San Patrice and Dalton Affinities on the
Central and Western Gulf Coastal Plain
1t. Blaine Ensor

ABSTRACT
This paper recommends integrating the San Patrice phenomenon of
Texas and Louisiana as defined by Webb (1946), Webb, Shiner, and Roberts
(1971), and Duffield (1963) into a broader regional perspective. Recent research on the Gulf Coastal Plain of Alabama and Mississippi has produced
evidence for widespread similarities between San Patrice and Dalton in morphology, technology, and environment. Supporting data are presented for the
inclusion of San Patrice as a local Gulf Coastal expression of the eastern
Woodlands Dalton horizon, and evidence for a Dalton subhorizon marker is
discussed. Finally, a plea is made for the increased use of interregional taxonomic classifications and standard artifact descriptions.

INTRODUCTION
This paper attempts to place the San Pa~ice phenomenon of Louisiana and East
Texas as defined by Webb (1946) and Webb, Shiner, and Roberts (1971) into a
broader regional perspective. Recent syntheses and reviews of the archeology of
East Texas and Louisiana offer somewhat conflicting interpretations of San Patrice
and its cultural and chronological position (cf. Patterson 1980). The San Patrice
finds of East Texas and Louisiana have been variously associated with the Paleoindian period by Story (1981) and Webb, Shiner, and Roberts (1971), and with other
late Pleistocene-early Holocene manifestations by Shafer (1973, 1977) and Duffield (1963). Wallace (1982:221) discusses the overall cultural and chronological
placement of San Patrice occupations in Louisiana and also notes that in general,
San Patrice occupations have been designated terminal Paleoindian. Story (1981),
in her overview of East Texas archeology, considers San Patrice a part of the
Paleoindian period, although she points out that this is by no means certain. In basic
agreement with Sharer (1977), she indicates that the traditional Plains model of big
gmne hunting is probably not applicable in East Texas.
Duffield (1963:138) suggests that San Patrice points at the Wolfshead site in
East Texas are associated with a pre-Archaic manifestation that occurs before corner- and side-notched expanding-stem forms such as Edgewood and Neches River.
He further assigns San Patrice points to the same general time period with lanceolate
projectile points of the Paleoindian tradition. Webb, Shiner, and Roberts (1971:46)
state that the San Patrice assemblage at the John Pearce site is technologically closer
to Plains Paleoindian. Morse (1973:30) considers San Patrice a southern variant of
Dalton but notes that San Patrice is usually referred to as Paleoindian in the lower
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57 (1986)

70

Texas Archeological Society

Mississippi Valley. The general consensus, however, has been that data for
adequately distinguishing San Patrice from earlier, later, or contemporaneous
manifestations are not available (Patterson 1980). Radiocarbon dates and stratigraphic sequences are badly needed to aid in clarifying much of the conflicting data
(Story 1981).
Recently, Goodyear (1982) has argued for temporal placement of the Dalton
horizon in the eastern Woodlands between 10,500 and 9,900 years ago. Other estimates place the age of Dalton between 10,000 and 9,500 years ago (Walthal11980;
Ensor 1981). The Dalton horizon is believed by many to bridge the gap between
Paleoindian manifestations and later Early Archaic assemblages characterized by
comer- and side-notched bifaces. Projectile points resembling the Dalton type are
generally believed to date between 11,000 and 9,000 years ago over a wide area of
the Gulf Coastal Plain from the Mississippi River to East Texas and northward into
Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Missouri (Webb et al. 1971).
DISTRIBUTION OF SAN PATRICE AND DALTON SITES
ON THE GULF COASTAL PLAIN
Recent research on the Gulf Coastal Plain of Alabama and Mississippi has produced evidence of widespread similarity in patterns of cultural expression from
about 11,000-9,000 years B.P., or the terminal Pleistocene-early Holocene interface, over much of the southeastern United States (Ensor 1981, 1982; Brookes
1979). The distribution of Dalton, San Patrice, and related lanceolate forms across
the Gulf Coastal Plain (Figure 1)suggests that the Dalton horizon extends over much

OWER

I

2 WOLFSHEAD
3 JAKE MARTIN
4 JOHN PEARCE
S

WHATLEY

6 HEBE
I

PLANTATION

BRAND

S SLOAN
9 JOE

POWELL

t0

PACKARD

11

NUCKOLLS

12

STANFII--’LO-WORLE Y

13 TENSAW
t4

THE

CR[EK

ROCK HOUSE

15 HARDAWAY
16 HESTER

GULF

OF

MEXICO

200

Figure 1. Map showing selected San Patrice and Dalton sites in the central andwestemGulf
Coastal Plain. Drawn by Kathy Reese.

Ensor m San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

71

of East Texas and Louisiana.
Attempts at integrating the vast and largely unknown terminal Pleistoceneearly Holocene cultures of the Gulf Coastal Plain have been impeded by the lack of
comparative data and precise descriptive/taxonomic practices. Fenwick and
Collins (1975) point out that traditional archeological lithic analysis in the southeastern United States and Texas has often fallen short of producing the wellrounded studies needed to complement other data and permit in-depth interpretation
of cultural systems. The number of terminal Pleistocene-early Holocene sites on the
Gulf Coastal Plain that have been adequately described is still limited.
Recent work on the coastal plains of Alabama and Mississippi has provided
some initial insights into this largely unknown area. A stratigraphic sequence at the
Hester site (Brookes 1979) and data from the Joe Powell site in the Gainesville Lake
area of west-central Alabama (Ensor 1985), have provided much needed data on
terminal Pleistocene-early Holocene cultures on this part of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
Close technological and morphological affinities between San Patrice and Dalton
forms are apparent from these investigations.
The work of Clarence Webb and others at the Pearce site in northwestern Louisiana has clearly isolated an early lithic horizon consistent with Dalton morphologies on the coastal plains of Alabama and Mississippi (Webb et al. 1971). Westward
extensions of San Patrice are found in East Texas at the Wolfshead (Duffield 1963)
and Jake Martin sites (Davis and Davis 1960), among others.
The western limits of San Patrice forms, according to Webb, Shiner, and
Roberts (1971), occur in the Brazos River valley of east-central Texas, but they are
more common in East Texas. Morphologically similar forms such as Brazos Fishtail (Watt 1978) and Rodgers Side-Hollowed (Willey et al. 1978) from north-central
Texas reflect more of a Plains adaptation and should not be confused with the San
Patrice type. Local chronological constructs in Central Texas do not recognize San
Patrice as a major component (cf. Weir 1976; Prewitt 1981). Webb, Shiner, and
Roberts (1971), Gagliano and Gregory (1965), Thomas and Campbell (1978), and
Yarborougb (1981) have demonstrated that San Patrice and related forms are common throughout most of Louisiana, western Mississippi, and southern Arkansas (cf.
Morse 1973). Patterson (1980) has noted San Patrice points in Harris and Wharton
counties of southeastern Texas, and Greenwell (1984:129) has described an apparent San Patrice variant from coastal Mississippi.
MORPHOLOGICAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL RELATIONS
Dalton varieties from the Hester site in northeastern Mississippi (Brookes
1979) and the Joe Powell site in west-central Alabama (Ensor 1985) closely parallel
morphological and technological diversity found in the San Patrice Hope and St.
Johns varieties (Duffield 1963; Webb et al. 1971) from Louisiana and East Texas
(Figures 2, 3). Dalton varieties from Alabama and Mississippi include a lanceolate
version (Cochrane) and another (River Bend) with incipient side notching (Ensor
1985;Brookes 1979). Smith(1986:10-14)hasnotedthatearlyHoloceneprojectile
points, including Dalton and related forms, characteristically have been reshar-

72

Texas Archeological Society

pened. In the case of Dalton points, Goodyear (1974:19) demonstrates several different stages of bifacial blade modification. However, none of these appears to affect the haft element to a large degree. The designation of neither Dalton nor San
Patrice varieties is based herein on blade modification; both varieties of each type
have been resharpened, some with beveling. Rather, the variety designations are
determined by differences noted in haft element morphology. The cultural and
chronological significance of these differences is unclear, given the lack of stratigraphic data. At this time one can only make these distinctions and hypothesize
concerning their meaning. The two Dalton varieties defined for the Tombigbee
drainage may represent chronologically and spatially restricted forms. These may
prove eventually to be indicative of local or regional cultural groups and provide
markers for local phase definition. The varieties discussed by Webb, Shiner, and
Roberts (1971) appear to parallel the morphological variation found in Dalton
forms over much of the southeastern United States (Ensor 1985:39) and may represent differences in local phase content. Morse (1973) has noted a similar breakdown
of Dalton morphology in the lower Mississippi alluvial valley that includes both
lanceolate and side-notched variants. Coe (1964) has demonstrated similar morphological distinctions from North Carolina, where the Hardaway-Dalton and
Hardaway Side-Notched types are found in an early context below corner-notched
forms. As noted by Ensor (1985:39), these data indicate that there may be a broad
subhorizon marker within the Dalton horizon as it is currently defined.
The San Patrice Hope and Dalton Cochrane varieties (Figures 2, 3) have overall
morphological and technological similarities. They are basically triangular forms
with incurvate ground bases and no definite lateral haft-element modification.
Blade edges are straight, and most have been resharpened. There is strong evidence
that flutelike flakes have been removed from the basal edge of the San Patrice Hope
variety, but this is not characteristic of the Dalton Cochrane variety.
The San Patrice St. Johns and Dalton River Bend varieties (Figures 2, 3) also
have strong morphological and technological similarities. Both have incurvate to
recurvate ground basal edges, expanding lateral haft elements, and straight, tapered
shoulders. Blade edges are straight and intensively resharpened. Perhaps the most
striking similarity is in the removal of broad, flutelike flakes from the base. The
Dalton and San Patrice varieties are also similar in size.
Evidence for other close technological relations between Dalton and San
Patrice is also apparent. Technological similarities include the use of local chert
resources in tool manufacture and the use of flakes to make many tools such as
projectile points, hafted end scrapers, and other scrapers. By themselves, these
proposed similarities offer no direct basis for comparison, since they could be
applied to many prehistoric lithic assemblages in North America. However, when
viewed from a regional perspective, they do reveal some interesting trends. As
noted by Smith (1986:14, 15), early Holocene lithic assemblages in the Southeast
are dominated by resharpened projectile points and demonstrate the use of bipolar
flaking to produce usable flake blanks and to recycle tools. Woodworking tools
such as the Dalton adze (Morse and Goodyear 1973) and unifacial scraper-planes
~nsor 1981, 1985) are common at Dalton sites in the Southeast. Uniface end and

Ensor m San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

A

[3

73

C

[3

0

I

2

3

t

I

I

I

cm
Figure 2. Drawings of San Patrice points. A-E, Hope variety; F-I, St. Johns variety. Redrawn
by Kathy Roemer from Webb 1946, Plate 1.

lateral scrapers, burins, gravers, and other notched tool forms are also common at
Dalton sites (Goodyear 1974; Brookes 1979). San Patrice assemblages have similar
content and, except for the Dalton adze, include all of the above forms, albeit under
different names in some cases (Webb, Shiner, and Roberts 1971; Duffield 1963).

74

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

C

D
0

I

2

3
I

cm

G

H

Figure 3. Drawings of Dalton points. A-E, Cochrane variety; F-I, River Bend variety.
Redrawn by Kathy Roemer from Ensor 1985, Figure 5.

Ensor m San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

75

In summation, the use of local chert to manufacture the greater number of tool
forms is seen in this case as evidence for close technological affinity in the Dalton
and San Patrice assemblages. Both are directly preceded by Paleoindian tool kits
that are dominated by nonlocal materials (Goodyear 1979). San Patrice and Dalton
points on the Gulf Coastal Plain are most often made from local materials, but earlier
lanceolate froms such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview are more often made from
exotic materials. The use of bipolar flaking to produce adzelike scraper-planes,
wedges, burins, and flakes for tool manufacture is common in western Alabama and
northeastern Mississippi. Although bifacial Dalton adzes do not seem to be present
in San Patricie assemblages, functional equivalents may be present (cf. Duffield
1963:107-114). Comparing this aspect of coastal plain Dalton and San Patrice assemblages is difficult due to differences in the availability of raw materials and in
techniques of artifact description. Certain tools referred to as scaled pieces at the
Pearce site resemble bipolar cores that have been rotated and turned over for additional flaking (Webb et al. 1971:23). Duffield (1963) illustrates several quadrilateral forms manufactured from petrified wood, which he terms knives. Some of
these may or may not have been produced by a bipolar technique. The diversity of
technology and use of San Patrice and Dalton assemblages on the Gulf Coastal Plain
is apparently similar if differences in local raw materials are held constant. In
general, both the San Patrice and Dalton assemblages on the coastal plains of
Alabama and Mississippi are made up of small artifacts, their size limited by the raw
materials available. This appears to reflect both the small size of natural raw
materials and the nature of the local settlement system. The need for procuring large
pieces of knappable stone evidently had diminished, compared to earlier Paleoindian resource exploitation.
CULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT

As already noted, Goodyear (1982a) has proposed a chronological position for
the Dalton horizon in the southeastern United States, which places it between 8500
and 7900 B.C. (10,500 -9,900 B.P.). His estimate is based on radiocarbon dates of
major hafted-biface styles from sites in the Eastern Woodlands. He postulates a
post-Pleistocene adaptation to a mesic deciduous forest for the Dalton culture.
Along the Gulf Coastal Plain it has been difficult to pinpoint a particular time period
for late glacial and early postglacial forest transition. Current evidence suggests
that a general warming and drying took place over much of the area from South
Carolina to Central Texas during late glacial and early postglacial times, from about
11,000 to 8,000 B.P., which apparently resulted in the establishment of a xeric oakhickory- southern-pine forest along the Gulf Coastal and southern Atlantic plains
(Delcourt and Delcourt 1979). The mixed deciduous forest environments covering
much of the southeastern United States by 10,000 B.P. provided the environmental
conditions to which Dalton culture was adapted. The westward extensions of San
Patrice into East Texas corresponds closely to modem-day extensions of the eastern
Woodlands or the Austroriparian Biotic Province as defined by Blair (1950).
If San Patrice belongs culturally and environmentally to the eastern Woodlands

76

Texas Archeological Society

Dalton horizon, it can be inferred that a hunter and gatherer adaptation to essentially
modem floral and faunal species was made. Dalton groups over much of the eastern
Woodlands were at least partially adapted to modem floral and faunal regimes
(Goodyear 1982a).
Shafer’s (1977) interpretation of early lithic assemblages and environmental
adaptations in East Texas points to a mixed hunter and gatherer economy between
the eastern High Plains and the eastern Woodlands. Wyckoff (1985:23) has argued
for complex late Pleistocene-early Holocene hunter-gatherer adaptations along the
prairie-eastern Woodlands interface in eastern Oklahoma. Some San Patrice
groups may have adapted to this transitional zone in East Texas and focused on the
exploitation of a mixed deciduous forest; other late Pleistocene-early Holocene
groups further west and north may have adapted to more of a big game-plains
environment (Shafer 1977; Story 1981). Both Shafer and Story suggest that
cultural and environmental forces may differentiate Paleoindian or big game
hunting cultures from San Patrice groups in the East Texas area. They cite shifts in
lithic procurement systems and an increase in frequency of San Patrice points as
evidence for more restrictive adaptive patterns and perhaps for increased population. As Goodyear (1979) has noted, this may reflect changes in economic
orientation and attendant settlement systems or a settling-in of ethnic populations.
Gunn (1982:224) has pointed out that Gagliano and Gregory’s survey of Paleoindian points in Louisiana upholds Goodyear’s thesis; data from Clovis and Dalton
sites in west-central Alabama (Ensor 1982) also support this trend.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

In summary, current research points to the existence of widespread uniformity
in Dalton-San Patrice technology and morphology, with regional environmental
differences apparent from roughly 11,000-8,000 B.P. on the Gulf Coastal Plain
across Louisiana, southern Arkansas, Mississippi, and western Alabama (Figure 1).
Data from Alabama and Mississippi suggest that terminal Pleistocene-early Holocene occupations reflect increased territorialism and regional diversity over earlier
fluted point cultures. It is suggested here that the San Patrice phenomenon, based
on stylistic, technological, and environmental considerations, represents a central
and western Gulf Coastal Plain extension of the eastern Woodlands Dalton horizon.
Taxonomic schemes conducive to integrating widespread areas from both cultural and environmental viewpoints are relatively scarce. Stoltman’s (1978) recent
attempt to provide such an areal framework for eastern North America is a noteworthy example. Although there has been improvement in descriptive and taxonomic
practices, it is felt that until such concepts are systematically applied across diverse
regions, differences and similarities in local phases will continue to be masked. The
San Patrice-Dalton example provided here is clear indication of a need for the application ofinterregional taxonomic schemes that stress cultural and environmental
relations. Admittedly, much of the data, both cultural and environmental, is still
sketchy with regard to the prehistoric record. However, it is imperative that an attempt be made to integrate regional constructs into larger interregional schemes.

Ensor ~ San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

77

Wyckoff (1985) has offered some timely criticisms on the use of projectile
points or a few other tools for horizon markers. Use of such markers uncritically,
without regard to strict definitions and purpose, undoubtedly leads to pitfalls.
There are systems of projectile point or hafted biface typology, such as the cluster/type approach advocated by Faulkner and McCollough (1973), Ensor (1981),
and Futato (1983) for parts of Tennessee and Alabama, for integrating widespread
cultural phenomena. The cluster/type concept has close parallels with the horizon
style; both serve to integrate phenomena that are widely distributed in space and of
relatively short duration (Willey 1945; Willey and Phillips 1958). Under such a
scheme the Dalton horizon as defined by Tuck (1974), Morse (1973), and Goodyear
(1982) for theeastern Woodlands area would extend into Louisiana and East Texas
to integrate local manifestations such as San Patrice. San Patrice would reflect local
adaptations to microenvironments but, on a broader scale, through common
elements such as style, technology, and environment, would be tied to Dalton manifestations over eastern North America.
Smith (1986:9, 10), in discussing the nature of early Holocene environments
in the southeastern United States, indicates that a picture of environmental homogeneity is not accurate. Regional diversity abounds in terms of resource potential
and species diversity. Smith restates an opinion (Clausen et al. 1979) and deduces
that"as a result, one might reasonably expect the documented, if often over-emphasized, geographic variation that does exist within early Holocene projectile point
type categories to be paralleled by regional diversity in tool kits and subsistence
patterns (Smith 1986:9)."
The approach taken to projectile point typology, including variety designation,
is that formal variation should be explicitly documented within a regional setting.
The creation of varieties is useful only if they are articulated within an overall
regional taxonomic scheme that allows meaningful assessment of local phase
content.
Under such a scheme, it is doubtful that the term Dalton should be applied at
the type level to all morphologically similar forms equivalent in age to the Dalton
horizon as defined by Goodyear (1982). Type designations should reflect regional
diversity and adaptations. The terms San Patrice and Hardaway-Dalton (Coe 1964)
conform to this concept, since they appear to reflect regional traditions. The term
Dalton, as construed, is best used as a horizon marker. Continued referral to morphologically similar forms that date to the Dalton time period as typologically Dalton, regardless of their geographic distribution or cultural context, will only confuse
cultural-historical reality. In retrospect, referral to the Gainesville Lake area Dalton
horizon forms as Dalton contributes to this confusion and tends to obfuscate important regional differences that undoubtedly obtain among various early Holocene
cultures of the Gulf Coastal Plain.
Type designations generally should reflect local culture and environmental
adaptations. At a different level of classification, phase content could be signified
through variety designations, where plausible, and could reflect local variations in
phase content. Therefore, the different varieties of San Patrice and Dalton noted
herein may lead eventually to definition of local phase content.

78

Texas Archeological Society

Crucial to the successful adoption of such a system, however, are both precise
techniques for describing artifacts and terminological clarity. Metrical analysis is
obviously an important part of description, but there are formal qualitative and
quantitative descriptive techniques that make it possible to describe hafted biface
morphology and eliminate many descriptive ambiguities (cf. Futato 1983; Ensor
1981). Only when overall taxonomic purpose is articulated with precise description
will communication among researchers grow and the utility of various regional
models be evaluated. Evaluation and refinement are necessary, but perhaps even
more is required for growth and maturity in the discipline of archeology.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I thank David L. Carlson, of the Archeological Research Laboratory at Texas
A&M University, for his critical review of the manuscript. Harry J. Sharer, of the
Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, also offered input into the
questions surrounding San Patrice occupations in Texas. I have benefited from
conversations and correspondence with Albert C. Goodyear, of the Institute of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of South Carolina; Sam Brookes, of the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Vicksburg District; Frank Weir, of the Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation; Leland W. Patterson, of Tenneco,
Inc.; and an anonymous reviewer.
The help of Kathy Roemer and Kathy Reese, who drew the illustrations, is
gratefully acknowledged, as is the help of William Moore and Celinda Stevens, of
the Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, who typed the
manuscript. Any errors in fact or content are the sole responsibility of the writer.
REFERENCES

CITED

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science. 2(1):93-116.
Brookes, Samuel O.
1979 The Hester site, an Early Archaic site in Monroe County, Mississippi.
A Preliminary report. Mississippi Department of Archives and History.
Jackson.
Clausen, C., D. Cohen, C. Emiliani, J. A. Holman, and J. J. Stipp
1979 Little Salt Spring, Florida: a unique underwater site. Science 20:609-614.
Coe, Joffre L.
1964 The formative cultures of the Carolina Piedmont. Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society 54 (new series).
Davis, W. A. and E. Mort Davis
1960 The Jake Martin site, an Archaic site in the Ferrell’s Bridge Reservoir area, north
eastern Texas. Archaeology Series, 3. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Ensor m San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

79

Delcourt, Paul A. and Hazel R. Delcourt
1979 Late Pleistocene and Holocene distributional history of the deciduous forest in the
southeastern United States. Contribution No. 12, Program for Quaternary Studies
of the Southeastern United States, University of Tennessee, Knoxville.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1963 The Wolfshead site: An Archaic-Neo-American site in San Augustine County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34:83-141.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1981 Gainesville Lake area lithics: chronology, technology, and use. Report of Investigations 13, Office of Archaeological Research, University of Alabama.
1982

Paleo-Indian and Archaic studies in the Gainesville Lake area. In: Archaeology of
the Gainesville Lake Area. Synthesis, by Ned J. Jenkins, pp. 15-47. Vol. 5 of
Archaeological Investigations in the Gainesville Lake Area of the TennesseeTombigbee Waterway. Report of Investigations No. 23, Office of Archaeological
Research, University of Alabama.

1985

The Joe Powell site (1Pi38): a Dalton manifestation on the Alabama Gulf Coastal
Plain. Journal of Alabama Archaeology 31(1): 1-47.

Faulkner, Charles H. and Major C.R. McCollough
1973 Introductory report of the Normandy Reservoir Salvage Project: environmental
setting, typology, and survey. Report of Investigations No. 11, Department of Anthropology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville.
Fenwick, Jason M. and Michael B. Collins
1975 Lithic analyses in the southeastem United States and in Texas. Paper presented at
the 40th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology. Dallas, Texas.
Futato, Eugene M.
1983 Archaeological investigations in the Cedar Creek and Upper Bear Creek
Reservoir. Report of Investigations 29. Office of Archaeological Research. University of Alabama.
Gagliano, Sherwood M. and Hiram F. Gregory
1965 A preliminary survey of Palm-Indian points from Louisiana. Louisiana Studies
4(1). Louisiana Studies Institute, Northwestern State College, Natchitoches.
Goodyear, Albert C.
1974 The Brand site: a techno-functional study of a Dalton site in Northeast Arkansas.
Arkansas Archaeological Survey Research Series No. 7.
1979

A hypothesis for the use of cryptocrystalline raw materials among Paleo-Indian
groups of North America. University of South Carolina, Institute of Archaeology
and Anthropology, Research Manuscript Series 156. Columbia.

1982

The chronological position of the Dalton horizon in the southeastern United S tates.
American Antiquity 47(2):382-395.

Texas Archeologieal Society

80

Greenwell, Dale
1984 The Mississippi Gulf Coast. In: Perspectives on Gulf Coast prehistory, edited by
David D. Davis, pp. 125-155. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and
History No. 5. The Florida State Museum.
Gunn, Joel
1982 Paleo-Indian technology and demography in northwestern Louisiana In: Eagle
Hill: A Late Quarternary upland site in western Louisiana, by Joel Gunn and David
O. Brown, pp. 223-227. Special Report 12, Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Morse, Dan F.
1973 Dalton culture in Northeast Arkansas. The Florida Anthropologist 26:23-28.
Gainesville.
Morse, Dan F., and Albert C. Goodyear
1973 The significance of the Dalton adze in Northeast Arkansas. Plains An thropologist 18:316-322.
Patterson, Leland W.
1980

The S an Patrice point type in Southeast Texas. Newsletter of the Louisiana Archaeological Society 8(1):22-23.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural chronology in CentralTexas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-89.
Shafer, Harry J.
1973 Lithic technology at the George C. Davis site. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1977

Early lithic assemblages in eastern Texas. The Museum Journal 17:187-197. West
Texas Museum Association, Lubbock.
Smith, Bruce D.

1986

The archaeology of the Southeastern United States: from Dalton to de Soto,
10,500-500 B.P. In Advances in World Archaeology, edited by Fred Wendorf and
Angela E. Close 5:1-92. Academic Press, Inc., New York.

Stoltman, James B.
1978 Temporal models in prehistory: an example from eastern North America. Current
Anthropology 19:703-746.
Story, Dee Ann
1981 An overview of the archaeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist
26(92):139-156.
Thomas, Prentiss M. and L. J. Campbell
1978 Multicomponent site on the Happyville Bend of Little River: 16LA37 - The
Whatley site. New World Research, Report of Investigations No. 11.

Ensor ~ San Patrice and Dalton Affinities

81

Tuck, James A.
1974

Early Archaic horizons in eastern North America. Archeology of Eastern North
America 2:72-80.

Wallace, Patricia
1982 Paleo-Indian projectile point chronology in western Louisiana. In: Eagle Hill: a
late quaternary upland site in western Louisiana by Joel Gum and David O.
Brown. pp. 220-223. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio. Special Report, No. 12.
Walthall, John A.
1980 Prehistoric Indians of the Southeast, archaeology of Alabama and the middle
South. The University of Alabama Press. University, Alabama.
Watt, Frank H.
1978

Radiocarbon chronology of site in the Central Brazos Valley. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological society 49:111-138.

Webb, Clarence H.
1946 Two unusual types of chipped stone artifacts from Northwest Louisiana. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 17:9-17.
Webb, Clarence H., J. L. Shiner and E. W. Roberts
1971 The John Pearce site (16CD56): a San Patrice site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:1-49.
Weir, Frank A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Washington State
University. Pullman.
Willey, Gordon R.
1945

Horizon styles and pottery traditions in Peruvian archaeology. American Antiquity
2:49-56.

Willey, Gordon R. and Philip Phillips
1958

Method and theory in American archaeology. University of Chicago Press.
Chicago.

Willey, Patrick S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978 The Rex Rodgers site. In: Archeology of the MacKenzie Reservoir, by J.T.Hughes
and P. S. Willey, pp. 49-68. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical
Commission, Survey Report 24. Austin.
Wyckoff, Don G.
1985 The Packard complex: Early Archaic,Pre-Dalton occupations on the PrairieWoodland border. Southeastern Archaeology 4(1): 1-26.
Yarborough, Kate
1981

A preliminary report of the Hebe Plantation site: chronology and function. Missis_
sippi Archaeology 16(1):30-38.

