AUST PHASE UR ALS AT THE PAT PARKE S TE,
TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS
JOHN W. GREER AND ROBERT A. BENFER

ABSTRACT
A Neo-American cemetery site in the rolling prairie country in central
Texas east of Austin yielded remains of at least 17-20 human burials.
Nearly all of the ten recognizable burials were flexed on their back or
side, with skull to the n0rthl and faced either east or west. Ab0riginai
grave goods consisted of deer antler, a marine shell pendant; and possibly
Scallorn arrow points. The burials are tentatively identified as early
Austin phase, dating about A.D. 800-1000.

INTRODUCTION
The Pat Parker site was brought to the attention of the
Department of Anthropology of The University of Texas at Austin in
1960 by the landowner, who found human bones eroding from a
slightly raised area beside the creek near his home. Controlled
limited excavation under the aegis of the Department of Anthropology uncovered several human burials, artifacts, and other
cultural debris presumably attributable to an early Austin phase
occupation. The purpose of this report is to describe and evaluate
the site.

THE SITE
The Pat Parker site (41 TV 88] is in northeastern Travis County,
northeast of Austin, on a small rise in the bottomland beside a
tributary flowing eastward into Gilleland Creek, This is a large
drainage system flowing southward into the Colorado River 16 miles
east of Austin. The site is about 7 miles east of the Balcones
Escarpment, the eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau, in an area of
open rolling prairie locally dissected by the major creek drainages.
Grasslands abound in the prairie areas, now mainly farmlands,
while the bottomlands along the creeks are often forested and in
brush. The site is on a small knoll about 100 feet south of the creek.
Deposits consist of a black midden nearly devoid of burned rocks.
Flint cobbles and pebbles occur naturally over an area of several
acres surrounding the site, but not on it. Construction of a stock tank

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

190

abutting the northwest side of the excavation area led to the
discovery of the burials.

EXCAVATION PROCEDURES
Horizontal and vertical locations were referenced to an arbitrary
datum at the site. Excavation followed a grid of 5-foot squares
excavated in 6-inch levels. Ten squares were excavated to an
average depth of two feet. No differentiation of natural zones was
recognizable. All excavated deposit was loosened by trowels and
screened through IA-inch mesh hardware cloth. All flint, bone, shell,
and considerable historic Euro:American debris was collected.
Notes, drawingsl maps and photographs made during excavation are
on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.

THE MIDDEN
The midden was apparently about 60 feet east-west along the
creek and 30 feet north-south perpendicular to the creek, although
its blending with the surrounding soils made accurate delimitation
impossible. Certainly it constituted at least the
recognizable
nucleus of the site. Aside from occasional chipped stone
manufacture debris (flakes, cores), tools, and similar artifacts
(unfinished objects, by-products), the midden content was nearly
entirely a black or dark brown compact soil, almost clay-like -- the
typical blackland vertisol-type soil. Below about 2-3 feet, soil became
lighter, more compact, and seemingly totally void of occupational
debris. Hearths and other activity features, other than burials, were
not encountered. Internal soil changes, including burial pits or
outlines, for the most part were not visible. This necessitated
excavation in arbitrary horizontal and vertical units. The rarity of
heat-fractured limestone rocks is not surprising, since no limestone
outcroppings occur nearby. Since research was oriented entirely
toward the recovery of burials, other portions of the site were not
tested.

HUMAN REMAINS
Ten recognizable burials (Fig. 1) were exhumed from an area
about 10 x 10 feet and about 1.5 feet deep. Either a large mass grave
pit or individual graves were dug into an existing midden of black
soil containing flint flakes and animal bone fragments. Grave fill

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

191

was midden soil; no grave pits or grave outlines were recognizable
in the field. Burial numbers given here are the field catalog
numbers. Burial data are presented in Tables 1 and 2. In most cases,
field notes record the presence of various artifacts near a skeleton
without giving the precise location; those comments are included in
th e following descriptions.
Burial i.

Four individuals are represented: a 12 year old female (?), a
25 year old male, a 30 year old male, and a 35 year old male with pro-

nounced muscle attachments. Two disturbed fragmentary male skeletons.
one on top of the other, were oriented with the skulls to the north and
facing west. The distal part of a Darl point was near the pelvic region of
one individual. Unusually large deer antler fragments from one animal
were aligned north-south as if placed on top of the bodies or beside them
Additional fragments from the same antler were between Burials 1. 3.
and 4. and appeared to be in direct association with those burials, suggesting that several people were buried al the same time in a common
grave. The proximity of the individuals to each other and the similarity of
skeleton orientation and position also suggest mass burial.
Observations: Many loose teeth have medium wear. and one molar is
heavily worn. One worn molar has caries and a worn premolar has a
large abscess at the base of the crown. Incisors are shovel-shaped.

Burial 2.

A loosely flexed skeleton of a 15 year old female lay on her
back with the skull, arms. and legs on their left side. The skull was
oriented northward with the face to the east. An associated marine shell
pendant (Fig. 6,a} was possibly originally attached to the right wrist. A
Darl point and a Scallorn point were found near the skeleton.

Burial 3.

This 40 + year old male was fairly tightly flexed on its left

side. Both hands were folded under the chin, and the skull was oriented
to the north, facing east.
Observations: Incisors are strongly shovel-shaped

Burial 4. A heavily muscled adult male was oriented northward, facing
east. The body was tightly flexed on its left side with legs to the east.
Burial 5.

A semi-flexed adult lay on its right side. oriented northward.
The initial discovery pit removed the upper portion of the skeleton. A
Scallorn point (Fig. 2,a), a probable Scallorn distal fragment (Fig. 2.b),
and a Darl point were found near the skeleton.

Burial 6.

An infant (possibly fetal} is represented by a few skull fragments found in a disturbed area.
Burial 7. A heavily muscled adult male was oriented northward, lying
loosely flexed on its left side and facing east.
Burial 8. An adult was oriented northward, with the skul! facing west
It was tightly flexed on its right side with the hands drawn up under the
chin. An arrow point fragment was found with the skeleton.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

192

PARKER SITE

PAT

(41TV88)

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII11

IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIII!1!11111111

initial
discovery
pit

Y

no. 2

no.l
no. 3

.1.,

n O.

modern

oo

no. 9

m

N
i

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~I

FIGURE 1. Excavation plan, showing locations of burials. No burial
pit outline was evident.

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS
Burial 9.

193

An adult was oriented northward, loosely flexed on its left

side, and faced east.

Burial 10.

A 35 year old male was oriented northward, loosely flexed

on its left side, and faced east.
Additional Material. At least six individuals, including two fragmentary skulls, are represented by the bones from the initial discovery
pit. All the skeletal material is fragmentary and some may belong to any
of the burials excavated by the university personnel. One of the two
skulls and some upper limb and torso bones must belong to Burial 5.
Individuals not represented in other parts of the excavation (as evidenCed
maInly by pelvis and patella fragments} include a child, a 15 year old
adolescent, and at least two adults.

DISCUSSION. Skeletons in a recognizable position include Burials 1
(two individuals), 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, and i0. The Burial 6 infant bones
represent another individual. Additional nonarticulated bones raise
the number of individuals in the excavated portion of the site to at
least 17 and perhaps 20, both male and female, ranging inage from
newborn to over 40.
Most burials are fairly consistent in pattern.
moderately to tightly flexed, usually (six of the ten
tons) on their left side facing east. Orientation
northward. Individuals of Burial 1 and probably
terred together. The compactness of the entire

Individuals were
articulated skelewas consistently
3 and 4 were inburial area, the

closeness of the burials, the overlapping features between some
burials (i.e. the antlers with Burials I, 3, and 4), and the uniformity
of interment indicate that the site is a cemetery, and seems to suggest that most, if not all, individuals were interred during a very
short period, possibly at one time. The cause or causes of death are
unknown.
Burial offerings (at least the recognizable nonperishable ones)
apparently were rare. A perforated marine shell probably was attached to the adolescent girl. Two Scallorn points from the initial
discovery pit may have been associated with the burials, though not
assuredly actual grave goods. Other projectile points (Scallorn and
Darl) found near the graves may have been placed in the graves or
may have been accidentally included in the grave fill,

OSTEOLOCICAL OBSERVATIONS
The postcranial material from these burials is fragmentary and
has not been analyzed. Cranial material is in poor condition; the reconstructed skulls are warped, and measurements for the two adults

-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

*~
o

, ,~,~,

.<

°~

g
.<

d

~.~

m
M
m

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

195

and one adolescent are approximate. Mandibles are in better condition and their measurements are accurate. Mandibles are all
rugged, but none is exceptionally so. Age was determined by criteria
of McKern and Stewart (1957); sex and mensuration follow the criteria of Montagu (1960).
The mental foramen of the 40 year old male from Burial 3 seems
pathological in being 7 mm in diameter. The mandibular third molars
are impacted on the same individual. Dental wear is generally excessive in all teeth at the site; secondary dentine is often evident.
The congenital absence of the mandibular third molars on four of
the eight mandibles complete enough for observation is noteworthy.
Both lower molars were congenitally absent from the mandible of
the adolescent female Burial 2. Only the !ower left molar was absent
in another female. Both lower molars are missing from the male
Burial 10, and the molar was missing from the right mandible (the
only part recovered) of a male in Burial 1. Dahlberg (1949:170-172)
has suggested that congenital absence of the third molar might be a
useful genetic trait, and he documents a wide range of percentage
differences for various groups (Ibid. Table 34). Goldstein (1948:72,
Table 6) reports 12% congenital absence of one or more mandibular
third molars for 173 Texas Indians. Thus, the small sample from the
Pat Parker site demonstrates considerably greater congenital molar
absence than is usual for Texas Indians.
Of the dozen incisors recovered, most lower incisors were weakly
or not at all shovel-shaped. Most upper incisors were weakly to
medium shovel-shaped.
One restorable male skull has Wormian bones and a complete
Inca bone. Two female skulls have Wormian bones, and an Inca
bone is present on the skull of Burial 2. The male skull is wide; the
two female skulls have narrow vaults.
Cranial and mandibular measurements are shown in Table 2,
together with measurements of an Austin phase skull from the Kyle
site in Hill County (lelks 1962) for comparison.
THE ARTIFACTS

Artifacts from the site were divided for description in a
traditional manner according to material and then into categories
generally describable as fineness of workmanship. Historic materials
follow aboriginal debris, since the interest in this report is strictly on
the Indian occupation. Thus, the artifactual order is ceramics,
chipped stone ( shaped tools followed by debitage), non-chipped
stone, bone, shell, and the variety of historic materials.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

196

03
:~

03

I

I
.-k

I

I

03
o~

;B
;M
03

o
"B

¢o

03

03

--¢[o

I

03
~.~

o

03

~

m
~

¯
m

03

03

I

I

I

I

03

~1~ ~03 03

¢

N

,-~03

2~

03~

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

197

Artifacts were generally scattered throughout the small
excavated portions of the midden. The nature of this portion of the
site is a shallow deposit seemingly perforated with burial pits,
historic pits, and relatively modern filled gullies. Artifact locations
therefore probably are mostly secondary. Artifact distribution
tables for this situation are meaningless and therefore are not
presented,
Aboriginal Pottery (6 sherds)
Six sherds are from, at most, two vessels of the same type.
Vessel form. Presumably medium-small jar or fairly deep bowl. Rim
very slightly outcurved, direct, with a flattened lip. Walls 5-6 mm thick;
lip 4 mm wide.
Exterior surface. Floated and very well polished; buff, tan, and reddishtan.
Interior surface. Finely smoothed to well-polished; buff to dark gray.
One sherd has a naturally red interior surface (not slipped}.
Paste. Contains a fair amount of quartz sand and some small inclUsions
of red material (presumably clay}. Appearance ranges from a lightcolored shale-like texture to what appears more like a very fine mud
(30x].
Core. Light gray to light red.
Temper. Sand if anything, probably none. Looks as if sand was part of
the clay and was not intentionally added. No bone or shell.
Provenience. Five sherds from surface; one from the uppermost sixinch level.
Remarks. Appearance, thickness, and outwardly observable attributes
are similar to sherds recovered by Tunnell (1962:111] from the Oblate
Site in Comal County (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory collections, Austin). Microscopically (30x} the pastes are radically different:
the paste of the Oblate sherds is tempered with bone fragments; the paste
of the Pat Parker sherds is a fairly homogenous clay.
Arrow Points (n = 21)
The 14 finished arrow points are all expanding-stem points (Fig. 2),
here referred to as Scallorn (Suhm et aL 1954:506-507}. Two points (Fig.
2,a-b) from Burial 5 in the initial discovery pit are made either from limestone or from flint which has since desilicified and turned chalky,
possibly from chemical action. The predominance of concave-base forms
in deposits with Darl points suggests that this variety is an early form of
Sca!!orn. Dimensions: 19-42 (est.) x 11-15 x 3-4 ram.
Four bifacially flaked unnotched specimens (Fig. 3) seem equivalent to
Jelks’ (1962} Granbury and Fresno types, but probably are Scallorn preforms (Sollberger 1970}. Dimensions: 22-49 (est.) x 12-17 x 3-5 ram.
Three distal fragments were also found (Fig. 2,n).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

198

f

\

t
f

e

d

c

b

a
/\

j

i

n

g

t

k

I \

o
I

m

I

I

/_.,
I

cm

FIGURE 2. Expanding-stem arrowpoints.

Dart Points [n= 27)
This fairly coherent grouping of Transitional Archaic-Neo-American
dart points is characterized by rectangular to expanding stems, straight
to concave bases, and fine pressure retouch. The sample consists of 15
Darl points [Fig. 4,a-k), 3 Fairland (Fig. 4,m-n), 7 distal blade fragments
’, and 2 medial fragments.

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

t

199

\

b

0
I
C]

1
cm

FIGURE 3. Unnotched arrowpoints.

Unnotched Thin Bifaces (n = 29}
These are thin, moderately well-worked pointed bifaces with no stem.
Form A (n= 2; Fig. 5,c) is wide, thin, and we]]’worked, has straight
blade edges and is widest at the base. The concave base has fairly sharp
basal corners. Dimensions: 89 (est.) x 38-45 x 7-8 mml
Form B (n = 3; Fig. 5,d} is narrow, rectangular in outline, and has nearly
straight blade edges. The straight to slightly convex base has definite,
though rounded, basal corners. These are similar to the narrowest
specimens of ]elks’ (1962:45) Cleburne type knives.
Form C (n= 3;Fig. 5,a-b) is very small, teardrop-shaped, widest at the
midblade, and has convex blade edges, a rounded base, and no basal
corners. These are similar to the smallest specimens of ]elks’ (1962:45)
Cleburne type, but are smaller, and also to his Granbury parker arrow
points. They are somewhat thicker and more crudely worked than the
arrow points from Pat Parker, and are probably preforms. Dimensions:
25-43 (est.) x 18-26 x 4-6 ram.
Form D (n = 2) are large, wide, fairly thin proximal fragments widest
about one-third of the way from the base. They have convex blade edges
and slightly concave to straight bases with rounded basal corners.
Dimensions (est.}: 57 x 34 x 9 mm.
Medial and distal fragments (n = 19) are not identifiable to form.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

200

/

a

c

b

d

e

ty~

g

h

i

j

k

FIGURE 4. Dart points, a-k, Darl; 1, Darl blade fragment; m-n,
Fairland.

Scrapers (n = 17]
Flakes with retouch on one or more edges of one face are grouped
according to location and shape of the retouched edge. The term "scraper"
is used here in the traditional descriptive sense, and may or may not
e~quate wilh the actual tool function.

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

201

C

0

I
d

4

l

I

i

I

CITI

FIGURE 5. Thin bifaces, a-b, Form C; c, Form A; d, Form B.

Form A (n = 1} are snub-nose scrapers made from initial cortex flakes,
are elliptical in outline, and have one end steeply beveled. Dimensions: 60 x
40x 15mm.
Form B (n= 1) are "spokeshaves" or "notches" with a small, steeply
beveled semicircular concavity 6-15 mm wide (average 9 mm} and
unifacially chipped on one or more edges of a cortex flake. Two flakes have
double concavities, one next to the other on the same edge. Four flakes are
additionally retouched.
Form C (n = 4) are small secondary flakes, not intentionally shaped, with
minor retouch on one or more edges. They average 40 mm in length.
Large Drills {n = 2)
These are the larger Archaic-type drills (as opposed to small NeoAmerican flake drills} with narrow shafts. One fragment with a triangular
base is 65 mm wide and 21 mm thick (max.), and was probably originally 80
mm long. Another appears to be a thin Kinney or Tortugas-like dart point
with a concave base, dully pointed basal corners, and straight lateral
edges. The distal half is reworked into a drill shaft 10 mm wide and 5 mm
thick. The complete Specimen probably was about 50 mm long; the base, 28
mm wide. Uniform flaking on the latter specimen suggests it is not a
reworked dart point, but is an intentional drill form.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

202

Graver (n= 1)
A small core with a natural beak-like projection presumably was used as
a graver (or perhaps as a small drill or punch}. Numerous minute use scars
on the lateral edges near the tip are evidence of use.
Burin In = 1)
Intersecting burin facets form a chisel-like edge which appears to have
been intensively used. Several dart points and thin biface fragments have
burin facets originating from either a worked edge or a snapped break. A
few scrapers have burin facets originating from a steeply, unifacially
retouched edge. Several specimens exhibit considerable wear on the
distal, chisel-like edge; the edge wear is dulling (rounding, micro-flakes,
etc.} as if the tools were used in a chiseling motion.
Choppers (n = 5)
Four large pebbles have large flakes bifacially removed to form crude.
curved cutting edges. Cortex remains on one or both faces on three
specimens and the edges are extensively battered. The remaining
specimen is a large initial cortex flake with one edge ventrally retouched.
Flakes and Cores
Several hundred flakes with no retouching or use marks are part of the
normal detritus of flintnapping. At least 18 cores have variable attributes
and range in size from 25-130 mm. Analysis of flakes and cores has not
been done.
Manos {n = 6}
These are mostly fragmentary handstones or mullers. Three are of
friable red granite, two are of quartzite, and one is of limestone. One
specimen has grinding facets on both faces and no marginal pecking; one
face is ridged, the other convex. Another has at least three convex and
three concave grinding facets 25 mm in diameter. Another has mildly
convex grinding facets on both faces. The limestone mano is triangular in
cross-section and has been burned.
Steam-worn Pebbles [n = 3)
One quartzite and two limestone pebbles are 42-57 mm in maximum
dimension. No areas of pecking or grinding are visible.
Bone Needle In= 1; Fig. 6,b)
A small smoothed bone sliver 5 mm wide has a small biconical hole 2 mm
in diameter near the rounded proximal end. The distal end is broken, and
the shaft is undecorated. Present length is 16 mm: total length was
probably at least 35 mm.
Marine Shell Pendant (n = 1; Fig. 6,a)
The left valve of a heavy, though small, ridged bivalve mollusc, probably
of Gulf coast origin, was found on top of the left forearm of the 15 year old
girl of Burial 2. It is 49 mm from end to end. 48 mm from beak to outer lip

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

FIGURE 6. Shell pendant from Burial 2, and bone needle.

the outer edge and 1.3 mm wide where it breaks into the interior of the
clam: the shall is 7 mm thick at this point. Although the perforation may be
cultural, it could be due to a boring marine gastropod. Shells. especially
cockles, often occur naturally along the coast, perforated in this manner,
although the cockle umbo is thinner than this shell and the perforation is
usually more narrowly conical. Identification is based on criteria set forth
by Morris (1951) and comparison with reference collections at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.
The shell belongs to the Arcidae family form Neotia ponderosa (the
Ponderous Ark), and eastern coast type commonly found in deep water
(and washes onto beaches) from Cape Hatteras southward to the West
Indies, and rarely as far northward as Cape Cod. It is also similar to such
Cardiidae family forms as Dinocardium robustrum (the Great Heart
Cockle) and Trachycardium maricatum (the Common Cockle), but the Pat
Parker specimen is heavier and has fewer ribs (24) than most Cardiidae
(the old term Cardium us no longer used). The beak also turns forward,
causing the ribs to curve forward a great deal, while the cockles usually
have central beaks and straight ribs. In addition, cockles have conspicuous
up-curved teeth on the ribs, a feature absent on the Pat Parker specimen.
Historic Materials
The Pat Parker Site was evidentally used as a trash dump by non-Indian
occupants. European and Anglo-American articles were abundant on the
surface and in the upper excavated levels. Ceramics consisted mainly of
white-paste earthenwares (transfer, hand-painted, stamped, feather edge,
plain) and patinated glass bottle fragments. Three mold-made clay pipe

203

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

204

bowl fragments were also found. Other items include mother-of-pearl
buttons, harmonica fragments, combs, round and square nails, fence
staples, a bridle bit, stirrup, saddle and harness trappings, metal bucket
fragments, an iron hoe, barrel hoops, and other metal objects, many of
which have not been identified. Such perishable materials as textiles,
modern corn remains, and various seeds presumably post-date indian
occupation, probably near the middle or end of the 19th century.

FAUNAL REMAINS
A partial sample of bones was identified by Ernest L. Lundelius.
Jr. (Department of Geology, The University of Texas at Austin): bison
or cow, deer, opossum, cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus sp.), cotton rat
(Sigmodon hispidus), unidentified bird, soft-shell turtle, and domestic pig. Due to the mixture of aboriginal and modern materials
in the excavated area, there is no way to distinguish the animals
used by prehistoric Indians from those killed by modern Europeans.
Deer antler fragments were abundant and represent at least five or
six antlers, all attributable to the aboriginal occupation. As
mentioned earlier, a cache of antler fragments was near Burials i,
3, and 4. Additional distributional information is unavailable.
Shell remains include numerous complete and fragmentary shells
of unidentified freshwater mussels, apparently obtained locally for
food. None show alteration or Use. The pendant described above from
a Ponderous Ark shell (Burial 2) came from the Gulf coast.

DISCUSSION
Artifactual and skeletal materials from the Pat Parker site seem
attributable to an early Neo-American occupation probably near the
beginning of the Austin phase. Presumably this would be sometime
around A.D. 800-I000 (Greet 1974:37; Prewitt 1974:22-32). Detailed
evaluation of the late Historic occupations and debris is beyond the
scope of this paper.
Placing the occupation in the Austin phase is based on traits generally believed to be representative of that period 0elks 1962):
Scallorn points, Granbury preforms (?), thick drills, and the carryover of Dad and Fairland dart points from the Transitional period.
Although the relationships between burials and artifacts in the surrounding matrix are tenuous, some Scallorn points seem to be
directly associated with skeletons, especially Burial 5. Two points
found by the landowner during the initial discovery, probably near
the head of Burial 5 may be burial inclusions. Aboriginal pottery
was on the surface and in the upper six inches of deposit, and may
repr

.... a’later O~C

erhaps Toyah’,phase:~ Other’ Toyah

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

205

phase traits, however, such as Perdiz arrow points, Covington
knives, and small flake drills are lacking at the site.
Placement in the early part of the Austin phase is due to the
suggested contemporaneity at the site of the Scallorn and Dad points.
The two types were found together, both immediately adjacent to
skeletons, and also in nonburial areas of the excavation. The
possibility exists that the two types occurred together because of
deposit mixing, but the simplest explanation seems to be
contemporaneity. Even so, it is unknown whether the two styles are
used by a single group or represent different groups. Although Darl is
a type most common to central Texas, Scallorn is a major type not
only in central Texas but also along portions of the Texas Gulf coast
and the coastal plains (Sulam et al 1954:506; Corbin 1974). Some sort
of coastal contact, possibly no more than indirect trade, is clearly
indicated by the perforated marine shell from Burial 2.
At least one additional explanation of the burials must be considered. The shallow depth of the skeletons (1.5 to 2 feet below the
present surface with little noticeable recent erosion) suggests that
the graves were dug from somewhere near the present surface.
Since the skeletons are clearly Indian and were buried by Indian
customs (orientation and position), the burials might be the result of
the most recent Indian activity at the site; that is, they might be
equated with the most recent Indian artifacts or, less plausibly, they
might be representative of a group leaving no recognizably late material remains.
The problem here is in designating the latest Indian artifacts. The
Scallorn-Darl assemblage appears to be a coherent group of associated types not followed at this site by other projectile point types.
The pottery, however, probably belongs to a later group, for data
are accumulating to indicate that pottery is very rarely associated
with Scallorn points. To our knowledge, the only site in central
Texas which may have pottery definitely associated with Scallorn is
the Wheatley site in Blanco County (Greer 1974), a single component
site presumably representing an overlap period of the Austin and
Toyah phases. Scallorn points at Wheatley seem smaller and different in outline from those at Pat Parker (other Wheatley forms
include Perdiz, Eddy, Cuney, and a wide rectangular-stem form). The
pottery at the Wheatley site has a coarser paste with some sand and
shell temper. Sherds from the Oblate Site in Comal County (Tunnell
1962) are remarkably similar to those from Pat Parker and likely are
part of an assemblage containing a distinctive form of Perdiz with
prominant, sharp barbs and a long, wide and pointed stem with
convex edges. The Oblate Site also contained a concave-base

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Scallorn form similar to the south-central Texas Edwards type (Sollberger 1967; Hester 1971:67-68), which seems to predate pottery. It
seems probable that the Pat Parker sherds are the only diagnostic
remains of a late Perdiz (late Toyah phase?) visit. If so, the burials
could date to this later period.
Turning to the burials, where position could be determined all
the bodies were oriented with the heads to the north (which is also
toward the adjacent creek). It is uncertain whether the direction the
body faced (six east and four west) was of any importance.
Two Austin phase burials were recovered at the Kyle site in Hill
County (Jelks 1962:21). A 30-35 year old female lay on its left side,
oriented to the northwest, and faced northeast. This situation is almost identical to most of the Pat Parker individuals. The other Kyle
burial was a 3-4 year old child, also flexed on its left side, but
orientation and direction the skeleton was facing are not given.
Neither of the Kyle burials had associated grave goods.
Stephenson (1970) reports additional Hill County burials which
are probably attributable to the Austin phase. Burial 1 in Pictograph
Cave is a child 3-4 years of age, flexed on its left side with the head
to the east (Ibid. p. 124). Burial i in Sheep Shelter (Ibid. pp. 193-196)
is an adult male, flexed, with the head to the east. Burial 2 is a male
(?) child, flexed, with the head to the west. Burial 3 is a double
burial with an adult male and an adolescent female semi-flexed on
their right side facing northwest and the heads to the northeast.
Burial 4 is a male (?) child, flexed, with the head to the southwest.
None of the burials had associated grave goods.
Another burial presumably attributable to the Austin phase is reported from the Cottonwood Terrace site on the Colorado River in
Burnet County (Benfer and Benfer 1965). The skeleton is a 28 year
old male oriented northward and tightly flexed on its left side facing
east. It was covered by five very large granite rocks; a biracial
granite mano lay directly on top of the skull. A Scallorn coryell was
"in the crumbling bone beneath and immediately surrounding the
cervical-thoracic iunction of the vertebral column" flbid. D. 32).
Hester and Collins (1969) have reported what they believe to be
Austin phase burials from the Frisch Auf! site in Fayette County.
Their results may be summarized as follows: (1) Two skeletons were
represented by two skulls and the postcranial material from one individual. Both were oriented southward, presumably flexed on their
right side facing generally east. Two nearly identical Scallorn sattler
arrow points were against the ribs, obviously grave goods. (2) One
skeleton of a child was oriented southward, flexed on its right side

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

207

facing east. No grave goods were associated. (3) An infant was
oriented southward in a flexed position. Grave goods included a
utilized antler tine fragment (flaking tool?), a smoothed and shaped
section of petrified wood of almost the same form as the antler, and
an unaltered freshwater mussel shell. (4) A broken carnivore
baculum from disturbed fill is believed to be from a grave.
The Loeve-Fox site (Prewitt 1974] is an Austin phase cemetery on
the San Gabriel River in Williamson County, northwest of Pat
Parker. About 25 burials (mostly single) were placed at different
times in an area about 10 feet square (though perhaps larger). The
earlier burials were loosely flexed; the later were tightly flexed,
perhaps to preserve the limits of a well defined cemetery area. Most
were oriented with heads to the north and lay on either side. Grave
goods were essentially absent; a conch shell object was associated
with one individual. Scallorn points and fragments imbedded on or
between bones in fatal positions indicate violent deaths.
Reported burials must be carefully evaluated before hypotheses
regarding Austin phase burial patterns are proposed, lelks reports
that the Kyle site burials are undoubtedly assignable to the Austin
phase on the basis of their stratigraphic position. The geographic
location of the site is certainly in keeping with the Edwards Plateau
image for Austin phase concentration. The same is true for Stephenson’s burials from the same area, although Pictograph Cave Burial 1
and Sheep Shelter Burial 4 are presumed late Austin phase and may
actually be early Toyah phase.
The Cottonwood Terrace skeleton from Burnet County is west of
the Balcones Fault and is in the area for which the Austin phase was
originally defined. A problem of interpretation exists with the uncertainty of assignment of Cottonwood Terrace to the Austin phase as a
cultural unity. During excavation it was uncertain whether the Scallorn point found near the vertebrae was a grave good, or was the
cause of death. The only safe inference is that the individual must
have died during the time Scallorn points were in use. Another item
worth noting is the treatment of the body during burial: a mano was
placed on the skull, and the body was covered with large rocks. Both
practices are common local traditions, probably with considerable
time depth, and are found over much of Texas (Greer and Benfer
1963:234). Although large stones are essentially absent in the
vicinity of Pat Parker and also Frisch Auf!, the Hill County sites
(Kyle, Pictograph Cave, Sheep Shelter) are limestone rock shelters.
The absence of stones covering the burials (presuming the lack of
mention in the reports indicates the absence of stones) seems sig-

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nificant. Only Burial I in Pictograph Cave was covered with hearthstones and ashes, after a fire pit was cleaned out to put the body in.
There also seem to be few problems with the assignment of LoeveFox or other nearby sites in Williamson County (Prewitt 1974) to the
Austin phase. The area is within currently accepted boundaries for
the Austin phase, and there can be no doubt that some of the people
were killed by someone using Scallorn points. Presumably the victims
were enemies of Austin phase groups. Prewitt believes the victims
and the survivors who constructed the cemetery were Austin phase
peoples (he prefers an interpretation of intra-Austin phase warfare
or the culling out of undesirable members of a group by the dominant
majority). The early dates and the general consensus that only Austin
phase groups making Scallorn points lived in the area during this
general A.D. 800-1200 period would seem to support him. There are,
however, other possibilities, such as conflicts with other peoples,
whether or not they hunted with Scallorn points or the more recently
introduced Perdiz.
Frisch Auf! presents a problem of phase identification because of
the location of the site. Several skeletons in a small area of the site
seem to date from a very short period. Two nearly identical Scallorn
points occur as grave goods with one burial and link the Scallorn
form with the burial traits. Unfortunately, the site’s location in Fayette County places it in the intermediate prairies between the lower,
eastern coastal plains and the hills of the Edwards Plateau west of
the fault line. Previous workers (e.g. Kelley 1951:137) have pointed
out the unique nature of this intermediate area and have warned
against including such sites in adjacent archeological areas without
considerable caution. It is therefore uncertain whether the Frisch
Auf! burials belong to the central Texas Austin phase, such coastal
entities as the Rockport or Galveston Bay phases, or some other cultural unit -- whether a unique, local manifestation or an unrecognized complex from an adjacent area. The southern orientation of
the skeletons and the number and variety of grave goods suggest
that something different is going on, but the significance of the variation cannot be evaluated at this point.
The Pat Parker site falls into the uncertain category also. The admixture of Scallorn and Darl points suggests a time near the introduction of Scallorn in the Travis County area. The difficulty of evaluating the association of projectile point types with any burial, however, restricts a definite linking of burials with any particular point
style, such as Scallorn. Although pottery was found in upper levels,
data from other sites indicate the introduction of pottery at a later

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

209

date and suggest that we should dissociate the sherds from the
points -- actually from all the other artifacts at the site, a rather
uncomfortable position. Recent Anglo materials reflecting farm life
were mixed in the upper levels also, and in general there was considerable disturbance in the burial area (deposits outside the burial
area were not adequately tested}. This mixing also supports the explanation that the sherds are later than Scallorn points and recently
have been mixed into subsurface deposits.
Having thus set up at least two questionable aboriginal occupations, and taking into account the shallowness of the burials, one
could argue for a much later, post-Austin phase date for the burials,
or even a post-Darl occupation by later Austin phase groups using
only Scallorn points. The presence of the marine shell as a grave
good indicates coastal contacts which, as with Frisch Auf!, confuses
the situation slightly, since the type and degree of interaction between central Texas and the coastal areas are presently unknown.
Several marine shells and coastal sherds have been found in sites
near the Colorado River in Travis, Burnet, Llano, and San Saba
counties (e.g. Jackson 1938:111,112, 117; Prewitt 1974:55-67), so it is
known that coastal contacts were experienced by at least some
central Texas groups.
Harry J. Shafer (personal communication 1975) and Elton Prewitt
(1974; personal communication 1975) have suggested an extension to
Shafer’s (1971) central Texas model. They see designated cemtery
areas as a pattern well established at least by the Austin phase in
the Blackland Prairie of central Texas. These cemetery areas are
isolated horizontal units (rockshelters or open sites) in which
several individuals were placed, seemingly at different times. The
burial areas often seem to be limited to a well defined area about i0
feet in maximum diameter and used over a fairly long period of time,
perhaps 100 years or more. This, to us, seems to indicate some sort
of formally marked and bounded area, such as a house or fenced
area, recognizable to and understood by possibly several generations. Examples for the cemetery hypothesis seem to include mainly
Loeve-Fox, Pat Parker, Frisch Auf!, Harte-Overcash (Polecat Hollow), and a few others (see Prewitt 1974 for a more comprehensive
review of central Texas burials).
Shafer also views the situations at Aycock Shelter (Watt 1936)
and the Asa Warner site (Watt 1956) as examples of what he terms
"Austin-Toyah cemeteries". These last two sites, both located near
Waco, contain Perdiz points, in some cases inside the body cavities,
but no Scallorn. According to Watt (1936), Aycock apparently con-

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tained a Transitional period midden (Darl, Ensor, and related projectile point forms} into which burials {containing Perdiz points} were
placed. Watt [1956) describes Asa Warner as a Toyah phase
occupation (with burials} with considerable contact with east Texas,
as evidenced by pottery and ear spools, among other things.
The Harte-Overcash Site is a deep, stratified open site in Travis
County about six miles south of Pat Parker. Of interest here are the
burials near the surface, mostly scattered (though some may be intentionally grouped} around the extensively occupied portion of the
site (areas outside the area of concentrated occupational debris
were not tested}. The burials are probably Nee-American in age (because they are shallow), but associations are uncertain. The materials and contexts have not been analyzed and it is not known
whether the burials could be considered a cemetery situation utilizing an existing midden, patronizing a selected and recognized area
for burial, whether their placement here is simply haphazard burial
within an existing midden, or some combination of the two (E. Mott
Davis, personal communication 1975).
The cemetery hypothesis should be carefully considered. With the
inception of the Austin phase (the traditional beginning of the NeeAmerican period, which should designate a cultural change as well
as an elaboration of materials), quite possibly not just arrowpoints
(and by implication the bow and arrow} were introduced into the
local Transitional phase (of Shafer 1971) of central Texas, but probably a number of other cultural alterations took place as well. One
of these could have been a more formal designation of burial areas,
whether or not they were set aside from the occupation area. Formal cemeteries of this sort, likewise, might tend to suggest larger,
more permanent villages, but this is speculation. Cemeteries seemingly continue into the Toyah phase.
Prewitt (1974) has pointed out the commonness of marine shell
objects (e.g. conch shell pendants} being found with at least one of
the burials at each site. These obviously indicate some sort of contact with the Gulf coast, and he suggests that these objects may relate to status. If so, we could be dealing with something like formerly
designated burial plots for an extended family or some other kind of
distinguishable social groups. Extensive testing at such sites as
Loeve-Fox might reveal additional cemetery areas and make possible
hypotheses regarding such things as intrasocial composition or the
distribution of families or social groups within a camp.
An important question regarding such cemetery situations as
those reported by Watt (1936, 1956} and Prewitt (1974), however,

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

211

revolves around who was being buried and by whom. Perdiz points
clearly were the cause of death in some individuals (e.g. Asa
Warner and Aycock Shelter}, but this does not necessarily mean
that they are totally within a post-Scallorn time period or cultural
pattern. Scallorn points also have been the direct cause of death at
some sites (Cottonwood Terrace, Loeve-Fox, and others; see Prewitt
1974:55-67). Even assuming that the use of Scallorn points died out
shortly after the introduction of Perdiz points (and the myriad of
other Plains-oriented Toyah phase traits), there easily could have
been a time during which the two point styles were both in use in the
same area (e.g. the Wheatley site, Greer 1974}. Next we must assume that for this particular case, the designated, specially chosen
projectile point forms are equatable with cultural phases, and that
these phases are equatable with different peoples (see Frison et al.
1974 for alternate assumptions}. There seems to be considerable evidence for this interpretation (as discussed by most of the people in
the bibliography}. Burials from sites indicating agression and/or violent deaths could be from a time in which Austin and Toyah phase
groups were in contact. For instance, Austin phase people could
have been killed with Toyah phase weapons and buried according to
practices similar to other Austin phase sites (flexed position on either side in a very shallow pit, oriented with the head usually to the
north). Had the initial contact between the two groups been unfriendly, such burial situations might be expected to occur rather
commonly. Ethnohistoric discussions (Kelley 1955:989 from Bolton
1912:16; Bryan 1956) and archeological reports (Aynesworth 1936;
Prewitt 1974} might be of use to someone constructing and evaluating a model of the agressiveness of Toyah phase peoples and their
relationships with other cultural groups.
Prewitt (1974:50; personal communication 1975} does not believe
that inter-phase warfare is a reasonable possibility, and prefers to
consider (1) internecene warfare involving territorial rights among
people of a single cultural pattern (e.g. the Austin phase) and (2)
genocide to relieve the group of responsibility for supporting aged,
sick, or otherwise unproductive members of the society. We strongly
prefer the warfare interpretation and see no reason to reject either
inter- or intra-phase conflict.
FINAL STATEMENT
The significance of the Pat Parker site lies mainly in its contribution of data regarding Austin phase burial customs. Unfortunately,
these phase-wide patterns, if such actually existed, are uncertain at

212

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

this time due to the difficulty of assigning burials with certainty to
Austin phase groups. Simply comparing burials containing Scallorn
points is inadequate, due to the probability of unrecognized subdivisions of the Austin phase. The basic cultural units and their local
manifestations or technofacies (Frison et al. 1974) must be defined in
terms of content, time, space, and external relations before we can
compare social aspects and hope to arrive at meaningful generalizations regarding central Texas groups.
At present the general pattern for late burials in central Texas is
one in which burials are often clustered in relatively small, apparently formally designated cemetery areas. Of particular interest are
groupings about I0 feet in diameter on open sites of scattered (horizontally extensive) midden debris. These groupings appear to have
been marked for several years during their use in some recognizable
and understood way, such as being a fenced-off area, a small house,
or an area beside surface markers. Craves probably were shallow,
and appeared either as single or multiple burials. Apparently individual graves were not marked, as indicated especially well at
Loeve-Fox and Aycock where skeletons were cut through by later
graves. Violence of some yet undetermined character is indicated by
projectile points commonly being the cause of death. Burial goods
are rare, although any site with a rather large number of individuals
usually has some sort of marine shell (Gulf coast) jewelry, indicating
direct or indirect contact with the Gulf coastal environmenl or with
coastal peoples. Deer antler also seems fairly commonly included in
the burial area. Future studies undoubtedly will add more to this
model in terms of social aspects and temporal and areal differences.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Excavation at the Pat Parker site was a cooperative effort under the
general coordination and supervision of E. Mort David (Department of
Anthropology) and Kenneth Honea (then of the Texas Memorial Museum] of
The University of Texas at Austin. The multitude of cheerful volunteer
laborers included members of the Texas Archeological Society, University of
Texas Archeological Society, Travis County Archeological Society, and
students of The University of Texas at Austin. E. B. Jelks, Curtis Tunnell, and
T. W. McKern served as consultants. During analysis of the materials and
preparation of the report, T.N. Campbell, E. Mort Davis, Dee Ann Story,
Alice Benfer, Patricia A. Treat, W. Raymond Wood, Harry J. Shafer, Thomas
R. Hester. and Elton R. Prewitt aided considerably in their direction,
criticism,

comments and general help. J.F. Epstein. E.B. ]elks, Curtis

Tunnell, Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr., and T. W. McKern assisted in classification
and description of materials relating to their specialities. Extra thanks and

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

213

appreciation are due the landowner, Pat Parker, and his son Gordon, who
through their insight in reporting the exposed burials, their allowing
scientific work, and their continual help and courtesy during the many
bothers and inconveniences caused by our field crew, added another bit of
information to our meager but growing knowledge of Texas prehistory.

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES

CITED

Aynesworth, K. H.
1936 Flint Arrowhead Wounds of Bones as Shown in Skeletons in Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 2,
pp. 74-79.
Benfer, R. and A. Benfer
1965 An Austin Focus Burial. Texas Engineering and Science Magazine,
Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 31-32.
Bolton, H. E.
1912 The Jumano Indians of Texas, 1650-1771. The Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association, Vol. 20, pp. 66-84.
Bryan, F.
1956 Early Texas Travelers. Central Texas Archeologist, Vol. 7, pp. 56108.
Corbin, J. E.
1974 A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend Area of
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 45, pp. 29-54.
Dahlberg, A. A.
1949 The Dentition of the American Indian. In: The Physical Anthropology
of the American Indian. pp. 138-176. The Viking Fund. Inc. New
York.
Frison, G. C., M. Wilson, D. J. Wilson
1974 The Holocene Stratigraphic Archaeology of Wyoming: An
Introduction. In: Applied Geology and Archaeology: The Holocene
History of Wyoming, by M. Wilson (Ed.). The Geological Survey of
Wyoming, Report of Investigations. Vol. 10. pp. 108-127.
Goldstein, M. S.
1948 Dentition of Indian Crania from Texas. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 63-84.
Greer. J. W.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Wheatley Site. Blanco County,
Texas. Report submitted to the Texas Historical Commission.
Austin.
Greer, J. W. and R. A. Benfer
1963 Langtry Creek Burial Cave. Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vot. 33. pp. 229-251.
Hester, T. R.
1971 Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42, pp. 51148.
Hester, T. R. and M. B. Collins
1969 Burials from the Frisch Auf! Site: 41 FY 42. The Texas lournal of
Science, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 261-272.

AUSTIN PHASE BURIALS

215

Jackson, A. T.
1938 The Fall Creek Sites. The University of Texas Publications 3802.
Anthropological Papers, Vol. 3, No. 1, Austin .....
Jelks, E. B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin. Archaeology Series 5.
Kelley, J. C.
1951 Stephenson and Krieger on "Culture Chronology in Texas".
American Antiquity, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 137-139.
1955 Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. American
Anthropologist, Vol. 57, No. 5, pp. 981-995.
McKern, T. W. and T. D. Stewart
1957 Skeletal Age Changes in Young American Males. Technical Report
EP-45. Quartermaster Research and Development Center,
Environmental Protection Research Division, U.S. Army. Natick,
Mass.
Montagu, M. F. A.
1960 A Handbook of Anthropometry. Charles C. Thomas, Pub.
Springfield, Ill.
Morris, P. A.
1951 A Field Guide to the Shells of our Atlantic and Gulf Coasts. The
Riverside Press, Cambridge.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 49.
Sharer, H. J.
1971 Late Prehistory of Central Texas, 500 B.C. - 1700 A.D. Paper
presented at the 74th Annual Meeting of the Texas Academy of
Science, Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches, Texas.
Solberger, J. B.
1967 A New Type of Arrowpoint with Speculations as to its Origin. The
Record, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 16-22. Dallas.
1970 Preforms are not Projectile Points. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 19, pp. 151-154.
Stephenson, R. L.
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41, pp. 37286.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25,

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Tunnell, C. D.
1962 Oblate: A Rockshelter Site. In: Salvage Archeology of Canyon
Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites, by L.
Johnson, Jr., D. A. Suhm, and C. D. Tunnell. Bulletin of the Texas
Memorial Museum, No. 5. Austin.
Watt, F. H.
1936 A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Central Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 5-27.
1956 Archeological Materials from the Asa Warner Sites. Central Texas
Archeologist Vol. 7, pp. 7-29.
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri

