Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:201-214

1981

NOTES

Vance T. Hoiiiday and Curtis M. Weity
ABSTRACT
A survey of lithic tool resources of the eastern Llano Estacado was aimed at characterizing the
types and availability of material suitable for tool making found in the various geologic units that
make up the bedrock of the area. Five major units are present along the eastern Llano Estacado:
Quartermaster Formation; Dockum Group; Antlers Sand; Edwards Limestone; and Ogallala
Formation. The Quartermaster Formation (uppermost Permian) contains the Alibates Dolomite
Lentil, providing the well known, multicolored Alibates agate found along the Canadian River
Valley. The Dockum Group (upper Triassic) has a basal gravel with quartzite and cherts, common throughout the survey area. Along the east central Llano Estacado, the Dockum contains
the Tecovas Formation which often yields lenses of jasper (Tecovas or Quitaque jasper) and
chert. The Antlers Sand (lower Cretaceous) found on the southeastern Llano Estacado has a
basal gravel with quartzites, cherts, and jasper. The Edwards Limestone, occurring in the same
areas as the Antlers, sometimes contains nodules and lenses of chert. The Ogallala Formation
(Miocene-Pliocene) has the most variety and abundance of suitable and available raw material for
artifacts. Gravels are found throughout the area, including quartzites, cherts, flint, and jasper.
Pedogenic caliches formed in the upper Ogallala, Edwards, and Blanco Formation (Pliocene) are
often silicified and occasionally opalized, providing marginal to good quality material. The presence of such quantities of varied, readily available material imposes severe limitations on the use
of particular rock types as indicators of trade with other areas.

INTRODUCTION
The types, quantities, and availability of rocks suitable for manufacturing
lithic tools in a given area should have considerable influence on the quantity
and quality of lithic tools and debitage found in archeological sites. The physical properties of a particular rock type will, in large measure, control the
workability of a tool and its wear resistance. The availability and amount of
usable material would be expected to control the degree of reutilization and
conservation of tools and debitage. As Ahler (1977:133) stated, a geological
survey aimed at linking".., stone types to an area of natural occurence...
is an essential step in any meaningful investigations of lithic or any other raw
material selection and procurement system."
The importance of proximity and quality of geological outcrops to archeological investigations is not new to archeology (Bryan, 1950; Coffin,
1951). However, such systematic surveys of lithic resource areas are rela-

202

Texas Archeological Society

tively rare in archeology. Surveys and petrographic studies of specific, well
known rock types or outcrops are more common (Clayton et al, 1970; Hood,
1978; Schaeffer, 1958).
The Llano Estacado (Southern High Plains of Texas and eastern New Mexico) has been the scene of archeological investigations for over half a century
(Collins, 1971; Kelly, 1964; Holliday, in press). The importance of raw material availability and types to the quality and quantity of tools and debitage in
archeological sites has been recognized (Green and Kelly, 1960; Hester,
1975; Hood, 1978; Hughes, 1976). The area contains outcrops and quarries
of Alibate agate, one of the best known raw materials on the Plains. Considerable attention has been given the material (Asquith, 1975; Bowers and
Reaser, 1974; Bryan, 1950; Green and Kelly, 1960; Schaeffer, 1958).
Hester (1972, 1975) reviews some of the more common rock types available in the area and mentions several specific locations. Several reviews of rock
types common in specific areas and some associated outcrops are available
(Etchieson et al., 1977, 1978; Hughes and Hood, 1976; Harrison and Killen,
1978). Hughes (1978) and Willey and Hughes (1978) review the bedrock
stratigraphy in the MacKenzie Reservoir area. Hughes (1976) provides a review of references to lithic resources in the Texas Panhandle.
Despite previous work, a regional, systematic research concerning the
characteristics of lithic material as they relate to bedrock types is lacking. Such
a survey is particularly important on the Llano Estacado because the surface is
mantled by a thick cover of Pleistocene eolian sediments. Hence, rock outcrops are common only along the escarpments that form the west, north, and
east boundaries of the Llano Estacado. Limited outcrops also occur along the
deeper drainages (draws) and lake basins (playas). To procure material, inhabitants of the interior of the area would have to travel some distance to the
outcrops or trade. Additionally, by determining the nature of available local
material, identification of rock types from other areas is feasible.

METHODOLOGY
A preliminary survey of available lithic tool resources on the eastern Llano
Estacado was conducted. The principal goal was to characterize, macroscopically, the types of materials available in each of the major bedrock units in the
region. Petrographic analysis was not undertaken nor an intensive study of
the knapping characteristics of individual rock types. Field investigations centered on the Lubbock area and included the eastern escarpment of the Llano
Estacado extending from the eastern end of Palo Duro Canyon (Briscoe
County) south and west to Fluvanna (Scurry County) and Lamesa (Dawson
County) and extending east from the escarpment a short distance onto the
Rolling Plains (Fig. 1).
Roadcuts and quarries were examined along the escarpment, reentrant
canyons, draws, and larger playa lake basins. An effort was not made to
locate archeological quarry sites. A survey of geological and archeological
literature dealing with rock types and stratigraphy and specific outcrop areas
and quarries also was conducted.

Holliday and Welty - Lithic Tool Resources

203

Soulhern
High
Pla~

~itaque
~N-

Dickens

Quoternnry"caver sands"
tncL Btackwoter Draw Fm.
To virtually everywhere
present under Qcs
Ogallala

~

Fm.!Ter rio r y: Mia.- Plio,)

Cretaceous undivided
incl. Antlers S,

~ Edwards Ls.

~ Dockum Gp. (Trinssic)

~
0

50

0

Quorterrnaster Fm,(Permian)

lOOmL
150 kin.
1981

Fig. 1 Generalized Geologic Map of the Llano Estacado (Texas Portion) with Units
and Localities Mentioned in the Report.

Exposures of suitable raw materials were recorded and sampled even if
they occurred as gravel too small to be utilized for tool manufacture. Although
specific localities may not have provided rocks of sufficient size for flaking, it
was considered that the material would be an indication of what could be
available in other exposures of the same formation. Identification of rock
types was based on macroscopic properties such as color, texture, and
mineralogical composition.

ROCK AND MINERAL NOMENCLATURE
When describing rocks and minerals used for manufacturing artifacts, it is
advisable to follow classification schemes established by geologists. Confusion exists among archeologists concerning certain rock types (e.g., flint vs.

204

Texas Archeological Society

chert); and in many cases, terms have been improperly used by geologists,
primarily because a general agreement on terminology is lacking. The following summary of various rock and mineral types commonly used for artifacts,
particularly on the Southern High Plains, follows those of Blatt et al. (1980)
and Lapedes (1978). Definitions can vary depending on the source consulted.
Most lithic tools are made from various forms of fine crystalline quartz
(silica). This quartz generally occurs as either fiberous varieties, termed
chalcedony (a mineral), or microcrystalline or cryptocrystalline forms termed
chert (a rock). Differentiating chalcedony from chert (which can have chalcedony in it) is very difficult in hand specimens. Color is the best key for a
general classification of forms of chert. The best known variety of chalcedony
is agate, which has multicolored bands. Cherts are most commonly various
shades of gray to tan. Very dark gray or black cherts usually are referred to as
flint. Cherts strongly colored with red, brown, or yellow are termed jasper.
Other common rock types for tools are quartzite and silicified and opalized
caliche. Quartzite is a metamorphic rock, usually a metamorphosed sandstone (i.e., subjected to high temperature and pressure). Quartz sandstone
cemented with silica is often mistermed quartzite. Individual grains of quartz
usually are not apparent in metamorphic quartzite (metaquartz). In silica cemented quartz sandstone (often called orthoquartz), individual, rounded
quartz grains generally are visible, particularly with the aid of a hand lens.
Ebright (1979) presents a summary of quartzite genesis and terminology
oriented toward the archeologist and lithic technician.
Caliche, also referred to as calcrete, is a frequently misused term. Caliche is
a massive, Well indurated form of calcium carbonate, precipitated during very
long periods of soil formation in semiarid to arid regions. Under proper conditions, calcium carbonate can be replaced by silica resulting in the formation of
silicified caliche. Generally, obvious visual differences are lacking between
caliche and silicified forms but the latter tends towards greenish hues. It also
breaks in concoidal fractures.
The silicification process also can result in the formation of opalized caliche.
Opal is a hydrated form of silica, usually a lustrous white and sometimes
exhibiting various spectral colors. The opal often is found in the caliche as
irregularly shaped nodules.
Much of the raw material used for tool making comes from gravels in unconsolidated sediments or conglomerates in consolidated deposits. Size classification of the clasts is of considerable importance in assessing suitability for
flaking into an artifact. They are as follows: boulders -- 256 mm (10 in) + ;
cobbles -- 64-256 mm (21/2-10 in); pebbles -- 4-64 mm (3/16-21/2 in).

BEDROCK STRATIGRAPHY
The stratigraphy and structure of the Southern High Plains is well known
from diverse studies (Meade et al, 1974; Evans, 1949; Evans and Brand,
1956; Nicholson, 1960; Sellards et al., 1947). Geologic maps of the area
include 1:250,000 scale maps of the Amarillo (Barnes, 1969), Plainview

Holliday and Welty - Lithic Tool Resources

205

(Barnes, 1968), Lubbock (Barnes, 1967) and Big Spring (Barnes, 1974)
areas.

Five major (sedimentary rock) units contain material suitable for lithic tool
manufacture. From older to younger, these are: Quartermaster Formation~
Dockum Group; Antlers Sand; Edwards Limestone; and Ogallala Formation. Various pedogenic caliches occasionally yield material of varying quality.
The Quartermaster Formation (uppermost Permian) and older Permian
redbeds crop out at the surface of the Rolling Plains east of the Llano Estacado
(Fig. 1). The Quartermaster is the oldest unit near the Llano Estacado containing suitable material for lithic tools. The redbeds consist of silty, evenly
bedded, locally massive shales; sandy, well indurated siltstone; and silty, fine
grained sandstone. Gypsum and dolomite beds occur discontinuously.
The Alibates Dolomite Lentil, in the upper Quartermaster has been
mapped along the northern Llano Estacado, primarily in the Canadian River
drainage. The unit, parts of which have been altered to agate, is found near
the top of the Quartermaster Formation (Gould, 1907; Barnes, 1969; Patton, 1923), although on some correlation charts it is shown as a separate unit,
underlying the Quartermaster (Nicholson, 1960:Fig. 45). The Quartermaster
Formation crops out continuously near the foot of the Llano Estacado escarpment from Donley to Kent counties (Fig. 1).
The Dockum Group (upper Triassic) forms the lower portion of the Llano
Estacado escarpment. Because the unit was deposited in a large northwest
southeast trending basin (McGowan et al., 1979), outcrops occur only along
the northwestern, eastern, and southeastern Llano Estacado with beds generally becoming thicker from north to south (Figs. 1,2). Along the northern
and northeastern Llano Estacado, the Dockum often is subdivided into the
Tecovas and Trujillo Formations.
The Tecovas Formation, the oldest unit, is composed of a basal conglomerate with discontinuous chert lenses and overlying varicolored shales. The
Trujillo Formation consists of red, interbedded sandy conglomerates, conglomeratic sandstones, and shales. To the south, the Dockum consists of a
complex sequence of conglomerates, fine to coarse grained, red, indurated
sandstones, reddish brown sandy clays, and varicolored sandy shales. Discontinuous chert lenses occur throughout the Unit (Barnes, 1969; McGowan
et al., 1979).
The Antlers Sand and Edwards Limestone are lower Cretaceous deposits
found along the east central and southeast Llano Estacado. The Antlers,
which is the basal Cretaceous unit in the area, consists of varicolored siltstone,
sand, sandstone, and a basal conglomerate. The Edwards Limestone is separated from the Antlers by the Walnut Formation and Comanche Peak Limestone. The Edwards consists of fine to medium grained limestone with occasional chert lenses (Brand, 1953; Barnes, 1974; Meade et al., 1974).
The Ogallala Formation (Miocene-Pliocene) is the most ubiquitous rock
unit of the High Plains, cropping out continuously along the northern and
eastern Llano Estacado. The unit consists of a basal red to brown sand and
conglomerate (Couch Formation of Evans, 1949); and an upper, reddish,
unconsolidated sand, silt, and clay with occasional gravel lenses (Bridwell
Formation of Evans, 1949) (Reeves, 1972). Along the northern Llano Esta-

Texas Archeological Society

206

High

Plains

cover sands~

"caprock caliche"

silicified & opalized caliches

Ogallala Fm

gravels w/quartzites, jasper,
flint, cherts
in situ

Edwards Ls.

chert

Comanche
Peak Ls.
Walnut Fm.

grovels w/quortzites, jasper, flint

Antlers Sand
Trujillo FI

\

gravels w/quartzites, jasper,

Dockum Gp. ~,

flint, cherts
inzitu jasper, chert

TecovasFm.~

insifu agate

Alibates Dolomite
~

~ Rolling

^

uuartermaster

Fm.

~

no

vertical

scale

56°N
i

32°N

I
Big Spring

Plainview

Lubbock

Amarillo

Canadian R

ploi,

High

:Pg = ~--~ plains
/~ol/ing

V7H/LLP

(section

approx,

along

101°W)

1981

Fig. 2 Composite Stratigraphic Column of Geologic Units and Respective Rock Types
Suitable for Tool Manufacture (above). Generalized North-South Geologic Cross Section of the Eastern Llano Estacado Showing Relative Thicknesses and Stratigraphic
Relationships of Units (below).

cado, Patton (1923) identified a basal gravel, termed the Potter Formation or
Potter gravel (Hood, 1978), lithologically different from the basal gravel common in the Ogallala to the south.
A very well developed, well indurated caliche formed at the top of the
bedrock, the ledge forming caprock caliche. Generally, the unit developed by
soil forming processes in the upper Ogallala. On the southern Llano Estacado, where the Ogallala thins and the Edwards Limestone forms the surface
outcrop, caliche formed in the latter.

Holliday and Welty -- Lithic Tool Resources

207

On the south central Llano Estacado, along the escarpment and in draws,
outcrops of the Blanco Formation (upper Pliocene) consist of discontinuous
deposits of dolomite set into the top of the Ogallala. A well developed caliche
often is found at the top of the Blanco. The Ogallala and Blanco caliches are
often silicified and occasionally opalized.
The surface of the Llano Estacado is mantled by a thick deposit of Pleistocene eolian sediments referred to as the cover sands (Frye and Leonard,
1965) or Blackwater Draw Formation (Reeves, 1976). The Ogallala appears
present virtually everywhere beneath the Pleistocene deposits (Oetking,
1959).

BEDROCK MATERIAL SUITABLE FOR
TOOL MANUFACTURE
Alibates agate is the only material in the Quartermaster Formation suitable
for manufacturing tools. This multicolored material, occurring as lenses and
nodules, is the result of silicification of the dolomite (Gould, 1907; Asquith,
1975; Bowers and Reaser, 1974). The best known outcrops are in Alibates
National Monument near Fritch (Fig. 1). Other outcrops are found on both
sides of the Canadian River northeast of Amarillo and sometimes in local
gravels (Etchieson et al., 1978; Gould, 1907; Hughes, 1976; Patton, 1923).
The colors in the agate occur mainly in bands, but also as mottles (Patton,
1923). Most colors are maroon to reds to tans with milky white interbands.
Other colors observed include chocolate brown, blue, and yellow.
Several different kinds of materials are available from the Dockum Group.
Most common are the pebble and cobble conglomerates, particularly notable
in the lower Dockum. In outcrops west of Flomot (Fig. 1), dominant lithologies are coarse to medium grained, light colored quartzites and red jaspers.
Other materials included flint and light glassy, fine grained, tan and light to
medium gray cherts. Similar lithologies are reported from a variety of areas
(McGowan et al., 1979) and outcrops appear to be quite common throughout the survey area. Outcrops with cobbles were not observed. Some probably are available and presumably lithologies would be similar.
Artifacts made from a jasper from the Tecovas Formation of the lower
Dockum Group are common in many archeological sites in the area. The
material is known locally known as Tecovas or Quitaque jasper (after the best
known outcrop near the town of Quitaque) (Fig. 1). Other reported outcrops
are in Palo Duro Canyon (Etchieson et al., 1978; McGowan et al., 1979) and
along the Canadian River Valley northwest of Amarillo (Jack T. Hughes,
personal communication). The material usually occurs as lenses. Colors
usually are maroon with mottles of yellow and brown common.
Tecovas jasper has been confused with Alibates agate, particularly if the
specimens are small such as flakes (Hughes, 1976; Green and Kelley, 1960;
Katz and Katz, 1976). Banding has been used as an indicator of Alibates
agate. However, Alibates also can be mottled. Alibates agate often has faint
suggestions of other colors within the red, whereas Tecovas jasper usually has
an even red color. Tecovas jasper tends to have more tiny quartz vugs than
Alibates agate.
Recent studies of the Lubbock lithic assemblage indicate that Alibates agate
and Tecovas jasper can be distinguished with relative confidence using low

208

Texas Archeological Society

magnifications (10-20x) (Doug Bamforth, personal communication). Ali~
bates agate tends to have a more vitreous, waxy luster and frequently, it is
possible to see a short distance into the stone. Tecovas jasper, on the other
hand, is opaque and bluish white quartz vugs are apparent.
A quartzite that is coarser grained than the jasper but otherwise has a similar
appearance (Tecovas quartzite) also is found in the Tecovas Formation (Etchieson et al., 1978).
Outcrops of the Antlers Sand are found in Borden, Dawson, and Garza
counties, south of Post and west of Fluvanna and Gail (Barnes, 1974) and in
Shafter Lake, Andrews County (Meade et al., 1974) (Fig. 1). The unit often
contains a basal gravel with lithologies similar to the Dockum gravel, including
some light colored quartzites, jasper, flint, and petrified wood. Observed outcrops of Antlers yielded only pebble clasts. It is not known if cobbles are
available.
Outcrops of material adequate for tool making were not found in the
Walnut Formation nor Comanche Peak Limestone. However, Evans and
Brand (1956:10) mention "a prominent quartzose conglomerate in the basal
3 feet of the [Commanche Peak Limestone]" in southeast Lubbock County.
Tan to gray cherts quite similar to cherts commonly found in the Edwards
Limestone in Central Texas are ubiquitous in archeological sites on the Llano
Estacado (Hester, 1972; Johnson and Holliday, 1981). In the survey area,
outcrops of light gray to tan cherts were found in the Edwards Limestone
along the southeast escarpment of the Llano Estacado in Borden and Garza
counties. The chert was not present everywhere in the Edwards outcrops.
This particular material probably does not account for the high percentages
of similar chert in local archeological sites. Hester (1972, 1975) reports outcrops of chert in the Edwards Limestone in the Sterling City - San Angelo
area, 50~90 mi southeast of Big Spring. Harrison and Killen (1978) mention
an outcrop in Jones County, northeast of San Angelo.
In the survey area, gravel of the Ogallala Formation produces the most
abundant and varied material for making lithic tools. The material is common
throughout the area. Within the Ogallala, the basal gravel generally seems to
have the largest clasts and highest quality materials. Light colored, medium to
coarse grained quartzites are most common. Several experimental tools were
made of this material by the authors, with most satisfactory results.
Dark gray to black, medium grained quartzites also were found; and red to
brown jaspers, medium to dark gray and dark blue chert, and flint were common. Outcrops of the upper Ogallala yielded a generally finer grained (pebble
sized) gravel and contained light colored, coarse grained quartzite, purple
quartzite, flint, some medium gray chert, and brown to yellow jasper. Along
the northeastern Llano Estacado, cherts apparently are rare in Ogallala
gravels, quartzites being the dominant lithology (Jack T. Hughes, personal
communication).
Potter chert is found in gravel of the Potter Formation of the lower Ogallala
on the northern Llano Estacado (Hood, 1978). The material is a dense, gray
to brown, silica cemented, very fine grained siltstone; it possibly is derived
from the Morrison Formation (Jurrasic) in New Mexico. Other materials
found in the Potter gravels are purple quartzite, some jasper, chert, petrified

Holliday and Welty -- Lithic Tool Resources

209

(silicified) wood, and various quartzites referred to as Potter quartzite (Hood,
1978~ Etchieson et al., 1977).
The various well developed caliches in the area provide occasionally
marginal to high quality raw materials for lithic tool manufacture. The caprock
caliche in the upper Ogallala Formation and Edwards Limestone and the
caliche formed in the upper Blanco Formation are silicified in places. Such
silicified caliche, although of poor quality, can be used for lithic tools. Despite
its poor workability the material is common in some archeological sites (Johnson and Holliday, 1981), particularly where outcrops are nearby.
In some areas, the silicification process has gone so far as to produce an
opalized caliche, usually in the lower caprock caliche (Reeves, 1970). The
opal is of fairly good quality and flakes of the material are common in archeological sites in the area (Hughes, 1976~ Hughes and Willey, 1978). Opal
outcrops were observed in exposures of the caprock at the Muleshoe Wildlife
Refuge (MWR) and reported from Cedar Lake (C.C. Reeves Jr., personal
communication) and in the MacKenzie Reservoir area (Hughes, 1978). (Fig.

1).
Outcrops of other materials sometimes found in sites on or near the Llano
Estacado are outside of the survey area. The Seymour Formation (Pleistocene) occurs in a north south trending outcrop 80 to 100 mi east of the Llano
Estacado. The deposit consists of gravels apparently derived from the Potter
gravels of the Ogallala Formation and the siliceous conglomerates from the.
Dockum Group (Hood, 1978). Presumably, Ogallala gravels with lithologies
similar to those found south of the Potter outcrops would be found in the
Seymour gravels.
Durler (1976) discusses a conglomerate with quartzites and other siliceous
material suitable for tool manufacture that makes up early or pre-Pleistocene
terraces of the Pecos River near Carlsbad (New Mexico), southwest of the
Llano Estacado.
Quartzite considered to be from outcrops of the Dakota Formation (upper
Cretaceous) near Ft. Sumner and Tucumcari (New Mexico), along the northwest escarpment, is a common artifact material on the northern Llano Estacado (Hester, 1975; Willey and Hughes, 1978). Although the material has
been described as "metamorphosed sandstone" (Willey and Hughes,
1978:47), this description is misleading as it is not a metamorphic rock. The
material is a silica cemented sandstone more properly termed Dakota orthoquartzite (Hughes and Hood, 1976). The material is coarse grained and
varies from reds to browns, causing some problem in differentiating it from
Tecovas quartzite.
Obsidian occasionally is found in archeological sites in the area. The
nearest source of this material is believed to be central New Mexico.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
A variety of materials suitable for manufacturing lithic artifacts is available
along the eastern escarpment of the Llano Estacado. Most of the material is
available in the form of gravel and includes flint, chert, jasper, and various

210

Texas Archeological Society

quartzites. Material found in situ in various deposits includes high quality
agate and jasper, chert, and some opal. The Ogallala Formation has the
greatest variety and abundance of material in the area.
Due to the amount of raw material available in gravels in the region, caution
should be exercised in naming rock types. Such distinctive in situ materials as
Alibates agate and Tecovas jasper are properly named. However, materials
found in gravels should only be described by rock type and not formally
named. The geological convention for naming a formation using its lithology
(e.g., Edwards Limestone, Antlers Sand) is employed only when the unit is
predominately of one lithology. When a variety of rock types is present, the
term Formation is used in place of the lithology (e.g., Ogallala Formation). By
analogy, the use of such terms as Potter chert or Ogallala chert (Hughes,
1976) implies that the material formed in the deposit. Ogallala chert or opal
may be properly applied to the silicified or opalized caliche in the Ogallala
(Hughes, 1976).
The availability of such a variety of material places considerable limitations
on the use of rock types found in archeological sites for estimating possible
trade routes. A notable example are the gravels of high quality chert and flint
in the Ogallala. The material is macroscopically identical to chert found in the
Edwards Limestone in Central Texas and may have been derived from previously existing Cretaceous outcrops in the area during deposition of the
Ogallala.
The availability and quality of chert from the Ogallala along the eastern and
southeastern Llano Estacado escarpment probably accounts for the large
number of tools made from it in archeological sites in the area rather than
trade networks between this area and Central Texas. Such trade routes may
have existed but lithic artifact materials should not be used as evidence.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The survey of lithic resources on the Eastern Llano Estacado was the culmination of several
years of interest and sporadic research in the topic. During this time, a number of individuals
provided considerable information on types and outcrops of regional lithic materials. Dr. Jack T.
Hughes (West Texas State University) freely shared his considerable knowledge of the subject.
Dr. C. C. Reeves Jr. (Texas Tech University), Dr. John P. Brand (formerly with Texas Tech
University), and Michael J. Kaczor (Arkansas Archeological Survey) also made available valuable information concerning rock types and specific outcrops. Douglas Bamforth (University of
California, Santa Barbara) provided valuable comments on the manuscript in light of his research
on the Lubbock Lake lithic assemblage.
Dr. Eileen Johnson (Director, Lubbock Lake Project) provided considerable encouragement
and support for this undertaking and reviewed drafts of the manuscript. Drs. James B. Benedict
(Center for Mountain Archeology) and Peter W. Birkeland (University of Colorado) also reviewed drafts of the manuscript and provided constructive criticism. Anne Knedler typed final
drafts of the manuscript. The survey was part of continuing research of the Lubbock Lake Project, funded by National Science Foundation (Grants SOC75-14857, BNS 7612006, BNS
7612006-AO1, BNS78-11155), National Geographic Society, Center for Field Research
(EARTHWATCH), Texas Historical Commission (National Register Program), City and County
of Lubbock, and the Museum, Texas Tech University.

Holliday and Welty - Lithic Tool Resources

211

REFERENCES CITED
Ahler, Stanley A.
Lithic Resource Utilization Patterns in the Middle Mississippi Subarea.
1977
Plains Anthropologist Memoir, 13:132-150.

Asquith, George B.
1975
Origin of the Dolomite and Chert. In: Jack T. Hughes and Kim E. Taylor,
Archeological Salvage at Pipeline Construction in Alibates National
Monument, pp. 29-31. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.
Barnes, Virgil E.
1967
Lubbock Sheet (1:250,000). Geological Atlas of Texas, Bureau of
Economic Geology, University of Texas, Austin.

1968

Plainview Sheet (1:250,000). Geologic Atlas of Texas, Bureau of
Economic Geology, University of Texas, Austin.

1969

Amarillo Sheet (1:250,000). Geologic Atlas of Texas, Bureau of
Economic Geology, University of Texas, Austin.

1974

Big Spring Sheet (1:250,000). Geologic Atlas of Texas, Bureau of
Economic Geology, University of Texas, Austin.

Blatt, Harvey, Gerard Middleton, and Raymond Murray
1980
Origin of Sedimentary Rocks (2nd Ed.). Prentice--Hall, Inc., Englewood
Cliffs, New Jersey.
Bowers, R. L. and Reaser, D. F.
1974
Local Chert Occurrence in Alibates Dolomite, Alibates National Monument and Vicinity, Northern Panhandle of Texas. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Geological Society of America, Stillwater, Oklahoma.
Brand, John P.
1953
Cretaceous of the Llano Estacado of Texas. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin, Report of Investigations,
20:1-59.
Bryan, Kirk
1950
Flint Quarries. Peabody Museum Papers, 17(3):1-40.
Coffin, Roy G.
Sources and Origins of Northern Colorado Artifact Materials. Southwest1951
ern Lore, 17(3):2-6.
Collins, Michael B.
A Review of Llano Estacado Archeology and Ethnohistory. Plains An1971
thropologist, 16(52):85-104.
Clayton, Lee, W. B. Bickley Jr., and W. J. Stone
1970
Knife River Flint. Plains Anthropologist, 15(50):282-290.
Durler, David
1976
Quartzite Conglomerate and Dune Deposits, Brantley Reservoir area.
Report prepared for Archeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

212

Texas Archeological Society

Ebright, C. A.
Comment on "Quartzite Qua Lithic Material in Archeology" by H.
1979
Wolcott Toll. Plains Anthropologist, 24(84):169-170.
Etchieson, Gerald M., Roberta D. Speer, and Jack T. Hughes
1977
An Archeological Survey of Certain Tracts in and near Caprock Canyons
State Park in Eastern Briscoe County, Texas. Archeological Research
Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.
1978

Archeological Investigations in the Truscoot Reservoir Area, King and
Knox Counties, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Killgore Research Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.

Evans, Glen L.
1949
Upper Cenozoic of the High Plains. In: Cenozoic Geology of the Llano
Estacado and Rio Grande Valley, pp. 1-9. West Texas Geological Society and New Mexico Geological Society Guidebook, Lubbock.
Evans, Glen L. and John P. Brand
1956
Eastern Llano Estacado and Adjoining Osage Plains. West Texas Geological Society and Lubbock Geological Society Guidebook, Lubbock.
Frye, John C. and A. Byron Leonard
Quaternary of the Southern Great Plains. In: H. E. Wright Jr. and David
1965
G. Frye (eds.), The Quaternary of the United States, pp. 203-216.
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Gould, Charles N.
1907
The Geology and Ground Water Resources of the Western Portion of the
Panhandle of Texas. United States Geological Survey Water Supply and
Irrigation Paper, 191:1-70.
Green, F. Earl and Jane Holden Kelley
1960
Comments on Alibates Flint. American Antiquity, 25(3):413-414
Harrison, Billy R. and Kay Killen
1978
Lake Theo: A Stratified Early Man Bison Butchering and Camping Site,
Briscoe County, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, Special
Archeological Report, 1:1-108.
Hester, James J.
1972
Blackwater Draw Locality No. 1: A Stratified Early Man Site in Eastern
New Mexico. Ft. Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
1975

Paleoarcheology of the Llano Estacado. In: Fred Wendorf and James J.
Hester (eds.), Late Pleistocene Environments of the Southern High
Plains, pp. 247-256. Ft. Burgwin Research Center, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.

Holliday, Vance T.
in press Cultural Chronology of the Llano Estacado. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High Plains.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

Holliday and Welty -- Lithic Tool Resources

213

Hood, Charles N.
1978
Analysis of the Seymour Gravels. In: Gerald M. Etchieson, Roberta D.
Speer, and Jack T. Hughes, Archeological Investigations in the Truscott
Reservoir Area, King and Knox Counties, Texas, pp. 379-386. Killgore
Research Center, Archeological Research Laboratory, West Texas State
University, Canyon.
Hughes, Jack T.
1976
A Review of Some References to Hint Sources in the Texas Panhandle.
Killgore Research Center, Archeological Research Laboratory, West
Texas State University, Canyon.
1978

Geology. In: Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey, Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Archeological Survey
Report, 24:16-32.

Hughes, Jack T. and Charles N. Hood
1976
Archeological Testing in the Lakeview Watershed, Hall County, Texas.
Killgore Research Center, Archeological Research Laboratory, West
Texas State University, Canyon.
Hughes, Jack T. and Patrick S. Willey
Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, At1978
theological Survey Report, 24:1-294.
Johnson, Eileen and Vance T. Holliday
Late Paleoindian Activity at the Lubbock Lake Site. Plains Anthropolo1981
gist, 26(93):173-193.
Katz, Susanna and Paul R. Katz
1976
Archeological Investigations in Lower Tule Canyon, Briscoe County,
Texas. Texas Historical Commission, Archeological Survey Report,
16:1-141.
Kelly, Jane Holden
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacado. Bulletin of the
1964
Texas Archeological Society, 35:1-18.
Lapedes, Daniel N.
McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of the Geological Sciences. McGraw-Hill
1978
Book Company, New York.

McGowan, J. H., G. E. Granaton, and S. J. Seni
1979
Depositional Framework of the Lower Dockum Group (Triassic), Texas
Panhandle. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin, Report of Investigations, 97:1-60.
Meade, Grayson E., Glen L. Evans, and John P. Brand
Mesozoic and Cenozoic Geology of the Southern Llano Estacado. Lub1974
bock Geological Society Guidebook, Lubbock.
Nicholson, John H.
1960
Geology of the Texas Panhandle. In: Aspects of the Geology of Texas: A
Symposium, pp. 51-64. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Oetking, Philip F.
1959
Geologic Highway Map of Texas. Dallas Geological Society of Dallas.

214

Texas Archeological Society

Patton, Leroy T.
1923
The Geology of Potter County, Texas. University of Texas Bulletin,
2330:1-180.

Reeves, C.

C. Jr.

1970

Some Geomorphic, Structural, and Stratigraphic Aspects of the Pliocene
and Pleistocene Sediments of the Southern High Plains. Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

1972

Tertiary-Quaternary Stratigraphy and Geomorphology of West Texas
and Southeastern New Mexico. In: Vincent C. Kelly and Frederick D.
Trauger (eds.), Guidebook of East-Central New Mexico, pp. 108-117.
New Mexico Geological Society, Socorro.

1976

Quaternary Stratigraphy and Geologic History of the Southern High
Plains, Texas and New Mexico. In: W. C. Mahaney (ed.), Quaternary
Stratigraphy of North America, pp. 213-234. Dowden, Hutchinson, and
Ross, Inc.

Schaffer, James B.
1958
The Alibates Flint Quarry of Texas. American Antiquity, 24(2): 189-191.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
The Geology of Texas (Vol. 1), Stratigraphy. University of the Texas at
1947
Austin Bulletin, 3232:1-1007.
Willey, Patrick and Jack T. Hughes
1978
Archeological Methods. In: Jack T. Hughes and Patrick S. Willey, Archeology at MacKenzie Reservoir. Texas Historical Commission, Archeological Survey Report, 24:45-48.

