99

Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800
Robert S. Weddle

ABSTRACT
Spanish exploration of the Texas coast began with the voyage of Alonso
Alvarez de Pineda in 1519. In the early stages, it was sporadic, o ften accidental, and
frequently tragic. The purposeful exploration began in 1685 with news that a
French colony had been established in Spanish territory. Eventually found on
Garcitas Creek above Lavaca B ay, the colony had been destroyed by the Karankawas.
Fear of foreign intrusion remained the primary motivation for Spanish exploration
of the Texas coast throughout most of the Colonial period. The Karankaw an tribes,
who held the barrier islands along file middle Texas coast until their strength was
eroded by the Comanches and encroaching Europeans, were the greatest deterrent
to Spanish control. Despite the m any recormais s ance expeditions recounted herein,
no Spanish port worthy of the name ever was developed on the Texas coast.
Modern research, aided by wider accessibility of sources, is chipping away at
some of the myths and misconceptions that have muddled the historiography of
Texas’s earliest episodes of discovery and exploration. The idea that Alonso
Alvarez de Pineda sailed up the Rio Grande in 1519, for example, is gradually being
put to rest. Similarly, the claims that he named this river the Rfo de las Palmas and
that Francisco de Garay attempted a settlement at its mouth are being abandoned by
more-knowledgeable historians.
The basis for such revision is found in the works of sixteenth century writers
such as Bernal Dfaz del Castillo (1955, Vol. 2:104) and Peter Martyr (Martff de
Angleria 1944:523-527, 569-583), as well as a few scattered documents of the
period. These sources make it clear that the name Rfo de las Palmas first designated
the Rfo Soto la Marina and that the river ascended by Alvarez de Pineda actually was
the P~nuco.
The myth that Cabeza de Vaca traversed the heart of Texas on his trek westward
is being surrendered more grudgingly; it has become increasingly clear that he
actually crossed the lower Rfo Grande and traveled through northern Mexico
(Chipman 1987:127-148). Other new interpretations associated with the Narvzfez
expedition are being offered also: that Cabeza de Vaca’s initial landing was not on
Galveston Island but at Follett’s Island (now a peninsula) just to the west; that
Narv~iez himself, instead of being lost at the mouth of the Mississippi, disappeared
into the Gulf after anchoring at Matagorda Bay.
Hernando de Soto’s men, seeking the Rfo P~inuco by sea in 1543 as Narv~iez had
done 15 years previously, narrowly escaped a similar disaster--being tossed on to
the Texas shore by heavy seas. After caulking their crude bergantines with tar like
that which still wshes up on Texas beaches from natural seeps, Soto’s men entered
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

100

Texas Archeological Society

two Texas bays "six leagues" apart. They therefore appear to have been the first
Europeans to explore Matagorda and Corpus Christi bays (Smith 1968:189).
Modem scholarship brings out the fact that the Soto expedition was not quite the
dead end that earlier writers assumed it to be. It had considerable influence on later
entradas in the Southeast, especially that of Trist,Sn de Luna y Arellano, and led
indirectly to further exploration of the Texas coast.
Perhaps the greatest confusion of all surrounded the wreck of three Spanish
merchant ships in 1554. Due largely to Agustfn Dfivila Padilla (1596:273), a
Dominican friar who wrote in the sixteenth century, the disaster was long presumed
to have occurred on the Florida peninsula in 1553. The ultimate proof to the contrary
developed in the the 1960s when treasure hunters discovered the remains of one of
the ships off Padre Island, near Port Mansfield. Subsequent archeological and
historical research by the Texas Antiquities Committee resulted in discovery of the
wreckage of the other two ships and established proof of their identity (Arnold and
Weddle 1978).
The shipwrecks, combined with reports of the Soto entrada, influenced Tristfin
de Luna y Arellano’s attempt to form a settlement at Pensacola Bay (Ranjel 1557).
To find the most appropriate site, Viceroy Luis de Velasco sent Guido de Lavazares
to explore the coast from the Rfo de las Palmas (Soto la Marina River) to the Florida
peninsula. On the Texas coast, in latitude 28°30’, Lav~ares discovered a large bay,
which he named San Francisco, and went ashore to take possession for the Spanish
Crown (Lavazares 1558). This appears to have been Matagorda Bay, which he
found to be shallow and uninviting--an assessment that La Salle was to prove more
than a century later.
The shipwrecks of 1554 also provided the excuse for Luis de Carvajal y de la
Cueva to enter Texas in 1572 from Nuevo Lern, to punish the coastal Indians for
their "many murders, robberies, and other crimes on ships that have wrecked there"
by taking them captive and selling them into slavery (Weddle 1985:337). This, from
all accounts, was the first Spanish expedition to cross the lower Rfo Grande into the
present state of Texas. Carvajal, who held a concession to all previously unclaimed
territory 200 leagues north and west of Tampico, made slave raiding his main
business, and he probably entered Texas on several occasions to take slaves. The
enmity he created among the coastal Indians erected a barrier that few dared
penetrate for more than a century and a half. In consequence, the approach to Texas,
after considerable delay, would be made by way of a long overland trail through
Coahuila.
Instances of sixteenth century European contact with the Texas coast were
sporadic, often accidental, and usually associated with tragedy. They he!ped to flesh
out the New World map, but they contributed little toward eventual settlement. The
more purposeful explorations began in 1685 with reports that La Salle had planted
a French colony on the Gulf Coast somewhere between Apalachee Bay and
Tampico. Thenceforth, to the end of the Colonial period, Spanish attention to the
coast was most often motivated by fear of foreign intrusion (Faulk 1964:113). Such
motivation even entered into the humanitarian concern for rescuing shipwreck

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

101

victims from the reputedly cannibalistic Karankawan tribes, for the castaways often
were foreigners. At the same time, thorough coastal exploration, and hence effective
settlement and development, was held in check by those same Indians, who reigned
supreme on the barrier islands between Galveston and Corpus Christi bays.
Just how little had been learned of the northern Gulf coast by La Salle’s time
is demonstrated by the bewilderment with which Spanish officials approached the
task of finding the intruders, and French knowledge was certainly no better than
Spanish. As ably demonstrated by Peter Wood (1984:294-323), it was just such a
lack of knowledge--and not secret design or navigational error--that caused La
Salle’s misplaced landing on the Texas coast rather than at the mouth of the
Mississippi River.
The Spanish search for La Salle comprised six expeditions by land and five by
sea and lasted more than three years. As officials in Mexico City began planning the
effort, they confronted their own ignorance. Information that La Salle had reached
the Gulf of Mexico from Canada via a river called "Michipipi" served only to
confuse; the name meant nothing to the Spaniards. It was surmised that this river was
the same as the one shown on maps since Alvarez de Pineda’s time as the Rfo del
Espfritu Santo, but no one could be found who had visited it (Weddle 1973:24-25;
1991:42).
In January 1686, Juan Enrfquez Barroto and Antonio Romero, both senior
captains and pilots of the Armada de Barlovento, sailed from Havana to seek the Rfo
del Espfritu Santo, supposing it to be the place ofLa Salle’s landing. Reaching the
mouth of the Mississippi, they failed to find any clue to the Frenchmen’s whereabouts. On their recommendation, two shallow-draftpiraguas, suitable for entering
shallow bays and inlets, were built for the next voyage, which left Veracruz on
Christmas Day, 1686. In the interim, the sargento mayor Alonso de Le6n had led
two overland expeditions from Cadereyta in Nuevo Le6n, first to the mouth of the
Rfo Grande, then across southern Texas to Baffin Bay. Both marches bore negative
results (Le6n et al. 1961:194-203).
With captains Martfn de Rivas and Pedro de Iriarte in command of the two
piraguas, Enrfquez and Romero sailed as pilots. Enrfquez, as chief pilot on the
command vessel, kept the expedition diary. This document, which details a
complete circumnavigation of the Gulf of Mexico, has a special significance for
Texas. It relates not only the finding of the wreckage of La Salle’s ships, but also
the exploration of the principal Texas bays and river mouths, of which there had
been no previous account. The origin of many of the names for Texas coastal
landmarks that appeared on maps for the next century (Figure 1)--some even to the
present--are found in this diary (Enrfquez Barroto 1687:149-206 [see Weddle
1987]).
The diary reveals that the voyagers sounded the mouth of the Rfo Grande on
March 14, 1687, while naked natives with bows strung menaced from the beach.
Reaching Aransas Pass, they sounded the bar and gave the name Rfo de San Jos6ph
to the lagoon behind the barrier islands. A shore party exchanged gifts--tobacco
and beads for fish--with bald and tattooed natives whom Enrfquez identified as

102

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Piano del lago de San Bernardo. This map uses Enr~quez B arroto’s names for Texas
Coastal features correctly, with the exception of R~o de Flores. In some respects it resembles
the work of Manuel de C~rdenas, who mapped the Matagorda Bay complex in 1690, but
neither author nor date has been established (from the Museo Naval, Madrid). The key along
the top of the map reads as follows: A. Estero de Juan Sordo; B. Guadalupe; C. Estero de
Guadalupe; D.Buena Vista; E. Pueblos de los Franceses; F. Rio de Idem; G. Rio de Sn.
Marcos; H. Rio del Spiritu Sto.; I. Lago de Idem; J. Lago de todos Santos; K. Lago de Sn.
Bernardo; L. Punta de Culebras; M. Rio de la Trinidad; N. Punta de Sn. Francisco; O. Boca
Chica; P. Barra de Sibolas; Q. Rio de Flores.

Pelones. The Indians offered arrows with the tips removed as peace tokens, but the
Tamaholipa interpreters brought from Tampico could not converse with them.
March 30 was Easter S unday--the Pasqua Florida or Pasqua de Flores. As the
two small vessels passed between barrier islands to anchor in a "large bay,"
EnrQuez Barroto named the passage R~o de Flores. It is identifiable today as Cedar
Bayou, which divides San Josd and Malagorda islands, where La Salle had first put
his soldiers ashore more than two years previously. It was here that the voyagers
found the first sign of the invading Frenchmen--ship fittings recovered from an
abandoned Indian canoe.
On April 3, the piraguas anchored off Decros Point, Matagorda Peninsula’s
western tip, at 28°23’N. Close at hand, Pass Cavallo opened into Matagorda Bay,

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

103

which Lav~ares in 1558 had named Bahfa de San Francisco. It now was named Rfo
de San Bernardo, for the feast day of Saint Bernard. The leeward point, southwest
of the entrance to the bay, was named San Francisco; the opposite point was called
Punta de Culebras for its many snakes.
Three leagues up the peninsula, the explorers found the wreckage ofLa Salle’s
barkBelle and salvaged usable items of rigging and ordnance. Guided by a captured
English pirate called Juan Poule, who had been there previously, the ships explored
most of the bay and probably passed Sand Point to enter Lavaca Bay. But signs of
La Salle’s fort, abandoned the previous January to a feeble contingent of maimed
and misfits, eluded them.
Along the west bayshore, the explorers encountered Indians "of large stature and very robust of limb," who refused an invitation to board the vessel
(Enrfquez Barroto 1687:174). When the Spaniards sought to use forcible persuasion, one of the Karankawas attacked with a knife and gave shouts that
brought a shower of arrows from his companions. Spanish musket fire soon put
the Indians to flight.
All in all, the Rivas-Iriarte expedition found Matagorda Bay much the same as
Lavazares had: shallow and uninviting, little more than two fathoms deep anywhere. Surely any Frenchmen who had attempted to land here had met with disaster.
The searchers sailed east on April 10, giving coastal features the names by
which they were to be identified on various European maps for years to come: Caney
Creek was called Boca Chica; the San Bernard River, Rfo de Zfvoras (Cfbolas); San
Luis Pass, Rfo de Santa Suzana. Indians seen along the way were friendly and had
no fear of firearms, indicating that they had never before encountered Europeans.
Discouraged by the shoals surrounding the mouth of Galveston Bay, the
mariners named it Rfo Bajo ("Shoal River") and sailed on. So far, the diarist
observed, the Texas coast had exhibited
only saltwater lagoons and barren sand dunes along a treacherous coast
offering no ports and no prospect for shipwreck victims but torture and
death at the hands of barbarous Indians [Enrfquez Barroto 1687:178].
The Sabine River, discharging a current of fresh water, was named Rfo Dulce.
Judging it too shallow to have interested La Salle, the voyagers gave it scant
attention. Among the Atakapa Indians on the Calcasieu River they found two
castaways from a Spanish privateer galley and through them heard news that caused
them to turn back and explore further.
The castaways were a Mexican youth named Nicolfis de Vargas and an
Apalachino Indian from San Luis de Apalache in Florida. They had deserted the
galley after the captain died and the surviving remnant of the crew ate the corpses
of their shipmates. The Indians supplied what was taken as a possible sequel to the
tale: they had seen on a river to the west a wrecked ship, which the natives of that
vicinity had burned to get nails for tipping their arrows. The men from the ship, they
said, had acquired horses from the Indians; the Atakapa had seen them hunting
buffalo on horseback with firearms, but the mariners had since gone inland. Such

104

Texas Archeological Society

news might have pertained to the missing Spanish galley or to La Salle’s colonists.
In either case, it had to be investigated.
Returning to Sabine Pass, the piraguas entered in six fathoms but found the
channel pinched in by oyster banks half a league upstream. They inched forward
another quarter league through a narrow passage of three fathoms toward the lee
shore before the channel played out altogether. Within sight of Sabine Lake, they
maneuvered with oars to a mud-bottomed anchorage of twelve spans. Not even the
canoes could go farther.
Indians who had come on foot from the Calcasieu then appeared to advise them
that this was the wrong river; they had meant the next river to the west. With one
of the Indians as guide, the Spaniards proceeded to make the first recorded
exploration of Galveston Bay. The guide directed them to a wooded promontory
two leagues from the bay mouth, where he claimed to have seen the white buffalo
hunters encamped. Ensign Francisco Aldama followed the Indian two leagues
inland to a cluster of dome-shaped native huts, long since abandoned. The explorers
at last concluded that the guide was lying; it appeared that the natives of this region
had destroyed both the ship and the starving remnant of the crew. As for La Salle,
his ships must have been lost in a storm; his colonists had surely perished from
starvation (Enrfquez Barroto 1687:195,196).
The Rivas-Pez voyage, making a complete circumnavigation of the Gulf of
Mexico, was overdue by the time it returned to Veracruz. Two frigates, commanded
by captains Francisco L6pez de Gamarra and Andr6s de Pez, had been sent to look
for the piraguas. Although the reconnaissance was repeated, the size of the ships
precluded the minute coastal examination made by the smaller vessels (G6mez
Raposo 1944:149).
In August 1688, the two piraguas, captained by Rivas and Pez, made another
voyage to the Texas shore. The captains sent canoes exploring up the Rfo Grande
for five days, then proceeded to Matagorda Bay, where they found the derelictBelle
virtually destroyed by the elements. They coasted the entire bay, went ashore to kill
a buffalo, and bartered with the Karankawas for fish but received no news of the
French colonists playing out the tragic drama of Fort Saint-Louis’s final days
(Fernzindez Carrasco 1688).
La Salle’s ruined settlement, victim of a recent massacre, was found by Alonso
de Le6n on his overland march from Coahuila on April 22, 1689. Only half a dozen
children who were living among the Karankawas and a handful of colonists who had
accompanied La Salle on his fatal march to the Hasinai Caddo of eastern Texas
remained alive. The captured French children, whose parents were Lucien and
Isabelle Talon, were taken to Mexico City to be reared as servants in the viceroy’s
household. It was they who eventually gave the only eyewitness account of the
massacre and the fate of the Barbier infant, the first white child born on the Texas
coast; after the mother was slain, a Karankawa warrior seized the baby by the heels
and bashed its head against a tree (Talon 1698:237). Two of the Talon brothers,
repatriated and returning to America with the Sieur d’Iberville, were yet to have a
part in exploring the Texas coast.

Weddle -- Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

105

Le6n, reaching La Salle’s colony, assumed that he had found the Bahfa del
Espfritu Santo, where La Salle was supposed to have settled. He therefore gave that
name to the Matagorda Bay complex. Thenceforth, the bay complex had two names:
Espfritu Santo and San Bernardo, the name given to it by the Rivas-Iriarte
expedition. Today, the lagoon between Matagorda Island and the mainland is called
Espfritu Santo Bay.
La Salle’s incursion gave rise to Spain’s defensive posture on the northern
frontier and resulted in the founding of the first Franciscan missions in eastern Texas
in 1690. Later the same year, Captain Francisco de Llanos commanded a voyage to
map Matagorda Bay, with Manuel Jos6ph Cfirdenas y Magafia as mapmaker (Llanos
1690). Cfirdenas’s map of the bay complex (Weddle 1973:Plate 11) was a landmark.
Carlos de Sigtienza y G6ngora, meanwhile, had taken Le6n’s field notes and
Enrfquez Barroto’s coastal chart and produced a map ofLe6n’s route from Coahuila
and the coast from the Rfo Bravo to East Matagorda Bay. He gave currency to the
place names assigned by Le6n and Enrfquez. Although present-day cartophiles tend
to discount the Spanish contribution to mapping the New World, the influence of
Sig~ienza and especially Enrfquez Barroto on French maps of the Gulf coast is
indisputable. Guillaume Delisle, the renowed mapmaker, owed them a great debt
(Jackson et al. 1990).
The primary focus of Spanish exploration and mapping of the Texas coast so
far had been Matagorda Bay, somewhat apart from the area chosen for settlement.
Reports of French penetration of Caddoan territory from the east caused the
Spaniards to believe that the immediate threat lay in that direction. Additionally, the
Hasinai seemed infinitely more promising as prospects for conversion than the
hostile Karankawan tribes. For such reasons Spanish missions were founded in the
pine-forested region of present-day Houston County in 1690 (see Corbin 1991).
Following the abortive expedition of Domingo Terfin de los Rfos, the first man
titled governor of Texas, in 1691-1692, to reinforce and extend the East Texas
missions, the enterprise was abandoned. The exposed Texas coast was forgotten-until a new French threat appeared. Events farther east, meanwhile, set the stage for
renewed Spanish-French confrontation in Texas. The Spaniards held Pensacola,
while the French became entrenched at Mobile. With Philip of Anjou--the French
king Louis XIV’s grandson--on the Spanish throne, the Spanish colonials were
checkmated in their desire to push the Frenchmen out. France and Spain joined
forces against England in the War of the Spanish Succession. Then, in 1714, the
French trader Louis Juchereau de Saint-Denis appeared out of the Texas wilderness
at the Spanish post of San Juan Bautista de Rfo Grande, guided by two of the Talon
brothers. The time had come, Spanish officials decided, to reassert their claim to
eastern Texas. While they did so in 1716, the French set up shop at Natchitoches.
Saint-Denis, playing his own game, had maneuvered both nations like chess men
to attain his goal of having French and Spanish settlements close enough to each
other for trade (Weddle 1991:196).
The death in 1715 of Louis XIV terminated the Family Compact by which
France and Spain were bound to each other. The two nations were restored to

106

Texas Archeological Society

their traditional posture as colonial adversaries. The establishment of New
Orleans by the French in 1718 was matched by the Spaniards’ founding of San
Antonio. There followed Texas Governor Martfn de Alarc6n’s inspection of his
jurisdiction, including the area around Matagorda Bay. Reaffirming the Spanish
claim, he visited the Fort Saint-Louis site and "took lawful possession (in King
Philip’s name) of all the bays, lakes, and neighboring lands in the manner
required" (C61iz 1935:66-67).
All this was with a view to occupying the bay, to which the French still laid
claim on the basis of La Salle’s intrusion. The War of the Quadruple Alliance,
erupting in ’1719, again focused French attention on Matagorda Bay, but two
expeditions sent to explore it failed to find it. Captain Jean B6ranger sailed past it
in 1720 to explore Aransas Bay instead. The following year, B&anger as ship
captain took Jean-Baptiste B~nard, Sieur de La Harpe, to occupy La Salle’s old site
but landed instead at Galveston Bay (Weddle 1991:216-223). In the meantime, the
Marquis de San Miguel de Aguayo, Alarc6n’s successor, sent troops to begin the
founding in 1721 of Presidio de Nuestra Sefiora de Loreto de la BaMa on the Fort
Saint-Louis site. Mission Nuestra Sefiora del Espfritu Santo de Zfifiiga was founded
nearby the following year. Aguayo, on his visit in 1722, sketched a crude map of the
bay (captioned Mar Ancho del Seno Mexicano), showing the relative locations of
the presidio and the mission (Weddle 1973:Plate 12).
The specific role of Presidio de la Bahfa was to guard the coastal region against
foreign invasion, while supporting the nearby mission for the Karankawan tribes.
Yet the garrison acquired little knowledge of the coast beyond its immediate
environs. The lack of vigor in exploring the territory is exemplified by the
commandant Juan Antonio Bustillo y Ceballos, who in 1725 was ordered to seek a
more suitable site for the mission and presidio. Instead of making a reconnaissance,
he chose a convenient spot on the Guadalupe River near the San Juan Bautista road
(above present-day Victoria) and borrowed from the faulty Aguayo map for his
report. Halving the distance from the old site to the new, he placed the new location
only three or four leagues farther from the mouth of Espfritu Santo Bay and claimed
the bay could be reached by descending the Guadalupe (Bustillo y Ceballos 1726).
More-accurate information was soon to be compiled, only to be lost in the maze
of official files. In November 1727, Pedro de Rivera arrived at La Bahfa on his
presidial inspection tour aimed at economizing and correcting abuses. Rivera’s own
report (1945:116) notwithstanding, the most significant coastal data came from a
map by his young military engineer, Francisco Alvarez Barreiro. From La Bahfa,
Rivera sent Alvarez Barreiro with twenty soldiers of that post and San Antonio de
B6xar"to explore the coast, ports, bays, lagoons, and land between this presidio and
the Neches River" (Rivera 1945:123). The engineer spent 35 days and logged 363
miles in making the most comprehensive exploration of the upper Texas coast to that
time.
The extent of Alvarez Barreiro’s reconnaissance is shown on his map, Plano
corographico e hidrographico (Weddle 1991:242-243), which gives many of the
river courses and locations of Indian villages and mission settlements. It depicts the

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519.1800

107

entire Texas coast, including the barrier islands, with relative accuracy, representing
a significant milestone in coastal cartography.
Alvarez Barreiro’s errors were to be repeated, even after the map itself was
superseded. The map of Jos6 Antonio de Alzate y Ramfrez (Martin and Martin
1982), published in Madrid in 1768, leans heavily upon the Piano, repeating
conceptions outdated by twenty years. In the interim, Joaqufn Orobio Basterra, as
commandant of La Bahfa on the Guadalupe, explored the coast in both directions.
In July 1745, in response to rumors of a French landing near the mouth of the Trinity,
he was ordered to reconnoiter the coast east ofLa Bahfa, a sector of which he seems
to have known little or nothing---Alvarez Barreiro’s reconnaissance notwithstanding. Setting out in October to explore the Matagorda Bay area, he turned back
because of flooded coastal marshes. He then sent a detail down the Guadalupe to see
if it could be navigated to its mouth, which he believed to be in Matagorda Bay, that
he might proceed thence along the coast in dugout canoes. In less than a day’s travel,
the soldiers found the river too choked with drifts to proceed.
Orobio, with soldiers from San Antonio de B6xar and San Juan Bautista, set out
up the Camino Real in January 1746. At the Trinity River crossing, at least 140 miles
from the river’s mouth, the local Indians advised against following the river
downstream as he had intended. He traveled on to Nacogdoches and Los Adaes.
Along the way, his fears of foreign invaders were exacerbated by reports that
actually pertained to the French ship Superbe, wrecked at the mouth of Matagorda
Bay the previous May. While Orobio chased rumors, two-thirds of Superbe’s
castaways, walking toward Tampico, were slain by Indians (Weddle 1991:253).
From Los Adaes, near present-day Robeline, Louisiana, Orobio marched
southwest for almost a month to reach several Bidai rancher[as. It was among the
Bidai that he learned of the French disaster and of a search party from New Orleans
that had withdrawn out of fear of the Karankawan tribes. He learned also that French
traders were making inroads among the Akokisa via the Trinity, Neches, and Brazos
rivers. The Spaniards traveled"west by southwest" among the Akokisa habitations,
supposedly on the San Jacinto River, seeking further sign of the elusive foreigners.
Finding little, they returned to La Bahfa along a more direct route (Orobio Basterra
1746).
In 1747, Orobio Basterra was called upon to lead a Texas troop in Jos6 de
Escand6n’s multipronged exploration of the region that was to make up the colony
of Nuevo Santander. With 50 soldiers from La Bahfa and Los Adaes, he spent two
weeks in January exploring along the San Antonio River, seeking a new site for
Presidio de la Bahfa and Mission Espfritu Santo, which Escand6n hoped would be
the northern anchor for the new colony. He chose the site on the San Antonio, at
present-clay Goliad, called Santa Dorotea. This river, he reported, flowed into
Espfritu Santo Bay (actually San Antonio Bay), "six leagues" away--another
example of faulty understanding of the immediate territory--where a good anchorage offered the means of supplying the settlement and guarding the coast. Then, on
February 16, the explorers struck south to traverse the proposed Nuevo Santander
region itself.

108

Texas Archeological Society

Reaching the Nueces River, believed until this time to join the Rfo Grande, they
followed it to its mouth to find that it entered a large bay, which was given the name
San Miguel Arcfingel (Escand6n 1747). With its mouth concealed within Corpus
Christi Bay, this was the river shown on maps since the 1520s as Rfo Escondido
("Hidden River"). More than two centuries had been required to reveal it.
As Orobio traveled south through dry country scarcely seen by Europeans since
Cabeza de Vaca, he named the prominent features: La Purfsima Concepci6n (Agua
Dulce Creek), Lago de la Santfsima Trinidad (Baffin Bay), and the salt lakes in
Willacy and Hidalgo counties (Sal Vieja and Sal del Rey), which he called San
Francisco Xavier. From the salt lakes, he turned southwest along a trail occasionally
used by Nuevo Le6n settlers to reach the salines. At the Rfo Grande crossing called
Paso del Cfintaro, above present-day Roma, Orobio received Escand6n’s order to
return to his post.
Orobio, in response to an Akokisa petition for missions, embarked in May 1748
on a new exploration of the upper coast. It was a step toward the eventual founding
of Mission Nuestra Sefiora de la Luz del Orcoquisac (Akokisa) and Presidio de San
Agustfn de Ahumada. Traveling northeast on a course paralleling the coast some 40
miles inland, he was met at the Trinity by an Akokisa band coming up the river in
canoes. Thence he explored downstream, visiting the natives’ small irrigated fields
of corn and vegetables and noting arable lands, abundant timber, and facility of
irrigation from the Trinity. Starting out to explore east from Trinity Bay, he shortly
found himself in an extensive timbered swamp with dense undergrowth--unsuitable
country for a mission site. He turned back to reconnoiter Trinity Bay, the river, and
its tributaries. After choosing a site for the proposed mission on a stream called
Arroyo de Nombre de Dies, he took up the march for his presidio on June 29, still
avoiding the coast between the Trinity and Guadalupe rivers (Orobio Basterra
1748). The Akokisa (or Orcoquisac) mission, however, must await a direct foreign
threat.
In the meantime, the information from Orobio’s reconnaissance was put to use
by Jacinto de Barrios y Jfiuregui, who took office as governor of Texas in 1751. The
data served Barrios’s contraband trade operation, especially when it was threatened
by French interlopers. In 1754, a French trader from Louisiana, Josdph Blancpain,
established a trading post near the mouth of the Trinity. Barrios sent Lieutenant
Marcos Ruiz to arrest Blancpain and his companions, who were sent as prisoners
to Mexico City (Ruiz 1754). The episode touched off a flurry of exploration,
followed by establishment in May or June 1756 of Presidio de San Agustfn.
The post was placed temporarily on the site of Blancpain’s trading post, some
two leagues east of the mouth of the Trinity River, while the Trinity and.San Jacinto
river drainages were explored lk~r a more suitable site. This reconnaissance was
carried on by Domingo del Rfo, Bernardo de Miranda, and Barrios himself. Some
10 leagues west of the San Jacinto and 20 leagues from the coast, Miranda
discovered the springs of Santa Maria del Alcazar and later took to Mexico City the
governor’s recommendation for removal of the post to that location. In the capital,
Miranda sought to inform the viceroy on the lower Trinity by sketching a crude map

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

109

(Weddle 1991:299) on which the Mississippi River is made one with the Red; the
San Jacinto is made to flow directly into the G ulf instead of Galveston Bay; and both
the Neches and its tributary, the Angelina, are shown as entering the Gulf, the
Angelina east of the Neches instead of west--evidence that the exploration to date
was far from complete.
Barrios, meanwhile, changed his mind; the presidio stayed where it was until
the hurricane of 1766 forced a short move. Soldiers of the post continued to play a
role in coastal exploration; a road was opened to La Bahfa. But the littoral between
the Trinity and the Guadalupe, so long a concern for the viceroy, remained
unexplored and most of it in the firm grasp of the Karankawan tribes (Weddle
1991:295-301).
At the close of the Seven Years’ War in 1763, France was eliminated from
colonial rivalry. The English, owning all the former Spanish and French territory
east of the Mississippi but the "Isle of Orleans," quickly filled the void as the chief
thorn-in-side for the jealous Spaniards. As rumors of foreign invaders so often
moved the Spaniards to action, it was rumors of an English threat that brought forth
the 1766 exploration of Padre Island.
In 1765, Malaguita Indians from the Padre Island vicinity brought to Mission
San Juan Bautista on the Rfo Grande reports that white invaders were settling on the
"Islas Blancas" near the mouth of the Nueces River. The New Spain viceroy,
Marqu6s de Cruillas, called upon Jos6 de Escand6n, the colonizer of Nuevo
Santander, to report on the Texas barrier islands. To explore these isles of shell sand,
the viceroy called on Diego Ortiz Parrilla, commandant of the Coahuila presidio of
Santa Rosa del Sacramento.
Escand6n sent Captain Blas Marfa de la Garza Falc6n of Camargo and his son
Jos6 Antonio to reconnoiter the coast between the Rfo Grande and Garza Falc6n’s
ranch outpost, Estancia de Santa Petronila, "five leagues" south of Corpus Christi
Bay. The Garza Falc6ns also made a preliminary reconnaissance of Padre Island.
Escand6n received information from a coastal fisherman, who described the "large
pastureland surrounded by lagoons," extending along the coast from the Rfo Grande
to the Nueces River. Only with storm surge, he said, was this area separated from
the mainland; therefore it could not properly be called an island. From the mouth of
the Nueces to the Bahfa del Espfritu Santo (Matagorda Bay), he described a series
of sandbanks that were completely inundated in times of high water (Escand6n
1766).
Ortiz Parrilla’s Coahuila force,.joined by 25 Nuevo Santander soldiers led by
the younger Garza Falc6n, set up camp on September 7, 1766, on the beach referred
to as "Playa de la Bahfa de Corpus Christi," or"Playa de Corpus Christi." There the
company waited out six days of drenching rain and high wind triggered by the
hurricane that ravaged the presidio and mission on the lower Trinity River (Ortiz
Parrilla 1766). Garza Falc6n and the Nuevo Santander soldiers then reconnoitered
the island, crossing the shallow lagoon "two leagues" wide. From Old Corpus
Christi Pass to Brazos Santiago, they trekked over a stoneless strip of barren sand
supporting only small clumps of stunted laurels and willows and a coarse, red grass.

110

Texas Archeological Society

On Brazos Island, amid bits of rigging from ships of all sizes, lay the broken hulk
of a 20-gun English frigate, but no other trace of Europeans (Garza Falc6n et al.
1766). The only Indian signs were abandoned rancherias at the lower end of the
island, where Ortiz Parrilla’s map (1767b) indicates habitations of the Manos de
Perro, Patrines, Piguisas, Pasnaaus, and Malaguitas.
A navigator in the company who had often sailed along the Tamaulipas coast
was surprised to find the area explored not connected to the mainland; this "Isla de
San Carlos de los Malaguitas," as the explorers now called it, was continuous except
for three storm passes, which in times of high water made it appear to be four (Garza
Falc6n et al. 1766).
The floods resulting from the hurricane forced Ortiz Parrilla to take a roundabout route to La Bahia. Arriving at that post with his troop from Coahuila, he
was informed by soldiers just arrived from the devastated Presidio de San Agusffn
that all the coastal lowlands were flooded. Further exploration was well-nigh
impossible. The soldiers gave depositions on the coast from the Nueces to
Galveston Bay, which were submitted with Ortiz Parrilla’s own report (1766,
1767a) and Ortiz Parrilla’s map of the entire coast. The map represents Padre
Island fairly accurately, although Baffin Bay is notably absent, and what appears to be Corpus Christi Bay is separated from the Nueces River. At the lower
end, Brazos Island is in its proper place. Arroyo Colorado, entering the Gulf in
southeastern Willacy County, is called Arroyo de San Miguel. The upper end of
the island, divided by a storm pass, evidently represents Mustang Island. On its
northern tip are shown habitations of the Carancaguases (Karankawas), Copanes
(Copanos), and Piguacasas (Piguiques) (Ortiz Parrilla 1767b). Above Corpus
Christi Bay, Copano Bay appears as Bahfa de Santo Domingo, fronted by a small
island of the same name. Beyond the coastal bend, the coastline is presented
less accurately, and place names assigned previously are wrongly applied. Ortiz
Parrilla contributed to advancement of coastal knowledge, but only for the sector that he had actually visited.
Presidio de San Agustfn was abandoned early in 1771, j ust ahead of the frontier
reorganization plan that ruled it no longer necessary. English traders took advantage
by opening trade with the Akokisa and their neighbors. With such news in July 1772,
the Texas governor, Bar6n de Ripperdzi, ordered out Captain Luis Cazorla, who only
the previous month had assumed command of Presidio de la Bahfa, located since
1749 on the San Antonio River at present-day Goliad.
Cazorla, with 40 men from San Antonio de B6xar, followed the "Orcoquisac"
road toward the abandoned settlement on the Trinity. Among Indian rancherfas of
diverse tribal elements--Karankawa, Coco, Bidai, and Aranam(e)--he observed
much evidence of trade with Europeans. C~orla was prevented from reaching the
mouth of the Trinity by a swamp but got close enough to determine that the river
flowed through Trinity and San Jacinto bays to reach the Gulf (Pichardo 1931,
Volume 1:393-397). On the return trip, he followed the San Jacinto River to its
mouth in Galveston Bay, thus disproving the map concept of both Miranda and Ortiz
Parrilla.

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

111

At the Brazos, the explorers groped their way down the left bank to the river’s
entry into the Gulf, near present-day Freeport. About three leagues from the Gulf,
they found the stream divided into two channels half a league apart. A maze of
lagoons, knee-deep on the horses at ebb tide, lay within the fork, spreading out in
an impenetrable thicket. On the beach, the soldiers found a ship’s boat embedded
in the sand and a rotted sea chest containing some rosaries and jewelry and 15 pesos
in Spanish coin: mute testimony to the fate of some luckless ship whose crew had
been swallowed up by the "Cannibal Coast."
Having been the first to explore the mouths of the San Jacinto and Brazos rivers
by land, Cazorla on a 1776 expedition broadened knowledge of the mysterious
barriers whileinvestigating the wreck on Matagorda Island of a ship whose crew had
been murdered by Karankawas. Near the former La Bahfa site on the Guadalupe
River, Cazorla learned from captured natives both the location of the wreck
("Toboso Island") and the identity of the culprits. He found the latter encamped at
the mouth of the Guadalupe, where he surrounded them and seized their canoes.
Sending the horses around the bay, Cazorla embarked in the canoes. The two
groups rendezvoused at the paraje del bergantin, a wharf near the mouth of San
Antonio Bay. Thence, the captain and 21 men crossed the league-wide lagoon on
horseback to reach Matagorda, or Toboso, Island, which C~orla says had not been
visited by Spaniards since 1749. The ship, a deep-draft English commercial frigate,
lay on the beach, having broken up and released her cargo for the natives to plunder.
Amid the wreckage the soldiers found the decomposed body of one English sailor.
Cazorla (1776a), noting the remnants of many ships that littered the beach, deplored
the pitiful misfortunes of the countless ships lost on this coast [where] the
poor sailors fortunate enough to escape the shipwreck fall into the hands
of the heathen Indians... and are victims of their cruelty.
Trying to explain the coastal topography, the captain wrote that Culebra Island
began at "the port called Matagorda" and "according to what they tell me, runs
eastward almost to New Orleans." Toboso Island, extending west from Matagorda
Bay, he said, continued to the mouth of the Nueces River. Citing the difficulty of
reaching the islands by land, he warned that foreigners might penetrate the territory
by ascending the rivers. He proposed clearing the "heathen nations" from the islands
and erecting a fort equipped with a shallow-draft vessel to patrol the coast (Cazorla
1776b). The plan went unheeded.
The Karankawa, having been admonished by Cazorla, informed him when a
French ship was driven by storm upon the Texas coast the following winter. La
Bahfa’s rescue force saved the castaways. But the natives continued their depredations, and others besides Cazorla were advocating their extinction. One of these was
Athanase de M6zi~res, veteran French soldier and trader at Natchitoches, who had
entered Spanish service in 1769. M6zi~res served both Texas and Louisiana as
Indian agent, diplomat, and explorer. Paying scant heed to political nuances, he
sought to solve the problem of the Karankawa tribes’ barrier-island stronghold by
involving Louisiana in exploring the lagoon between islands and mainland and

112

Texas Archeological Society

opening a port on the Texas coast. Louisiana Governor Luis de Unzaga y Amezaga
responded favorably to the M6zi~res plan, and Teodoro de Croix, as
commandant-general of the new Provincias Internas jurisdiction, cleared the way
for this rare instance of cooperation between provinces. The joint expedition sailed
from New Orleans on December 13, 1777, after Bernardo de Gfilvez had succeeded
Unzaga as Louisiana governor.
G~ilvez assigned Luis Antonio Andry, an engineer and captain of the royal
schooner E! Sehor de la Yedra, to explore and map the coast as far asSan Bernardo
(Matagorda) Bay. Andry was accompanied by his young son (a cadet), Isidro Millet
(second officer and pilot), and 11 other sailors. Among the latter were Tom,is de la
Cruz, a Christianized Maya Indian, and a former La Bahfa soldier, Crist6bal G6mez,
who claimed knowledge of the Texas coast and its Indians. The vessel was long
overdue in New Orleans and given up for lost before its actual fate was known.
When at last news came, it was from an unexpected quarter: the Maya Cruz had
turned up as a Karankawa slave (Cabello 1779).
As Cruz told it, Yedra entered Matagorda Bay in March 1778, the exploration
and mapping essentially complete and provisions exhausted. When Indians appeared on shore, G6mez, who knew many of the Indians in this vicinity, volunteered
to lead the shore party; he and four companions expected to obtain food from the
natives for their walk to La Bahfa, where they would get provisions for the ship.
Days passed without word. When the captain fired a signal gun, two Indians
appeared, claiming to be soldiers from La Bahfa. Unsuspecting, Andry brought on
board the apostate Karankawas Josdph Marfa and Mateo, brothers whose trademark
was treachery and murder. They won the mariners’ confidence, and the captain sent
three more men ashore with them to look for the missing men. The two Indians soon
returned without the sailors. Instead, several companions of Jos6ph Marfa and
Mateo suddenly appeared, and the massacre began. Five of the remaining six sailors
were slain (Cabello 1779).
Some four months later, in July 1778, the Indians of Mission Rosario, including
the aged mother of Jos6ph Marfa and Mateo, took flight under the influence of the
two renegades. As they made their way toward their barrier-island refuge, the old
woman could not keep up. Josdph Marfa shot her through with an arrow and left her
body on the trail (Cabello 1779).
Many of the fugitives, pardoned by Governor Ripperdfi, soon returned to the
missions, but Josdph Marfa, Mateo, and a few others remained in the wilds. In
February 1779, Fray Joaqufn de Escobar, minister of Mission Rosario, went to urge
them to come back and found Tomfis de la Cruz, held by Josdph Marfa as his slave.
The renegade surrendered his captive upon the priest’s demand. Cruz recounted the
massacre first to La Bahfa Captain Jos6 Santoja, then to the new Texas governor,
Domingo Cabello.
Proposals for further exploration of the Texas coast, and for subjugation of the
troublesome Karankawas, passed back and forth between Cabello in San Antonio,
Croix in Chihuahua, and G,’ilvez in New Orleans. Mdzi~res offered what may have
been the most feasible plan: a union of the Spanish horse soldiers from the Texas

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1M9-1800

113

presidios and the Louisiana boat crews, each element to function in its accustomed
sphere (Bolton 1914, Volume 2:299-302). But Spain’s entry into the war with
England on the side of the American colonies in May 1779 put the matter on hold.
The Andry affair, however, was by no means forgotten by Bernardo de G~lvez.
Following his successes against the English in West Florida, G~ilvez was elevated
to captain-general of Cuba, Louisiana, and the Floridas. In that capacity, he ordered
Jos6 de Evia to survey and map the Gulf coast from the Florida peninsula to Bahfa
de San Bernardo.
Evia, having begun his reconnaissance on the east, exchanged his schooners at
the Atakapas post on Bayou Teche for smaller craft before proceeding to Texas with
two verchas and two pirogues. In apprehension of the hostile Karankawa groups, the
boats carried 20 well-armed militiamen from the Opelousas post besides Evia’s
regular crew of 36 (Holmes 1968:93). On reaching the Sabine, July 10, 1785, the
captain put his crew on guard against surprise Indian attack and proceeded down the
coast under oar and sail. Buffeted by heavy swells, as Narv~iez’s and Moscoso’s
boats had been, his craft stood in constant danger of being driven on to the lee shore.
Reaching Galveston Bay, Evia perceived its potential as a deep-water port and
postponed his reconnaissance for his return voyage. The boats entered the lagoon
between Galveston Island and the mainland and advanced westward with oar and
sail in four- and five-foot water. They exited through San Luis Pass on the next day
and coasted west in the open sea to San Bernardo Bay.
Aware of the bloody history of Spanish and French encounters with the
Karankawan tribes at this location, Evia doubled his defensive stratagems. An
entrenchment was made around his camp, guarded by the swivel guns. The Indians,
however, appear to have caused no problem.
On July 20, while Domingo de Lemos sounded the bar with the pirogues, Evia
took the other two boats and began mapping the bay. After working around the point
of Matagorda Island (Enrfquez Barroto’s Punta de San Francisco), where La Salle
had made his first camp in 1685, he sailed up the west side of the bay to sketch the
shoreline and trace the inner margin of Matagorda Island. A diminishing larder and
lack of potable water caused the expedition to withdraw on July 22. Next day, they
began mapping Galveston Bay (Figure 2). Finding "good depth", the bar sufficient
for ships drawing 15 to 16 feet, Evia gave it the name it still carries, honoring the
governor and captain-general, Bernardo de Gillvez, who had by this time been made
viceroy of New Spain to succeed his late father (Holmes 1968:102).
After the larder was replenished by a deer hunt, the boats sailed on eastward on
the twenty-sixth in search of fresh water. At the Sabine, the water in the mouth was
brackish; only by difficult rowing through Sabine Lake was fresh water finally
found in the mouth of the Neches River. The Texas reconnaissance ended abruptly
as a heavy thunderstorm forced the boats to get underway at two o’clock in the
morning.
Evia, however, was not yet finished with Texas. In Mexico the following
March to report to Viceroy Gfilvez, he received new orders: to reconnoiter the
coast from Tampico to San Bernardo Bay, with particular attention to the Rfo

114

Texas Archeological Society

,(

Figure 2. I ) lano de la B ahfa de Galveston, by Jos6 de Evia, 1785. Holmes (1968) has a different

Evia map of the bay with a different cartouche but identical configuration. Why Evia chose
the particular English form for the name is a puzzle (Museo Naval, Madrid).

Bravo (R~o Grande), because its course extended from the Interior Provinces.
He sailed from Veracruz on June 5, 1786, with two vessels carrying, besides the
crew, 50 infantrymen of the Zamora and Corona regiments, commanded by
Captain Elfas de Castro--the protection Evia felt was necessary against the coastal
Indians. Gathering additional support as he ascended the coast to Tampico, he

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

115

had a schooner, a coastal vessel (barco de la costa), a launch, and four canoes
(alternately called piraguas).
At Altamira, Castro recruited 20 mounted men to follow the expedition along
the beach. The canoes sailed close to shore to sound the coast and sketch its
outline; the larger vessels stayed farther out. Nearing the mouth of the Rio
Grande, the explorers were met by 25 cavalrymen from the upriver settlements
of Reynosa and Camargo, who were to be their escort on the Texas coast. The
boatmen sounded 7 to 10 feet of water over the bar, four fathoms within; the
river was 120 varas (330 feet) wide at the mouth and at seven leagues upstream.
After registering the Barra de Santiago (Brazos Santiago), the boats proceeded
northward along Padre Island. Among fragments of ships wrecked here or
brought by the current, Evia recognized part of the DragOn, on which he had
once sailed; the vessel had been wrecked on Bajo Nuevo in the Bay of Campeche
more than three years previously.
In observed latitude 28°10’N on August 11, the piraguas entered a bay that,
according to the natives, was called Corpus Christi. The coastal pilots of Nuevo
Santander informed the captain that the Nueces River emptied into the bay. Evia
identified the pass as "the one they call Caballos," resembling that of Bahia de
San Bemardo (Holmes 1968:183). To the northwest was Lago (Rio) de San Jos6,
so named by Enrfquez Barroto in 1686. Thence, the boats sailed northeastward
along the barrier island to the point where they had turned back the previous
year; there, the boats turned back toward the Rio Grande.
The time alloted for Evia’s voyage was much too short to permit a complete survey, so his efforts were directed at the bays that offered possibilities for
navigation. The reconnaissance nevertheless was a milestone. Evia’s map data
were useful to others, including Juan de Lingara on his well-known map of the
Louisiana-Texas coast, which came in for considerable attention from 1804 to
1821 in the attempt to unravel the Louisiana boundary question (Holmes
1968:26).
Even before Spain’s retrocession of Louisiana to France and France’s sale
of the territory to the United States, the matter of the boundary between Louisiana and Texas focused attention on the Gulf Coast. In 1789, the commandant
at Natchitoches, Luis Carlos de Blanc, proposed extending his jurisdiction to
the Sabine River. The matter was dragged through official channels until 1791,
when the viceroy, the second Conde de Revillagigedo, issued orders for exploring Texas and its coasts with a view to opening commerce between the two
provinces and redrawing the boundary. The reconnaissance was to begin at
"Espfritu Santo Bay" and proceed to
the coast of that of San Bernardo and the adjacent small islands where
live the Indios Carancaguases [Karankawas] and other roving bands
who locate their rancherfas on them, as well as on the mainland.
And so on to the Trinity River and "the port to which the pilot Jos6 Ant.
Evia gave the name of Galveston" (Revi!lagigedo 1791).

116

Texas Archeological Society

\

/’\
\

/

/

f

:

!~ LA PROU~N 37~ ~ T~XAS~

Figure 3. Plano Geografyco de la Prouyncya de Texas, "by disposition of Subinspector
Colonel" Fdlix Calleja, 1807. Calleja became New Spain’s viceroy (1813-1816). The map,

Weddle n Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

117

which reflects little knowledge of previous explorations, creates more confusion than it
dispels (Archivo Histdrico Nacional, Madrid).

118

Texas Archeological Society

The plan had many worthy objectives: the opening of a Texas port, fortifying
San Bernardo Bay to curb the ravages of the Karankawas, detailed mapping of
the region, and much more, including consideration of the boundary change. A
1793 Crown decision against shifting the provincial boundary seems to have
ended the matter. Already, the Mission Nuestra Sefiora del Refugio had been
founded for the Karankawans and Aranames near the mouth of San Antonio Bay.
The site had been chosen following Fray Jos6 Francisco Garza’s reconnaissance
of the coast from Lavaca Bay to the mouth of the Nueces River. In July 1793,
Juan Cort6s, the La Bahfa commandant, inspected the new mission’s environs
with special attention to the Indians’ retreat on Toboso Island from San Antonio
Bay to the "Port of Matagorda." He found Matagorda Bay to be too shallow to
accommodate even packet boats or smacks. The island--"more appropriately
called Purgatory"--was without potable water or forage and swarming with
blood-sucking mosquitoes (Cort6s 1793). Two years later, the mission moved
inland, to present-day Refugio, Texas, where it functioned until 1828.
Mission Refugio, combining its efforts with those of missions Rosario and
Espfritu Santo, was not an unqualified success at solving the problem of the
coastal tribes. Neither was it an outright failure. By 1804, "very few runaway
families" remained of those who traditionally inhabited the barrier islands and
blocked Spanish efforts to control the Texas coast. The trouble caused by these
apostates had virtually ceased (John 1991:174). To Spanish coastal exploration,
the Karankawans had provided one of the principal motivations (surpassed only
by that of preventing foreign intrusion) and also the greatest obstacle.
No port worthy of the name was ever developed on the Texas coast during
Spain’s tenure. The Spaniards, in fact, were ambivalent about the developmnent
of ports and settlement of the coast, which would have facilitated contraband
trade and helped to spread knowledge of Spanish possessions abroad. The jealousy with which the Spaniards sought to keep knowledge of their territories from
other nations may also have kept it from their own; information on earlier explorations seems seldom to have been on tap when it was needed (Figure 3).
With the fading of the native menace, the expeditions of the Spaniards most
often made coastal reconnaissance in response to rumors of foreign intrusion-sometimes groundless, sometimes not. The knowledge that came from such
efforts fell short of giving them mastery of the coast. Invaders--Napoleonic
exiles, freebooters, filibusters, and revolutionaries--persisted to the end.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This paper was made possible through the assistance of a research grant from
the National Endowment for the Humanities. The grant, which enabled the author
to work in the principal archives of Spain, was awarded for his larger study of
discovery and exploration encompassing the entire Gul for Mexico, from which this
paper is drawn.

Weddle J Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

119

REFERENCES CITED
Abbreviations
AGI

Archivo General de Indias, Sevilla

AGN

Archivo General y Pfblico de la Naci6n

BTHC

Barker Texas History Center, University of Texas at Austin

PI

Provincias Internas, in AGN

Arnold, J. Barto III, and Robert S. Weddle
The Nautical Archeology of Padre Island: The Spanish Shipwrecks of 1554.
1978
Academic Press, New York.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene (editor)
1914
Athanase de Mdzikres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780. Two
volumes. Arthur H. Clark, Cleveland.
Bustillo y Ceballos, Juan Antonio
1726
June 18. Letter to the viceroy. AGN, PI 236, BTHC transcript.
Cabello, Domingo
1779
March 20. Extract o frepor t. In: Concesion de una pension a la viuda de d. Ysidro
Millet, Madrid, March 18, 1791. AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajo 1160, no.
223.
Cazorla, Luis
1776a June 5. Diario. AGN, PI 99, BTHC transcript.
1776b

June 12. Letter to viceroy. AGN, PI 99, BTHC transcript.

C6liz, Francisco
DiaryoftheAIarc6nExpeditionintoTexas,1718-1719.TranslatedbyFritzLe°
1935
Hoffmann. The Quivira Society, Los Angeles.
Chipman, Donald E.
In Search of Cabeza de Vaca’s Route across Texas: An Historiographical
1987
Survey. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 91(2):127-148.
Corbin, James E.
1991
Retracing the Camino de los Tejas from the Trinity River to Los Adaes: New
Insights into East Texas History. In: A TexasLegacy: The OldSanAntonio Road
and the Camino Reales. A Tricentennial History, 1691-1991, edited by A.
Joachim McGraw, John W. Clark, Jr., and Elizabeth A. Robbins, pp. 191-219.
Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin.
Cortfis, Juan
1793
Aug. 23. Report to Manuel Mufioz. B~xar Archives, BTHC.

120

Texas Archeological Society

D~ivila Padilla, Agusffn
1596
Histdria de la fundacidn y discurso de la provincia de Santiago de Mexico,
de la Orden de Predicadores, por las vidas de sus varones insignes y casos
notables de Nueva Espaha. Pedro Madrigal, Madrid.

Dfaz del Castillo, Bernal
Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva Espaha. 2 volumes. Editorial
1955
Porrua, Mexico City.
Enrfquez B arroto, Juan
1687
Diary of the Voyage. In: La Salle, the Mississippi, and the Gulf: Three Primary
Documents (1987), edited by Robert S. Weddle, pp. 149-205. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.
Escand6n, Jos6 de
1747
October 28, Queretaro. Letter to viceroy. AGN, PI 179, pt. 1. BTHC transcript.
1766

May 2, Villa de Nuevo Santander. Letter to viceroy. AGN, PI 110. BTHC
transcript.

Faulk, Odie B.
1964
The Last Years of Spanish Texas, 1778-1821. Mouton, The Hague.
FernAndez Carrasco, Pedro.
1688
Diario del viaje. AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajos 616.
Garza Falc6n, Josg Antonio, Eugenio Fermindez, and Mateo Marffnez
Sept. 24, Real de Santa Petronila. Ynforme. AGI, Audiencia de Guadalajara,
1766
legajos 511.
Gdmez Raposo, Luis
1944
Diario del descubrimiento que hizo el Capit~n Don Andr6s del Pez (/kilo de
1687). In: Colecci6n de diarios y relaciones para la historia de los viajes y
descubrimientos 4:115-150. Instimto Hist6rico de Marina, Madrid.

Holmes, Jack D. L. (editor)
Josd de Evia y sus reconocimientos del Golfo de Mexico. Ediciones Jos~ Porrfia
1968
Turanzas, Madrid.
Jackson, Jack, Robert S. Weddle, and Winston De Ville
Mapping Texas and the Gulf Coast: The Contributions of Saint-Denis, Olivdn,
1990
and Le Maire. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

John, Elizabeth A. H. (editor)
1991
Views from a Desk in Chihuahua: Manuel Merino’s Report on Apaches and
Neighboring Nations, ca. 1804. Southwestern tIistorical Quarterly 95 (2): 139175.
Lavazares, Guido
1558
Declaracidn. Real Academia de la ttistoria, A/115, folios 84-86, Madrid.

Weddle ~ Spanish Exploration of the Texas Coast, 1519-1800

121

Llanos, Francisco de
Diario y derrota del Viaje que se hecho y Ejecutado a la B ahfa de S an Bemardo.
1690
AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajos 616.
Ledn, Alonso de, Juan Bautista Chapa, and Femando S~inchez de Zamora
1961
Historia de Nuevo Le6n, con noticias sobre Coahuila, Tamaulipas, Texas y
Nuevo Mdxico. Biblioteca de Nuevo Ledn, Monterrey.
Martin, J. C., and Robert S. Martin
1982
Contours ofDiscovery: Printed Maps Delineating the Texas and Southwestern
Chapters in the Cartographic History ofNorth America, 1513-1930. Portfolio.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Martfr de Anglerfa, Pedro
Ddcadas delNuevo Mundo. Translated by D. Joaquin Torres Asensio. Editorial
1944
Bajel, Buenos Aires.
Orobio Basterra, Joaqufn
1746
Diligencias practicadas por Dn Joaqn Orobio Capn de laB alga sobre establecimto
de Franceses. B4xar Archives, Bahia, 1743-1778. BTHC.
1748

July 22. Consulta. Archivo San Francisco el Grande, Volume 19:95. Photostat,
BTHC.

Ortiz Parrilla, Diego
1766
October 7-14, Presidio de la Bahia. Testimonio de las Diligencias practicadas
por e! Coronel Don Diego Ortiz Parrilla en que de puntial noticia de la Ysla de
los Malaguitas. AGI, Audiencia de Guadalajara, legajos 511. BTHC transcript.
1767a

June 21, Mexico City. Consulta. AGI, Audiencia de Guadalajara, legajos 511,
BTHC transcript.

1767b

Plano que manifiesta la Costa del Seno Mexicano desde el Rio grande del Norte
que est~i en 24 grados y 40 minutos de latimd Septentrional hasta la Bahia de Sn.
Bemardo que se ha!la en la de 29 grados y 20 minutos. Museo Naval, B aVI-CaB
no. 1. Madrid.

Pichardo, Jos6 Antonio
Pichardo’s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas, edited by Charles
1931
Wilson Hackett. Volume 1 of 4. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Ranjel, Rodrigo
1557
April 25. Letter to the Spanish Crown. AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajos 168.
Revillagigedo, Conde de
1791
April 6. Ynstruccidn que deverfi observar Dn. N. Pral., comisionado para el
importante desempeno de reconocimiento que hart de hacerse en la Provincia de
Texas. AGI, Audiencia de Mexico, legajos 2506.

122

Texas Archeological Society

Rivera y Villaldn, Pedro de
1945

Diario y derrotero de lo caminado, visto y observado en el discurso de la visita
general de Pr ecidios situados en las Provincias Ynternas de Nueva Espaha, que
de 6rden de su magestad execut6 D. Pedro de Rivera. Edited by Guillermo
Porras Mufioz. Mexico City.

Ruiz, Marcos
1754
Sept. 20. Auto. AGI, Audiencia de Guadalajara, tegajos 329.
Smith, Buckingham (translator)
1968

Narratives ofDe Soto in the conquest ofFlorida, as told by a Gentleman ofElvas
and in a relation by Luys Herndndez de Biedma. Palmetto Books, Gainesville,
Florida.

Talon, Pierre and Jean-Baptiste
1698
Voyage to the Mississippi through the Gulf of Mexico. In: La Salle, the
Mississippi and the Gulf." Three Primary Documents (1987), edited by Robert
S. Weddle, pp. 225-258. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Weddle, Robert S.
1973
Wilderness Manhunt: The Spanish Search for La Salle. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
1985

Spanish Sea: The Gulf of Mexico in North American Discovery, 1500-1685.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1987

(editor) La Salle, the Mississippi, and the Gulf: Three Primary Documents.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1991

TheFrenehThorn:RivalExplorersintheSpanishSea,1682-1762.TexasA&M
University Press, College Station.

Wood, Peter H.
1984

La Salle: Discovery of a Lost Explorer. The American Historical Review
89(2):294-323.

