THE COGDELL BURIAL
IN FLOYD COUNTY, TEXAS
JAMES H. WORD AND ANNE FOX

ABSTRACT
This paper reports the discovery of an historical Indian burial in Floyd
County, Texas. Investigations of this find. the Cogdell Burial site, produced
an abundance of artifactual material including beaded garments, jewelry,
blankets, a saddle and several utilitarian objects. Descriptions of these artifacts are presented.
Although the burial had been removed from its original context, information regarding the body position and burial customs was obtained.
Comparisons with published accounts and unreported burials of similar
age in the Texas Tech and Panhandle-Plains Historical Museums verify
some of the cultural practices reported for the Comanche burials and
question others. Two additional burial customs for the Comanche are
suggested on the basis of archeological findings.
Research associated with the Cogdell Burial site artifact analysis indicates that a main source of Indian trade goods for this area of the south
plains was through the Comanchero. Second and third-hand acquisition of
European goods was provided by association with other Indian groups
and by predatory raids against white settlements and aboriginal enemies.
Dating on the basis of artifact content, the time of the burial appeared to
have been between 1850 and 1860.

INTRODUCTION
Late in February of 1972, D.M. Cogdell telephoned the senior
author that a burial had been discovered on his ranch. He recognized
the potential of the find and donated the skeletal material and
associated burial offerings to the Floyd County Historical Museum.
The burial was brought to town in a burlap bag. Upon opening the
bag, objects definitely associated with an historic burial were
revealed. Although some of the skeletal parts, wooden artifacts,
leather and cloth were damaged by rodents, the numerous offerings
prompted further inquiry, and an arrangement was made for the site
to be visited the following Saturday. Although the burial had been
removed from its context, it was hoped that careful interrogation of
Bruce McFall (discoverer of the burial and son of the Cogdell Ranch
foreman) and screening of the matrix would yield information concerning placement of burial offerings in relation to the body.
William J. Mayer-Oakes of the Department of Anthropology at
Texas Tech University was contacted, and he sent a group of his
students to assist in the necessary field work.

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Prior to the interview of Bruce McFall, the senior author prepared
a series of questions designed to reveal as much information as
possible concerning the circumstances of the burial and the relative
location of the associated burial goods. Bruce stated that he was
riding a horse and observed a niche or small cave in the east face of
the Llano Estacado escarpment. He noted that it was nearly filled
with rocks and assumed that the roof had collapsed. Moving some
of the rocks, McFall heard a metallic "clink" and upon further
investigation found a brass bracelet. More rocks were removed, exposing the skull. McFall left and a day or so later returned and completely uncovered the burial. It was at this time that Sid McFal],
Cogdell foreman, learned of the discovery and advised D. M. Cogdell.
While the interview was taking place, the Texas Tech students
established a datum point and began mapping the burial site.
Associates of the senior author began screening the material which
had been thrown down the slope in front of the cave, and a considerable amount of additional cultural material was recovered.
While both authors contributed to identification and analysis,
there are areas in which each assumed primary responsibility. Anne
Fox analyzed and described beads, leather clothing and
miscellaneous leather. ]ames H. Word is responsible for the other
portions of the report, including analysis of the saddle leather.
LOCALE OF THE BURIAL

waters of many of the major rivers of Texas. Hall Creek flows
southeasterly (Fig. 1) where it joins the North Fork of the Pease River.
Short, dry tributaries of Hall Creek form a dendritic pattern, and it is
one of these southerly flowing drainages that containect the burial site
THE BURIAL NICHE
The niche selected for the burial faces west and is near the upper
rim of a short canyon (Fig. 2). It is 253 cm. wide at the opening and
widens to a maximum width of 315 cm. midway to the back. The
maximum depth from the overhang to back is 256 cm. at a point in the
southeastern part and gently narrows to a depth of 147 cm as the back
wall angles outward. The floor of the niche is slightly undulating with a
pronounced dip near the rear wall. The roof is more irregular than the
floor, attaining a maximum height of 128 cm. near the back.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

3
\

TEXAS

A
....
("’)

BU IAL SITE
"’l
CAPROCK ESCARPMENT ..j
DRA NAGE
POND OR PLAYA

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

~.i

,._.---..,.II

-~-- ~’ ....
I"

l\"

l~
i

FIGURE 1, Location map of Cogdell burial site.

THE BURIAL
The depression or pit is 58.8 cm. wide and 181.3 cm. long {Figs. 3, A

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

5

The body was placed on its left side facing west (Fig. 4). The left arm
was bent sharply at the elbow with the hand over the upper pelvis. The
right arm was bent less acutely and extended past the lower part of the
pelvis. The right leg was extended. The left thigh angled outward and
the lower leg was flexed with the foot under the right leg.
Over the chest were two travois poles broken into three nearly equal
parts and, with a travois brace, these poles were placed in a fan shape
with the apex of the "fan" over the chest. Limestone-caliche rocks
varying from 15 to 24 cm. in maximum diameter were placed over the
body to form a cairn, A small fire was built on top of the mound of
rocks.

LOCATION OF ARTIFACTS
Since the body and a majority of the burial goods had been removed
from their original position, the placement of burial goods is based on
information gathered from Bruce McFall and from deductions based on
copper stains from brass objects.
Dessicated and copper-stained flesh in the vicinity of the left ear
helped to determine the placement of a series of hair ornaments. Impressions in the flesh matched the shape of the hair ornaments and
provided further proof of the location of these objects.
A necklace consisting of hairpipe and glass beads was placed about
the neck (Fig. 4). Above the left and right elbows and above the left
hand at the wrist were brass bracelets. A gold plated brass ring was
on the ring finger of the left hand.
The balance of the burial offerings were located toward the mouth of
the cave. Beside the body was a cluster of artifacts (Fig. 4). These will
be described as they were located from south to north. A decorated
saddle rigging ring was the southernmost artifact. Just to the north was
an iron "D"-shaped rigging ring. Both were probably parts of the saddie rigging, A circular silver concha was next. Two abalone gorgers
were the most northern goods. To the west of the previously mentioned
concha was yet another concha. Directly south of this second concha
were the remains of a saddle tree. The saddle horn was to the north. To
the right of the saddle (westward) was a small hand mirror and south
of the mirror was an eye hoe. A concha was found on a small shelf-like
projection in the north wall of the burial chamber. The provenience of
the fourth concha is unknown.
The body was probably clothed in a cloth shirt, leather leggings, and
moccasins. It was wrapped in a series of blankets and possibly a buffalo robe. Another set of leather clothing was found in the burial niche.
These leather goods were folded with the beaded parts inside and

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

_1
_1
It_

:::i:i-

._3
Z

::::::::::::::::::::: >- 5
ta3

.. ==========================
a
I._,._.1
IzB

....... :::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

7

iiiiiii

r~

g

<,:<-:+:+:+:+:+:,:<+:+:-

o

.,.,...-.-.,...,.,., ,., ¯ ¯ .,,..,....
.’.’.’,’,’n’,’.’.’n’.-.’.’n’.-.,.-.,
<+:.:<.:<<.:.:<-:+:+:,:.:+:.
,’.’n’,’,’.’.’n’n’.’.’.’.’.’,’.’.’.’
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
".’,’n’.’.’.’.’.’.’.’.’.’.’.".’.’.’,’.’,’."
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
".’.’.’.’.’.’.".’.’,’.’.’.’,’,’,’n’.’.’n’." :
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
-:.:<<-:+:+:<+:-:.:+:+:<.:,:.:+:-:<+
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:-:-:-:+:-:+:+:<<+:+:+:<+:<-:+:+:+
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
-:-:<<+:+:+:+:+:+:.:<.:+:+:+:+:.:+:.
:+:+:<+:.:+:<+:.:+:.:<+:<+:.:.:+:.:.:<.

~2

°~,..t

\

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: ::::::::: :::::

i:i i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i i i:i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i:
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::iiii
~

i i i i i i i !i i i i i i i i

I

I

0
c.O

0

r6

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

9

when the site was first visited by the senior author, these objects
were found at the northern end of the niche. McFall does not recall
the location of the beaded leather goods; but he states elsewhere in
our interview that as objects were discovered, they were placed
either behind or beside him, If this situation is correct, the pieces
of beaded clothing were originally at the feet of the deceased.

ARTIFACTUAL MATERIAL
ELOTHING. Fabrics and leather goods were found with the burial.
Without question many of these represent parts of clothing. When the
burial place was visited, some of these objects had been removed
from their original context and placed at the north end of the burial
niche. Copper stains on various garments gave clues as to their
location relative to the body,
Cloth Clothing. Large fragments of a cotton shirt were recovered.
It is probable that the shirt was made by folding a length of cloth and
sewing down the sides with holes left for the arms. Cotton thread
stitched in simple over-and-under fashion along the selvage joined the
edges of the cloth to form a loosely fitting pullover shirt. The weft and
warp have a thread count of 120 per 2.5 cm. The weave is simply one
over one. The selvage is of plain finish. Copper stains from brass
bracelets on the arms and upper body and on the shirt substantiate
the location of this garment.
Leather Clothing. Most of the leather, which includes all tanned
animal skins, was delivered to the junior author in the approximate
state in which it was removed from the ground. Soil and rodent clung
encrusted everything and there were wadded-up pieces and layers of
gnawed and torn fragments, some showing blue and white beading
apparently still in place on the leather.
The task of gently easing apart and cleaning these fragments was
accomplished gradually over a period of time, using a dull knife and
stiff brushes to scrape and chip off as much filth as possible without
damaging the leather. Meanwhile, a search was made for a method of
relaxing the skins in order to determine their original shape and
dimensions.
After consulting a number of authorities, no consensus was
reached on the method to use in softening the skins and that the only
way was to go slowly and evolve the best method for each particular
case. Since the ingredients for leather preservation found in most
handbooks are difficult to obtain, complicated to use, and usually
specified for book bindings rather than for dirty, fragile archeological
specimens, it was decided to experiment first with Lexol. Lexol is a

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

I0

product used at the Witte Museum in San Antonio for restoration of
historical objects made of tanned leather, and recommended by Anderson (1968: 56-57). A letter from the Lexol Corporation assured the
junior author that their product is "an emulsion of the purest animal
fat liquors," and that it is currently being used by archeological
teams in the United States and Greece. After experimenting with
various methods of application, it was determined that the best
technique was to lay the object out on wire mesh and apply the
solution with a small paint brush, gradually stretching and flattening
the leather as the Lexol soaked in. Each leather fragment was treated
in this way, spread on wire mesh so that air could reach both sides,
and left in a well-ventilated room for several weeks. Materials so
treated were restored to their original shape and texture and were
not sticky or oily when thoroughly dry. A minimum of darkening occurred in some areas, which could be reversed by gently brushing or
scraping with a dull knife after the article was dry.
Identification of the animals from which the skins were taken was

ARTICLEA -- Beaded Moccasin (Fig. 5, A).
.2
cm.
simple white
.2 ÷ cm.
simple blue
The preserved fragment includes enough beading to suggest that the
only colors used were blue and white, with a preponderance of blue, and a
white stripe down the instep. The colors and pattern are unlike anything in
Beads:

the Witte Museum’s collection (Comanche or otherwise) or observed in
other published works On Indian artifacts. This. plus the fact that the
beads are nearly all .2 to .3 cm. in diameter, gives the feeling of an older

COGDELL BURIAL SITE
piece, perhaps pre-1865. The sole is .6 cm. thick, which is unusually heavy
compared to observed specimens. The skin is probably deer or antelope.

ARTICLE B -- Beaded Garment (Fig. 5, B).
simple white
.2
cm.
simple blue
.2
cm.
simple white
.3 + cm.
compound white
.3
cm.
The simple white and blue .2 cm beads dominate with the larger simple
ones used mostly in the border. Twenty compound white beads are scattered throughout the body of the design. It has been impossible to determine what type of garment this was. The angle at which the beaded strip
was applied to the skin does not correspond to any garment known to the
authors, but it may be some sort of shirt. The skin is probably deer or antelope.
Beads:

ARTICLE C

--

Beaded Leggings (Fig. 6, A).

Beads:

simple white
.2-.3 + cm.
simple blue
.2-.3 + cm.
compound white
.2-.3 + cm.
The presence of nearly 100 compound beads, plus the fact that the
majority of all the beads are over .3 Cm.. tends to date this piece earlier
than the others. There can be little doubt that this was a fragment from
leggings, from the placement of the beaded strips and the length and
proportions of the remaining garment fragments. Traces of fringe and ties
are still present on one piece. The similarity of the bead colors and pattern
and beading technique to those of a bag collected by Jean Louis
Berlandier in the early 19th century (Berlandier 1969: Plate 19} and one in
the collection of the Witte Museum (Fig. 6, B) are interesting to observe.
It is very likely that they are contemporary. The leather is nearly
identical to that of Article B.

ARTICLE D

Beaded Strip

simple white
.3 + cm.
simple blue
.3 + cm. (2 shades}
Only small fragments remain of a beaded strip which differs from those
on the other garments in the width of the rows in which the beads are applied. The beading resembles that of Article C. however, and could be from
that garment.
Beads:

ARTICLE E -- Pair of Moccasins.
These appear to be identical to those illustrated in Figure 32 of Berlandier (1969: 181) and identified as Comanche. They still retain the imprint of

11

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

/D

A

B

FIGURE 5. Beaded objects. A, fragment of beaded moccasin; B,
fragment of beaded garment.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE ......

13

B
FIGURE 6. Beaded objects. A, fragment of beaded leggings; B,
beaded Comanche hunting pouch in the Witte Museum, San Antonio.

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the feet of their owner, and he may have been wearing them when he was
buried.

Leggings typically have side fringes, but none are on this garment. From
the cut and patternS of stress, this garment appears to have been a plain
leather leggingl Perhaps it was similar to those painted by Lino Sanchez y
Tapia and described by Ewers in Berlandier (1696: Plate 3. 157) as "skin
leggings which fit rather snugl~ ab0ve the knees, bUt Which are extended
into triangular fringed fla~s below the ~ees.’~ several Seams ~nd a hem
along tWo Sides are sewn with a fine cotton thread, and the leather is
darker than that of the other garments ~hd obviously tamed in ~ different
manner. This could conceivably be a garment obtained in trade or by
raiding the Anglo or Mexican settlements.

BEADS. The majority of the loose beads recovered from the matrix of
the burial probably came from the damaged beaded objects of
clothing, so they are included and described here.
A great deal can be determined about a burial from careful
examination of beads, headwork, and leather when they have been
properly cleaned and restored. While the processes are timeconsuming, the results are well worth the effort. Detailed observation, examination and analysis, however, while yielding interesting results in themselves, cannot be of too much value unless
they are done with an understanding of the ethnological and
historical setting of the burial in question. With these points in mind,
the junior author embarked on a thor0ugh search of ethnological and
historical sources which might throw light on the materials under
examination. This proved to be of great help in interpreting what was
observed about the artifacts.
The study of beads proceeded from a preliminary assumption, due
to its location in known Comanche territory and to the preponderance
of blue beads and the color known to have been favored by this tribe
according to Ewers (in Berlandier 1969: 178) and Wallace and Hoebel
(1952: 77), that this was a Comanche Indian burial. This assumption
was reinforced by the illustration of a beaded Comanche pouch in the
Berlandier Collection at the Smithsonian Institution [Berlandier 1969:
Plate 19) which closely resembles one fragment from the burial in
ead colors and proportions. The opportunity was taken to closely
examine and compare a similar bag in the Witte Museum collection
which was accessioned as an early Comanche hunting pouch (Fig. 6,
B).
There is no need to elaborate upon the process of manufacture and
distribution of glass and shell trade beads in the 19th century. The

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

15

subject has been thoroughly explored in previous publications,
especially by Orchard (1929), Woodward (1965: 4-17), and Ewers
(1957: 29-85). Terms used here are those which are generally accepted in bead descriptions. A simple bead is one homogeneous piece
of glass, a compound one is formed of two or more concentric layers,
and unless otherwise indicated, beads are of hollow-cane manufacture. It has been the junior author’s observation that in the analysis of
bead size, the length can vary as much as .2 cm. within a type on a
single beaded object, especially on those made during the early 19th
century. The diameter is therefore the measurement which is of most
use in comparative dating, and is the only one recorded in this report.
Information on the beads from this site was collected in several
ways. A complete list of beads in the possession of the original excavators was provided by them. Jim and Dot Word laboriously picked
out over 64,000 beads before delivering the remainder of the back dirt
(approximately 350 pounds} to San Antonio. It was obvious that the
matrix was too rocky to dissolve in water and it would require a lifetime to pick out all the beads individually. Reducing the pebbly soil
with muriatic acid proved too expensive and inefficient. The
following method was evolved for estimating the total number of
beads. Since the dirt had been packed in bags of approximately eight
pounds each, 16 pounds of back dirt were measured into a large container and thoroughly mixed together. From this amount, one pound
was weighed out and all the beads picked out by hand and recorded
and the total number of each type of bead in this portion was projected from these numbers. Since there was no way to be sure that beads
were evenly distributed throughout the back dirt, it was all weighed
and examined in this manner and totals projected for each 16 pound
batch.
In the following listing, the blue and white embroidery bead totals
were estimated in the above manner. Since no additional necklacesized beads were found in the sorting of back dirt, it is assumed that
these totals are complete. All of the extra small blue beads (#180)
and many of the small blue embroidery beads were extremely fragile, and the totals reflect only a portion of the number actually
present.
Numbers and approximate dates asslgned to bead types and their
descriptions are those used by R. King Harris (Harris and Harris
1967: 139-162}. Also included are some types recorded by him since
1967. These identifications have all been confirmed in consultation
with Mr. Harris. The blue seed or embroidery beads can be divided
into three sub-types according to the shade of blue and the ap-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

16

pearance of the glass. Further studies may show some dating value in
pursuing this further, but for the purposes of this report they are all
added together in the totals. Numbers have not as yet been assigned
to these types, and the descriptions are those of the author. Sizes
refer to bead diameters as follows: large, over .6 cm.; medium, .4-.6
cm.; small, .2-.4 cm.; extra small, .0-.2 cm.
Glass Necklace Beads (over .5 cm)
Harris’ Number
77. Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, donut-shaped
necklace bead of simple construction. (1740-1820)
130. Large, dark Bluebird Blue. barrel-shaped, translucent,
faceted bead of simple construction. There are 16 to 20
186.

187.

189.

190.
194.

facets on the surface of the bead. (1820-1836)
Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of mandrel-wound simple construction, The glass is porcelainlike in texture,
Medium, white, opaque~ olive-shaped necklace or garter
bead of mandrel-wound simple construction. The glass is
porcelain-like in texture. (19th century)
Medium Harvard crimson, translucent, olive-shaped
necklace or garter bead of mandrel-wound simple construction.
Large, white, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction.
Large, Brick Red, opaque, donut-shaped, necklace bead of
compound construction. The inner layer of glass is opaque
white. This type is generally referred to as "Cornaline
d’Aleppo’ ." The red over white replaced the red over
translucent translucent green about 1850.

Totals
76

22

27

16

1
50

24

Glass Garter or Embroidery Beads (under .5 cm)
50.

134.

87.
180.
44.

45.

Small, black, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. Glass is porcelain-like in texture. (17001836)
Small, dark Amber, barrel-shaped, translucent, faceted
garter bead of simple construction. The facets appear to
be pressed and Vary from four to eight in number. (1767)
Small, brick red. over red opaque, donut-shaped garter
bead of compound construction. (1740)
EXtra small Yale Blue translucent, donut-shaped garter
bead 0f simple constructi0n (1836-1850) Very fragile.

8

1
70 +

Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. The glass has a porcelain-like texture. (17001836)
Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of compound onstruction. The inner layer has a porcelain-like

55,700

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

texture, and the outer layer is clear but has a slightly
frosted appearance, probably due to age. (1700-1836)

17

180

Blue A. Small, bright blue, semi-translucent, donut-shaped embroidery bead of simple construction; may correspond to
Ray and Jelks’ "translucent blue." (1964: 132)
Blue B. Small, aquamarine, translucent, donut-shaped embroidery bead of simple construction. Glass has
longitudinal striations and bubbles, and beads are fragile:
Blue C. Small, blue, translucent, donut-shaped embroidery bead
of simple construction. Glass has longitudinal striations;
may correspond to the "translucent aquamarine" of Ray
and Jelks (1964:132}
Shell Hairpipes
7.2 cm. long, .7 cm. maximum diameter
3.0 cm. long, .6 cm. maximum diameter

93,000

1
2

Judging from bead types alone, this burial would appear to date
sometime after 1850, the approximate date of the introduction of the
white-centered Cornaline (#194) into the Texas area (Harris, personal communication), and before the 1880’s when shell hair pipes
were replaced by bone (Ewers 1957:62).
Ray and Jelks have suggested (1964: 139-140) that seed beads used
in the 18th century tended to be larger than those used in the 19th,
and that there may have been a gradual change from one size to the
other which could be useful in dating Indian burials. A synthesis of
bead diameters from reported historic burials in the PanhandlePlains region of Texas as reported by Ray and Jelks and by Parsons
(1967: 92) is Shown in Table 1.
Checking this another way, Ray and Jelks suggest that there was a
gradual change in the proportions of compound versus simple white
seed beads over a period of time. The result of adding the earlier
Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks 1961) in Rains County to the above
sites, again using Ray and Jelks’ and Parson’s statistics, is shown in
Table 2.
It appears, according to these methods of analysis, that the 41FL45
site should date somewhere between 1840 and 1860. It is interesting to
note that projected totals show 4% of the blue seed beads and 20% of
the white to measure .3 cm. and over. By Ray and Jelks’ standards,
this should put the date between 1850 and 1860.
The varieties of bead sizes served to reinforce Richard Conn’s
(1972: 9) observation that the use of the pony bead (over .3 cm.) was
primarily a matter of choice rather than availability since all sizes of
beads were represented. The use of the colors blue and white was
also a matter of choice, though it is hard to determine who was

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

18

o

o

Z
o
o

z~
8

Z

z

g
r~
r~

0

g~

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

19

making the choice, the traders who offered them or the Indians who
demanded them.
Since only one whole hair pipe bead and two fragmentary ones
were found, they were probably not a part of a breastplate or a multistranded necklace such as those described by a trader with the
Comanche in 1642 (Ewers 1957: 50) and by a member of Capt. Marcy’s
expedition in 1854 (ibid.: 51). A munber of beaded awl cases and
pouches in the Witte Museum collection, attributed to the Plains
tribes, have two or three shell hair pipes strung on the thongs by
which they were suspended from the belt. All of these objects would
date after 1870 to judge from the size, colors, and patterns of the
beads [Lyferd 1940: 58; Conn 1972: i0), but the tradition could go back
much further. Hair pipes were also worn suspended from the ears in
the pre-reservation period by men of the Kiowa, Kiowa-Apache, and
the Comanche tribes (Ewers 1957: 76).
Beads are a common item to be found in historic burials. Of the 13
other burials examined or reports studied, ten report beads. The
Merrell burial and the child burial from the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum did not have glass beads in the material
examined. However, the circumstances of these discoveries may have
been such that glass beads, if present, were not observed or were
kept by those making the discovery. Mr. Walter Merrell, who was one
of the individuals discovering the Merrell burial, stated that the soil
containing the body was not screened [personal communication), so
beads could have been present, but not observed. Bennett did not
recover any beads from the Dawson County burial (1966: 78). Suhm
reported a fragment of buckskin with beads still attached by the lazy
stitch method (Suhm 1961: 104). Ray and Jelks (1964: 129-131) did not
report any beaded objects, but the loose beads recovered probably
represent a necklace, and no doubt other objects were beaded that
did not survive. The Yellowhouse burial (Newcomb 1955: 187)
produced evidence of beaded moccasins and the remains of a breastplate of hair pipes were noted. Parsons [1967: 87-90) recovered loose
glass beads and fragments of textiles (ibid.: 90-91) with beads still
adhering to the cloth. The Caprock burial (Conner, Allison and
Runkles, ms.) was associated with glass beads and one fragment of
deer skin with beads still attached which probably represented a
fragmentary clothing item. The McKaskle burial from near Stanton,
Texas, yielded fragments of cloth with bead work still attached and
the Biddy burial from near Paducah, Texas, produced loose beads.
Hester [1966) reported the occurrence of over 100 loose blue and
white glass beads with a historic burial near Ozona in Crockett
County.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SADDLE. In order to acquaint the reader with saddle construction, a
brief description will be given. The first process was to shape a saddie tree. Often a forked limb of adaptable shape was used for the
fork. The horn and fork were of one piece. The bars and cantle were
made and joined to the fork. In saddles made in the mid-part of the
19th century, the various parts were bonded with glue and nailed.
They were further strengthened by covering with wet rawhide. When
the rawhide shrank upon drying, the saddle frame was quite sturdy.
In the better saddles, the under parts next to the horse were padded
with soft leather or heavy felt to prevent injury to the horse. Often the
saddle was decorated with tooled designs.
Saddle Fork (Fig. 7, A, B). It

appears to have

been made from the

fork of a soft-wooded tree such as cottonwood. The evidence for this is in
the grain of the wood and cambium extending down the inner sides of the
gullet. The wood has the texture of cottonwood which is common
throughout this region. Saw marks on the back of the fork indicate the saddle was commercially made. Fragments of heavy tooled leather, common to
saddle manufacture, also suggest this. The actual shaping of the horn and
fork appears to have been done either by a draw knife or a wide bladed
chisel. The top of the horn was formed by a chisel. The gullet was definitely
formed by chiseling away excess wood. The fork is badly damaged by both
termite and rodent action, All narrow and angular edges are damaged by
the ravages of gnawing rodents. The neck of the born is for all practical
purposes non-existent since it joins or meetsthe upper part of the fork. The
angle of the fork would produce a narrow but low pommell. The maximum
width of the horn is 8. cm. (viewed from the front). The part of the horn and
saddle tree next to the rider is straight and is the part with the saw marks.
The horn arcs gently forward and overhangs the neck and gullet. This is
typical of the Santa Fe style saddle (Livingston, n.d.). The entire fragment
is 24 cm. from the base of the fork to the top of the horn. The fork tapers
slightly inward from the lower to upper part ....
Saddle Cantle. A fragment of wood with two drilled holes may be a part
of the cantle of the saddle (Fig. 8, A). It has the curve of this part of the saddle. The crudely drilled holes probably provide a means of attaching}he
rawhide undercovering to the cantle. One hole is 1 cm. from the side and
top and the other is 2.5 cm. from the edge and 1.4 cm. from the top. These
holes are slightly oval. It is possible that the holes represent efforts to
repair the saddle. The specimen is thicker (1.2 cm.) at the lower edge in
cross section and tapers to a rounding edge.
Saddle Leather. Fragments of saddle leather and rawhide were
recovered from the Cogdell burial. Al! have been badly damaged from
rodent action; however, some parts can be identified. Two fragmentary
straps were recovered. One is 22.9 cm. long, to which is attached a cir-

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

FIGURE 7. Saddle fork. A, top view; B, side view,

21

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
cular ring 9 cm. in diameter (Fig. 8, B), and was probably a girt strap.
The strap is folded back and secured with rawhide thongs to form a loop
which attaches the strap to the ring. The other strap (Fig. 8, C) is 40.5 cm.
long and 5.4 cm. wide and was probably a stirrup strap. The leather of
this object has been split and appears to have been stitched to a soft
leather or felt lining. One end has been cut lengthwise for some unknown
reason.
Several segments of the rawhide underpart of the cantle were found.
Two pieces of rawhide (Fig. 8, D) were joined by over- and under lacing,
utilizing the seam to conform the rawhide to the edge of the cantle. Holes .3
cm. in diameter were used to attach the rawhide to a leather covering and
to the saddle tree. Another rawhide fragment (Fig. 8, E) is also a cantle
part. It is joined in a similar manner to the previously described fragment.
Two circular holes 1¯2 cm¯ in diameter and 1.3 and 1.5 cm. from the edge
were probably used to lace the rawhide to the saddle tree. The first mentioned rawhide fragment fits into a section of saddle leather. Remains of
iron brads .3 cm. in diameter indicate the entire covering of rawhide and
leather was attached to the saddle tree in this fashion¯ A small piece of
wood probably represents a part of the cantle and matches one part of the
rawhide and leather. These parts are undecorated.
A large fragment of leather (Fig. 8, F) was probably a saddle skirt. It has
been badly damaged by rodents and is 42.3 cm. long and 14.5 cm. wide.
Decorations tooled into the leather can be faintly seen. Three types of
decorations were used. The principal design appears to be interlocking
"S’s" (Fig. 9] on the skirt edge. Parallel lines varying from two to three in
number have been tooled into the leather along the outer edge vertical to
the skirt axm and above the lower S decoratmn. Above the S des gn
and parallel to the vertical lines are a series of rosettes consisting of small
circles of equal diameter (Fig. 9). Forward of the vertical lines are a serles
of oval holes varying from 2 cm. to .6 cm. on the long axis. These were
probably used to fasten the skirt to the underskirt of the saddle.
A badly damaged irregUlar leather fragment with a maximum length of
32.2 cm. ~d 21.1 cm. wide was probably a part of the fender. It may have
been decorated with rosettes, but it is so badly weathered that this cannot
be said with any certainty. One edge has been altered by cutting off a section of unknown Width. A strip of leather 5.2 cm. wide was laced to it with
leather thongs. Variously spaced oval holes suggest that the underside of
the fender was faced with some sort of material such as soft leather or
heavy felt.
No other leather parts of the saddle were recovered. It is possible that
salt-hungry rodents completely destroyed the rest of the saddle.
Iron Saddle Fixtures. A fragmentary "D" ring (Fig. 10, A) was found
to the inside and forward of the saddle (between the saddle and the body).
Exact measurements are not possible since one end has eroded away.
Along the straight element it is approximtely 11.0 cm. long. It is estimated
that the distance from the straight part to the extreme back of the "D" is
about 8.5 cm. This type of object was and still is used to fasten straps from
the saddle to the girt or cinch,
A second piece of saddle hardware {Fig. 10, B) has the appearance of a
"’D" ring with specialized adaptations. A rectangular projection was made

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

A

B

23

C

D

G

0

FIGURE 8. Saddle parts and iron hoe. A, fragment of wooden saddle
cantle; B, leather strap ring; C, stirrup strap; D, E, rawhide saddle
parts; F, saddle skirt; G, iron eye hoe.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

24

/

(
/

2

5

4

5

CM.

FIGURE 9. Decorated saddle skirt fragment.

/

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

....

25

on the lower curve of the "D" 2.0 cm. from each edge. The projection extends 3.1 cm. down and is 6.7 cm. wide. The lower, straight bar of this object is worn. A strap was either attached to or passed around this part. It is
estimated that the original length was 11.3 cm., with a maximum width of
8.2 cm. from the lower part of the rectangular projection to the extreme
back bar of the "D" ring. It is decorated by crescentic impressions .55 cm.
wide from the beginning of the curved part and down both legs of the rectangular projection. They are randomly spaced and appear to have been
made by a die while the object was heated sufficiently to recmve an impression.

Inquiring into the possible function of this object, local rancher
Charlie Lewis, descendant of a pioneer Floyd County ranching family,
suggested that it may have been attached to a saddle and the rectangular part received the girt strap.
CORDAGE (Fig. i0, C). Four fragments of cordage were recovered from
the burial. Their original provenience is unknown, and as a consequence
their function cannot be determined. Since a bit was not found with the
material recovered, it is possible that they are fragments of a hackamore.
Two segments are 4.7 and 6.5 cm. long respectively and were disassociated from the two longer specimens. 19.2 and 21.1 cm. long. Thelong specimens appear to have been coiled into loops and are cemented at one bend
of the loop by rat dung. The ends away from the loop bends are not present
and were possibly gnawed away by rodent action.
The unidentified fibers are coarse, much like the fibers of bear grass,
which is abundant in the area. Thirty-eight to 42 fibers were gathered
together and joined in a loose Z twist to form strands. Four strands were S
twisted tightly to form a four ply rope 1.3 cm. in diameter. The original
diameter of the shorter pieces cannot be determined because they have
loosened, but they are s~flarly made and were probably the approximate
diameter of the longer fragments.
BRASS SALIVATERS (Fig. 10, D). Three brass objects were identified
by Curtis Tunnell (personal communication) as "salivaters", without any
certainty that they served this or a similar purpose. To our knowledge a
Spanish bit was not recovered. Brass or copper salivaters were common in
Spanish bits (Fig. 11). Three or four strips of brass or copper were looped
about one or two bars across the port of the bit. They have the appearance of buckle tongues and are similar in form. Pieces of brass 5.8 to 6.1
cm. long were cut from sheet brass. The widths vary from .35 to .40 cm.
and the thickness from .10 to .15 cm. The loop attaching the salivaters to
the bar was formed by bending about the port bar. The distal end was
doubled back .2 cm. and hammered fiat. The shanks are from 2.1 to 2.3
cm. in length.

Examples of Spanish bits at the Witte Museum were examined for
salivaters and the objects recovered from the Cogdell Burial are
similar.

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

"t2

:’t:q
©

m-

~d

.t..i
0~
,.m
’XD

¢5
v-i
L.x.q

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

27

SALIVATERS

FIGURE 11. Spanish bit showing where salivaters were located.

Horse trappings are the most common denominator of all the burial
goods recovered from Historic Indian interments, All but two of the
thirteen Historic Indian burials examined contained horse gear of one
sort or another. Only the child burial and Collingsworth County burial
in the Panhandle.Plains Memorial Historical Museum did not have
horse trappings,
....
TRAVOIS POLES. Two travois pO1 es were each
broken into three sections of approximately the same length and placed in fan shape with the
apex over the chest area. One travois pole was made of lodge pole pine
with diameters of 4.8 cm. at the distal end and 3.2 cm. at the proximal end.
The distal part (dragging end) is beveled from wear for a distance of 24.2
cm. This part is 114.0 cm. long, the mid-section is 90.0 cm. long, and the

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
proximal end (hitching or tie end) is 101.4 cm. in length. The proximal end
had a biconical hole burned through it 7.0 cm. [ram the end. The hole is
oval and 1.1 cm. by .85 cm The outside of the biconical hole is 1.5 cm. on
one side and 1.4 cm. on the other side. In order to divide the travois poles
into three parts, they were hacked to a depth varying from .5 to 1.0 cm. by
an axe or hatchet and then snapped.
The second travois pole is shorter, being 281.5 cm. long. This specimen
was made from a species of juniper. The distal part is 99.0 cm. long and the
taper resulting from being dragged is 22.8 cm. long. The midsection is 94.5
cm. in length. The proximal or hitching end is 88.0 cm. long. The tie hole is
highly worn and does not appear to have been made by burning. The edges
of the hole where the tie thongs rubbed are depressed at an upward angle
toward the most proximal part (about 15 degrees of the long axis of the
travois pole). This travois is not as straight or symmetrical as the lodge
pole pine specimen. The various small limbs and twigs were neatly trimmed and it is highly polished along the upper two-thirds of its length. Its
4.6 cm. diameter at the dragging end reduces to 2.6 cm. at the proximal
end. The tie hole is 7.5 cm. from the proximal end.
TRAVOIS BRACE. This object appears to be a brace to keep the
travois poles from spreading apart. Sometimes there were one or two additional cross braces according to the need and situation (Lowie 1936: Fig.
12). This particular specimen is 56.1 cm. long and made from juniper. It
was placed with the travois poles and for this reason it is assumed that it
performed this function. The ends were cut deeply, probably by an axe.
and snapped off. The ends were left unsmoothed. Its entire surface has a
high sheen or polish. No bark is present. It is 3.8 cm. at the larger end and
3.2 cm. at the small end. Several small scorched areas are randomly
spaced on the larger end to about the center of the brace Hack marks are
randomly located over its entire surface. These scars appear to have been
made by an object more like a knife than a heavier object like an axe.

PERSONAL ITEMS. This group of artifacts includes objects of ornamentation as well as objects not normally classed as clothing.
Brass Bracelets (Fig. 12, A). Fourteen brass bracelets and one
fragment were recovered from the burial. All are round to ovoid in outline.
The wire from which the bracelets were made is .45 cm. in thickness. The
diameters of complete or reconstructed bracelets vary from 8.4 to 9.65 cm.
Four are not altered in any way. Ten specimens and a fragment are flattened laterally. The flattened surfaces have the appearance of being hammered. Lengths of wire varying from 24.2 to 26.1 cm. were cut and bent.
Th.ey appear to have been adjusted by leaving gaps or by overlapping. The
re was cut in four ways -- by cuts from opposite sides at an angle,
squarely across the wire, scored or notched and snapped and by cutting
through at an angle from one side. The flattened surfaces have partly
obliterated the manner in which the wire was cut.

Ray and ]elks (1964: 135-137) recovered similar specimens at the
Watson site, as well as some that were decorated. The White site

COCDELL BURIAL SITE

29

(Suhm 1962: 94-97) produced both decorated and undecorated
specimens. The child burial observed at the Panhandle,Plains
Historical Museum had simple, undecorated bracelets’ Other
unreported historic burials with brass bracelets are the Dean Ranch,
McKaskle and Biddy burials from the Texas Wech Muse~, and the
Caprock burial (Conner, Allison and Runldes ms.}. A single specimen
was fo~d in ihe Dawson County burial reported by Bennett (1968:
78)’ Brass braCeieis have been fo~d ~ historic burials in CroCkett

Hair Ornaments (Figl 121 B): Ten circular brass ornaments were
found tied by an overhand knot in a three-ply plait of hair which was worn
on the left side in the vicinity of the temple: Two others and three frag:
ments were probably part of the hair ornament since they are of the same
form and Were recovered in the back dirt: The thickness varies from .25 to
.30 cm. Lengths of wire, varying from 14.9 to 18.8 cm. were cut and bent
to shape, resulting in diameters from 4.8 to 8.3 cm. The manner in Which
they were cut can not be determ~ed since the ends have been altered in
various ways. Three were flattened inside and out, resultihg in
rectangular cross-sections. In the others, the brass wire was unaltered
except for the ends, which were tapered to a dull point. The hair
ornaments are nearly perfect circle and were possibly bent about a
circular objecL There is no incising’ notching, or other decoration.
The McKaskle burial in the Texas Tech MUseum had a silver con-

cha on the right brow which was probably a hair

ornament or

plate.

The only other reference to hair ornaments in the vicinity is made by
Woodall (1967: 83), who described a small triangular,shaped silver

alloy ornament located in the temple area: .... ......
Finger BJng. The discoverer of the burial found a complete commercially made finger ring. On the assumption that the ring was gold and
would bend, his science teacher squeezed it between his fingers and broke
it. Dr. Frank Dougherty of West Texas State University tested the basic
metal of the ring and found it to be brass plated with gold. The gold was
worn off in many places with only a remnant of the plating still present.
Using the fragment, it can be determined that the outside diameter is 2.3
cm,, .i cm. thick, and .3 cm. wide. It was worn on the ring finger of the right
hand, as indicated by the greenish stain on the first joint of the third finger.

Dr. James A. Hanson of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in
Canyon and a student of the Historic Indians writes, "there is nothing
really diagnostic in the goods except perhaps the ringi If it is not German silver, I think a date of 1830-1850 would be in order."
Suhm (1962: 89)reported a brass finger ring from the White site. In
this instance the ring was oversized for the child remains. The
McKaskle burial produced two sheet brass rings on the right hand.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

30

Ray and Jelks (1965: 134) reported seven rings of brass wire and two
of brass straps. A silver ring was recovered from the Caprock burial
(Conner, Allison and Runldes ms.), and Newcomb (1955: 188) reported
a copper ring from the Yellowhouse burial.
Silver Conchas. Conchas of silver are one of the most common articles found with Historic Indian burials in this area. Of the thirteen
burials, six produced conchas. Four were recovered from the Cogdell
Burial. Two were placed between the saddle and the body (Fig. 4),
one was found on a small shelf in the northeastern part of the burial
niche, and the provenience of the fourth is not known. Several
viewers gave varied opinions of the metal from which the conchas
were made. In order to determine the true content, a test was run by a
metallurgist, and the results indicated silver of + 98%. Sterling is
92.5% pure. This does not rule out the possibility that the conchas
were made from coins. Dr. James A. Hanson (personal communication) stated that in melting, silver tends to revert to a purer
state.
CONCHA A (Fig. 13, A). This specimen is 5.9 cm. on one axis and 5.3
cm. on the other. Three millimeters from one edge is a square hole .15 cm.
wide. Such a hole could have been made by a square nail. The edge is
beveled and decorated by incised lines about the perimeter. They are
about .05 cm. long and spaced from .025 to .075 cm. apart at an angle of 30
degrees from the edge. It has a consistent thickness of .225 cm. and is Concavo-convex. The convex surface is well polished but has faint "wear"
scratches running in various directions. An area of .5 cm. on each side of
the square hole is worn and the incised marks are nearly worn away. The
reverse (concave} side is slightly rough or irregular. In the central part are
two openings, square on three sides. The fourth side, which faced to the
outer edge, is formed by two arcs joining to form a "peak." The .4 cm. section between these openings is slightly depressed, suggesting that leather
or cloth was passed through one hole, over the separating bar and back
down the opposite hole. Pressure from such action could depress the
separating bar. The square hole also suggests that it was at times worn as
a pendant. No indication of how the concha was formed can be discerned.
No stress cracks, usual in formation by a cold process such as the anvilhammer method, are present.
CONCHA B (Fig. 13, B). This concavo-convex specimen is nearly circular being 6.5 em. on one axis and 6.7 cm. on the other. It is centrally perforated by a circular .4 cm. hole. On opposite sides are two elliptical holes
.1 and .3 cm. punched from the convex side. On one edge is a stress crack
.55 cm. long. Cut marks made by a sharp object such as a knife, varying
from .! to .7 cm. in length at an angle varying from 30 degrees to 45
degrees, are spaced from .05 to .3 cm. apart. A circular polished area 2 cm.
in diameter around the central hole suggests this concha was possibly

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

31

secured by a leather washer on its convex side; it may have been attached
to clothing or possibly worn as a hair plate.
CONCHA C (Fig. 13, C). This concha is 6.4 by 6.7 cm. in diameter. It is
perforated by truncated triangles joined by their apices. A semicircular
notch .4 cm. in diameter has been cut in the center of the base of one of the
triangles. The truncated triangles were cut out by a knife or similar thin.
sharp object. On each side of the narrow part of the opening are .1 by .2
cm. oval holes punched from the concave side. This specimen could easily
have been secured to clothing or to a hair braid by passing a small pin
through the two holes and under or through the fabric, or in a similar
fashion in a hair braid. It is 2.6 cm. from the base of one truncated triangle
to the base of the other and 1.4 cm. wide at the juncture of the triangles.

CONCHA D (Fig. 13, D). This specimen is also circular being 6.4 cra. on
one axis and 6.7 em. on the other. It is centrally perforated by two semicircles 2.2 cm. along the diameters divided by a bar .3 cm. wide. The bar
separating the semicircles is slightly depressed, indicating that cloth was
brought up through one of the holes, over the bar. and down through the
other hole. It could have been utilized in a similar fashion as a hair plate.
The semicircular holes were made by a series of cuts varying from .5 cm. to
.9 cm. long, made with a keen edged object. The bar separating the semicircular segments was cut in a similar fashion.
It is possible that specimens B, C, and D were made from sheet
metal or were cast from coin silver. To test the first possibility, the
thickness of each specimen was measured by a micrometer. The
result produced a thickness varying from .0052 to .0089 cm. The
variation of thickness of .0037 cm. is of interest and indicates the
possibility that all three were made from the same piece of material.
For example, the variation in Specimen B indicates a thinning of only
.0007 cm. from the center to the edge. Forming objects by the anvilhammer method from soft, thin sheet silver would result in little
variation in thickness.

Small Animal Skin. From the hair remaining, this article appears to be
the pelt of a member of the weasel family, probably the long-tailed or
bridled weasel, Mustela frenata frenata, whose range extends today
across Mexico and Texas (Ford 1951: I05).
Furred pelts were used for many purposes by the Indians of the
southwest. Catlin (1926: Fig. 172) painted a Comanche warrior in 1834
with a breech clout and a quiver of fur. Mason describes a number of
types of fur quivers from various tribes (1893: 631-680]. Another
possible function for the animal skin is that it might have been part of
an amulet or pouhahante, a combination good luck charm and oracle
common among Indians of the southwestern area. Berlandier (1969:

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

32

54, 91, 116) mentions these objects several times in respect to the
Comanches, explaining that they are usually small, stuffed animals or
a portion of one, attached to the shield or carried around the neck or
in the hair.

Mirror (Fig. 12, C).

A small hand mirror 7 cm. wide by 9.15 cm, long
and .3 cm. thick was found just outside and toward the forward part of the
saddle fork. It may have had a frame at one time, but there is no evidence
that it was in a frame of any sort. One corner has what appears to be an
old break -- possibly dating from the time of the burial or earlier. In any
event, no fragments were recovered from the screening of the disturbed
matrix. Nearly all of the silvering has eroded away and all surfaces are
patinated.

Newcomb and Field (1967: 271) report that mirrors were a part of
Navarette’s trade goods, and de Mezieres (Bolton 1914:132-134 and
200-202) included mirrors as a trade item. Wallace and Hoebel (1952:
280) list mirrors as one part of the goods used to lure the Comanche
into coming in for treaty talks with Anglos during the mid-1850’s. It is
surprising that only three other mirrors have been found associated
with burials. The Caprock site contained two mirrors (Conner, Allison
and Runkles ms.), and the Watson site (Ray and Jelks 1964: 137) reported one mirror.
Historic accounts give instances of mirrors being used as
heliographic devises in directing activities of warriors during combat
and in horseback games.

Silver Buckle Tongue (Fig. 12, D). A silver object was recovered
while screening back dirt on the talus slope. It has the overall appearance
of a buckle tongue except the loop to attach the tongue to the buckle bar appears to have t~een cut off by a narrow, sharp tool such as a knife. This object is 2.6 cm. long, .55 cm. wide midway, and .5 cm. wide at the most
narrow part. The sides are generally parallel but expand slightly midway
between the two ends; it is .55 cm. Wide at this point, and .35 cm. from the
distal end it reduces to .4 cm. The distal end is rounded and is slightly
turned downward, Since the proximal end has been severed, it was probably altered to serve some other purpose ~ possibly as a decorative object
tied to a garment by the constricted part near the distal end.

Elk Tooth Pendants (Fig. 12, E). Two drilled elk teeth were
recovered from the grave fill. The placement of these objects is not known;
however, illustrations of Plains Indians in the collections of the
Smithsonian Institution (Ewers 1957 Plate 33b) indicate that elkteeth were
frequently attached to jackets or shirts.
~e cogdell specimens are biconically drilled at the root section. The
holes vary from .2 to .35 cm. in diameter and the outer part of the holes
vary from .4 to .5 cm. It is possible that one specimen is older than the
other, as the outer edges of the hole are more worn ....

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

~

33

!~

i’

~i~

~i~,

~

~

~,ii

i~

~i

i~

~

B

E
D

¢
0

/0
,

FIGURE 12. Brass bracelets, hair ornaments, mirror, buckle, tongue,
elk tooth pendants. A, brass bracelets; B, brass hair ornaments in
braided hair; C, mirror; D, silver buckle tongue; E, drilled elk tooth
pendants,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

34

Of all the burial goods examined by the senior author in the collections of the Panhandle-Plains Historical and Texas Tech Museums, no
other examples of drilled elk teeth were found. Parsons (1967: 83-84)
found three drilled elk teeth at the Morgan Jones site.
Abalone Shell Pendants. Two abalone shell pendants were
recovered from near the chest area of the burial and toward the
mouth of the burial chamber.
PENDANT A.

This specimen is 7.3 cm. wide and 8.8 cm. in length. The

edges are slightly convex and the corners are rounded. The o~zerall outline
is rectangular. Two biconically dri!led holes at one end were probably used
for attachment to some object, possibly to one of the leather garments. The
two holes are .3 cm. in diameter. The upper end is slightly more narrow
than the distal end.

PENDANT B. This specimen is slightly smaller than Pendant A. The sides
are nearly straight, but are very slightly convex. It is 6.9 cm. wide and 8.7
cm. in length The corners are rounded. At the proximal end are three
evenly spaced biconically drilled holes. The two outer holes are .3 cm. in
diameter and the central one is .4 cm. in diameter. In addition to the attachment hales, small decorations were drilled into the lower or distal end.
These holes are .1 cm. in diameter and spaced .3 cm. apart.

While these objects have been arbitrarily called pendants, it is
possible that they were gorgers or hair ornaments. Shell objects of
this nature are extremely rare in this area. Abalone shell ornaments
were recovered from an Antelope Creek focus burial north of Borger,

decorative or ceremonial object. While shell ornaments of the various
marine molluscs of the larger variety are rare, they occasionally ocour in this area. Olivella shell beads are a co~on form of bead
recovered.
Necklace. As a matter of convenience, necklace beads and shell
hair pipes are described in this report in the section dealing with
beads.
Blankets (Table 3), Fabrics were found with the burial. How they
were placed in relation tolhe body is not known for certain. They were
removed and placed at either end of the burial niche when the burial was
disturbed by McFall. It is assumed that these fabrics were blankets in
which the body was wrapped, since copper stains hint that they were
wrapped about the body. In addition, a sequence of blanket wrappings can

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

35

\

\

/

\

\

~0
\

\

\

/

A

B
/

\

/

/

0
q

I
!

/

2
I

,3
I

FIGURE 13. Silver conchas. A, Concha A; B, Conoha B; C, Concha C;
D, Concha D.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

36

be determined because a fragment 7 cm. to 7.6 cm. thick was recovered
that was cemented together in some manner (possibly by body fluids or
rat urine). A red commercial blanket was next to the body and a Navajo
or Pueblo blanket composed the outer layer.
The blanket fabrics were examined by Dr. Joe Ben Wheat of the University of Colorado Museum, and his analysis (personal communication) is the
basis of interpretation of these two items. The fragments of a striped
blanket probably represent a single object, It appears that there was a
broad red and white stripe, perhaps near the center. One fragment has a
red stripe with beaded or speckled weave, Several fragments have narrow
alternating red and gray-tan stripes. Several fragments have yellow, graytan and red stripes repeated several times. Another fragment contains
wide white and gray-tan stripes in a wider white-speckled red stripe. The
thread count is eight per .25 cm. and the weft is 24 per .25 cm. The date of
manufacture was between 1820 and 1850.
The commercial blanket is of napped diagonal twill plain weave, two
over two. except the black band which is plain tapestry. Blankets of this
type generally have a black band at each end. The selvage is of plain finish.
The thread count is twenty-four per .25 cm. for the warp. The diagonal
weft is eighteen per .25 cm. and the tapestry weft varies from thirty-eight
to forty per .25 cm. Blankets of this type were made between 1825 and
1865.

Suhm (1962: 103) recovered fragments too small for identification
from the White site. The W. H. Watson site in Fisher County (Ray and
Jelks 1964: 137-138) produced woolen fabrics, as didthe Morgan Jones
burial in Crosby County (Parsons 1957: 90-91), and in both instances
the fabrics were too fragmentary for identification. Examination of
historic burial goods at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum and
the Texas Tech Museum resulted in two instances of recovered
fabrics.
Buffalo Ro be.

Numerous small fragments have traces of the wooly hair

of the buffalo still clinging to them and the yellowish, glazed appearance
observed on robes in the Witte Museum collection. There are several
fragments which include the seam which usually ran up the center of a
robe. but there is no trace of paint.

Jose Maria Sanchez y Tapia painted a Comanche in such a garment
before 1828 [Berlandier 1969: Plate 2). Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 81}
describe a typical Comanche robe as having no decoration except a
stripe down the seam.
FAUNAL REMAINS, Placed near the feet and toward the opening of the
burial chamber were the remains of what in all probability was a food offering. Of the seven bones of either Bos or Bison, five may have been
cooked, which altered their appearance. The other two do not seem to have
been subjected to any unusual circumstances. The unaltered bones consist

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

37

o

o

o

~

O

z~

o
ca

Z

.~.~

~ooo

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38

of an astragalum and a second phalange. It has been the observation of the
senior author that artifacts of bone are nearly always better preserved in
aboriginal sites than bone scrap or waste. This is possibly due to impregnation of oils from handling. It has also been observed that bones lying
beside a bone artifact often times are in a poorer state of preservation. Is
this difference due to impregnation of the bone by fats as a result of either
boiling or roasting? In any event, five bones were altered in some manner
and in addition one large bone was severed near a joint end by sawing. It is
possible that two other bones of this group could have been sawed, but due
to rodent damage this can not be determined. All five have been damaged
by rodents to the degree that positive identification as to Bison or Bos can
not be determined {Ernest L. Landelius, personal communication}. On the
other hand, the astragalum and second phalange have been but slightly
damaged by gnawing, further indicating that these bones were not as attractive to rodents as were the other five.

Other examples of possible food offerings can be cited. In the
White site (Suhm 1962: 106), the presence of deer or antelope bones
suggest a possible food offering. Two historic burials in the collections of the Panhandle-Plans Historical Museum also contained
possible food offerings. In one instance rabbit bones were found with
a child burial, and in the second instance the hump section of a bison
was associated with an adult male burial. With similar circumstances at the Cogdell site, there is a strong possibility that the
Bos or Bison bones are a food offering, and this practice may be more
common than previously believed.
In addition to the Bos or Bison bones, turkey buzzard and rodent
bones were found throughout the matrix. The rocks covering the
burial had been thrown out of the cave; in examining these rocks the
excrement of turkey buzzards was evident, and fragments of buzzard
egg shells were noted. It appears that the site of the burial was also
used as a nesting and roosting place by these birds. Evidence of
rodents was plentiful, not only from the bones, but also by urinecemented dung clinging to artifacts and by an abundance of rat dung
throughout the deposits. None of the bird or rodent bones showed any
evidence of alteration.

MISCELLANEOUS OBJECTS. Several miscellaneous objects were
recovered from the fill around the burial. These are described
below.
Leather. One object consists of two carefully cut. rectangular pieces of
very thin leather folded one inside the other. Judging from the texture and
the hair remaining, the skin may have come from the underside of a deer.
The shape and construction do not suggest any known object.
Another object consisted of three layers of very thin leather laid one
within the other. The leather looks and feels like that of the preceding object, but has no hair. Again. there is no clue to its use.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

39

Wood. Two wooden objects similar in construction were recovered.
While one is incomplete due to rodent gnawing, it has the appearance of
the complete specimen. The complete specimen (Fig. 14, A} is 17.0 cm. long,
2.8 cm. wide with a maximum thickness of .6 cm. The ends are rounded and
it is ellipsoidal in cross section. It appears to have been shaped by a knife.
The rounded ends indicate that it was nearly cut through and then snapped
off. Two or more were possibly made, as indicated by the cut and snap
technique of the complete specimen. The wood appears to be some type of
pine. The incomplete specimen is 12.7 cm. long. It has the width and
thickness and cross section of the previously described specimen. The
identification of these objects and their function are unknown:
Two fragments of what were probably of the same item were found. Termite action has so badly damaged the fragments it can not be determined
what the object was. A limb about 2.6 cm. in diameter of an unknown
species of tree was girded by a knife and either broken or cut completely
through. The outer bark was smoothed by a sharp object such as a knife.
Two fragments of squared wood were found. It can not be determined
what the complete object was. The bark remaining on one of the sides appears to be wild plum, of which there is an abundance along the banks of
the streams in this area. The squared sides are highly polished and no Cut
marks are visiblel It was squared by trimming three sides of a small branch, leaving the bark on the fourth side. Length measurements are of little
value since the fragments are so small. The diameter is 1.3 cm. on one
axis and 1.6 cm. on the other.
A branch of a fruit tree, probably wild plum, was recovered. Both ends
are broken. Twigs were neatly trimmed off. Groups of cut marks are present about midway, and random cuts are irregularly spaced along the rest
of this specimen. It is 23.8 cm. long and 1.5 cm. in diameter. Due to its fragmentary state, it is impossible to determine the function of this artifact.
Glass Lens (Fig. 14, B). A glass lens with a central minus correction
was found in the burial matrix. McFall did not recall where it was located
in relation to the body or to other artifacts. The lens was taken to school
and in showing it to classmates, it was dropped. A triangular fragment .9
cm. wide along the beveled edge and 3.8 em. long was recovered.

In order to get an opinion regarding the age and use of the lens,
the fragment was sent to Mr. J. C. Sticksel, regional manager of the
American Optical Company. Sticksel forwarded the fragment to Mr.
E. W. Tillyer, manager of the lens division of the American Optical
Company. His reply is as follows:
"After considerable analysis, it seems that the lens is a ’myodisc’ and is
approximately 50 years old. We base that age on two factors:
1. The glass is well annealed and these annealing techniques came
into being about 1920. However, that one decision alone is not sufficient
because there is a possibility that the lens was exposed to unintended
heat, and, therefore, was annealed,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

40

B

C

D

E
0

I

I

!

4
I

!

I

5
I

CM.

A
FIGURE 14. Miscellaneous artifacts. A, wooden object; B, glass lens;
G, lead ball; D, brass rim pipe; E, brass chain.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

41

2. The edging of the lens fragment was done with equipment available after 1920.
At first, I thought it was a cement wafer type lens, but after developing the whole from the fragment, it looks as though it was actually a high
minus."

In order to verify the data from the American Optical Company. the
fragment lens was sent to Mr. Earl F. Adams, senior product administrator of Bausch and Lomb, Opthalmic Division. Additional comments are as follows:
"The lens appears to have a rather sophisticated toric surface and compound lenses of this type have been developed in this century.
The lens was flouresced to compare with our present day crown glass
and they appear to be the same. This is not particularly significant, however, as soda-lime glass compositions have been in existence for many
years.
The lens fragment looks like a watch crystal or the cover for some type
of small gauge. The central minus portion is a product of recent times
and the bevel edge would suggest a gauge."

The reconstructed lens is 4.1 cm. in diameter and the central minus
is 1.6 cm. in diameter. There is a polished bevel .015 cm. wide about
the circumference.
Three questions naturally come to mind when the lens is considered. (I) The burial occurred sometime after 1920. Interviews with
long time residents of this area do not reveal any such event as Indians visiting the immediate area. Ranchers check their livestock
daily and it would have been difficult for such an event to have gone
unnoticed. There is no ethnohistoric reason that can be found for Indians to return to this area for a burial. (2) Another possibility is that
it was accidentally dropped in the burial crevice. (3) The third
possibility is that pack rats found the lens close by and introduced it
into the burial place. This is the most probable explanation, as pack
rats had extensively used the burial niche, and the lens is not too
heavy for a large rodent to have transported. In any event, the lens is
inconsistent with all the other burial goods.
No other such optical object has been discovered in either
published or unpublished burials in this area.
Iron Hoe (Fig. 8, G). An eye hoe was recovered east of the saddle tree
and to the outside of the burial chamber. The original length of the hoe
blade was approximately 18,1 cm. The width from the edge of the blade to
the lower part of the eye socket is 11.8 cm. Viewing the hoe from the handle
side, it can be seen that the right edge has been worn or cut away. The central reinforcing "rib" runs from the base of the eye toward the blade edge

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and was the center of the hoe. The left side is 9.1 cm. wide and only 5.7 cm.
to the right edge. The cutting edge of the hoe does not exhibit any unusual
use, but the sides indicate that they were heavily used in a hammering or
battering process. It is apparent that the right side was used more extensively than the left side since this is the narrower part as measured
from the center rib. The top of the eye has been scored as though it had
been used as an anvil for cutting with a chisel or other sharp edged tool.

In an attempt to discover as much as possible about eye hoes, the
Scovil Hoe Company and True Temper Tool Company were written
concerning the history and method of manufacture of this particular
tool. The Scovil Hoe Company replied and sent samples of their hoes
from the 1890 to 1905 period and from 1905 to the present. The hoe
found with the burial is definitely not of Scovil manufacture.
D. W. Fisher, Plant Manager of Scovil Hoe Company, described the
manufacturing process prior to 1905 as follows:
"Our company began making hoes in I~14 and during the 1850’s
developed a process of making hoes that consisted of forming an eye
socket, a ferrule, a throat, and a blade. Each piece was separate and hot
welded together to form the semi-finished product which was then
frimmed, ground, and painted. Around 1900, our process was refined from
a production point, but the eye construction remained about the same as
before. About 1920. we again changed the process of making hoes and
machines replaced men. The hoe retained the same outward appearance,
but was drawn from one piece of steel, thus making it a much stronger
tool."

It is obvious that the Cogdell Burial hoe is not of Scovil manufacture
since it is of one piece manufacture. Photographs of the hoe were sent
to Dr. Charles E. Hanson, Director of The Museum of the Fur Trade at
Chadron, Nebraska. In his reply he states,
"The eye hoe is a type that was popular throughout most of the 19th
century and occupied too long a span to be valuable for dating purposes.
We have copies of pages from a Sheffield tool catalogue ca. 1815 which
illustrated two patterns very similar to yours. Both were obviously made
for exportation to the United States.
From the examples we have here, your hoe seems typical of the 18151860 period."

Similar hoes have been recovered from the Merrell burial and th~
Merrell Comanchero site (41FL19), both of which are a short distance
from the Cogdell Burial.
Lead Ball (Fig. 14, C]. A lead ball was recovered from the talus slope
by Jim Servatius of Plainview, Texas. and was lent to the author for
examination. It appears to have been cast in a worn bullet mold. as each

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

43

half is slightly off-set, It has a diameter of 1.636 cm. along the seam of the
mold and a diameter of 1.588 cm. on the axis 90 degrees to the mold seam.
The spue was neatly trimmed. A ball of this size suggests a rifle or musket
of approximately .65 caliber with a moderately thick patch. The surface
is slightly pocked, probably the result of corromve soil action. There is a
small gouged-out rectangular area about .05 cm, deep. There are no
rifling or patch impressions, which indicates that it was never fired.
Since no firearms were found with the burial, no conjecture can be made
of its purpose or significance.
Brass Ram Pipe (Fig. 14, D). A tabular brass object 1.45 cm. long
with a .9 cm. outside diameter and a .8 cm. inside diameter was recovered
in screening the talus slope. It was made from sheet brass 1.45 cm. long
bent into a cylinder. It was decorated with two grooves about .05 cm. wide
and spaced .15 cm. apart from each end. It has the appearance of a ram
pipe from either a small caliber muzzleloading rifle such as a squirrel rifle
or a small caliber pistol. However. it has no flange to accept a fastening pin
to the barrel. No weapon was found with the burial, and the single lead
ball of large caliber does not match the size of the ram pipe, Normally the
ramrod is just slightly smaller than the bore diameter (just enough smaller
to clear the bore of the weapon), How this object was utilized is not known.
Brass Chain (Fig. 14, E). A fragment of brass chain 2.5 cm. long was
recovered, It was from brass wire .1 cm. in diameter and about 1.5 cm.
long. A loop was made out of approximately one half the length of the wire.
The resulting loop is .3 cm. [outside diameter). A similar loop was made
with the other half, but at a 90 degree angle. This forms two chain loops
made of one piece of wire. Another piece of wire of similar length was
passed through the loop of the first double link and again bent to form a
second segment of the chain. This process is continued until the length of
chain is completed. This is probably a machine made chain. The widths of
the loops are consistent. No other fragments of this chain were found, and
its use is unknown.

GENERAL DISCUSSION
COMPARISONS OF BURIAL PRACTICES. The Morgan ]ones site (Parsons 1967) in Crosby County is the only burial in northwestern Texas
that has been found and reported by a professional archeologist. Unfortunately, the burial goods from this site were relatively scant and
it had been badly disturbed by rodents and other animals. The other
reported burials had been disturbed in varying degrees by human action.
An attempt will be made to compare burial goods and behavioral
patterns of the Historic Indians (Tables 4 and 5). It is felt that this information should be made available to other researchers. The data
from materials resting in repositories and the few published reports
have been consolidated into a mass of data which, hopefully, will
reveal characteristics heretofore unknown or not recognizable in in-

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

dividual reports. The senior author visited the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum in Canyon, Texas and the Texas Tech Museum in
Lubbock. The recently discovered Cap rock burial is in manuscript
form (Conner, Allison and Runkles, ms.) and the authors have
graciously let us have a copy of the paper they are preparing for
publication. The unreported burials represent seven burials, or over
double the number that have been reported from this area.
Historic burials have been reported by Newcomb (1955}, Suhm
(1962), Ray and ]elks (1964), Bennett (1968), Hester {1968), and the
previously mentioned Morgan ]ones site by Parsons {1967}. However,
the burials reported by Hester (1968) will not be included in this
analysis because burial goods are limited to only a few items and
burial details were not recorded. Including the Cogdell burial there
are 13 historic burials from which to draw inferences and to synthesize characteristics. Each interment contains one or more unique
burial goods as well as elements in common. These minor characteristics will not be dealt with at this time for they do not seem to have
a common denominator except to demonstrate that people are individuals and are not bound by rigid customs. Table 4 gives the
characteristics for each burial.
One of the problems involving analysis of unreported burial traits is
that only the Yellowhouse (Newcomb 1955), White (Suhm 1962), Watson (Ray and ]elks 1964), Morgan ]ones (Parsons 1967), Caprock (Conner, Allison and Runkles ms.} and Cogdell burials are adequately
documented as to location, position of the body and/or burial goods.
As for the unreported burials used for statistical purposes, it is
assumed that all the burial goods were given to the repositories, but it
is probable thai items were lost, given away or kept by the donors.
Small objects could have been overlooked if the matrix was not
carefully screened, and this is not known. The three female burials
and six male burials do not indicate a great difference in burial offerings. Another possibility is that some of the burials occurred at
times of stress (if it is assumed that all the burial offerings are
present), or that the deceased was not a person of prominent family
or tribal status, as reflected in the paucity of burial goods. On the
other hand, it is a possibility that t~hose ~th copious funerary offerings were highly respected.
It appears that some burial goods were consistently placed with the
body. In compiling a list of burial goods, there is no way to determine
if some items were occasionally leh out or were of perishable nature
and were not evident when the burial was discovered. For example,
glass beads would probably be associated with either or both beacted
garments and necl<laces, iherefore, any list is probably incomplete

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

45

when the burial was found in an unsheltered place. Another factor
already mentioned is the method used in recovering burial goods. If
the matrix was screened, imperishable items would be relatively complete; but if the matrix was not screened, many smaller items would
not be represented.
The list (Table 4) included here represents what was associated
with the burials either in reports or in donations to the two museums.
The most common material was horse gear of one sort or another
(present in eleven of the thirteen burials). Brass bracelets and glass
beads were the next most common items and were found with ten of
the thirteen burials, European tools such as hoes or similar objects
and fabrics were recovered in eight instances, Native-made artifacts,
finger rings, conchas and hair pipes are well represented ~th siX occurrences. Metal knives, possible food offerings and leather garments occurred in five burials, but leather garments probably should
have a higher representation. Perhaps rodent action and failure to include tattered and soiled fragments of garments account for the low
representation. European utensils, tinklers, buttons, hawk bells,
pigment, body wrappings and shell beads or pendants have a frequency of four out of the thirteen.
.....
It was surprising to find only three mirrors, de Mezieres (Bolton
1914) and Navarette (Newcomb and Field 1~967) list mirrors as standard items of trade. Wallace and Hoebel (1952) state that goods
including mirrors were used to lure the Comanches to treaty conferences, and that a warrior spent much of his time grooming and
was especially proud of his hair. Equally surprising was the
recovery of wooden or metal kegs and buckets and musical
instruments associated with three burials. Aboriginal necklaces or
pendants of perforated animal claws and teeth were to be expected.
The recovery of only two European weapons may be the result of not
all such items being included in the material donated to the museums.
It is also possible that firearms represented articles so vital to every
day need they were not commonly left as an offering. Metal pendants
may have been overlooked unless the matrix was carefully screened.
Those objects found only once probably represent the whim of those
giving memorial gifts and it would be unusual to find all burial
offerings to be consistent.
Aboriginal objects such as projectile points, bifaces, and scrapers
were frequently placed with the body and may be a hold-over from
more primitive times. European tools and utensils appear to be a common grave offering and metal knives were the most common of such
objects observed or reported.
There are twenty-one burial traits recorded by Berlandier (1969),
Wallace and Hoebel (1952), Newcomb (1961), and K. Ten Kate

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

46

TABLE 4
HISTORIC BURIAL CHARACTERISTICS

PHYSICAL
TRAITS

Merrell Child
PPHM PPHM

CoUinsworth

Dean McKaskle

Biddy

PPHM

TTM

TTM

TTM

Caprock

SEX

M

?

M

F

M

"~

F

AGE

Adult

Child

Adult

Adult

Adult

Child

Adult

?

Flex

?

Flex

Ext

~

Flex

Open

Niche

Open

Niche

Niche

Niche

X

x
x
x

x
X
x

X
X
x
x

X
X
X
x
X

x
x
X

BODY PosrrION

NICHE OR OPEN Niche
BURIAL GOODS

Horse gear
Bracelets
Glass beads
Fabrics
European tool
Ind. artifacts
Finger rings
Conchas
Hair pipes
Metal knives
Food offering
Leather garm’ts

X

Euro. utensils
Tinklers
Buttons
Bells
Pigment
Body wrapped
Shell pendants
Mirror
Barrel-keg

X

Perf. claw-teeth
Mus. instrumts.
Euro. weapons
Ceremon’l fire
Metal pendants
Pipe
Hair ornament
TOTALS

X
X

X
X
X

X
x
x

X
X
x

x

x
X
x

X
x

X
x

x
X

x
X
x
x
X

x
X
X

X

X

X

x
x
X

X
x

X

X
X
x
X

X

9

3

4

7

18

14

10

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

47

TABLE 4 [continued)
HISTORIC BURIAL CHARACTERISTICS

White

Watson

Yellowhouse

Morgan Jones

Dawson Co.

Cogdell

?

F

M

M

?

M

Child

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

Adult

?

Ext

Flex

Flex

Ext

Ext

Open

Niche

Niche

Niche

Niche

Niche
Totals

x
X
x
X
X
X
x
x
X

x
x
x
X
X

x
x
X
x

x
X
x
x
X
X

X
x
X
x

x
X
X
x
X

11
10
10
8
8
6

x
X
X

X
x

x
X
X
x
x

X

6
6
6
5

X
x

x
X
X

5
5
4
4
4
4

x
x

x

4

x
X
x

4
4
3
3
3
3

x

2
2
2
1

15

11

12

x

1

17

134

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Hester and Stross 1973a).* These traits are listed in Table 5. Only
two traits are common in all four accounts; six are reported only once
by one or another, five are recorded twice, and three traits are
common in nine instances. However, some of these behavioral
patterns can not be tested from archeological recovery. The
behavioral patterns associated with burials that can not be verified
are as follows: burial was the same for those killed in battle and those
who died in camp; men accompanying the deceased on a raid cut their
hair and wept; the bathing of the corpse; body mutilation of
mourners; destruction of the deceased’s possessions not included as
burial goods; destruction of the tipi and a funeral dance. However,
many of the burial practices can be compared either by direct
evidence or be inference. These are as follows: body flexed and
bound in position; face and/or body painted with vermillion; body
dressed in finest clothes; wrapped in buffalo robe or blanket; flexed
body buried in sitting position or on side; body taken to grave site on a
horse; buried in crevice or secluded place; body faced to east;
deceased’s possessions buried with him; saddle and bridle included in
burial goods; grave covered with rocks; ceremonial fire built; favorite
horse killed; and life after death. Thus, there are fourteen burial
traits reported in ethnographic accounts that can be verified from
published and unpublished data and from direct evidence or by
inference.
According to various accounts, beginning with Berlandier in the
1830’s to 1883 (H. Ten Kate), it appears that some of the practices
were abandoned, perhaps from necessity. However, even though
restricted by reservation life, the Comanches apparently continued to
fellow traditional practices as far as possible.
interments made while the group was permanently encamped were
probably given full ceremonies (Berlandier 1969: 96). By inference it
is possible that death away from the main camp resulted in abbreviated ceremonies. Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 149) report that
burial took place as quickly as possible and that the body was
prepared with considerable care ,However, if death occurred while
on the trail or on a raid, it is possible that short cuts were taken.
Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 150) and Newcomb (1961: 173) state that
the body was bound in a flexed position before rigor mortis had set in
Some additional burial traits, not included in the present analysis, are reported by
Hester and Stross (1973b: 43-44}. These were recorded by a trapper who claimed to have
been a Comanche captive ca. 1820-1840. Certain of the traits are similar to those reported by Berlandier (see Table 5) during roughly the same time period. These include the
killing of a favorite captive to accompany the deceased [Berlandier 1969: 96; Hester and
Stross 1973b: 43).

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

4g

T<× × × ~

~<

××
g

I
i.o
o

× ×× × × × × X × × × X × ×

~4

z

×

Z
O
X × × × × X × × × × × × × × × ×

×

¢o

.-g
o

"6

:g
××

x

×

×

x×××

×~
co

~O

Z
;;.I

I

I

~4
O

o

o

:--.1

~

o

° ~ g.~ ~ ~
~ ~ ~ ~ ~Oo~
~ ~ ~.~.-

.r~ ~: ~ii
~ ~ ~ o~.~

~ ~ ~

~ x~o
~4~

I

I

o

o

Z Z

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and if possible was buried in a crevice. There is no evidence of any of
the bodies being bound since bindings have not been found and four
bodies were either fully extended or the legs bent only slightly. Two
crevice burials were flexed. Those buried on the Llano Estacado and
some distance from the escarpment were flexed. In crevice burials it
was noted that orientation of the face in an easterly direction depended on how the burial chamber was oriented; this is inconsistent with
Wallace and Hoebel’s and Newcomb’s statements. In the Cogdell
burial the small shelter ran north and south, but the head was facing
west. In any case, none of the records indicate that the body was
placed in a sitting position. The Watson site (Ray and lelks 1964: 127)
is an exception in that this female was buried in a standing position
and for statistical purposes is considered extended.
The reported practice of burying a bridle and saddle with the
deceased appears to be a common trait and may be symbolic of the
reported custom of killing a horse near the grave (Wallace and
Hoebel 1952: 152; Berlandier 1969: 96). Suhm (1962: 117) reported
horse bones associated with the White site; it is the only published account of this practice, which may have been optional.
The wrapping of the body in blankets or bison robe appears to be a
trait as reported by Berlandier (1969: 95), Wallace and Hoebel (1952:
150) and Newcomb (1961: 173) when there was ample time to provide
a full burial ceremony. However, the unreported burials and ones interred in the open can not be used for analysis since burial wrappings
may have deteriorated. The occurrence of pigment is also probably
biased and should be higher on the list due to lack of trained observation and dissipation of pigment stains in non-crevice burials.
Suhm (1962: 96-97) found items such as finger rings and bracelets
too large to have been worn by the deceased. The Cottle County child
had oversized bracelets, files, adult sized stirrups, knives,and metal
powder cans. In these two burials it seems that offerings were made
which were nol personal possessions of the deceased. This trait
would be difficult to determine in adult burials since no out of context
offerings could be discerned, but probably is a custom as reported by
Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 195), Newcomb (1961: 174), and Berlandier (1969: 96). They state that outsiders who had no personal claim to
share in the estate could establish a claim against the estate of the
survivors by providing property of their own to be buried with the
deceased.
Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 151) state that sometimes a fire was
built and a funeral dance was held. It is not stated that the fire was
built on the grave covering the body. However, the McKaskle and

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

51

Cogdell burials had fires built on the grave, suggesting that in some
cases this was a custom. The possible use of ceremonial fires may be
an indication of special status or may result from some purification
ceremony.
In the Cogdell burial two travois poles were broken into three
nearly equal parts and placed over the chest along with a travois
brace. Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 151), Newcomb (1961: 173), and
Berlandier (1969: 96) state that the tipi in which the deceased died
was destroyed. The broken travois poles may be symbolic of the
destruction of the tipi, or the body may have been transported to the
place of burial by travois which may have been the last vestige of the
tipi to be destroyed.
Suhm (1962: 106), in her report of the White site, reported faunal
remains that may have been food offerings. In the examination of
unreported burials three other instances were noted where faunal
remains were with the body, and the Cogdell burial definitely had
food offerings. The Merrell site contained the remains of a bison
hump; the child burial at the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
contained the remains of a rabbit. The McKaskle burial produced a
bowl containing possible remains of food. The Cogdell burial food offerings were represented by either Bison or Bos bones which had
been sawed by a steel saw and placed by the body.
There is an additional possible burial custom suggested by the
Cogdell burial. There were two sets of clothing and moccasins. One
set was on the body and the other folded and placed near the body.
Berlandier (1969: 96) states a warrior’s clothes were buried with him
when circumstances permitted. The clothing on the body was of plain,
every day type. Berlandier (1969: 50) reported that the Comanche
were poorly dressed except when going to war. This suggests that
special clothing was worn only on important occasions. The clothing
placed beside the body was highly ornamented with bead work. Thus.
it appears that the best and most treasured objects of clothing were
not regularly worn, but were reserved for the anticipated after life of
the deceased. Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 186-187) and Newcomb
(1961: 188) gave a detailed account of the belief in existence beyond
death in which the ideal life was anticipated. It would seem natural
that the best clothing would be reserved for this great event.
Wallace and Hoebel (1952: 214) state that a Comanche wife was
considered chattel. Berlandier (1969: 118) states that the Comanche
were polygamous and this provided the husband with more servants.
Women were bought and could be abandoned at any time. This implies that women were generally held in low esteem and served as a
labor force and as a source of children. However, Wallace and

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hoebel (1952: 214) state that sometimes women were allowed in council meetings. Apparently some women were held in greater esteem
than reported by Berlandier. The Caprock burial in Garza County
(Conners, Allison and Runkles ms.) had an abundance of grave goods
and the Watson site (Ray and Jelks 1964) had more than average
burial offerings.

HISTORIC ABORIGINAL TRADE One of the least known activities
dealing with Historic Indians of the southern Plains concerns trade
goods or items of European derivation. One facet of this problem is:
who were the traders, and did all the various tribes and clans have
equal access to their goods? As far as can be determined at this date,
this problem can not be resolved, but some light can be shed on this
issue.
In an effort to learn as much as possible about where glass beads in
particular were coming from, T.N. Campbell of the University of
Texas at Austin was consulted. His thoughts disclosed three possible
sources of European goods. He suggested that there was no need to
have direct contact with traders. In other words, one group having a
vis-a-vis access to trade goods probablyhad contact with more inaccessible Indians. Inthis way groups of Indians in remote areas could
acquire trade goods by second and third hand. Newcomb (1961: 161)
states that the Quahadi band of Comanche occupied the Cogdell
burial area and were more isolated frorn the active trade areas of the
French and Spanish. Goods such as glass beads, brass wire, mirrors,
cloth, guns and other desirable goods could have filtered into the area
from people to the east and west. It was also suggested that European
goods were probably acquired through raids and by taking coveted
objects from corpses of victims, either aboriginal or European. The
Comanche, once they had established their domain on the southern
Plains after 1780, frequently raided as far south as northern Mexico
(Campbell and Field 1968: 129). Bolton (1914) in his comprehensive
work on the governorship of de Mezieres cites many instances of
Comanche raids as early as 1768 and as far east and southeast of
their regular territory as east Texas (Grand Cado) and Bahia del
Espiritu Santo, the Presidio of San Antonio, and neighboring places.
i~edro Vial (Loomis and Nasatir 1967) made several trips into the
southern Plains from late 18th century to early 19th century recording several interesting observations concerning the relationships of
the Comanche and the people of New Mexico. Vial stated that Spanish
colonists in New Mexico lacked many of the comforts of the times. Under such circumstances it is unlikely that glamour objects such as
beads and brass wire would be imported for trade to Indian groups.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

53

Instead, goods normally brought into distant areas for every day use
or locally made items would more likely be trade material.
Vial’s reports offer clues as to how goods filtered down to the
Comanche. Trading fairs were held with some regularity in Taos and
were attended by Navahos, Cheyenne. Kiowa, Kiowa-Apache and
Comanche. In addition to Spaniards, English, French and American
traders were present at various times in th e western Red River area.
Undoubtedly there was ample opportunity for desirable goods to be
acquired through these sources. It is also likely that there was a
cultural interchange between groups. In such circumstances designs
in beaded leather could have passed from one group to another. Many
of the goods such as brass,beads, saddlery, silver, blankets, cloth,
mirrors and other objects could have been available.
Almaraz’s (1971} translation of the governorship of Salcedo from
1803 to 1813 reveals Comanche raids in the central Texas and San Antonio areas. Taylor and Hammons (1957} give good evidence (18171822} that the Comanche were actively raiding in southern settlements of Texas during Martinez’s governorship. While Spanish
trade with Indian groups diminished during the governorships of
Alvarez and Martinez, illicit trade was taking place. Acquisition of
European goods by raiding is a strong possibility if not an established
fact.
It is highly probable that the Comanche had opportunities to
acquire European goods from their aboriginal and European enemies
and from the Apache in particular. Wedel [1959: 74} writes that by
1739 the Apaches had been displaced by the Comanche in the area
northeast of Santa Fe. It is possible that some of the European goods
in the hands of the Comanche resulted from such conflicts since the
Apache were mortal enemies of the Comanche and their Wichita
allies. The treaty with the Wichitas in the 1740’s (Newcomb and
Field 1967: 241} consolidated the eastern front of the Comancheria
and the treaty with the Kiowa about 1790 (ibid.} provided security on
the northern front. These treaties are significant since they made
possible the consolidation of their territories and provided the opportunity for raids into eastern New Mexico and into the south against
the Apache.
This brings up the question as to where the Commanche bands
who had contact with European traders got the bulk of their trade
goods. The treaty with the Wichita increased the input of trade
goods. The French had established a rapport with the Wichita
earlier in the 18th century. Newcomb and Field (1967: 268] state that
Indians were given presents which included beads and blankets in
1761. In 1759, the French were trading guns and other items to the

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Wichita {ibid.: 264). Still later, Navarette sent Calahorra presents of
mirrors, clothing, hoes, beads, wire and cloth {ibid.: 271). During the
governorship of de Mezieres, from 1768 to 1780, gifts were given to
maintain peace on the frontier north of San Antonio. De Mezieres
(Bolton 1914) gives inventories of goods which included shirts, guns.
blankets, cloth, copper kettles, gun powder, balls, vermillion, glass
beads, thread, axes, adzes, knives, hawkbells, tobacco, mirrors,
wire and other goods. These peace offerings continued during the
entire governorship of de Mezieres. While these goods were
generally traded with Indian groups bordering the Edwards Plateau
and East Texas, illegal trade was also active during this time. Illegal
traders accepted deer skins, bear fat, and buffalo hides for their
wares {Bolton 1914}. It is of interest to note that, in the manifests
given by de Mezieres, the most common colors of beads were blue,
white, red and black; but blue and white dominated. Bolton further
reports that in September, 1778, de Mezieres set out with a small
escort with gifts to visit the Indians of the north.
Almaraz (1971: 12, 72, and 157) reported hostile Indians {Comanche) in the vicinity of San Antonio during the governorship of Salcedo
from 1808 to 1813. Salcedo requested reinforcement from
Nacogdoches for protection against the Comanches. It is interesting
to note that the raids generally lessened from mid-spring through
December, which probably coincided with the migration of bison.
Taylor and Hammons (1957) state that the raids were so numerous
that they became "old hat" and no longer merited special mentioning.
Padilla {Hatcher 1920: 53-56) reported on the Indians of the Province of Texas and listed the Comanche as the most numerous of the
hostile tribes. He states that up te 1811 the Comanche were not so
well armed (it is assumed he meant with firearms]. However, a
revolution had broken out in Mexico and the Comanche became emboldened and raided, taking great numbers of livestock and
prisoners.

still a lightly populated region and still predominantly an Indian country (Berlanclier 1969: 11. Berlandier (ibid.: 31} reported that in September, 1828, the arrival of Indians at frontier presidios was a special
occasion. It was reported that several hundred Comanches visited
Bexar for trading. It is further stated that even the most hostile Indians (Apache, Charticas, and Comanche) engaged in at least a little
trade. Nacogdoches was an active trade center and furs and hides
were bartered. The other Mexican presidios had neglected trade and

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

55

Berlandier stated that it was too late for them to compete. The Indians were particularly interested in knives, hardware, weapons,
ammunition, and spirits. Berlandier (1969: 120) states that the Comanche had been trading in Santa Fe, New Mexico, for over a century;
silver ornaments for personal adornment and horses are listed as
items of trade.
American traders were also competing for the Indian trade at this
time and were coming to the Indian encampments for horses taken
from the townspeople. In addition to the items acquired from
Nacogdoches, the American traders offered cloth and cinnabar.
The most direct trade with the Comanche of the Llano Estacado
was with the Comancheros. The most complete study of this relationship has been reported by Kenner (1969). By early in the 19th century,
trade had developed to the point that regular meeting places had been
established. One place frequently mentioned is the Quitaque Creek
area which lies but a few miles northeast of the Cogdell burial. Prior
to Kenner’s report, Haley (1935) published a brief paper on Comanchero trade. He mentions beads as a trade item (ibid.: 163~. Common
goods listed for barter are ammunition, lead, muskets, knives, calico,
whisky, flour and bread. Kenner (1969: 85) adds saddlery, metal
arrow points and blankets. Kenner (ibid.: 94) reports that captives of
the Comanche were ransomed by the Spanish. The ransom for a
young woman was "two striped blankets, ten yards of blue cotton
drilling, ten yards of cotton shirting, two handkerchiefs, four plugs of
tobacco, one bag of corn, and one knife." Kenner (1969: 178) gives an
inventory of goods taken in the year 1867 from a group of Mexicans
(Comancheros) who lacked a trade permit from the New Mexican
territorial government. The inventory includes corn meal, Mexican
hard bread, butcher knives, files, vermillion, shirts, flannel, vests,
iron hoops, ducking, calico, shelled corn, tea, sugar, flour, letter
paper,candy and percussion caps.
Lowell H. Harrison (1965) reported on the activities of three
Comancheros in the 1860’s in court action brought by Goodnight and
Sheek against the United States in an effort to recoup losses of cattle
and horses from depredations of the Comanche. It was alleged that
the Comancheros traded goods to the Comanche for stolen livestock.
In sworn testimony of Tafoya (previously a Comanchero), a
generalized list of trade goods is given which includes beads, flour,
baked bread, cloth and calico. The testimony of Julian Baca (ibid.: 89]
states that trade also took place with the Kiowa as well as the Comanche. This statement is of interest because all of the witnesses mention
the Quitaque area just off the Llano Estacado escarpment as one of
the principal trading centers and Harrison’s is the only account of

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Kiowas being in the vicinity of the Cogdell burial in the 1870’s.
Newcomb (1961: 195) states that the Comanche and Kiowa treaty was
concluded about 1790 and thereafter the Kiowa, Kiowa-Apache, and
Comanche shared trading territories and often raided together.
However, the normal range of the Kiowa and Kiowa-Apache was
generally in the northern part of the Texas Panhandle, and the
Quahadi band of the Comanche was south of the Red River, as shown
by Newcomb (1961: 161}.
From the foregoing discussion it can be demonstrated that while
the Comanche of the southern High Plains were remote from Spanish,
French, English, and American traders, they probably had access to
goods through second and third hand contacts as well as by raiding
and warring against other Indian groups. Comanchero trade was
generally of more mundane goods, but beads and other exotic
materials may have been occasional trade items. War parties and
raids probably provided a considerable volume of goods consisting of
glass beads and brass wire bracelets; in other words, goods that
could be easily transported by fast moving raiders on horseback.

CONCLUSIONS
It is difficult to account for the 150,000 beads in this burial in the
light of a dozen early travelers’ descriptions of the Comanches as
using few beads and little decoration on their clothing. Juan Antonio
Padilla in 1820 said the Comanches wore "only a breechclout," adding buffalo skins in cold weather (Padilla 1920: 54). In 1844, Josiah
Gregg observed, "Comanche dress consists of the usualleggins, moccasins, flap and blanket or robe." The only mention he made of beads
is that they were worn in the hair (1933: 432).
Early artists such as Sanchez y Tapia in 1828 [Berlandier 1969:
Plates 2 and 3) and Catlin in 1830 (1926: Figs. 165, 168-172) show only
necklace beads. Bollaert s sketch of 1844 (Berlandier 1969: Fig. 18)
shows a bag similar to the beaded ones of the Berlandier and Witte
Museum collections, but the drawing is too vague to be sure if it is
beaded. The Berlandier collection (which could date anywhere from
1828 to 1851) contains only three beaded articles -- the pouch mentioned above, a smaller pouch (Fig. 35) and a simple band on a
feathered bonnet (Fig 29). To judge from the photographs and
descriptions, the beads are primarily blue and white and over .3 cm.
in diameter, with the exception of the small beaded pouch which has
other colors as well and smaller beads.
There is a gap of about thirty years between the time of these
accounts and the start of the reservation period in 1870. After a con-

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

57

certed effort to locate early beaded items, it is the reluctant conclusion of the authors that nearly all of the preserved Comanche
materials in the United States date from 1870 on. These later articles
are so obviously influenced by other Plains tribes in their color and
design as to make identification nearly impossible unless there is
documented provenience. By this time also the bead size is almost
without exception in the extra small (.2 cm. or smaller) range.
The 41FL45 site appears to fall in the little known period of early
contact and trade when the Spanish traders from New Mexico,
French from New Orleans, and Americans from the Mississippi were
bringing in seed beads in increasing numbers, and contact between
the tribes brought about amalgamation of designs and innovations in
dress. For instance, it was not until after 1840 that the Comanche
began to wear shirts of any kind, according to research done by Mary
Jane Schneider (1969:8) in an interesting article on change and
development in Plains Indian clothing.
A number of questions have yet to be answered concerning bead
work of this 1840 to 1870 period.
1. Was a preference for blue and white beads limited to a few
specific tribes, or was it perhaps a universal preference during this
early period? Lewis and Clark found the same preference among the
Indians of the Columbia River area in 1805 (Shiner 1961: 209]. A site
on Berrian’s Island in th e Columbia, which dated from the middle
1700’s into the early 1800’s, yielded over 600 beads, of which about
75% were blue and the rest largely white (Osborne 1957: 98). The
Spanish in extensive trade with the Comanches, Lipans, and Tancahuas at San Antonio in 1808, distributed only blue and white beads
in equal proportions (Curtis 1955: 74). Traders at Bent’s Fort in the
1840’s observed that "white and blue beads in that order were
preferred by Cheyenne women," while red beads were not popular
(McNitt 1962: 37).
2. Was the acceptance and use of the "pony bead" as an embroidery bead among the Comanches accomplished gradually over a
period of time and, if so, can this gradual acceptance be used as a
means of comparative dating of sites? More work must be done before
this tentative theory can be substantiated. Materials from a number
of unpublished sites in the area would appear to bear out the dating
sequence, but these and other similar ones containing datable artifacts will have to be carefully analyzed before conclusions can be
drawn.

3. Why are there no eyewitness accounts of these early beaded
garments? Were they extremely rare or for some reason kept from
the view of outsiders? Historian T. R. Fehrenbach h as suggested (per-

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sonal communication) that the Comanche were not particularly
hospitable or communicative toward early settlers and travelers
during this period, which might account for the lack of descriptions.
4. How accurately would the artifacts found in a Comanche grave
reflect the date of burial? There is some evidence that treasured articles were sometimes given at death to a friend or relative, despite
the tradition that a man’s most treasured possessions were buried
with him (Wallace and Hoebel 1952: 152). The chance of the presence
of such heirloom objects is certainly great enough to be taken into
consideration during analysis.
5. What was the source of these early "pony beads" and was there
more than one country making them? Were all-of the traders
acquiring them from the same source, or might it be possible to tell
Mexican from New Orleans traders’ goods? Arthur Woodward (1965:
9) says that some glass beads were manufactured in France and
Czechoslovakia in the early 19th century, It is also possible that glass
beads were being made in Mexico, perhaps in Puebla (King Harris
personal communication).
6. At what point in time did the Comanche begin to use the more
complicated geometric designs prevalent in the reservation period?
Only the simplest stripes, bars, and squares were used on what appear to be the earliest pieces. This corresponds with Lyford’s descriptions of the earliest pony bead period among the Sioux, which was
1800-1840 (1940: 66).
7. Are there documented early beaded garments of Comanche and
other Southern Plains tribes still in existence in museum collections
which might help to answer these questions? Richard Corm of the
Denver Art Museum has remarked on the similarity of these beaded
fragments to examples of historic Jicarilla Apache and Comanche
man’s shirts and leggings in that museum’s collection (personal communication, 1973).
An ever present problem dealing with Historic burials from this
area is "to which tribe did the deceased belong?" Probabilities will
be discussed, but it can not be resolved with any certainty.
About 1790 the Comanche, Kiowa, and Ki0wa-Apache signed a
treaty (Newcomb 1961: 195) and the three groups shared hunting
grourlds in the northern Llano Estacado. They also raided together.
7Wallace s map (1960) showing the known historic camps of the three
people indicates that after 1840 the Kiowa and Kiowa-Apache were
more active in the area north of the Prairie Dog Fork of the Red River.
If the burial dates between 1850 and 1860, we can narrow the
possibilities considerably. Whiting s report of 1849 (Bender 1927: 130)
recommended placing troops on the Red River to hold in check the

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

59

northern Comanche. No mention is made of the Kiowa or KiowaApache. In Kenner’s comprehensive study of Comanchero trade
{1969}, mention is made of a relationship between New Mexican
traders and Comanche in the vicinity of the burial. Harrison’s report
(1965} of Goodnight’s and Sheek’s attempt to collect damages resulting from cattle and horse thefts by Comanche cites the testimony of
three ex-Comancheros. In each instance, their activities were in the
Quitaque area and principally with the Comanche. Wallace (1964: 23)
states that in 1865 the Quahadi band of Comanches occupied an area
along the headwaters of the Colorado, Brazos, and Red Rivers. He
also states that the Kiowas had left the reservation due to unrest
resulting from poor quality goods they were receiving from the
federal government. At this time, they joined the Comanche and were
raiding in the vicinity of Waco. Ewers (in Berlandier 1969: 135) re-

ports in a footnote that Indian agent Fitzpatrick stated that the
Kiowa-Apache in 1850 had for many years lived with the Kiowas and
Comanches. Berlandier (1969: 135) places the Kiowa-Apache on the
Red River by 1830. It is evident that the Kiowa and Kiowa-Apache often joined in raids on settlements. However, the Cogdell burial individual did not appear to have died from wounds since no evidence of
violence was noted, It is possible that a lethal projectile missed all the
bones, but it is unlikely since the rifles of this period were of large
caliber. A pure lead projectile mushrooms quite rapidly and it would
be fortuitous if it missed all the bones. It can be assumed that the
deceased was in his own environment. The burial offerings suggest a
full ceremony without duress.
No positive identification can be made from burial goods. It was
hoped that beaded designs on leather clothing would be of assistance,
but such articles for the estimated time of death have not survived in
any appreciable number. Jack Hughes of West Texas State University
and Frank Weir, archeologist for the Texas Highway Department
(persona] communication) feel that the alternate banding of blue and
white beads suggests a northern Plains influence. On the other hand,
illustrations by Berlandier and collections of Comanche beaded objects in the Witte Museum in San Antonio are similar to Cogdell burial
material.
The strongest possibility is that the Cogdell burial represents a
Comanche interred between 1850 and 1860.

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In any endeavor, archeological or otherwise, a great many people make
contributions -- some greater than others. The authors are deeply appreciative of these people.
We gratefully acknowledge the cooperation of Bruce McFal]. discoverer
of the burial, whose keen observations were most helpful. L. D. Britton.
Paul and O.R. Mclntosh. Don and Dan Daniel. Larry ]ones and Dallas
Ramsey, all of Floydada, Texas: and Enrico Pizzini (foreign exchange
student at Floydada High School of Rome. Italy} were patient screeners.
Dr. William 1. Mayer-Oakes of Texas Tech University responded to a call
for help by sending a crew headed by Eduardo Mimiago and lane Gould,
who mapped the burial site.
Identification and advice on skins from which various items were made
was done by Ernest E. Roney, Jr., assistant to the director of the San Antonio Zoological Society. Assistance on bead design, sources, and dating
was graciously received from Richard Corm, curator in the Native Arts
Department, The Denver Arts Musuem; John C. Ewers, Senior Ethnologist,
Smithsonian Institution; and R. King Harris of Dallas, Texas.
Correspondence with Dr. Robert E. Bell Oklahoma University: Dr, T. N.
Campbell and Dr. Ernest Lundelius, The University of Texas at Austin: Dr.
]ames A. Hanson, The Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum at Canyon
Texas: and Dr. Charles Hanson, The Museum of the Fur Trade, Chadron,
Nebraska, were helpful in identifying and dating cultural material and
trading activities. ]. C Sticksel and E. W. Tillyer of the American Optical
Company and Earl F. Adams of Bausch and Lomb were helpful in dating an
optical lens. D. W. Fisher of the Scovfl Hoe Company gave helpful details of
eye hoe construction.
Jim Servatius; Mrs. R. R. Ehresman of Plainview. Texas: Mr. Fairy McWilliams of Silverton, Texas; and Mrs. Bobby McWilliams of Quitaque,
TeXas shared information on material they recovered from the site.
Dr. Mary Elizabeth King of Texas Tech Museum and Billy R. Harrison of
the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum graciously made available
Historic burial materials for study and analysis. Dr. Joe Ben Wheat.
University of Colorado Museum. Boulder. Colorado, identified and dated
blankets associated with the burial.
Two people are due special recognition. D. M. and ]oni Dell Cogdell, on
whose land the burial was discovered recognized the cultural potential of
the burial. Their cooperation and interest made this report possible.
Last and certainly not least, Dorothy Word and Henry Fox were understanding and sympathetic and patiently endured hours of neglect: to
them is due the deep appreciation of the authors.

COCDELL BURIAL SITE

61

REFERENCES CITED

Almaraz, Felix C., Jr.
1971 Tragic Cavalier, Governor Manuel Salcedo of Texas. University of
Texas Press.
Anderson, Adrienne
1968 The Archaeology of Mass-produced Footware. Historical Archaeology, Vol. II, pp. 56-65.
Bender, A. B.
1927- Opening Routes Across West Texas, 1848-1850. Southwestern Quar28 terly. Vol. XXXVII. No. 2, pp. 116-135.
Bennett, R. A.
1968 Dawson County Historical Burial. Transactions of the Fourth
Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, p. 78.
Berlandier, Jean Louis
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830. Edited by John C. Ewers. Smithsonian
Institution Press.
BoRon, Herbert E.
1914 Anthanase de Mezieres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780.
(2 Vols.). Cleveland.
Campbell. T. N. and W. T. Field
1968 Identification of Comanche Raiding Trails in the Trans-Pecos, Texas.
West Texas Historical Association Year Book.
Catlin, George
1926 North American Indians. Vol. II. Edinburg
Corm, Richard G.
1972 The Pony Bead Period: A Cultural Problem of Western North
America. The Society for Historical Archaeology Newsletter, Vol. 5,
No. 4, pp. 7-13.
Conners, Mrs. R. S., Mr. and Mrs. Rex Allison, and Frank A. Runkles
ms. The Caprock Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Garza County, Texas.
Unpublished Manuscript.
Curtis. Albert
1955 Fabulous San Antonio. Naylor, San Antonio.
Duffield. Lathel F. and Edward B. Jelks
1961 The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir,
Rains County, Texas. The University of Texas. Department of Anthropology, Archeology Series, No. 4.
Ewers, John C.
1957 Hair Pipes in Plains Indian Adornment. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin 164, pp. 29-85.
Ford, Alice (Compiler and Editor)
1951 Audubon’s Animals. The Quadrupeds of North America. New York.
Gregg, Josiah
1933 Commerce of the Prairies. Southwestern Press.
Haley, J. Evetts
1935 The Comanchero Trade. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol.
XXXVII, No. 3, pp. 157-176.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Harris, R. King and Inus Marie Harris
1967 Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. A Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Assembled by Robert E. Bell,
Edward B. ]elks, and W. W. Newcomb. National Science Foundation
Report, pp. 129-162.
Harrison, Lowell H.
1965 Three Comancheros and a Trader. Panhandle-Plains Historical
Review, Vol. XXXIII, pp.73-93.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1968 Notes on Some Historic Indian Artifacts Found near Ozona, Texas.
Newsletter, Midland Archeological Society; June, 1968, pp. 2-4.
Hester, Thomas R. and Fred H. Stross
1973a H. Ten Kate’s Account of the Burial of a Penateka Comanche at Fort
Sill, Oklahoma, 1883. Southwestern Lore, Vol. 39, No. 1, pp. 9-10.
Hester. T. R. and F. H. Stross (editors)
1973b Ethnographic Information on the Comanches Gathered from the
Mouth of a Trapper Who Was Th eir Prisoner _for Thirteen Years (by
Leon de Cessac). Archaeological Research Facility, University of
California. Berkeley.
Kenner, Charles L.
1969 A History of New Mexican-Plains Indian Relations. University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Livingston. Phil
n.d. Tex Tan’s Cavalcade of American Saddles. Tex Tan Western
Leather Co.. Yoakum Texas.
Loomis. Noel M. and Abraham P. Nasatir
1967 Pedra Vial and the Roads to Santa Fe. University of Oklahoma Press.
Norman.
Lowie, Robert H.
1963 Indians of the Plains. Natural History Press. Garden City, N. Y.
Lyford, Carrie A.
1940 Quill and Beadwork of the Western Sioux. U. S, Office of Indian Affairs.
Mason, Otis T,
1893 Nerth American Bows. Arrows. and Quivers. Annual Report of the
Smithsonian Institution, pp. 613-680.
McNitt, Frank
1962 Indian Traders. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, Okla.
Newcomb. W. W.
1955 An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp, 155-189.
1961 The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University
of Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr. and William T. Field
1967 An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory. A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory. Assembled by Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks and
W. W. Newcomb. National Science Foundation Report, pp. 240-331.
Orchard. William C.
1929 Beads and Beadwork of the American Indians. Museum of the
American Indian, Heye Foundation.

COGDELL BURIAL SITE

63

Osborne, Douglas
1957 Excavations in the McNary Reservoir near Unatilla, Oregon. River
Basins Surveys Papers, No. 8. Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin, No. 166.
Padilla, Juan Antonio
1920 Texas in 1820. Translated by Mattie Austin Hatcher. Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. No. XXIII, pp. 47-68.
Parsons, Mark L.
1967 Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens Counties, Texas,
During the Winter, 1966-1967. State Building Commission Archeological Program Report, No. 7.
Ray, Cyrus N. and Edward B. lelks
1964 The W. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35, pp. 127141.
Schneider, Mary Jane
1968 Plains Indian Clothing: Stylistic Persistence and Change. Bulletin of
the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. XVII, pp. 1-55.
Shiner, Joel L.
1961 McNary Reservoir: A Study in Plateau Archeology. River Basin Survey Papers, No. 23. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin. No. 179,
pp. 149-266.
Simm, Herbert S. and Donald F. Hoffmeister
1955 Mammals. Western Publishing Company.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1962 The White Site: An Historial Burial in Yoakum County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32, pp. 85-119.
Taylor, Virginia H. and Juanita Hammons
1957 The Letters of Antonio Martinez. Last Spanish Governor of Texas
1817-1822. Texas State Library, Austin.
Wallace, Ernest
1960 Map of the Habitat and Range of the Kiowa and Comanche Indians
1835~1867. Texas Technological College, Lubbock.
1964 Ronald S. Mackenzie on the Texas Frontier. West Texas Museum
Association, Lubbock.
Wallace, Ernest and E. Adamson Hoebel
1952 The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959 An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin, No. 174, Washington.
Woodall, J. Ned
1967 Miscellaneous European Trade Goods. A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Assembled by Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb. National Science Foundation
Report: pp. 180-183.
Woodward, Arthur
1965 Indian Trade Goods. Oregon Archaeological Society Publication No.
2.
Floydada, Texas
San Antonio, Texas

