Rattlesnake Shelter: 41CX29
AARON D. RInGs, JR.
ABSTRACT
The author excavated a small shelter within the bank of an intermittent
stream in northwestern Crockett County in the summer of 1968. Burned
rocks, ash, flakes, scrapers, and a bifaee foliate were found. The author was
unable to assign the artifact assemblage to a particular time period.

INTRODUCTION
The author is indebted to Mr. and Mrs. J. M. Barkes of Midland for
the contour map. I am happy to thank the following people who made
the exeavation possible: Mr. Arnold E. Sommer of Midland for his
companionship and assistance during the excavation; the O. W.
Parker family for permission to excavate; and Mr. Burton Lanehart
of Iraan for his interest and his maintenanee of transportation equipment. Mr. C. S. Parker of Lubboek brought the site to the attention of
the author. Dr. Joel L. Shiner, SMU Anthropology Research Center,
offered eneouragement in the preparation of the report.
In 1966, the Texas Areheologieal Society held its annual sunnner
field school at the Dunlap Site, twenty-two miles southeast of Rattlesnake Shelter. A badly disturbed rockshelter, two burned rock middens
in the draw below the shelter, and two other nearby shelters were
tested. The results of the excavation have not been published.
Field work under the supervision of Dessamae Lorrain of Southern
Methodist University was conducted at the Meadows Shelter, Walters
Site, Chimney Shelter, and Rivas Site in November, 1966, and at the
Sotol Site in May and June, 1967 (Lorrain, 1968:5).
The excavation of Rattlesnake Shelter was the fifth in a series of
systematic tests conducted on the O. W. Parker Ranch in northwestern
Crockett County, Texas. Previous archeologieal researeh reported
sandals, knotted fibers, fire hearth sticks, scrapers, and projectile points
from a shelter, Site 41CX10 (Riggs, 1968A:41). A midden excavation
recovered Langtry projectile points and other artifacts at Site 41CXll
(Riggs, 1968B:76-82). An excavation of a ring midden which yielded
an Ensor projectile point was discussed by Sommer at the Fourth Regional Areheologieal Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas. Riggs (1968C:2-9) reports a variety of projectile
point types (including Plainview, Langtry, Pandale, Ahnagre, Castroville, Ensor, Frio, Perdiz, Bonham, and Toyah) from an apparently
mixed context at Shelter 41CX12.

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PHYSICAL SETTING
Northwestern Crockett County is desert plateau country modified
by the action of the Peeos River and its tributaries in downcutting
valleys through the resistant eaprock of the Edwards Plateau (Lorrain, 1968:6).
The climate is mild. The January low average temperature is 38
degrees F., the July average high temperature is 95 degrees F. (Texas
Almanac, 1966-67:117). The rainfall average at Ozona is 14.90 inches
per year. The crisp, dry, warm days are followed by eool nights.
Plant life characteristic of deserts is common here. Vegetation on the
plateau tops is dominated by sotol, leehuguilla, and significant
amounts of sacahuiste, guajillo, and various grasses. The base of the
eaprock has hackberry, buekeye, and catclaw in dense growth where
greater moisture is present. In the valley, the more common vegetation
includes creosote bush, mesquite, screwbean, and cacti. Juniper and
Texas mountain laurel provided shade at the edge of the shelter.
The fauna is diverse. Mammals commonly found in the area today
include the white-tail deer, javelina, ringtail, skunk, fox, jack rabbit,
ground squirrel, cottontail, and several speeies of small rodents. Numerous species of birds and reptiles are present in the area.
The present economy depends almost entirely upon the oil industry
and on sheep and goat ranching.
RATTLESNAKE SHELTER
Rattlesnake Shelter, named for a former occupant, is a small, shallow rockshelter. It is near the head of a small tributary canyon of an
intermittent stream which enters the Pecos River about three miles
to the west. Maximum width is 16.0 meters, maximum depth is 2.9
meters, and maximum height of the ceiling is 1.9 meters. The western
portion average ceiling height is .9 meter, considerably reduced by
a projecting ledge. There was a small burned rock talus in front of
the eastern portion of the shelter. The stream bank at the eenter of
the shelter was bare sloping limestone bedrock. The ceiling was
blackened from smoke. The floor at the center of the shelter is 1.4
meters above the present stream bed. Figure 2 is a eross-seetion of
the shelter.
TECHNIQUE
A site survey report form was recorded with the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin, and assigned the Site Number
41CX29 as a means of identification.

RATTLESNAKE

109

SHELTER

41 CX 29

FIG. 1. Contour map of Rattlesnake shelter.

Photographs were taken of the site from several directions before
and during the excavation.
A bench mark was established on the terrace across the intermittent
stream from the shelter. A contour map (Figure 1) was prepared with
the aid of a plane table and telescopic alidade. A grid system was
established that would provide six squares one meter by one meter
to test the fill in the eastern portion of the shelter. The western portion
had a marked decrease in ceiling height and was not tested.
Excavation was conducted by picking the rocks flee, removing
larger rocks by hand, and passing the remaining fill over a one-quarter inch mesh wire screen.
Records were kept by square. The fill containing artifacts was less
than twenty centimeters in thickness and was thoroughly mixed as

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Ii0

0

1

2

I

I

I

Meters

Bedrock
m--

,m.

D

Excavated

A

FIc. 2. Profile of Rattlesnake shelter.
attested to by the presence of fresh goat and sheep pellets from top
to bottom of the fill. Squares were assigned alphabetical letters and
plotted on the contour map.
Artifacts were washed and labeled by site number and assigned
catalog numbers.
The bedrock floor was brushed dean, checked for usage, and
photographed.
THE FILL
Towards the rear of the shelter there were two layers making up
the fill. Lying on the bedrock with no cultural debris was a 9,0 em.
layer of light limestone dust and spalls mixed with goat and sheep
dung. This layer was topped by a thin layer of compacted goat and
sheep dung. Near the back line of the outward squares the two zones
or layers graded into one layer of dark limestone dust and spalls, goat
and sheep dung, ash, burned limestone fragments, and lithie material.
Figure 3 is a profile photograph of the east wall of squares A and D.

t:IATTLESNAKE

SHELTER

iii

FIG. 3. Profile of east wall.

ARTIFACTS
Six squares of one meter by one meter were excavated. Thirteen
specimens of lithic material were recovered from Square A, 33 from
square B, 19 from square C and 3 from square D. Squares E and F
were sterile. Artifacts are combined for description due to the limited
sample and lack of stratigraphic differences in provenience.
Although the specimens were not measured, their sizes can be
ascertained from the illustrations.
In addition to the 68 lithic specimens, the excavation uncovered one
nmssel shell and one small fragment of a long bone of a small animal.
The bright red berries of the Texas mountain laurel were scattered
throughout the shelter, most likely, the results of rodent action.
crops (11 specimens; Figure 4, A).
Provenience: A (1), B (5), C (5).
These represent flaking debris of local brown and gray chert. Four
have some of the cortex layer remaining. A chip is too small to be
made into a tool.
FLAKES (22 specimens; Figure 4, B).
Provenience: A (4), B (11), C (5), D (2).
These appear to be unused remnants of flaking debris of a size suitable
for making into tools. Twelve have some of the cortex layer remaining. They vary in size and shape, most are relatively broad and thin.

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Fro. 4. a, Chips; b, Flaking debris.

FIG. 5. Use retouched flakes.
The material is local chert. Representative specimens are illustrated.
USE RETOUCHED I?LAKES (9 specimens; Figure 5).
Provenience: A (2), B (6), C (1).
These are of the same size and shape as the unused remnants of flaking debris. They diker only in that one or more lateral edges have

BATTLESNAKE SHELTER

113

FIo. 6. Retouched flakes.

been dulled Dora use. The marginal use retouch (fine flaking along
the edge) is uneven. Three have some cortex layer remaining.
BETOUCHED FLAKES (9 specimens: Figure 6).
Provenience: A (9,), B (3), C (3), D (1).
These are flakes with obverse retouch on one or more lateral edges
to form straight or convex scraping bits. Three are on cortex flakes.
One has some inverse retouch, but, not on the scraping edge.
OVEBSHOT

FLAKES (fi

specimens; Figure 7, A and B).

Provenience: C (9,).
An overshot flake is one that turns into the core instead of going
parallel to a face. The result is that the flake cuts the bifaee or core
into two parts. One (Figure 7, A) may be a ruined biface. The other
(Figure 7, B) appears to be a thinning flake struck from a bifaeially
worked specflnen.
ltETOUCHED BLADES (3 specimens; Figure 7, C-E).
Provenience: A (1), B (1), C (1).
Three relatively long and narrow, thick, cortex retouched blades were
uncovered. Each has a lateral edge obversely retouched to form a
convex scraping bit. Two (Figure 7, D and E) have a wide flat edge
composed of a long narrow flake scar opposite the retouched edge.
One of these (E) has basal truncation.

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Fro. 7. a, b Overshot flakes; c-e Retouched blades.

Fro. 8. a-c, Denticulates; d, e Notches.

RATrLESNAKE

SIIELTER

115

Fro. 9. Scrapers.

specimens; Figure 8, A-C).
Provenience: A (1), B (2).
DENTICULATES (3

These have coarsely toothed bits. Two (Figure 8, A and B:) are made
by obverse unifacial retouch. One (Figure 8, C) has alternating retouch.
NOTCHES (2 specimens; Figure 8, D and E).
Provenience: B (2).
These are small concave scrapers made by steep obverse retouch on
large flakes. Each has a flat edge opposite the scraping edge. They
are of a size for scraping arrow or dart shafts. One specimen contains
some of the cortex.
MULTIPLE EDGE SCRAPER (5 specimens; Figure 9).
Provenience: A (1), B (2), C (2).

All have a convex bit made by striking the edge of the ventral face and
removing flakes from the dorsal face. One is on a cortex flake. All have
fine flaking along the lateral edges. One is produced from a large chip.
GI~VER (1 specimen; Figure 10, A).
Provenience: A ( 1 ).
This is a flake scraper with small finely retouched graver points suitable for engraving or incising. The graver points were formed by
obverse retouching a chance point formed by an edge fracture.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Fro. 10. a, Graver; b, Biface foliate.

BIFACE FOLIATE (1 specimen; Figure 10, B).
Provenience: B (1).
This is a leaf-shaped biface having a convex base. It may have served
as a knife or may be an unfinished tool.
DISCUSSION
Previous archeological investigations on the O. W. Parker Ranch
had produced a mixture of cultural material from the lower Pecos
l{iver area with that from central Texas and a smaller amount from
the South Plains.
Rattlesnake Shelter, indicating a limited amount of use, offered the
possibility of being an unmixed cultural occupation. This may or may
not have been the ease.
Few chronological changes have been reported for chipped stone
artifacts other than projectile points. It is not because the other artifacts are considered unimportant, but, simply because of the limited
available information about them. Each archeologist has classified
scrapers and knives somewhat differently. The terms used in this
report follow that of SMU as the artifacts were sent there for analysis.

RATTLESNAKE

117

SHELTER

None of the lithic material excavated can serve, at least at the present
time, to identify a culture or to assign the artifact assemblage to a
particular time period.
Excavation indicates a limited amount of occupation in the east end
of the shelter near the drip line, Nearly all of the occupational debris
was recovered from the front row of squares. This could be the result
of periodic cleaning of the shelter either by the occupants or by
stream flooding.
The lack of perishables, either animal or vegetal remains, is suggestive of periodic flooding of the shelter by the adjacent stream. This
periodic flooding, or the fear of its happening, could account for a
limited use of the shelter.
REFERENCES CITED
Lorrain, Dessamae
1968 Areheological Excavations in Northwestern Crockett County, Texas,
1966-1967. State Building Commission, ArcheologicaI Program, Report
No. 12, Austin.
Riggs, Aaron D., Jr.
1968A A Crockett County Shelter (41CX10), Transactions of the Third Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, South Plains Archeological Society, Lubbock, 41-50.
1968B Excavations of a Buried Midden, Site 41CXll in Crockett County,
Texas. Bulletin of Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 38, 76-82.
1968C 41CX12: A Preliminary Report on a Crockett County, Texas, Shelter.
Transactions of the Fourth Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas. Iraan Archeological Society,
Iraan.
Texas Almanac 1966-1967. Dallas Morning News.
Midland, Texas

