THE BELLEVUE MOUND: A PRE-CADDOAN
SITE IN BOSSIER PARISH, LOUISIANA

ROBERT L. FULTON AND CLARENCE H. WE~
Little is known of the pre-Caddoan pottery cultures of the
northern part of Louisiana. Attention has been called
(Webb, 1948 b) to certain evidences of pre- or non-pottery
cultures of the area and mention has been made of the
Fredericks site in Natchitoches Parish, from which surface
collections demonstrate Marksville or Troyvi!le to be the
major culture period (Ford, 1951; Webb, 1948 a). Occasional
sherds of these periods have been reported from sites which
represented later horizons (Webb, 1948 a). The major emphasis has been on the numerous sites of the Caddoan time
levels and there has been no previous report of excavations
in this part of the state which demonstrated an early pottery
horizon.
Description of the Site
The Bellevue mound site is located approximately two
miles west of Bellevue, in the central part of Bossier Parish
and about 20 miles northeast of Shreveport (Fig. 1, B). It
is situated on a hill overlooking the western bank of Bodcau
Bayou, the solitary mound capping the hill about 150 yards
from the stream and some 60 feet above its present normal
water level (Fig. 1, A). A secondary highway, State Route
181, cuts through the village site immediately south of the
mound. A house is situated on the stream bank a few feet
east of the mound; a small amount of surface material was
collected from the clearing around the house and from the
access road which impinges on the northern and southern
edges of the mound. (Fig. 1, C).
The extent of the village site is difficult to determine because the area is densely wooded except for the clearing
around the house; some evidences of a thin midden cover
several acres along the stream. No burials, post molds or
other village features were found apart from the excavated
portion of the mound. The banks of the bayou are almost
completely engulfed in a heavy growth of cypress and un-

The Bellevue Mound

19

derbrush; the surrounding flora consists of oak, ash, elm,
pine, willow, cedar, sycamore, locust, sassafras, hickory, cottonwood, persimmon and many other tree varieties, in addition to thick underbrush and vines which give a jungle-like
appearance along the water edge. The native fauna includes
opossums, raccoons, squirrels, rabbits, armadillos and even
some deer, while larger animals such as bears, cougars and
wolves must have been common in former years.
The original size and contour of the mound were uncertain because of the road cuts on the slopes and the several
pits which had been dug into the crest. It appeared to be
oval in outline, approximately 80 feet in diameter and about
10 feet in height, with a flat top 20 to 30 feet in diameter.
Lifetime residents of the area have stated that prior to the
digging of intrusive pits the mound was not flat-topped but
had a rounded contour. Excavation was hampered considerably by the presence of eight large trees, three of them
near the crest, and four stumps, two of which were old and
evidently represented very large trees.
The Bellevue site was chosen for excavation because of
its accessibility, its comparatively small size which permitted exploration in one summer’s work, and because it represented a type of mound in this area which had not been
reported upon.* A small number of solitary hilltop mounds
overlooking valleys and small streams contrast strikingly
with larger mounds and mound groups in the valleys of
nearby Red River and its tributaries. Heretofore none of
these solitary hill-capping mounds has been carefully excavated and their place in the archaeology of the region has
been uncertain.
Methodology
Permission to remove the mound was not obtained, hence
a trenching technique was used. A five-foot trench was cut
on a north-south line from the margin of the north road
through the mound crest and well onto the southern slope
*Excavation of this mound was carried on largely by R. L. F. in preparation for his
thesis in Anthropology at the University of New Mexico. The second author acted in
advisory capacity, with limited assistance in excavation and study of artifacts.

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

20

(Fig. 1, C), for a total length of 70 feet. This trench was
placed with the idea of revealing whether the site warranted
a summer’s work and whether stratigraphic levels could be
recognized; in the event structure outlines were demonstrated, a modified stripping technic was planned. In the
absence of these, vertical slicing was utilized throughout,
shaving thin slices of the fill with a shovel and trowelling
through midden deposits. Parallel to the original trench, an
additional 5-foot cut was removed on the west side and two

°"n

FIGURE 1
A, Map of Bellevue mound locality.
C, Outline of excavations.

B, Location of related sites mentioned in "~ext.

The Bellew~e Mound

such cuts on the east, producing a total width of 20 feet
completely excavated beneath the crest of the mound.
Each trench was subdivided into sections, five feet square,
marked by stakes.

These sections were numbered from

north to south, 14 in the original trench, and corresponding
sections of the later trenches were similarly numbered.
Trenches were designated A, B, C, D from west to east
(Fig. 3, C).

A field catalog was kept in which each speci-

men was numbered and a card was filed for each, recording
the depth from mound surface, height above pre-mound clay
level and placement within the corresponding section. If
the specimens were not found in situ or came from one of
the interruption pits, such information was recorded. Profiles were taken at five-foot intervals; features were recorded, diagrammed and photographed.
Stratigraphy
The mound was constructed upon a hard red clay subsurface, which was covered by a layer of fine sand beneath
most of the mound, although in some places beneath the
center the lowermost midden deposit extended to the clay
subsoil and several features lay on this clay. The contact
zone between the clay and over-lying sand was not sharp,
but was a gradual mixture as is found over the village site
away from the mound. Hence it is likely that at least the
peripheral portions of the mound were built upon village
sand, although the finding of several projectile points in the
contact zone immediately above the clay leaves in question
whether the sand layer was the first construction layer of
the mound or was village sand subject to habitation disturbances which left these artifacts in its lower zone.
The first of three midden deposits was superimposed upon
the light sand layer (Fig. 2, A, B) beneath most of the mound
area. It was first detected as a thin layer in trench B about
12 feet from the northern perimeter and became progressively darker and thicker beneath the mound center. It
attained a maximum thickness of 31/2 feet, had 3 firebeds in

h.

Z

FIGURE 2
Profiles of Bellevue mound.
"C", oriented north-south.

A,

Profile

"B",

oriented

north-south.

B,

Profile

The Bellevue Mound

23

association, and yielded about half of all artifacts found in
the excavation.
This initial midden layer was covered, beneath the center
of the mound, by a clay cap which varied in thickness from
one inch to two feet (Fig. 2, A, B). The thinner portions
represented pure dark red clay similar to the clay subsoil;
the thicker portions had some admixture of sand. The cap
was oval in outline, 20 to 25 feet in diameter, with its
thickest portions over the center of the mound and fraying
out around the periphery. When Burial I was found lying

on it, it was presumed to be a burial platform. However,
no other burials were found on it and firebed D was also
in association with it (Fig. 3, C).
A second midden deposit, 4 inches or less in thickness, lay
immediately above a portion of this cap, detectable over a
diameter of approximately 15 feet. The remainder of the
mound above this level was composed largely of sand or
mixed sand and clay fill, with one rather dense clay layer,
1 to 2 feet in thickness, its lower levels about one foot above
the second midden deposit (Fig. 2, A, B). This layer was
quite irregular and was interpreted as an incidental construction deposit of no significance. Above it, however, was
a third midden layer, rather irregular and thin, visible more
clearly along the west wall of the excavation and containing
very few artifacts. If a final occupation midden existed
atop the mound, it had been removed by-erosion and the
digging of several pits as mentioned below.
Features

Intrusive pits. Evidences were found of six intrusive pits
sunk from the top of the mound, all apparently in recent
times. Three of these, a barbecue pit and two narrow adjacent pits (Fig. 2, A) found by trenches A and B, did little
damage to mound stratigraphy or feature’s. Two others,
found in trenches B and C, did little damage but a larger
pit (Intrusive pit C) sunk from the center of the mound and
detectable in trenches B and C, was more disturbing in that
it was carried to the clay subsoil, interrupting all layers and

Texas Archeological Society

24

disturbing Burials II and III and their associations (Fig.
2, B).
Firebed A.

This was a small firebed, 1~’2 by 2 feet in

diameter and 2 to 3 inches in thickness, lying directly on
the sub-mound clay at the adjoining corners of Sections
B9 and 10 and C9 and 10 (Fig. 3, B).

The ashes were de-

posited on the slope of a shallow depression or basin in the
clay, which was approximately 5 by 6 feet in diameter.
Immediately to the east of the firebed were some of the
bones of Burial II, which also lay within the shallow depression. Intrusive Pit C, mentioned above, cut across the
edges of the firebed and the burial, extended down to the
clay of the depression, and interfered with interpretation of
the aboriginal features.
Firebed B. This firebed, slightly larger than A but of
similar thickness, also was placed on the submound clay in
Section B8, in what appeared to be a prepared bed. Beneath
its ashes was the beginning of a trench, extending eastward
for about 7 feet, slightly sinuous in outline, 11/2 to 2 feet
wide and 5 to 6 inches deep, filled with white sand (Fig.
3, B). No artifacts were in association with the firebed or
the trench.
Firebed C. This was the largest of the firebeds, about 5
feet in length, 2 feet in maximal width and 2 to 3 inches in
thickness. It surmounted the lowermost midden deposit and
was covered directl:~ by the red clay cap in Sections C and
D 8 (Fig. 3, C). A few broken animal bones and sherds
were found in and around this ashbed.
Firebed D. This bed was placed immediately atop the red
clay cap, 3 feet south of Burial I. It was irregular in outline
and could have represented one large bed, 3 to 31/2 feet in
diameter, or an aggregation of several small beds (Fig. 3,
C). The second habitation midden surrounded and overlay
this bed; only a few bone fragments and sherds were in
association. There was no indication of a prepared clay
basin.

A
¢
FIGURE 3
Bellevue mound burial and excavation plots.
C, Level of elay platform.

A,

Burial

1,

B,

Sub-mound

level.

The Bellevue Mound

27

Structure 1. It has been mentioned that Firebed A and
Burial II were found in a shallow oval depression or scooped
out basin in the clay subsoil almost directly beneath the
center of the mound (Fig. 3, B). This depression was 5 by
6 feet in diameter and 6 to 8 inches in depth at the center.
A thin layer of white sand had been placed on the clay
before the fire was built and the burial deposited. Although
Intrusive Pit C had cut into these features so that only the
right humerus and portions of the corresponding radius and
ulna were intact and in situ, there was a suggestion of cremation because several human bones were found among the
ashes and others of the bones were hard, brittle and discolored as though partially charred.
Surrounding the depression was a larger oval of post
molds detected at the sand-clay contact zone and extending
into the clay for a depth of 12 to 18 inches. There were 14
molds, 4 to 8 inches in diameter, placed irregularly at intervals of 1 to 3 feet to form an oval outline 11 feet in N-S
diameter and 9 feet in E-W diameter (Fig. 3, B). One 3
inch mold was inset at the south end. A square mold, 16
inches in diameter and 2 feet deep, was found within the
oval and at the bottom of Intrusive Pit C. It was uncertain
whether this was aborigina! or dug at the bottom of the intrusive pit.
Since this outline seems small for a habitation and since
it was directly associated with the basin containing Firebed
A and Burial II, it is reasonable to infer that Structure 1
was a small crude arbor or ceremonial structure enclosing a
crematory basin.
Burials
Burial 1 was found intact, lying on the clay cap or platform
in Section B7 (Fig. 3, C) with no artifact association, and no
evidence of a burial pit. The axis of the body was east-west,
with the head directed east. The position was flexed and
rotated to the right side. The spine was strongly flexed, the
legs flexed to 90 degrees at the hips, with lower legs fully
flexed to place the heels against the pelvis. The right arm

Texas Archeological Society

28

was flexed at the elbow, placing the hand under the mandible; the left arm extended with the left hand between the
femora. The skull indicated an elderly female.
Burial 2 was badly disturbed, as mentioned above, by Intrusive Pit C.

Only the right humerous and six inches of

the right radius and ulna were found undisturbed and articulated, lying alongside Firebed A (Fig. 3, B). In the bottom of the intrusive pit, near the firebed, there was a pile
of bones, consisting of ribs, vertebrae, left humerus, part of
the maxilla and upper dentures, parts of the pelvis and
skull. Several ribs or portions of ribs lay among the ashes
and the hardened, discolored condition of some of the bones,
which indicated partial cremation, has already been described. No artifacts were in association. A preliminary examination of the skull fragments and teeth indicated a young
adult female.
Burial 3, even more fragmentary, was found about 2 feet
from Burial 2 (Fig. 3, B), apparently placed on the clay at
the bottom of Intrusive Pit C. It was not certain to ’the
excavator whether the fragments lay in the fil! of this interruption or immediately beneath it. The former seemed
more probable and this burial may have been closely associated with Burial 2. The skeleton was represented only
by the mandible, upper teeth and several other bone fragments crushed into one mass and showing evidence of considerable burning. The teeth indicated a child of 2 to 3
years.
Food Sources
A large number of animal bones found in the midden
layers and fill suggested that hunting was significant in the
subsistence pattern of these people. Deer bones predominated. Mussel and snail shells were frequent. No fish bones
were identified, but this may have been a matter of preservation, since many of the larger bones were badly absorbed.
No evidence of agriculture was found except the implication
afforded by the manos to be discussed later.

The Bellevue Mound

29

Pottery

A total of 752 sherds was available for study, 695 found by
Fulton in the original excavation, 57 found by Webb in a
subsequent trench on the east side. There were 31 (4.1 per
cent) rim sherds and only 6 (0.8 per cent) decorated sherds
in the entire series; in two instances the decoration was confined to the lip. This preponderance of plain ware and the
lack of any stratigraphic evidence of differentiation on the
basis of temper or surface finish preclude any attempt to
set up typology.
One group of 14 sherds was of interest because of tempering with a white material which we interpreted as crushed
bone and identified as bone by subsequent microscopic examination. In some instances this material had leached out
from the surfaces, leaving a porous or "hole-tempered" appearance (Fig. 4, A, B). Since bone tempering has not been
reported from the earlier horizons in Louisiana, typica!
specimens, in addition to a representative selection of other
sherds from this site, were submitted to the Ceramics Repository, Ann Arbor, Michigan. We quote from a report by
Dr. James B. Griffin:
Sherds 10D-3 and M-56 were submitted to our Minerology
Department for identification of the tempering material. Their
reply was that the white temper is "apatite (calcium phosphate), could be either shell or bone." The sherds from the
site which have this whitish temper and those from which the
tempering material has been leached very closely resemble
the appearance of pottery which has inclusions of limestone
or fossil shell. When the temper did not react to dilute hydrochloric acid it was indicated that the material was not limestone.
Two of these sherds are rims with narrowed and rounded
lips. They are too small to determine accurately the vessel
shape. Three of the sherds are fragments from the lower side
wall where it joins the base. They are quite thick (1 cm.),
while the rim sections are 6 to 7 ram. in thickness. Sherd 202
is from a side wall 7 mm. thick and has clay inclusions as well
as the angular holes from leached temper. The exterior surfaces are smoothed but not burnished or polished. They are
somewhat uneven. The texture is medium coarse to coarse
with large angular temper inclusions and the clay has a con-

Texas Archeological Society

torted and twisted appearance in cross-section. Some of the
breakage lines suggest that the vessel was coiled, and the contorted appearance of the clay is also suggestive of this method
of construction. The surface hardness is 2-2.5. Except for the
temper this group of sherds conforms rather well to the majority, which is clay tempered.
Most of the sherds sent in by Fulton are tempered with clay
particles which I believe are crushed sherd particles, since
some of the inclusions also seem to have tempering in them.
Most are from the side walls of large bowls Or deep, rather
cylindrical jars with flat circular bases. The bases were shaped
and the first and succeeding additions to the sides were added
coils of clay. The paste is contorted and medium coarse to
coarse on most of these body and basal sections. The bases are
1 to 1.3 cm. thick; most of the walls are .7 to 1 cm. in thickness.
Both inner and outer surfaces are smoothed but are uneven.
The exterior surfaces have a hardness of 2-2.5. Sherd 266 is
somewhat unusual in that it is thinner, 6 mm., has a well-com,
pacted burnished to polished exterior and is noticeably harder
(2.5) than the majority of the specimens. The exterior colors
are various shades of tan or buff, with grayish tones either
from firing or from use over a fire. A minority of the sherds
have reddish to pink exteriors, also produced by firing.
Most of the rim sherds are small but suggest a wide bowl
form with either a vertical rim area or a slight inward curve.
The rim areas are thinner (5 to 7 mm.) than the side walls
and base, and the lips are narrowed and rounded. One rim has
a markedly constricted mouth so that the rim is almost horizontal. Two of the rim sherds have lip decorations. The first
(Fig. 4, D) has medium wide (2 mm.) and deep oblique grooves
across the rounded surface of the lip. The second (Fig. 4, E)
has very narrow, closely spaced oblique cuts on the rounded
lip. (The authors call attention to the similarity of these decorations to lip decorations on steatite vessels from Poverty
Point.)

(Webb, 1944).

An unusual rim (Fig. 4, F) is quite thin, 4 to 5 mm.

It has

a very narrow lip (1.5 mm.) and a thickened rim area 1 cm.
high with a slight channel on the exterior below the thickened
rim. It is suggestive of rim forms in Adena and Hopewell
pottery. Both surfaces of this vesse! were smoothed and burnished with horizontal strokes. This sherd is clay tempered,
presumably with crushed pottery; the texture is medium and
the exterior surface hardness is 3~

Two sherds have a sandy feel not present in the others. One
of these is a basal piece and has clay temper. The other may

The Bellevue Mound

31

be a rim and is also clay tempered, so that the different tactile
quality of these sherds is likely due to a slightly different clay
source rather than to any markedly different cultural source
from most of the specimens at the site.
The majority of the sherds sent by Webb are not significantly different from the Fulton group, having the same general temper, paste, color, surface and shape qualities. There
are some exceptions. One is a rather large rim sherd with a
slightly narrowed and flattened lip. The rim is vertical and is
from either a wide cylindrical jar or a vertical-walled deep
bowl. One body sherd (Fig. 4, H) with a zoned punctate design has a smoothed exterior surface and a surface hardness of
4. Typologically this sherd reminds me more of the Troyville
type Churupa Punctated than any other. The punctates are
more like those of Rhinehart Punctated, but the bordering incised lines are Churupa. !k small rim sherd with a single
horizontal incised line 1.3 Cm. below the lip is not readily assignable. The body sherd (Fig. 4, G) with curvilinear incised
lines is probably Marksville Incised. I can do very little with
the fourth decorated sherd which has a few scratches or incised lines.
Summary. The sherds from the Bellevue mound are, on the
whole, I think, closest to the Marksville level. They are not
much like Tchefuncte, nor are they much like the TroyvilleColes Creek paste. It is perhaps unfair to make this comparison since these specimens should be contrasted with the
ceramic sequence in northwestern Louisiana, which is still in
the process of construction. In paste quality, the Bellevue
material would conform most closely with Early Baytown,
particularly period E-D (Lower Mississippi Valley sequence).
The burnished to polished sherds and the rim placed on a
horizontal plane, with a markedly constricted orifice, are characteristics which are somewhat later than the Marksville period.

Baked Clay Object
One fragment of baked clay object was found in the
mound fill (Fig. 4, M). It is tan-colored, smoothed on all
except the broken surface. Although not typical in shape,
this fragment is suggestive of the Poverty Point proble:
matical objects of clay balls (Webb, 1944). No clay pipe
or figurine fragments were found.
Stone Artifacts
Projectiles. Twenty-two whole projectiles were found by

32

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

excavation, in addition to one from the village surface.
There were 12 portions of broken projectiles, of which 5
could be typed. All are of the larger, or "dart-point" size.
Sixteen have contracting stems, corresponding to type Gary
Stemmed (Newell and Krieger, 1949) of East Texas, but
also found in Central Louisiana and throughout the Southeast (Fig. 5, B-D). The specimens from this site range from
3.2 to 5 cm. in length and from short and stubby to longer
and slender in proportions. Ten of these are rather well
made, the remainder crude---possibly due to inferior quality
of material.
Seven projectile points (Fig. 5, E-F) are of the expanding
stem type designated Ellis Stemmed by Newell and Krieger
(1949). They range from 2.6 to 4.3 cm. in length and most
are well chipped. Two projectiles (Fig. 5, G-H) are possibly
of the type Yarbrough Stemmed (Newell and Krieger, 1949),
not unusual in pre-pottery cultures of East Texas and found
with pottery in the Davis mound. They are well made, ~t
and 4.6 cm. in length and quite slender.
Two projectiles (Fig. 5, I-J) are of the type San Patrice
Concave Base. They have been described from surface collections in the area (Webb, 1946) and were assumed to be
late Archaic in origin. None had been found heretofore in
excavations where cultural associations could be assumed.
One (Fig. 5, I), a surface find, is 2.6 cm. in length, and 2 cm.
in greatest width. It is of petrified wood, smoothly worked
to extreme thinness, with secondary chipping along the
edges and the concave base thinned by removal of a single
wide longitudinal flake from one face. The second, found
immediately below the clay platform in the mound proper,
is more typical in shape (Fig. 5, J) and demonstrates a similar flaking technique. It is 3.2 cm. long, 2.4 cm. wide, very
thin with basal thinning achieved by bifacial removal of
wide longitudinal flakes.
Scrapers or Knives. Twenty flaked stone objects were
found which are thought to be scrapers or knives, although
some are so rough that it is questionable whether they are
artifacts. Four were simply made by flaking along one

The Bellevue Mound

33

d

~.0".~" .: " ":<~ :." ." ~’.

/

Ge n ~’, ~cT. ers "
I~IGURE 4
Potsherds and clay artifacts from Bellevue mound. A, B, Bone tempered.
C, J-L,
Plain rims.
D, E, Decorated on lip. F, Sherd with exterior rim channel.
G, Marksville Incised.
H, Churupa Punctated (?).
I, Incised sherd.
M, Baked-Clay ball
fragment.

34

Texas Archeological Society

edge, leaving the remainder of the stone unworked (Fig.
5, L). Another was made from a flat rectangular pebble of
chert by flaking one end and the two adjoining edges (Fig.
5, M). A third is a long oval, 6.3 cm. long by 1.2 cm. wide,
worked on all edges (Fig. 5, O). There were several smaller
side scrapers.
Spokeshave. One beveled spokeshave or scraper (Fig. 5,
N) is of the Albany type, with squared haft and angulated
beveled blade. It apparently was made from a reworked
projectile. Spokeshaves of this type have been described
(Webb, 1946) as surface finds in this area, generally in association with San Patrice Concave Base proj ectiles.
Manos. Three hand-sized stones from the mound showed
evidence of smoothing on one face, presumably from use as
manos (Fig. 5, Q). They range from 10 to 12 cm. in length,
8 to 9.8 cm. in width, and 3 to 4.5 cm. in thickness. No
pitted or nut-stones were found.
Quartz Crystals. Two small unworked quartz crystals,
about 2.5 cm. in length, were found. One (Fig. 5, P) is clear
quartz, the other opaque.
No beads, ornaments, celts, banner stones, bar stones, or
other polished stone artifacts were found in or around the
mound.
Discussion and Conclusions
The evidence indicates that the Bellevue mound was constructed for burial purposes by a comparatively small group
of individuals who lived in a fairly early pottery-making
period and were comparatively retarded in cultural development. The smallness of the group is indicated by the thinness of habitation evidence on the village site and the limited
amount of materials in the mound fill and layers. The absence of ceremonial objects, ornaments and copper, in contrast with more highly developed centers of this general time
period, further attest to the cultural paucity of the group.
A carry-over of Archaic-like existence, primarily dependent
on hunting and gathering, is indicated by the food remains;

The Bellevue Mound

35

evidence of agriculture is inferred only from the general
Southeastern association of mound-building and agriculture.
The persistence of Archaic traits at this site is especially
strong in the stonework. The chief projectile types, Gary
Stemmed and Ellis Stemmed, are widespread in the late
Archaic. They have been carried over into pottery-making
horizons of the Gibson Aspect in Texas (Newell and Krieger,
1949), Fourche-Maline and Early Spiro in Oklahoma (Bell,
1953; Orr, 1952), the Tchefuncte-Marksville-Troyville sequence in Central Louisiana (Ford and Quimby, 1945; Ford
and Willey, 1940; Ford, 1951), Arkansas and Mississippi
(Jennings, 1952) and elsewhere in the Southeast (Newell
and Krieger, 1949). In Northwestern Louisiana, Webb
(1948) has noted their presence, as well as the San Patrice
point and Albany scraper, on non-pottery and pottery sites.
The scraper types and the baked clay ball fragment at the
Bellevue site also represent carry-overs from Archaic times.
The baked clay objects, originating in the Poverty Point
period, have been found with pottery association in Tchefuncte, Marksville and Troyville sites (Ford and Quimby,
1945; Ford and Willey, 1940; Ford, 1951). They occasionally
occur in sites of later periods such as Coles Creek and Alto
(Ford, 1951; Newell and Krieger, 1949).
The construction of the mound on this site and the presence of several habitation debris layers in the mound show
that the village, however small and primitive, was a fixed
settlement for some time. There was no evidence that the
mound served as a substructure for buildings. The added
information that the original shape was a rounded cone, with
the evidence of cremated burials and a flexed burial placed
on a prepared clay platform, place it in the burial mound
category of Early and Middle Woodland (Jennings, 1952)
or Ford and Willey’s (1941) Burial Mound I and II of the
Southeast. Jennings (1952) states that small conical mounds
on ridges or low terraces along streams of varying sizes
occur in both Early and Middle Woodland levels of the
lower valley, although multiple conical mounds placed on
river flood plains are more characteristic of Middle Wood-

36

land.

Texas Archeological Society

In the Early period burials were placed on prepared

floors or in pits beneath the original surface and the conical
mounds heaped over them. Burials were flexed and placements were rare. In the Middle period, typically the top
soil was removed and a flat-topped platform of earth, about
30 to 40 feet square and not over 3 to 4 feet in height, was
constructed. A mass or group burial was placed on this or
log tombs were let down into the platform, the platform and
burials were covered by a conical heap of dirt, then a secondary mantle of earth covered the entire original structure
or structures to a height up to 20 feet and a total diameter
up to 100 feet. Full flexion still predominated; partially
flexed, bundle, and skull burials were not unusual but fully
extended burials were rare. Cremation was practiced in
certain instances during both periods, generally in prepared
clay-lined basins in the original surface. Placement of objects with burials continued to be infrequent; 84 per cent
of burials at Crooks site had no artifacts.

Although the position of the Bellevue mound on a ridge
overlooking the stream and its small size are like mounds of
the Early Woodland period, the construction of the claycovered platform upon which the flexed burial was placed
suggests Middle Woodland times, consistent with the pottery evidence. The placement of the platform over a habitation layer differs from the custom in central Louisiana
Marksville sites, also in Miller II sites in Mississippi (Jennings, 1952), where sterile soil was used. Regardless of
whether Burials 2 and 3 were cremated in a submound
basin or in a pit dug into the platform, these burial customs
are consistent with Burial Mound II features elsewhere, as
is the absence of artifact placement with burials.
The above mentioned structural features, burial arrangements, and stone artifact types correspond quite well with
the conclusions reached by Griffin from a study of the pottery. He has indicated that the sherds are on the whole
closest to the Marksville time level and in paste quality
conform most closely with early Baytown. The various
evidences therefore indicate that the Bellevue site and

The Bellevue Mound

37

e

b

q

h

5

Con t ~ r~ete r5

o

FIGURE

Stone artifacts from Bellevue mound,
Quartz crystal

Q, ~Iano.

5

h.J, Projectile points.

K-O, Scrapers.

P,

38

Texas Archeological Society

mound belong to the general Burial Mound II or Middle
Woodland Horizon, in which are included Marksville of
Central Louisiana, Early Baytown in the Lower Mississippi
Valley, Miller II in Mississippi, Copena in Alabama, Santa
Rosa in West Florida, and Cooper Focus in Oklahoma (Bell
and Baerreis, 1951).
Several questions are raised by the pottery study. The
preponderance of undecorated pottery is unusual, even in
this period. At the Crooks site, 80 per cent of total sherds
and 90 per cent of the Marksville period sherds were plain,
in comparison with 99.2 per cent at Bellevue. In Miller II,
96 per cent of the pottery was plain or cordmarked. Orr
(1952) reports a low percentage of decorated sherds in
Fourche-Maline pottery of eastern Oklahoma, only 90 out
of 6,000 sherds showing decoration, most of this being incised straight-line designs. The absence of any technique
of body roughening by cordmarking or paddle stamping on
the Bellevue sherds is consistent with the general absence
of these techniques in the "Caddoan" area. Indeed, as Ford
(1952) has pointed out, the lower Mississippi valley and the
"Caddoan" area have a consistent technique of body smoothing and of plain wares in all early potteries. Fabric impressing, cordmarking, and check stamping never penetrated
the "Caddoan" area, and generalized body roughening by
brushing did not appear until Haley Focus times and the subsequent period of the Fulton Aspect, in which it is common.
Bone tempering, present in 14 (1.8 per cent) of the Bellevue sherds, seems to be indigenous to the four-state "Caddoan" area and westward into Texas. In northwestern
Louisiana bone tempering was found in a large cache of
pottery in the margin of a borrow pit near the big mound
at Mound Plantation, chiefly in plain or straight-line decorated sherds, preponderantly thick-walled, with which were
associated several sherds of the marker types of Coles Creek
pottery (Coles Creek Incised, French Fork Incised), and
several others of a plain black, polished ware.
A minor percentage of bone tempering extends into the
Fulton Aspect wares of the Bossier Focus (Webb, 1948 a)

39

The Bellevue Mound

and the Belcher Focus in this area. In Texas, Krieger (1946)
reports bone tempering to a minor degree in all loci of the
Gibson and Fulton Aspects; also that it occurs outside of
the "Caddoan area" in cord-marked pottery of the Antelope
Creek and nearby cultures in the Panhandle and in the Aus~
tin Focus of Central Texas, wherein the chief pottery type,
Leon Plain, is predominantly bone tempered.

In Oklahoma,

Orr (1952) states that somewhat less than 5 per cent of
Fourche-Maline pottery sherds have bone tempering.
The suggestion by Griffin that the burnished sherds and
strongly incurving rim are characteristics which are somewhat later than the Marksville period, and the presence of
the decorated sherd of Churupa Punctated (placed by Ford
in the Troyville potteries), pose the question whether the
Bellevue mound should be equated with Troyville rather
than Marksville.

Although this question seems to be com-

paratively academic outside of the central Louisiana homeland, since elsewhere it has been difficult or impossible to
differentiate Marksville Stamped and Marksville Incised
from Troyville Stamped and Yokena Incised, it might be
pointed out that barrel-shaped pots and bowls with incurving rims are present--even though infrequent--in Marksville wares and Churupa Punctated sherds were present in
small numbers at the Crooks site (Ford and Willey, 1940).
At the Kirkham site in Arkansas (Dickinson and Lemley,
1939) and the Fredericks site in Northwestern La., the two
nearest Marksville (or Troyville) sites to Bellevue (Fig. 1,
B), Churupa Punctated sherds occurred with sherds which
have characteristic Marksville features (deeply incised concentric circles or ovals, conventionalized bird design, dentate rocker stamping and cross-hatched Marksville rims).
Moreover, sherds secured by Webb from the deeper levels
of one of the Larto mounds showed a similar association of

Texas Archeo!ogical Society

4O

Churupa Punctated with Marksville Incised and Marksville
Stamped pottery.

The Bellevue mound furthermore shows

none of the traits which first appear during the Troyville
transition as distinguished f r o m Marksville: rectangular
temple mounds, plaza arrangement of mounds, extended
burials, head deformation, small (arrow) projectile points,
the replacement of monitor or platform pipes by elbow and
effigy pipes, French Fork Incised and Mazique Incised pottery, cordmarked surface, and so on.
We conclude, therefore, that the Bellevue mound site represents a simple Burial Mound culture, on the Burial Mound
II or Middle Woodland horizon, which developed out of the
late Archaic horizon in this area.
Bibliography
Bell, Robert E.
1953.

The Scott Site, Le Flore County, OMahoma.

American Antiquity, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 314-331.
Bell, Robert E. and David Baerreis ....
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bull T. A. P.
S.

Vol. 22, pp, 7-100.

Dickinson, S. D. and Harry J. Lemley
1939. Evidences of the Marksville and Coles Creek Complexes at the Kirkham Place, Clark County, Arkansas.
Bull. T. A. P. S] Vol. 11, pp. 139-189.
Ford, James A.
1951.

Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site

in Avoyelles Parish, La.

Anthropological Papers of the

American Museum of Natural History, N. Y. Vol. 44,
Part I.

The Bellevue Mound

1952.

41

Measurements of Some Prehistoric Design De-

velopments in the Southeastern States. Anthropological
Papers of the American Museum of Natural History,
Vol. 44, Part 3.
Ford, James A. and George I. Quimby, Jr.
1945.

The Tchefuncte Culture, an Early Occupation of

the Lower Mississippi Valley.

Mem. Soc. Amer. Arch.,

No. 2.
Ford, James A. and Gordon Willey
1940. Crooks Site, a Marksville Period Burial Mound in
La Salle Parish, La. Anthropological Study No. 3, Department of Conservation, La. Geological Survey.
1941. An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern
United States.

American Anthropologist, Vol. 43, pp.

325-363.
Jennings, Jesse D.
1952.

Prehistory of the Lower Mississippi Valley. In:

Archeology of Eastern United States, Univ. of Chicago
Press, pp. 256-271.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946.

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern

Texas with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi Valley.

Univ. of Texas Pub. No. 4640, Austin.

Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoir 5, Society for American Archeology.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1952. Survey of Caddoan Area Archeology. In: Archeol-

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

42

ogy of Eastern United States.

Univ. of Chicago Press,

pp. 246-247.
Webb, Clarence H.
1944.

Stone Vessels from a Northeast Louisiana Site.

American Antiquity, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 386’394.
1946.

Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts

from Northwest Louisiana.
pp. 9-17.
1948a.

Bull. T. A. P. S., Vol. 17.

Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus.

Bull.

T. A. P. S., Vol. 19, pp. 100-147.
1948b.

Evidences of Pre-Pottery Cultures in Louisiana.

American Antiquity, Vol. 13, pp. 227-232.
3346 Youree Drive
Shreveport, La.
The Children’s Clinic
1560 Line Ave.
Shreveport, La.

