THE GRACE CREEK SITES,
GREGG COUNTY, TEXAS
By BUDDY C. JONES
East Texas is an area of wooded, hilly country, drained by a
number of major rivers. In the north, Sulphur River and Cypress
Bayou flow eastward into Red River, whereas further south the
Sabine, Angelina, and Neches Rivers flow southeastward into
the Gulf of Mexico.

Along the course of the Sabine River lies Gregg County
(Fig. 47), a small county known for its oil industries. The
Gregg County area has an average elevation of 350 ft., an average temperature of 65.8 degrees, a growing season of 252 days
a year, and an average annual rainfall of 42.28 inches. The soil
contains deposits of lignite and varieties of clay (Webb and
Carroll, 1952).
Little is known of Gregg County archeologieally. It is an important area, however, because it contains early cultural materials which are related both to East Texas and to Louisiana,
and which may provide "missing links" between complexes in
those two areas. Thus the information from Gregg County may
have an important effect upon our knowledge of Texas archeology in general.
The purpose of this report is to present information on two
sites in Gregg County studied by the author, and to promote
interest in further archeological study of the East Texas area.
LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION
The Grace Creek sites are located in Gregg County about three
miles south of Longview on the property of R. G. LeTourneau,
Inc. The local topography is composed of a hilly upland which,
about two miles south of Longview, drops off southward to a
low overflow bottom which extends about one mile to the Sabine
River. On the south side of the Sabine the upland is relatively
close to the river.

The Grace C~’eek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

199

The Sabine bottom lands are covered with hackberry, birch,
willow, hickory, pin oak, holly, black cherry, sassafras, pawpaw,
black walnut, persimmon, and matted growths of vines. On the
hilly uplands one finds shortleaf pine, hickory, sweet gum, hackberry, black walnut, and varieties of oak. Natural clearings
often occur along the edge of the uplands providing good site
locations for the early people in the area.
Game animals such as deer, racoon, rabbit, opossom, wild
fowl, squirrel, and other small game were no doubt available
to the early inhabitants.
The sites lie on the eastern side of Grace Creek, which flows
into the Sabine River from the north. Site I is about one-fourth
mile north of the mouth of the creek, and Site 2 is about one

Fig. 47.

Map

of

part of East Texas.

.....

Fig. 48.

7

The Grace Creek sites. A, Site 1, November, 1954. B, Site 2,

March, 1955.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

201

mile north of Site 1. The surrounding land is low bottom land
that is usually flooded each year.
Site I (Figs. 48, A; 49) is usually above flood waters because
of its location on a natural rise adjoining Muddy Lake and
Grace Creek. Muddy Lake is apparently located on an old river
channel, and Grace Creek probably once flowed into the river
at the west end of the present Muddy Lake.
The subsoil at Site 1 is a sterile red clay. The natural rise on
which the site lies is made up of two to four feet of dark sandy
loam which contains village refuse and which overlies the red
clay. A zone of mixed clay and sand intervenes between the
midden deposit and the clay.
Site 2 (Figs. 48, B; 50) is on a high sandy upland from which
a low ridge extends westward towards Grace Greek. The soil
here is similar to that of Site 1, the underlying sterile red clay
being capped with a zone of mixed clay and sand which in turn
is overlain by three to four feet of dark sandy loam. The topsoil
at Site 2, however, differs from that at Site 1 in being less dark
in color and in not containing any bones, probably because very
little occupational debris was left there during the time of the
pottery-making people.
DESTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION OF SITES
During the early summer months of 1954, the LeTourneau
Company cleared an area of bottom land on Grace Creek and
the Sabine River, and built a large earthen dike around it to
keep the water out and to serve as a road around the freshly
cleared land. Site 1, because of its location on a natural rise,
was chosen as a place to obtain dirt for construction of the
dike. Unfortunately it was not apparent to the engineers that
the site contained archeological remains, and as a consequence
much of the richest village area was abruptly graded away to
serve as dike fill. After moderate rains, many projectile points
and other artifacts were recovered from the freshly graded
soil.
At Site 1, erosion over the years, chiefly by floods, made it

N

Fig. 49.

Map and cross section of Grace Creek Site No. 1.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

203

difficult to distinguish any significant stratigraphic changes in
the soil or to determine correct depths of certain artifacts.
At Site 2, the soil representing the richest village area was
also graded away in 1954, and used to build the dike. Fortunately, while the work was going on a stratigraphic change was
noticed in the soil and recorded as well as possible in the limited
time available. There is no doubt, however, that much archeological information was destroyed without record. Soon after
the construction of the dike, further archeological work was
hindered by the construction of State Farm-to-Market Road
1845 through the west end of the site.
From 1954 to 1956 the author carried on minor excavations
at both sites whenever any unusual characteristics appeared in
the soil. These small excavations are shown in Figs. 49 and 50.
All of these excavations yielded artifacts corresponding in form
to those found in the graded and surrounding areas, and were
therefore of great value in determining the correct stratigraphic
origin of many of the artifacts that were found in the graded
earth. Comparison of the sites would not have been accurate,
and perhaps not even possible, without the information gathered
from these excavations.
FEATURES--SITE 1
Burial. Only one burial was discovered during the study of
the Grace Creek sites. It was found and excavated in the Fall
of 1954 in Area B of Site 1 (Fig. 49). The burial consisted of a
single flexed individual with the head eastward, in a pit hollowed out in the sterile red clay at an unknown depth. Due to
poor preservation of the bones, only fragmentary portions of
the cranium and the long bones were found. No burial offerings
were found in the hollowed-out grave; but two dart points, one
a Gary point and the other an Ellis point, were found in the
midden soil possibly associated with the burial. Since the burial
was also in midden soil, there is some question concerning the
true association of the points with the burial.
The near-absence of burials at the Grace Creek sites is not
surprising to the author, since it is common for Alto Focus

Fig. 50.

Map and cross section of Grace Creek Site No. 2,

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

205

sites to lack data on burial method and nature of mortuary
offerings (Suhm et al., 1954). The Alto Focus people doubtless
disposed of their dead in some manner as yet not known in the
East Texas area. If they practised inhumation, it is logical to
assume that some of the burials would have been discovered by
this time at one of the many Alto Focus sites in East Texas.
Pits. A fire pit, Pit A (Fig. 49), was located in June of 1954
while Site 1 was being graded away, and was excavated after
permission was secured from the dike engineers. The investigation was necessarily hurried. The pit extended down to the
top of the sterile clay. It contained bone fragments, pottery
fragments of plain Alto type, flint chips, traces of charcoal, and
two Alba type arrow points.
A small pit, Feature 3 (Fig. 49), extending to a depth of six
inches above the clay near Pit A, was observed and excavated
during June of 1954. It was filled with fresh water clam shells
(Unio elegans) which were probably stored for future use after
their contents had been eaten.
Post molds. Three post molds forming a right angle pattern
were observed during minor excavations in December, 1955.
They were eight inches apart and each was four inches in
diameter. No other indications of structures were noted at
Site 1, but it is believed that further excavations in Area C
(Fig. 49) may reveal important information on houses.
FEATURES--SITE 2
Pit. A very interesting fire pit, Pit B, was discovered in
September, 1955, before it was completely graded away, and
was excavated (Fig. 50). It was found to be oval in shape and
to extend downward to a depth of three inches below the top
of the clay. It contained bone fragments, a small amount of
charcoal, flint chips, a complete Plainview point (Fig. 54, C),
and a broken knife-like point.
No other features were observed at Site 2. They were doubtless graded away without being noted.

206

Texas Archeological Society,

POTTERY--SITE 1
A total of 593 pottery sherds representing the Alto Focus
pottery complex were recovered from the graded areas and
minor excavations in Site 1 by the author. The sherds are of
interest because of their unusual type and their relation to
the rest of the Gregg County area.
The disturbed soil and the high percentage of plain pottery
made classification difficult. However, typological analysis was
attempted and was to some degree successful, since the sherd
classes from the site corresponded almost exclusively with the
known pottery types of the Alto Focus (Suhm et al., 1954).
Davis Incised.
(Fig. 51, B, C, I, O, R). Pottery of this type
was found to lead all other decorated types in frequency, with
a total of 49 sherds, 8.4% of the total, representing an estimated 35 vessels. The sherds were collected from both the
graded surfaces and the minor excavations.
According to Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954, p. 266), Davis
Incised sherds vary in color, showing shades of yellowish-brown,
red (not filmed), reddish-brown, and occasionally gray-brown
to black, the core having the same paste color as the surface.
The temper is usually abundant coarse clay-grit, the texture
coarse, the surface smooth but not often polished, the lips
rounded or flat but not thickened and varying from 4 to 12 ram.
in thickness, and the vessels are carinated or barrel-shaped (as
well as of other forms), with a design of horizontal lines encircling the body. The sherds from Site 1 at Grace Creek fit
this description well, although they do not show such a wide
range of color, most sherds being gray-brown to black in color.
It should be further stated that this pottery was classified as
Davis Incised because of its distinctive characteristics and its
relation to other pottery types found at the site. Thus there
is actually little doubt that this pottery is related only to the
Alto Focus. Its relation to Coles Creek Incised, Greenhouse
Incised, and Hardy Incised of the Coles Creek and Troyvi!le
Complexes in Louisiana (Ford, 1951) is still questionable.
Dunkin Incised (Fig. 51, F, G, H, N). This type is represented by 19 sherds, 3.5% of the total, from an estimated 14 ves-

Tl~e Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

207

sels. These sherds correspond in description to the Dunkin
Incised type as defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954,
p. 268), but tend toward later Dunkin variant types (Newell
and Krieger, 1949) in that they usually lack the "sets of parallel lines in a wide variety of straight-line patterns . . . in triangles, diamonds, and hachures" (Suhm et al., 1954, p. 268)
that are so distinctive of early Dunkin types. There is definitely
an absence of bone tempering in sherds of this type, but it is
best not to specify traits other than those already mentioned,
since the sample of the type at this site is so small.
Alto Focus types other than Davis Incised and Dunkin Incised were present in very small numbers, a circumstance that
was surprising and puzzling to the author. The little information gained from them is as follows:
Crockett Curvilinear Incised (Fig. 51, M, P). Represented
by four’ sherds, 0.6% of the total, from an estimated four
vessels. They were gray-brown and lacked bone temper.
Hickory Fine Engraved. Represented by two sherds, 0.3%
of the total, from an estimated two vessels. The sherds were
gray in color and lacked bone temper.
Holly Fine Engraved (Fig. 51, L). Represented by only one
sherd. This was a black sherd with engraved lines originally
containing red pigment. This sherd is apparently a portion of
a Holly type water bottle.
Pennington Punctated-Incised (Fig. 51, J). Represented by
one sherd. The sherd is light brown in color and seems to be
that of a carinated Pennington type vessel (Suhm et al., 1954,
p. 340). It has a design of crossed diagonal lines with a single
punctate located in the center of each diagonal.
Weches Fingernail I~pressed (Fig. 51, E, K). Represented
by four sherds, 0.6% of the total, varying from light brown to
dark gray color. The sherds seem to indicate a cylindrical or
barrel-shaped vessel.
Plain sherds (Fig. 51, A, D). Plain sherds were most numerous in the collection from Site 1, there being 448 sherds or

Fig. 51. Pottery sherds from the Grace Creek sites. A, D, plain sherds.
B, C, I, O, R, Davis Incised. E, K, Weches Fingernail Impressed. F, G, H, N,
Dunkin Incised. J, Pennington Punctated-Incised. L, Holly Fine Engraved.
M, P, Crockett Curvilinear Incised. Q, "Molar Incised."

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

209

83.5% of the total. They vary from 2 to 10 ram. in thickness
and in color from light brown to gray. The relationship of this
plain type of pottery to the Alto sherds presents an interesting
question that cannot be adequately answered, because of the
mixed and disturbed condition of the soil of the site. However, all the minor excavations proved this plain pottery to be
in close association with the sherds of the different Alto Focus
types.
Sherds of the plain pottery usually have light exterior surfaces and dark interior surfaces, but many sherds show an even
color from inner to outer surface. Most sherds are light brown
to black in color, many having reddish or orange exterior surfaces. In some cases the orange cover may be seen on both surfaces. Others are made entirely from the native clay.
These plain sherds are believed to represent rounded- to
flat-lipped jars with vertical rims, barrel or cylindrical shape,
with a tendency to curve inward. Sherds of this incurving
type characteristically have colors of brown, gray, or black,
with a fair to good polish. They are always composed of compact clay with only a slight degree of sand added to the paste,
and a complete absence of bone tempering. Only three of the
plain sherds suggest bottle shapes.
Non-Alto pottery. Other pottery sherds believed not to be
directly associated with the Alto types were found in small
quantities at Site 1 as follows.
There were 10 brushed sherds, 4 to 6 ram. thick, with light
brown interior and exterior surfaces and black cores. They
cannot be typed with any accuracy since no lip portions were
found.
Three sherds, representing an estimated two vessels, were
found which apparently had been decorated by impressing some
small object alternately over the surface of the original vessel
(Fig. 51, Q). These impressions seem to have been made by
the use of a human or animal molar tooth. Because of this
characteristic, the writer will refer to this type as "Molar Incised." These sherds were approximately 4 ram. in thickness
and were composed of a mixture of native orange clays.

210

Texas Archeological Society

One grooved sherd corresponds to the type found at the
Davis site (Newell and Krieger, 1949, p. 123). It was of solid
black paste and probably belonged to a small jar.
The Killough Pinched type was represented by three sherds
from an estimated two vessels.
There were three sherds which are believed to belong to the
Ripley Engraved type of the Titus Focus. They seem to have
been from three carinated vessels.
No trade sherds from the area to the east and northeast of
Texas were found at Site 1. For a site of this type, this circumstance is definitely unusual.
It should be noted that all the facts presented here concerning
pottery types and their associations at the site are based only
on the characteristics of the sherds themselves, and not from
any other information such as stratigraphic distribution. For
this reason, a completely detailed analysis of the pottery from
such a site cannot be made accurately and should not be given
too much emphasis.
POTTERY-- SITE 2
Site 2 had a very small pottery sample, and the few sherds
corresponded in type to those from Site 1. Very little information
can be gained from such a small sample. The scarcity of speciments from this site, compared to Site 1, may be due to the
greater degree of destruction of Site 2 which had taken place
when the author began the study. However, it seems likely
that Site 2 had relatively few occupational materials even in
its original condition. It is probable that this site was occupied
only by one or two families for a brief period.
Weches Fingernail IMpressed was represented by two sherds.
One was of gray clay with an orange cover on both interior and
exterior surfaces. It had a design of fingernail punctates in
vertical rows around the original vessel. The other sherd was
of solid brown paste with a typical Weches design of fingernail
punctates placed in horizontal rows around the vessel. The two
vessels were apparently globular in shape, with short rims.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

211

Dunki.n Incised. One Dunkin Incised sherd was found, which
be!onged to a vessel with a more or less globular body, tall
rim, and flat but not widened lip. It shows a design of closely
spaced, unevenly incised lines.
Davis Incised. Surprisingly, only one Davis Incised sherd
was found. It was of a solid gray paste and represented the
flat lip of a globular vessel. The thickness was uniform from
lip to body. It should be noted that this is the only deeply concave rim sherd of the Davis Incised type found in either of the
Grace Creek sites. It has the same shape as many of the plain
sherds from Site 1.
Hicko~j Engraved. One rim sherd from a Hickory Engraved
bottle was found. It showed a flat, even lip and polished surface.
Plain sherds. Three plain sherds, like those found at Site 1,
constitute the remainder of the pottery found at Site 2. As at
Site 1, they have dark cores and native orange exterior and interior surfaces. They vary from 4 ram. to 6 ram. in thickness.
One of these sherds is unusual because it has a slanted-inward
carinated shape and a widened lip, and because it is the only
bone-tempered sherd found at Site 2.
MISCELLANEOUS CLAY OBJECTS
Only three types of clay objects, all from Site 1, were found
during the study of the Grace Creek sites.
Balls. Several baked clay balls or lumps were found. Judging
from their rough shape and small size, they were probably used
for vessel supports during the firing of pottery.
Spoon. Another clay object is in all probability a fragment
of a pottery spoon. This specimen, 2.5 cm. long, seems to be
the section of the spoon where the handle joins the bowl.
Pipe. The remaining clay object is a 3-cm. section of a longstemmed polished and fired pottery pipe (Fig. 54, R), of the
type characteristic of the Alto pottery complex (Newell and
Krieger, 1949, pp. 147-148).

212

Texas A~’cheological Society

Table 1.

Arrowpoints

Site i
Known types:
Alba .................. 76
Bonham ............... 1
Other:
Type A ...............

6

Site 2

Fig.

1
--

52, I, J
--

--

52, K

Totals ..................... 83
ARROWPOINTS
A total of 83 arrowpoints were recovered from the soil of
Site 1. They weee collected from the upper levels of the midden,
the levels that contained pottery sherds and other clay artifacts.
Their association with the upper part of the Archaic level at
the site the mixed clay and sand--cannot be stated positively,
but there is evidence that the arrowpoint made its appearance
near the end of the Archaic period at the site and continued
through the pottery period.
At Site 2, only one point, an Alba point, was found. The
following discussion, then, refers entirely to specimens from
Site 1.
Alba (Fig. 52, I, J). Arrowpoints of the Alba type are represented by 76 specimens composed of native and foreign cherts.
They vary from 0.8 to 2 cm. in length, and have a more or less
Alba or "fir tree" shape. Compared with the Alba type as defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954, p. 494), they are
~ather small and vary considerably in shape. For this reason
there is some question concerning the relationship of these
points to the Alba type as now defined in the literature.
Bonk~m. One point distinctly of the Bonham type was recovered. It is 4 cm. long and is made of local tan chert. There is
little resemblance between this point and other points found at
Site 1.
Type A (Fig. 52, K). Six specimens are no doubt closely related to the Alba type, but are nevertheless distinct and are

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

213

therefore classed separately here under the heading "Type A."
They are from 1 to 2 cm. long and have a shape somewhat like
Alba points, but the shoulders are inverted, turning toward the
distal end of the point. Many specimens of this type have knotty
serrations along the blade edges. The author has noticed that
points of this type commonly occur at pottery sites along the
Sabine River in Smith, Gregg, and Harrison Counties. Unfor=
tunately this form of point has not been studied to the extent
that definite conclusions can be reached concerning its relationships to the Alto Focus and other complexes. As far as can be
seen now, it is associated with late Alto and Bossier Focus materials, principally along the Sabine River basin.
Table 2.
Known types:
Gary ...............
Ellis ................
Yarbrough ..........
Wells ...............
Kent ................
Bulverde ............
San Patrice ..........
Meserve .............
Ensor ...............
Carrollton ...........
Morrill ..............
Lange ..............
Pogo . ..............
Angostura ...........
Elam ...............
Paisano .............
Palmillas ............
Plainview ...........
Scottsbluff ...........
Darl ................
Edgewood ...........
Taylor Thinned Base .
Trinity ..............
Fairland (?) .........

Dart Points
Site 1

Site 2

211
93
32
24
13
12
10
9
8
7
6
5
5
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
1

53
29
25
3
2
9
1
1
2
--

Fig.
53,
52,
52,
52,

C-E
E-H
0
C, D

52, A,B
54, E, F
54, G,H
52, R-T

5
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
2

52,

P,Q

54, C,D
54, A,B

53, F
52, U,V

214

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2, concluded
Known types:
Frio(?) .............
Folsom (?) ..........
Matamoros (?) .......

Site 1

Fig.

Site 2

1
1
1

54, I

Other:
Almagre (?) ......... 24
Type B ..............
5
6
Type C ..............
Type D ..............
3
Type E ..............
8
Type F ..............
4
Unclassified ......... 25

11

Totals .................... 540

159

2
1
1
2

53,
52,
53,
53,
54,

A, B
L-N
H-J
G
J-L

DART POINTS--SITE 1
At Site 1, 540 dart points were collected. They have been
typed according to the classification set up by Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks. The points from this site provide a good representation of the complex group of dart point types found at Archaic
sites throughout East Texas. The numbers of points found
within each category are presented in Table 2.
Gary, Ellis (Figs. 53, C-E; 52, E-H). The points most frequently found at Site 1 were Gary and Ellis points. This is the
usual circumstance in East Texas. The Gary points are made
chiefly of local chert or petrified wood and are distinguished
from points of the Pogo and Almagre types only by their size.
The Ellis points are more frequently made of foreign flint than
is the case with the Gary points.
Yc~rbrough, Wells, Kent (Fig. 52, O, C, D). Points of these
types were made chiefly of red and yellow cherts which are
found commonly in this a~’ea.
Elam (Fig. 52, P, Q). Elam points were present only in smal!
numbers. However, this circumstance could have arisen in the

Fig. 52. Dart points and arrowpoints from the Grace Creek sites.
A, B, Bulverde points. C, D, Wells points. E-H, Ellis points. I, J, Alba
points. K, Type A point. L-N, Type B point. O, ¥arbrough point. P, Q,
Elam points. R-T, Carrollton points. U, V, Trinity points.

0

Fig. 53.

Dart points and other chipped artifacts ~rom the Grace Creek

sites. A, B, Almagre(?) points. C-E, Gary points. F, Taylor Thinned Base
point. G, Type D point. I-I-J, Type C points. K, L, knife blades. M, N,
picks or gouges. O, P, small thumbnail end scrapers. Q, S, small gravers.
R, small drill.

f

T]~e Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

217

sorting due to typological overlapping with the Ellis point
category.
Darl. This type is represented only by a few small specimens
that are distinct from associated points.
Fairla~d (?). One point that seems to be a Fairland point is
made of light-colored chert. Because of its differences from the
Fairland type it may well fit into the San Patrice category.
Bulverde (Fig. 52, A, B). Bulverde points were well represented at the site, with little confusion existing between them
and other types of points. Most of them are made of materials
foreign to the East Texas area.
Pogo. There are only a few specimens which are classed as
Pogo points, this assignment being made because their length
exceeds that of Gary points. Because of their fine workmanship,
they probably have little relationship to the South Texas A1magre point type.
Carrollton, Trinity (Fig. 52, R-V). These two types are
represented only by a few distinct specimens, most of which are
made of native chert and petrified wood.
Lange. Five reddish chert points are classed as Lange points,
but because of their resemblance to other point types found in
this area, it is not certain that they fit in the Lange type as
defined by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks.
Taylor Thinned Base, Frio, Matamoros. One specimen of each
of these types was found. The Taylor Thinned Base specimen
(Fig. 53, F) might be classed with the Tortugas type (Suhm
et al., 1954, p. 482; Newell and Krieger, 1949, pp. 168-170).
Points of these three types are rarely found in East Texas.
Palmillas. Three specimens were believed to represent this
type, which is not common in this area. They were of local
flint.
Paisano, San Patrice (Fig. 54, E, F). Three specimens are
assigned to the Paisano type. In appearance these specimens
closely resemble San Patrice points, and the two types probably

|

!

C

B

H

I

D

j

E

F

K

L

¯

Fig. 54. Dart points and other artifacts from the Grace Creek sites.
A, B, Scottsbluff points. C, D, Plainview points. E, F, San Patrice points.
G, H, Meserve points. I, Folsom(?) point. J-L, Type E points. M, N,
chipped and polished celts. O, worked shell. P, polished stone turtle-back.
Q, pecked stone ball (throwing stone?). R, pipestem, Alto type.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

219

overlap in this case. San Patrice points (Webb, 1946) are represented by 10 specimens at the site, all made of native red
and yellow cherts. They were associated with both the pottery
yielding and the Archaic levels.
Meserve (Fig. 54, G, H). There are nine points of this type,
most of them made of flint characteristic of the Edwards Plateau area. All of them appear to be reworked Plainview or
Clovis points, and were found associated with the Archaic
levels.
Paleo-American Points
Ten points were found at Site 1 that represent Paleo points
of four different types. There were three instances in which the
specimens were found in the deepest Archaic levels, embedded
in the hard mixed clay directly above the sterile red clay subsoil. They were found in the course of the minor excavations.
The other Paleo points were found eroded out of the soil along
the dike or in other graded areas. It is unfortunate that these
points were not found in undisturbed soil, in order that more
information might have been obtained concerning their primary
associations.
Angostura. Three points possessing the characteristics of the
Angostura type were found at the site. Two of them are made
of native chert; while the other is of foreign white material.
Unfortunately all three points are represented only by the
basal half. All have slightly-ground to well-ground shafts. They
range from 1.5 cm. to 2 cm. in width at the basal end. Since
there are no complete specimens, a more accurate and definitive
description is not possible.
Sco.ttsblu[f (Fig. 54, A, B). Three points were found which
may well fit into the East Texas type of Scottsbluff point. One
of them was found in the mixed clay zone. In length these specimens range from 5 cm. to 8 cm., and the width at the base
ranges from 2.5 to 3 cm. The stem constitutes a considerable
part of the total length of the point. A good descriptive term
for them would be the "squatty" type of Scottsbluff. This type
is more often found in East Texas than elsewhere in the state.
However, its distribution and its relationship to the distinct

220

Texas Archeological Society

longer type of Scottsbluff point in East Texas has as yet not
been studied.
Plainview (Fig. 54, C, D). This type is represented by three
specimens, made of foreign dark or gray flints which may well
be trade material from the Edwards Plateau region. Only one is
complete, but the other two are complete enough to enable
reasonable classification. In width these points range from
2.5 cm. to 3 cm., and in length from 5 to 8 cm. All three specimens have roughly matched chipping scars on the blade, and
well-ground bases. These points are strikingly like the typical
Plainview points from the Plainview site (Sellards, Evans, and
Meade, 1947). Fortunately, one of the specimens (Fig. 54, C)
was recovered from the deepest Archaic level corresponding
to the depth of the Scottsbluff point already mentioned, in the
compact mixed clay located immediately above the sterile
clay (Fig. 49). One of the other specimens was found eroded
from the mixed clay level along the north bank of graded area
A (Fig. 49). The remaining Plainview specimen was found in
the graded soil forming the dike.
Folsom (?). The last point believed to be affiliated with the
Paleo-American horizon was of particular interest because of
its unusual characteristics (Fig. 54, I). It possesses features of
the Folsom type. It is 2 cm. in width and 3.5 cm. long, and is
made of a pale yellow flint. One face has a central flute running
the entire length of the point, while the opposite face has not
been fluted and instead has fairly neat, matched chipping scars.
This point was excavated from an unexcavated part of area A,
near the lake (Fig. 49), from the mixed clay level corresponding
to that in which the Plainview and Scottsbluff points were
found. There is some question concerning the relationship of
this point to the original Folsom type; there is a possibility
that the flute was caused accidentally, as could have happened
if the distal end of the point struck a solid object.
Points Not of Established Types
During the typological analysis of the dart points, several
classes were distinguished which did not fit the established
typology. Some of them closely resemble Almagre points; the

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

221

others have been divided into classes to which letter designations have been given.
A[magre (?). A large rough type of point resembling Almagre
points was well represented by 24 specimens at the site. Naturally one cannot definitely class these points as being of the
South Texas AImagre point type; but there is every possibility
that they were made near the time of that type. This possibility
depends on the relationship between the two types in the two
areas, a matter as yet not studied. The specimens from Site 1
(Fig. 53, A, B) range in length from 5.5 to 8.5 cm. and have
a minimum width of 2.5 cm. and a thickness usually exceeding
1.5 cm. They are believed to have little relationship to the
Pogo or Gary points found at th~s site.
Type B (Fig. 52, L, M, N). There are five specimens in this
class, which is distinct from other categories from the site. They
range in length from 4 to 5 cm. and in width from 1.5 to 2 cm.
Characteristically they are slender, with convex base, a stem
constituting almost half the length of the point, and almost no
shoulders. This type of point could have developed from points
resembling Morrill or Yarbrough points.
Type C (Fig. 53, H-J). This is also a distinctive type at Site
1. Specimens of this type range in length from 3 cm. to 4.5 cm.
and in shoulder width from 2 to 3 cm. The stem is contracting
and the base concave. Most of the specimens are made of well
worked flint. This type has shape characteristics similar to
those of the Langtry point, but there may be little relationship
implied in this resemblance.
Type D (Fig. 53, G) seems distinct from other types found at
the site. it may well be a type of knife or other cutting implement, but because of its unusual ground base the author feels
that it represents a type of projectile point. There may be a
relationship between this type and the Meserve point. Specimens
of this type from Site 1 range in length from 4.5 to 6 cm., and
in width from 1.5 to 2.25 cm. Most of them are made of petrifled wood.
Type E (Fig. 54, J, K, L) is an interesting roughly worked
type of point, represented by eight specimens. Most specimens

[:]:£ik~i;
222

:’¢, ~:.

= ~ i.ii] F~i’]

Texas Archeologieal Society

are from 3 to 4 cm. long and 1.5 to 2 cm. in width. Points of
this type are thicker than most of those found at the site. Most
of them are made of native chert. The type is distinguished by
a single pair of notches on the blade. These points are probably
relatively early, and may be related to the similar notched
points found in Louisiana (Webb, 1948).
Type F is defined on the basis of material rather than of form.
Points of this type are made of a type of soft gray slate. There
is relatively small range in size, most specimens being about
4 cm. long and 2 cm. wide with a roughly expanded base and
moderate shoulders. This type is not only found at Site 1, but
has also been found here and there throughout Gregg County.
Many of these slate points ~esemble San Patrice points. It
should be emphasized that these slate specimens are too fragile
for actual use as projectile points.
Unclassified. There were 27 projectile points which, in the
author’s judgment, did not fit into any distinct categories. It
is probably possible to put many of these into existing classes,
but to do so would be to force the typology and to deviate from
the true categories--that is, those presumed to have existed in
the minds of the makers of the specimens--to a degree such
as to render the resulting classification meaningless.
DART POINTS--SITE 2
The classification of the dart points from Site 2 (Table 2)
resulted only in types found also at Site 1. However, many
types found at Site 1 were not present at Site 2, doubtless because Site 1 seems to have been occupied for a longer period
of time. Since a number of types are found at both sites, comparative study is possible. This comparative study is pursued
later, in the Discussion section.
OTHER CHIPPEDI STONE ARTIFACTS
From Site 1, 296 chipped stone artifacts other than points
were recovered. They include knives, picks, gouges, cores, choppers, spoke-shaves, scrapers, gravers, and drills. From Site 2,
a total of 92 specimens of corresponding categories were re-

Texas ircheo!og£e~T
Southern Methodist Universi~~
Bo~ 165
Dallss~ 9exas ?5£££
The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

223

covered. However, these totals do not represent the full actual
number of such artifacts at the sites, because the author collected only those specimens which were evidently worked. Thus
the ratio of these artifacts to the total artifact collection is
not as great as it could have been. Also, it should be emphasized that many of these types of artifacts overlap one another,
so much so that the totals within each category, as given below,
must be considered as only approximate.
Knives, picks, gouges, cores, choppers. Approximately 93
rough knives were found at Site 1, and 31 at Site 2. Almost
all of them are composed of native ferruginous chert, although
some are made of petrified wood (Fig. 53, K, L). There is considerable overlapping between knives, picks, gouges, and cores.
Picks and gouges (Fig. 53, M, N) number 43 from Site 1 and
nine from Site 2. Cores and choppers from both sites are 123
in number.

Spokeshaves were of small size, numbering 17 at Site 1 and
seven at Site 2.
Scrapers. There are two simple types of scrapers, pianoconvex or snubnose end scrapers (Fig. 53, O, P) and side
scrapers. Because of their small size the piano-convex scrapers
are of the kind often called "thumbnail" scrapers. Most of these
thumbnail scrapers are made of native stone, whereas most of
the side scrapers are made of foreign white or gray flints. The
side scrapers vary considerably in size, but are for the most
part larger than the thumbnail scrapers. There are 24 thumbnai! scrapers and 32 side scrapers from Site 1. From Site 2
there are 10 thumbnail scrapers and 19 side scrapers.
Gravers (Fig. 53, Q, S). There are five small gravers from
Site I and three from Site 2.
Drills (Fig. 53, R). Four small drills were recovered from
Site 1. The largest was 2.5 cm. long.
GROUND STONE ARTIFACTS
A considerable number of ground and polished artifacts were
recovered from the Grace Creek sites. Most of these specimens

224

Texas A~’cheological Society

are of Archaic types and presumably were associated with the
Archaic horizons represented at the two sites. No doubt they
indicate~ trade relationships with neighboring areas of East
Texas.
Axes, tomahawks (Fig. 55, A, B). There were 11 ground
and polished axes and tomahawks from the two sites, five from
Site 1 and six from Site 2. The only distinction between the
axes and the tomahawks is that the axes are larger. All specimens have halting grooves. From Site 1 there are two axes and
three tomahawks. From tomahawks to axes, sizes range from
7 cm. long and 5 cm. wide to 15 cm. long, 12 cm. wide, and 4
cm. thick. One axe is unusual because it is made of flint, whereas
all the others are made of soft hematite. At Site 2 only one
specimen was considered to be an axe; it has most unusual
grooving (Fig. 55, A). One of the tomahawks from Site 2 was
unusual in having a double groove (Fig. 55, B).

B

C.

0
F.

G.
I

CM.
Fig. 55. Ground and polished stone from the Grace Creek sites. A,
"T-grooved" axe, hematite. B, double-grooved tomahawk, hematite. C,
polished pitted stone ("fire stone"). D, rough pitted stone ("nut-cracking
stone"). E, ground adze, Ouachita sandstone. F, G, pendants or gorgers,
Ouachita sandstone. H, sinker(?) (atlatl weight?), hematite. I, banner
stone, Ouachita sandstone.

The Grace C~’eek Sites, G~egg County, Texas

225

Adze (Fig. 55, E). Only one complete ground or polished adze
was found. It is 14 cm. long, 6 cm. wide, and 2 cm. thick, and is
made of dark green Ouachita Sandstone.
Chipped and ground adzes, celts, or hoes (Fig. 54, M, N).
Nine of these specimens, made of native sandstone, were found
at Site 1, and 11 at Site 2. These specimens have been chipped
to a rough shape usually 6-8 cm. long, 4-5 cm. wide, and 2-3 cm.
thick. They have been polished along the edges and on one
face. The other face has been left rough.
Pendants (Fig. 55, F, G). Two fragments representing two
pendants were found in the graded area of Site 2. Both appear
to have been made from trade material from Arkansas or Northern Louisiana.
Sinker (?) (Fig. 55, H). One interesting specimen found
at Site 1 is without doubt related to the "Waco sinker," and
may be an atlatl weight. It is made of hematite, has been pecked
and slightly ground to produce a moderately smooth finish. It is
7.5 cm. long and 3.5 cm. in cross section between the two
ground, notched ends.
Banner Stone (Fig. 55, I). Approximately one-half of a green
Ouachita Sandstone "Banner Stone," commonly called "Plumb
Bob," was found at Site 2. It is well polished and apparently
represents a fine trade specimen.
Polished pitted stones (Fig. 55, C). Polished hematite pieces
about "hand" size, with one or more g~ound-out polished holes
usually 2.5 cm. in diameter and not exceeding 1 cm. in depth on
one or more surfaces, were found at both sites. There are 21
from Site 1 and 13 from Site 2. These specimens have been referred to as "Fire Stones," but it is not known whether they
were used for this or some other purpose.
Rough pitted stones (Fig. 55, D). A similar type of specimen
found commonly at both sites is much more variable in size
and has one or more rough pitted holes on one or more surfaces. There are 43 specimens from Site I and 12 from Site 2.
These are often called "nut-cracking stones." In weight these
specimens range from 8 oz. to 80 lbs., a greater range than is

226

Texas Archeological Society

found in the polished pitted stones. They are made out of native
sandstone, and are sometimes combination "nut-cracking
stones" and milling stones. Nineteen of the 43 specimens from
Site I manifest this combination of functions, whereas only
four of the 12 from Site 2 are of the combined type. The rest
could have served as manos.
Polishing stones and balls. At Site 1 a large number of native gravel or chert stones were found which could have served
as pottery polishing stones. However, only seven seem certainly
to have served this purpose. No certain specimens were found
at Site 2.
Three specimens that may fit into this class, if it were not
for their pecked shape, were recovered from Site 1 (Fig. 54,
Q). They are about 2.5 cm. in diameter and have been pecked
to a spherical shape. They were probably used as throwing
balls.
Hones. Three specimens definitely recognized as hones of
native stone were found at Site 1. None were found at Site 2.
Turtle-back (Fig. 54, P). One small black specimen of the
form usually called a "turtle-back" was found at Site 1.
TRADE MATERIALS
Besides Ouachita Sandstone, only two materials were specifically recognized as significant trade materials at the two
sites. They are represented by a few lumps of unworked kaolin
and one quartz crystal. A few chips of quartz crystal were
also found at Site 1.
BONE AND SHELL MATERIAL
The only bone and shell specimens found at the sites are
from Site 1. They are one deer ulna found in Pit A, a half-shell
scraper or knife (Fig. 54, 0), and the shells in the cache pit
of Feature 3. However, fine traces of bone were often noticed
at Site 1, in the graded and excavated areas. These were no
doubt the remains of animals used as food. Minute traces of
bone were found in Pit B of Site 2, but no other indications of
bones were encountered at that site.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

227

DISCUSSION
Grace Creek Sites 1 and 2 are in the same area, on the
same waterway, and their occupations were no doubt closely
associated. However, there are some differences in the occupations, since at Site 1 the pottery period is well represented
whereas Site 2 has only slight indications of a pottery period.
Because of these considerations, the author felt that making a
comparison between the two sites and the George C. Davis site
(Newell and Krieger, 1949) would reveal significant information on artifact relationships between these sites and the different occupational periods of the early prehistoric cultures of
Gregg County and the Sabine River Basin.
Possible Paleo-American occupation. The 12 Paleo-American
points recovered from the sites are certainly significant. As
noted in Table 2, 10 of the 12 points were found at Site I and
the remaining two were from Site 2. Two points at Site I and
one at Site 2 were recovered from excavations. In view of the
presence of these points, it is intriguing to examine the possibility that Paleo-Americans were actually associated with the
sites before the Archaic people arrived. Several alternatives,
applicable to both sites, present themselves:
(1) The Paleo-Americans could have come into the area and
occupied the sites near the end of the Paleo-American period
and could have evolved into Archaic peoples, as is possibly indicated by the presence of Angostura and Meserve points.
(2) The Paleo-Americans could have come into the area at
an earlier time, eventually dying off or leaving. After an interval
they could have been succeeded by the people of the Archaic
period, who picked up a few of the points lost by the earlier people, used them, and worked them over for use.
(3) The Paleo points could have been picked up in some other
area by nomadic bands of hunters of Archaic or even later
time who used them and left them at these sites. However, this
suggestion seems less logical than the others, because the number of Paleo points found at these two sites suggests that they
were not brought in incidentally from elsewhere.

228

Texas A~’cheological Society

The Archaic occupation. Some of the differences in numbers
of dart points listed in Table 2 reflect the possibility that during the Archaic period Site 1 was occupied for a longer time
than Site 2. Certain dart point types were found in Site I but
not Site 2. These are the Carrollton, Morrill, Fairland, Frio,
Matamoros, and Trinity types, and Types D and F. As far as
the information from these sites is concerned, some of these
types were probably associated with the Archaic occupation and
others with the pottery occupation. However, of these types
only the Morrill has previously been found associated with
Alto Focus pottery (Newell and Krieger, 1949). It appears,
then, that most of these points refer to an occupation of Site 1
when Site 2 was not occupied. If this is so, it seems probable
that the Archaic occupation of Site 1 began before that of Site
2. It is further to be observed that this earlier Archaic occupation complex of Site 1, as represented by the point types just
listed, has affiliations with the Central Texas Archaic. Thus we
have here an indication of the possible origin, or of contributions to the origin, of the East Texas Aspect of the Archaic
Stage.
Other artifacts believed to refer to the Archaic occupation
are the chipped celts. The author has often collected specimens
like these from Archaic sites in Gregg County and vicinity.
Most of the other ground and polished artifacts from the
sites may well be related to the Archaic period also.
The Alto Focus occupation. In the Sabine River Basin, the
Alto Focus is the earliest pottery bearing culture, to our present knowledge. The situation at the Grace Creek sites, with
Archaic materials directly underlying Alto Focus materials,
appears to express accurately the general sequence of periods
in the Sabine Basin as a whole.
The ceramic material from the Grace Creek sites cannot be
accurately correlated with any definite phase of the Davis
Mound sites in Cherokee County, Texas, the type site of the
Alto Focus (Newell and Krieger, 1949), because of lack of
house information, lack of identifiable trade sherds, poor

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

229

stratification, and variation of types from those found at the
Davis site. This difficulty of correlation is made even greater
by the great preponderance of plain sherds over all other types
found at the Grace Creek sites.
However, since Davis Incised was the second most numerous
type, and since the Holly, Hickory, Pennington, and Crockett
types were also present, it can be suggested that the ceramic
occupation of Grace Creek Site 1 dates from somewhat before
the time of Phase I at the Davis site, or from the time of
Phase I. Thus, Site 1 represents a development in the Gregg
County area, parallel to that represented farther southwest by
Phase I of the Davis site, which continued for a short while
and involved making types of pottery modified from, or at any
rate similar to, those from Phase I at the Davis site. The author
is most inclined to this conclusion because at the Davis site the
complex in Phase I shows, with only two exceptions, an almost
complete preoccupation with straight line designs.
Further, Phases II and III at the Davis site have appreciably
greater percentages of decorated pottery and of trade pottery
than is the case at the Grace Creek sites (Newell and Krieger,
1949, Tables). If the Grace Creek sites were related to either
Phase II or Phase III it would be logical to expect that they
would contain comparable proportions of decorated and trade
pottery; but they do not.
If the cultural assignment presented here is true, then the
sherds from the Grace Creek sites which represent the Titus
and Frankston Foci either are trade sherds from early components of those foci, or are sherds lost by later Titus and
Frankston people in the area.
The small representation of pottery types at Site 2 probably
indicates that it was occupied only briefly and perhaps by people
who originated at Site 1.
All the arrow-points found at Site 1 are believed to be associated with the pottery occupation. However, there is evidence
that the arrow-point was introduced in the very late Archaic
period and continued thereafter through pottery times.

230

Texas Archeological Society

The one Alba type point found at Site 2 probably belongs to
the brief pottery occupation there. The "mill" stone and the
combination mano and "nut-cracking" stone are characteristic
of this period.
CONCLUSIONS
1. The Grace Creek sites are believed to have been near a
Paleo-American site, or else Site 1 was itself a Paleo-American
site, since ten Paleo points were found there.
2. Both sites were occupied during the Archaic Period. At
Site 1 the Archaic occupation began earlier and continued for a
longer period of time than at Site 2. Site 1 in the early part of
its Archaic occupation apparently had some relationships with
the Central Texas Archaic. Later, both sites apparently had
affiliations with the Eastern Archaic.
3. Both sites were occupied during pottery times. A group
of people represented by a component of the Alto Focus, related
to that of Phase I at the George C. Davis site in Cherokee
County, occupied Site 1 almost immediately following the
Archaic period. From the Site 1 people a small group branched
and lived at Site 2 for a short time.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
For permission and co-operation during the study of the
Grace Creek sites, I express my most sincere appreciation to
the R. G. LeTourneau Corporation of Longview, Texas.
To my friends, Henry Allen, Jr., of Tyler, Texas, for his
outstanding photographic work, and Dr. Alex D. Krieger of
Riverside, California, for his personal inspiration, I express
my most sincere appreciation for help that made this report
possible.
REFERENCES CITED
Ford, James A.
1951. Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period site in
Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana. Anthrop. Papers, American
Museum of Natural History, Vol. 44, Part 1.

The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas

Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Society for American Archaeology, Memoir No. 5.
Sellards, E. H., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade
1947. Fossil Bison and associated artifacts from Plainview, Texas, with description of the artifacts by Alex D.
Krieger. Bulletin, Geological Society of America, Vol. 58,
No. 10, pp. 927-954.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Webb, Clarence H.
1946. Two unusual types of chipped stone artifacts from
northwest Louisiana. Bulletin, Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 17, pp. 9-17.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, V01. 19,
pp. 100-147.
Webb, Walter P., and H. Bailey Carroll, eds.
1952. The Handbook of Texas. The Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.
Route 4
Longview, Texas

