PREHISTORIC BISON
POPULATIONS OF
NORTHCENTRAL TEXAS

ABSTRACT
Dillehay (1974) offered a diachronic model of changes in density and distribution of bison populations on the Southern Plains that has considerable implications
for interpretation of paleoclimates. The broad-spectrum geographical approach
utilized by Dillehay is critiqued; applicability of the model in terms of prehistoric
data from northcentral Texas is examined. Interpretations offered suggest that an
increase in bison density in Northcentral Texas occurred during the Late NeoAmerican period (A.D. 1200-1600). Prior to this time, bison probably appeared
as small scattered herds in the tall grass prairies and Cross Timbers.

INTRODUCTION
Plains archeology and anthropology have been closely associated with
the image of nomadic bison hunters. Consequently, understanding the demographic aspects of bison ecology are an important part of the science.
Bison unquestionably represent an extremely important aspect of plains prehistory; and archeologists must strive to better understand the changes which
have occurred in bison populations through time.
Dillehay (1974) proposed a model of changing bison populations in the
Southern Plains area which suggested that three long term periods of wide
spread bison presence were separated by two significant periods in which
density and distribution of bison were greatly reduced. The model was well
received and incorporated into a recent synthesis of Plains archeology (Wedel, 1978:187-189).
The Dillehay model is criticized at a number of levels. The model is evaluated in terms of data available from the prairies and Cross Timbers of
Northcentral Texas. Specific comments regarding the author’s and Dillehay’s
(1974) use and interpretation of data is limited to data from Northcentral
Texas. Extrapolation of these criticism to other areas of the Southern Plains
may be appropriate, but must be presented by individuals more familiar with
the data than the author.
Several critical comments regarding use of data from Northcentral Texas,
are presented. Specific comments regarding the nature and context of bison
remains in Northcentral Texas are provided along with an interpretation of
past bison distributions in Northcentral Texas.

90

Texas Archeological Society

THE SOUTHERN PLAINS AS A REGION
Originally developed by geographers, the concept of a region remains
essentially a classificatory tool. As a classification device, the regional concept
must be applied to specific questions or problems (Dean, 1978; Grigg, 1972).
Regions which are defined without considering the problems to be solved are
frequently either too large, hence camouflaging crucial data amid an abundance of background noise; or too small and therefore lacking one or more
crucial elements needed to solve the problem (Judge, 1976). The model
proposed by Dillehay (1974) to explain changes in Southern Plains bison
population distribution through time suffers from just this problem.
The region defined by Dillehay (1974) included all or parts of New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, and Louisiana. Through the examination of faunal
remains associated with archeological sites, it was proposed that long term
periods of presence and absence of bison could be distinguished in the region.
Two absence periods from about 8000-7000 to 4500 B.P. (6000-5000 to
2500 B.C.) and from 1500 to 800-700 B.P. (A.D. 500 to 1200-1300) were
interpreted as separating periods of wide spread bison presence. These long
term changes were attributed to a combination of bison range changes and
fluctuations in bison densities resulting primarily from changes in the Plains
climatic regime.
The four state area in Dillehay’s (1974) Southern Plains region consists of
up to 48 botanic provinces (Kuchler, 1964). One of the unstated assumptions
of the model is that bison were equally distributed throughout these biotic
provinces at any given point in time. This is clearly a poor assumption. The
presence of bison in the oak-hickory forests of East Texas has far greater
climatic implications than does the presence of bison in the High Plains of the
Llano Estacado.
In lumping these biotic zones into one large region, Dillehay (1974)
created a false image of homogeneity. Changes in bison population distribution, or any animal, can best be dealt with in terms of regions which are
smaller and ecologically more homogenous. By combining a large number of
biotic zones, it is quite possible that critical variability in the diachronic density
and distribution of bison populations is lost in the diversity of ecological zones.

REPORTING OF FAUNAL DATA
Before reviewing the faunal evidence, it is necessary to consider some of
the problems in interpreting these data. One of the major handicaps in dealing
with any type of faunal remains in Texas is the quality of the archeological
data. Although faunal remains were collected for years through standard data
recovery techniques, the quantification and reporting of faunal remains has
only become common in the last ten years. Consequently, much of the faunal
data recovered from archeological sites in Northcentral Texas is unanalyzed
and unreported. The small sample of sites with reported faunal remains, in
proportion to the total number of investigated sites, cannot be overemphasized.

Lynott - Bison Populations

91

PHYSICAL AND CULTURAL CONTEXT OF
FAUNAL REMAINS
Sediment churning by natural forces is another factor which inhibits diachronic interpretation of faunal data, Churning of archaeological deposits can
be caused by a number of factors. Pedoturbation is fairly common in many
areas of Northcentral Texas due to the vertisolic nature of the sediments
(Duffield, 1970). The shrink swell potential is great and considerable displacement of artifacts is common.
Bioturbation of site deposits, primarily through rodent burrowing, is fairly
common in Northcentral Texas. Rodents are extremely common in prairie
ecozones and capable of considerable sediment disturbance. Although bison
bones may not be greatly displaced by rodent activity, artifacts used to provide relative dating of the bones can be greatly churned. The sample of sites
selected by Dillehay (1974) to support his model failed to consider the
churned nature of many of these sites.
For example, the Pecan Springs site (Sorrow, 1966) is placed in Presence
Period II, Absence Period II, and Presence Period III. This placement indicates an occupation ranging from 4500 to 450 B.P. (2500 B.C. to A.D.
1550). Associated artifacts and the single radiocarbon date from the site
(1950 + 130 B,P.; A.D. I) support this interpretation. However, Dillehay
(1974) claimed that bison were present at Pecan Springs during Presence
Period II (4500 to 1500 B.P.; 2500 B.C. to A.D. 500) and III (800 to 450
B.P.; A.D. 1200 to 1550) and absent at the site during Absence Period II
(1500 to 800 B.P.; A.D. 500 to 1200).
An examination of the stratigraphic context of Pe.can Springs reveals
2.7 ft of dark, undifferentiated sediment. It is virtually impossible to recognize
the boundaries of the chronological stages in the stratigraphic profile. In addition, the sediment is vertisolic and archeological material likely to be highly
churned. With the exception of material recovered from occupational features, the cultural material from Pecan Springs probably should be treated as
a single mixed assemblage.
Another important shortcoming of the model is its failure to recognize the
distinction between bison which were hunted, killed, and butchered in the
area of the site and tools made of bison bone which may have been transported great distances. For example, the only bison remains reported at the
Upper Farmersville site are bison scapula hoes associated as grave goods with
a burial (Harris, 1945; Stephenson, 1949). Since less than 25% of the interments from the East Fork of the Trinity have any form of mortuary goods
(Lynott, 1975:120-121), it is likely that these bison scapula hoes are symbols
of high social status. Mortuary goods associated with a high status individual
may have traveled a considerable distance (trade goods or items representative of high social status) before they were placed in this grave.
Dillehay (1974) interpreted these bison scapula hoes as dating to Presence Period III (800-700 to 500 B.P. ; A.D. 1200-1300 to 1500) despite the
lack of temporally diagnostic artifacts associated with the burial. This temporal
interpretation was made even more speculative by the fact that temporally
diagnostic artifacts associated with the site indicate occupation from the Late
Archaic until about A.D. 1500. This time span covers Presence Period II,
Absence Period II, and Presence Period III.

92

Texas Archeological Society

In reality, there is no certainty that these bison scapula hoes were obtained
in Northcentral Texas, nor at which point in the site’s occupation they were
placed in the grave. Thus at this site, Dillehay (1974) converted a very complex situation into a simplified presence or absence situation supporting his
model.
Too many factors are potentially involved in the movement of bison bone
from the time the animal is killed and butchered until the time of its excavating
to treat the problem as a simple case of presence or absence. Long distance
trade, post-depositional bioturbation, and the general shortage of reported
faunal remains complicate the situation beyond the point where presence or
absence is useful. The context of bison remains cannot be ignored or manipulated.

NORTHCENTRAL TEXAS
Northcentr*al Texas is a small part of the four state region defined by
Dillehay (1974) as the Southern Plains (Fig. I). The area consists of three
north south bands of tall grass prairie separated by two north south bands of
prairie parkland called the Cross Timbers. The prairie zones are characterized
as grasslands with an absence of trees and shrubs except in the valleys of
major rivers and along the banks of intermittent tributary streams. The Cross
Timbers consist of an overstory composed primarily of oaks, spatially distributed in a parkland pattern. The Cross Timbers understory differed very little
from the grasses and forbs found in the prairie. The river valleys of Northcentral Texas represent westward extensions of the East Texas hardwood forests.
Animal resources in the tall grass prairie and Cross Timbers, exclusive of
the wooded bottomlands and gallery forests, were dominated by a variety of
small and medium sized mammals. Rodents and birds were especially numerous. Bison, although present in the tall grass prairie and Cross Timbers, were
not as numerous in the historic period as herds in the mixed prairie and High
Plains to the west (Shelford, 1963:332; Blair, 1950; Gunnerson, 1972).
One of the reasons for this is the nutritional composition of native prairie
grasses. Mature short grass has a protein/carbohydrate ratio which is not only
higher than that of the tall grass prairie but better suited to the protein/
carbohydrate balance required by bison (Johnson, 1951; Larson, 1940). The
interpretation offered is that bison in Northcentral Texas were generally limited to small, sporadic herds.
Bison remains are reported from only 13 sites in Northcentral Texas. A
brief summary of the sites and recovery context follows.
The Dixon Branch site (Harris and Harris, 1970) is a bison kill site on a
terrace of White Rock Creek near Dallas. The bison was a juvenile. Three
small Fresno points were recovered from between the ribs. Charcoal associated with another bison in the same geological stratum (approximately 20
meters distance from the young bison) was radiocarbon dated at 475 B.P.
(A.D. 1475). Although a standard deviation was not reported, the date appears to fit reasonably well with the estimated age of Fresno points. Although
this is the only published account of a bison kill in the White Rock Creek
drainage, R. K. Harris (personal communication) has recorded similar sites in
the area.

Lynott - Bison Populations

93

The Wolters site (Morris and Morris, 1970) is a bison kill on the Elm Fork
of the Trinity River in northwest Dallas County. The bison was exposed in the
side of the lower terrace by a front-end loader. There is evidence of on-site
butchering activities. A triangular arrow point associated with the kill indicates
a Late Neo-American occupation.
The Harrell site (Krieger, 1946; Hughes, 1942) is located at Possum
Kingdom Lake. WPA excavation resulted in recovery of 32 human burials;
16 were interred in limestone slab lined cists. At least three multiple interments were recorded, varying from three to six individuals per grave. AIthough houses were not exposed, 135 hearths in a variety of forms were
excavated. Ceramics were almost exclusively shell tempered Nocona Plain
vessels and sherds. The locality is the type site for the Henrietta Focus. Unquantified food remains reported from the site include bison, deer, antelope,
shellfish, and maize.
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES WITH REPORTED BISON REMAINS
IN NORTHCENTRAL TEXAS

©

iI

/II

Fig. I Prehistoric sites with reported bison remains in Northcentral
Texas. 1. Dixon Branch; 2. Wolters; 3. Harrell; 4. Coyote; 5. Glass; 6.
Chicken House; 7. Hackberry; 8. Pictograph; 9. Kyle; 10. Gossett Bottoms; 11. Winston; 12. Pecan Springs; 13. Upper Farmersville; 14. Ham
Creek; 15. Bear Creek,

94

Texas Archeological Society

The Coyote site is located on a terrace of the Red River near Spanish Fort,
Texas (Woodall, 1967)~ The site is relatively large (about 17,000 sq m) and
appears to be affiliated with the Henrietta Focus. Limited excavation of this
Late Neo-American site provided evidence of 11 round cache pits, one refuse
pit, and three hearths. A bison scapula hoe was reported among the modified
bone artifacts. Although a quantified description of the faunal remains was
not reported, examination of the collection suggests that bison was present
(Timothy Perttula, personal communication).
The Glass site also is located on a terrace of the Red River near Spanish
Fort (Lorrain, 1967) It appears to be another large site attributable to the
Henrietta Focus. Limited excavation revealed the presence of nine bell
shaped cache pits and an oval pit house. Associated artifacts are suggestive of
a Late Neo-American occupation. Although faunal remains from the site
were not reported, 21 bison scapula hoes and nine bison tibia digging sticks
were described. The site appears to be in a relatively undisturbed context.
The Chicken House site (Lorrain, 1969), at Fish Creek Lake, represents a
semi-permanent village affiliated with the Henrietta Focus. Excavations at the
site revealed three oval houses with interior hearths and cache pits, seven
miscellaneous cache pits, 11 miscellaneous hearths, two ash pits, and nine
smudge pits. Four radiocarbon dates for the site fall between 670 and 320
B~P. (A.D~ 1280 and 1630). Bison elements were reported but greatly outnumbered by deer remains.
The Winston site (Jeffrey Richner, personal communication) is located in
the bank of the Trinity River near the spillway of Cedar Creek Lake. The site is
buried in the modern Trinity River flood plain. Recent test excavations revealed a stratified sequence. A thin gray paleosol layer contained a circular
depression associated with a shell lens horizon. The feature contained fragments of a bison mandible and a Iongbone in association with a deer element,
numerous freshwater shellfish, scrapers, an arrow point, and incised
ceramics. Two radiocarbon samples from immediately below the horizon
were dated 505 + 98 B.P. (A.D. 1445) and 547 + 107 B.P. (A.D. 1403).
Data appear to be in primary context.
The Pictograph site (Stephenson, 1970) is a rockshelter at Lake Whitney,
on the Brazos River. The site is stratified, with both Early and Late NeoAmerican occupations. River Basin Surveys excavations revealed 14
hearths, three slab lined cache pits, two human burials, and several pictographs. Deer was the most common animal represented at the site~ but a
bison element was present in the Late Neo~American occupation.
The Kyle site (Jelks, 1962) is another rockshelter in the Lake Whitney
area. The site is a stratified multicomponent site containing Late Archaic and
Early and Late Neo-American occupations. Fourteen radiocarbon dates
ranging from 1980 to 390 B.P. (30 B.C. to A.D. 1560) support this interpretatiom River Basin Surveys excavations revealed three hearths, one cache
pit, and three human burials. Bison elements were reported from only the
Late Neo-American occupation.
The Bear Creek Shelter (Lynott, 1978) is another stratified rockshelter
occupation on the Brazos River at Lake Whitney. The site contains Middle,
Late, and Transitional Archaic occupations underlying Early and Late NeoAmerican occupations. Limited testing revealed 20 hearths, three shell concentrations, a human burial, and a thin sheet midden. Twelve radiocarbon

Lynott - Bison Populations

95

dates ranging from 4150 to 630 B.P. (2200 B.C. to A.D. 1320) support the
artifact associations. Faunal remains are dominated by riverine/floodplain
forest animals; but a few bison remains were present in all but the Middle
Archaic occupation zone.
The Hackberry site (Barber, 1966, 1969) is located on a terrace along
Little Elm Creek at Garza-Little Elm Lake northwest of Dallas. Erosional
forces from wave action of the lake exposed four refuse pits and five cooking
ash pits. Artifactual remains suggest a Late Neo-American occupation. Bison
remains were present but unquantified.
The L. O. Ray site (Gilmore and Hoffrichter, 1964) is a Late Archaic and
Early Neo-American site in mixed context in the South Sulphur River
drainage. Occupation features were not reported. Deer, rabbit, and miscellaneous rodents represented the majority of faunal remains, but a bison element was identified. The cultural deposit was reported to be a midden and
temporal indicators suggest it was highly churned.
The Gossett Bottoms site (Story, 1965) is located along Cedar Creek in
what is now Cedar Creek Lake. Excavations revealed the presence of a human and a dog burial. The faunal assemblage contains five bison elements
and 425 deer elements in association with Late Archaic and Neo-American
artifact assemblages. The site is situated on a low rise in the floodplain and has
a loose, sandy, cultural deposit capping sterile clay. Considerable rodent
activity was recorded.
The Pecan Springs site (Sorrow, 1966) is located in the Waxahachie
Creek drainage at Bardwell Lake. Excavations revealed seven hearths, three
human burials, two refuse pits, and three amorphic rock concentrations. Projectile point styles indicated Late Archaic and Early and Late Neo-American
occupations in a mixed context. A radiocarbon date of 1950 + 130 B.P.
(A.D. 1) seems to represent the Late Archaic occupation. Analysis of a sample of the faunal remains (Heartfield, ms.) identified primarily deer (4315
elements) along with five elements of bison.
The Ham Creek site (Forrester, 1964) is one of the few known burned
rock middens north of the Brazos River in Northcentral Texas. The site is on
the second terrace of Ham Creek and consists of at least 6000 sq m of burned
limestone and midden sediment. Excavations revealed a human burial in
association with an Archaic artifact assemblage. An unquantified amount of
bison remains were reported.
The Upper Farmersville site (Harris, 1945) is located on Pilot Grove
Creek in Collin County. Surface investigations and excavation of features
exposed by plowing provide evidence of Late Archaic and Early and Late
Neo-American artifact assemblages. The sediment matrix at the site is a vertisolic clay that has been heavily churned. Bison remains reported from the site
consist of eight scapula hoes found in association with a human burial.

CONCLUSIONS
A summary of the data relating to the nature and context of bison remains
from Northcentral Texas is presented in Table 1. These data represent a
compilation of published evidence of bison remains from the region. Several
cases of surface remains which could not be definitively distinguished from

Texas Archeological Society

96

~

"~

o=

~ "~ "~o

~o

"~o

o~

0

~o o ~

~

~ .~o ~

0

.~- ~ "4~

~ .~-

"~

-~ ~

u3

0

0

0

~o

o

o

z

z

0

~

o

0

r"
0

-~o~
~0,1

0

0

z

z

~q

r~

.-(3

<C

z

Z

z

z

0

G3

-5o

"Sa
"F-.

u~

ua

o~

¯..O

03
o

~

o~ ~
-’S m-~
,.o
~

r..4"{:~

-o

r~

E
0
0

0

0
r-,

.x=

m
.x=
0

r"

’T"

c~

.g

o

~

o

~

..~

i

0

Lynott - Bison Populations

o~

80oo~~

~
u

E
E

.b

0

"5

._

o~

0

’5

~

~

o .~,

~

~,

~.

~ .~ o

E

o
a2
Off3

0~

<

~

.

+I~

~<, o

+,

o

o

~

~

E

°6

E

~

< E

Z

do
Z

e~ ,.

0

o

~

o

~o~

.~, .~,
<~ <~-~,

o6
<

.~

~z=~
~’~

~E

0’.~

o

o

_o

.~

,~~

~_o E~.~

-

o

~

o

o

=o
oO

~

.~

z~, g

o

o

~

~

,~,~.~.~

.~

97

98

Texas Archeological Society

domestic cattle bone were eliminated as were bison remains unassociated
with artifact assemblages (e.g., Skinner, 1975),
Bison remains are relatively rare in Northcentral Texas. Throughout the
region, white-tailed deer is the most common mammal in prehistoric faunal
assemblages. Bison remains occur with a greater frequency along the Brazos
River; but this may be an interpretive bias produced by the greater quantity of
research conducted in this area. From a temporal standpoint, there is more
evidence of bison remains in the Late Neo-American than any other period of
prehistory. Bison were reported from definite Archaic contexts at Ham Creek
and Bear Creek Shelter. They were reported at only one site from an Early
Neo-American context~ from ten Late Neo-American sites throughout
Northcentral Texas~ and from three mixed multicomponent sites.
From these data, it appears that bison remains are most common during
the Late Neo-American period (800-400 B.P. ; A.D. 1200-1600). It is uncertain whether this is a result of changes in density and distribution of bison
populations or changes in the exploitative strategy of prehistoric human
groups. At any rate, there is little evidence to support the hypothesis of widespread bison populations in Northcentral Texas prior to 800 B.P. (A.D.
1200).
After 800 B,P. (A.D. 1200), bison remains are present at a number of
sites but greatly outnumbered by remains of white-tailed deer and other
woodland mammals. Assuming that native human populations in Northcentral Texas were firmly committed to exploitation of bottomland faunal resources, it is quite possible that a major increase in bison population density
would not be evidenced in the archeological record. However, it seems unlikely, based upon the diversity of exploited faunal resources from most sites,
that bison would be ignored if they were abundantly Iavailable¯
Gunnerson (1972) proposed that a dramatic increase in bison number
and distribution on the Southern Plains occurred during the Protohistoric
period. The model she presented proposed that following a major drought of
the 600’s B.P. (A.D¯ 1400’s), bison returned to the Central and Southern
Plains in greater numbers than before¯ The vast numbers of bison were hypothesized to have served as a deterent for Plains horticulturalists who might
have reoccupied the area, while serving to encourage the southward movement of proto-Apachean peoples.
Bison are best adapted to short grass plains. Drying conditions associated
with the Altithermal are likely to have increased the area of short grass plains
at the expense of tall grass prairie, thereby increasing the preferred habitat of
bison (Reeves, 1973). If the 600’s B.P. (A¯D. 1400’s) drought had a similar
effect, then it is highly likely that bison were present in vast numbers in much
of the Southern Plains area during the late prehistoric period¯ This speculation is supported in part by available data from Northcentral Texas. Although
there is no archeological evidence for vast numbers of bison during the Late
Neo-American period, there is evidence of an increase in bison exploitation at
that time.
This brief discussion was fairly critical of the diachronic model of changing
bison populations (Dillehay, 1974) for several reasons. The model ignored
the ecological variability of the Southern Plains region, treating the entire area
as a homogenous region of study. Examination of data from Northcentral

Lynott - Bison Populations

99

Texas offered in support of the model indicates the context of bison remains
from several sites is questionable due to the disturbed nature of the deposits.
The model also treated bison bone tools, which may have moved great
distances through trade or migration, as evidence of bison presence in
Northcentral Texas. Finally, evidence from Northcentral Texas does not indicate major changes in density or distribution of local bison populations until at
least 800 B.P. (A.D. 1200). Even during the Late Neo-American period,
when bison remains are most common, the only evidence of a truly bison
hunting economy is probably limited to sites in the western extremes of the tall
grass prairie area.
The model proposed by Dillehay (1974) was an ambitious attempt to
develop a synthetic model of changing density and distribution of bison population on the Southern Plains. Implications of the proposed model are extremely significant for interpretation of past climatic and ecological conditions. Before accepting the model, the evidence for changes in density and
distribution of bison populations in local biotic zones should be carefully examined.
The model is not fully applicable to Northcentral Texas. Careful examination of data in other regions may provide similar interpretations. The proposed interpretation suggests that bison populations were relatively small in
the tall grass prairies and Cross Timbers of Northcentral Texas until the Late
Neo-American period (post 800 B.P.; post A.D. 1200). At that time, the
relative density of bison populations increased. The increase, however, was
not nearly to the density of bison herds found on the High Plains to the west.

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
This paper benefitted from critical commentary by Jeffrey Richner and Timothy Perttula.
Figures were prepared by Melodie Tune. The author gratefully acknowledges the support of Dr.
F. A. Calabrese and the staff of the Midwest Archeological Center for their help in producing this
paper.

REFERENCES CITED
Barber Bryon L.
1966

The Irish Farm Site, 18C4-2. The Record, 22(2):9-14.

1969

The Hackberry Site. The Record, 25(3):18-24.

Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, 2:93-117.
Dean, Jeffery S.
1978

An Evaluation of the Initial SARG Research Design. In: R. C. Euler and
G. J. Gummerman (eds.), Investigations of the Southwestern Anthro.
pological Research Group, pp. 103-117. Museum of Northern Arizona,
Flagstaff.

Dillehay, Tom D.
1974

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist, 19(65):180-196.

100

Texas Archeological Society

Duffield, L. F.
Vertisols and Their Implications for Archaeological Research. American
1970
Anthropologist, 72:1055-1062.
Forrester, R. E.
The Ham Creek Site: An Edwards Plateau Aspect Site in Johnson
1964
County, Texas. Tarrant County Archeological Society.
Gilmore, Kathleen and Norma Hoffrichter
1964
Preliminary Investigations, L. O. Ray Site, Delta County, Texas. The
Record, 19(I):3-17.

Grigg, Davis
The Logic of Regional Systems. In: P. W. English and R. C. Mayfield
1972
(eds.), Man, Space and Environment, pp. 450-480. Oxford University
Press, London.
Gunnerson, Dolores A.
1972
Man and Bison on the Plains in the Protohistoric Period. Plains Anthropologist, 17(55):1-10.
Harris, R~ K.
Bone Implement Burial, Collin County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
1945
Archeological and Paleontological Society, 16:84-89.
Harris, R. K. and I. M. Harris
A Bison Kill on Dixon’s Branch, Site 27A2-5, Dallas County, Texas. The
1970
Record, 27(1):I-2.
Heartfield, Lorrain
ms.
Analytical Description of Animal Bone from Archeological Sites: Pecan
Springs (41ELll), Spring Canyon (41HC20). Manuscript on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas, Austin.
Hughes, Jack T.
An Archaeological Report on the Harrell Site of Northcentral Texas.
1942
Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
Jelks, Edward B~
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas~ University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archeology
Series, 5:1-115.
Johnson, C. W.
Protein as a Factor in the Distribution of the American Bisom Geographi1951
cal Review, 41:330-331.
Judge, W. James
Problems in Regional Research Designs. Paper presented at the third
1976
Southwestern Cultural Resource Management Seminar, Albuquerque.
Krieger, Alex D.
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
1946
Texas Publication, 4640:1~366.
Kuchler, A~ W.
Potential Natural Vegetation of the Coterminus United States. American
1964
Geographical Society, 36:1-116.

Lynott - Bison Populations

101

Larson, Floyd
1940
The Role of the Bison in Maintaining the Short Grass Plains. Ecology,
21:113-121.
Lorrain, Dessamae
1967
The Glass Site. In: R. B. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb Jr.
(eds.), A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory,
pp. 24-44. Southern Methodist University, Dallas. Report to the National Science Foundation, Washington, D.C.
1969

Archaeological Excavations in the Fish Creek Reservoir. Southern
Methodist University Contributions in Anthropology, 4:1-160.

Lynott, Mark J.
1975

Archaeological Excavations at Lake Lavon 1974. Southern Methodist
University Contributions in Anthropology, 16:1-136.

1978

An Archaeological Assessment of the Bear Creek Shelter, Lake Whitney, Te~:as. Southern Methodist University, ,~rchaeology Research Program, Research Report, 115:1-109.

Morris, Virginia and Bill Morris
1970

Excavation of Bison Remains in Northwest Dallas County. The Record,
27(1):2-5.

Reeves, Brian
1973 The Concept of an Altithermal Hiatus in Northern Plains Prehistory.
American Anthropologist, 75(5) : 122 i- 1253.
Shelford, Victor E.
1963
The Ecology of North America. University of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Skinner, S. Alan
1975

The Dell Ray Pipkin Site, Hill County, Texas. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program, Research Report, 65:1-15.

Sorrow, William M.
The Pecan Springs Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas. Papers of the Texas
1966
Archeological Salvage Project, 10:1-68.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1949
Archeological Survey of Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs; A Preliminary Report. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, 20:21-62.
1970

Archaeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 40:37-257.

Story, Dee Ann
1965
The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson and Kaufman
Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 36:163257.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1978

The Prehistoric Plains. In: Jesse D. Jennings (ed.), Ancient Native
Americans, pp. 183-219. W. H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco.

Woodall, J. Ned
1967
The Coyote Site. In: R. B. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb Jr.
(eds.), A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archaeology and Ethnohistory,
pp. 15-23. Southern Methodist University, Dallas. Report to the National Science Foundation, Washington D.C.

