105

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

MISCELLANEOUS EUROPEAN GOODS
by R. K. HARRIS and Curms D. TUNNELL
In addition to the tools, guns, and ornaments described above,
several other objects of European provenance were found at the
Gilbert Site. Grouped under the heading Miscellaneous European
Goods, these include a bail and several bail ears from brass kettles,
some horse trappings, metal scraps, and fragments of glass.
KETTLE BAIL EARS

No. of Specimens: 7
Provenience: Feature 1 (3), Feature 3 (2), Feature 7 (’2)
Illustrations: Figure 46, b-g
The heaviest bail ear (Fig. 46, g) is of cast brass. The lower end
consists of three lobes, each lobe pierced by a copper rivet. On the
interior a remnant of the sheet-brass body of the kettle is still
attached by the rivets. Above the three-lobed lower portion is a
rectangular extension with rounded corners which is perforated to
receive one end of the bail. Between the bail perforation and the
three-lobed lower part the body of the ear bulges outward so as toe
create a broad channel on the inside. Presumably the rim of the kettle
fitted into this channel. Maximum length of this specimen is 79 mm.;
maximum width of the lower portion is 80 mm.; maximum width of
the upper, rectangular part is 45 ram. The thickness is variable,
ranging from 9. mm. to slightly more than 3 mm. The attached sheetbrass remnant of the kettle body is approximately 0.2 mm. thick.
Two other large bail ears (Fig. 46, b, f) resemble one another.
Each is composed of five or six thicknesses of thin sheet brass (about
0.9. mm, thick) folded together into a rectangle. They are respectively 58 and 79 mm. high by 58 and 65 ram. wide. Each was
fastened to its kettle by two large copper rivets (these are still in
place in both specimens), and each has an oval perforation at the
top for insertion of the bail end. The two lower corners of both ears
are trimmed across, but their upper corners are bent over and
hammered down in "dog-ear" fashion. A similar bail ear from a
19th century site, 14 PO 9.4, in Kansas has been described and
illustrated by Wedel (1959: 195, P1. 19b), but it was attached with
iron, rather than copper, rivets.
A fragment consists of a dog-eared corner and part of the perforation for the bail. Made of four layers of sheet brass, it appears to
have come from a bail ear that was ahnost identical to the two
specimens described immediately above.

106

FIGURE 46.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Metal artifacts, a, bracelet; b-g, kettle bail ears.

Two small bail ears (Fig. 46, d-e), both from Feature 7, probably
are from the same vessel. They are made from a single thickness
of sheet brass and are rectangular in shape with the lower corners
trimmed off and the upper ones dog-eared. At the lower end of each

107

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

specimen are two small copper rivets for attachment to the vessel
wall, but in place of the usual perforation for insertion of the bail
end, there is a deep notch. From appearances these ears were mounted
in an upside down manner (in comparison with the others) as the
notches would not engage the ends of the bail if mounted in the
orthodox way. However, their exact position is not known. These
specimens are from 26 to 28 ram. wide; if straightened out (both
are bent) they would be slightly more than 40 mm. long.
The remaining bail ear (Fig. 46, e) was made by bending a
small iron rod into a loop and then hammering the two ends flat.
The rod is approximately square in cross section and is from 6 mm.
to 8 ram. wide. The flattened ends are spatulate in shape with pointed
tips; both ends are between 1 and 2 mm. thick with maximum width
of about 25 ram. Between the loop and the flattened ends the rod
sections bulge toward the outside, evidently to fit snugly around
the rim of the vessel. The bail ear of east brass described above is
bent in similar fashion.
KE2TLE

BAILS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
This is a length of heavy iron wire about 5 ram. in diameter (approximately 4 gauge) that originally had a small loop bent into each
end. One of the loops is now missing.
Total length, from the bottom of the loops, was 44.0 era., from
which it can be calculated that the diameter of the kettle (or pail?)
to which the bail was attached was probably between 30 and 35 em.
HORSE

TRAPPINGS

No. of Specimens: 9 bridle fragments, 1 eoncho
Provenience: Feature 3 (9.), Feature 4 (2), Feature 5 (4), Feature
11 (coneho and 1 bridle fragment)
Illustrations: Figure 47
Included in the bridle trappings are two large chin-piece fragments, four pieces of cheek plate, one higo, or decorative jingler, and
one unidentifiable fragment from either a headstall or cheek plate.
The two chin-piece fragments (Fig. 47, a, d), which originally"
connected the cheek plates and were suspended below the horse’s
mouth, are rather elaborately formed. They are pierced with holes,
apparently for the attachment of the small decorative higos (Di Peso,

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

FmuR~ 47. Horse trappings, a, d, bridle headstalls; b, f, g, bridle cheek
plates; c, hJgo; e, bridle cannon; h, concho. The higo (c) is double scale.

1953: 194). On one (Fig. 47, d) a series of straight engraved lines
radiate downward from the upper border of the plate and bracket
each perforation along the bottom. The decorated side of this plate
undoubtedly faced outward when the bridle was in place. The other
chin-piece fragment (Fig. 47, a) is a crescent-shaped, flattened bar
of iron with a center flange projecting downward. The flange is

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

109

pierced with several holes arranged in a decorative pattern. This
specimen measures 100 mm. between the center of the holes for the
cheek-plate connection, at least 32 mm. wide at the center, and
approximatly 80 mm. in width near the cheek plate hole. Another
crescent-shaped fragment, 33 mm. wide, is pierced with holes spaced
at 9 mm. intervals. This plate has been cut and its exact length cannot
be determined, but judging from the curvature the size must have
been close to that of the specimen described above.
Four fragments of cheek plates (Fig. 47, b, e, f, g) were found,
two with the cannon still attached. Cheek plates are those portions
of the Spanish bridle which were alongside the lower jaw of the
bridled horse. The cheek plates, like the chin pieces, are provided
with means of attaching the higos. On three of the fragments, these
consist of holes punched in a flange extending downward from a
transverse bar, the latter connecting to the chin piece at one end
and to the cannon at the other.
Only one cheek plate (Fig. 47, g) is intact enough for measurement, and it is distorted. It is 68 mm. from the center of the hole for
admitting the chin piece to the cannon, which normally meets the
cheek plate at a right angle. The width is 29 mm. at the flange, and
6 ram. near the chin piece. The flange is perforated with four holes,
each approximately 4 mm. in diameter, spaced at about 7 mm. intervals along the crescent-shaped border of the extension.
The single higo (Fig. 47, e) found at Gilbert is a stylized representation of the fica or clasped human hand, a symbol employed
to ward off the evil eye (Di Peso, 1953: 210-211). This amulet was
extremely popular among colonial Spaniards and later among Mexicans for ornamental purposes. The specimen measures 23 mm. long
and 7 mm. wide at the "fist." Apparently it was attached by bending
the upper part to form a loop which passed through the holes of the
bridle plates.
One piece of bridle trapping cannot be positively identified. It is
probably a fragment of either a chin piece or a cheek plate. There
are three holes, 4 mm. in diameter, which are spaced along a lunate
border at 8 mm. intervals. This is characteristic of both plates as
described above.
A round brass coneho (Fig. 47, h), probably off a saddle, was evidently attached by passing a strap through two broad slits in its
center. A series of short, widely spaced lines provides additional
decoration. This concho is 44 mm. in diameter.

110

FIC.URE 48.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Sheet brass patch (a), rivets (b), and chipped glass (c).
METAL SCRAPS

Scraps of metal were found at all the features. It is apparent that
the inhabitants of the Gilbert Site placed a high value on metal and
that any piece they obtained was likely to be used and reused until
it became too small for further alteration. Over 300 scraps of copper,
approximately 100 fragments of iron, several pieces of lead, and two
fragments of sheet silver were found, most of it at Features 1, 3,
and 5.
Almost all of the brass scraps appear to have come from kettles
made of thin sheet brass. Many are evidently trimmings cut with
scissors, presumably residue, from making arrow points and other
artifacts from kettle brass. A number of sheet-brass fragments were
found with rivets or rivet holes in them (Fig. 48, a-b). The rivets
were made of thin strips of sheet brass. Evidently kettles with holes
in them were repaired by rivetting sheet-brass patches over the holes,
using homemade rivets.
Among the iron scraps are pieces of flattened gun barrels, kettle
bail fragments, and what is perhaps a medial section of a sword blade.
The two scraps of thin sheet silver both bear engraved scroll designs
reminiscent of the decoration on snuff boxes. The lead scraps are
nondescript.
GLASS FRAGMENTS

Flat Gl~s
No. of Specimens: 44
Provenience: Feature 1 (16), Feature 2 (3), Feature 3 (5), Fea-

111

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

ture 4 (4), Feature 5 (8), Feature 6 (1), Feature 7 (1), Feature 10
(2), Feature 19 (1), Feature 18 (2), Feature 20 (1)
Sherds of flat clear glass are probably pieces of mirrors traded to
the Indians by the French. On two fragments, what appears to be
silvering covered over with shellac adheres to one side of the glass.
One small sherd has the two numbers, 1 and 3, scratched into the
surface of one side. The flat glass sherds vary in thickness.
Bottle Glass
No. of Specimens: 24 green, 1 brown
Provenience: Feature 1 (6), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (9), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (3), Feature 17 (5)
Since most of the bottle sherds are small, bottle shapes cannot be
determined. The necks seem to have tapered toward the top, and the
bodies were straight for a distance of at least 65 mm. from the base.
Body diameter was about 100 ram. The bases were indented. The
bottles were almost certainly hand blown since the use of molds
was not common until after A.D. 1800. One neck sherd has stress
marks, a condition which results from reheating and stretching the
glass when a rim is hand finished.

Chipped Glass Fragments
No. of Specimens: 10
Provenience: Feature 1 (8), Feature 3 (1), Feature 7 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 48, c
Seven pieces of clear flat glass have been bifacially retouched into
points or knives. One sherd of clear, fiat glass and two green bottle
fragments have unifacial flaking along one edge which may be intentional retouch or wear from use as scrapers.

