Deductions Concerning the
Clear Fork Gouge
CYRUS N. RAY
nineteenth century several discoveries of evidences of
ancient man in America were made by reputable observers, but they
were met with so much ridicule and abuse that the evidences were
soon forgotten. It seems that the leaders of American anthropology at
that time had evolved a theory that none but American Indians of
Mongoloid stock had ever lived in America, and they for only about
two thousand years. These people had written books advocating that
theory and resented any disbelief in it. It is hard now to realize how
venomously anyone’s veracity was attacked, even as late as 19£5, if he
presented evidence suggesting that this idea was not entirely correct.
Personally, the writer never believed a word of this theory, because
it was an illogical deduction. After all, at that time all scientific circles
also believed the evidence that huge animals of proboscidean types
and of numerous widely differing species had gone back and forth
across the Bering Straits for a long enough time to have evolved
numerous different species on each continent. If the animals had done
it, man could do it too.
Into the hostile atmosphere of that time Dr. Harold J. Cook, then
paleontologist of the Colorado Museum of Natural History, exploded
in 1927 the news of his discovery of three flint blades imbedded among
the ribs of a Pleistocene bison, in the gravel bank of Lone Wolf Creek
near Colorado City, Texas.
This discovery gave the writer the idea that if ancient man lived
only seventy-five miles away he probably also lived near Abilene, and
I could think of nothing more thrilling than finding his remains. So
thenceforth anything involving time-consuming spectator entertainment and speeches by bores went out of my program. During the
summer of 19£7 I started a week-end search of the countryside with
all of the fervor of the seekers of the Holy Grail.
Gravel pits and river beds, and high gravel ridges where ancient
DURING THE

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rivers once ran, and present day river banks from vertical cliffs forty
feet tall to the water’s edge, were closely examined and many evidences of ancient man’s presence were found in most of them (Ray,
1929; note p. 18 and P1. 1, lower panel, nos. 8-11; this is the first
mention in scientific literature of the Clear Fork Gouge). The implications of some of these evidences are so vastly ancient that the times
are still not ready for publication on them. Even during the first year
I found the bones of a strange curved boned race, and with them two
petrified shell beads, which no doubt had mineralized after they were
carved and drilled. I also found great numbers of previously unknown
artifacts of several different culture types, and these discoveries have
been described in the early bulletins of this society (Ray, 1930; note
p. 46, "Limestone Incrusted Artifacts;" P1. 10, no. 2).
The subject discussed here will be one ancient implement type out
of the Clear Fork Culture, the gouge (Ray, 1934; Clear Fork Gouges
shown on P1. 18, nos. 101,102, 104, 106, 109, 110, 111). Early in my
research I began to find gouges on the highest gravel-strewn terrace
tops which parallel present day streams at distances of a mile or more
(Ray, 1938: 193, Pls. 24 and 25). These specimens were thick percussion-fractured blades with curved or scooped-out cutting edges at
the larger ends. These tools were later found deeply buried in pure
culture aggregations composed of a great variety of deeply patinated
tools of either previously undescribed types or of implements which
greatly resembled European paleolithic tools (Ray, 1940). Within a
few months in 1927 I had collected about fifteen gouges of various
sizes which I would arrange in a row and ask visiting scientists to
name, and none of them could do so, nor had they ever seen them
before. One collector tried to convince me that the gouges were not
purposely made tools, but were flint cores which had accidentally
taken on such a shape. However, the uniformity of the curved cutting
edges showed them to be some specialized form of tool. Years later I
delivered over five hundred gouges to the Museum of Texas Technological College at Lubbock with my collection of stone tools and
ancient skeletons.
While there are several distinct types and sizes of gouges, with the
ends opposite the broad end finished into borers, chisels, knives, and
spatulas, all have the curved cutting edges at the broader ends. The
production of this type of end seems to have been so dominant in the

practices of Clear Fork men that a recognizable trace of the same
trait exists on the bases of many of the long fine knife blades of Clear
Fork time, and also on the bases of a few of their dart points also.

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

201

The base on these specimens has a square cut across the end, and on
one face is a shallow flaked depression.
There has been considerable speculation about the uses of the Clear
Fork gouge. Evidently it was not a woman’s hide scraper, as the culture
was abundantly supplied with large, crusted, flake side-scrapers, and
gouges were not abundant enough in any site to supply such a need.
I felt unusually successful if I found six or eight gouges in a full day
of searching over heavily eroded areas in the red silts of the mountain
valleys where the Clear Fork hearths lay exposed. It is unlikely that
other collectors had found them ahead of me, because at that time few
collectors collected anything besides arrow heads.
The scooped-out cutting ends might suggest that the gouges were
halted and used as we do garden trowels, to dig roots for food; and
their scattered distribution on mountain slopes, where such plants
grow, might suggest the same function. It is evident that some gouges
were pushed across a material of sufficient hardness to polish areas on
the flat faces. Both the specimens made on a flake with one flat face,
and those flaked all over, show such signs of polish. At that distant
period soft wood species of trees suitable for wood-working with stone
tools may have lived in a wet cool climate. We once found a large
gouge in mountain gullies in which Clovis points were also found;
this gouge had three smooth notches cut into the sides and end which
evidently were made so as to fit it to be tied to something. We have
wondered if some of the gouges could have been used as counterweights on the throwing sticks of atlatls.
Gouges have been found which have a calcium incrustation such
as occurs commonly on the older flaked stones from the old gravel
beds of the region, and this feature occurs fully as often on gouges as
on Clovis points. In the thirty-one years that gouges have been under
our observation we have seen no evidence that they were made or
used at a time later than many thousands of years before pottery was
made in Texas. There are twenty or more feet of silts separating them
in river banks where the ancient silts still lie in regallar age sequence.
We do know of two sites, however, in the Abilene region, where the
forces which aggrade apparently have balanced those which erode so
evenly that as each generation of types of men occupied the low creek
bank sites, their various types of flint tools were let down into a common soil mixture of everything from Folsom and Clovis points, and
Clear Fork gouges, on up to the unpatinated arrow heads and endscrapers of the latest pottery culture of the region, the Valley Creek.
In such sites, examples of almost everything used by stone age man

TEXA.S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 1. Two views of the Hedges Site, looking east. The photographs were taken in 1959.
The section of the bank shown

in the top photograph is to the right (south)

of that

in

the lower view.
The bank has caved off and its

lower half is covered with top silts in which vegeta,’ion

has grown, so that study of the lower part of the bank is more difficult than when the site
was first described. In the upper photograph, and the right-hand part of the lower photograph,

horizontal

lines

mark

major

indicate climatic changes as well.

changes

in

silt

textures

and

colors,

and

probably

They probably also denote old valley floor levels which

persisted for considerable time periods. There was a tendency for

camp site hearths and

debris to accumulate on these lines.
The Clear Fork Culture camp site formerly exposed in the Hedges site was to the south,
beyond the right end of the upper photograph, in the lower zone of vegetation. The excavation made by the W.P.A.-Texas Technological College was at the

left end of the

lower

CLEAR FORK GOUGE

203

during the ages back to the Pleistocene can be found on one plowed
field. Such sites are very confusing to an inexperienced student until
he has worked out the correct age placement of the artifacts in undisturbed stratified deposits. All over a vast area of the Callahan
Divide, which separates the watersheds of the Colorado and Brazos
Rivers, three distinct sheets of silt were laid down, largely by wind
action as well as water, which have the same relative placement on
the uplands as along the river valleys below. The top silt layer is
composed of the pinkish-tan sandy Nugent Silts. The second layer is
composed of red silt and gravels of the Upper Clear Fork Silt, and
below that is the dark red clayey Lower Clear Fork Silt.
In this area most of the light sandy Nugent Silts have been carried
away by the runoff from steeper slopes in the mountains, and this
erosion has exposed large areas of the two older more compact Clear
Fork Silts, which lie below the Nugent Silts, so that they can be inspected from their top surfaces. Here whole campsites lie imbedded,
which date from Clear Fork times, and numerous hearths lie exposed
in the Upper Clear Fork Silt. In the deep gullies worn down into
these silts the Clear Fork hearths and implements occur in a zone of
gravel between the Upper and Lower Clear Fork Silts. Once the
Upper Clear Fork zone of occupation has been identified, it can be easily
traced all over the area as the gravel zone in which most of the ancient
hearths are found. Whereas some of the campsites may be observed
on the top of eroded silt surfaces, sites of the same age in the lower
river valleys are covered with twenty or more feet of Nugent deposits,
and it is like hunting for a raisin in the edge of a layer cake to find a
flint blade in the edge of a stratum only a few feet thick along a steep
vertical river bank (Ray, 1944-45; 1946~ 1955).
Another thing not understood by the casual obse~wer is that a river
bank thirty feet high may have at one place a complete stratified
record in it from the most recent Indian back to Pleistocene man,
whereas a few hundred feet upstream or downstream the same bank
may have been gullied and later refilled to the same height--a process
photograph. The large mesquite tree marks the southern edge of that excavation, which
was made into a recenHy refilled river bank deposit. The ancient river strata indicated by
the horizontal lines in the upper photograph extend across the lower view and end at the
dark spot about 25 ft. south of the W.P.A. excavation. From the dark spot northward to the
end of the bank, the silt has no stratification and is of uniform texture and color from
bottom to top, and doubless is no more than a few hundred years old. Consequently, the
W.P.A. excavation was made in a fill that is of no value in determining the age of the
ancient silts.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 2. The Gibson Site on Elm Creek, as it appeared in 1959. When discovered by the
writer in 1930, it contained numerous hearths, abundant charcoal deposits, man-made flint
chips, and some complete flint artifacts, eroding from strata varying in depth from 24 to 30
ft. below the surface. The material was exposed for a distance of 125 ft. along the bank.
The situation at that time is shown in Ray, 1930, Plate 11, Figs. 3 and 4, and Plate 15.
The site is situated where Elm Creek, turning shorply east from a north-south course, undercuts the bank and causes cave-offs. The bank is 30 ft. high and has probably receded westward as much as 20 ft. during the 30 years it has been studied. During all of that period
charcoal, flakes, hearths, and occasional complete Clear Fork points and other ancient point
types such as Clovis points have been found imbedded in the hard red silt in the Upper and
Lower Clear Fork strata shown near the bottom of the bank.
At the present time campsite evidences seem to be thinning out, but in this latest picture
a considerable deposit of charcoal shows in the hard red silt 8 ft. directly below the left end

CLEAR

FORK GOUGE

20~

sometimes taking only a few hundred years--the new fill consisting
of top-level plow-depth silt containing unpatinated flints of the most
recent stone age Indians of the region. Such a bank refill is an
amorphous sand bar mixture of no age significance. It may contain
anything formerly held by the older banks above it. The serious student can learn to identify this development easily near Ft. Griffin, as
there is no stratified banding in such recent refills and the sandy
textured amorphous silt is of the same color from top to bottom.
We visited the excavation at South Bend while it was in progress.
It was situated where two branches of the Brazos River join, with a
narrow sand bar between them, and the site consisted of a deposit of
amorphous sandy silt left by the overflows of the two streams. There
was no stratification from the bottom to the top of the bank, and it
was all of the same color and texture. Here people of the latest flint
culture of the region, the Valley Creek, had buried their dead during
dry periods, and may have lived on the same sand bar during similar
times between floods. Accretion evidently progressed rapidly in such
a place and the grave depths mean nothing of any age consequence on
a sand bar, and any serious student of anthropology Should know
better than to attempt such conclusions as have been made by some.
Such refills occurred extensively near Ft. Griffin and at intervals all
along the branches of the upper Brazos River. The Valley Creek
Culture there also contains Rio Grande trade potsherds such as were
alleged to have been found in the South Bend sand bar. Long ago
Dr. Mera of the Laboratory of Anthropology in Santa Fe identified
Pueblo sherds I sent him from a Valley Creek site as "Rio Grande
Glaze paint ware which was dated from early in the 14th century
A.D. to about 1700" (Ray, 1935: 83-84).
In the Abilene region there are several recent refills of areas adjoining ancient stratified river bank deposits, and these have caused
some serious errors by unwary diggers sent there. There is one top-tobottom refill of amorphous silt adioining the Gibson Site on the northeast end, and another one was at the north end of the Hodges Site
until it was excavated at great expense by the W.P.A. with no definite
results. In the latter case, we asked the Texas Technological College
to excavate a Clear Fork Culture site several hundred feet south of
where they decided to do their work. They dug out a recently refilled
river bed where the stream ran not more than a few hundred years
of the bottom of the large cave-off scar in the center of the picture. The marker set on the
charcoal

shows dimly on the lowest dark stratum. Just below that is caved-off material at

the base of the bank, and the light area below that is the dry creek bed.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ago. The old filled channel could still be traced by its outlines, as it
had cut through the north end of the ancient stratified deposits, and
also by a chain of shallow surface sloughs which had not yet entirely
refilled and still held water after rains. Why the superintendent of
the excavation rejected our recommendations we do not know. On the
spot I had picked to dig, a Clear Fork Culture accumulation of burned
rocks in a long line had been eroding for years at a depth of twenty
feet in the ancient stratified section of the bank. From the exposed
edge of the deposit I had dug portions of a Clear Fork metate, a whole
worn mano, and two Clear Fork Gouges, along with considerable
charcoal.
The mistake made at the Hodges site can still be seen plainly if one
views the whole east bank from the top of the west bank when the
late afternoon rays of the sun illuminate it fully (Fig. 1 ). The banded
or stratified deposit is seen to stop near the south end of the W.P.A.
excavation, and the bank from there northward to the edge of the
excavation is seen to be an amorphous recent Ft. Griffin type of refill
from bottom to top.
l~everting to the claims that four Clear Fork Gouges were found
in the South Bend sand bar with a Rio Grande potsherd, and that it
proves that the gouge is only a few hundreds of years old, the writer
visited the site while it was being excavated, and only Valley Creek
flints were shown to us, but no gouges, and the pictures shown in the
later report were too poor to tell whether they were of gouges or not;
but if they were, it proves exactly nothing. We once found a section
of the bone which supported a Permian Ship Lizard’s dorsal sail fin
in a hearth deposit of the 24 feet deep Upper Clear Fork Silt level at
the Gibson Site, which was also full of charcoal and burned rocks, and
in which Clear Fork darts were found. However, we did not rush into
print with any great discovery that the Ship Lizard of the Permian
Period lived until Clear Fork times.

Re]erences Cited
Ray, Cyrus N.
1929. A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Section. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1, pp.
7-22.
1950. Report on Some Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene Section,
Ibid., Vol. 2, pp. 45-58.

1934. Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas. Ibid., Vol. 6, pp. 107-111.
1955. The Pottery Complex Artifacts of the Abilene Region. Ibid., Vol. 7, pp.
70-88.

CLEAR FORK

GOUGE

207

1938. The Clear Fork Culture Complex. Ibid., Vol. 10, pp. 193-207.
1940. The Deeply Buried Gibson Site. Ibid., Vol. 12, pp. 223-237.
1944-45. Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. Ibid., Vol. 16, pp. 117-147.
1946. Scientists Inspect Ancient Hearths in River Silts. Ibid., Vol. 17, pp. 1041955.

107, Plates 22-24.
Stone Lined Basin With Charcoal in Lower Clear Fork Silt. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, ¥ol. 26, pp. 101-110.

Abilene, Texas

