164

Texas Archeological Society

APPENDIX F

Texas Archeologicai Society Field

School
Excavations at the McKinney

Homestead

INTRODUCTION
Rock rubble which filled the east room of the McKinney Homestead was
sketched in place before its removal away from the east wall (Fig. 1). A 1 m
trench was laid out along the east wall and four 1 m squares opened. The
goal was to find floor and sub-floor construction details, materials, and
associated artifacts. Joist pockets, floor construction, evidence of original
charred flooring (6 in shiplap, machine cut), two north south running beams
(possibly floor joists) possibly supported by rock piers, plaster rubble (some
painted white), pieces of tin roofing, and miscellaneous artifacts (such as
square nails, glass, ceramics) were recovered. A fine, thin, brown deposit
appearing on top of some of the burned flooring was burned linoleum. The
original flooring was not found. It either burned, deteriorated, or was ripped
up before the second floor was put in the room.
EAST ROOM
Excavation to the original ground surface under the floor of the east room
revealed limestone rubble probably left by stonemasons during house wall
building and before floor construction (Fig. 2). A few larger rocks were
placed on top of the ground, presumably to hold the floor joists. A sill running along the east wall (inside the house) extends into the interior of the
room along the east wall. However, it is not level enough to have been used
to hold the easternmost north-south joist.
The original use of this room is unknown. It has a large fireplace which
could have been used for cooking. However, significant artifacts were not
found to pin down the function of the room. Placement of a test pit on the
west side of the room near the fireplace might prove useful.
The original fireplace was made smaller by filling with stones on either
side; the opening was lowered, probably to make a more efficient source of
heat. Perhaps if the use of the room had changed to that of a bedroom, the
fireplace was made smaller.

l-loffrichter - TAS Excavations

165

41TV289
HOUSE

Units & Wall Fall

Fig. 1 Rock rubble and TAS excavation units at the McKinney Homestead.

41TV289

HOUSE

EAST 2OOM
N~Ih ProH*

Fig. 2 East room profile at the McKinney Homestead.

The lower east room perhaps was never plastered, except for the ceiling
between the beams. Small nails on the walls are about the right distance out
from the wall to hold the net backing for wallpaper; if the nails were in
plaster, they would be further out from the wall. Remains of plaster on the
walls in this east room are lacking. However, plaster is clearly visible on the
walls of the room above. Plaster found in the floor rubble could be ac-

166

Texas Archeological Society

counted for by having fallen from the upper room or possibly the ceiling.
Charlie Johns, when asked about the house, said he remembered a
beautiful beamed ceiling and no plaster in the east room.
Pieces of an old fashioned type of corrugated tin roofing were uncovered
in the northernmost square. The 1942 pictures (Figs. 16-18, Main Text)
show a corrugated tin roof, but it is not possible to tell what kind of tin.
When an old house is covered with a tin roof, the roofers put the tin right on
top of the old roof. If there were gutters on the house, the corrugated tin
roof would have covered them.
The north/south beams that were uncovered in the east room line up
with the location of the second story floor joist pockets. However, they are
probably not the original floor joists. They could be the second story joists
that have fallen or they could be the replaced joists for the first floor.
SOUTHEAST CORNER TRENCH
A trench I m wide was laid out at the southeast corner of the building to
look for evidence of other structures and significant artifacts. The foundation
at that corner consisted of a block placed on mortar, a building sill added,
and then courses of rock laid on top. An attempt was made to find the
builders’ trench outline (trench dug for the foundation blocks), but it was not
seen in the profiles. Medium sized rocks which must have been placed as
trench fill were found alongside the foundation blocks.
In the first square of this trench (E2), a lens of gravel or pebbles appears in
profile on the north, east, and part of the south walls. The adjacent square
where the gravel probably plays out was not excavated. The lens appears to
lack structural importance from the standpoint of the building itself.
Three other 1 x 1 m squares were excavated in the east trench.
Miscellaneous artifacts include: pressed glass, glass medicine bottles, metal
artifacts, and hand painted ceramics. Artifacts were very scarce below 13-15
cm. There was a very definite sediment change at this level. The upper level
was clay loam, very hard when dry. The lower level was less compact, a
more reddish brown, with some filled in wormholes.
Ash lenses appeared in Units E3, E4, and E5. Charlie Johns said they used to dump trash east of the building in a depression and then let it wash
away. That could be close to the building or 20-30 m away.
OTHER UNITS
A I x I square (El) was opened south of the building at the southeast corner, which would have been under the porch. Few artifacts were located but
the full corner of the foundation was exposed. Original plans were to run the
trench far enough out from the house to pick up part of the porch foundation, but this was not done. The remains of pilaster foundations were found
next to the house at ground level and perhaps represent some of the rocks
on which the front porch posts rested. The imprint of the stairs that served as
entry to the second floor porch and upstairs of the house was clearly visible
in the soft limestone wall.
A trench was placed north of the house extending out from the window; 8
I/2 I x 1 m squares were excavated. The house foundation was exposed in
the first 1/2 m north. The foundation under the window was much deeper

Hoffrichter -- TAS Excavations

167

than the foundation at the southeast corner of the house and a sill was lacking. The measurement from the top of the block in the first course of stones
to the bottom of the foundation is the same at both the southeast corner and
north wall.
The magnetometer and metal detector survey showed clearly that there
was nothing structural in line with the trench. However, had the trench been
placed a few meters to the east, the remains of a structure probably would
have been intersected.
Two squares were opened at the northwest corner of the building to
reveal the corner foundation and part of the west room. Flooring was not
found. However, a number of interesting artifacts were recovered which
seem to confirm that the room functioned as a smokehouse or kitchen. A
meat hook, three pronged fork, large animal bones, eggshells, ceramics,
glass, and a lock with a key were found inside the house; eggshells also were
found outside the house. These artifacts were different from those found in
other areas of the house. A larger sample would reveal more about the function of this room.

