303

An Archeological Footnote to History
Kathleen Gilmore
with the collaboration of H. Gill-King
ABSTRACT
Historical, archeological, and skeletal evidence shows that a male adult burial
that had two round lead projectiles in the rib cage area, excavated by A. T. Jackson
in 1932 at a Caddo Indian site, has the high probability of being that of Sieur de
Marie, a member of LaSalle’s colony that was established on the Gulf Coast of
Texas in 1685. However, exploration of the combined evidence does not conclusively answer the question of murder raised by Jackson.

INTRODUCTION
In 1932, A. T. Jackson (1932) excavated seven burials from a low rise at the Eli
Moore.s site (41BW2) in Bowie County, Texas. Six of these burials were of children
nine years old or less; the other was an adult male with two lead balls in the area just
below the rib cage. Jackson speculated that the lead balls were "the missiles that
inflicted death." The burial was lying on the right side with arms flexed and the
hands near the face. Jackson noted that this was an unusual position for an East
Texas burial; most Late Prehistoric Caddoan burials in the general area are extended
on their backs. Except for the lead balls, no historic artifacts were found in any of
Jackson’s excavations at the site.
Who was this man--a lone adult among children--and was he murdered?
There is a high probability that this was one Mr. Marle, a Frenchman and a member
of LaSalle’s colony established in 1685 on Garcitas Creek near Matagorda Bay. The
historical, archeological, and skeletal evidence for his identity (the last presented by
H. Gill-King, forensic anthropologist) may settle the question of murder.
THE HISTORICAL EVIDENCE

On March 20, 1687--300 years ago--Robert Cavelier, Sieur de LaSalle, was
ambushed and murdered (probably somewhere near the Trinity River in Texas) with
a bullet shot to his head. Three days before, LaSalle’s nephew Moranget and two
of LaSalle’s servants, Nica and Saget, had been murdered by axe blows to their
heads. The scenario leading to the murders is described in the diary of Henri Joutel,
a member of LaSalle’s colony (Joutel 1962; Margry 1886, V. 3).
Seventeen persons had left the destitute French colony near Matagorda Bay on
January 12, 1687, intending to go for help to France by way of Canada. Sixteen of
these individuals were LaSalle, Abbe Cavelier (LaSalle’s brother), Father
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

304

Texas Archeological Society

Anastasious, LaSalle’s nephews Moranget and young Cavelier, Duhaut,
L’Archeveque, Heins, Liotot, young Talon, Nica (the Indian hunter), Saget
(LaSalle’s footman), Tessier (the pilot), Marie, Bartholomew (a youth from Paris),
and Joutel. The seventeenth person was not identified.
After two months of arduous trekking through dense woods in rain and cold,
food was becoming scarce, so a camp was made on March 15 to retrieve food that
had been cached by LaSalle on a previous journey. To their dismay, the food was
spoiled, but on March 16, about 3 to 5 miles from the main camp, Liotot, Duhaut,
Heins, Nica, and Saget were smoking two bison that Nica had killed. Word was sent
to LaSalle of their activities, and LaSalle sent Moranget and Marie to obtain some
of the meat. As was usual, the men who made the kill had laid aside the choice
marrow bones that were their reward to eat after they had been roasted. When
Moranget arrived at the place where the men were smoking the bison, he flew into
a rage and seized all the meat, saying the hunters had too much and that "he would
manage it some other way" (Joutel 1962).
Because of this treatment and other real and perhaps imagined complaints
against Moranget, the group decided to kill him, Nica, and Saget--the last two
because of their loyalty to LaSalle. That night, while Duhaut, Heins, Tessier, and
L’Archeveque stood guard, Liotot took an axe to the three men with "many strokes
to the head" (Joutel 1962). Moranget did not die instantly; he sat up but could not
speak, and "the assassins obliged the Sieur de Marie to make an end of him, tho’ he
was not in the conspiracy" (Joutel 1962).
Two days passed, and LaSalle set out with Father Anastasious for the hunting
camp to see why the men had not returned. As they approached the camp, LaSalle
was shot by Duhaut and died instantly. Gathering back at the main camp, Joutel and
those who were friends of LaSalle "guarded themselves to sustain their lives"
(Joutel 1962). Joutel and young Cavelier, LaSalle’s nephew, wanted revenge
against the murderers, but Abbe Cavelier (LaSalle’s brother) always opposed it and
restrained them.
It was not until June 13, 1687--three months later--that Joutel and his
companions, Abbe Cavelier, young Cavelier (about 17 years old), Father Anastasious, the Sieur de Marie, Tessier, and Bartholomew, could extricate themselves
from the assassins and their companions and start the journey toward Canada, about
2000 miles away, mainly through unknown and trackless wilderness.
Two weeks later, on June 26, they arrived near a village of the Cadohadacho.
On the instructions of the chief of the nearby village, who had been informed of their
arrival, the group waited on the bank of a river for other Indians to come and
welcome them. All the Frenchmen were carried on the backs of the Indians for more
than a quarter of a league (about 3500 feet) to a place near the chief’s "cottage." It
took three men to carry Joutel, who was a large man and was carrying, among other
things, a firelock (probably a flintlock), a case of pistols, and a kettle; two held up
his legs.
On the next day, June 24, as Joutel relates it,

Gilmore ~ Archeological Footnote to History

305

Monsieur de la Marie, one of the prime men in our company, having breakfasted, would needs go bathe himself in the river we had passed the day
before, and not knowing how to swim he went too far and stepped into a
hole, whence he could not recover himself and was unfortunately drowned.
Young Monsieur Cavelier, having been told that Monsieur de Marie was
going to bathe himself, ran after him, and coming to the river, saw he was
drowning, he ran back to acquaint us [Margry 1886 V. 3:407].
The Frenchmen and some Indians rushed to his rescue, but it was too late.
According to Joutel, after the last "duties" were performed, Marie was buried in a
"little field behind the house." Joutel noted that every day the chief’s wife placed
a little basket of corn on Marie’s grave.
Father Anastasious had a slightly different story of the tragedy. He did not keep
a journal on the trip, and his story was written some years after his return to France.
According to the good father, who was known to elaborate on occasion to enhance
his image in performing priestly duties (Delanglez 1938),
the Sieur de Marne [sic], in spite of all we could say, went to bathe on the
evening of the 24th; the younger Sieur Cavelier accompanied him to the
river side, quite near the village. De Marne sprang into the water and
immediately disappeared .... A few hours afterward his body was
recovered and brought to the chief’s cabin .... The chief’s wife herself
wound him in a beautiful cloth while the young men dug the grave .... Our
friend was interred on an eminence near the village and his tomb surrounded
by a palisade, surmounted by a large cross... [Cox 1968 V. 1:250f].
The small, sad, and bedraggled party, now comprising only six persons, left on
June 30 to continue their homeward journey to France. On October 9, 1688, they
finally arrived back at Rochelle, where they had embarked in July 1684, looking for
a brave new world.
Three years later, in November 1691, Domingo Teran was sent by the Spanish
government to investigate the Cadohadacho country for the presence of Frenchmen
(Hatcher 1932). He visited a Cadohadacho village and drew a map of the settlement
(Figure 1). Mildred Wedel (1978:10) has shown convincingly that Teran visited the
same village as the Joutel party and that this village is represented by the archeological sites of Hatchel, Mitchell and Moores in Bowie County (Figure 2). Therefore,
the Teran map, drawn only four years after the visit of Joutel and his group, should
show the layout of the settlement much as it was when the Frenchmen visited and
Marle was buried.
The word templo is shown on the map near the mound, and Cadi, a short
distance to the southeast. Teran noted that this distance was half a league or 1.33
miles, which is the distance between the Hatchel Mound site and the Eli Moores site.
Near the place marked Cadi, there is a cross on a low rise; this is probably the cross
placed at the Cadi’s house by Father Massenet, who accompanied the Teran
expedition. No mention was made of a cross being there when the Teran expedition
arrived, making it doubtful that a cross had been placed on Marie’s grave.

306

Texas Archeological Society

cJ
-2"

L)

0

o

o

0

~D

O

0
e~

E

Gilmore -- Archeological Footnote to History

307

Old channel
McKinney

0

I
0

1 MILE
I

1

I LEAGUE

Figure 2. Map of part of Texas and Arkansas showing archeological sites in the area.
Modified from U.S Geological Survey, Barkman quadrangle (U.S. Geological Survey
1950a) and Ogden quadrangle (U.S. Geological Survey 1950b).

On the Teran map, the southern boundary of the site is curved, as if it follows
a creek or small river. The distance from the river where the Frenchmen waited for
their hosts to carry them piggyback to a place in the village near the chief’s cottage,
according to Joutel, was more than aquarter of a league (more than 3500 feet). Using
the approximate scale of the Teran map (half a league from the templo to the Cadi’s
house), it is about a quarter of a league from the river bank to the Cadi’s house on
the Teran map. Modern maps (U.S. Geological Survey 1950) show that it is about
4000 feet from the Eli Moores site (the location of the Cadi’s house) to an old
channel of McKinney Bayou 0~igure 2). The stream where Joutel and his party
waited for the Indians therefore must be McKinney Bayou. The Bayou must also be
the stream they "passed the day before," so it is the stream where Mr. Marie went
to bathe and met his demise.
Both Joutel and young Cavelier, as already noted, wanted to avenge the
murders of LaSalle and the others, and they had many opportunities to do so, but

308

Texas Archeological Society

LaSalle’s brother Abbe Cavelier vetoed the action. It has also been noted that Marie
was forced by the assassins "to make an end" to Mornaget’s life. Could young
Cavelier, who was at the river with Marie, have harbored such resentment of Marie’s
act that he shot him, causing his death? Furthermore, could it be more than
coincidence that Book 10 of Joutel’s original diary, which describes this part of the
experience, was lost? Delanglez (1938:18), discussing the vicissitudes that befell
Joutel’s diary, notes that three notebooks, among them Book 10, were lost, and other
sections were mutilated. He attributes most of this destruction to the Renandot
Coterie, a political group whose hero was LaSalle. A greatly abridged and edited
version of Joutel’s diary was published by Michel (Joute11962), who reconstructed
Book 10 from the diary as later published by Margry (1886 V. 3) and from notes
made from the original diary by DeLisle, the mapmaker. The translation of the
Michel edition has been used for this investigation, as well as the account in Margry
V. 3. For this purpose, they differ little, but was something omitted from these
abridged accounts that would have cast a bad light on the Cavelier family?
THE ARCHEOLOGICAL EVIDENCE
The burial of the adult male (J-3, Figure 3) with two lead balls just below the
left rib cage, was found by Jackson on a low rise or mound at the Eli Moores site
about 20 feet southeast of a posthole pattern that he interpreted as a hut (Figure 3),
but the pattern is irregular and may represent more than one house or more than one
building episode. The burial is on a low rise, so it fits the descriptions of both Joutel
and Father Anastasious, especially if the posthole pattern does indeed represent the
Cadi’s house. The case for this burial being that of Marie is strengthened further by
the fact that the Teran map shows a low rise near the Cadi’s house.
As already stated, the body was buried on the right side with the hands near the
face; the position of the lower limbs is uncertain because they had been disturbed.
The burials of all the six children were extended supine (Jackson 1932). Jackson
noted that since the flexed position of the adult was unusual, a thick midden-andash deposit covered the grave, and there were none of the offerings usually found
in aboriginal burials, the burial must date from Late Prehistoric times. A turkey bone
and a crude Young point found with the burial in all probability were inclusions in
fill dirt. All but one of the other six graves excavated by Jackson had burial goods.
The lead balls found with the burial were examined by Alan Jones, firearms
examiner, and Patrick Besant Matthews, M.D., medical examiner, both of the
Criminal Investigation Laboratory in Dallas, and Jay C. Blaine, an authority on
guns, also from Dallas.
The balls weigh 194.5 g and 165 g and are about half an inch in diameter. The
smaller ball is ramrod marked, and both are scarred. Jones (1986) notes that
although they are small for late seventeenth or early eighteenth century muskets,
they are not of the Civil War era. Blaine (1986) agrees with Jones, but adds that the
size is all right for pistols of the late seventeenth or early eighteenth century. The
fact that the two balls were found close together in the body cavity argues for shots

Gilmore ~ Archeological Footnote to History

@

........................

~

309

Post molds

Bufiats

Figure 3. Modified field drawing by A. T. Jackson, showing post molds and burials; J-3
is the grave of an adult male. (Courtesy of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), The University of Texas at Austin.)

fired at fairly close range, probably from two pistols at the same time. Two balls
were seldom loaded into one gun, and, according to Jay Blaine, double-barrelled
guns were in only limited use at that time; nevertheless, although it is still possible,
it is unlikely, in view of the positions of the balls, that the shots were fired by two
persons at different times.
Being shot with these balls would not necessarily cause instant death. A person
could survive for two weeks or more (Besant-Matthews 1986) if vital organs were
not injured. According to Bell, Jelks, and Newcomb (1965:269), for example, one
Antonio Trevifio was still alive and apparently well six months after he received four
bullet and two lance wounds in an attack by Indians in 1765.
Was it murder? This question can’t be answered with the present evidence.
Assuming that the remains are indeed those of Marle, it is true that he was shot twice,
but when and where the shooting took place is unknown. Most likely he was shot
by a Frenchman who was perhaps holding a pistol in each hand, since at this time
of early contact, few Indians had guns, and the few Indians who had guns seldom

310

Texas Archeological Society

used pistols. Marie could have been shot at the French village near Matagorda Bay
before the group set out for Canada; no mention is made of such a shooting by the
diarists, but, on the other hand, the diarists seldom mentioned fights or violent
quarrels. Or, to indulge in wild and romantic speculation, had Marie, being a
gentleman, (as evidenced by the title Sieur) survived a duel or duels in France that
precipitated his joining the LaSalle Expedition? The shooting could have occurred
as much as three and a half months before his death when the assassins "obliged"
him "to make an end to Moranget’s life." Would the murderers have resorted to such
drastic means? And would Marie have been so reluctant that only by shooting him
could they force him to do the deed? The murderers were a bloodthirsty lot indeed,
but was Marie that courageous?
Finally, was it drowning in the river near the Indian village that caused Marie’s
death? Joutel had a case of pistols, but it seems most unlikely that he would have
risked the success of the rescue mission he was part of (getting help for the
beleaguered colony) by shooting one of its prime members. It is also unlikely that
young Cavelier shot Marie; however, youths are impetuous and seldom consider
consequences. But is it mere coincidence that the original of Joutel’s diary for this
part of the trip is missing? The question of murder remains unanswered. This time
the body was found, but the crime was missing.
In summary, the following evidence indicates that the skeletal remains containing
two lead balls excavated in 1932 by A. T. Jackson have a high probability of being
the remains of Sieur de Marie, a member of LaSalle’s colony established in 1685
near Matagorda Bay, Texas.
1. Marie was among the Frenchmen of the LaSalle Expedition who were
headed to France by the way of Canada.
2. Marie died on June 24, 1687 and was buried at a village on a small rise near
the Cadi’s house.
3. A map of this village drawn four years later by the Teran Expedition shows
the Cadi’s house and a rise nearby.
4. This village survives as the Hatchel, Mitchell, and Moores archeological
sites in Bowie County, Texas; the temple was on the Hatchel Mound and the Cadi’s
house was on the Moores site.
5. The distance from the temple to the Cadi’s house on the Teran map coincides
with the distance from the Hatchel Mound to the Eli Moores site (US Geological
Survey 1:24,000, Barkman and Ogden 7.5 minute quadrangles).
6. The distance from the Cadi’s house to the stream where Marie went to bathe
coincides with the distance from the Eli Moores site to McKinney Bayou (US
Geological Survey 1:24,~, Barkman and Ogden quadrangles).
7. Skeletal remains of an adult male were found on a low rise near a posthole
pattern at the Eli Moores site.
8. The lead balls found with the remains could date to the late seventeenth
century, which is contemporaneous with LaSalle’s colony.
9. Skeletal evidence indicates that the remains have a very low probability of
being Indian. The analysis of the remains that leads to this conclusion follows.

Gilmore E Archeological Footnote to History

311

Skeletal Analysis of Individual 571-A, (J-3)
H. Gill-King
A positive identification made from skeletal remains ordinarily requires that
known unique features, or unique combinations of features from a suspected match
be noted in the sample at hand. The challenge in this instance lies partly in the fact
that no details except for gender and implied good health or robustness are available
for the Sieur de Marie. Evidence that the burial feature known as J-3 (Goldstein
1940) is indeed that of Mr. Marie must be considered circumstantial, and this
circumstantial evidence is marred by the curious fates of the various diaries that
describe the events laid forth by Gilmore above. If it can be demonstrated beyond
reasonable doubt that the remains known as individual 571-A are those of an adult
male European, the likelihood that this person was in fact Mr. Marie increases
considerably.
A limitation imposed upon the investigation is the absence of the cranium and
mandible from the set of remains conserved at The Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL),The University of Texas at Austin. Available for analysis were
(1) three half-scale photographs taken in standard anatomical views (Figures 4, 5,
6); (2) two cranial data forms prepared by Marcus S. Goldstein in 1940 and revised
and expanded by William R. Maples in 1962 (Figure 7), and (3) the fragmentary
postcranial remains of individual 571-A (conserved at TARL).
Goldstein’s and Maples’s observations of cranium 571-A include 26 standard
measurements, five indices, annotations on the dentition and pathology, and
comments on the three standard views of the skull. Fortunately, detailed craniometric
analysis was a prominent feature of the physical anthropology of the era, and
Goldstein, and later Maples, were two of the best practitioners.
DETERMINATION OF SEX

Goldstein assigns the remains to the male sex on the basis of "large mastoid
processes, robusmess and angulation of the jaw, and notable occipital crest." To this
might be added the observation that the zygomatic arch or cheek bone inserts into
the skull well behind the ear hole. Although Goldstein’s notes on the postcranial
materials, if they exist, have not been discovered, his diagnosis of sex can be
supported by an iliac crest fragment with prominent gluteal muscle insertions. The
proximal phalanx of the right thumb shows roughened adductor muscle insertions
signifying a strong grip, and all four of the proximal phalanges recovered have
prominent crests where flexor muscles insert. A large and roughened xiphiod
process extends from the sternum (breast bone). This pattern of robustness generally
persists throughout the postcranial remains (Stewart 1979:88).

312

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Front view of the cranium of burial 571 (J-3). Reproduction of half-scale
photograph made in 1940 by Marcus S. Goldstein. (Courtesy of(TARL, The University of
Texas at Austin.)

Gilmore ~ Archeological Foomote to History

313

Figure 5. Side view of the cranium of burial 571 (J-3). Reproduction of half-scale
photograph made in 1940 by Marcus S. Goldstein. (Courtesy of TARL ,The University of
Texas at Austin.)

314

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Top view of the cranium of burial 571 (J-3). Reproduction of half-scale
photograph made in 1940 by Marcus S. Goldstein. (Courtesy of TARL The University of
Texas at Austin.)

Gilmore m Archeological Footnote to History

315

AGE AT DEATH

The overall picture is of a muscular male of middle years, perhaps between 40
and 50 at death. Goldstein assigned an age of"circa 40 yrs" (Figure 7), based upon
the degree of dental wear and obliterated "basilar" skull slructure (spheno-occipital
synchondrosis), which is an indication of age beyond about 35 years in modem
populations (Krogman and Iscan 1986:111). Maples later revised this estimate to 45
years (Figure 7); the second estimate may be a more realistic one, but it is impossible
to specify age so closely without making many assumptions about the history of the
subjects’s life activity.
Osteoarthritic lipping and severe wear that extend into the cervical (neck)
vertebrae, suggest an age of somewhat beyond 40 years (Stewart 1958:140-156).
The left humerus (upper ann) is broken open proximally, revealing a medullary
cone that has advanced almost to the surgical neck, suggesting an age of perhaps 50
years (Acsadi and Nemeskeri 1970:124-125).
RACE:THE CENTRALISSUE
American Indians are considerably more generalized Mongoloids than are
modem Asians, and consequently may share several craniofacial characteristics
with European Caucasians (Newman 1953:311-13). During the original excavation of this skeleton, A.T. Jackson had no reason to question the racial affinity of
individual 571-A (then known as Burial J-3), and Goldstein, in his detailed cranial
observations, made no comment on the race of this individual. Perhaps it is
significant that the space on the cranial data sheet labelled tribe was left blank. Did
Goldstein muse upon the dolichocranic (long headed) proportions of this skull with
the knowledge that most Caddo were mesocranic (round headed)? Whatever doubts
he may have had, another 22 years passed before the development of discriminant
function techniques that could resolve such issues with reasonable reliability. Our
downstream position in time now affords us the opportunity to apply these
techniques to the remains in question.
Two techniques are commonly used for the statistical discrimination of Anglo
vs. American Indian crania; the technique of Giles and Elliot (1962) and another
developed by Gill (1979) that is particularly useful in the northwestern Plains of the
United States. Because Gill’s method requires measurements that were not recorded
for the now missing skull, only the Giles-Elliot (G-E) technique could be applied
to this individual. It is likely that this method would have proved more useful in any
event because of greater similarity of the Caddo to the archeological population
(Indian Knoll) upon which the technique was developed; Stewart assigns an
accuracy of 93-95 percent to this technique. A lower estimate of usefulness, 86
percent, has been given by Birkby (1966:22). Using Goldstein’s original measurements and Maples’s revisions, the Giles-Elliot discriminant function was calculated
to be 18.1, which falls within the Anglo range (i. e., less that 22.3).

316

Texas Archeological Society

Gilmore -- Archeological Footnote to History

317

,-1

l!
"_

o~

~’oiI

-~ "~

~iI

o .~

~1~ ~+~

"~
..~’,

¥ ~o.~
~

318

Texas Archeological Society

Also revealing are three indices computed from intact limb segments and the
left clavicle; the brachial, platymetric, and claviculo-humeral indices, together with
the Giles-Elliot result, were completed for individual 571-A and various historic
Europeans populations (Table 1).

Table 1. Measurements and Indices Used to Distinguish
American Indian and European Skeletons.
Measurement/Index
Giles-Elliot
Brachial 1
Platymeric 2
Claviculo-humeral 3

571- A
18.1
74.6
88.3
44.1

Control
W<22.4
75.5 a
85.0 c
47.0

Amerindian
A>22.4
78.2 b
74.0 d
49.0 b

1 Radius length/humerus length
2 Subtrochanteric anterior diameter/Iransverse diameter for femur
3 Clavicle length/humerus length on same side
a, b Krogman and Iscan 1986:294-95
c Brothwell 1965:91
d Bass 1986:214

Goldstein noted a 95 percent incidence of shovelled incisors and a 4.5 percent
incidence of trace shovelling in the central incisors of Texas Indians of this period
and region (Goldstein 1948:71-82). This observation stands in sharp contrast
against the data for 571-A, which explicitly indicates no shovelling or trace
shovelling (Figure 7); Maples did not change or add to this observation in 1962.
Since dental and craniofacial structures are genetically independent in their
development (Ranly 1980:112-113), the statistical likelihood of discovering a
particular Giles-Elliot value in combination with shovelling (or nonshovelling) in
the same individual is equal to the product of the independent chances of having
either. From the null-hypothesis perspective, one might ask "what are the chances
of a Caddo having a Giles-Elliot value below 22.4 and no shovelling?" Since the
minimum reliability of the G-E function is 86 percent, and the likelihood of a Caddo
having shovelling is about 95 percent, the issue may be restated as follows: The
chance of a Caddo having a G-E value above 22.4 is about 14 percent, and the chance
of a Caddo being without shovelling is about 5 percent. Therefore, the chance of a
Caddo having this combination of characteristics is 5 percent times 14 percent, or
0.7 percent (or less if trace shovelling is counted). Goldstein also notes a slight
overbite in his analysis of 57 l-A, a departure from the typical edge-to-edge bite
expected in American Indians of the region.
A separate line of reasoning based upon presumed dietary differences between
seventeenth century Europeans and their Caddo contemporaries was also pursued.

Gilmore ~ Archeological Footnote to History

319

Katzenberg and Krouse (1987:156) demonstrated the use of stable isotope ratios of
12C and 1~C and 15N and 14N to identify population membership in forensic contexts.
Because stable isotope data for late prehistoric and early historic Caddo of the
northeast Texas area were available, it seemed useful to compare these data with
isotopic data on individual 571-A (Figure 8). These data indicate that individual
571-A differs appreciably from the Caddo samples by having had a diet that was not
only more varied but also richer in condensed (animal/marine) protein sources
(Kruger and Sullivan 1984:219-220).

+25,

o
+20

o
Z
uq

+10’

+5

o%

)

J
I

)
)

J
f

t

A

-20

-15

-’~o

-5

~13Cgelatin
0 - Northwest Coast Eskimo (fish, seals, and occasional car;Dou
- Coast of Mame (fish and shellfish)
- 41HPI06 and DN 97 Caddo (maize supplemented by hunting)
!ndv~dual 571-A (presumed European m~xed diet)

Figure 8. Isotopic profile of individual 571-A compared to profiles of groups with known
diets.

320

Texas Archeological Society

Such findings are by themselves inconclusive, but they round out the picture
developed from dental, morphological, and metric observation.
THE LIVING APPEARANCE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
Standard procedure in determining individual identity from skeletal remains
begs an attempt to describe how the person might have looked near the time of death.
This involves assessment of sex, age, race, stature, some estimate of general
physique, and, where feasible, any probable abnormality of posture or gait and any
pathology that might have been noticeable in life. In this case, the observations are
summarized in the hope that a more thorough description of the suspected match,
de Marie, from personal accounts, diaries of others, ship’s rosters, or other
historiographic sources that may become available to researchers in the future.
These observations are divided into (1) characteristics that would have been evident
in the appearance or possibly in mechanical functioning of the living subject and (2)
cryptic traits revealed only in the skeleton (Table 2).

Table 2. Observations of Skeleton 571-A
Traits Possibly
Noticeable in Life
1.Inflammatory bone reaction left frontotemporal
2.Pronounced left deviation
of xiphod process\ (visible in posture).
3.Missing right upper second incisor
4.Stature, (from left humerus)
is 17 1.5 cm ~ 3.9cm (Trotter and
Gleser 1977:355-56)

Cryptic
(Skeletal) Traits
1.Fracture of proximal left.
humerus
2.Schmorrs nodes T-21>L1a
3. Left sided compression of
two thoracic vertebrae
4.Herniated centrum (T-4?)

5.Prominent insertions on flexor
surfaces
a Ortner and Putschar 1986:331

Although it is impossible to know with certainty, it is likely that the extensive
osteoarthritic condition of the spine, together with the compressions and herniation
noted, imposed some limitations on the flexibility of the upper body and suggests
some degree of right-sided scoliosis. These observations merge into an impression
of a robust male European of late middle years whose skeleton belies a history of
rigorous upper body effort of a bending/lifting nature. The fracture noted on the
proximal left humerus and the inflammatory bone reaction on the temporal region
of the same side may have occured as part of a single, massive traumatic event.

Gilmore -- Archeological Footnote to History

321

CAUSE AND MANNER OF DEATH

The central position of the two lead projectiles in the region of the diaphragm
suggests that gunshot was the cause of death. Neither of the soft lead pellets is
damaged beyond indentations that represent primer signatures, whereas, had either
pellet struck a rib or a vertebra, it is likely that more damage to these soft lead
projectiles would be evident. About 40 to 50 percent of the linear surface of the ribs
was recovered, and these fragments give no indication of ballistic damage. The
foregoing suggests that the projectiles entered through the soft tissues of the anterior
abdomen.
The events and circumstances immediately surrounding the demise of a person
are know as the manner of death. Here, few inferences are possible. As already
stated, it is reasonable to conclude that two pistols were used to shoot the subject,
since neither ball had the contact or impactfacet often seen when pistols of that day
were loaded with more than one pellet. Yet, if we are to assume that two pistols were
used, we must decide whether one or two assailants were involved. The close
placement of the two shots could be interpreted equally well as good marksmanship
by two parties or by one. In either case, the victim was in all likelihood shot at close
range and from the front. Does all this mean that individual 571-A allowed his
murderer to move within close range, and, if so, what can be made of it? Here the
issue of manner of death must remain unclear.
SUMMARY

The remains analyzed here were brought to the writer’s attention by Gilmore
because of their unusual disposition and by the high probability that the grave from
which they came was that of one Sieur de Marie. The skeleton in question is, with
little doubt, that of a European male of late midlife. Why was this adult individual
laid out in a flexed position, which was inconsistent with the local practice, in a
children’s burial plot? Was the interment a deliberate attempt to obscure the
circumstances of death or a practical solution dictated by circumstances? Whether
the findings described represent vengeful premeditation or rage at a moment of
opportunity may never be known. Yet it is hoped that this analysis provides a basis
for comparison against whatever biographical or historic data concerning Mr. Marie
may emerge in time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all who have been interested in this problem, those who reviewed the
manuscript and offered suggestions, and especially those who had a solution to the
"crime"--all too numerous to list. We are also grateful for the detailed records left
by all who have examined the osteological remains and for the cooperation of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin and
the Southwestern Institute of Forensic Sciences in Dallas.

322

Texas ArcheologicaI Society
REFERENCES CITED

Acsadi, G., and J. Nemeskeri
1970 History of Human Lifespan and Mortality. Kiado Academy Press,
Budapest, Hungary.
Bass, W. M.
1987 Human Osteology : A Laboratory and Field Manual (third edition).Missouri Archeological Society, Columbia.

Bell, R. E., E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Final
report to the National Science Foundation, Grant GS964, Washington,
DC.
Birkby, W. H.
1966 An Evaluation of Race and Sex Identification from Cranial
Measurements. American Journal ofPhysical Anthropology 24:21-28.
Brothwell, D. R.
1965 Digging Up Bones: The Excavation, Treatment, and Study of Human
Skeletal Remains. British Museum of Natural History, London.
Cox, I. J.
1968 The Journeys of Sieur de la Salle. The Pemberton Press, Austin.

Delanglez, J.
1938 The Journal of Jean Cavelier. Institute of Jesuit History, Chicago.
Giles, E., and O. Elliot
1962 Race Identification from Cranial Measurements. Journal of Forensic
Science 7:147-57.

Gill, G. W.
1984 A Forensic Test Case for a New Method of Geographical Race Determination. In: Human Identification: Case Studies in Forensic Anthropology, edited by T. A. Rathbun and J. E. Buikstra, 44-87. C. C. Thomas,
Springfield, Missouri.
Goldstein, M. S. J.
1940 Skeletal Material from E. H. Moore’s Farm. Manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
1948 Dentititon in Indian Crania from Texas. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology 6:63-84.

Gilmore ~ Archeological Footnote to History

323

Hatcher, M. A.
1932 The Expedition ofdon Domingo Teran de los Rios into Texas.Prelim2nary
Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society, Vol. 2, No. 1, Austin.
Hamilton, T. M.
1980 Colonial Frontier Guns. The Furr Press, Chadron, Nebraska.
Jackson, A. T.
1932 Exploration of a Burial Site on E. H. Moore’s Plantation in Bowie
County, Texas. Manuscript on file, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, Austin.
Joutel, Henri
1714 Jouters Journal of La Salle’s Last Voyage. (1962 Reprint) Corinth
Books, New York.
Katzenberg, M. A., and H. R. Krouse
1987 Forensic Applications of Stable Isotope Analysis. Journal of the Canadian Society of Forensic Sciences 20(3): 156.
Krogman, W. M., and M. Y. Iscan
1986 The Human Skeleton in Forensic Medicine, second edition, C. C.
Thomas, Springfield, Missouri.
Kruger, H. W., and C. H. Sullivan
1984 Models for Carbon Isotope Fractionation between Diet and Bone.
American Chemical Society Symposium Series 258:205-220.

Maples, W. R.
1962 The Morphological Comparison of Skeletal Material from Sanders
Focus and from Fulton Aspect. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.
Margry, Pierre
1888 Decouvertes et Establissments des Francais dans l’ Quest et darts le Sud
de l’Amerique Septentrionale (1614-1754), Vol. 3. Paris.
Nemeskrri, J~inos, Lfiszl6 Harsfinyi, and Gy,3rgy Acsfidi
1960 Methoden zur Diagnose des Lebensalters von Skellettfunden.
Anthropologischer Anzeiger 24(1):70-95, Stuttgart.
Newman, M. T.
1953 The Application of Ecological Rules to the Racial Anthropology of the
Aboriginal New World. American Anthropologist 55(1):311-327 and
313-325.

324

Texas Archeological Society

Ortner, D. J., and W. G. J. Putschar
1985 Identification of Pathological Conditions in Human Skeletal Remains.
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.

Ranly, D. M.
1980 A Synopsis ofCraniofacial Growth. Appleton-Century-Crofts,Norwalk,
Connecticut.
Stewart, T. D.
1958 The Rate of Development of Vertebral Osteoarthritis in American
Whites and Its Significance in Skeletal Age Determination. The Leech
28(3): 140-156.
1979 Essentials of Forensic Anthropology, Especially as Developed in the
United States. C. C. Thomas, Springfield, Missouri.
U.S. Geological Survey
1950a Barkman Quadrangle, Tex.-Ark. 7.5 Minute Series, Photorevised 1970.
1950b Ogden Quadrangle, Ark.-Tex. 7.5 Minute Series, Photorevised 1970.
Wedel, M. M.
1978 La Harpe’s 1719 Post on Red River and Nearby Caddo Settlements.
Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 30, University of Texas, Austin.

