THE FINIS FROST SITE: A TOYAH PHASE
OCCUPATION IN SAN SABA COUNTY,
CENTRAL TEXAS
L. M. GREEN AND THOMAS R. I-IESTER
Abstract
The Finis Frost Site (41 SS 20) is situated near Richland Springs Creek
(also known as Richland Creek) in western San Saba County, Texas.
Artifactual materials from the site are attributable to the Toyah phase of
the late prehistoric times in Central Texas. These artifacts include Perdiz
arrow points, bipointed and four-beveled bifaces, end and side scrapers,
perforators, modified flakes (including gravers), manos and metates, and
Leon Plain pottery. Evidence of a core-blade technology is also present.
Judging from the faunal remains, bison bunting appears to have been a
major economic pursuit of the site occupants. The high percentage of
scraping tools in the lithic tool kit may be related to the process of working
bison hides.

INTRODUCTION
This paper reports archeological materials from a discrete Toyah
phase occupation site in San Saba County, centra! Texas (Fig. 1). The
site is situated in the northwest portion of the county, on the north
edge of the town of Richland Springs. It was discovered following the
clearing of a small pasture for agricultural purposes. The landowner
at that time, L. M. Matlock, found a number of chipped and ground
stone artifacts. The property has since been acquired by Mr. Finis
Frost (after whom the site is named) and he and the senior author
investigated the site during 1970 and 1971. A large number of artifacts
have been obtained and samples of exposed faunal remains have been
collected.
There has been little in the way of scientifically-oriented archeological research in the San Saba County area. Some sites in the Lake
Buchanan reservoir area in the southeastern corner of the county were
investigated by Jackson (1938), and in subsequent years, L. P. McElroy
(1940) and Albert Field (1956) examined cave, rockshelter and open
occupation sites in the county. More recently, L. M. Green has published a survey of archeological sites along Richland Springs Creek
(Green 1970) and has investigated midden accumulations on the
Colorado River in northern San Saba County (Green 1971).
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA
A rather detailed account of the local environment has been previously given in papers by Green (1970, 1971); therefore, we will restrict

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

our comments here to a description of the ecological conditions in the
site vicinity. Three basic ecological zones can be discerned (each
undoubtedly contains several discrete microenvironments which
would be evidenced through comprehensive mapping of the zones):
1) aquatic; 2)flood plain-low terrace; 3) uplands. Each of these zones
is described below.
Major components of the aquatic zone are the channel of Richland
Springs Creek (an intermittent tributary of the middle Colorado River
watershed) and a narrow band of vegetation paralleling the stream
course. The waters of the creek support a variety of fishes, including
catfish, sunfish and carp; also present are turtles, water snakes, frogs,
freshwater mussels, and occasionally, beavers. In the winter, the
aquatic habitat attracts migratory waterfowl. Vegetation on the
fringes of the stream include pecan, willow and wild plum trees.
The flood plain-low terrace zone extends both to the north and
south of the stream (Fig. 1). The dark alluvial soils of the flood plain
grade to sandy loams and stony soils on the terraces (Thompson
1893). Much of this zone is currently used for agriculture. Vegetation
includes oak, mesquite, cedar and blackjack; fruit-bearing species are
mulberry, dewberry, agarita, wild grape and wild persimmon. Common cacti include prickly pear and turkey pear (or tasajillo), and there
are a variety of native and introduced grasses.
The uplands to the north of the site are characteristic of the Western Cross Timbers physiographic province. It is a geologicallycomplex region, with exposures of clays, shales, sandstones and
conglomerates, mostly of Pennsylvanian and Mississippian ages
(Drake 893; Oetking 1959). The region isknown locally as the "sandy"
or "postoak" country. The upland zone to the south of the site is
typical of the Edwards Plateau, with eroded limestone hills and thin
soils. It is referred to colloquially as the "limestone" or "liveoak"
country. Vegetation on the uplands, both north and south of the site,
include bee brush, blue brush, catclaw, cedar, oaks, mesquite and
scattered wild persimmon. The contemporary fauna are characteristic
of Blair’s (1950) Balconian Biotic Province, and include whitetail
deer, jackrabbit, cottontail rabbit, raccoon, opossum, skunk, and red
and gray fox. Reptilian species include lizards and snakes, and important avifauna are turkey, quail, dove, hawk, owl and a variety of
songbirds. Most of these fauna are shared with the flood plain-low
terrace zone, and the vegetated fringes of the aquatic zone.
At present we have no data on pre-European environmental conditions in the area and we cannot be sure to what extent recent agricultural and ranching practices have altered those conditions (cf. Gibson
1969). Reconnaissance along Richard Springs Creek by Green (1970)

FINIS FROST SITE

A

71

FINIS FROST SITE
and vicinity
41 SS 20

S

f
"/SAN SABA COUNTY

\
concentration

u

p

I

a

n

d

s

ROUGH CROSS SECTION (downstream)

1

aquatic

2

flood plain - terrace

3

uplands

FIGURE 1. Sketch maps of 77ze Finis" Frost Site and Vicinity (not to scale).
Upper, location of site; note concentration of debris in east-southeast
corner, lower left, rough cross-section, looking downstream; major
ecologic divisions are indicated; lower right, index map showing
location of San Saba County within state.

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

has revealed that most prehistoric occupation was confined to the
flood plain-low terrace zone. We can safely assume that the ecological
zones described above served as resource areas for the prehistoric
inhabitants of the area, but we do not yet know (and it would indeed
be difficult to determine) to what extent the potential of each zone was
exploited.
THE SITE
The Finis Frost Site is an open occupation site lying on flood
plain/eroded low terrace deposits immediately to the south of Richland Springs Creek. Limestone uplands, represented by a row of low
hills on the east, approach to within 75 to 100 yards of the site (Fig. 1).
A small tributary of Richland Springs Creek forms the southern and
western boundaries of the site. A "spring branch" joins the tributary
near the southwestern corner of the site; this stream flows from an
intermittent spring which still provides water for the modern-day
inhabitants of Richland Springs. Another spring, which ceased flowing several decades ago, is situated at the western edge of the site near
the east bank of the tributary.
Occupational debris is scattered over approximately 4 acres. A
dense concentration of artifacts and other detritus is located in the
east-southeast part of the site covering an area 250 feet in length and
70 feet in width (Fig. 1). Though mussel shell is found in fragmentary
form over much of the site, there are no discernible concentrations
such as those reported from other San Saba County sites on the
Colorado River 10 to 12 miles to the north (Green 1971). Anima! bones
are found over the entire site area although again no clusters were
observed.
THE ARTIFACTS
All of the artifacts reported here are surface finds, unearthed by
chiseling, plowing and other agricultural practices in recent years. As
we shall discuss in more detail later, the artifactual materials appear
to be exclusively Late Prehistoric in age, since not a fragment of a dart
point or other diagnostic Archaic artifact forms have been collected
(for an overview of the Archaic artifact assemblages of the Richland
Springs Creek area, see Green 1970).
The artifact descriptions which follow vary in their completeness,
since collections from the site are scattered among several persons
and were available to the authors for only brief inspection. While we
were able to examine most of the materials, it was not possible to
study all of them in detail. Therefore, emphasis has been placed on
outlining the range of artifact types present at the site, and providing
full descriptive data where possible.

FINIS FROST SITE

73

i

c

d
e

g

t

k

I

m

n

r

P

0

s

t

q
0

50
I

mm.

FIGURE 2. Arrow Pointsfrom Finis Frost Site. a-r, contracted stem (Perdiz)
arrow points; s,t, triangular arrow points.

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Artifacts of Chipped Stone

Projectile Points
Contracted Stem Arrow Points (Fig. 2a-r).
Twenty-seven relatively complete specimens have been studied. In general, they
conform to thePerdiz type as defined by Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954:504). Most are
made on thin flakes. Unifacial flaking (on the dorsal face of the flake) is present on the
bodies, with trimming along the lateral edges; stems are bifacially flaked. Manufacturing techniques appear to closely parallel those described for Berclair Site Perdiz points
(Hester and Parker 1970:17). Bodies are triangular with straight to slightly-convex
edges; three specimens have one lateral edge which is slightly recurved (Fig. 2h) and
several have serrated edges. Stems are pointed to slightly rounded.
Two of the specimens are made on flake blades (Fig. 2q,r). Each retains a portion of
the median ridge on the dorsal surface. One (Fig. 2r) shows no modification other than
the shaping of the stem and barbs, and the other (Fig. 2q) is flaked over some of the
dorsal face and trimmed along one edge of the ventral face.
Length ranges from 29 mm. to an estimated 51 mm. (mean: 36.3 mm.) maximum
width is from 15 mm. to an estimated 25 mm. (mean: 19.6 mm.); and maximum
thickness varies from 2 mm. to 5 mm. (mean: 3.1 mm.).

Triangular Arrow Points (Fig. 2s,t).
Three triangular arrow points have been found at the Finis Frost Site. One (Fig. 2s)
resembles the Fresno type (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954:498) and the others, (Fig. 2t),
possible variants of the type. They are made on thin flakes and exhibit delicate chipping. All have mildly concave bases, thinned in two instances by the removal of a
broad, arc-shaped flake. One specimen is serrated (Fig. 2t.)
Lengths are 33,32 (estimated) and 19 mm., maximum widths, 21, 17 and 6 mm. and
maximum thicknesses, 2 mm. on each.

Side-notched Arrow Point (Fig. 8a).
The specimen is triangular in outline with a mildly convex basal edge and two
shallow si de notches 10 mm. above the base. It fits within the Harrell type, as defined by
Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954:500), although greater similarities are noted with the
Washita type of Bell (1958: Pl. 49). Length of the specimen is 30 mm., maximum width
is 16 mm., and maximum thickness, 3 ram.

Bifacial Tools
Bipointed Bifaces (Fig. 3a-f.)
The site has yielded nine relatively complete specimens and a number of fragments.
Four of these are diamond-shaped with four beveled edges, a characteristic form in Late
Prehistoric times in central Texas (@ Poteet 1938:245; Krieger 1946:166; Suhm 1955,
Pl. 5 A; Schuetz 1957: Fig. 39 A,B). The beveling results from the resharpening of a
dulled cutting edge (Sollberger 1971). The four beveled bifaces have lengths of 99, 115,
127 (estimated) and 148 mm., maximum widths of 27, 31,41 and 39 mm., and thicknesses of 7, 7, 7, and 8 mm., respectively. Two other bifaces are double-pointed but not
beveled (cy. Suhm 1957:40; Jelks 1962:45-46; Hester 1971). They have lengths of 76 ram.
and 112.5 mm., maximum widths of 33 mm. and 31 mm., and thicknesses of 7 mm. and
9 ram.
Three additional specimens (Fig. 2e,f) are present. Two are broad with markedly
convex lateral edges. One has been roughly shaped by percussion and the other shows
fine flaking with trimming notching along one lateral edge (Fig. 20. The third specimen, which is narrow and has convex lateral edges, seems to have been made on a flake

FINIS FROST SITE

75

’!i

"!

FIGURE 3. Bipointed B![hces /~om Finis Frost Site. a-c, diamond-shaped,
four-beveled bifaces; d-f, double-pointed bifaces.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

76

blade. Lengths are 100, 133, and 76 mm., maximum widths, 27, 55, and 26 mm., and
maximum thicknesses, 12, 8 and 6 mm., respectively.
Large Asymmetrical Bifaces (Fig. 4a,b).
Two large, complete asymmetrical bifaces and several fragments are in the collection. The two complete specimens (Fig. 4) exhibit broad flake scars and are made of dark
gray flint which occurs in ledge form in the area. One (Fig. 4a) has been roughly
trimmed along the lateral edges, while the other shows no such trimming. Lengths are
131 mm. and 155 mm., maximum widths, 53 mm. and 59 ram., and maximum thicknesses on both, 11..

b
c

F

d

o

,

so

mm.

FIGURE 4. Bifaces from Finis Frost Site. a,b, asymmetrical bifaces; c,d,
large thick bifaces; e,f, choppers.

FINIS FROST SITE

77

e

h

0
t

mm.

50
j

FIGURE 5. Unifaces from Finis Frost Site. a-h, end scrapers; i, large
bipointed uniface.
Large Thick Bifaces (Fig. 4c,d).
A few large, crudely chipped bifaces occur at the site. All appear to be entirely
percussion flaked; some may represent cores while others may be preforms. One
specimen is rectanguloid in outline (Fig. 4c) and roughly serrated at one end. It is 135

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mm. long, 92 mm. in maximum width and 26 mm. thick. Another is triangular (Fig. 4d),
with a convex base and cortex remnants on one face. Length is 101 ram., maximum
width, 63 mm., and maximum thickness, 24 ram.
Choppers (Fig. 4e,f)
Choppers recovered from the site are all made on cobbles with one end flaked to form
a working edge and the other retaining the cortical surface. In outline, they vary from
ovate to rectanguloid. Some may be cores, but most show battering and other forms of
use-wear resulting from chopping activities.
Perforators (Fig. 6a-d).
Of the six small perforators or drills recovered frmn the site, three are made on flakes
and three on flake blades. These tools show only minimal modification on the proximal
end or base, but have carefully bifaced bits or drill shafts. The original flake striking
platform is visible on five of the tools.

Unifacial Tools
Large Bipointed Uniface (Fig. 5i)
This specimen is made on a large cortex flake. It has been trimmed to a point at both
ends and steeply beveled along one lateral edge. It may have functioned either as a
scraper or as a knife. Length is 129 mm., maximum width, 45 mm. and maximum
thickness 9 mm.
Scrapers (Fig. 5a-h; Fig. 6m,n)
This group with 90 specimens, represents the most abundant artifact category at the
Finis Frost Site. Sixty-seven are classified as end-scrapers. Of these, 25 are trimmed at
the distal end only, 17 are trimmed on the end and along the right side, and 24 are
trimmed on the end and along the left side. Outlines vary from rectangular to ovate.
Most are made on flakes, but several specimens have been made on flake blades; over
half retain some cortex on the dorsal surface.
Side-scrapers in the collection are usually retouched along one lateral edge. They
are made on flakes of various forms, but long, narrow flakes seem to have been
preferred.
We are able to provide only these broad measurement ranges for both classes of
scrapers: length, 43 mm. to 101 mm.; maximum width, 29 mm. to 59 mm.; and
maximum thickness, 7 mm. to 23 mm. Due to the dispersed nature of the scraper
collections, we have been unable to study them more carefully. It is our impression that
they are representative of Late Prehistoric scraper forms in Central Texas (cf. Suhm
1957; Shafer 1969; Sorrow 1970).

Cores and Flakes
Polyhedral Core (Fig. 7).
The only core collected from the site, aside from possible cores included in some of
the previously described biface categories, is the polyhedral core described here. The
conical specimen is made of a variegated tan-gray fine grained flint and has a flat cortex
striking platform. Small trimming flakes have been detached around the platform
circumference; their purpose was to remove the overhang caused by negative bulbs of
percussion from prior flake detachments. The platform angle varies from 60° to 80°.
The purpose of the core was the removal of long, narrow flake blades. There are scars
on the body of the core representing the detachment of at least four such flake blades.
They have the following length-width measurements: 70 x 24 ram., 73 x 23 ram., 70 x 13
ram. and 93 x 20 mm. All had been struck from the cortex-covered platform. However,

FINIS FROST SITE

79

b

a

c

d

e

S

0

h

m

k

0
I

50
,

i
rn~n,1,

FIGURE 6. Perforators, Flakes and Unifaces from Finis Frost Site. a-d,
perforators; e,f, modified flakes (note graver point on f); g-l, flake
blades; m,n, side scrapers.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

one blade (71 ram. long and 22 mm. wide) has been struck from the wedge-shaped distal
end of the core. A hinge fracture is also present on the core (struck from the cortex
surface) and the distal end shows crushing.
Height of the core is 84 ram., maximum platform diameter is 82 ram., and minimum
platform diameter is 73 ram. Polyhedral cores designed for the removalof flake blades
are rare in central Texas, and usually occur in uncertain archaeological contexts (cf.
Green 1963: Fig. 8; Epstein 1969:86; Honea 1966:263-264).

Flake Blades (Fig. 6g-l).
In his research in the Robert Lee Reservoir of west central Texas, Shafer (1969:4) has
defined a flake blade as".., an elongated flake (usually twice as long as it is wide), with
parallel sides and one or more parallel ridges or scars running nearly the length of the
dorsal surface." A number of these have been collected at the Finis Frost Site and seven
examples are illustrated in Figure 6. All have one or more dorsal ridges and each retains
all or part of the striking platform and bulb of percussion. Four of the illustrated pieces
retain cortex on the dorsal face and three others were apparently removed from the
interior of a core. One blade (not shown) has a graver beak at both ends. As we have
noted previously, flake blades were often used as blanks in the manufacture of scrapers
and arrow points.

FIGURE 7. Polyhedral Blade Core from Finis Frost Site (shown natural
size).

FINIS FROST SITE

81

Modified Flakes (Fig. 6e,f; Fig. 8b).
Irregular waste flakes which have seen some utilization, usually of a casual nature,
are scattered over much of the site, with a definite clustering in the east-southeast
portion. Some are ovate and trimmed around the edges (Fig. 6e); some others are
irregular, with graver beaks (cf. Jelks 1962: Fig. 20 F,G). One specimen (Fig. 8b) is a
rectangular flake of black flint. Along the distal end of the flake is a series of three long,
vertical flakes. A few other flakes have been detached from both sides of the specimen,
and a series of neat trimming scars are found along one edge. This edge may have been
used for cutting or scraping; microscopic examination revealed a single striation
oblique to the edge. Length of the piece is 46 mm., maximum width is 23 mm., and
maximum thickness, 4 mm.

Artifacts of Pecked, Ground and Polished Stone
Hammerstones (not illustrated).
Several specimens were found at the site. In general they are ovate to rounded chert
and quartzite pebbles, some of which appear to have been shaped by pecking. All have
edges battered from use.

Manos and Metates (not illustrated).
Four complete grinding slabs (or metates) and four manos, all made of sandstone,
were found at the site by a former landowner and are not available for study.

Polishing or Rubbing Stones (not illustrated).
Occasional quartzite cobbles at the site exhibit highly polished facets, perhaps
resulting from use in smoothing or rubbing activities (for instance, as "pot-polishers").

Artifacts of Clay
Potsherds
Seventeen plain body sherds have been collected; three specimens are not now
available for analysis. At first glance, most appear to conform to the bone-tempered
Leon Plain type found in central and southern Texas (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954;
Greene ms.; Hester 1971; Hester and Hill 1971). However, one specimen is grogtempered an two others seem to be tempered with calcareous materials.
The bone-tempered sherds have hard surfaces (3-4 on Mohs’ scale), flecked with
tempering agents, and gray or pink pastes. Exterior surfaces are either well-smoothed
(although sometimes uneven) or burnished. The interiors are similarly treated, while
one interior shows an unsmoothed coil juncture and another is roughly-smoothed, with
three short gouges. Size of tempering agents varies from less than 1 mm. in length on
one sherd, to a maximum of 2.0-2.5 mm. on most of the others. In the core of one sherd, a
bone fragment 4 mm. long is preserved. On one specimen there is a remnant of a
perforation in which a handle was once attached (cf. Hester and Hill 1971: Fig. 2t,u).
The grog-tempered sherd has a dark brown crumbly paste; with multicolored
tempering agents, up to 2.5 mm. long. The surfaces have a distinct sandy feel and are
unevenly smoothed (2-3 Mohs’ scale). Shafer (1971:71) notes grog-tempered sherds
from the nearby Robert Lee Reservoir basin.
Two of the sherds are tempered with what appears to be bits of highly-crushed, and
slightly rounded, white rock (perhaps fossilized bone); size of the particles ranges up to
2.5 mm. in length. Pastes are light brown in color and are highly compact. Surfaces are
burnished, with hardnesses of 4-5 on Mohs’ scale. Further analyses of these sherds are
required.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

82

a

b

50

0

J

I

mm.
s

12
FIGURE 8. Additional Artifacts from Finis Frost Site. Specimens recorded
by Green in late 1971. a, triangular arrow point; b, modified flake
(cross section shown); c, possible tool of bison bone; rounded and
beveled end indicated by heavy stippling.

FINIS FROST SITE

83

Color and other attributes of the sherds are listed below. The varied surface colors no
doubt results from the vessels having been fired in an oxidizing atmosphere. Surface
and paste characteristics suggest to us that at least seven vessels are represented. Colors
given below are based on the Munsell color charts.

Color

Temper

Exterior

Interior

Thickness in mm.
Max.
Min.

reddish-yellow
(5YR:7/6)

pink (5YR:8/4)

bone

4.5

4.0

It. reddishbrown (5YR:6/4)

same as
exterior

bone

4.5

3.0

light brown

pink

stone

6.0

5.0

(5YR:6/4)

(5YR: 7/4)

lt. reddish-

same as
exterior

bone

4.0

3.0

brown (5YR:6/4)
smudged

light brown

grog

7.0

4.0

(5YR: 6/4)
pink (5YR: 7/4)

pink (5YR: 8/4)

bone

4.5

4.0

gray-brown

light gray
(1OYR: 7/2)

stone

4.0

3.0

burned
bone and
stone(?)

4.0

3.0

bone

9.0

7.0

(10YR: 5/2)
brown (10YR: 513)

same as
exterior

pale brown

reddish-yellow

(10YR: 6/3)

(5YR: 6/6)

pink (7.5YR:

very pale brown
(10YR: 7/4)

bone

5.8

5.5

7/4)
It. brown to
pink (7.5YR: 6/4-7/4)

very pate brown
(10YR: 7/4)

bone

8.0

7.0

same as above

gray (10YR: 5/1)

bone

8.0

7.0

pink (7.5YR:7/4)

same as exterior

bone

9.5

5.0

very pale brown
(10YR: 7/4)

same as exterior
(with gray streaks)

bone

7.0

6.0

pink (7.5YR: 7/4)

same as exterior

bone

4.0

3.5

FAUNAL REMAINS
Fauna! remains are scattered over the site and no distinct clusters
were found. Samples have been collected and identified by personnel
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin. Identified
remains include bison, deer, turtle, and bobcat (the latter represented

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

by a single mandible). While no quantitative measurements are possible, we should like to emphasize that bones of the bison are by far the
dominant faunal remains at the site. Comminuted long bone fragments of bison are widely distributed and at least 20 teeth and tooth
fragments have been collected.
A splinter of bison bone from the site may have been intentionally
modified (Fig. 8c). One end has been rounded off, and appears to be
slightly beveled, with more prominent beveling on the opposite face.
Length is 67 mm., maximum width, 24 mm., and maximum thickness,
6 mm.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In reviewing the cultural materials at the Finis Frost Site, it is
immediately apparent that these manifestations are characteristic of
the late prehistoric Toyah Phase (Shafer 1971; the Toyah Focus of
Jelks 1962) of central Texas. Chronometric evaluations have placed
the age of this phase at between A.D. 1250 and A.D. 1560 (Jelks 1962;
Sharer 1971; Hester 1971).
The lithic tool kit at Finis Frost includes many contracted stem
arrow points (Perdiz), three triangular arrow points (possiblyFresno),
and a side-notched point (possibly Washita), numerous unifacial
scraping tools, diamond-shaped beveled bifaces and bipointed
bifaces (both forms may have functioned as knives), choppers, crude
bifaces of various sorts, perforators and gravers made on flakes, and
manos and metates. Pottery vessels are represented by sherds of Leon
Plain ware. In general, this assemblage resembles those of other
Toyah phase sites in central Texas (Sharer 1971; Hester and Parker
1970; Jelks 1962; Stephenson 1970). Triangular arrow points occur in
Toyah phase contexts in the Whitney Reservoir of central Texas
(Stephenson 1970). Somewhat similar triangular points are known
from the earlier Austin phase (these are the Granbury points of Jelks
1962:35).
Bison dominates the faunal remains at the Finis Frost Site, a fact
consistent with data from other Toyah phase sites noted by Sharer
(1971). It is most likely that the large number of scrapers (and possibly
the beveled and bipointed bifaces) reflect a hide-working technology
which accompanied the heavy economic emphasis on bison. In addition to the exploitation of bison the inhabitants of the site gathered
freshwater mussels and box turtles and hunted whitetail deer. The
bobcat represented at the site may not have been a food item (cf. Jelks
1962: 93). Both Jelks(1962:93) and Stephenson (1970:247) note the
heavy reliance of Toyah phase peoples in the Whitney Reservoir area

FINIS FROST SITE

85

on the gathering of mussels and land snails; such emphasis appears to
be absent at the Finis Frost Site. Jelks (1962:93) also notes the importance of fishing, but again we have no data for this activity.
If climatic conditions of today are similar to those which existed at
the site in late prehistoric times, there would have been an abundance
of plant foods in the three ecological zones or resource areas available
to the site inhabitants. The manos and metates found at the site were
probably used in the processing of such plant foods. However, Shafer
(1971) has suggested that Toyah phase peoples might have been
engaged in maize horticulture in favorable locales, such as the one in
which the Finis Frost Site is situated. In such an instance, these
grinding tools might have been used on maize or other foodstuffs
which may have been produced.
It is difficult to estimate the length or nature of the occupation at the
site. While the occupational debris is scattered over 4 acres, it is
concentrated in a rather small area in the east-southeast part of the
site; we believe this may have been the locus in which much of the
activity at the site was confined. Given the large amount of bison bone
and accompanying processing tools, we can speculate that the site
represents a seasonal bison-hunting encampment. However, the site
is situated in an ideal location, with easily accessible permanent
water sources and in close proximity to the productive aquatic and
upland resource areas, and may have seen semi-sedentary occupations (cf. Shafer 1971).
We have inadequate data for detailed inferences on lithic technology at the site. Samples of waste flakes have not been collected or
studied. It is apparent, however, that a core-blade technology was
known. The carefully-worked polyhedral blade core has few counterparts in dated contexts in central Texas. Flake blades have been
previously recognized in central and west-central Texas by Honea
(1966), Shafer (1969), Hester (1971) and Hester and Shafer (1974), and
it is becoming rather clear that most of these materials can be attributed to the Late Prehistoric era. At this site, the flake blades were
used in the manufacture of arrow points, end scrapers, side scrapers
and other tools.
Although Green (1970) has reported several other sites along the
Richland Springs Creek drainage system, the Finis Frost Site represents the only known major Toyah phase occupation. Perdiz points are
known from two other sites (41 SS 11 and 41 SS 13), both of which
date mainly from Late Archaic times. Triangular arrow points, flake
blades, end and side scrapers, bipointed knives and other similar
materials also occur, but also in mixed, predominantly Archaic contexts.

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In conclusion, we can state that the Finis Frost Site represents a
discrete Toyah phase occupation site, the inhabitants of which appear
to have emphasized the hunting of bison in their subsistence regime.
Investigations are continuing at the site and further data will be
forthcoming.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to several people who helped us when we were gathering data for this
report: Finis Frost, owner of the land where the site is located; Mr. L. M. Matlock, former
owner; and Frank Green and Ronald Moore. We sincerely thank all of these people.

REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1958 Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile
Points. Special Bulletin, Oklahoma Anthropological Society, No. 1.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No.
1:93-117.
Drake, N. F.
1893 Report on the Colorado Coal Field of Texas. Fourth Annual Report,
Geological Survey of Texas: 357-446.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1969 The San Isidro Site, An Early Man Campsite in Nuevo Leon, Mexico.
University of Texas Anthropological Series, No. 7.
Field, Albert
1956 Archeological Investigations in Lampasas, Burnet, Llano, and San
Saba Counties, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 27:161-184.
Gibson, Jan L. and Blake L. Benham
1969 Archaeological Survey of Parts of the Denton Creek Watershed.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 40:199-230.
Green, F. E.
1963 The Clovis Blades: An Important Addition to the Llano Complex.
American Antiquity, Vol. 29, No. 2:145-165.
Green, L. M.
1970 An Introduction to the Archeology of the Richland Springs Creek
Area, Western San Saba County, Texas (with the collaboration ofT. R.
Hester). Lower Plains Archeological Society, Bulletin No. 1:1-38.
1971 Notes on the Archeology of the Happy Patch Site, San Saba County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42:319-333.
Greene, Lorraine H.
ms. An Analysis of Leon Plain Typology. Unpublished manuscript.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1971 Archeological Investigationsat the La Jita Site, Uvalde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 42:51-148.
Hester, Thomas Roy and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1971 An Initial Study of a Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition in Southern Texas.
Plains Anthropologist Vol. 16, No. 53:195-203.

FINIS FROST SITE

87

Hester, Thomas Roy and Robert C. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in Goliad County,
Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
41:1-24.
Hester, Thomas R. and Harry J. Shafer
1974 An Initial Study of Blade Technology on the Central and Southern
Texas Coast. Texas Journal of Science manuscript submitted for publication.
Honea, Kenneth M.
1966 Prehistoric Flaking Technologies in Texas. Atti del VI Congresso
Internazionale delle Scienze Prehistoriche e Protostoriche, Vol.
3:260-267.
Jackson, A. T.
1938 The Fall Creek Sites. University of Texas Publication, No. 3802.
Anthropological Papers, Vol. 3, No. 1:11-118.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. University of Texas Archaeology Series, No. 5.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publication, No. 4640.
McElroy, L. P.
1940 A Study of Indian Mortar Hole Sites in Mills and San Saba Counties.
The Record, Vol. 1, No. 10:40-42, 43-44.
Munsell Soil Color Charts
1954 Munsell Color Company, Baltimore.
Oetking, Phillip F.
1959 Geological Highway Map of Texas. Dallas Geological Society.
Poteet, Sybil
1938 The Occurrence and Distribution of Beveled Knives. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10:245-262.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1957 A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 28:135-168.
Sharer, Harry J.
1969 Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir Basin, West
Central Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No.
17.
1971 Late Prehistory of Central Texas: 500 B.C. to A.D. 1700. Paper given at
annual meeting, Texas Academy of Science, Nacogdoches.
Sollberger, J. B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains Anthrop ol ogist, Vol.
16, No. 53:209-218.
Sorrow, William M.
1970 Archeological Investigations at the Barker Site. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Research Report, No. 1.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1970 Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 41:37-286.

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Suhm, Dee Ann
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 26:7-54.
1957 Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 1:26-58.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Thompson, R. A.
1893 Reports on the Soils, Water Supply and Irrigation of the Colorado Coal
Field. Fourth Annual Report, Geological Survey of Texas: 449-481.
Richland Springs
University of Texas at San Antonio

