An Archeological Review of the
Central Texas Coast
Harry J. Shafer and Clell L. Bond

ABSTRACT
Archeological research into the prehistory of the Coastal Bend region of Texas is
reviewed in this paper. Attention is focused on the nature and condition of the archeological resources that occur in the region. Distribution of the natural resources and patterning in the archeological record are used as the basis for suggesting a seasonal foraging
pattern for the ancient Coastal Bend populations. Temporal changes in the culture sequence are seen to be due to (1) a shift in the local ecology and (2) a shift in selective
preference by the ancient populations.

INTRODUCTION
This paper reviews the history of archeotogical research and examines the
prehistoric period in the Coastal Bend of Texas, which extends from Corpus
Christi Bay eastward to the mouth of the Brazos River and about 80 km (50
miles) inland (Figure 1). The region is characterized by a low-lying landscape,
many freshwater streams, brackish and saline bays and lagoons, and a generally
temperate environment. Prehistoric aboriginal" populations lived in the area as
early as about 9000 years ago, but the shifting coastline and the coastal ecology
limited these populations to an exclusively foraging lifeway. The ancient cultures
changed their strategies of exploitation from time to time, leaving recognizable
qualitative changes in their artifact assemblages.

ENVIRONMENT
The climate of the area is mild, with hot summers and cool winters, an average annual temperature of about 20° C. (70° F.), and a growing season of about
295 days. Rainfall averages 80 to 90 cm (32 to 36 in.) annually (Arbingast et al.
1976).
Blair (1950) has placed the Texas Coastal Bend in the Tamaulipan Biotic
Province, a region that has close biological relations with the thorn scrub, coastal
marshes, and sand dunes of northeastern Mexico. According to Gould’s (1975)
vegetation zones of Texas, the area lies near the geographic center of the Gulf
Prairies and Marshes zone, a relatively narrow strip of land extending the length
of the Texas coast.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

272

0

Texas Archeological Society

I00

200 kn3

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing location of Coastal Bend region.

The topography of the Coastal Bend, mainly flat and sloping gently to the
southeast, is typical of the Pleistocene Beaumont Formation, which comprises
most of the coastal plain in Texas (American Association of Petroleum Geologists n.d.). The heavy, clayey prairie soils are not easily permeated and are
droughty in nature. The Gulf Prairies and Marshes zone is a typically mediumto-tall-grass prairie composed of such perennial grasses as tanglehead (Heteropogon cotttortltS), lndiangrass (Sorghastrum elliotii), big bluestem (Andropogon
gerardii), and Trichloris plur([tora, which occupy the well-drained areas; short
grasses such as buffalo grass (Buch/oe dactyloides), 3-awn (Aristida roemeriana),
and silver bluestem (Andropogon saccharoides) occupy the poorly drained clays
(Jones 1975; Gould 1975).
In the vicinity of the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge (Figure 2) the topography of the Beaumont Formation has been altered by coastal geological pro-

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

273

Figure 2. Map of part of the Coastal Bend region of Texas. Base map from U.S. Army
Map Service 1:250,000; Bay City, Beeville, Corpus Christi, Houston, Seguin.

cesses. A 5-to-13-km-wide (3-to-8-mile) strip of deep sand runs the length of the
Coastal Bend (LeBlanc and Hodgson 1959). This sandy strip, termed the Live
Oak Ridge or Barrier in the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge area, is a Pleistocene barrier island that was formed 100 to 120 thousand years ago (Shepard and
Moore 1955). In the vicinity of the Wildlife Refuge, the Live Oak Barrier, which
includes the Blackjack Peninsula, is paralleled on the landward side by an ancient
filled lagoon termed Ingleside Lagoon by Price (1947). On the seaward side,
Blackjack Peninsula is flanked by two lagoonal bays, Mesquite and Carlos; a bay
of both riverine and lagoonal origin, Aransas; and by a Holocene barrier island,
Matagorda (Figure 2). Spectacular shell ridges, which support thick woody
growth, have been formed along the edge of the peninsula facing these bays. Unfortunately, some of this interesting area has been mined for shell road-building
materials.
The topographic manifestations of these geological features are low, sometimes wooded, sandy ridges alternating with swaley areas on the seaward side,
and the ancient filled lagoon (still occupied in part by St. Charles Bay) on the
landward side. The deep sands support a woody growth of sweet bay (Persea

274

Texas Archeological Society

borbonia) and oaks such as Quercus minina, Quercus fusiformis, laurel oak
(Quercus hemisphaerica), live oak (Quercus virginiana), and blackjack oak
(Quercus marylandica) from which Blackjack Peninsula gets its name. Due to
the sandy, well-drained nature of the soil and the calcareous nature of the shell
ridges, other woody plants in the area are quite reminiscent of the South Texas
and northern Mexico shrublands. These plants include Mexican buckeye (Ungnadia speciosa), granjeno ( Celtis pallida), guayacan ( Forestieria angustifolia),
prickly ash (Xanthoxylum clava-herculis), and the lilly Yucca treculeana.
The swaley areas between the wooded ridges are covered with a dense growth
of cordgrass (Spartina spartinae), gulfdune paspalum (Paspalum monostachyum), and seashore paspalum (Paspalum vaginatum). Other poorly drained soils
near the bays are covered with such salt resistant plants as purslane (Sesuviuprt
portulacastrum), salt heliotrope (Heliotropum curassavicum), seashore saltgrass
(Distichlis spicata), smooth cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora), and shoregrass
( Monanthocloe littoralis).
Migratory birds are perhaps the most spectacular aspect of the fauna, as the
area is on a major North American flyway and is the winter home of the whooping crane (Grus americana). Land mammals occupying the area include pocket
gophers (Cratogeomys castanops), cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus) and wood rat
(Neotoma floridana), cottontails (Sylvilagus floridanus), swamp rabbits (Syh, ilagus aquaticus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), bobcats (Lynx
rufus), and even black bear (Ursus americanus) as recently as early historic times.
The shallow bays and flats provide shelter for abundant marine life such as
blue crab (Callinectes sapidus), brown shrimp (Crago vulgaris), speckled trout
(Cynoscion nebulosus), redfish (Sciaenops ocellata), drum (Pogonias cromis),
croaker (Micropogon undulatus), and mullet (Mugil cephalus), and also have
extensive oyster (Crassostrea virginica) reefs, all of which could have been
exploited by aborigines (Hedgepeth 1953). Except for the lack of a riverine environment, the area should have been an excellent foraging ground for prehistoric inhabitants. However, from the standpoint of the survey archeologist, the
physiography and vegetation present many difficulties. The stable sands are covered with vegetation, which in most areas is quite thick, severely limiting visibility at ground level. In those areas of shifting sands--all those not covered with
vegetation--wind action greatly alters the ground surface, both covering and destroying sites. In addition, oyster shells have been used extensively for road
building, and, as a result of fires, which are common in the area, the ground in
many places is covered with flecks of charcoal. The widespread charcoal and
oyster shell complicate recognition of sites in this region because charcoal and
oyster shell are abundant in the sites and artifacts are scarce.
HISTORY OF ARCHEOLOGICAL WORK
A brief history of the archeological work in the Coastal Bend of Texas
points out several regional problems. Some of the information provided in syntheses of the area (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954; Campbell 1960; Mallouf, Fox,
and Briggs 1973) is pertinent to the development of awareness of the cultural
diversity in the region.
The first significant attempt to document the archeological remains in the
Coastal Bend area was made by two avocational archeologists, George C. Martin

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

275

and Wendell H. Potter, in the late 1920s and early 1930s (Martin n.d., 1929,
1930a, 1930b, 1931; Potter 1930). These two men recorded sites between Baffin
and Matagorda bays and provided the beginning of scientific inquiry into this
part of Texas. Although they failed to grasp the evolutionary significance of their
own test excavations (they attributed virtually all materials to the Karankawa Indians), the fact that they were first was not the only contribution they made. Information provided by them, particularly from their test excavations at the
Johnson (Campbell 1947) and Kent-Crane (Campbell 1952) sites was used to
guide the Works Progress Administration (WPA) archeological field work in the
Coastal Bend region and laid the groundwork for a sound body of data for the
establishment of a cultural sequence. Their findings were also used by Sayles
(1935) as a basis for the first synthesis of the archeological assemblages along the
Texas coast. Sayles had conducted a reconnaissance of Texas for Gila Pueblo,
and, considering the time period, his contribution, "Archaeological Survey of
Texas," was remarkable, for he was the first to recognize that the coastal sites
covered considerable time spans. Sayles defined two phases, the Oso and Rockport, as part of what he called the Karankawan pattern; his Rockport phase survives, albeit in modified form, to this day, but the Oso phase has not stood the
test of time.
Campbell’s analysis of materials recovered from excavations at the Johnson
and Kent-Crane sites provided the first definition of the Aransas focus (Campbell
1947, 1952). He also analyzed materials from a number of other sites, including
sites on five islands in Laguna Madre (Campbell 1956) which provided substantiation of the Rockport focus concept. His synthesis of the archeology along the
central and southern Gulf Coast of Texas raised specific questions to aid in guiding future work. Campbell’s synthesis, while dated now, is still a major contribution on Texas coastal archeology. Other significant contributions by Campbell
(1962, 1964) include his hypotheses on the origin of Rockport wares and a survey of Padre Island(1964), which indicates the degree to which the late prehistoric population utilized this barrier island environment.
Corbin (1963) reported on the results of a prolonged survey in the Coastal
Bend. This report is important because several of the sites that Corbin described
no longer exist and because it was on the basis of Corbin’s recommendations that
Story (1968) conducted test excavations at the Ingleside Cove site. Story’s work
provided a significant body of data on the chronology and human ecology of
these prehistoric coastal adaptations. In fact, Story’s investigations at the Ingleside Cove and Anaqua sites mark an important shift in the theoretical orientation
of coastal archeology. Her investigations had a strong bent toward the ecological
approach while at the same time providing excellent and detailed descriptions of
the cultural materials recovered from these sites.
Some of the more informative surveys were those of Fritz (1972, 1975) in
the Matagorda Bay area. In 1972 Fritz conducted a pilot survey of Cox Bay and
Huisache Cove in Calhoun County. This work, conducted under the auspices of
the Texas General Land Office, and part of a multi-disciplinary Matagorda BayEstuarine Resource Management Study, was followed by a more intensive inspection of six "target areas" extending from the eastern end of Matagorda
Island to the eastern end of Matagorda Bay, including sections of the Navidad
Delta, Lavaca, Cox, and Keller bays. The 94 archeological sites recorded during

276

Texas Archeological Society

these surveys added appreciably to our knowledge of types, distribution, and
condition of sites, and of the spatial distribution of ceramic and lithic artifacts.
The objectives of the survey were "to provide a general evaluation of Matagorda
Bay’s archeological resources and to determine as fully as possible, using the limited methods of surficial survey, the potentials of the sites for yielding information concerning the area’s paleoenvironment" (Fritz 1975:1,2). (Certain data
provided by Fritz will be mentioned later.)
Studies along the coast also provided information on the spatial distribution
of some important classes of archeological data. Campbell’s (1956) analysis of
materials from five islands in the Laguna Madre and Hester’s (1969) survey in
Kenedy and Kleberg counties south of Corpus Christi provided information on
the southern extent of the distribution of Rockport assemblage materials. Hester
also published descriptions of the artifacts collected in 1941 by G. C. Arnold, of
the University of Texas. Corbin and Hester conducted limited test excavations at
the Kirchmeyer site, a clay dune site on Oso Creek. Although this work remains
largely unpublished, data on some materials collected from the site by C. A.
Calhoun, Corbin, and Hester were incorporated into a study of blade technology
in Rockport assemblages on the central and southern coast of Texas (Hester and
Shafer 1969).
The Palmetto Bend Reservoir district in Jackson County along the lower
Lavaca and Navidad rivers can be considered inland coastal and has received
much attention in the past decade. The initial Palmetto Bend Reservoir survey
was made by Wakefield (1968) and resulted in the recording of 22 archeological
sites. A more intensive survey and limited testing of this reservoir impoundment
area was conducted by the Texas Historical Survey Committee (Mallouf, Fox,
and Briggs 1973) and an additional 62 sites were added to the inventory. The first
mitigation phase of the Palmetto Bend salvage work was carried out in 1974 by
the Texas Archeological Survey (McGuff et al. 1978). Five sites were excavated.
and data derived from this work have provided a clearer picture of the culture
history of the lower Navidad watershed. However, the authors of this latter report
departed from the standard terminology used by previous archeologists in the
Palmetto Bend area and the Coastal Bend region, so it is difficult to compare their
findings with those of Mallouf et al., Fritz, and Story.
Dering and Ayers (1977) report on archeological work at small shellmidden localities along Oyster Creek in Brazoria County. In this study, Dering
critically reviewed the various approaches to analysis of shell middens around the
world in an effort to establish an appropriate avenue for study of these sites in
Texas. Dering observed that research on shell midden economies has produced a
composite of theoretical approaches that can be applied to shell middens on the
Texas coast.
Only when the results of a Texas midden analysis are placed in the framework
of a clearly stated theory which considers the annual economy of a prehistoric group
will the results be placed into the proper perspective. One of the striking accomplishments of Clark’s (1954) work at Starr Carr was the visibility of each move that was
made in establishing a relationship between the archeological remains and the prehistoric population level. Each step was testable; no intuitive leaps from archeological remains to population size or subsistence patterns were made. As a result,
even though modifications of the theory were necessary, the Starr Carr study still

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

277

stands as a beautiful example of a scientific approach to prehistoric economy [Dering
and Ayers 1977:16].
Dering also noted that data from previous excavations in Texas shell middens were not fitted into a framework of concise testable hypotheses. Shell
middens offer a unique opportunity to get reliable quantitative information on
prehistoric coastal economy. Several authors have expressed alarm at the rapidity
of destruction of these sites from natural and cultural causes. Dering and Ayers
have demonstrated the validity of an economic approach to shell midden analysis
patterned after Clark’s (1954) classic study. They were able to demonstrate the
transient nature of the occupants of the Oyster Creek shell midden and to point
out that despite the predominance of Rangia shells, qualitative analysis of the
biomass of the Rangia meat showed that shellfish amounted to only a minor part
of the diet of the small band who occupied the site. They also cautioned archeologists to consider the economy of individual sites in the context of the total
annual economy of the prehistoric inhabitants of coastal zones.

CULTURE HISTORY
When Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) provided a framework for ordering
the archeological materials in Texas, they employed the then-popular stage concept. These stages, Paleo-American, Archaic, Neo-American, and Historic,
were based generally on assumed economic patterns. Texas archeologists continue to view culture history in this four-stage sequence, but, although those concepts initially provided a beginning, continued reliance on them has resulted in a
series of somewhat rigid assumptions. The validity of these concepts needs tO be
thoroughly examined.
We assume that all of the prehistoric populations who inhabited the Coastal
Bend region were foragers, or hunters and gatherers, if we have interpreted the
material remains correctly; however, this should not be taken as proven because
there is much we do not know about the inland adaptations.
One locality, the Buckner Ranch site reported by Sellards (1940), has
yielded artifacts in context with extinct faunal remains, and, although there is
some question about the stratigraphic associations, the early date of the Buckner
Ranch materials cannot be denied. The presence of similar early (what some
would term Paleo-American) materials along Oso and Petronila creeks in Nueces
County (Patterson and Ford 1974) demonstrates that assemblages dating back
about 7,000 to 9,000 years do occur in the inland coastal area.
Very little is known of the foraging adaptations from about 7000 to 3000 B.p.
Many archeologists have assumed that the so-called Archaic populations were
composed of fluid bands Of nomadic or seminomadic foragers, but recent findings at the Ernest Witte site (Hall 1981), a reevaluation of the Morhiss site material, and the excavation by the Texas Department of Public Transportation
(C. Johnson, personal communication, n.d.) of a large cemetery site, 41LK28,
in Live Oak County, northwest of Corpus Christi, illustrate our lack of understanding about the sociocultural systems of the Archaic adaptations in the inlands
bordering the coast. The Ernest Witte and Morhiss sites were largely cemetery
localities, each containing several hundred interments. Artifact associations with
the earlier series of burials at these sites hint at a socioeconomic structure remi-

278

Texas Archeological Society

niscent of, and possibly linked to, the eastern Archaic. The cultural systems involved in the Morhiss culture complex undoubtedly affected or perhaps even incorporated the early Aransas culture. It is indeed unfortunate that the Morhiss
data have never been analyzed and published, because Morhiss is perhaps the
single most important site in this part of the coastal inlands.
As noted earlier, Campbell’s (1947) analysis of the Johnson site data provide
the basis for defining the Aransas focus, an assemblage of hunting and gathering populations who did not use pottery, but had shell, bone, and stone tools.
Campbell notes that Aransas focus sites occur on the shores of bays but not along
the open Gulf sides of the offshore islands. No definite traces of house remains
were found at the Johdson site, but circular pavements of shells about 1.5 meters
in diameter may have served as floors for structures surrounding the midden
proper. Burials were infrequent but occurred in both flexed and extended positions with no surviving grave goods. Campbell notes that these people made extensive use of materials from the coastal environment. Conch shell was used for
hammers, adzes, gouges, scrapers, awls, ornaments, and possibly containers;
clam shells were found chipped along an edge, perhaps as a result of their use as
knives and scrapers. (Also see Steele and Mokry 1985 for aboriginal uses of
shell along the central coast of Texas.) Bone was used extensively t’or awls,
beads, and other tools. Except lor sandstone concretions, stone does not occur
along the outer coastal zone.
Campbell suggests a minimum date for Aransas focus material of A.D. 1500,
since no European goods have been recovered from the Archaic levels. Although
he originally limited the extent of the Aransas focus to the area from Guadalupe
Bay to Corpus Christi Bay, Corbin (1974) notes that it has been extended to include materials from the Colorado River to Baffin Bay and argues that, with this
geographic extension and the inclusion of the Kent-Crane materials, the concept
of the Aransas focus has been, in his words, destroyed. Corbin, reevaluating the
Kent-Crane and Johnson site materials and incorporating materials from other
sites, including the Ingleside Cove site, was able to demonstrate through seriation an evolutionary change in the projectile point forms dating from about
3000 B.c. to A.D. 1200. Palmillas and Bulverde-like forms clustered in the lower
levels of both sites; Ensor and Catan forms were late. Also, he notes that conch
columella gouges and conch adzes were common in the lower zones of KentCrane, but only a few occurred in the lower levels of the Johnson site. Corbin
observes differences in the geographic occurrence of certain dart point forms as
well; south of a line formed by the Nueces River and Corpus Christi Bay, stemless dart points predominate in the Archaic assemblages, whereas north of
that line stemmed forms predominate. These temporal and spatial differences
were sufficient to convince Corbin that the Aransas focus, as it was currently
used, masked the real keys to cultural change archeologists were looking for. He
(Corbin 1974:37) suggests either (1)restricting the term to the most recent
archeological manifestations of Archaic cultural adaptations to coastal environments or (2) rejecting the concept of an Aransas focus but applying the term
Aransas complex to Archaic cultural adaptations to the coastal environment.
Corbin similarly demonstrated the complexity of the Rockport focus when
he critically analyzed and synthesized data associated with the ceramic period
(Corbin 1974). Rockport focus materials stratigraphically overlie the Aransas

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

279

materials. Sayles originally proposed the name Rockport for ceramic assemblages along the entire Texas coast, but Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) reduced
the geographic extent from Baffin Bay to the Colorado River. Like the preceding
Aransas focus, the entire ceramic period along the Coastal Bend region was
lumped under one heading and therefore was masking whatever temporal or spatial differences that might exist. Before Story (1968) excavated the Anaqua site,
all of the coastal pottery was thought to belong to the Rockport series. However,
Story found a discrete cultural deposit yielding Scallorn arrow points and sandypaste pottery similar to the Galveston Bay ceramics. Campbell (1962) has theorized that the origin of Rockport ware was to the east in the Galveston Bay area,
and recent explorations in the Trinity River delta have shown that the origin of
the Southeast Texas sandy-paste and Galveston Bay wares was theTchefuncte culture in the lower Mississippi Valley. Corbin, in his examination of the data on
temporal changes within the Coastal Bend ceramic period, has convincingly
shown that there are changes in projectile point form, with Scallorn appearing
before Perdiz. Corbin, together with Story, has suggested that Campbell’s thesis
regarding the origin of Rockport ware is correct, and it is supported by the temporal data. Corbin also points out parallels between Rockport Incised motifs and
motifs found in the Galveston Bay area.
Based on findings at the Anaqua site (Story 1968), Fritz’s surveys of Matagorda Bay (Fritz 1975), and Corbin’s seriation (1974), the post-Archaic sequence
appears to be as follows. From Lavaca Bay eastward perhaps to the Colorado
River, the earliest ceramics are a sandy-paste ware associated with Scallorn arrow
points. Through time, perhaps no more than two centuries, the ceramics evolved
into what we now call the Rockport series, with asphalt painting appearing on
some vessels. These ceramics spread southward, eventually reaching the Baffin
Bay area. The predominant arrow point types are Perdiz, with a few bulbarstemmed triangular forms continuing. It is interesting to observe that shell tools
are virtually absent in the post-Archaic assemblages. Certain sites yielding Rockport series pottery and mostly Perdiz arrow points also contained glass arrow
points and glass beads, artifacts indicative of the Spanish Colonial period. Certainly these associations are convincing enough to tie the materials of the waning
Rockport to historic times, or at least to A.D. 1550. A third ware, Goliad, is
sometimes associated with these late Rockport sites (Campbell 1962).

ARCHEOLOGICAL RESOURCES IN THE COASTAL BEND REGION
From findings of the archeological surveys of Martin (n.d., 1929), Potter
(1930), Corbin (1963), and Fritz (1972, 1975), and of excavations by Campbell
at the Johnson (1947), Kent-Crane (1952), and Live Oak Point (1958) sites, the
predominant archeological sites to be expected in the central coastal area of
Texas are shell middens, lithic scatters, bone and ceramic concentrations, and
cemeteries. Fritz (1975:142, 143) lists nine descriptive categories of sites based
on appearance and content ranging from large and small shell middens to artifact
scatters or artifact concentrations with no shell. The variability in site type may
be due to temporal or functional differences or both. Variability may also simply
reflect the condition of sites that were modified in prehistoric or modern times.
Shell middens, however, once constituted the dominant resources in the region. At excavated shell midden sites such as Johnson and Kent-Crane, the ma-

280

Texas Archeological Society

trix was shell and dark soil. They contained bone refuse, lithic items, shell tools,
ceramics (in the upper levels, which were devoid of shell tools), and occasional
flexed or extended burials. The most common shells at Johnson were principally
oyster, conch, scallop, and moon shell, with oyster predominating (Campbell
1947:45). Interestingly, conch was the predominant shell mentioned at the KentCrane site. Fritz (1975) has provided an important set of data on the spatial distribution of certain economic species of invertebrates. She noted a transition
from middens dominated by Rangia cuneata in the northeastern part of Matagorda Bay to middens dominated by oysters (Crossostrea sp. and Ostrea sp.) in
the southwestern part. In addition to the north-south transition zone, the composition of middens varied according to their positions in relation to the salinity
gradients of the estuaries. Oyster middens were found in primary, secondary, and
tertiary bays, and in stream channels near where they joined these bays. Rangia
middens were found on the shores of brackish freshwater lakes and from a few
hundred meters to a few kilometers up freshwater streams.
As suggested by the lngleside Cove data, the occurrence of conch (Bus~,con) at archeological sites tends to increase southward from Matagorda Bay.
Conch is frequent in the early component at Kent-Crane and other sites (Corbin
1974:37). Its presence at the Johnson site and in the lower levels of the lngleside
Cove site (among others) does not necessarily mean that it was a primary food
source. As Story (1968) notes, the larger conch shells, those most frequently
selected as raw material, are also often inhabited by hermit crabs. Collecting
conch shells may have been an expedient way to collect these crustaceans.
Campbell (1947) may have provided the first tangible data on the structure
of the Coastal Bend settlements themselves in the finding of small circular deposits of shell around the midden at the Johnson site. These circular features averaged about 1.5 meters in diameter and were found as far as 250 meters from the
midden. More recently, similar findings have been documented at the DowCleaver site (Ted Hollingsworth, personal communication, n.d.). Martin (1929)
interpreted these phenomena as the shell debris floors of some kind of temporary
shelters; Campbell (1947) tends to support this view. These features bring to mind
a description of a historic Atakapan settlement in southwestern Louisiana which
notes that the shell midden was reserved for the headman’s house while the other.
families camped in the vicinity, and that in the other huts "fireplaces" were of
oyster shells (Newcomb 1961:325). Dering and Ayers (1977) report several similar small shell features, but warn against attaching a particular function to them.
Lithic items such as projectile points, awls, other biface tools, flake and
uniface tools, and core and flake debitage occur in the sites, but, as several researchers have pointed out, there are no flint deposits along the coast. This absence of local flint was noted by Cabeza de Vaca, who recalled that the Copoques
(probably located in the area of what is now Velasco Peninsula in 1528- 1533).
traded cockles and other seashells to inland tribes for flint, glue, hard cane, and
tassels of deer hair (Bandelier 1905).
An examination by the senior author of the lithic artifacts from the Aransas
and Rockport collections at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory of The
University of Texas at Austin suggests that different approaches were used to re~tuce the pebble-sized and small-cobble-sized flint nodules. The predominant
method of the Aransas flint knappers was the bifacing or random flaking of nod-

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

281

ules, and some bipolar flaking. The Rockport flint knappers, on the other hand,
tended to prepare a platform and remove a series of flake blades from the nodules, thus maximizing the amount of cutting edge obtained from the imported
resource and producing elongated flakes that were easily transformed into long
Perdiz points, triangular arrow points, and other tools (Hester and Shafer 1969).
The Rockport knappers also engaged in random core reduction, but their knowledge of blade technology is notable. These differences between the reduction
strategies of the Aransas and Rockport knappers undoubtedly were influenced by
the end products desired, but they could also be indicative of differences through
time in social relations with inland groups. Whatever the reasons are for these
differences, thorough analysis of debitage collections may bring to light important temporal and technological differences not indicated by other remains.
The ceramic wares from the Coastal Bend area fall into three basic categories: the thin, sandy-paste Rockport ware, including Rockport Black-on-Gray,
Rockport Incised, and Rockport Plain (Campbell 1962), the sand-and-bonetempered Goliad Ware, including Goliad Plain, Goliad Red-on-Bluff, and Goliad
Black-on-Bluff (Campbell 1962), and a thick, sandy-paste and grog-tempered
ware related to the Galveston Bay series of ceramic types. As noted earlier, the
first example of this ware in the Coastal Bend area was reported by Story (1968).
Story’s findings have been substantiated by Fritz’s survey and indeed Fritz’s
(1975:106) observations are pertinent to research problems in the study area:
Sherds collected during the Matagorda Bay survey provide interesting data for
interpretations of coastal prehistory. First, the presence of unmistakable Goose Creek
and San Jacinto pottery in Matagorda County extends the western limit of these traits
associated with the Galveston Bay Focus almost as far west as the Colorado River.
Second, the presence of two distinct ceramic traditions--Rockport ware in Calhoun
County and Goose Creek-San Jacinto ware in eastern Matagorda County--raises interesting questions concerning territorial ranges of and cultural variation among
groups of coastal Indians. Third, the existence of non Rockport pottery as well as
Rockport pottery along the Lavaca River in Jackson County suggests a previously
undefined ceramic technology which either predates or coexists with the manufacture
of Rockport ware in the inland reaches of the western portion of Matagorda Bay
study area [Fritz 1975: 106].
The vessel forms are predominantly bowls and jars. A question that to our
knowledge has never been raised regarding the function of ceramics along the
coast is why these seminomadic foragers used pottery at all. Particularly obvious
to any viewer of these coastal wares is the coarse, fragile nature of the sandy
paste. Transporting the pottery overland would be a tenuous endeavor and would
likely yield a cluster of sherds somewhere along the journey. Our contention is
that the pottery was made more functional in this nomadic setting as a result of
canoe transportation. Pottery would have been a more versatile container when
safely stored in the hold of a canoe. Canoes were used extensively by historic
groups all along the Texas coast and presumably their use extended into prehistory.
Dering and Ayers (1977) have appropriately cautioned that studies of shell
middens alone will not provide sufficient data to predict the annual economy of
the foragers who inhabited the Texas coast, but careful examination of the size,
volume, and content of shell middens, as Dering has demonstrated, can provide

282

Texas Archeological Society

a valuable body of data that will support predictions regardless of the economic
patterns on a site level. Aten (1977) has provided the tools for determining the
seasonality of harvest of certain species of Rangia cuneata. We hope that similar
predictive tools can be established for other species as well.

DISCUSSION
Past work has indicated that the sites in the Coastal Bend of Texas are the
results of repeated use of specific localities such as low bluffs, bluff remnants,
river levees, and ancient beach ridges. The human ecology of the prehistoric
populations, perhaps dating back to about 2000 to 3000 B.c., was closely tied to
the ecological dynamics of the coastal zone, Changes recognized in the temporal
distribution of certain shell species such as conch, which appears early in the
coastal sequence but tends to drop out rather abruptly as a resource for tools (and
less so as a possible food resource), may represent not so much a shift in cultural
preference as a continual alteration in the geomorphology of the coast itself,
where Hotocene silting constantly alters the depth and therefore the ecology of
the bays and estuaries.
The absence of early Archaic (pre-3000 B.c.) materials along the bays and
estuaries is largely due to late Holocene changes along the coast, and we suspect
that, on drowned landforms of the continental shelf, shell middens occur earlier
than those we have mentioned here. Despite the claim that the present sea level
was reached about 5,000 years ago, modifications of the shoreline and evolution
of the geomorphic features continue. These natural processes, which are still destroying sites occupied by prehistoric populations, are also removing important
sources of data that would be useful for documenting the history of the current
coastal setting. We believe the aboriginal populations had to adapt to a constantly
though perhaps subtly changing environment. Assuming a systemic relation between culture and environment, the changes in the cultural history of the Coastal
Bend can be explained in three ways: (1) a shift in the local ecology to the extent that exploitation of some species was no longer economically feasible; (2) a
shift in culture preference due to sociocultural stimuli; or (3) a shift in human
population.
As Dering and Ayers have noted (1977), it is doubtful that the prehistoric
foragers of the Coastal Bend could have lived along the coast the year around.
Inland resources were needed, and the groups either practiceda kind of transhumance or established social relations that helped them in acquiring the inland
resources. Cabeza de Vaca described just such nomadism in some coastal groups.

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, S. A., I. G. Kennamer, et al.
1976 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
American Association of Petroleum Geologists
n.d.
Geological highway maps of Texas. H. B. Renfro memorial edition. Tulsa.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1977 Estimating seasonality from shellfish remains. Paper presented at the MidAtlantic Archeological Conference.

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

283

Bandelier, Fanny (translator)
1905 The journey of Alvar Nt~ez Cabeza de Vaca. New York.
Blair, W. F.
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson site: type site of the Aransas focus of the Texas coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:40-75.

1952

The Kent-Crane site: a shell midden on the Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 23: 39- 77.

1956

Archeological material from five islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 27:7-46.

1958

Archeological remains from the Live Oak Point site, Aransas County, Texas.
Texas Journal of Science 10(4):423-442.

1960

Archeology of the central and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-171.

1962

Origins of pottery types from the Coastal Bend region of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32: 331 - 336.

1964

Appraisal of the archeological resources of Padre Island, Texas. Report submitted
to the National Park Service by The University of Texas, Austin.

Clark, J. D. G.
1954 Excavations at Starr Carr. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological materials from the northern shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 34: 5- 30.
1974

A model of cultural succession for the coastal bend area of Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 45:29-54.

Dering, Phil, and D. Ayers
1977 Archeological investigation in the village of Oyster Creek, Brazoria County,
Texas: a reassessment of economic archeology on the Texas coast. Anthropology
Laboratory, Texas A&M University, Report 42. College Station.
Fritz, Gayle
1972 Pilot archeological field survey, Cox Bay, Calhoun County, Texas. Matagorda
Bay-Estuarine Resource Management Study. Texas General Land Office, Austin.
1975

Matagorda Bay area, Texas: a survey of the archeological and historical resources. Texas Archeological Survey and Texas General Land Office Research
Report 45. Austin.

Gould, F. W.
1975 Texas plants: a checklist and ecological summary. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Hall, Grant D.
1981 Allens Creek: a study in the cultural prehistory of the lower Brazos River valley,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Research
Report 61.

284

Texas Archeological Society

Hedgepeth, J. W.
1953 An introduction to the zoogeography of the northwestern Gulf of Mexico with
reference to the invertebrate fauna. Publications of the Institute of Marine Science, University of Texas 3 : 111-224.
Hester, Thomas R.
1969 Archeological investigations in Kenedy and Kleberg counties, Texas, in August

1967. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas State Building Commission, Report
15. Austin.
Hester, T. R., and H. J. Shafer
1969 An initial study of blade technology on the central and southern Texas coast.
Plains Anthropologist 20:175- t 85.
Jones, F. B.
1975 Flora of the Texas Coastal Bend. Welder Wildlife Foundation Contributions B-6.
LeBlanc, R. J., and W. G. Hodgson
1959 Origin and development of the Texas coastline. Gulf Coastal Association of Geological Societies Transactions 9:197-220.
McGuff, Paul R., V. M. Bryant Jr., B. M. Davidson, W. B. Fawcett, L. Jones, and
D. Skelton
t978 Prehistoric archeological investigations at Palmetto Bend Reservoir: Phase 5,
Jackson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin, Research Report 58.
Mallouf, R. J., D. E. Fox, and A. K. Briggs
1973 An assessment of the cultural resources of Palmetto Bend Reservoir, Jackson
County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Survey Report 11. Austin.

Martin, George C.
1929 Notes on some Texas coast campsites and other remains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 1:50-57.

1930a Two sites on the Callo del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2: 7-17.

1930b A vase and some carved stones and pebbles from Nueces County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas A rcheological and Paleontological Society 2:18-20.

1931

Texas coastal pottery. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 3:53-56.

n.d.

Preliminary archeological survey of a portion of the Texas coast made by George
C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929. Privately printed.

Newcomb, W. W. Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: from prehistoric to modern times. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Patterson, E. R, and M. M. Ford
1974 Oso Creek flood control project area, Nueces County, Texas: a report on the archeological and historical resources. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, Research Report 35.
Potter, Wendell H.
1930 Ornamentation on the pottery of the Texas coastal tribes. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 2:41-44.

Shafer and Bond--Central Texas Coast

285

Price, W. A.
1947 Equilibrium of form and forces in tidal basins of the coast of Texas and Louisiana. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 31 : 1619-1633.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An archaeological survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17. Gila Pueblo, Globe,
Arizona.
Sellards, E. H.
1940 Pleistocene artifacts and associated fossils from Bee County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Geological Society of America 51:1627-1658.
Shepard, F. R, and D. G. Moore
1955 Central Texas coast sedimentation: characteristics of sedimentary environment,
recent history and diagenisis. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 39:1463- t593.

Steele, D. G., and E. R. Mokry, Jr.
1985 Archeological investigations of seven prehistoric sites along Oso Creek, Nueces
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeological investigations at two central Texas Gulf Coast sites. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas State Building Commission Report 13. Austin.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeologica! Society, Vol. 25.
Wakefield, Walter H.
1968 Archeological surveys of Palmetto Bend and Choke Canyon reservoirs, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, Survey Report 5.

