53

From E1 Paso to Eagle Pass:
Spanish Entradas along the Lower Rio Grande
in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries
Joseph P. Sdnchez
ABSTRACT
In the sixteenth century, the search for Quivira inspired early Spanish
explorers to move northward along the Mesa Central of Mexico toward and beyond
the Rio Grande. Later, Franciscan missionaries, Hispanic settlers, and military
personnel established missions, settlements, and forts south of and along a rugged
frontier that stretched from E1 Paso to Eagle Pass and beyond. In spite of its
importance to Spanish Colonial expansion, the history of that area is little known.
Yet that region saw much activity in the period from 1580 to 1700, and its history
is intriguing partly because it pointed the way to the eventual founding of Texas.

The history of the area between E1 Paso and Eagle Pass is linked to that of New
Mexico, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Le6n, and Tamaulipas. The period from
1524, when Panuco was established, to the 1570s, when the Santa Barbara and the
Saltillo mining frontiers opened up, was one of expansionism beyond the Gran
Chichimeca frontier that had stalled the northward movement of the Spanish for
several decades. Between 1580 and 1680, slavers, explorers, prospectors, settlers,
and missionaries criss-crossed the area with relative frequency. They, too, represented the many expansion projects by Spain to occupy new frontiers along the
lower Rio Grande. Renewed interest in the part of Texas east and north of the Rio
Grande took place after 1680, when E1 Paso was founded as a result of the Pueblo
Revolt in New Mexico. Indeed, early missionary activity into that area after 1692
originated from both the New Mexico missions and those in Chihuahua, Coahuila,
and Nuevo Le6n.
Spanish interest in the Rio Grande first resulted from maritime explorations
along the Gulf Coast as early as 1519, when Alonso de Pineda, sailing for Francisco
Garay, a rival of Hemfin Cortes, discovered "a large river" with many Indian
villages along its banks (Navarrette 1837-1880:147-148). Having spent 40 days
there, Pineda mapped the area and called the large river Rio de las Palmas.
Impressed by the report, Garay made plans to settle the Rio Grande and sent Diego
de Camargo with three ships and 150 men to colonize the area. However, because
of hostility of the natives, the Camargo expedition abandoned its weakly held
outpost, losing several men and one ship in the process. Garay, undaunted,
attempted again to settle the Rio Grande, this time armed with a charter to the land
known as Amichal. But that, too, would come to naught. The importance is that one
end of the Rio Grande had become the object of Spanish interest.
Bulletin of the Texas Areheological Society 63 (1992)

54

Texas Archeological Society

Sixteen years later, four men, castaways from the ill-fated Panfilo de Narvfiez
expedition that had been wrecked on the Texas coast, made their way across
southern Texas, hoping to reach any of the few but scattered Spanish outposts north
of Mexico City. It was 1535 when Alvar Nufiez, better known as Cabeza de Vaca,
and three companions criss-crossed southern Texas, reaching different points along
the Rio Grande (Pacheco et al. 1864-1865:269). One of these points is believed to
be in the vicinity of Del Rio, another at Santa Elena Canyon in the Big Bend, and
a third in or near present E1 Paso (Bishop 1933:137). They were the first Europeans
to see what lay beyond the Rio Grande and to realize the extent of the river from its
mouth to a point somewhere in the interior. Vaca’s Relaci6n did not escape the
interest of later explorers, who were aware of its contents.
In 1540, the expedition of Francisco Vazquez de Coronado wended its way
from Culiacan, in western Mexico, through Sonora and eastern Arizona before
reaching Zuni, in western New Mexico (Bolton 1949:ii; Hammond and Rey
1940:15-17). From there, Vazquez de Coronado sent an advance guard westward.
Led by Hernando de Alvarado, the detachment passed Acoma and, a few days later,
reached a large fiver that he named Rio de Nuestra Sefiora (Hammond and Rey
1940:183; Pacheco et al. 1864-1865:304-317, 511-513). Along it there were many
Indian villages, and Alvarado and his men were even more impressed with the
length of the river when they traveled as far north as Taos Pueblo on its east. They
must have learned that the river originated in the mountains far to the northwest, in
present southern Colorado. With V~quez de Coronado, then, more was learned
about the Rio Grande.
Beginning with the expedition of Francisco S~inchez de Chamuscado (Hammond
and Rey 1940:67-150), the exploration of New Mexico would be reoriented from
the route taken by Vazquez de Coronado. For nearly four decades after the Cibola
expedition, Spanish prospectors and slavers had ventured beyond the last outposts
in present Chihuahua, Coahuila, and Nuevo Le6n. By the late 1570s, mining towns
had been established at Santa Barbara in Chihuahua and Saltillo in Nuevo Le6n.
Through these unknown explorers, much knowledge about the land beyond these
towns was gathered, although the Rio Grande and what lay beyond it was known
only to the few who had dared to cross it.
The expedition of Francisco Sfinchez Chamuscado was the first legal expedition to cross the Rio Grande from the direction of Santa Barbara and to report on
what lay beyond. Yet more significant than the information he gathered was the
route he took, for it later became part of the famous Camino Real de Tierra Adentro,
which ultimately ran from Mexico City to Santa Fe in New Mexico. Motivated by
Franciscans hopeful of expanding their missionary field, the expedition set out in
June 1580.
The trail blazed by S~nchez and his Indian guides ran north from Santa Barbara
along the Rio San Gregorio, one of the upper branches of the Rio Conchos, to its
confluence with the Florido and beyond to the Rio Conchos (Hammond and Rey
1940:68). From there they continued northward along the often traveled route to the
Rio Grande. After going a short distance past the Rio Florido, they met several

Sdnchez m Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

55

Indian tribes to whom they gave the name Conchos. These Indians presented them
with pumpkins, mesquite beans, and com. Approaching the Rio Grande, they
encountered other tribes whom they called the Raya--later known as the Rayados-who spoke a language similar to that of the Conchos (Hammond and Rey 1940:6970). Hern~n Gallegos, one of the chroniclers of the expedition and former slave
runner who knew the country well, described these groups by writing in unabashed
colonial terms: "They go about naked like savages. They are lazy, capable of little
work, and dirty. They sustain themselves with quantifies of calabashes, ground
mesquite, mushrooms, prickly pears and fish from the river" (Hammond and Rey
1940:70).
Five leagues beyond the country of the Rayas, the expedition came upon
another tribe of Indians they called the Cabris or the Pazaguantes. They, too,
inhabited the area near the junction of the Conchos and the Rio Grande, but they
spoke a different language from the tribes previously met. More complimentary
about them, Gallegos wrote, "The Cabris are a very handsome, very spirited, very
active, and more intelligent than the people previously met. They are of large stature
and their face, arms and bodies are striped with pleasing lines" (Hammond and Rey
1940:70-71). Later, the Cabris would be associated with the much larger tribe that
lived north of the Rio Grande, the Jumanos. The Cabris, like most of the tribes they
met along the route, were friendly. They cultivated small patches of land seasonally,
and they appeared to be more industrious than those tribes they had met farther south
(Hammond and Rey 1940:71).
Moving beyond the Cabris, the expedition reached La Junta de Los Rios, near
present Presidio, where the Conchos enters the Rio Grande. There, they found many
Indians and erected several crosses among them. Gallegos called the new tribe
Amotomanco, later known as the Otomoaco. Of them, he wrote, "The men are very
handsome and the women beautiful" (Hammond and Rey 1940:73). Typical of the
natives in the area, the Amotomanco wore stripes on their faces; they lived in houses
made of sticks and brush plastered with mud. They raised corn and stored an
abundance of pumpkins and beans. The Amotomanco were part of the Jumano
nation who ranged in a wide area north and east of the Rio Grande in the Southern
Plains where they hunted buffalo (Hammond and Rey 1940:73).
Once at La Junta, it appears that they continued along the west bank of the Rio
Grande, although it is not possible to determine with certainty whether they crossed
the river at this point to continue their march. If they crossed it, they did so
momentarily, that is, for a short reconnaissance of the other side, before resuming
their march on the west bank.However, before reaching the Rio Grande, Gallegos
reported that "to reach this river, the largest to be found in the Indies, we left the
Conchos on our right, with our backs to the south" (Hammond and Rey 1940:75).
It is known that Fray Agustin Rodriquez and some of his companions crossed the
river, spent a day or two a short distance from La Junta, but rejoined the expedition
on the west side because it was easier to travel (Hammond and Rey 1940:75).
Moving up the Rio Grande for a distance of 5 or 6 leagues above its junction
with the Conchos, they encountered another tribe of Jumanos who had copper and

56

Texas Archeological Society

turquoise pendants that they had obtained through trade (Hammond and Rey
1940:76). The Jumanos told them that if they continued upstream for 13 days, they
would encounter many clothed people who cultivated much corn, calabashes,
beans, and much cotton, which they wove and made into blankets and clothes.
Gallegos wrote (Hammond and Rey 1940:77) that the Spaniards asked them
if any men like us had passed that way, and they replied that long ago four
Christians had passed through there. By the description they gave us we
say plainly and clearly that it m ust have been Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca,
because according to his account he had come by way of these people.
The expedition was one month out of Santa Barbara. Still on the west bank, they
continued their march up the Rio Grande where they met other Jumanos who also
recalled Cabeza de Vaea. Finally, they reached the last of the Jumano settlements,
a group they called Magdalena (Hammond and Rey 1940:78), south of the present
ruins of Fort Quitman in Texas. Three days from there, they reached the marshlands
that extend from the Guadalupe to E1 Paso (Hammond and Rey 1940:80). Encountering fewer and fewer tribes, they traveled 15 more days. Sometime during this part
of the journey, they crossed the river to the east side, for their next stop was the most
southerly Piro Pueblo of New Mexico, which they called San Felipe (Hammond and
Rey 1940:81). They found the Pueblo deserted but well stocked with supplies. The
expedition continued northward until they reached Puaray, in the valley of present
Albuquerque, and from there they explored as far north as Taos Pueblo, as far east
as the Canadian and Pecos rivers, southeast to the saline lakes beyond the Manzano
mountain range, and west to Zuni Pueblo before returning to Santa Barbara
(Hammond and Rey 1940:12-14).
The sequel to the Sfinchez Chamuscado expedition was that of Antonio de
Espejo (Hammond and Rey 1940:153-237). Encouraged by the Franciscans, who
reported that some of their brethren had been left in the pueblos of the Rio Grande,
Antonio de Espejo agreed to lead the next expedition north to rescue them. In
November 1582, the new expedition left Santa Barbara and assembled at San
Bartolome, a mining outpost nine leagues north of Santa Barbara, on the San
Gregorio River. Fray Bernardino Beltran was technically in command, but as
military commander, Antonio de Espejo was the recognized leader of the expedition. Moving clown the San Gregorio to the Conchos, as the previous expedition had
done, they met the Conchos, the Pazaguantes, and other tribes of the Jumanos
(Hammond and Rey 1940:155-158). Espejo and his men adopted a studied eye
concerning the various tribes. They observed that the tribes adjoining
the Pazaguantes on the Conchos and extending for some distance up the
Rio Grande were known as the Patarabueyes or the Otomoacasl those
living at the junction of the rivers and south of it were called Abriades; and
those who lived across the Rio Grande and roamed the plains in pursuit of
buffalo were known as the Jumanos proper (Mecham 1926:122).

Sdnchez m Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

57

By December 9, they reached the Rio Grande at La Junta, which S~chez
Chamuscado named Rio del Norte for the first time. Resting for eight days, they
camped a short distance from an Indian settlement they called San Bernardino. They
traded with the natives for maize, beans, mescal, dried pumpkins, gourd vessels,
buffalo skins, and bows and arrows. At La Junta, they visited another Indian village,
which they called Santo Tomfis. There they found a cross that had been raised the
year before by Fray Rodriguez and his companions (Hammond and Rey 1940:163).
From Santo Tomfis they crossed over the Rio Grande into Texas. Apparently,
this is the first recorded crossing into Texas. Of the event, Diego Perez de Luxan
wrote,
We went on this day (December 10, 1582) as previously stated, half a
league farther (from Santo Tom,is) to a pueblo situated on the opposite
bank of the river which Chamuscado’s men called Del Norte (sic). The
pueblo was on a high ridge with many flat-roofed houses; below were
many other houses forming a sort of suburb. Its cacique was called Casica
Mayo. In this pueblo they kissed the hand of the Father and brought
presents as in the others. They named this pueblo San Juan Evangelista.
Here they found another cross which the said Gaspar de Luxan and his
companions had erected; this they had in a neatly kept plaza .... They slept
there that night and the next morning they went to another pueblo .... In
this pueblo and in all the others they told us how Cabeza de Vaca and his
two companions and a negro had been there. The Indians of this pueblo are
all farmers, as the river is very appropriate for it [Hammond and Rey
1929:59].
The Spaniards named the second town on the east side of the Rio Grande,
opposite the mouth of the Conchos, Santiago. They spent eight days there among
the Jumanos and they visited nearly all the settlements in the vicinity of La Junta de
los Rios on both sides of the Rio Grande (Hammond and Rey 1929:163). On
December 17, continuing their march north, they crossed back to the west side of
the Rio Grande. Forty-five days after they had left La Junta, they arrived in the
southernmost pueblos of the Piros in New Mexico.
Like Sfinchez Chamuscado, the expedition explored in all directions from the
Rio Grande Valley. Espejo and his men visited the Rio Grande pueblos, explored
westward to the Verde River in Arizona, and eastward to the Great Plains. Finally,
on July 5, 1583, the party reached the Pecos River and followed it as closely as
possible in the hope of finding a new way back to La Junta de los Rios (Hammond
and Rey 1929:121). By August 6, after traveling for a month down river, they
encountered Jumanos who were hunting. Lfixfin wrote that through their interpreter,
Pedro, a Patarabuey Indian, they learned that the Pecos "came out very far down
from the Conchos River; that they would take us by good roads to the junction of
the Rio del Norte and the Conchos rivers, which is among the Pataragueyes"
(Hammond and Rey 1929:124).

58

Texas Archeological Society

Espejo and his men were the first Europeans to explore the Pecos River, but
more importantly, they were the first white men to travel the land between the
Pecos and La Junta de los Rios. Basically, they followed a route from presentday Pecos, Texas, past Toya Creek, below Toya Lake, then across to present
Toyahvale in the vicinity of Balmorhea, where they encountered more Jumanos
(Castafieda 1936:178-180). Following a route from Balmorhea, they passed
through the vicinity of Fort Davis and headed southward through present Marfa.
On August 14, they continued marching over plains and camped in "a very large
valley, where there were some pools of rain water" (Hammond and Rey
1929:125). They rested there four days and traveled six leagues more "over bad
roads through a very rough sierra" before they reached the Rio Grande "nine
leagues from the pueblo which seems to be San Bernaldino of the Patarabueyes"
(Hammond and Rey 1929:125). They were north of La Junta de los Rios,
probably in the vicinity of present Ruidosa or Candelaria.
When they arrived on the Rio Grande, they were once again among the
Jumanos, particularly the Patarabueyes, whom they had seen on the way north
several months previously. "All the rancherias there gave us a grand reception,"
wrote Ltixfin,"according to their custom and gave us quantities of ears of green corn,
cooked and raw calabashes, and catfish. They put on great dances and other
rejoicings as a sign of peace" (Hammond and Rey 1929:125-126). Espejo and his
men remained there two days. On August 20, they marched down the Rio Grande
and reached San Bernardo at La J unta a day later. There they crossed the Rio Grande
and visited the pueblo of Santo Tomfis on the north bank of the Conchos. Because
of high water on the Conchos, they remained there three days, resting and trading.
Finally, on August 26, Espejo and his companions began the last lap of their journey
back to Santa Barbara. They had been gone 10 months; they had explored more than
350 miles of the Pecos River and, after abandoning the river, were the first to journey
cross-country to the Rio Grande near its con fluence with the Rio Conchos (Castafieda
1936: t 79-180).
The reports of the expedition aroused widespread interest and desire among
Spanish officials to occupy the lands that were visited. They reported on the land,
possible routes, the disposition of natives, the climate and natural resources, as well
as its possible mineral wealth. But in the end, it would be the religious motivation,
namely the desire to establish missions in the area, that would inspire the next legal
expeditions northward to occupy the land along the Rio Grande drainage.
Meanwhile, on the faraway frontier of Saltillo, Nuevo Le6n, another dramatic
story unfolded that would add new information about what lay beyond La Junta de
los Rios and the mouth of the Rio Grande. In 1590 the ambitious and daring Gaspar
Castafio de Sosa, governor of Nuevo Le6n, set out to settle New Mexico, albeit
illegally, since he had not received official permission to do so (Shroeder and
Matson 1974:9). Castafio de Sosa recruited colonists from Almaden near presentday Monclova, for they had been accustomed to crossing the Rio Grande, and
appeared to have knowledge of the Pecos River. With promises of a great silver find
in New Mexico, he persuaded nearly 200 men, women, and children to go to New

Sdnchez ~ Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

59

Mexico in search of rich mines. On July 27, 1590, Castafio de Sosa and a wagon train
of settlers left Almaden (Shroeder and Matson 1974:29).
Following a northern course, they camped on the Nadadores River in the first
week of August. Then they continued their journey until they reached the Rio
Salinas, probably present Rio Aura in Coahuila, then crossed the Rio Sabinas and
what appears to have been the Rio San Diego a few miles below present Villa Acufia.
Finally, on September 9, 44 days out of Almaden, they reached the Rio Grande,
some distance below the mouth of the Pec0s River, probably near present Del Rio,
Texas (Shroeder and Matson 1974:32).
They camped for three weeks, hopeful that a messenger with instructions from
the viceroy would validate their expedition. But none was forthcoming. Meantime,
several scouting expeditions were sent out to find a passable route for the carretas
(wagons). In the end, Castafio de Sosa decided to follow the original plan to find the
Pecos River and ascend it to New Mexico. Just below the Rio Laxa, or present Devils
River, the expedition crossed the Rio Grande because that location offered them the
best possible place to ford (Shroeder and Matson 1974:34). Once safely across, they
camped, while scouts moved northwestward to find the best route to the Pecos
River. Because of the rugged terrain and the dense thickets, the scouts were unable
to find a passable route for the wagons. Finally on October 24, a suitable route was
found and two days later they reached the Pecos, where they camped for two days
(Shroeder and Matson 1974:49-50).
By the end of October, the expedition was on its way north following the Pecos
River to their destination in New Mexico where they settled among the Rio Grande
Pueblos for more than a year. The significance of the expedition, however, is the
route they blazed to the Rio Grande and the Pecos River. New knowledge of the
lower Rio Grande was furnished by the expedition, but, alas, Castafio de Sosa, its
latest explorer, was arrested and found guilty of illegally trespassing on the King’s
land (Shroeder and Matson 1974:8-10).
Another illegal entry into New Mexico took place in 1594. The information
regarding the expedition led by Francisco Leiva Bonilla and Antonio Gutierrez de
Humafia is scant and somewhat fragmented (Hammond and Rey 1940:323-326). It
is known that as a result of tracking rebel Indians in northeastern Nueva Vizcaya-present Chihuahua--that Leiva and Gutierrez decided to cross the Rio Grande.
They proceeded northward in violation of their authority toward the pueblos of
Puaray, Taos, and Pecos. From Pecos, they traveled to the Great Plains, where the
expedition was wiped out by an Indian attack (Hammond and Rey 1940:323).
Meanwhile, the governor of Nueva Vizcaya sent Pedro de Cazorla to overtake them,
but by that time, Leiva and Gutierrez were beyond the reach of the law. S till, the two
expeditions added to the growing frequency of Spanish entradas to the Rio Grande
and beyond.
In 1598, the Spanish crown authorized Juan de Ofiate to lead an expedition to
establish a settlement in New Mexico. After many delays, it left the valley of San
Bartolom6 in the Bolson de Mapimf bound for San Geronimo on the Conchos River.
Four hundred men, of whom 130 had their families, took up the march. The baggage

60

Texas Archeological Society

train consisted of 83 wagons and carts, as well as 7,000 head of stock. Although the
route to La Junta de los Rios was well known, Ofiate did not follow the tortuous
course of the Conchos River, but cut across directly to the ford at present E1 Paso
(Hammond and Rey 1953:16).
For months on end, the air of northern Chihuahua resounded with the sharp
cracks made by the whips of drivers as they pushed the caravan farther toward the
Rio Grande, which they reached at the end of April 1598. On the occasion of
reaching the river, one settler wrote,
On April 30, 1598, day of the Ascension of our Lord, at the Rio del Norte,
Governor don Juan de Ofiate took possession of all the kingdoms and
provinces of New Mexico, in the name of King Felipe II, our lord, in the
presence of Juan Perez de Donis, royal notary and secretary of the
jurisdiction and expedition. There was a sermon, a great ecclesiastical and
secular celebration, a great salute and rejoicing, and in the afternoon, a
comedy. The royal standard was blessed and placed in charge of Francisco
de Sosa Pefialosa, the royal ensign [Hammond and Rey 1953:314-315].
Although the expedition continued northward to New Mexico and certain
fame, the significance of the moment was that the ford at E1 Paso had been
established and became part of the Camino Real that was used as the point of entry
beyond the Rio Grande. The Ofiate expedition had followed the river to a point
where the mountains came down to form "the pass of the river and the ford"
(Hammond and Rey 1953:315). The crossing was named "Los Puertos", although
later it would be known as E1 Paso del Norte. The warm spring sun of May 4
witnessed the activity as Ofiate’s army and 40 Indians, on that desolate place on the
earth, moved their cargo, carts, and livestock across the river. It was near there that
they met the first Indians from New Mexico (Hammond and Rey 1953:315).
Little by little, knowledge of the Rio Grande was gathered so that by 1598,
Spanish frontiersmen had considerable information about its length. In 1601 Enrico
Martfnez, a cosmographer, drew a map of New Mexico (Hammond and Rey
1953:955) for Juan de Ofiate showing the course of the river from Taos Pueblo in
the north to its mouth near present Brownsville, Texas, in the south. In the interim,
knowledge of the Rio Grande was hard earned, and the route to New Mexico
provided part of the solution to the puzzle. The relatively heavily traveled Camino
Real continued to usher in a pageantry of settlers, missionaries, politicians, and
Indians from different parts of the Empire. Once a base of operations was
established in New Mexico, Spanish frontiersmen explored in all directions--west
to the Colorado River of Arizona; north to Taos; east to the Great Plains; and
southeast toward the Nueces River. Perhaps the explorations southeast to the
Nueces River were rooted in missionary efforts to convert the Jumanos. Certainly,
the miraculous visitations of the Venerable Mother Marfa de Agreda were influential in motivating missionaries such as Fray Juan de Salas in 1629 to visit the
Jumanos and some Apachean groups in southwestern Texas about 300 miles eastsoutheast of Isleta Pueblo in New Mexico (Forrestal and Lynch 1954:57n, 121).

Sdnchez m Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

61

In 1632, Father Salas made a second expedition to the Jumanos (Thomas 1982).
This time he traveled along the Colorado River as far as the Concho River near
present San Angelo, Texas. Moving southward, Salas and his companions reached
the Rio de las Nueces. There, Fray Juan de Ortega stayed for six months ministering
to the Jumanos.
The initial ventures southeast of New Mexico were intriguing to Spanish
officials. Yet it would be another 15 years before a military expedition would be sent
in that direction from New Mexico. In 1650, General Hernfindo de la Concha
ordered Captains Hern~n Martfn and Diego del Castillo to explore the "Nueces"
River (the present Concho River in Texas) and the surrounding country with a group
of soldiers and a number of Christian Indians (Thomas 1982:26-28). They set out
from Santa Fe and, crossing through southwestern Texas, reached the Concho
River. They had marched nearly 600 miles to visit the Jumanos (Thomas 1982:5).
In the six months of their visit, they explored for pearls, which they claimed they
found, though they were of poor quality, and they gathered much information about
the land and its people.
Pursuant to their instructions, the two captains traveled down the present
Concho towards "the east and inclining to the south through the lands of the
Cuitoas, Escanjaques and Aijados" (Thomas 1982:27). Eventually, they came to
the nation called Tejas and Friar Alonso de Posada described the lands they
occupied:
This nation of the Tejas runs from south to north, the distance that lies from
the Rio del Norte to the Rio de las Nueces, which must be about one
hundred leagues. In width it must be as many leagues from east to west.
From the far limits of this nation to the coast and Gulf of Mexico there must
be about fifty more leagues to the east, and the said fifty leagues are
occupied by disorganized Indian tribes who neither sow nor reap, because
according to the information of the country bordering the coast, this is
filled with many sandy stretches and sand dunes. On its northern boundary,
the country of the Tejas adjoins that of the Quiviras .... They plant and
gather their crops of corn; their lands are fertile; they have abundant
irrigation from the streams that flow from the north; and they utilize the
wild cows called cibolas and the wild fruits found on the Nueces on which
they border. The nations of the Tejas, from whose limits Captains Hermin
Martfn and Diego del Castillo returned by the same route to Santa Fe, is in
28 degrees of latitude [Thomas 1982:28].
Two more Spanish expeditions entered the Nueces River drainage--one in
1654 led by Diego Guadalajara from Santa Fe (Thomas 1982:29); and the other in
1683 under Juan Dominguez de Mendoza from E1 Paso (Thomas 1982:6). The
significance of the last two expeditions is that they were military in character and
resulted in knowledge of the Jumano country and of the Tejas Indians and their
neighbors. The latter expedition resulted in a set of recommendations pointing to the
development of the area from E1 Paso to the Bahfa del Espfritu Santo on the Texas

62

Texas Archeological Society

coast. All of the information became useful to subsequent efforts of missionaries in
the next century.
Although Spanish entradas from New Mexico had been preceded by earlier
efforts to explore beyond La Junta de los Rios, the Spanish advances east of the
confluence of the Rio Pecos and the Rio Grande had been undertaken for a longer
period. Eagle Pass had long been the focus of Spanish attention, for it was one of
the early gateways to the Texas frontier. West of there, Del Rio had served the
interests of Castafio de Sosa, who, historically, represented part of the Spanish
efforts in the development of that area. Both Del Rio and Eagle Pass would, in the
long haul of Texas history, stand as natural monuments to the pioneering efforts of
Hispanic frontiersmen to establish a foothold in Texas.
The earliest of these pioneers was Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca and his three
companions who as castaways of the ill-fated 1528 Florida expedition of Panfilo de
Narv~iez desperately made their escape from tribes who had held them in bondage
in south Texas. By 1535, they had made their escape westward to the Balcones
Escarpment, thence southwest to the Rio Grande in the vicinity of the Devils River
near Del Rio. From there they reached the outskirts of the Chisos Mountains and,
once in the area, they approached Santa Elena Canyon in the present Big Bend
National Park. Proceeding eastward, they reached the Pecos River and were led by
natives across 50 leagues "of desert, over rough mountains, which being dry were
without game" (Hodge 1907:99). These were evidently the Davis Mountains. Not
far from there, Cabeza de Vaca and his companions reached another point along the
Rio Grande, possibly within sight of present Presidio, Texas. It is possible that they
were led by natives up the Rio Grande to present El Paso and north of there, probably
as far north as present Las Cruces. Soon after, they left the Rio Grande and crossed
southwestward toward Sonora, where they were ultimately rescued.
By the 1600s much was known about the Rio Grande. However, renewed
interest in the river east of Eagle Pass resulted from news that the Dutch had
entered the Gulf Coast and threatened the Spanish claim to Texas. In 1638, the
governor of Nuevo Le6n received confusing rumors from Indians that a landing
had been made on the northeastern Texas coast by men different from Spaniards
"with blond beards and hair, who wore red socks, steel plate corselets and hats,
and who carried longer arquebuses" than those of the Spaniards. Fearing that the
Dutch had made an entry along the Rio de las Palmas, or Rio Grande, the governor of Nuevo Le6n decided to notify the viceroy of an expedition he had mounted
against the intruders. Led by the Sargento Mayor Jacinto Garcfa de Sepfilveda, a
detachment of 40 men were sent to investigate the rumors (Garcfa 1909:151155). On August 16, 1638, Garcfa de Sepfilveda left Cerralvo and 4 days later
reached the Rio Grande far to the south of Mier and proceeded down-river possibly as far as present Brownsville. The rumor was false, for no signs of an intrusion could be found. Still, Spanish officials kept a wary eye on all points of the
Rio Grande. In 1663, Alonso de Le6n, el viejo, explored the Rio Grande about
its mouth to reconfirm past knowledge concerning the mouth of the river still
called Rio de las Palmas (Garcfa 1909:203-206).

Sdnchez m Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

63

But in the interior of the Rio Grande Valley a real threat existed. After 1600,
Indians from the north and beyond the Rio Grande increased their hostilities against
Spanish outposts at Saltillo, Monterrey, and Cerralvo and carried out depredations
as far west as Chihuahua and Casas Grandes. Outraged, Spanish authorities carried
out punitive expeditions against the warring tribes (Garcfa 1909:221-223). In
October 1663, after decades of hostile Indian activity, a company of more than 100
men from Saltillo and Monterrey under the command of Juan de la Garza departed
for the Rio Grande. Traveling northward from Monterrey, they encountered the
warring tribes of the Cacaxtles in the vicinity of present Eagle Pass (Garcfa
1909:221-223; Bolton 1912). The Cacaxtles were prepared for the Spaniards, and
a hard fight ensued. Apparently the expedition was a success for the Spanish, for the
raiding abated for a short while. De la Garza and his men had crossed the Rio Grande
in pursuit of their enemy.
Spanish activity continued in the area of Eagle Pass the following year when
the Cacaxtles were again attacked at nearly the same place as the year before
(Castafieda 1936:9). Again in 1665, another expedition, this time led by Fernando
de Azcue, the alcalde mayor of Saltillo, attacked the Cacaxtles after crossing the Rio
Grande near Eagle Pass (Garcfa 1909:228-229). The expedition was large, more
than 400 men, including 300 Bobole Indians, and was led by Azcue, Juan Cavazos,
and Ambrosio Cepeda.
Although the expeditions of de la Garza and Azcue were punitive, they added
new knowledge about the Rio Grande and Eagle Pass. They are also significant
because they established another element in the written history of the area. The
expeditions demonstrate the intense Spanish persistence in the pacification of that
part of the river.
Slowly, the frontiers of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Le6n, and Tamaulipas
were moving towards the Rio Grande. It was only a question of time before
Franciscan missionaries would advance the mission frontier beyond the river.
Already the Franciscans were eyeing the "Great Kingdom of Texas." Indeed, in
1676, when the Bishop of Guadalajara, Manuel Fernandez de Santa Cruz, visited
Coahuila, he was ready to promote the evangelization of the Tejas, north of the Rio
Grande (Bolton 1912:26). Already by 1675, the expedition ofFernando del Bosque
had assisted missionaries beyond the Rio Grande. Since 1673, Fray Juan Larios and
his companions had spent three years working among the natives in the area between
Eagle Pass and Del Rio and had gone as far north as the Nueces River near present
Uvalde (Bolton 1908:284).
Meanwhile, a new era in Texas history was dawning. The Spanish push beyond the Rio Grande had been preceded by the pioneering efforts of those who
had daringly crossed the Rio Grande between Del Rio and Eagle Pass. In the
1680s, Spanish fears of a foreign invasion were realized when shocking news
reached them of the establishment of a French fort along the Texas coast. Led by
Rene Robert Cavalier, Sieur de La Salle, the French had indeed landed on the
Texas coast at Matagorda Bay in 1685 (Bannon 1963:95; see also Weddle, this
volume).

64

Texas Archeological Society

In the course of establishing his fort, La Salle undertook two expeditions into
the interior of Texas, one of which reached the Rio Grande. The La Salle expedition
to the Rio Grande was undertaken in the winter of 1685 and spring of 1686
(Castafieda 1936:292-293). La Salle claimed that he had reached a large river and
that the only reason he had not invaded Nueva Vizcaya was because of the poor
condition of his men and his lack of confidence in his Indian allies (Castafieda
1936:292-293). On that expedition, La Salle reached the Rio Grande somewhere
between Del Rio and Eagle Pass.
Fearing a French invasion, the Spanish spent considerable time, resources,
and men searching for La Salle’s fort (Castafieda 1936:301-340). They later
found it, destroyed by Indians, and with a few survivors living among various
tribes in East Texas. Between the missionary drive across the Rio Grande and
the supposed French invasion, East Texas soon became a focal point of Spanish
activity.
One of the French manhunters was Alonso de Le6n. After two previous
fruitless attempts to find the French fort, he was pulled back to help establish a
Spanish villa and presidio in Coahuila. Simultaneously, he was named governor of
the province (Portillo 1984:145-146). While putting down a revolt of the Tobosos
in Coahuila he learned of a Frenchman who had become an Indian chief (Portillo
1984:175). Le6n then organized an ex pedition to find the French renegade. Relying
on information from Indians regarding the location of the Frenchman, Le6n
departed from present Monclova, crossed the Rio Grande in the vicinity of Eagle
Pass, and proceeded to a point near Brackettville, Texas. On May 18, 1688, after
several days’ march from the Rio Grande, Le6n found the Frenchman, Jean Gery,
and took him back to Coahuila (Portillo 1984:178). There, he interrogated him,
learning that La Salle’s fort had been destroyed. Gery was willing to take him there
and show him the French outpost. Finally, Le6n would see the destroyed French
settlement in Texas, for in 1689, Gery led him to the place. The French menace led
by La Salle was over.
Two years later, in 1691, Domingo Ter~in de los Rios was named governor of
the Provincia de los Tejas, making him the first governor of Texas (Bancroft
1884:402). He was instructed to set out as soon as practicable and establish eight
missions among the Tejas and neighboring tribes. Although he was to find practical
routes to East Texas, he was to understand that his chief role was to help the
missionaries accomplish their goals under Father Damian Massanet. Therefore, on
May 16, 1691, the expedition set out from Monclova northward toward the Rio
Grande, which was crossed at Eagle Pass, and con tinued to the Nueces and on to East
Texas. History was made on that entrada, for it was the founding expedition of Texas
proper (Bancroft 1884:402). And indeed, it was the last major seventeelath century
expedition to pass through Eagle Pass. The road for the establishment of San
Antonio had been blazed for many decades before Governor Martfn Alarcon
formally established the villa in 1716, and the early explorers who had traversed the
Rio Grande from E1 Paso del Norte and Eagle Pass had played an extraordinary role
in its history.

Sdnchez -- Spanish Entradas Aaong the Lower Rio Grande

65

Spanish advances along the Rio Grande, forming the northern boundaries of
present Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Ledn, and Tamaulipas, resulted from early
exploration of that region, as well as later efforts of Franciscan missionaries from
Queretaro who advocated maintaining that area solely as a mission field, especially
after the expeditions of Femando Bosque and Alonso de Le6n in the 1670s and
1680s. The first missionary attempt of the East Texas frontier by Father Massanet
ended in failure with its abandonment in 1693. Finally, by 1698, Massanet’s
proposal to establish a base of operations for his missionary activities by founding
a Spanish settlement on the lower Rio Grande to support his efforts was realized, for
that year a mission--Nuestra Sefiora de los Dolores at Punta de Lampazos--was
established on the extreme northern end of Nuevo Ledn. In 1699 another mission,
San Juan Bautista del Rio Grande, was founded. After two attempts to found San
Juan Bautista, the mission was finally established at Eagle Pass. There a fort, the
Presidio of the Rio Grande, was established in 1700, then the easternmost interior
fortification on Spain’s northern frontier in North America. Later, two otfier
military posts were established in the same area, one at San Bernabe, the other at San
Francisco Solano. Northeast of there, Franciscan missionaries worked to establish
a permanent foothold on the Texas frontier at San Antonio. The Rio Grande between
E1 Paso and Eagle Pass in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was the anvil upon
which future Spanish colonial development would be hammered out for the frontier
areas of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo Ledn, Tamaulipas, and Texas.

REFERENCES CITED
Bancroft, Hubert Howe
1884

North American States and Texas, 1531-1800. A. L. Bancroft, San Francisco.

Bannon, John Francis
1963

The Spanish Borderlands Frontier, 1513-1821. Holt, Winston and Rinehart,
Los Angeles.

Bishop, Morris
1933
The Odyssey of Cabeza de Vaca. Century, New York.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1908

Spanish Exploration in the Southwest. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York.

1912

The Spanish Occupation of Texas. The Texas State Historical Association
Quarterly XVI.

1949

Coronado, Knight of Pueblos and Plains. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936

OurCatholicHeritage in Texas. Volume I, The Discovery of Texas, 1519-1690.
Von Boeckmann-Jones, Austin.

66

Texas Archeological Society

Forrestal, Peter P., and Cyprian J. Lynch (editors and translators)
Alonso de Benavides’ Memorial of 1630. Academy of American Franciscan
1943
History, Washington, D.C.
Garcfa, Genaro (editor)
1909
H istoria de Nuevo Le6n con noticias sobre Coahuila, Tejas, Nuevo Mexico, por
el Capitan Alonso de Le6n, un autor anomino y el General Fernando Sdnchez
de Zamora. Vda. de C. Bouret, Mexico.

Hammond, George P., and Agapito Rey (editors and translators)
1929
Expedition into New Mexico made by Antonio de Espejo, 1582-1583; as
revealed in the journal of Diego Perez de L~xdn, a member of the party. The
Quivira Society, Los Angeles.
1940

Narratives ofthe Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.

1953

Don Juan de Ohate, Colonizer ofNew Mexico, 1595-1628. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

1966

The Rediscovery ofNew Mexico, 1580-1594. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

Hodge, Frederick W. (editor)
1907

The Spanish Explorers of the Southern United States, 1528-1543. Charles
Scribner’s Sons, New York.

Mecham, Lloyd J.
Antonio de Espejo and his journey to New Mexico. Texas State Historical
1926
Association Quarterly, Volume XXX, No. 2.
Navarrette, Femando (editor)
1837-1880

Coleccion de los Viages y Descubrimientos que hicieron por mar los

espanoles desdefines del siglo XV... 5 vols. Imprenta Nacional, Madrid.
Pacheco, Joaquin F., Francisco de Cardenas, and Luis Toarres de Mendoza (editors)
1864-1865

Coleccion de Documentos lneditos Relativos al Descubrimiento,

Conqu&ta y Organizacion de las Antiguas Posesiones Espanoles de America y
Oceania. 42 vols. Madrid.

Portillo, Est6ban L.
1984
Apuntes para la Historia Antigua de Coahuila y Texas. Biblioteca de la
Universidad Autonoma de Coahuila, Saltillo.
Shroeder, Albert H., and Dan S. Matson (editors)
1974
A Colony on the Move: Gaspar Castaho de Sosa’s Journal, 1590-1591. School
of American Research, Santa Fe.
Thomas, Alfred Barnaby (editor and translator)
1982
Alonso de Posada Report, 1686. Perdido Bay Press.

