111

Diet Change in the Lower Pecos:
Analysis of Baker Cave Coprolites
Kds~n D. SoboHk
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the many coprolite studies that have been conducted in
the Lower Pecos Region, where coprolites range in time between about 7500
B.C. and A.D. 900 and geographically throughout southwestern Texas and
northern Mexico. A study of coprolites dated at about A.D. 900 from Baker
Cave, Val Verde County, Texas has provided new data from the Lower Pecos.
Comparison of the data from Baker Cave with those from the previous studies
illustrates the changes in diet in the prehistoric Lower Pecos Region through
time. The diet, although increased in diversity, particularly in the amount of
fish, birds, and flowers consumed, has continued to revolve primarily around
stable resources such as prickly pear, agave, sotol, and rodents.
INTRODUCTION

Coprolite analyses are important for determining the diet, seasonality of
occupation, and subsistence patterns of the prehistoric inhabitants of the Lower
Pecos Region of southwestern Texas, where, due to the aridity of the climate,
they are sometimes abundant in dry limestone rockshelters. The many analyses
of coprolites from this area have revealed some aspects of the prehistoric Lower
Pecos diet over a long time range and sizeable geographic area.
An analysis of the coprolites from Baker Cave (Sobolik 1988), which are
dated to about A.D. 900, is important for two reasons. It provides additional
dietary data on prehistoric Lower Pecos populations, and it extends knowledge
of dietary habits into Late Prehistoric time. Baker Cave, although it is in the
Lower Pecos Region, has a more mesic biological environment than the rockshelters examined in previous studies. The cave is on a tributary of the Devils
River in an ecotonal environment bordered by the mesquite-chaparral zone of
the Tamaulipan biotic province in southern Texas, the oak-cedar zone of the
Edwards Plateau in the Balconian biotic province to the east, and the sotollechuguilla zone of the Chihuahuan biotic province to the west (Blair 1950;
Chadderdon 1983).
The Lower Pecos Region is in southwestern Texas and Coahuila in northern
Mexico, centering on the confluence of the Pecos and Devils Rivers with the Rio
Grande. The mainly semiarid environment, which is similar to much of the
southwestern United States, contributes to the excellent preservation of the
cultural remains in the rockshelters and open sites of the area. The marginally
desertic conditions in the area are probably the same today as in much of the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59 (for 1988)

112

Texas Archeological Society

past, but around 750 B.C. there may have been a brief climatic shift in the area to
more mesic conditions (Dering 1979; Bryant and Holloway 1985).
Prehistoric occupation of the Lower Pecos canyon areas began at least
9,000 years ago (Shafer 1981). The lifeways of these populations, determined by
the semiarid environment, were mainly conservative foraging adaptations.
However, slight shifts in the pattern have been noted (Stock 1983; Shafer 1986).
The continuous subsistence search of the prehistoric occupations of the Lower
Pecos Region was centered around a stable resource, the desert succulents,
consisting mainly of sotol, prickly pear, and lechuguilla (Shafer and Bryant
1977; Williams-Dean 1978; Dering 1979; Shafer 1981; Stock 1983; and Brown
1986). These desert succulents were eaten and burned and were used in textiles,
basketry, sandals, and netting (Shafer 1986). One of the main reasons why
subsistence and cultural practices probably remained stable for such a long time
was that the xeric conditions prevailed, and the flora and fauna of the area
remained relatively unchanged (Dering 1979; Lord 1984).
Paleoecology became an important consideration for Lower Pecos archeologists, with the focus of research centering on obtaining new kinds of information. Some of the Lake Amistad Reservoir salvage excavations during the late
1960s that focused on obtaining paleoecological material (Figure 1) were conducted at Parida Cave, 41VV187 (Alexander 1970), and Conejo Shelter, 41VV162
(Alexander 1974). The coprolites from these excavations--the first to systematically save coprolite material were analyzed by Riskind (1970) and Bryant
(1969, 1974b) respectively. Among other archeological investigations conducted
in order to further the information on Lower Pecos paleoecology were extensive
excavations at Hinds Cave, 41VV456 (Sharer and Bryant 1977), and Baker
Cave, 41VV213 (Brown n.d.; Hester 1983, 1986). The excavations at Hinds
Cave yielded more than two thousand bags of plant remains and cultural material and more than a thousand human coprolites. The careful recovery procedures used at Hinds and Baker Caves will permit continued analysis of the
prehistoric Lower Pecos Region long after all of the archeological sites in the
area are gone.
THE VALUE OF COPROLITE STUDIES

The evaluation of prehistoric subsistence practices has become important
for archeologists. Knowledge of subsistence, the reconstruction of diet, and
information on health status can be obtained by several means, most significantly, the analysis of coprolites (dessicated human feces), ethnobotanical material, faunal remains, and ethnographic information. All of these analyses need to
be made in order to support comprehensive statements about the diet or nutritional status of a population. Coprolites, however, are a unique resource for
determining prehistoric subsistence; their analyses offer direct answers to questions of diet (Bryant 1974a) and encompass most other types of information. The
constituents of a coprolite are mostly the remains of intentionally eaten food

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

La

JO

SHELTER "

x BA

113

R CAVE

Figure 1. Plan of the Lower Pecos Region, showing sites in Texas from which coprolites
have been analyzed. Coprolites were also recovered at Frightful Cave, in Coahuila, Mexico, which is off the map to the south.

114

Texas Archeological Society

items, but they also contain wind-blown pollen, contaminants, grit, and fecesthriving insects. Coprolites, therefore, can, under ideal conditions, be used to
determine diet, health, seasonality of occupation, processing practices, and
overall subsistence patterns. Coprolites, since they are the dietary remains of
specific individuals, are precise samples, supplying data that cannot be replicated accurately from the other animal and plant debris from archeological sites.
Although the potential of human coprolites as dietary indicators was realized by Harshberger as early as 1896, the first scientific analyses of coprolites
were conducted in the early twentieth century. Initial studies were conducted on
materials from North American caves (Young 1910, Loud and Harrington 1929),
and dried fecal remains from Nubian mummies (Smith and Jones 1910). The
processing techniques for these early analyses consisted of either cutting open
the dry coprolites and observing the large, visible contents, or grinding the
samples through screens, breaking much of the material in the process.
Improved techniques for analyzing coprolites were developed by Callen
and Camerion (1960), who refine a technique developed by Benninghoff (1947)
for herbarium specimens, and by Van Cleave and Ross (1947), for zoological
specimens. The samples are rehydrated in a mild solution of the detergent
trisodium phosphate in order to break apart the materials gently for ease in
screening. These techniques, which are still used, revolutionized the science of
coprolite analysis.
However, some problems are inherent to coprolite analysis, mainly that
they comprise only undigestible foods; the digestible portions have been absorbed in the digestive process--it is estimated that meat protein is usually
completely absorbed during digestion 0:ry 1985). The underrepresentation of
meat in coprolites is apparent when the amount of bone materials recovered
from zooarcheological analyses at a site is compared to the amount of meat
protein in the coprolites. Lord (1984) recovered 64 different faunal taxa in his
analysis of Hinds Cave material, and 40 different taxa were identified from
Baker Cave material (Douglas 1970). Macroremains of Hinds Cave coprolites
contained 11 (Stock 1983)and 20 (Williams-Dean 1978)different taxa respectively, and the Baker Cave coprolites contained only nine different faunal taxa.
This strongly suggests that coprolites tend to severely underepresent meat intake. How closely the coprolite contents reflect actual food intake is unknown.
Another problem is the direct association of a coprolite or a group of
coprolites with a group of people, as in a latrine, where the actual defecators are
unknown. The coprolites may reflect deposition and food usage by the specific
group, since "rarely are feces found away from the designated latrine area;"
(Shafter 1986:99) indicating that almost everyone used the latrine. Alternatively, coprolites may reflect the deposition of one sick person forced to defecate
in the area near his or her bed. In this example, the coprolites may contain a high
amount of medicinal materials, although medicines probably were also used by
the population in everyday life for minor problems.
A group of coprolites could also represent the fecal matter of mainly women
and children of hunting and gathering groups, who stay near camp during the

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

115

day while the men mainly defecated away from the camp during their hunting
expeditions. This could be misleading when women and children eat different
foods from the men or are deprived of certain dietary items due to cultual
constraints, such as taboos.
BAKER CAVE COPROLITES
The coprolites studied here were excavated from Baker Cave (41VV213), a
dry rockshelter on a high bluff, one of several archeological sites in Val Verde
County in the Lower Pecos Region of southwestern Texas (Figure 2) The cave is
70 meters above Phillips Canyon, a dry tributary of the Devils River, and
measures 15 meters in width, 37 meters in length, and has an overall surface area
of about 451.5 square meters (Word and Douglas 1970). The fill of Baker Cave,
which consists of spalls, limestone dust, and cultural material, is about 3 to 3.3
meters deep (Hester 1983). The occupational debris dates from no earlier than
7,000 B.C., during the late Paleo-Indian period (Word and Douglas 1970; Hester
1983), but most of the habitation was during the Archaic and Late Prehistoric
periods.
The most recent excavations at Baker Cave were conducted by Thomas R.
Hester and James H. Word during the 1984 and 1985 field seasons (Brown n.d.,
Hester 1986). The coprolites analyzed for this study were recovered from a
latrine area during the 1984 season. Others working at Baker Cave were Thomas
R. Hester and Robert F. Heizer in 1976 (Hester 1983; Chadderon 1983), John W.
Greer, a graduate student at the University of Texas in 1968 (Greer 1968), and
avocational archeologist James H. Word from 1962 to 1966 (Word and Douglas
1970).
The coprolites analyzed for this study were in a buried latrine area near the
entrance to Baker Cave (Figure 2) in unit N6E9 stratum 2. Samples 1 and 2 from
the latrine area were mapped at 98.37 meters elevation and are tentatively
considered a part of the intact occupation floor found 10 to 20 cm below the
surface that extends for a least 5 meters over the area of excavation (Brown,
n.d.). Feature 84-3, from this occupation floor at grids N3E8 and N3E9, was a
large grass-lined pit at least 30 cm deep. This feature contained bundles of green
sotol flower stalks that radiated from the center of the pit to the outside rim,
where they were bent down over the rim and covered with a thick layer of grass
(Brown, n.d.). The green sotol flower stalks (Lab No F84-3) were dated in
uncorrected radiocarbon years to l l00-&100 B.P. (Beta-15634; ~13C adjusted
radiocarbon age 1090&_100 B.P.; K. M. Brown, personal communication 1988).
Since the latrine area has been tentatively placed within the same living floor as
feature 84-3, the coprolites are considered to date to the same time period (K. M.
Brown, personal communication, 1988).
Since some of the specimens in the latrine area could not be distinguished
from one another and were taken out in chunks, each of the 38 specimens may
not necessarily be a single, whole coprolite. However, in this analysis each of
the 38 specimens will be considered a coprolite, although that may not always be
the case.

116

Texas Archeological Society

\

__--

\

-.~

=.--/~1
o

""-

=5M

LATRINE

DA TUM

Figure 2¯ Plan of Baker Cave (41VV213), showing area (gridded) excavated in 1984 by
the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, and the
Witte Museum of San Antonio. Drawn by Kenneth M. Brown.

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

117

The specimens analyzed were processed for extraction of dietary information from pollen and macroremains. Half of each coprolite, except in cases
where the coprolite weighted less than 10 grams, was analyzed. The samples
were halved, mainly to preserve some of the sample for analysis at a future time
when techniques may be more sophisticated. The samples were then placed in a
0.5 percent trisodium phosphate mixture for at least 48 hours, in accordance
with the method descibed by Callen and Cameron (1960). At this time, one
tablet of an exotic marker (Lycopodium spores 11,300+400 spores) per gram of
sample weight was added to permit calculation of overall pollen concentration.
After the samples had broken apart, they were screened through 850- and
250-micrometer mesh screens. The macroremains on the screens were allowed
to dry, were separated, and were identified with the help of the reference
collection at Texas A&M University of material collected near Baker cave, and
a seed manual (Martin and Barkley 1973).
The heavy sedimentation material that passed through the screen was processed for pollen. Chemical extraction techniques were used in order to remove
organic debris and silicates. The cellulose material was softened with 10 percent
potassium hydroxide (KOH) and subsequently removed, together with organic
material, during acetolysis (9 parts acetic anhydride to 1 part sulfuric acid).
Silicates removal by heavy density separation was conducted with zinc chloride,
and the material remaining was placed in vials with glycerol and mounted on
slides for identification of pollen, which was made with the aid of the pollen
reference collection at Texas A&M University and with Kapp’s pollen identification key (1969).
Macrofossil contents not readily identified from local reference materials
were sent to specialists for identification. The insect renains were identified by
Richard Blume, of Bryan, Texas, the fish scales were sent to David J. Lee, of the
Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, Texas A&M University, and the bird
feathers were sent to Keith Arnold, also of the Department of Wildlife and
Fisheries, Texas A&M University.
Baker Cave Diet
The occupants of Baker Cave at about A.D. 900 used what was available in
their environment in order to obtain a balanced diet and for medicinal needs. The
coprolites reflect a diet that included a large variety of plants and small game
animals. Another material that should have been important to the Baker Cave
diet yet is not reflected in the coprolites is meat from larger game animals.
All of the coprolites analyzed had large quantities of fiber, mainly from the
prickly pear cactus, which probably provided the stable subsistence base for the
Lower Pecos populations (Williams-Dean 1978, Stock 1983). Prickly pear items
identified from the Baker Cave coprolites included fiber, fruit seeds, calcium
oxylate druse crystals, epidermis, and spines. Prickly pear pollen was not observed in the samples, indicating that at the time of deposition prickly pear

118

Texas Archeological Society

flowers were not eaten. Most of the prickly pear seeds were fragmented, suggesting that the fruit was processed before consumption, possibly by milling or
grinding with metates.
Although a few spines were recovered from the coprolites, the processing
technique used on the prickly pear tunas probably involved a way of removing
the spines; they could have been burned off (Vestal 1952, Whiting 1978),
rubbed off (Millspaugh 1974, Stevenson 1915), or rolled off (Whiting 1978).
Onion bulbs and fibers were also prevalent in the coprolite samples. Onion
was probably eaten whole and unwashed, fresh from the ground, because sand
and dirt were found in high frequency in coprolites associated with the onion
remains. Onion bulbs were also found in association with fish remains, suggesting that the onion may have been used as a seasoning or relish (Whiting 1939,
Vestal 1952).
The fiber from desert succulents--yucca, agave, and sotol was also observed in the coprolite samples, indicating that these plants, which have been
considered staples (Williams-Dean 1978, Stock 1983), were also important
dietary resources for the Baker Cave inhabitants. No pollen grains from yucca
and agave were seen in the coprolite samples, suggesting that the flowers of
these plants were not ingested at the time of deposition. But sotol pollen was
observed, although in frequencies so low that it is doubtful that sotol flowers
were ingested. If they were eaten, the coprolites that contained sotol pollen
probably were deposited many days after the flowers were ingested (Sobolik
1988).
Seeds were also eaten by the Baker Cave occupants, mainly those of the
prickly pear cactus, as discussed above, but also seeds of juniper, mesquite,
goosefoot, pincushion cactus, mustard family, hackberry, oak, and walnut. None
of these seed remains, however, were observed in more than three of the samples
analyzed, indicating that they probably were not a main dietary item.
Pollen grains from plants that produce the smaller seeds of Chenopodium
(goosefoot) and Brassicaceae (mustard family) also were observed in the samples.
One sample had a high frequency of both Cheno-am pollen (pollen from Chenopodiceae or Amaranthus) and Chenopodium seeds, suggesting that the seeds
and inflorescences were eaten together. This is a likely possibility since the
small goosefoot seeds would have been hard to separate from the rest of the
plant. The most frequent pollen was Brassicaceae, but these same samples did
not contain Brassicaceae seeds. Brassicaceae inflorescences and seeds could
have been eaten together, with the remains showing up in different fecal samples
(Sobolik 1988), but the evidence is not conclusive.
Hard hulls of Juniperus seeds and Juglans microcaropa walnut shells
indicate that these items were ground up and ingested for the nutritious internal
meats, shell, hull, and all.
Pollen analyses provided evidence that the flowers, seeds, or inflorescences
of certain plants were also dietary or medicinal items of the Baker Cave occupants. The pollen from Brassicaceae, Artemisia (sagebrush), and Gramineae
(grass family) occured in high frequencies in the samples, indicating that pollens

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

119

from these plants were ingested a few days before sample deposition (Sobolik
1988). Grass pollen and seeds have been observed in all of the lower Pecos
coprolite studies (Riskind 1970, Bryant 1974b, Williams-Dean 1978, Stock
1983, Reinhard et al. 1989), indicating that this resource may have been a stable,
unchanging aspect of prehistoric Lower Pecos diet. Grass seeds in samples from
Hinds Cave, however, have been interpreted as accidental ingestants through
rodent or bird remains (Williams-Dean 1978, Stock 1983).
Fish, the most important faunal dietary item as determined from the coprolites, was seen in 37 percent of the samples. The scales extracted from the
coprolites were mainly from the Perciformes and the Cypriniformes families.
Scales from sunfish, from a member of the salmon family (probably trout), and
from gizzard shad or threadfin shad were also identified. Fish bone and scale
remains were associated with a high frequency of charcoal, suggesting that the
fish were roasted on coals.
The remains of rodents were also prevalent in the Baker Cave coprolite
samples, identified in 34 percent of the samples. These remains included bones
of the mouse (Peromyscus), wood rat (Neotoma), and cotton rat (Sigmodon). A
large amount of rodent hair was also observed, and all parts of the rodent were
represented, suggesting that they were eaten whole.
Bird bones and feathers were extracted from 16 percent of the Baker Cave
coprolites. Almost the entire array of bird bones were represented from these
samples, indicating that birds too were ingested whole. The other faunal remains
observed in the Baker Cave coprolites were a snake vertebra and scale, lizard
bones and skin, a rabbit bone, and unknown mammal bones. Coprolite~, however, do not provide identification for the entire dietary array; larger animals
whose remains could not be identified in the coprolites were also important in
the diet of the Baker Cave occupants. These animals probably were a large
variety of mammals, reptiles, and amphibians and, to a lesser degree, large fish
and bird species, such as those identified in the faunal array at Hinds Cave
(Lord 1984).
OTHER LOWER PECOS COPROLITE STUDIES

Many coprolite studies have been conducted on Lower Pecos material,
suggesting a time span of about 8,400 years (Table 1). The first analyses of
coprolites were from Hinds Cave (6,280 B.C.; Stock 1983) and Frightful Cave
(7,500 to 5,000 B.C.; Bryant 1975, Fry n.d.). Time periods represented from
Hinds Cave also include 4,800 to 5,500 B.C. (Stock 1983), 4,000 B.C. (Williams-Dean 1978) and 2,500 to 3,680 B.C. (Reinhard et al. 1989). Coprolites
were also analyzed from the 5,000 to 2,000 B.C. and 2,000 B.C. to A.D. 300
levels at Frightful Cave (Bryant 1975, Fry n.d.). The youngest coprolites previously analyzed included samples from Conejo shelter dating from about 500
B.C. to A.D. 800 (Bryant 1969, 1974a). The analysis of the Baker Cave coprolites presented here (which date to about A.D. 900) provides the most recent information on Lower Pecos diet (Sobolik 1988).

120

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1.

Date
7,500-5,000 B.C.
6,280 B.C.
5,500-4,800 B.C.
4,000 B.C.
3,680-2,500 B.C.
5,000-2,000 B.C.
2,000 B.C-A.D. 300
500 B.C-A.D. 800
A.D. 900
No Dates

Lower Pecos Coprolite Studies

Location
Frightful Cave
Hinds Cave
Hinds Cave
Hinds Cave
Hinds Cave
Frightful Cave
Frightful Cave
Conejo Shelter
Baker Cave
Parida Cave

Sample
Size
15
29
26
100
25
16
16
43
38
11

Researcher
Bryant (1975), Fry (n.d.)
Stock (1983)
Stock (1983)
WiUia~s-Dean (1978)
Reinhard et al. (1989)
Bryant (1975), Fry (n.d.)
Bryant (1975), Fry (n.d.)
Bryant (1974b)
Sobolik (1988)
Riskind (1970)

The most comprehensive analysis of coprolites in this area was a study of
100 coprolites from Hinds Cave by Williams-Dean (1978). These samples are
dated to about 4,000 B.C. and reflect a diet centered around gathering (plant
foods) and foraging (animal foods such as rodents, avifauna, and herpetofauna).
The main plant items recovered were fiber, epidermis, spines, and seeds of the
prickly pear cactus. Other plants identified from the samples were onion, persimmon, hackberry, sotol, lechuguilla, and walnut.
Other studies of Hinds Cave (41VV456) coprolites include analyses by
Stock (1983) and Reinhard, Jones, and Barros (1989). Stock (1983) analyzed the
macroremains of 55 coprolite specimens from two different areas of occupation
at Hinds Cave. Twenty-six coprolites with an average date of 5,286 B.C. and 29
specimens with an average date of 6,280 B.C. were analyzed for comparison
with those in Williams-Dean’s study and to support generalizations about diet
change and subsistence of the Hinds Cave occupants. Stock’s analysis also
showed that prickly pear was the main dietary item; other significant dietary
items were onions, persimmons, walnuts, fish, and rodents.
Stock (1983) conducted extensive statistical comparisons (analysis of variance and Wilcoxon test) between the Hinds Cave coprolites as represented in her
study and the chronologically later samples analyzed by Williams-Dean (1978).
She found that the incidence of fiber decreased as the number of species
increased. Cacti and succulents remained important in the diet at all time
periods, but a trend toward increase in the amount of constituents--particularly
fauna, rodent, and rodent hair--was observed. Animal protein and fish were
observed--but not in abundance--in the earlier time periods; bird remains were
observed only in the later period.
Pollen remains from Hinds Cave coprolites were studied by Williams-Dean
(1978) who noted a variety of pollen types in the coprolites, including sotol,
agave, cenizo, cactus, and prickly pear.

SoboHk~D&tChange

121

In the recent study of 25 coprolite samples conducted by Reinhard, Jones,
and Barros (1989), parasites, pollen, and macroremains were analyzed. The
samples were excavated from levels dating between about 2,500 and 3,680 B.C.,
(slightly later than those analyzed by Williams-Dean) and contained a variety of
economic pollen types, including grass pollen aggregates (suggesting the eating
of anthers), agave, sotol, hackberry, and Lycium. Opuntia seeds and fiber were
major constituents, and bone was observed in 64 percent of the samples.
Only about 25 percent of the more-than-1,000 coprolites excavated from
Hinds Cave (Shafer and Bryant 1977) have been analyzed; the remaining specimens are being held in reserve for future analysts when new methods and
proceedures may yield more information. The reservation of coprolite samples
is especially important, since substantial numbers of coprolites from Lower
Pecos sites already have been lost, discarded by previous excavators as unimportant (Bryant 1987)
Macroremains (Fry n.d.) and pollen content of 47 coprolites recovered from
Frightful Cave in Coahuila, Mexico (Bryant 1975) have been analyzed. These
samples were divided into three groups; 15 samples date from 7,500 to 5,000
B.C., 16 samples date from 5,000 to 2,000 B.C., and 16 samples date from 2,000
B.C. to A.D. 300. Bryant (1975) analyzed the diet of the Frightful Cave occupants, observing that in all of the time periods they were eating flowers or
inflorescences. Opuntia pollen was very important in the early levels, as well as
Leucaena and Umbelliferae pollen. Other items became important in the diet,
but Opuntia pollen was not one of them. Bryant (1975) proposed from these data
that the change in Opuntia pollen usage resulted mainly from cultural change
rather than from degree of availability in the environment. Ingestion of other
parts of Opuntia (prickly pear) did not drop off; it remained a steady, stable
dietary item (Fry n.d.). Animal hair also was present in all of the macroremains
(Fry n.d.), indicating that mammals remained an important dietary item.
Forty-three coprolites (Bryant 1969, 1974b) excavated from various levels
of Conejo Shelter (41VV162) and dated from 500 B.C. to A.D. 800, are the
youngest samples outside of the Baker Cave study. They indicated that the
inhabitants of Conejo shelter were mainly eating a large variety of flowers and
inflourescences, including yucca, agave, sotol, prickly pear, pincushion cactus,
persimmon, gilia, leadtree, and mesquite. The plant macroremains (fiber and
seeds) from 47 coprolites recovered from Frightful Cave in Coahuila, Mexico,
indicated that Opuntia was still a main staple in the diet, and succulent fibers
such as sotol and agave were also prevalent. The animal macroremains reflected
the ingestion mainly of rodents but also some fish, lizards, and grasshoppers.
The remains of mammals were observed in 23 percent of the samples--fewer
than in the Hinds Cave studies (Williams-Dean 1978, Stock 1983).
Riskind’s (1970) analysis of the pollen spectra from 11 coprolites from
Parida Cave (41VV187)--all excavated from test pit 4 and representing many
levels of occupation--identified the economic pollen types agave, pincushion
cactus, yucca, grass, and mormon tea. The data from the Parida Cave coprolites

122

Texas Archeological Society

(Riskind 1970) are not included in this analysis, since the samples represent all
levels of the cave matrix and have not been dated.
CONCLUSIONS
From the analysis of a variety of coprolites representing a wide time range
in the Lower Pecos Region, prickly pear was found to be a main dietary staple.
Evidence of prickly pear usage; fiber, seeds, spines, calcium oxylate crystals,
and glochids, shows up in all of the coprolite studies. Other prominent dietary
items include sotol, agave, and yucca fiber, which were used consistently in the
Lower Pecos diet, and possibly during all seasons, but they may have been
winter staples (Brown 1988).
The other dietary items observed in the coprolites varied in cosistency and
variety. Rodent remains were observed with varying frequencies in all of the
coprolites. The highest amount and variety of rodents in the diet was at Hinds
Cave from 6,280 to 4,000 B.C.. Other coprolites studied indicate rodent usage,
although in lower frequencies and with less variety. Instead of dietary change
through time, the differences in rodent frequencies may indicate a difference in
the distribution of rodent species through time. This difference may also indicate
that larger game made up most of the animal protein during other time periods.
Since protein from meat sources is entirely digested in the system and meat from
larger game is usually removed from the bones before eating, no remains of
larger animals would be seen in the coprolite material. For this reason, the
importance of their meat protein to the diet cannot be estimated.
Together with the rodent remains, there apparently was an increase in
faunal diversity, mainly bird and fish, through time. The Baker Cave coprolites
had the highest incidence of fish and bird remains in the Lower Pecos Region.
No bird remains were observed in the early copro!ite samples, and fish were
only observed at low frequencies.
Flower and inflorescence ingestion has also been observed in all time
periods of the Lower Pecos. Through time, however, there tends to have been an
increase in the diversity of flowers ingested, although this probably reflects
seasonal differences. The mustard family, sagebrush, leadtree, and gilia are
some of the new pollen types added toward the end of the Lower Pecos occupation. Grass pollen was observed in all of the coprolite studies, suggesting that
their inflorescences and seeds were also a staple.
These differences through time and differences in the several coprolite
studies may merely reflect seasonality. This is evident in the economic pollen
assemblage at Conejo shelter, which has been tentatively designated a springearly summer occupation. The pollens in these samples represent a large variety
of plants. More plants bloom in the spring and summer months, and if flowers
were a dietary item, more pollen types would be found in samples that were
deposited during the spring and summer.

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

123

There were fewer economic pollen types at Baker Cave than at Conejo
shelter. Since Baker Cave is postulated as a late summer-fall occupation (Sob:
olik 1988) when fewer plants bloom, less pollen variety would be expected in
the coprolite samples. The economic pollen types observed, however, may
indicate that new flower or inflorescence types were being ingested. The Baker
Cave coprolites may also be the only ones analyzed that reflect a late summerfall occupation, so the different pollen types observed in the samples reflect only
seasonality and not the addition of a wider variety of species.
Turpin (1984, 1986) and Shafer (written communication) have indicated
that the Late Prehistoric time period differed from the Archaic in the Lower
Pecos Region, and that there may have been great social mobility and unrest as
populations intruded from the north and west. The bow and arrow replaced the
atlatl, the art stlye changed, the earlier pictograph styles were replaced by a
different red monochrome style, and there was a shift in burials and living sites
during this time period from the rockshelters to the uplands (Turpin 1984, 1986).
A change in the diet of the Lower Pecos Region, as reflected in the most recent
coprolites, may merely reflect this cultural change.
Diet change in the Lower Pecos Region may have several explanations. The
differences among the coprolite studies may actually indicate change through
time. Other explanations include seasonality differences, differences in species
distribution through time, or changes in cultural practices and preferences.
Overall, the lower Pecos diet, as reflected by coprolites, has not changed
drastically but has maintained a stable economic subsistence that has supported
a population in the region for more than 9,000 years. The staples of the diet-items that were probably eaten year round--were prickly pear pads and yucca,
sotol, and agave fiber and tissue. An increase in the variety of the diet, however,
has been observed and is represented by a larger amount of fish and birds and an
increase in the variety of flower types ingested.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Kenneth M. Brown and Harry J. Shafer for information pertaining to
the Lower Pecos Region, and Kenneth M. Brown for providing the excellent
map of Baker Cave. Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., D. Gentry Steele, and Harry J.
Shafer also provided interesting discussions and ideas.
REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, R. K.
1970
Archeological Investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 19, Austin.
1974

The Archaeology of Conejo Shelter: A Study of Cultural Stability at an
Archaic Rockshelter Site in Southwestern Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthhropology, The University of Texas, Austin.

124

Texas Archeological Society

Benninghoff, W. S.
Use of Trisodium Phosphate with Herbarium Material and Microfossils in
1974
Peat. Science 183:1206-1207.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Brown, K. M.
n.d.
The 1984 Season at Baker Cave. Manuscript on file at the Anthropology
Library, Texas A&M University.
1986

Prehistoric Economics at Baker Cave: Some Thoughts on Optimal Rummaging. Paper presented in the symposium Recent Advances in Texas
Archeology. Annual meeting of the Archeological Institute of America, S an
Antonio, Texas.

1988

Some Annoted Excerpts from Alonso De Leon’s History of Nuevo Leon. La
Tierra !5(2):5-20.

Bryant, V. M., Jr.
1969
Late Full-Glacial and Post-Glacial Pollen Analysis of Texas Sediments.
Unpublished PhD. dissertation, Department of Botany, The University of
Texas, Austin.
1974a

The Role of Coprolite Analysis in Archeology. Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society 45:1-28.

1974b

Prehistoric Diet in Southwest Texas: The Coprolite Evidence. American
Antiquity 39(3):407-420.

1975

Pollen as an Indicator of Prehistoric Diets in Coahuila, Mexico. Bulletin of
the Texas ArcheologicaI Society 46:87-106.

1987

Pollen Grains: The Tiniest Clues in Archaeology. Environment Southwest
519:10-13, San Diego Society of Natural History.

Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of
the Pollen Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American
Sediments, Bryant and Holloway (eds.). American Association Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas.
Callen, E. O., and T. W. M. Cameron
1960
A Prehistoric Diet Revealed in Coprolites. The New Scientist 8(190):35-40.
Chadderdon, M. F.
1983
Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas: The 1976 Excavations. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio, Special
Report 13.
Dering, J. P.
Pollen and Plant Macrofossil Vegetation Record Recovered from Hinds
1979
Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Unpublished M. S. Thesis, Department of
Anthhropology, Texas A&M University.

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

125

Douglas, C. L.
1970
Analysis of the Faunal Remains. In Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas, Bulletin of the Texas Memorial Museum No. 16, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fry, G.F.
1985

n.d.

Analysis of Fecal Material. In The Analysis of Prehistoric Diets. Academic
Press, New York.
Analysis of Human Coprolites from Frightful Cave. in Contributions to
Coahuila Prehistory, (R. C. Carlisle., Ed.) Ethnology Monographs
Series (n.d.).

Greer, J. W.
1968
Excavations at Baker Cave in Central Val Verde County, Texas. Notes on
file at Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Harshberger, J. W.
1896
The Purpose of Ethnobotany. American Antiquarian 17(2.)
Hester, T. R.
1983
Late Paleo-Indian Occupations at Baker Cave, Southwestern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 53:101-119.
1986

Baker Cave: A Rich Archaeological Record. In Ancient Texans: Rock Art
and Lifeways Along the Lower Pecos. Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Kapp, R. O.
How to Know Pollen and Spores. William C. Brown Company, Dubuque.
1969
Lord, K. J.
1984

The Zooarchaeology of Hinds Cave (41VV 456). Unpublished Ph. D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.

Loud, L. L., and M. R. Harrington
1929
Lovelock Cave. University of California Publications in America Archeology and Ethnology 25(1).
Martin, A. C., and W. D. Barkley
1973
Seed Identification Mannual. (Second edition.) University of California
Press, Berkley.
Millspaugh, C. F.
1974
American Medicinal Plants. Dover Publications, New York.
Reinhard, K. J., J. G. Jones, and R. P. Barros
1989
Bioculture Overview of the Lower Pecos Region of Texas. Health and
Disease in the Prehistoric Southwest IL (Stan Rine and R. Ted Steinbock,
Editors) Maxwell Museum, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque. In
press.

126

Texas Archeological Society

Riskind, D. H.
1970
Pollen Analysis of Human Coprolites from Parida Cave. In Archaeological
Investigations at Parida Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Papers of the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project 19. Austin.
Shafer, H. J.
1981
The Adaptive Technology of the Prehistoric Inhabitants of Southwest Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 26:129-138.
1986

Ancient Texans: Rock Art and Lifeways Along the Lower Pecos. Texas
Monthly Press, Austin.

Shafer, H. J., and V. M. Bryant, Jr.
Archaeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde County,
1977
Texas. Annual Report to the National Science Foundation 1-66.
Smith, G. E., and F. W. Jones
1910
Archeological Survey of Nubia 1907-1908. Cairo.
Sobolik, K. D.
1988
The Prehistoric Diet and Subsistence of the Lower Pecos Region, as Reflected in Coprolites from Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Unpublished M.A. thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University.
1989

The Importance of Pollen Concentration Values from Coprolites: An Analysis of Southwest Texas Samples. Palynology 12:201-214.

Stevenson, M. C.
1915

Ethnobotany of the Zuni Indians. Thirtieth Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology.

Stock, J. A.
The Prehistoric Diet of Hinds Cave (41VV456), Val Verde County, Texas:
1983
The Coprolite Evidence. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University.
Turpin, S. A.
1984
The Red Monochrome Style Pictographs of the Lower Pecos River Region,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:123-144.
1986

The Red Monochrome Style and Later Pictographs: The Art of Newcomers
to the Lower Pecos. In Ancient Texans: Rock Art and Lifeways Along the
Lower Pecos, Harry J. Shafer (Ed.). Texas Monthly Press, Austin.

Van Cleave, H. J., and J. A. Ross
1947
A Method for Reclaiming Dried Zoological Specimens. Science 105.
Vestal, P. A.
Ethnobotany of the Ramah Navaho. Papers of the Peabody Museum of
1952
American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University, 40(4).

Sobolik ~ Diet Change

127

Whiting, A. F.
1939
Ethnobotany of the Hopi. Museum of Northern Arizona Bulletin 15.
Williams-Dean, G. J.
1978
Ethnobotany and Cultural Ecology of Prehistoric Man in Southwest Texas.
Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M
University.
Word, J. H., and C. L. Douglas
Excavations at Baker Cave, Val Verde County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
1970
Memorial Museum 16.
Young, B. H.
The Prehistoric Men of Kentucky. Filson Club Publications 25. Louisville,
1910
Kentucky.

