SHELL POINT: A COASTAL CAMP
AND BURIAL SITE IN BRAZORIA COUNTY
FRANK HOLE AND RICHARD G. WILKINSON

Abstract
Salvage archeology at an eroding shell midden on Chocolate Bayou,
Brazoria County, was carried out as a class project by students at Rice
University. Analysis of the contents of the site suggests that it was a
fishing camp. The chief interest in this site is a burial of five persons,
probably a simultaneous interment. An analysis of these skeletons, along
with portions of four others which had eroded out of the site shows a very
homogeneous population with a great amount of sexual dimorphism.
Comparison of the skeletons with others from the area shows similarities
as far south as Corpus Christi Bay. Morphologically the skeletons correspond with historic accounts of Karankawa Indians.

The Archeology of Shell Point (41 BZ 2)
FRANK HOLE

DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE
The Shell Point Site (41 BZ 2) is near the junction of Chocolate
Bayou and Galveston’s West Bay at a point marked Shell Point on
USGS Quadrangle Hoskins Mound, Texas, 1963 (Fig. 1). The site is
presently on land owned by General Crude Oil Company and is not
accessible by public road.
Very little of the site remains today. Formerly it was a midden
situated on the landward end of an oyster reef that still runs out into
the bayou, although we could find no evidence that oysters are still
growing on the reef. According to local informants the site was once
much more extensive than it is today. In the 10 years that the site has
been under regular observation by Frank Mebane, Jr., it has eroded
back some 5-7 meters and its original size can only be a matter of
speculation. The present dimensions along a north-south axis are 20
meters, and east-west it is 12 meters (Fig. 2). The maximum thickness
of the shell layers which comprise the midden is 40 cm. The entire
remaining midden is covered to varying depths by sandy loam that
was deposited subsequent to Indian occupation, and the entire site is
covered with a mat of vegetation.
When we first saw the site, it was actively eroding and a burial had
been exposed only a few weeks earlier. This erosion had cut deeply
into portions of the site, leaving a peninsula of midden which appeared suitable for salvage work. Small pits placed at intervals over

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 1. Map of a portion of the Texas Gulf Coast showing the
location of sites mentioned in the text.

the surface revealed that the topography of the midden was irregular.
In places it lay just below the grass while in others it was as much as 40
cm. below the sandy loam, although the present surface is relatively
flat. The irregularity of the surface of the midden resulted from nonuniform dumping of shell and some excavation by both the Indians
and by Frank Mebane, Jr. Mr. Mebane dug a shallow pit into the site in
about 1961 and removed about a "washtub" of shell and dirt after
three hours of work. He could not reca!l having filled the pit; consequently its refilling must have been due to erosion and deposition
during flooding.
Some years before Mebane dug his pit, an oil exploration crew had
used the site for landing heavy equipment. The tight compaction of
some of the layers and the fragmentary condition of the burials can be
explained by the driving of vehicles directly over them. Nevertheless,
the essential damage was relatively slight.

SHELL POINT

GEOGRAPHY OF THE AREA
The land in the immediate vicinity of the site lies near sea level.
Tides of more than 3.5 meters completely innundate the land around
the site and up the bayou to Frank Mebane’s camp which is at an
elevation of about 1 meter. As might be expected the land itself is
sandy and carries salt grass vegetation.
The terrain of most of this area is described as Coastal Prairie by
physiographers. Although there are many swamps and marshes, it is
essentially a fiat grassland with an elevation slightly above sea-level.
Cord grasses, bluestem, and salt grasses (Spartina) are the dominant
vegetation, but there are wooded areas along the bayous and streams
that cross the prairie on their way to the Gulf (Newcomb 1961:60). The
following resumd of the local geology was kindly provided by Margie
Lohse who studied the area with her husband Dr. Alan Lohse of the
Department of Geology of the University of Houston.
The Shell Point Site is located upon a remnant of the natural levee
bordering the eastern edge o~ Chocolate Bayou which is an entrenched valley of Late Pleistocene age. The soils beneath the midden
and the slightly elevated land form upon which it is located, along
with the processes which formed them are Late Pleistocene age,
although the formation of Shell Point as a topographic feature extending into the middle portion of Chocolate Bay, and the deposition of
marshy soils to the east, are Recent in age.
Evidence for the Pleistocene age of the subsoil is twofold: (a) the
characteristic tan to reddish-brown, stiff, oxidized clay of the Beaumont Formation, here modified by an admixture of fine-grained sand,
and (b) the presence of pimple mounds on the land surface to the
north. Pimple mounds are low (10 cm. to about 3.5 m. in height),
circular mounds varying from 1 to 75 meters in diameter. They are
common in southeast and central southwest Texas, on silty or sandy
terrain of Pleistocene age and older. Mounds are also known on soils
of Recent age but are distinguishable from those on the older surfaces.
By contrast, sediments of Recent age forming the marsh and swamp
terrain now bordering the bay are not oxidized, contain an abundance
of black to gray organic detritus, and support a marsh flora.
After the creation of Galveston Island and the development of West
Bay as a low-energy, shallow-water body separated from waves and
currents of the open Gulf, the mainland shore began to advance
slowly as a result of the deposition of modern sediment within the
bay. This is the normal process of accretion. It has continued for at
least 2000 years to form the Big Marsh area east of Chocolate Bay and
other mainland marsh areas more than one mile in width that contain

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

\

\\\

\
\
/
/

9

SHELL POINT

Carancahua Lake and Greens Lake to the northeast.
Simultaneously, a second modifying process commenced, and continues into the present time. The lower reaches of each bayou, in
reality a small estuary, is subjected to erosion and scour by internal
wave action. This wave action, which results in a rounding of shape to
create a new bay, is generated by prevailing onshore winds blowing
from the southeast for six months of the year and the 15 to 20 winter
"northers" that reach the coast annually with winds in excess of 40
knots.
Approximately 2000 years ago, after the formation of the barrier
island and before the "rounding" effect of Chocolate Bay, the Shell
Point promontory extended more or less southeastward to a distance
that is unknown from present data but may have been as much as 1.25
statute miles. This estimate is based upon the general bathymetry of
the bay and the line of oyster reefs which extends southeastward from
Shell Point. Middens located upon the east-bank of the natural levee
system would have been lost by erosion. If the midden was situated
where the river and the bay met, the present Shell Point Site is
possibly as recent as 200 years, and any older remains would have
been lost through erosion.
A further modification of the terrain and destruction of the site is
taking place as a result of regional subsidence in the HoustonGalveston area. Undoubtedly the Shell Point Site has also subsided a
meter or more, affecting the adjacent marsh of Recent age and increasing the rate of erosion of the shore.
GOALS OF THE PROJECT
The principal objectives were to salvage a potentially interesting
site that was in imminent danger of destruction through erosion, and
to teach archeological field techniques in the context of a real project.
Additionally, we viewed this project as one of a series of excavations
that would enable us to build up a systematic picture of aboriginal
occupation along the coast. Speaking in general, our knowledge of
local archeology is based on miscellaneous surface collections and a
few small and unevenly reported excavations. At best we have a
general idea of the distribution of sites and some knowledge of the
overall duration of occupation in the area, but very little information
about sizes of populations, activities represented in the sites, and of
the relations among sites in different parts of the area.
Shell Point was reported to us as a burial site and in view of its
eroded condition it seemed most likely that its major contribution
would be in ellucidating certain burial practices and in helping to

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

establish the physical characteristics of the local population. Finally,
insofar as possible, we wished to determine the nature of the site itself
(as an area of activity used by the Indians) as it exists independently of
the burials that are contained within.
At the time we began work, Aten (1971) had just completed a report
on his work at the Harris County Boys School burial site and this
report suggested a number of things concerning the burials that might
be investigated at Shell Point.
Some of the specific things we were looking for in relation to the
burials follow.
1. Are the burials contemporary with the midden, or were they
placed either before or after it had accumulated? This question concerns whether sites were selected specially for cemeteries, or whether
people were buried in sites that continued to be occupied. The facts
that many sites do not seem to have burials and that some have an
extraordinary number of them suggested this question.
2. Is there a consistent method of orientation? Aten (1971) suggested that there was a consistent orientation at the Jamaica Beach
Site and also at the Boys School Site.
3. Is there a consistent method of interment? Are there single,
multiple, primary and secondary burials ? Are sites used for long or for
short periods? These questions can be only partially answered by
previous work because there are so few good records of the actual
circumstances.
4. Can one find evidence for differences in the morphology of the
Indians that correspond with ethnohistorical accounts of distinct
groups of Indians along the coast at the time of European contact?
5. Is there differential treatment of individual burials that can be
seen in relation to status, sex or ethnic affiliation?
There were also problems of a more strictly archeological nature.
1. What is the age of this site?
2. What is the nature of the site? Was it a temporary camp, a burial
ground, a habitation site, a special activity site?
3. Was the site occupied during certain seasons?
4. What geographic area was exploited by people using the site?
5. What is the relation of this site to others up the bayou?
6. What is the variability within the site? Most middens are treated
as if they are homogenous yet this is an untested assumption.
7. What is the nature of deposition of the midden itself? How did it
accumulate?
In view of the great amount of the site that had been eroded it
seemed that we might get information on any of these topics but there
are many other problems that one could hardly hope to solve. To

SHELL POINT

11

accomplish further goals it is necessary, as we have already begun, to
excavate sites which are entirely intact.
PRINCIPAL RESULTS
Clearly the most interesting aspect of the excavation was the finding of five burials which probably represent a single interment. To
these we may add four skeletons which had been recovered by Frank
Mebane, Jr., from the eroding bank of the site, and which are described
in Wilkinson’s study of the physical anthropology.

,excavated

1960 shorelinef\

/
FIGURE 3. Location and orientation of the investigated burials.

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

We had questioned whether some sites were reserved for burials or
whether they remained habitation or camping sites as well as burial
grounds. Our findings were similar to those of Aten (1971) in that we
could determine that the burials had been placed into a pit that was
dug after the bulk of the midden has accumulated, but we are uncertain whether the site remained in use for other purposes thereafter.
What is evident at both sites is that little if any midden accumulated
after the burials were placed in position.
It appears that both multiple and single burials occur in the site.
Ordinarily one would expect to find single burials and the finding of a
multiple burial is cause for comment. As described later, it seems
likely that members of a fishing party were caught in a natural disaster, possibly a norther which caused their untimely death when they
were exposed to the full force of the weather and were unable to regain
their base camp. The burials which were found eroding out of the site,
however, were apparently placed singly, if Mebane’s recollections as
to their locations are correct.
Aten (1971:45-46) feels that burials at the Boys School Site were
oriented with the heads toward the rising sun. Perhaps this is true,
although the high degree of variability in the orientation of heads at
that site leaves considerable room for doubt. We did not measure the
orientation of the Shell Point burials because of the post-mortem
dislocation of the skeletons. Nevertheless, as Figure 3 shows, the
bodies were usually placed in a flexed position along an east-west
axis with the heads facing the northeast quadrant. Still there is some
deviation from this pattern in that one of those excavated by our group
faced south and one of those removed by Mebane faced the same
direction. From the plans of the burial groups it looks as if there is
somewhat less variation in the axis of the body at Shell Point than
there is at the Boys School Site. Nevertheless, the pattern of interment
at the two sites appears to be very similar.
More interesting than matters of orientation are the physical
characteristics of the Indians themselves. As Wilkinson describes in
his report, they conform closely to other populations described from
sites west and south of Houston and with the historical descriptions of
Karankawa Indians. The question of the areas occupied by various
historically-known Indian groups has been raised many times but
there has been little useful evidence to answer it. It can now be stated
that a population which is physically different from those found in
sites south of Houston existed on Bolivar Peninsula, as evidenced by
the Caplen Site.
The artifacts found with the skeletons are few; they consist of beads
and other personal ornaments. Most unusual is the fact that the child

SHELL POINT

13

had a necklace of shell beads whereas most of the adults were without
ornamentation.
Also of interest are conclusions with respect to the nature of the site.
Its age has not been determined through radiocarbon methods, but the
artifacts and the geology of the area both suggest a recent date, probably around the time of European contact. This supposition is supported by our work at the Three-Oaks Site up the bayou which has
contact material along with Indian artifacts.
The site itself is most likely a fishing camp, like those presently
dotting the landscape in the immediate vicinity. Virtually all of the
faunal remains were derived from the water and there is little pottery.
These facts suggest that the site was used as a temporary camp and not
as a living site.
It has not been possible with the present analyses to determine the
seasons during which the site was used, but ethnohistoric reports
indicate that Indians lived in coastal areas during the winter. It seems
likely that the principal camp of these people was up the bayou at the
Three-Oaks Site where dry land and abundant fuel were both available.
The deposits in the site were badly disturbed through the digging of
burial pits and the areas of intact midden that we dug were relatively
small and discontinuous. We could not, therefore, do a useful analysis
of intrasite variability. It was readily apparent, however, on visual
examination that the artifacts were not evely scattered, especially
toward the edges of the midden where they were very rare indeed. By
far the largest concentrations of artifacts were in the area of the
burials.
The midden itself was apparently built through a series of dumpings of shells. On the edges a number of discrete piles of shells were
found, suggesting that this waste was scattered inland, thus extending the useable surface into the surrounding marsh.
The excavation enabled us to accomplish most of our goals and has
added significant new information, especially on types of settlements
and on the burial practices, morphology and pathology of the local
populations.

THE EXCAVATION
Prior to digging, the site was laid out in a 2-meter grid with a stake at
each corner (Fig. 2). Stake 12NIW was set as the permanent datum
and all other stakes marked on the same level to facilitate plotting the
depths of features and strata. Then we dug a series of shove!-sized pits
around the periphery of the site to determine the limits of the shell.

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

We found in so doing that the remaining midden is not very extensive
and that it slopes off rapidly on its outer margins.
The initial work on the main area consisted of first stripping the
grass off the portion of the site we wished to investigate (Fig. 4a,b) and
then stripping the sandy loam down to the top of the shell in squares
10NaW, 12N3W, 12N5W. The sandy loam overlying the shell was
designated Layer 1. The loam was excavated with shovels until shell
appeared, at which time the remaining loam immediately above the
shell layer was removed with trowels and screwdrivers so that the top
of the shell layer would remain in place (Fig. 5). All dirt from Layer 1
was put through a 1/4" screen to recover any artifacts. Artifacts in Layer
1 were bagged by the 2 meter square in which they were found; no
other recording was deemed necessary.
This procedure was used for the following reasons: The surface of
the site appeared visually, and in plotting the depth of the surface soil,
to be relatively smooth and the product of a combination of deposition
and erosion. Therefore it was reasoned that it did not contain artifacts
in primary association but might have material derived from the
midden directly below. It was further reasoned that the midden might
have a contour different from the overlying soil and that if there were
only scattered artifacts in the soil, the case for post-occupation deposition of the sand would be secure. The initial results indicated that
this was the case and suggested that when additional squares were
dug the upper soil should be simply discarded without screening.
Our experience in digging 41 HR 82 had demonstrated the advantages of removing artifacts by natural layers through the tedious
process of removing shells individually and leaving the artifacts in
place. We decided to follow this procedure at Shell Point but were
prevented from carrying out this systembecause of the presence of the
burial pits which occupied nearly all the area that we excavated. For
this reason we had basically two collection levels: 1, which consisted
of the few artifacts found in the loam overlying the midden; and 2,
which contained artifacts found in the fill of the burial pits. Aside
from the quantity of recovered material, there was no essential difference between the two "strata".
Upon clearing the grass layer in Square 10N5W we noticed a
number of roughly circular dark areas which had a high proportion of
finely broken shell in them (Fig. 5a). These were clearly pits and were
dug as such. Several proved to be of no particular interest as they were
simply holes (probably from rotted bushes or trees) into which broken
up shells had washed at times of high tide or storms. This conclusion
was obvious upon comparison of the contents of the pits with the
beach alongside the eroding bank of the site.

SHELL POINT

15

a

FIGURE 4. Viea~s ~/ Shell Poi~zt Site. a, Stripping grass off site prior to
excavation. On spoil banks in the background across Chocolate
Bayou are modern fishing camps. Note eroded bank of site; b, After
removal of the grass, excavation proceeded within a grid of 2-meter
squares. In the background is the shell beach.

A similar, but somewhat less obvious darkened area, in Square
10N3W proved to contain the group of skeletons (Fig. 5b). A major

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 5. Excavation in Progress at Shell Point. a, Sandy loam and salt
grass covered the midden to varying depths. When this was cleared
down to the shell midden, pits into the midden were recognized as
dark areas which were filled with finely broken shell; b, The edge of
the burial pit is outlined by plastic markers. Arm bones from Burial
No. 1 are seen protruding into the grass root zone.

SHELL POINT

17

concern was whether the burials were placed during or after the
accumulation of the midden. We were not able to solve this problem,
however, because the burials lay directly under the grass in the top of
the midden. All we can say for certain is that the burial pit was dug
after the bulk of the midden had accumulated and that there is very
little material on top of the burials. There is nothing above them, in
fact, that could not have been derived from the backfilling of shells
over the bodies. In view of the apparent recentness of the site -- very
close to the period of European contact-- it is doubtful that very much
midden would have accumulated even if the site had continued in
use.

Aside from digging in the burial area, we sought through test pits to
determine the limits of the site and something of the nature of the
midden with respect to the land around it. This work consisted
basically of a series of trenches to probe the edges of the midden (Fig.
2). The objective in probing the edges was to see whether shells had
been used to help fill in marshy land, thus providing more dry living
or work space for the inhabitants. Essentially what this showed was
that the midden rests directly upon marsh soils but does not interdigitate with them. Thus, the shells did extend the useful land surface, but there is no suggestion that the land was subsiding while the
site was in use. Heaps of shells lying at the midden’s edge illustrate
the fact that individual baskets (?) of them were heaved around the
periphery, a practice that had been suspected from the distribution of
shells in 41 HR 82 and also at the Three-Oaks Site up Chocolate
Bayou.
Although Figure 2 shows that considerable area was excavated,
most of the trenches simply cut down to the top of the shell layer or
exposed its edges, thus providing us with relatively few artifacts. The
bulk of the artifacts in the analysis came from the following squares:
6NIE, 8N3W, 10N3W and 10N5W. In other squares e.g., 16N8W,
which were completely excavated, there were few, if any artifacts.
Other material that proved useful came from the beach just below the
eroding bank of the midden where concentrations of pottery were
found lying in shallow water. In all there were relatively few artifacts
from the site as compared with 41 HR 82 or the Three-Oaks Site.

THE BURIALS
The upper portions of the first burials encountered were very fragmentary as a result of their having been crushed by vehicles driving
over the site. It was immediately apparent that human bones were
present, but at first it was exceptionally difficult to determine how

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

they lay in the earth because a) they were broken, b) they were tightly
packed in with oyster shells and c) several individuals were represented (Fig. 6). My first thought was that we were dealing with a
secondary interment of miscellaneous bones. We were unable to leave
the bones in the ground as we encountered them because the oyster
shells prevented cleaning and exposing adjacent bones simultaneously. Therefore, we sketched the position of each bone along with its
orientation and removed it. It was not until we had removed a dozen
or more bones in this fashion that we were able to see that we were
dealing with several closely packed, but articulated skeletons. Once
we discovered this every effort was made to leave the bones in place.

FIGURE 6. A vertical photograph of the upper level of bones lying
directly under the surface, showing them to be tightly packed in with
oyster shell.

SHELL POINT

19

This was somewhat easier as we proceeded downward because the
shells were less dense and the soil less compacted. The tight packing
of the shells in the upper layer apparently helped to preserve the
skeletons below through dispersing the pressure of the vehicles that
crossed the site.
In digging the burials our attention was continually on the limits
and nature of the pit that contained them (Fig. 6). A rough indication
of the pit had been clear from the start but the finding of its limits as
we worked downward proved difficult, as one might expect in a hole
dug into loosely packed shell. Nevertheless, we could determine that
the hole was dug from the surface down into the underlying sand. The
bodies were then placed in, the lowermost being placed directly on
the sand and the remainder as close to this level as the space in the pit
permitted.
Once the burials were exposed, it was apparent that they must have
been a simultaneous interment. In other words, five bodies, fully
described in Wilkinson’s report, were buried together (Fig. 7, 8). The
reason for deciding that they represent a single burial episode is
basically that they are placed closely together without clear evidence
of the dislocation of bones that would have occurred had a pit been
dug into a previous burial. The sketch of the burial group (Fig. 8)
shows the relations of the burials to one another and from the placing
we can deduce the following order of burial. First, body No. 4, an
adult female was placed in the ground. Then bodies I and 2, those of
an adult male and a child were put into the pit with the head of No. 1
placed on the hip of No. 4. Then bodies 3 and 5 were placed back to
back with the legs of No. 3 resting against the bodies of I and 2. Some
cramming was necessary to get all the bodies into the shallow pit. The
left leg of No. I had been bent back so that it lay alongside the left arm
and No. 3 had been placed completely on his side rather than partly on
his back as was the usual custom.
The difference between this group of articulated skeletons and the
fragmentary condition of disturbed burials is readily seen by comparing Figure 7 with Figure 19 in Aten’s (1971) report. The other four
burials at Shell Point were evidently single interments spaced some
distance from one another so that there was no disturbance.
The circumstance of finding a group burial seemed unusual as we
had no evidence of foul play, and it demanded an explanation. Hostile
action which left no traces either in projectile points or in cut marks
on the bones cannot be excluded. Neither can some unfortunate
natural disaster or disease. However, in view of the location of the site
and of the presumed activities that took place there, I suggest that a
reasonable explanation is death through freezing.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 7. Vertical photograph of the five burials which lay on the
sandy soi! directly under the midden.

The site is in an exposed location, several kilometers from the
wooded portion of Chocolate Bayou and from the site that we have
tentatively considered to be the base camp of the group. Assuming
that a small party went down the bayou for fishing and collecting, if
one of the unusually extreme northers had suddenly blown up, the
Indians could easily have perished. In fact, local fishermen have told
us that they have come close to freezing themselves when they have
found themselves in their camps during a norther. Even with power
boats, getting back up the bayou may be impossible because of the
force of the wind and the outgoing tide. To suggest the kinds of
conditions that occasionally befall the area, Melissa Crowfoot has
compiled the following information.

SHELL POINT

21

FIGURE 8. A sketch traced from Figure 7 which shows the essential
relationships of the bodies more clearly than the photographs. Many
bones were omitted for clarity.

A perusal of the Weather Bureau records coupled with an examination of the area newspapers makes it obvious that it does get sufficiently cold in the Gulf Coast area of Texas for humans to freeze to
death. These extremely cold winters seem to occur on an average of
about every six to ten years, with measurable snowfall every six years
(snowfall of over one inch is recorded about every ten years). Severe
ice storms occur less often, but do occur irregularly in a rough pattern
of about fifteen years. As another general rule, these storms blow in
from the north (known as "northers"), and tend to cover the entire
area of southeast Texas, if not the whole state. That is they are not local
flurries, but are part of an entire weather system that brings bad
weather to a wide area.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

22

The coldest winter over all the state was 1898-1899, when Houston
recorded a minimum temperature of 6°, while Galveston recorded 8°
(February 12-13). The greatest snowfall by far was recorded in the
winter of 1895: officially, 15.4 inches were on the ground in Galveston, while the unofficial figures went as high as 20 inches in Houston
and 28 inches in the Beaumont area. The worst ice storm was in 1951,
when Houston was crippled for three days with 123 consecutive
hours of temperatures below freezing.
Table 1. Extended Freezing Temperatures
(number of consecutive hours with temperatures below freezing)
Galveston
# of hours

lowest temp reached

January 12-13, 1912

33

20

January 11-12, 1918

33

16

January

1 -2, 1928

34

20

January 22-23, 1930

36

20

22

13

11

24

15

19

15

21

20

15

19-20

15

21

22-23

15

26

13

19
25

30

15

26

30-31

16

24

12

27

Date

(also 17-18
18-19)
February 7 -8, 1933
8 -9
January 18-29, 1949

January 30-31, 1951

(the record in Houston was set during this time period, 123 hours)
January 3117
44
February 2, 1951
18
63
January 9-12, 1962

Table 2. Mean Number of Days
with Minimum Temperature Less Than 32°

Downtown Houston

Galveston

December- 1 day
January - 3 days
February- 1 day
March - 1 day

December- .5 (less than)
January - 1 day
February - 1 day
March - 0 day

SHELL POINT

23

Newspaper articles give a better understanding of what these figures mean when applied to the human situation:
Galveston Daily News, January 8-10, 1886:3 and 10:
"the cold wave acted fiercely last night freezing pumps, water pipes, the
ground, and water in pitchers and vessels... 5° above at some places...
clear sky, strong north wind."... "Yesterday can be described as decidely
winterish. While the water in the street gutters was frozen hard, the water
in the bay, except along the extreme edges, was not frozen; but as the high
wind would dash the spray upon the sides of the vessels in port, it would
rapidly freeze over and cover their sides, rudders and chains with ice,
reminding the seafarers of the scenes of a more northern latitude."

These figures can also mean death, for the frozen body of Captain
Thomas Jefferson was found the afternoon of the tenth on the deck of
his sloop Annie that had been stranded on the flats the night before.
The rescue party themselves were nearly frozen, as "the wind was
blowing a gale at the time and the thermometer about 35o.’’ Also, by
the tenth, the bay had frozen over for miles and resembled "an arctic
scene." Old-timers grumbled that it was worse than the "dreadful
winters of ’38, ’45, and ’64." Reference to the storm of ’64 was made in
another article which told of the deaths of 22 Confederate soldiers
stranded in Matagorda Bay, who died from exposure and freezing.
Table 3. Snowfall
(This table records only those years in which the snowfall
exceeds or is close to one inch.)
Downtown Houston
Galveston
(records kept since 1909
(records kept since 1871)
Feb. 14-15, 1895
Dec. 21-22, 1929
March. 10-11, 1932
Jan. 22, 1940
Jan. 30, 1949
Feb. 12, 1960

20.0 inches
(unofficial)
2.5 inches
0.8 inches
3.0 inches
2.6 inches
3.0 inches

Feb. 14-15, 1895

15.4 inches

Jan. 22, 1940
Jan. 30, 1949
Feb. 12-13, 1960

0.9 inches
0.8 inches
2.2 inches

Table 4. Severe Ice Storms
Downtown Houston
(records kept since 1909)
January
December

2,

1919

19-22,

1924

January

22,

1940

January

29-3,

1951

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

24

The snows of the winter of 1895 were also covered in the Galveston
Daily News (p. 6), with reports of snowfall from all around the area: 28
inches in Beaumont, an average of 16 inches in Orange, 8 inches in
Columbus, and 20 inches reported for both Houston and Lake Charles,
Louisiana. The temperature climbed to above 32° for only an hour
during February 15-16. Cattle losses were estimated at a minimum of
10% and a maximum of 75% (the latter was by a man in Orange). Three
people suffered death by freezing, one in Beaumont, one in Round
Rock and one in Clear Creek. No mention was made of the condition of
Galveston Bay, but Matagorda Bay was frozen over so that people
were ice-skating on it.
"Nothing like it ever in America" was the headline of the Daily
News on February 13, 1899, as the "range of the blizzard" covered the
whole South, with the exception of southern Florida, south Texas,
Mississippi and Alabama. "Loss to fruit and garden truck is great,
cattle have suffered, hundreds have died." Ten degrees below zero
was reported, and several anonymous frozen corpses were discussed.
That was the winter that recorded the lowest temperatures in both
Houston and Galveston (6° and 8°, respectively).
Table 5. Hurricanes
Texas Gulf Coast Area
Land Station

Deaths

Dates of

with Highest

Hurricanes

Wind Speed

(U.S,
only)

Aug. 27 -

Galveston,

Sep 15, 1900

77 mph,

6,000

Damages
(in dollars)
5,0OO,00050,000,000

Galveston,
92 mph,

flooded Galveston
5-6 feet

120 mph

1915

12-foot tide
to a deptb of

gusts to

Aug 5-25,

Description

275

5,000,00050,000,000

gusts to

again, a storm
tide inundated
Galveston

120 mph
Sep 16-25,

Texas City,

1941

gusts to

5,00O,0OO50,000,000

heavy crop
damage-most low
places evacuated

83 mph

in time
Sep 27 -

Freeport

Oct 6, 1949

est. 135 mph

Jun 25-28,

Sabine Pass,

1957

85 mph, gusts

AUDREY

to 100 mph

2

390

5,000,000-

most of damage

50,000,060

was to crops

50,000,000-

storm surge over 12

500,000,000

feet caused flooding
as far as 25 miles
inland; many homes
destroyed and offshore oil rigs
damaged

Sep 3-15,

Port Lavaca and

1961

Matagorda, est.

CARLA

145 mpb, gusts
est to 175 mph

46

50,000~000500,000,000

largest and most
intense in years;
damage from high
winds and tides,
flooding

SHELL POINT

25

On January 23, 1940, theHouston Post reported that three inches of
snow fell on that city, the worst storm since the one of 1899, and again
it covered the entire area. Three hundred forty nine deaths across the
South were blamed directly and indirectly on the snow and ice, with
23 of those in the Gulf Coast area.
The worst ice storm was that of late January and early February,
1951. For three days, schools were let out, telephone service, bus and
taxi service, and garbage service were suspended, the airport was
closed, and at times, even the radio stations weren’t functioning.
In summary, it does get cold enough for human beings to die from
exposure to the low temperatures, wind, snow and ice. Tables 1, 2, 3
and 4 present the extreme weather patterns in the Houston-Galveston
area.
Hurricanes would be another natural hazard for local Indians, although it is doubtful that bodies would be recovered after these
disasters. Table 5 records these storms which seem to affect the local
area on the average about every 10-15 years.

THE ARTIFACTS
There were relatively few artifacts of any kind from the excavated
portion of the site. Surprisingly, no lithics were recovered, although
Frank Mebane told us that he had picked up points on the eroded shell
beach. Despite our continual search, we were unable to find any
evidence at all for artifacts of chipped stone. The following brief
descriptions of the artifacts are divided by the material out of which
they were made. Most of the artifacts were found either in the burial
pit, some in definite association with the burials, or in the adjacent
square.

Shell
Beads, pendants and worked shell are included in this group.
Beads. A string of five beads (Fig. 9 a-e) made from the inside whorl of a conch shell was
found around the neck of the child (Burial No. 2}. These beads are polished and drilled
biconically (Fig. 10 a) and the ends have been ground down flat. Their dimensions (in
cm.) are given in the table.

Maximum
Diameter

Fig. No.

Example

Length

A

4.12

1.6

9a

B

2.94

1.15

9b

C

2.47

1.12

9c

D

2.36

1.19

9d

E

2.11

1.15

9e

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

26

d

b

e

O

9

,~ Cm

k
FIGURE 9. Shell and Bone Artifacts. a-e, five tubular conch shell beads
associated with Burial No. 2; f, conch shell pendant associated with
Burial No. 4; g, bone awl found in the burial pit; h, broken deer radius
awl; i, tubular bone bead; j, incised bone awl; k, tip of bone aw!.

SHELL POINT

27

A discarded end of the inside whorl of a conch which had been cut into beads was
found in the deposit adjacent to the burials. This segment had been cut and partly
ground. It looks as if the first step in manufacturing beads was to grind the entire whorl
to the diameter desired and then to cut it into sections whose ends were subsequently
ground flat.
Pendant. Associated with Burial 4, the female, was a pendant made from the outer
whorl of a conch. One end had been pierced for suspension and a series of five holes had
been partly drilled into its inner surface (Fig. 9f}. The edges of the piece are ground and
slightly beveled.

Bone
There are two bone awls and a probable section of an awl which had been incised.
One specimen (burial pit) is complete (Figs. 9g; 10d) and was made from a longitudinal
section of a deer long bone. This example is 10.8 cm. long. The second example (burial
pit) is the tip of an awl, also made of a section of deer long bone (Fig. 9k).
The incised example (burial pit) is also a section of long bone which has been
polished like an awl but which has four incisions or cut marks at the small end where it
is broken, and a single cut mark at the larger end where it is also broken (Figs. 9j; 10b).

®o

b

I

I

C

d
FIGURE 10. Shell and Bone Artifacts. a, Conch shell bead showing
method of drilling hole; b, incised fragment of bone awl; c, tubular
bone bead; d, polished bone awl.

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Also in the burial pit was the proximal end of the radius of a small deer which was
broken and then polished, probably to make an awl. The end of the piece has been
broken and worn down, partly by gnawing to judge from the tooth marks (Fig. 9h).
A possible bone bead is a tapered section cut from a long bone which was smoothed
on the outside and partly hollowed out on the inside. The narrow end is intact, but the
remainder has been broken (Figs. 9i; 10c).

Discussion of Non-Ceramic Artifacts
The beads and pendant are clearly personal ornaments associated
with burials and they correspond closely with artifacts found at the
Boys School Site. Similar beads are described by Aten (1971:Fig.
14c,d) as Type B, eight of which were found in association with his
Burial 3. All of these beads were shaped from conch shell whorls and
all retain the spiral groove. The beads found at the Boys School Site
have an average length of 2.76 cm. and an average diameter of 1.27
cm. This compares with the smaller four of the five beads from Shell
Point whose length average 2.47 cm. and whose diameters average
1.15 cm.
The shell pendant is of the same style as the one found at the Boys
School Site (80-62) although the latter is slightly larger and has more
elaborate decoration in the form of evenly spaced drilled holes (Aten:
1971:Fig. 15A-A’).
Bone awls which are usually found in archeological sites of this
region have basic similarities which can be attributed to function and
the material out of which they were made.
Ceramics
One hundred thirty-seven sherds were recorded from various pits
in our excavation. Considering the area we dug, pottery is scarce, a
situation which is not surprising if we accept the view that the site
was a fishing camp and not a residence area. Although a sample of this
size enables us to relate the sherds to other sites, we can do so with far
less precision than we would like because of two factors: 1) the sherds
tend to be extremely small, and 2) we have no way of determining on
present evidence whether they should all be considered contemporary. Attempts to refine a ceramic chronology for the area have been
difficult because of the same factors at most sites and because of our
poor understanding of regional variation. The Three-Oaks Site which
is currently under investigation has a large collection of pottery
which is accurately controlled stratigraphically. A complete analysis
of this will be necessary before it is useful to reach firm conclusions
about the Shell Point material. What we can say now is that there is
nothing in the ceramics to suggest that the site is not late. For this

SHELL POINT

29

j..,
/

b
5cm
i

FIGURE 11. Potter), fron~ Shell Point. a-c, sherds with notched rims; d-e,
plain rims.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

reason I have not assigned the sherds to the usual series of types
which are found in the region.
The salient characteristic of all our sherds is that they are sand
tempered; only three had bits of grog temper along with the sand.
Eleven of the 18 rims have notching (Fig. 11a-c) and three sherds have
parallel horizontal incisions (Fig. 11a). One sherd has a trace of
asphalt decoration, a trait which is more common in sites well to the
south of Houston than to the Clear Lake area, for example. The range
of variation in rim sherds is illustrated in Figure 11.

FAUNA
Bones
A zoological analysis of the bones has not been carried out but Charles Stedman
grouped the bones according to major categories and calculated the percentages by
weight. Most of the bones were tiny chips recovered in the screen and could not be
further identified. By weight these comprised 49.3 percent of the total. Of the remainder, 25.1 percent are fish bones. Bones of rodents, turtles, and birds made up another
13.3 percent. A few fragments of deer bone and a cow tooth (possibly a recent addition
to the site) added up to 5.7 percent of the total weight. The remainder were miscellaneous burned bones. Crude though this breakdown may be, it does indicate that the
principal activity was fishing, along with collecting of oysters. The lack of deer bones
accords well with the absence of projectile points and of Ethics themselves.

Shell
The bulk of the midden is composed of oyster shells but scallops and Busycan shells,
also derived from saline water, were found, the former only as small fragments.
Additionally, there were half a dozen fragments of Rangia and more than 100 examples
of at least three kinds of terrestrial snails. There is nothing in the shells themselves to
suggest environmental conditions different from those prevailing in the area today.
Indeed, all the species found occur in the vicinity today, either living or washed up on
beaches.

The Physical Anthropology of Shell Point
RICHARD G. WILKINSON

INTRODUCTION
The eight burials from the Shell Point Site, representing a
minimum of nine individuals, can provide students of American
Indian osteology with additional data for overall syntheses and
specific information concerning the physical anthropology of a restricted geographical/ecological area. To this end, the skeletal material from the site will be described metrically, morphologically and
pathologically; additional skeletal series will be considered for comparative purposes.

BURIAL DESCRIPTIONS
Burial 1
Burial 1 is an adult mate, of approximately 25 to 30 years of age. Like the other adult
males from the site, Burial 1 is robust, with well-defined muscle markings, and the
browridge, mastoid processes, supra-mastoid crest and nuchal ridge are all prominent.
The mandible (Fig. 12) is very robust, with a bilateral chin, marked gonial eversion and
a large, nearly vertical (103°) ramus.
The post-cranial skeleton reaffirms the impression of muscularity evident from the
skull and mandible. The humerus has a massive deltoid crest and a deep groove for the
biceps tendon. The femur is likewise massive, with equally marked areas of muscle
attachment.
The dentition is sound, with no pre-mortem tooth loss, and a single, small apical
carie. Burial 1 is the only individual from the site with caries. The wear on the teeth is
moderately heavy and the posterior dentition is characterized by flat wear which is
greater on the buccal aspect of the mandibular dentition and on the lingual aspect of the
maxillary dentition. This form of wear is typical of the other burials as well and the
older individuals demonstrate it to a greater degree.
The skeleton is relatively free of pathology; only the lumbar vertebrae and the left
femur are pathological. The vertebrae have porotic superior and inferior articulating
facets, and the femur shows a slight amount of lipping around the patellar surface of the
femoral condyle.

Burial 2
This individual is a child of 5 to 6 years of age at death. The post-cranial remains are
fairly complete but badly fragmented and give no indication of trauma or pathology.
Due to the fragmentary nature of the skeleton the dentition provides the only consistently observable part of the skeleton. The mandibular first molars are erupted but not
yet in the occlusal plane. The deciduous teeth show very little wear, considering the
fact that the permanent teeth are coming in. The wear is confined to tiny facets on the
molars and small patches of dentine on the mandibular and maxillary incisors. Considering the amount of wear seen on the adults, and even young adults such as Burial 1, the
tooth wear on this child may indicate that children were eating food of different
consistency than that of the adults, if not different food altogether.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

32

b

c

d

FIGURE 12. Ma~dibles. a, Burial 7; b, Burial 8; c, Burial 1; d, Burial 3;
Burials 1, 3 and 7 are males,

Burial 3
Burial 3 is a male of approximately 50 years of age. As is the case with the other adult
burials, the age estimate must be based on a combination of endocranial suture closure
and dental attrition, as no pubic symphyses were preserved. The usual caveats
concerning these methods of age estimation are understood and the reader must keep
them in mind. This individual is another example of a markedly rugged male, as
indicated by the large size of the browridge, mastoids and other such characteristics
traditionally used to determine sex. In addition, the skull shows the typical form for this
series, being characterized by a high, narrow vault, marked parietal bossing and
constrictions immediately superior to the supramastoid crests (Fig. 13). As was true of
Burial 1, the mandible has a bilateral chin, marked gonial eversion and generally
marked rugosity (Fig. 12). The muscularity so obviously evident in the skull is equally
obvious post-cranially, as was the case with Burial 1.

SHELL POINT

33

b

(1

¢
FIGURE 13. Crania, occipital view. a, Burial 4; b, Burial 7; c, Burial 3.
Burials 3 and 7 are males.
Dental attrition is very marked with relatively more wear on the anterior dentition
and the first premolars. Despite the wear, the teeth were sound, with no evidence of
dental pathology. Bone pathology on this skeleton is restricted to the right tibia and the
lumbar and cervical vertebrae. The right tibia is grossly pathological, with marked

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

swelling of the anterior aspect of the shaft and severe porosis. The pathology is most
marked on the lateral shaft, but encompasses the entire shaft to a lesser extent. The
epiphyses are not affected.
Vertebral pathology consists of marked exostoses on the centrum of L4 (Fig. 15) and
less marked lipping of L5, C5 and C6. In addition, L4 has bony growths surrounding the
margins of the superior articulating facets and the inferior facets are missing, presumably as a result of disease.

Burial 4
This is the only female skeleton in the group of five individuals. From dental attrition
and suture closure, it is quite clear that the individual is old, but 40 + years is as accurate
an estimate as is possible at this point. Like the majority of the males Burial 4 has a skull
characterized by its height and narrow width, with the constrictions above the supramastoid crests when viewed from the rear. The mandible is much less rugged than
those of the males although gonial eversion is quite marked.
In the area of pathology, only the mandible and frontal bone are involved. There is an
alveolar abcess around the roots of the left mandibular third molar and the roof of the
left orbit is porotic, a condition usually referred to as cribra orbitalia. As in the males,
the dental wear is flat with a lingual-to-buccal direction in the mandible and the reverse
in the maxilla. The anterior dentition exhibits relatively more wear than the posterior.

b
FIGURE 14. Sexual Dimorphism. a, left humeri of Burials 1 and 4; b,
mandibles of Burials 1 and 4. Burial 1 is a male, 4 a female.

SHELL POINT

35

Cl

b

C

FIGURE 15. Patholo~,. a, cross-section of adult humerus; b, fourth
lumbar vertebra of Burial 3; c, lateral view of adult tibia.

Burial 5
This individual was still imbedded in earth at the time I examined the skeletal
material, as the skeleton is intended for display. As a result only a superficial examination could be made. Burial 5 is a male of at least 40 years of age at death. Like the other
males, he is extremely robust, although shorter than the others. Based on the length of

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the right femur (435mm.) which was measured in situ, the estimated stature is 166.1
cm., or 65.4 inches. Observable pathology was restricted to the right tibia and the
lumbar vertebrae. As in Burial 3, the shaft of the tibia is swollen and porotic and the
lumbars have lipping of the centra. The pathological involvement of the tibia in Burial 5
is much less severe than that observed in Burial 3, and would appear to be an earlier
manifestation of the same disease.

Burial 6
This burial consists of the skull and mandible of an adolescent, 10 to 11 years of age.
The mandible shows a strong, bilateral chin and marked swelling of the body in the
region of the second molars. The mandible would, therefore, indicate that this individual is a male. Accurate sex determination at such a young age is quite improbable in
most cases, but the extreme amount of sexual dimorphism in this series (especially
evident in the mandibles) makes such determination likely in this case. The postcranial remains associated with the cranium are of another individual, probably an
adult female. No abnormalities nor pathologies were observed.

Burial 7
The most complete individual in this burial is an adult male over 40 at death. The
skull is typically high and narrow, the mandible typically robust although lacking
gonial eversion. Post-cranially, the skeleton again suggests ruggedness, and this individual was also the tallest, the stature estimated as 180.7 cm., or 71.1 inches. The tibiae
have smooth bumps along the anterior edge, and some porosis. It would appear that this
individual was in the early stages of the disease that affected burials 3 and 5. Unlike the
other two burials the vertebrae of Burial 7 are free of pathology.
Additionally, Burial 7 contains a second mandible and skull fragments, also of an
adult male. The second mandible appears to be that of an individual older than the mate
described above. The second mandible and skull fragments continue the morphological traits observed in the more complete males. Thus the mandible is characterized by a
bilaterial chin and overall rugosity. The maxillary dentition has extreme wear, flat as in
the other individuals, and in a buccal-to-lingual direction.
A partial post-cranial skeleton of a child is also included in Burial 7. The long bones
have no epiphyses and the size indicates a child of approximately 10 years of age. These
bones may belong to the skull described as Burial 6. No pathologies nor anomalies were
observed.

Burial 8
This burial consists of the badly broken skull of an old adult female. Although
distorted in breakage and reconstruction, the skull is high and narrow, like the other
individuals. The frontal bone is pathological, as there is a series of irregular bumps and
a shallow depression just above the orbits; no endocranial involvement is observable.
Like Burial 4, this female is very small, and similarly points to the marked degree of a
sexual dimorphism present in this group.

MORPHOLOGY
Selected measurements of the skull, mandible and long bones are
presented in Tables 6 and 7. The lack of facial measurements is due to
the poor condition of the crania, as none has a complete facial skele-

SHELL POINT

37

ton. As can be seen from the measurements, the skulls are quite long,
¯ and the cranial indices derived from the length and breadth measurement show all of the measurable adult skulls to be dolichocranial.
Basion-bregma height could be taken on only one skull, and the value
for this measurement, 146 mm., is relatively high. The marked height
of all of the skulls was also evident. The measurements thus reinforce
the visual impression one has of the skulls, that is, long, narrow and
high.
The mandibular measurements are notable mainly in the area of the
ascending ramus, as the measurements show the rami to be very high
and quite broad. The differences between the one measurable female
and the males is very obvious in these measurements; Plate III reaffirms this dimorphism. The post-cranial measurements are the most
dimorphic, especially those expressing shaft diameter. Unfortunately, it is impossible to assess the significance of this sexua! dimorphism because of the small sample size, as there are only two
adult females in the sample. The fact remains, however, that these two
females are small and very gracile, whereas all of the males are
large-boned and rugged. It was even possible to determine the sex of a
pre-adolescent boy, Burial 6, with a fair degree of confidence. Comparing Burials I and 4 the amount of sexual dimorphism, as measured
by dividing the male value by the female, ranges from 2.7% to 31.7%
in the skull and mandible, and from 207% to 47.1% in the post-cranial
skeleton.
With the exception of the 2.7% value for cranial length, all of the
other values were greater than those calculated by de Villiers (1968)
for South African Negroes, even though the same measurements were
significantly different among the two sexes of the Negro population.
Some of the measurements show even more dimorphism than that
observable among gorillas, which are usually assumed to be among
the most dimorphic of the primates. The meaning of such a finding is
unclear, especially since the small sample size prohibits the determination of statistical significance. All that can be said at this point is
that all of the males were larger than both of the females. To accept
such a difference as representative of the entire population is obviously premature, as is the interpretation of the difference. If such a
difference did exist within the population then it would remain for us
to demonstrate an equally diverse diet and/or division of labor to
explain the differences. The rather scarce comparative literature is of
little help here, as sexual dimorphism is never referred to. Several of
the reports on Texas Coast skeletal series mention the marked robusticity of the males, but a corresponding lack of robusticity among the
females is not mentioned.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38

Table 6. Cranial Measurements
Males
Measurement
Length
Breadth
Basion-Bregma
Minimum Frontal
Basion-Nasion
Palate Length
Palate Width
Symphysis Height
Bigonial Width
Bicondylar Width
Ramus Height
Ramus Width
Body Length

3

7

191
140
146
103
118
57
70
40
119
129
83
38
105

191
138

186
134

184

96

99

92

58
70
40
91
121
80
40

70
38
116
122
73
39
105

7a

Female
4

1

128

36

35

106
121
74
39

63
35
93

Table 7. Post-cranial Measurements

Males

Measurement

Female
4

7

3
Humerus
339

336

346

280

Head Diameter

45

46

45

36

Ant.-Post. Mid-shaft Diameter

24

25

20

16

’ Med.-Lat. Mid-shaft Diameter

25

25

23

Radius Length

273

276

Ulna Length

302

293

286

Length

472

470

490

Bicondylar Length

470

468

483

Ant.-Post. Mid-shaft Diameter

35

34

29

Med.-Lat. Mid-shaft Diameter

30

30

29

LengthI

18
226

Femur

Tibia
406

397

414

336

Ant.-Post. Mid-shaft Diameter2

41

37

41

29

Med.-Lat. Mid-shaft Diameter

28

28

26

21

Length

1. All lengths are maximum. The measurements are for the left bone when both bones
of a pair were present.
2. The diameter of the tibia was taken at the level of the distal aspect of the nutrient
forament.

SHELL POINT

39

STATURE
Table 8 lists the estimated stature for the four adult males from the
Shell Point Site and some comparative series from the Texas Gulf
Coast. As is evident, there is a considerable difference in stature
depending on the formulae used for the estimation. The tables supplied by Genoves (1967) yield estimates consistently less than those
derived from the formulae of Trotter and Gleser (1958) for Mongoloids. Since Genoves’ tables are based on cadaveral stature of
Mesoamerican Indians who are of short stature, estimates for North
American Indians based on these tables are most likely too short
(Bass, Evans and Jantz 1971; Wilkinson 1971:51). All estimates are
based on femora! and/or tibial measurements, as suggested by Trotter
and Gleser (1958:120).

Table 8. Stature Estimates of Texas Coast Males
Site
and
Burial

Femur

Genoves

and

Femur

Tibia

Shell Point 1

170.5

171.0

177.2

3

170.0

169.0

176.1

5

162.5

7

174.5

172.5

180.7

169.4

170.8

178.0

Mean
Oso*

Tibia

Trotter and Gleser
Femur

176.9
166.1
177.4

167.0

170.4

"b"

171.0

174.5

"c"

173.5

176.6

"d"

175.5

178.8
180.9

174.0
171.8

175.1

"1"

161.0

165.0

"2"

167.0

170.4

"3"

173.0

176.2

167.0

170.5

Mean

H-U
178.9

"a"

3 males

Tibia

Doering and
Kob**

Mean

*Woodbury and Woodbury, 1935
**Newman, 1953

The stature estimates indicate that the Texas Coast males were
relatively tall and that all three series used here were quite similar in
stature. The Shell point males have stature estimates which range
from approximately 5’5" to 5’11" with a mean of 5’9", using the

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Trotter and Gleser formulae. The Oso series (Woodbury and Woodbury 1935) ranged from 5’7" to 5’11" with a mean of 69.4 inches; This
is nearly identical to the Shell Point estimate. The three skeletons
from the Doering and Kob sites (Newman 1953b) are somewhat shorter than those from the other series, as the mean stature is 5’7". Stature
estimates made on five males from the Harris County Boys School
Cemetery (Aten et al., 1971) indicate a mean stature of 67.1 inches.
This is identical to the Doering and Kob estimate but is based on
"either the femur, tibia or both" and is calculated from a different
formula in the present study.
The males from these Texas Coast series are taller than a Middle
Woodland series from Kansas (Phenice 1969) and six Middle to Late
Woodland series from Illinois and Michigan (Wilkinson 1971). Additionally, the Shell Point male stature is greater than that estimated for
Arikara males, using the same formulae (Bass, Evans and Jantz
1971:167). Stature estimates using the humerus and ulna are in one
case greater, in one case less and in the third case the same as the
estimates based on the bones of the leg. Thus it would not appear that
the tall stature estimates are an artifact of unusually long legs among
the Shell Point group.
It is quite clear that the Shell Point males were very tall for precontact American Indians. It is also clear that they were not unusual in
this regard in that the existing data indicate that relatively tall stature
was the rule among late prehistoric Indians of the east Texas Coast.
Newman (1953) has demonstrated a south to north gradient of increasing stature for American Indians, and also has presented evidence for increasing stature through time among American Indians of
the southeastern United States (Newman 1962). The skeletal series
discussed in this report have statures which are considerably too tall
to be explained in terms of the "rules" of Bergmann and Allen;
further, it is unlikely that a secular trend can explain the high values,
due to lack of evidence for shorter ancestral populations. While secular changes in stature are well documented they are accompanied by
similar changes in levels of nutrition. No such nutritive change of the
appropriate magnitude can be demonstrated for the populations of
tile Texas Coast.

DEMOGRAPHY
The sex and age distributions are not what might be expected in a
representative sample of a small population. Of the minimum of nine
individuals, only two are subadults, and of the seven adults only one,
Burial 1, is of reproductive age. Burials 1 through 5 were found

SHELL POINT

41

together, and on this basis may be thought to represent members of a
common social group such as a family. This group contains two old
(40+) males and one old female, a young adult male and a 5 year-old
child.
While we might expect a reasonably large proportion of the burials
to be individuals older than 40, the proportion among the Shell Point
series, 67%, would seem too high. We would also expect more subadults (especially infants) to be represented. Obviously the small
number of individuals in the sample prevents drawing sound conclusions concerning the age distribution, but it should be noted that it is
not as expected under "normal" prehistoric conditions. It is, of
course, quite possible that the burials do indeed represent a real social
group. The low number of subadults is apparently not unusual for
Karankawa:
The family unit was apparently quite small. Usually two parents and one
child, and never more than two children, were observed. In addition to
this nuclear family the couple lived with one set of relatives by marriage
and possibly one or two other relatives (Schaedel 1949:124).

There may well have been unusual circumstances leading to the
death of these individuals, considering that at least Burials i through
5 were apparently interred simultaneously. There is no evidence of
trauma and the pathology present was not responsible for the presumed sudden death. There are many references to cannibalism
among the Karankawa, Atakapa and Tonkawa, but no evidence of this
in the form of cutting marks on the bones was observed.
The most obvious and common pathology is a progressive bone
disease seen in three of the nine individuals. Burials 3, 5 and 7 have
tibiae exhibiting varying stages of this disease. The affected tibiae are
swollen along the anterior shaft and the shaft is marked by longitudinal striations. In the more severely affected bones the swelling progresses to the entire shaft, the cortical bone is very porotic and the
entire medullary canal is infested with spongy bone. The epiphyses,
and thus the joints, are not affected. The most severely affected tibia is
one which could not be associated with any individual. This bone was
one of a number of bones recovered from the site without exact
provenience. That the disease is restricted to males may be of significance but the fact that five of the seven adults are males is most likely
the reason for the association.
The disease would seem most likely to be a form of periostitis. Like
most infectious diseases which affect bone tissue, the most probable
cause is an infection somewhere else in the body. Infectious diseases
are also another possible cause. The evidence from the bones only

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

indicates that some sort of infection was present; it could have been
syphi!lis, which would be interesting considering three of the males
exhibited the disease, or it could just as well have been tonsilitis, at
least originally.
Dental pathology is very limited in the Shell Point series. One of six
observable adult dentitions contains caries, and three have premortem tooth loss. Such a low frequency of caries accords well with
data from larger series from the Texas coast. Among shellfish gatherers of the Texas coast Goldstein (1948) found caries in 34.5% of the
dentitions whereas east Texas agriculturalists had a frequency of
46.8%. The frequencies of pre-mortem tooth loss were equally disparate and suggest differences attributable to dietary patterns. The
Shell Point population was most certainly non-agricultural and the
low incidence of dental pathology, if not due to sampling error, may
be explained on the basis of inferred dietary practices.
COMPARATIVE MATERIAL
There are a few skeletal series from the east Texas Coast area and
they can provide some data with which to compare the Shell Point
material. Because of the small size of most of the samples (including
the Shell Point series) only the most simple comparisons can be made.
The location of these sites is indicated in Figure 1.
The skeletal material most frequently encountered in the literature
from the Texas Coast area is that from the Oso Site on Corpus Christi
Bay in Nueces County. Burials from the Oso Site are apparently first
described by the Woodburys (Woodbury and Woodbury 1935) along
with skeletons from at least one other site. Woodbury (1937) later uses
the Oso remains in a comparative paper and notes that "This series is
too small (less than 10 individuals) for statistical reliability but as
there are no more in existence nothing can be done about it (p. 9)."
The tables show a maximum of 11 individuals from the site and by
1957 the Oso population grew to 22 individuals (Goldstein 1957:305).
The Oso skeletons also served as part of the original sample upon
which Neumann’s Otamid physical variety was based (Neumann,
1952). Although few artifacts were found at the Oso site Woodbury
(1937) felt that the probable late date and geographical location of the
site would argue for the site being identifiable as Karankawa. This
identification is repeated by Neumann (1952).
The descriptions provided by the Woodburys and Neumann could
easily fit most of the Shell Point skulls. For example, "When observed
from the rear, the skull appear to have perpendicular sides" (Woodbury and Woodbury 1935) and the well-developed chins are also

SHELL POINT

43

noted. Neumann’s description of the Otamid type is even closer to the
Shell Point series as he mentions the dolichocranial, high skulls, with
medium to pronounced muscle relief, large browridges and large
mastoids. The mandibles are "medium to large, rather massive, with a
wide bilaterial type of chin... (Neumann 1952:16)."
The Caplen Mound (Woodbury 1937; Campbell 1957) is located
near Galveston.From the date and the artifacts Woodbury identifies
the site as Atakapan and notes that the cultural material "differs
radically" from that found at the Oso site (Woodbury 1937:9).
Woodbury’s tables indicate that the Caplen series was considerably
more brachycephalic than the Oso series; the cranial index being 70.1
for the Oso males, and 77.3 for the males from the Caplen Site. There
are also some differences in mandibular measurements but the two
series are very similar in 17 of 22 measurements. Woodbury emphasized the differences and concluded that the two series were
remotely related, at best; the opposite conclusion, that they were
closely related, is also consistent with the data if the similarities are
stressed. The broader skulls of the Caplen Mound series do represent a
distinct difference from other Texas Coast series and an explanation
based on different gene pools would seem to be the only logical one.
The Jamaica Beach Site (Aten 1965; Aten et al. 1971) is located on
Galveston Island. The site yielded 17 burials, and was radiocarbon
dated at 490+ 100 B.P. (Aten 1965:154). In Aten’s original report five
skulls were discussed briefly and the long, narrow and high vaults,
similar to those at Shell Point, were noted. The skeletal material is
also discussed as a comparative series for yet another Texas Coast
series from the Harris County Boys School Site (Aten et al. 1971). In
this later report 19 burials from the Jamaica Beach site are mentioned.
The different body counts are at least partially understandable when
we learn that some of the burials were carefully exhumed, only to be
crushed under the wheels of a passing truck. According to this recent
paper only two of the 19 individuals from the Jamaica Beach site were
subadults, and one of these was an infant (Aten et al. 1971).
I was able to examine a few of the extant skulls from the Jamaica
Beach site through the courtesy of Dr. Pulley of the Houston Museum
of Natural Science. With one exception the male skulls were very
similar in overall morphology to those from Shell Point -- being
characterized by long, narrow and high vaults. The depressions noted
just above the supramastoid crests on the Shell Point skulls are also
evident on most of the Jamaica Beach skulls examined. The one major
exception is a skeleton referred to as "Burial D" which is said to be a
40 to 50 year old male (Aten et al. 1971). This was the only burial with
the cranium positioned toward the east (Aten 1965) and the only

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

brachycranial skull at either the Jamaica Beach or Shell Point sites.
This skull is obviously different from all of the other skulls in these
series and although variability could account for this difference it is
much more probable that this skull is of an individual from another
population. The peculiar burial orientation is also evidence that the
person was seen as somehow different by the rest of the population.
Upon examining the skeletal material it was immediately obvious
that Burial D was not a male and it could thus well be that the skeleton
represents a female brought into the group from another population.
The only brachycrania! skeletal series of which I am aware in this
area is that from the Caplen Mound, discussed above. It may well have
been that the female known as "Burial D" originally came from the
population represented by the Caplen Mound skeletal material.
Whether this burial represents an exchanged mate, a captive woman
or any number of other possibilities is naturally unknown. All that
can be said with any certainty is that she was perceived as being
different by the Jamaica Beach population, as witnessed by the peculiar burial position.
The skeletal remains from the Harris County Boys School Cemetery
(Aten et al. 1971) would be an ideal population with which to compare the Shell Point material but the requisite information is not
available. There is no description of the skulls, and "traditional osteometric techniques were not used in this study since there is a
growing realization in physical anthropology that understanding of
the significance of such techniques is markedly deficient (Aten et al.
1971:48)." That the authors later complain of the lack of comparative
data (ibid. p. 53) is astonishing.
Some of the Harris County Boys School Cemetery Burials are affected with bone infections which appear to be identical to those
observed on three of the Shell Point burials. Thus Burial 13 is described as an adult male with "mild inflammation affecting the cortical bone of the femur and tibia that was diagnosed as periostitis (Aten
et al. 1971). Burial 29 is an adult female with vertebral lipping and
tibial inflammation, affecting the cancellous bone as well as the
cortical bone. This is exactly the type of pathology observed in the
Shell Point skeletons.
As was the case at the Shell Point and Jamaica Beach sites there
were fewer subadults than expected at the Harris County Boys School
Site. Seven of the 32 burials were less than 11 years at death, and this
ratio is seen as evidence of "easy living" (Aten et al. 1971). A late
summer occupancy is thus assumed. Presumably a site occupied
during the winter would be evident from the larger proportion of
subadult deaths. Such an assumption is not warranted. The Jamaica

SHELL POINT

45

Beach Site contained 19 burials, only two of which were subadults,
yet the same authors consider this to be a winter occupation. While
these two sites may well be summer and winter occupations the
proportions of subadults should not be the determining factor in
judging seasonality.
The Doering and Kobs sites are located about 16 miles west of
Houston. They yielded a total of seven skeletons (Newman 1953b).
The Doering Site yielded four individuals, including a male and two
females described as long-headed and a second adult male with a
cranial index of 81.5. The Kobs Site contained three individuals, two
females and a male, and they are all described as long-headed. The
Doering Burials are felt by Newman to be most similar to those from
the Caplen Mound, and the Kobs are associated with the Oso material,
which means that the Doering group is Atakapan, while the Dobs
series is Karankawan (Newman 1953b:265). The two males from the
Doering Site are considerably shorter than the males from Shell Point
and Oso (see Table 8). Atakapans have been described as having a
short stature (Dyer 1917) whereas there are several references to the
tall stature of the Karankawa.
Most of the skeletal series from Texas Coast sites relatable to either
the Karankawa or Atakapa are very small, incomplete and/or poorly
described. The information that is available, however, makes it quite
clear that there was a predominant physical similarity among many of
the series. The most notable morphological features are the head
shapes and stature. With the exception of the Caplen Mound skulls
the "typical" skull from the area is strongly dolichocranial, with
marked muscle relief, and exhibits a large mandible with a strongly
bilateral chin. The dolichocranial features of the skulls from the Texas
Coast area have been noted by many and have been seen as evidence
for the existence of marginal remnants of early American Indians. The
skulls described in this report are dolichocranial but are also characterized by having high vaults and variably marked depressions just
superior to the supra-mastoid crests.
The skeletal material from Caplen Mound and the Doering and
Kobs sites (Woodbury 1937; Newman 1953b) is identified as Atakapan in both areas, but the morphology exhibits large differences. The
skulls from the Doering and Kobs sites are described as long and
narrow whereas those from the Caplen Mound are considerably more
brachycranial. Thus, either the Atakapans varied greatly in morphology or the identification of these three sites as Atakapan is erroneous.
Descriptions of living Atakapans are extremely rare, and the only
reference I could locate was very brief:" ’... their bodies stout, stature
short, and heads of large size placed between their shoulders... (Dyer

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1917, cited by Newcomb 1961).’ "The meaning of"large heads" is, of
course, debatable but the reference to short stature would separate the
Atakapans from the Karankawa.
The third major group in the East Texas area were the Tonkawa, a
19th century confederation of small, obscure groups with histories
connected to the Southern Plains. There are no adequate descriptions
of the morphology of the Tonkawa but Newcomb (1961:Plate II and
III) illustrates some 19th Century Tonkawas. The few individuals
pictured are meso- to brachycephalic but this is hardly sufficient data
upon which to base ethnographic identification.
There is little doubt that the majority of the skeletal series mentioned in this study are identifiable as Karankawa. The tall stature and
general ruggedness evident in the skeletal material from the Shell
Point, Jamaica Beach, (9so and Harris County Boys School sites are
alluded to in various early accounts of Karankawans. When visited
around 1830, the males were described as being nearly 6 feet tall
(Berlandier 1969:32), and in general, "The Carancahueses are a big
people, with robust, well formed, athletic bodies (ibid. p. 149)." Their
strength impressed others as well: " ’... every warrior’s bow when
strung, was precisely as long as his person and as useless in the hands
of a man of ordinary strength as was the bow of Ulysses in the hands of
the suitors (Kuykendall 1903, cited in Newcomb 1961:61).’ " The
Karankawa made a less poetic but equally strong impression on
others: " ’They were the most savage looking human beings I ever
saw. Many of the bucks were six feet in height with bows and arrows
in proportion (Smithwick 1900, cited in Newcomb 1961:64).’ "
SUMMARY
The analysis of the skeletal material from the Shell Point Site allows
a number of conclusions, although each should be tempered with the
implications of small sample size. In terms of overall morphology it is
evident that the Shell Point material is similar to a number of precontact or early contact skeletal series from the Texas Coast area. The
similarities are most marked in the areas of head shape and stature.
Yet the Shell Point series also had distinctiveness notably in the
homogeneity of head shape and in the high degree of sexual dimorphism.
In terms of demography the Shell Point series would not seem to be
representative of a "real" social group, due to the age and sex of the
nine individuals. Of the nine, two were adult females beyond reproductive age, two were subadults and the rest were adult males. Only
one of the males was less than 40 at the time of death. The skeletal

SHELL POINT

47

material showed no signs of trauma and the marked robusticity of the
males would suggest that the group was adequately nourished.
Skeletal pathology was noted on several of the males. A progressive
periostitis is indicated, affecting primarily the tibiae of four individuals. Dental pathology is slight, with only one observable carie and
three individuals with pre-mortem tooth loss.
The Shell Point skeletal series can be compared with several Texas
Coast skeletal series and such a comparison points to a basic similarity among skeletons from sites identified as Karankawa and some
differences when compared to putative Atakapan skeletal material.
From various descriptions of living Karankawa Indians made in the
19th century, all of which note the tall stature and ruggedness of the
males, there is little doubt that the She!l Point series can be identified
as Karankawa. While differing from the Karankawa series in head
shape and stature the skeletal material from the Caplen Mound and
the Doering Site also shows a number of similarities to the material
from Oso, Shell Point and Jamaica Beach. If these two sites are in fact
Atakapan then we could expect that Atakapa and Karankawa shared a
gene pool at one time.
Biological evidence for the origin of these two groups is scanty, due
mainly to the small sample sizes and lack of published data from
Texas Coast populations. Ethnographic and archaeological evidence
seems to point toward Louisiana as a possible homeland; biological
evidence does not contradict this view. Snow’s description of the
Tchefuncte skeletal material, emphasizing as it does the high, narrow
heads and marked muscularity {Snow 1945) could provide a basis for
establishing a population ancestral to those of the Texas Coast.

Acknowledgments
Without the help and cooperation of many persons the excavation of the Shell Point
Site could not have been carried out. Special appreciation is due to the Mebane family
who own a fishing camp a short distance up the bayou from the site and who alerted
officials of General Crude Oil Company, the present owners of the land, to the danger of
the site’s being eroded into the bayou. To Frank Mebane, Jr., we owe special thanks for
his care in recovering skeletons that had eroded out of the banks of the site over the two
years preceding our excavation. We would not have been able to work at the site,
however, except for the foresight of Mr. K. E. Montague, President of General Crude Oil
who informed Dr. Thomas Pulley of the Houston Museum of Natural Science in August,
1971 that a skull was at that time eroding out of the bank. We were informed immediately and after visiting the site decided it was worth excavating as a class project at
Rice. General Crude Oil, through the good offices of G. E. Gotschall and James Montague, gave us permission to enter the prdperty and to conduct the excavation. Frank

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Mebane, Sr., has been extremely helpful in guiding us over the difficult marsh terrain,
welcoming us into his camp and in providing a rich lore about the area based on his
lifelong experiences.
The work itself was carried out by students in Anthropology 323a (Archeological
Techniques). The following students participated: Susan Bielstein, Bruce Byland,
Melissa Crowfoot, Margie Lohse, Anntoinette Moore, Michael O’Brien, Elsa Redmond,
Charles Spencer, Charles Stedman, Oscar loost, Mary Williamson, John Thorne. Much
of the information in this report was compiled and in some cases written by these
students. In addition Mrs. Barbara Burger and Mrs. Nancy Jircik, although not students
in the class, volunteered their services in excavation, and Bob Cartier, a graduate
student in Anthropology at Rice, helped build equipment and was in charge of photographic processing.
Finally special appreciation must be extended to General Crude Oil Company for
providing funds which enabled Richard Wilkinson to travel to Houston to study the
skeletons and which facilitated the preparation of the manuscript.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1965 Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site (41 GV 5), Galveston County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 36:153-162.
Aten, L. E., C. K. Chandler, A. B. Wesolowsky and R. M. Malina
1971 Archaeological Investigations at the Harris County Boys School
Cemetery. Manuscript submitted to the Texas Antiquities Committee,
Austin.
Bass, W. M., R. D. Evans and R. L. Jantz
1971 The Leavenworth Site Cemetery: Archaeology and Physical Anthropology. University of Kansas Publications in Anthropology, No.
2.
Berlandier, J. L.
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830. John C. Ewers, editor and annotator.
Smithsonian Institution Press. Washington, D.C.
Campbell, T. N.
1957 Archeotogical Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County,
Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 4:448-471.
Dyer, J. O.
!917 The Lake Charles Atakapas Cannibals. Period of 1817 - 1820.
Genoves, S.
1967 Proportionality of the Long Bones and their Relation to Stature among
Mesoamericans.American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 26,
No. 1:67-78.
Goldstein, M. S.
1948 Dentition of Indian Crania from Texas. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology, Vol 6, No. 1:63-84.
1957 Skeletal Pathology of Early Indians in Texas. American Journal of
Physical Anthropology, Vol. 15, No. 3:299-311.

SHELL POINT

49

Kuykendall, J. H.
1903 Reminiscences of Early Texas. Quarterly of the Texas Historical
Association, Vol. 6:236-253;311-330.
Neumann, G. K.
1952 Archeology and Race in the American Indian. In: Archeology of Eastern United States, James B. Griffin, editor. University of Chicago
Press. Chicago.
Newcomb, W. W. Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas, from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of
Texas Press. Austin.
Newman, M. T.
1953a The Application of Ecological Rules to the Racial Anthropology of the
Aboriginal New World. American Anthropologist, Vol. 55, No.
3:311-327.
1953b Indian Skeletal Remains from the Doering and Kobs Sites, Addicks
Reservoir, Texas. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin
154:253-266.
1962 Evolutionary Changes in Body Size and Head Form in American
Indians. American Anthropologist, Vol. 64, No. 2:237-257.
Phenice, T. W.
1969 An Analysis of the Human Skeletal Material from Burial Mounds in
North Central Kansas. University of Kansas Publications in
Anthropology, No. 1.
Schaedel, R. P.
1949 The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast. Southwestern Journal of
Anthroplogy, Vol. 5, No. 2:117-137.
Smithwick, Noah
1900 The Evolution of a State, or Recollections of Old Texas Days. Compiled by Nanna Smithwick Donaldson, Austin, Texas.
Snow, C. E.
1945 Tchefuncte Skeletal Remains. In: The Tchefuncte Culture, an Early
Occupation of the Lower Mississippi Valley by James A. Ford and G. I.
Quimby, Jr. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, Vol.
10, No. 3, Part 2:99-110.
Trotter, M. and G. C. Gleser
1958 A re-evaluation of Estimation of Stature Based on Measurements of
Stature Taken during Life and of Long Bones after Death. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 16, No. 1:79-123.
United States Department of Commerce
1962 Climatic Guide for Houston-Galveston, Texas Area. Climatography of
the United States. Department of Commerce Publication No. 40-41,
June.
n.d. Some Devastating North Atlantic Hurricanes of the Twentieth
Century. Department of Commerce, Environmental Sciences Administration.
deVillers, H.
1968 Sexual Dimorphism of the Skull of the South African Bantu-speaking
Negro. South African Journal of Science, Vol. 64:118-124.

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Wilkinson, R. G.
1971 Prehistoric Biological Relationships in the Great Lakes Region.
Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan Anthropological
Papers, No. 43.
Woodbury, G.
1937 Notes on Some Skeletal Remains of Texas. University of Texas
Publication, No. 3734. Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 5:5-16.
Woodbury, G. and E. Woodbury
1935 Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the Texas Coast. The Medallion
Papers, No. 18.
Rice University
Houston

