Late Caddoan Social Group Identifications
and Sociopolitical Organization
in the Upper Cypress Basin and Vicinity,
Northeastern Texas
J. Peter Thurmond

ABSTRACT
The Late Caddoan culture traditionally referred to as the Titus focus is reconsidered.
A new terminology is proposed for the Titus focus, separating its spatial and chronological aspects. The term Cypress cluster is recommended as a label for the cultural entity
represented by the Titus focus, and the terms Whelan phase and Titus phase are suggested
for its temporal divisions. The boundaries of the Cypress clUster during each phase are
delimited. Four spatial divisions within the Cypress cluster are identified during the Titus
phase on the basis of differences in material culture; these are termed subclusters. It is
suggested that, at least during the Titus phase, one can identify in the archeological record
a major Late Caddoan social group and its constituent subgroups, or in more traditional
terms, a "confederacy" and its component "tribes."

INTRODUCTION
From January 1980 to May 1981, the author performed an inventory and
analysis of recorded archeological sites in the Cypress Creek drainage basin of
northeastern Texas and northwestern Louisiana. A total of 476 sites was included
in the study, the results of which were submitted to The University of Texas at
Austin as a master’s thesis (Thurmond 1981). In the course of that study, the author had the opportunity to analyze artifact collections from 172 of the sites in
the Texas portion of the basin. Certain spatial patterning became apparent in the
distribution of Late Caddoan ceramic attributes and, to a lesser extent, arrow
point forms. The scope of the study was therefore expanded to include a consideration of recorded Late Caddoan components in immediately adjacent parts of
the Sabine and Sulphur basins (Figure 1). The following article summarizes the
spatial patterning suggested by archeological remains of Late Caddoan components in the vicinity of the upper Cypress Basin and explores sociopolitical implications of that patterning.
In making this presentation, the author is climbing out on something of an
academic limb, in that the interpretations which follow are based on the results of
archeological investigations of extremely variable intensity, purpose, and quality
spanning some fifty years. As can be seen in Figure 2, portions of the study area

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985for 1983)

186

Texas Archeological Society

,¯¯

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiil

187

188

Texas Archeological Society

have been quite carefully surveyed, while other large segments remain virtually
unexplored. Such history of investigation is clearly less than ideal to the student
of spatial distributions. However, every undertaking must have its beginning, and
the tollowing presentation should be construed as nothing more than that.

CHRONOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK
It has become the vogue in recent years to belittle the study of archeological
chronology as prehistorians have expanded the scope of their interests to address
a broader range of research topics, from settlement and subsistence patterning to
paleopathology. As is so often the case, in rejecting the negative characteristics
of earlier archeological research, we have tended to overlook its beneficial aspects. It cannot be overstated that a command of the local chronology is a fundamental precursor to all other archeological studies in any region, in that the assumption of contemporaneity underlies so many processual models. This is
certainly true of models of sociopolitical organization, and so we must first establish some chronological control over the archeological materials.
Ironically, despite all the derision (seldom in print) in recent years of the
concentration upon chronology in the Caddoan area studies of the 1940s and
1950s (c.f. Krieger 1946; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954), our command of the
chronology of this region remains relatively poor for much of the span of human
occupation. The rarity of preservation of wood samples suitable for dendrochronological research, a dearth of tightly controlled suites of radiocarbon dates,
and the virtual absence of depositional regimes conducive to significant archeological stratification are largely responsible for this state of affairs. However,
chronologies have been constructed for the region and its constituent areas over
the years on the basis of intersite seriation, rare instances of natural or cultural
stratification, and correlation with the chronologies of adjacent regions. Tentative calendric spans have been assigned to the various time periods on the basis
of widely scattered radiocarbon dates, a good deal of inference, and, again, comparison to surrounding areas. Although there is still considerable controversy on
this topic, the author would summarize the chronological periods of the study
area and their diagnostics as follows. Detailed citations tracing the development
of the local chronology may be found in Thurmond (1981:90- 97, 418- 448).
Early Paleo-lndian (10,000 to 8,000 B.C.): fluted projectile points of the types
Clovis and Folsom.
Late Paleo-Indian (8,000 to 6,000 B.C.): projectile points of the types Dalton,
Meserve, Plainview, San Patrice, and Scottsbluff; early side-notched dart points;
and Albany bevelled bifaces.
Archaic (6,000 to 200 B.C.): Perkin bifaces; a high relative incidence of lithic
debitage within a site; most nonprojectile bifacial implements; numerous ground
stone tools; polished stone gorgets, boatstones, and grooved axes; and Clear Fork
gouges.
Early Archaic (6,000 to 4,000 B.C.): dart points of the types Bulverde,
Calf" Creek, Carrollton, Dawson, Morrill, and Wells; and stemless triangular dart points.

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

189

Middle Archaic (4,000 to 2,000 B.c.): dart points of the types Edgewood,
Ellis, Evans, Lone Oak, Palmillas, Trinity, Yarbrough, and Wesley; and
most other straight- or expanding-stem dart points.
Late Archaic (2,000 to 200 B.C.): dart points of the types Ensor, Gary, and
Kent, in the absence of pottery.
Early Ceramic (200 B.C. to A.D.800): Late Archaic dart point styles in association with pottery of the types Williams Plain, Le Flore Plain, Marksville/
Troyville period types of the lower Mississippi Valley, and (rarely) sandy paste
ware (e.g. Bear Creek Plain).

Early Caddoan (A.D. 800 to 1400): dominance of body sherd collections by
plain, incised, punctated, and fingernail-impressed specimens; paste and thickness of utility wares often grade into types Williams Plain and Le Flore Plain;
pottery of the types Hickory Fine Engraved, Carmel Engraved, Crockett Curvilinear Incised, and Pennington Punctated-Incised; Red River ceramic pipes; arrow points of the types Alba, Bonham, Catahoula, Hayes, and Scallorn; and
Gahagan bifaces.
Period 1 (A.D. 800 tO 1200): pottery of the types Davis Incised, Holly
Fine Engraved, Spiro Engraved, and Weches Fingernail Impressed; Coles
Creek Incised and other Coles Creek period types of the lower Mississippi
Valley; major portion of the utility ware exhibits Williams!Le Flore
characteristics.
Period 2 (A.D. 1200 to 1400): pottery of the types Canton Incised, Haley
Engraved, Maxey Noded Redware, Sanders Engraved, and Sanders Plain;
utility ware exhibiting Williams/Le Flore characteristics much less common than during Period 1.
Transitional Early to Late Caddoan (A.D. 1400 to 1500): ceramic assemblages
exhibiting a fusion of Early Caddoan Period 2 and Whelan phase concepts, in
association with arrow points of the types Scal!orn and Perdiz.
Late Caddoan A.D. (1500 to 1700): pottery of the types Bullard Brushed and
Maydelle Incised; relatively high incidence of brushed body fragments in sherd
collections from the eastern half of the study area; ceramic elbow and biconical
pipes; Galt bifaces.
Whelan phase (A.D. 1500 to 1600): Ripley Engraved bowls exhibiting all
motifs other than pendant triangle (Figure 3), with border elements commonly filled by carelessly executed curvilinear hatchures; also pottery of
the types Pease Brushed-Incised, proto-Harleton Applique, McKinney
Plain, and, rarely, Taylor Engraved, and trade vessels of the type Poynor
Engraved; arrow points predominantly of the types Scallorn and Perdiz.
Titus phase (A.D. 1600 to 1700): pottery of the types Bailey Engraved,
Harleton Applique, Johns Engraved, Karnack Brushed-Incised, La Rue
Neck Banded, McKinney Plain, Ripley Engraved, Taylor Engraved, and
Wilder Engraved; Ripley bowls exhibit all but horizontal diamond, bisected diamond, and interlocking diamond motifs (Figure 3), commonly
executed in broad, deep excising and engraving; tradeware of the types

190

Texas Archeological Society

Pendant

Scroll

Scroll and Circle

Scroll and

Continuous

Nested

Bisected

Triangle

Semicircle

Scroll

Triangle

Diamond

Circle and Nested

Interlocking

Triangle

Scroll

Horizontal

Diamond

Interlocking

Dtamond

SHP / 82

Figure 3. Ripley Engraved bowl-rim motifs.

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

191

Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, Cass Applique, Belcher Engraved,
Belcher Ridged, Cowhide Stamped, Foster Trailed-Incised, Glassell Engraved, Hodges Engraved, and Keno Trailed; arrow points predominantly
of the types Bassett, Maud, Reed, and Talco; European glass beads and
ceramics of the Wichita type Womack Engraved .found as burial associations in a few components.
Happily, the present study concentrates upon the briefest of the chronological subdivisions, the Whelan and Titus phases of the Late Caddoan period, previously defined as the Fulton aspect by Krieger (1946). The definition of the Titus
phase follows that of Krieger’s Titus focus (Krieger 1946), and the separation of
the precedent Whelan phase follows Davis’s (1958) definition of the Whelan
complex. The author employs the term phase as a purely chronological division
within a tightly circumscribed local culture, distinct from the fusion of the concepts of relative contemporaneity and spatial circumscription in the old McKern
(1939) term focus.

SOCIAL GROUP IDENTIFICATIONS AND
SOCIOPOLITICAL ORGANIZATION
Turner (1978) has recently suggested that a chronological subdivision of the
Titus phase can be made on the basis of Ripley Engraved bowl rim motifs and
arrow point types. Specifically, he has suggested that the early Titus phase components are characterized by an absence of the Ripley pendant triangle motif
(Figure 3) and dominance of the arrow point assemblage by the types Perdiz and
Bassett. Late Titus phase components would conversely be indicated by a high
incidence of the pendant triangle motif and arrow points of the types Talco and
Maud. Turner’s interpretations were largely based on his analysis of grave goods
from Titus phase cemeteries at the Tuck Carpenter (41CP5), Tommy Johns
(41CP2), and Alex Justice (41TT13) sites.
The foregoing struck this author as quite reasonable at the time of its publication in 1978, and Turner’s temporal division of the Titus phase was followed
during the data collection of my thesis project. However, as the results were analyzed, it became clear that the geographic distribution of the components so classified was quite markedly biased. The "early" components were all in the
western part of the Cypress Basin, and the "late" components were near its center.
This observation prompted a harder look at the artifacts associated with the
Titus phase components within the Cypress Basin and an expansion of the scope
of the study to examine the collections from, and published reports of, Late Cad:
doan components to the immediate north, west, and south. The collections at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin and the published accounts
of the Lake Tawakoni (Johnson 1957), Lake Carl Estes (Malone 1972), Lake
Fork Reservoir (Bruseth and Perttula 1981; Bruseth et al. 1977), Cooper Lake
(Doehner and Larson 1978; Doehner, Peter, and Skinner 1978), and Lake Texarkana (Jelks 1961) archeological projects were consulted. Data more recently
published by Skiles, Bruseth, and Perttula (1980) also were utilized.
Even on the basis of the rather gross level of classification employed in my
study, it rapidly became clear that many of the geographic limits of the Titus
phase ceramics could be defined on the basis of the present site sample, and that
at least four groups of components should be defined within those boundaries.

192

Texas Archeological Society

The patterning was clear on a descriptive level, and the concept of a "confederacy" composed of "tribes" fi la Swanton (1942) was immediately suggested.
It happened that Dee Ann Story was concurrently working with similar
problems in her reanalysis of the Late Caddoan components in the vicinity of the
Deshazo site near Nacogdoches, Texas (Story and Creel, 1982). Story has formulated a model of Late Caddoan sociopolitical organization for the !ocal cultures defined by Krieger (1946) as the Frankston and Allen foci which the author
believes to be directly applicable to the components at hand. Story interprets the
two foci as the archeological manifestations of a single Late Caddoan social group,
the Hasinai Confederacy, as defined by Swanton (1942). This "confederacy" is
seen as a weakly hierarchical structure with two levels of integration. The terminological equivalent of Swanton’s confederacy, Story’s affiliated group is postulated to represent the highest level of Late Caddoan intergroup sociopolitical
organization. Comprising this maximal group were a number of constituent
groups, the equivalents of Swanton’s tribes, each composed of multiple settlements, cemeteries, and limited use areas (Story and Creel 1982:32-33).
Story predicts that interaction through the mechanisms of intermarriage, economic exchange, joint participation in ceremonies, and visitation would be
"more frequent and intense among the constituent groups than between a
member group and a nonmember group" of the affiliation (Story and Creel
1982:32-33). One would expect to identify the affiliated group archeologically
by means of a pronounced sharing of attributes in the material culture. The predicted archeological manifestation of the model is therefore synonymous with the
McKern system focus, or what we might alternatively refer to as a local culture.
Story terms this spatial expression a cluster, and its temporal divisions are designated phases in harmony with this author’s use of the term (Story and Creel
1982:33-34). She then proceeds to spatially define the Anderson cluster, chronologically divided into the prehistoric Frankston and historic Allen phases. No
equivalent archeological term was proposed by Story on the constituent-group
level, as she feared that their detection by archeologists would be quite difficult
(Story and Creel 1982:33-34).
Again, the author is of the opinion that Story’s model of Late Caddoan
sociopolitical organization can be quite profitably applied to the Late Caddoan
components of the upper Cypress Basin and its vicinity. The term Cypress cluster is proposed as a replacement for the spatial element of Krieger’s Titus focus
and is believed to identify the archeological manifestation of a Late Caddoan affiliated group. Two chronological subdivisions are suggested for the Cypress
cluster, the prehistoric Whelan phase, dating from approximately A.D. 1500 tO
1600, and the protohistorical to early historic Titus phase, estimated to span the
century from about A.D. 1600 to 1700. At the least, this application of Story’s
model provides a terminology for the classification of Late Caddoan components
in the study area which clearly separates the spatial and chronological elements
formerly combined in the term focus. The model can also serve as a useful
framework for the analysis of Late Caddoan social groups and sociopolitical organization in the study area.
Many of the boundaries of the Cypress cluster during both the Whelan and
Titus phases can be identified on the basis of the presently available data. Components exhibiting artifact assemblages characteristic of the Whelan phase of the

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

193

Cypress cluster are not known to occur beyond the bounds of the Cypress Basin
(Figure 4). The recorded components occur only along Big Cypress Creek, from
its confluence with Little Cypress and Black Cypress creeks to its upper reaches
in the northwestern part of the Cypress Basin. It is not known whether Whelan
phase components occur in the adjacent Little Cypress and Black Cypress valleys, as these areas remain unknown archeologically (Figures 1 and 2).
There is a distinct westward expansion in the occurrence of Cypress cluster
components during the Titus phase (Figure 5). Cypress cluster components definitely occur along the eastern reaches of Lake Fork Reservoir, but none were
recorded in its western reaches, nor at Lake Tawakoni or Lake Carl Estes
(Bmseth and Perttula 1981; Bruseth et al. 1977; Johnson 1957; Malone 1972). To
the northwest the University of Texas, in investigations of the 1930s, recorded
Cypress cluster components of the Titus phase along the middle reaches of White
Oak Bayou, but more recent investigations at Cooper Lake on the South Sulphur
failed to identify a single Cypress cluster component (Doehner and Larson 1978;
Doehner, Peter, and Skinner 1978). To the north a single Titus phase component,
41TT2, the W. A. Ford site, was recorded by the University of Texas in the 1930s
on the Sulphur River, but no Cypress cluster components were recorded at Lake
Texarkana (Jelks 1961). It seems likely that Cypress cluster components will be
found in the Black Cypress, Little Cypress, and Big Sandy basins, but this
clearly remains to be tested. Titus phase components of the Cypress cluster definitely do not occur east of the Big Cypress/Little Cypress confluence (Thurmond
1981: Figure 15) or south of the Sabine River (Kleinschmidt 1982:193-211).
Four distinct spatial groups of components can be identified within the Cypress cluster during the Titus phase on the basis of the artifact assemblages. It is
believed that these represent the archeological manifestations of constituent
groups, and the term subcluster is used as the archeological equivalent of the
constituent group. The distribution of the components making up each subcluster
is illustrated in Figure 6. The ceramics and arrow points characteristic of each
subcluster are as follows.
Three Basins subcluster: Ripley Engraved is by far the dominant engraved ware.
Ripley bowls most frequently exhibit the scroll, scroll and circle, and continuous
scroll motifs (Figure 3), and the pendant triangle motif is entirely absent. Wilder
Engraved is virtually the only other engraved ware, barring apparent trade vessels of the types Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and, rarely, Womack Engraved. The utility ware is largely classifiable as McKinney Plain, Maydelle Incised, and Harleton Applique, with very little brushed ware present (less than
5 percent of the utility ware). Arrow points are of the types Talco and Maud,
with Perdiz occurring infrequently.
Tankersley Creek subcluster: Ripley Engraved is the most common engraved
ware. Ripley bowls most frequently exhibit the scroll, scroll and circle, and continuous scroll motifs, and the pendant triangle motif does occur rarely. Wilder
Engraved is the only other common engraved ware, but Taylor Engraved is
present at low frequencies. The greatest part of the utility ware is evenly divided
between vessels classifiable as Harleton Applique, Maydelle Incised, McKinney
Plain, and Bullard Brushed. Brushed ware accounts for 20 to 30 percent of the
utility ware. Arrow points are most commonly of the type Maud, but Talco,
Bassett, and Perdiz also occur.

194

Texas Archeological Society

\
\
~7~ f

\

o

\

\
\

I
I

/

-d

/
/
/

r,.)

/

k
\
0

k

0

\

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

195

o
\

o

o

/

/
/

o

o
©

E
0

N

\

196

Texas Archeological Society

Swauano Creek subcluster: Ripley Engraved remains the most common engraved
ware, but Bailey Engraved and Wilder Engraved also are quite common, and
Johns Engraved and Taylor Engraved occur infrequently. The Ripley bowls most
commonly exhibit the pendant triangle, scroll, scroll and circle, and continuous
scroll motifs in roughly equal frequencies. Bullard Brushed is the most common
utility ware, with Harleton Applique and Maydelle Incised present less frequently than in Tankersley Creek components. McKinney Plain vessels are quite
uncommon. Brushed ware accounts for 40 to 50 percent of the utility ware.
Arrow points are predominantly of the type Talco, but Maud and Bassett also are
common, and Reed occurs infrequently.
Big Cypress Creek subcluster: Ripley Engraved and Taylor Engraved are the
dominant engraved wares, occurring at roughly equal frequencies. On the Ripley
bowls, the pendant triangle motif is more common than all others combined.
Bailey Engraved, Wilder Engraved, and Johns Engraved are all relatively minor
types within the engraved ware, but Bailey is the more common of the three.
Brushed ware strongly dominates the engraved ware, with Bullard Brushed and
Karnack Brushed-Incised the most common types. Harleton Applique, Maydelle
Incised, and McKinney Plain are present at lower frequencies than in any other
subcluster. Brushed ware accounts for 50 to 60 percent of the utility vessels.
Trade vessels of the Belcher phase types Belcher Engraved, Belcher Ridged,
Cowhide Stamped, Foster Trailed-Incised, Glassell Engraved, Hodges Engraved,
and Keno Trailed also are common. (It should be noted that vessels of the Texarkana phase types Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and Cass Applique are
ubiquitous at low frequencies within Titus phase components of the Cypress
cluster.) Arrow points of the type Talco are by far the most frequent, but Bassett
and Maud also are fairly common.
CONCLUSION
To reiterate, it is herein suggested that the Cypress cluster represents the
archeological manifestation of a series of social groups banded together in a
sociopolitical structure analogous to, and at least partially contemporaneous
with, that of the Hasinai to the south and the Kadohadacho to the northeast. Four
subclusters, the diagnostics of which have been detailed, are believed to represent the individual constituent groups making up this affiliated group. In Swanton’s terms, it appears that we can identify a confederacy and its component
tribes in the archeological records.
There is, as noted above, evidence that the Titus phase extends into the early
historic period. Glass beads were recovered in burial association at the Tracy site
(41CP71) in the Big Cypress Creek subcluster by a private collector (Thurmond
1981:130). Within the Three Basins subcluster, the historic Wichita types
Womack Engraved and Womack Plain have been recovered in burial association
at 41HP1, the Culpepper site (Scurlock 1962), and at 41TT2, the W. A. Ford site
(Thurmond 1981:448). The proximity of the western Titus phase components to
the easternmost recorded Wichita components, the Pearson site (41RA5;
Duffield and Jelks 1961) and the Gilbert site (41RA13; Jelks 1966), can be seen
in Figure 6.

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

197

8

\

\
\
I
I
/
/
/

I

/

I

/

/
I

/

198

Texas Archeological Society

One will be naturally led to wonder if the patterning discernible in the Titus
phase components might not be attributable to diachronic demographic processes rather than synchronic social group differentiation. In short, it is entirely
possible that the discrete sets of Titus phase components identified herein as subclusters are not contemporaneous, but reflect instead a directional shift in the
Cypress cluster population over time. However, the author considers this possibility unlikely for two reasons. First, the artifact assemblages of the components
within each subcluster are strikingly homogeneous, and the assemblages of
neighboring components of different subclusters tend to be quite distinct. This is
a subjective impression, but there is simply not the gradation of traits in any
direction that one would expect to see in a situation of demographic shift. Perhaps even more convincing is the occurrence of apparently early historic components at opposite ends of the Cypress cluster area during the Titus phase, within
the Big Cypress Creek and Three Basins subclusters, as noted above. The evidence would seem to weigh in favor of contemporaneity.
That the Late Caddoan affiliated group postulated herein should have escaped the attention of early European travelers through the Caddoan area, and
thus not become a part of the ethnohistoric record, is not entirely surprising. For
one thing, the dearth of sites exhibiting historic materials, in comparison to the
adjacent Red River (Kadohadacho) and Hasinai areas, is striking. This suggests
that the Titus phase occupations extend only into the very earliest period of
Spanish and French influence. Further, the most direct route between the Kadohadacho and Hasinai areas crosses the Cypress Basin in the vicinity of Caddo
Lake in Harrison and Marion counties. Again, there are no known Titus phase
components east of the lower reaches of Lake o’ the Pines, and Belcher phase
components are not known to occur above the Red River Valley within the Cypress Basin (Thurmond 1981:Figure 15). It therefore seems likely that the area
traversed by early explorers of the seventeenth century in passing between the
Hasinai and Kadohadacho areas, presumed to be the vicinity of Caddo Lake,
held no resident population.
It is intriguing to note in Figure 4 that four groups of Cypress cluster components of the precedent Whetan phase are suggested. The easterly three appear
to be centered on mound sites. These are, ranging from east to west, the Whelan
site (41MR2), the Dalton-Harroun complex (41UR10, 11, and 18), and the Sam
Roberts site (41CP8). There is at least a hint that the four subclusters identified
for the Titus phase were already in existence during the Whelan phase. However,
this apparent pattern could simply be a function of survey bias (see Figure 2),
and the ceramic analysis employed by the author was not sufficiently detailed to
permit a detection of any distinctions that may be present within these compo,
nents. It is highly recommended that any other researcher interested in pursuing
this problem employ a detailed attribute analysis of the ceramics from the relevant components (for an inventory of the known Whelan phase components, see
Thurmond 1981 :Figure 14 and Table 9).
Finally, it should be emphasized that the Big Sandy, Little Cypress, and
Black Cypress valleys are virtually unknown archeologically, and these areas are
clearly vital to an understanding of the Cypress cluster. Major reservoir construction is planned within the latter two drainages by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Figure 1), and a cultural resources overview of the two areas has already

Thurmond--Caddoan Social Groups

199

been performed (Northern and Skiles 1981). It is to be hoped that the more intensive site inventory and mitigation phases of the cultural resource management
investigations presumably slated for the Little Cypress and Black Cypress valleys
will employ techniques of field investigation, analysis, and reporting sufficient to
permit the identification and interpretation of any Cypress cluster components
that may occur.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to express his gratitude to the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory in Austin for the free access granted to their artifact collections, records and
library, and for the office space provided. Dee Ann Story graciously shared her ideas concerning Late Caddoan sociopolitical organization early in the formulation of the model
described in this article. The author is also indebted to James E. Bruseth for the provision
of information regarding the Lake Fork Reservoir components prior to the publication of
the final report in 1981. Darrell Creel, Dee Ann Story, and my wife, Susie, reviewed this
article after it had been first composed and provided much useful criticism. All of the
illustrations were drafted by Sandra and Timothy Price of Austin. The final manuscript
was prepared by Pamela Kauk of Leedey.

REFERENCES CITED
Bruseth, James E.,and Timothy K. Perttula
1981 Prehistoric settlement patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Texas Antiquities Permit
Series Report 2. Southern Methodist University, Dallas, and Texas Antiquities
Committee, Austin.
Bruseth, James E., J. T. Bagot, K. M. Banks, and M. A. McKinley
1977 Archaeological research at Lake Fork Reservoir: site inventory and assessment.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 87. Dallas.
Davis, E. Mott
1958 The Whelan site: a Late Caddoan component in the Ferrell’s Bridge Reservoir,
northeastern Texas. Typescript report submitted to the National Park Service by
the Division of Research in Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Doehner, Karen, and Richard E. Larson
1978 Archaeological research at the proposed Cooper Lake, Northeast Texas, 19741975. Archaeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 108. Dallas
Doehner, Karen, Duane Peter, and S. Alan Skinner
1978 Evaluation of the archeology at the proposed Cooper Lake. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Research Report 114. Dallas.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961 The Pearson site: a historic Indian site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County
Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin, Archaeology Series 4.
Jelks, Edward B.
1961
Excavations at Texarkana Reservoir, Sulphur River, Texas. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin 179:1-78.

200

Texas Archeological Society

Jelks, Edward B. (editor)
1966 The Gilbert site: a Nortefio focus site in northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 37.
Johnson, Leroy R.
1957 Appraisal of the archeological resources of Iron Bridge Reservoir, Hunt, Rains
and Van Zandt counties, Texas. Typescript report submitted to the National Park
Service by the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Kleinschmidt, Ulrich K. W.
1982 Review and analysis of the A. C. Saunders site, 41AN19, Anderson County,
Texas. Unpublished Master’s thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
McKern, W. C.
1939 The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an aid to archeological study. American
Antiquity 4(4): 301 - 313.
Malone, James M.
1972 Archeological reconnaissance at the proposed Mineola Reservoir. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Survey Report 10. Copublished
by Texas Water Development Board, Austin.
Northern, Martin J., and B. D. Skiles
1981
Cultural resources overview of the proposed Black Cypress and Marshall reservoirs. Environmental Consultants, Inc., Cultural Resources Report 81-I 1.
Dallas.
Scurlock, J. Dan
1962 The Culpepper site: a late Fulton aspect site in northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32:285-316.
Skiles, B. D., James E. Bruseth, and Timothy K. Perttula
1980 A synthesis of the upper Sabine River Basin culture history. Dallas Archeological
Society, The Record 36(1.): t - 12.
Story, Dee Ann, and Darrell Creel
1982 The cultural setting. In The Deshazo site, Nacogdoches County Texas, edited by
Dee Ann Story, Vol. 1, pp. 20-34. Texas Antiquities Permit Series 7. Texas Antiquities Committee and Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.
Swanton, John R.
1942 Source material on the history and ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 132.
Thurmond, J. Peter
1981 Archeology of the Cypress Creek drainage basin, northeastern Texas and northwestern Louisiana. Unpublished Master’s thesis, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Turner, Robert L.
1978 The Tuck Carpenter site and its relation to other sites within the Titus focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:1 - 110.

