The Basic Tool Kit Required To Make and Notch
Arrow Shafts for Stone Points
J. B. SOnLBERCER
ABSTRACT
A project-approach is designed to find and define logical lithie tools.
Arrow shaft notching saws, abrading knives, scrapers, and planing knives
are described physically and comparatively on the basis of cutting edge
type. Hard substances like wood or bone are found to be more readily and
efficiently worked with tools having edges without retouch or other flaking.

INTRODUCTION
It seems to me that research of this nature needs a word or two of
explanation. After the laboratory analysis and classification of the
artifacts, there normally was a residue of specimens which were regarded as mere flakes. Some of these pieces are now believed to have
been used as tools. They are being subjected to an analysis to determine their technique of manufacture, and to note and describe any
effects of "use" that is discernible on them (Semenov, 1964).
There has as yet, been no particular emphasis or concern over what
may have been a specific job for these "tools" other than major divisions such as scraping or cutting. Rather, the emphasis has been on
how job use has affected or marked the tools. This approach only
verifies that the "tool" was used in some mechanical way. It does not
lead to identifying "tool" types for specific jobs.
Cultural change may be marked by the addition, or change, of
products. This may require a modification of old tools, a shift in the
relative frequency, or the creation of new types for new products. If
these new forms are ever to be recognized, we need to greatly expand
our knowledge of tools and pseudo tools. Special tool types should
point to specific products. The presence of certain tools may indicate
certain activities whether or not the product survived into an areheological inventory.
It is my belief that new tools may be recognized and eventually
be added to our inventory of types. These new tools by their names
will reflect major functions, or they will sub-divide classes. An example would be to sub-divide scrapers into: apparently best for bone,
apparently best for wood, etc. (that is, apparently in the laboratory
experiment ).
I think that if any success is to be recognized along these lines, it
will come from work projects designed to find the artifact tool that

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

will best do a specific job. Such a project is recorded in the following
text.
GATHERING THE WOOD STOCK
Numerous excursions into the field proved to the author that stone
axes were unsuitable for gathering shaftings of the proper diameter
for arrows. Chopping resulted in long tapering ends, or in mashing,
bruising, and splitting. The abrading knife (Sollberger, 1968b:97) in
the proper size, does a fine easy job of gathering raw materials for
arrow shafts. This tool will also quickly make the nook for a bow
string in the proximal end of the arrow.
DRESSING AND SIZING THE SHAFT
The shaftings need to be uniform in length, weight, and spine for
uniform performance. For this contouring, bifaces were found to be
worthless. They will not do suitably neat work because of the irregularity of edge type.
Sufficient time was spent by the author making shaftings to acquire
mechanical skill with lithic tools. One tool proved superior over all
the others in reducing the diameters, and contouring wooden handles
and shaftings. Uniface tools (scrapers) will do the work, but these
were positively found to be second best. Flake or spall type tools with
cutting edges formed by the intersecting line of two long flakes, make
by far the best wood and bone working tools. Such spalls with thin,
acute edge angles, can also be used as knives. These also may be
snapped or truncated to make (like glass) excellent wood scrapers.
However, the ultimate wood working tool is one that combines two
special flake features. In the following paragraphs this tool will be
referred to temporarily as a spall scraper. After a comparison of spall
edged scrapers to flaked edge scrapers in wood working is made, this
tool will be reclassified.
SPALL, OR NATURAL EDGED FLAKE SCRAPERS
The spall, or natural edge scrapers, that I have found to be the
superior type for working wood or bone can be selected from the
detritus of any lithic work shop, or, they can be made. From a mass,
strike a platform large enough to produce flakes x and a to d (Fig.
1, A). Strike flake x and discard it. The following flakes, a through d
are next struck to have in common this feature-that the plane surface
below the positive bulb will be convex on both axes. This will produce
four natural edge scraping implements that are knife-sharp and unblemished by other flake scar ridges.

AYt!qOW

SHAFT

233

TOOL KIT

A,

pre ssure

cortex

motion

,~

)
FIGURE 1. A, planer knife core, in section, showing knives a-d below the
positive bulbs. B, planer knife shown in use. Note that scraper attributes
are not present in use. The terms spall, or flake edge scraper, are inapplicable.

Now, with the aid of Fig. 1, B, the features will be listed that make
this scraper type superior on hard substances like wood or bone. 1.
The cutting edge is not marred by any ridge or irregularity. 2. The
cutting edge has a lineal continuous concavity along its upper face
that provides room for shavings to rise with a minimum of friction
or distortion. 3. In use, this edge is self cleaning with the addition of

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICALSOCIETY

a slight lateral motion to the forward motion. 4. This edge is much
longer lasting and capable of doing harder and tougher work because
a "use-flaking angle" is not present in its use. 5. The convex surface
below the cutting edge permits depth control over the shavings
raised. This is accomplished by raising or lowering the cortex end as
illustrated in Fig. 1, B. Gouging and rippling of the surface being
worked is greatly reduced by this large planer surface directly beneath the cutting edge. In that this cutting edge is directly in line with
the forward cutting motion, it will make thicker shavings with less
effort, with less edge breakage, and with smoother finish than will the
scrapers formed by chipping an edge.
FLAKED EDGE SCIIAPEtlS
The scrapers that have been assigned informal type names such as:
thumbnail, keelback, end, side, duckbill, spokeshave, etc. or classified
by a modified European system (Shiner, in Blaine et al. 1968:76) all
have one feature in common. That is, that the scraping edge is created
and/or shaped by a series of flakes. An analysis of the edge reveals the
following characteristics that are common to all scrapers. 1. Each
flake removed to initially form or to resharpen an edge, will leave two
ridges on the object face, and two ridge points at the edge being
formed. 2. The edge between these points will be concave or scalloped.
3. The faces between the flake scar ridges will be concave, and there
will be additional concavities-the negative bulb scars. Scrapers having these unalterable features proved to be considerably less efficient
and harder to use than are natural edged (spall type) scrapers on hard
substanees like wood or bone.
When in use on wood or bone, (Fig. 2, B) the following events
oceur that do not occur when using scrapers that have no flakes on
their cutting edges. 1. The ridge points striate the worked surface,
and it never becomes eompletely smooth. 9.. Full even surfaee contact
is not made without excessive downward pressure because of the
edge scallops and ridge points. 3. The ridge points must wear down
and become dull before the scraper edge can make full even contact.
4. The scraper is therefore, on hard substances, never more than
about fifty percent efllcient. 5. There is no depth control over the cut
other than downward pressure. This results in an excessive amount
of ripple and gougings on arrow shaft surfaces that can only be
removed by sanding or grinding. 6. Use-flaking of the edge occurs
on hard surfaces whether this type of scraper is pulled or pushed
into the work (Fig. 2, B). 7. The negative cavities create a thinness
at the very edge that often breaks under hard usage. 8. Flaked edge

AI~I:~OW

SHAFT

TOOL KIT

9,{35

A

Pushed

Motion

>
Pulled
Motion

low angle

high angle

B

0

FlOURE 2. A, unalterable features of flaked edge scrapers; ridges and points
--p, face and edge cavities--c.

scrapers must be presented into their work at a use-flaking angle
(Fig. 9., B). On hard substances, this results in a too-short life be-

236

FmuRE 3.
knife.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Planer knife shavings. Square ends were cut with an abrading

cause of abrasion, breaks, and use-flaking. 9. The flaked edge scrapers
are continually clogging up with wood fibers (items 2, 3 and 4). The
edge contour (round to concave) of flaked edge scrapers seldom
permits the self eleaning lateral motion to be added to the forward
motion of the tool. The result here, is short broken shavings, and diagonal edge-gougings on the shaft being worked. Long continuous
shavings as made by spall type scrapers (Fig. 3) are therefore very
difficult to make with flaked edge scrapers.
THE PLANER KNIFE
Now that we have used both flaked edge scrapers and spall edged
scrapers on the same and identical arrow shaftings, it is abundantly
clear that the stone age man who was both a craftsman and artisan
probably would not labor on similar shaftings by using a flaked-edge
type scraper. It should also be clear that the spall type scraper that
combines a "hollow-ground" upper face with a convex lower face is
not a scraper, but, is properly a planing knife (Fig. 4).
Tool class in the functional sense is a determination of major mechanical activity that separates chopping, pounding, boring, grinding,
scraping, cutting, etc. Type recognizes variations that are similar
within class. Scrapers, as a class, have working edges that are designed
to be pressed or raked across a surface. The sharp edges are not in

ARROW

SHAFT

FmuR~ 4.

TOOL KIT

237

Planer knife.

line with the shavings raised or the cutting motion of the tool. Knives
are cutting and slicing tools. Their edges are forced into the work in
line and in plane with the cut desired. Lithie knives with very acute
cutting edge angles are extremely fragile When used on substances
as hard as wood or bone. Only very light side pressure is required to
nick or break such an edge. Therefore, the edge angle is increased to
prevent such damage as the hardness of the materials being worked
increases. Wood or bone working knives of the planer type must have
very strong or steep pitched working edges to prevent use flaking.
This strength is provided by the convex surface below the edge. This
convexity also serves as a depth gauge and planing bed, making it
possible to produce long unbroken shavings of uniform thickness. The
concave surface above the cutting edge serves the dual purpose of
reducing the force required in cutting and friction distortion of the
work done. The planer knife is forced directly into the work with
the edge motion in line or paralleling the cut. It therefore is not a
scraper, but a knife tool.
It is not known in what age stone workers discovered the superior
qualities of edges combining a concave upper face with a convex
lower face on a spall or flake, but this knowledge may have led to
some of the blade industries recognized in various parts of the world.
Perfection of this edge type extended into historic times in Mesoamerica. There, blades of obsidian were used as razors to shave with
by the early Spaniards and others. These prismatic blades that formed
polyhedral cores in their making (Crabtree, 1968:446) have edge
types similar to planer knives. In fact, most blades, in cross-section,
combine a convex lower face with a concave upper face in relation to
the cutting edge. The edge angle is adjusted to suit the valTing materials cut.

238

TEXAS AnCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FIGURE 5. Notching saw, upper left. Note shallow teeth on lower edge.
Knife flake, upper right. Gap thickness of notch on left is only 1.5 mm.

NOTCHING THE SHAFT
The preceding paragraphs have gathered the raw materials, shaped
the arrow shaft, and described the certain tools required. Notching
the distal end of arrow shafts, in which a stone point may be securely
mounted, requires two more tools.
Statistics gathered from measuring a large number of stone points,
tells us a number of facts that must apply in replicating an average
sized distal end and notch, to receive the point. The diameter of this
end will be reduced to about 6 ram. so that barbs or shoulders will
not be obstructed. The notch must extend in from the tip of the shaft
10 mm. The notch gap, in order to hold tightly the thinnest points,
must at times be no more than 3 mm. wide.
The tools to make the notch must have been available to all stone
age men. The limitation of size, strength, and hardness, dietates that
the tool material was the same as that from which the points were
made. Fig. 5, upper left, illustrates the notching-saw flake that made
the illustrated notches. The notching saw must have a few teeth (3
or 4) created by breaking small nieks from the lineal edge. Flaking

ARROW

SHAFT

TOOL

KIT

239

the edge will cause the tool to bind excessively and it then will not
cut free the wood particles from within the cut. The saw is used until
binding of its sides causes it to wedge in the cut. The knife-flake Fig.
5, upper right, is used to cut the sides of the deepening notch, parallel.
The alternate use of the saw and the knife will make notches of any
desired length. The notching saw must not have coarse teeth like
artifacts usually described as dentieulates. Each face of the saw
should be a single plane. The faces should be essentially parallel and
form a saw body often no thicker than 3 mm. for the thinner points.
The notching saw flakes and the knife flakes are normal by-products
of a lithie work shop. Billet flakes are especially adaptable. Notehings
for dart points and other larger haltings, permits the use of thicker
and larger tools. One good notching saw will make several notches in
soft green wood. Hard dry arrow shafts may require as many as two
or three saws to complete one notch. Heavily used saws have wear on
their edges that is easily felt or seen. The knives usually become
nicked on the working edge before a light polish is apparent.
ARTIFACTS, VERSUS SHOP TOOLS
All of the various tools used in this project I made in order to have
new, sharp, unworn cutting edges. Once it became determined that
the abrading knife, the notching saw and the planer knife were, to
me, the best possible tools for each phase of work, it became possible
to test the hypothesis. The work performed had provided the physical
features and method of using the tools in the laboratory. Knowing
now what to look for, artifact assemblages were examined, and artifacts in exact replica of the shop tools were found.
I have collected planer knives ,from a quarry-shelter site at the
Belton Reservoir, Texas. They average about four inches long, three
inches wide, and one and one-half inches thick at the bulb. The bulb
convexities are large and pronounced. Some examples have use-polish
from the cutting edge extending back under the convex lower face.
On others, where polish is not apparent, hand lenses show a smoothing that appears as a reduction of grain size of the stone surface. So
far, with artifacts, shine has been restricted to the bulb area itself.
Toward the distal end of the flake where cutting angles are more
acute, extensive use retouch is present without polish.
At the Acton Site (Blaine et al. 1968:45) where all lithic artifacts
and scrap were collected, no large flakes were present. However, I was
permitted to sort out all pieces which had the technical morphology of
the planer knife as I have discussed it. Examination of these edges
with five to fifteen power hand lenses showed use-flakes of the proper
character to indicate planer knife use. That is, use-retouch on the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

240

lower convex face showed hinged flakes. Had the tool been used as
a scraper, the use flakes on the under convex face would be feathered
at the point of final separation, rather than hinged or broken off.
This demonstrates the possibility that those tools were inade and used
as I made and used the planer knife in the shop.
CONCLUSIONS
It must be noted, regarding the wood working conclusions of this
report, that green wood is much more easily worked. Seasoned wood
and all bone will use-flake any lithie tool with a sharp edge. Notchings
for halting purposes must be delayed until the wood is nearly dry.
Otherwise, the shaft or handle may split at the base of the notch during the seasoning interval.
The objectives of this project, initially stated in the introduction,
have been realized to the extent that several conclusions seem justified.
The replicating of bona fide stone age products (arrow shafts) should
help in identifying new tools for archaeological inventories. One of
these is the notching flake saw. This tool has no alternate when the
notch is for light thin arrow points. The abrading knife has no alternate equal for gathering shafting and handling wood stock, and in
making the proximal end nock for bow strings.
The planer knife is recognized here for the first time. It has no
equal among lithic tools for making long uniform wood shavings, as
far as laboratory experiments could determine.
A final conclusion is that wood scraping tools without retouch are
superior to retouched edge scrapers. It is conceded that retouching of
scraping edges for hard substances was probably done in the absence
of available new tool stock; or to create a necessary shape not available in spall form.
REFERENCES CITED
Blaine, Jay C., R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook Jr., and Joel L. Shiner
1968 The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI Society, Vol. 39, Dallas.
Crabtree, Don E.
1968 Mesoamerican Polyhedral Cores and Prismatic Blades. American Antiquity, Vol. 33, No. 4, Salt Lake City.
Semenov, S. A.
1964 Prehistoric Technology. (Originally published in Russian 1957, U.S.S.R.,
Translated by M. W." Thompson), London.

Sollberger, J. B.
1968a The Paleo Type Flake Knife.
ciety, Vol. 38, Dallas.
1968b A Partial Report on Research

Bulletin of

the Texas

ArcheoIogical

So-

Work Concerning Lithic Typology and
Technology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 39, Dallas.
Dallas, Texas

