67

Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition:
The Evidence from Texas
James E. Bruseth

ABSTRACT
Several artifacts found over the past several decades are attributed to the de
Soto expedition of 1542 as it wandered through Texas, but it is unlikely that any
of these, except for a spur from near Corsicana, Texas, were left by the expedition.
The Corsicana spur is of the style worn by the conquistadors, but this type of spur
was also used by later Spaniards, particularly along the northern borders of New
Spain (Mexico). Other kinds of evidence, such as iron objects from arms and armor
and bioarcheological data on European disease-induced epidemics--similar to
what is found at European archeological sites of the sixteenth century in the
Southeast--are more likely candidates for Texas and should be sought from
archeological sites.

INTRODUCTION

Over the past 50 years, several artifacts from North and East Texas have been
attributed to the 1542 de Soto expedition’s travel through Texas in search of New
Spain--today’s Mexico. Some of these artifacts have been reported in issues of the
Dallas Archeological Society’s Record (Crook 1988; Hanna 1940; Harris 1951),
but others have not been described in publications and remain in private collections.
In this paper the author examines these objects to the extent possible--some are no
longer available for observation--and attempts to determine their authenticity as
artifacts of the de Soto expedition.
The Columbus Quincentenary is a propitious time to examine these artifacts,
for this year’s celebration of Columbus’s discovery of the New World in 1492 has
stimulated scholars throughout the world to reexamine narratives and other historical documentation relating to early European exploration of the Americas. New
information has come to light on many of these explorations as a result of this
revived interest (cf. Milanich and Milbrath 1989; Thomas 1990).
Especially important are the major advancements that have been made in
identifying the archeological residue of the expedition. Only 20 years ago, our
knowledge of the archeological record from the early sixteenth century Spanish
occupation was very limited (Mitchem 1989:99), but it has been established that the
presence of several specific artifact types can verify the passage of the de Soto
expedition. This new information comes in large part from studies of artifacts found
at archeological sites in the Southeast and the Caribbean that show evidence of
European contact (Smith 1987; Deagan 1987). The Martin site, reported to be the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

68

Texas Archeological Society

1539 to 1540 winter encampment of the de Soto expedition (Ewen 1989, 1990), is
of particular significance. Recent excavations at the site have identified several
artifacts left by de Soto’s army, including coins, Spanish ceramics, glass beads,
metal objects, and pieces of chain mail armor.
The Route
For centuries scholars have debated the route of the de Soto expedition through
the United States; the most extensive and thorough research was undertaken by the
De Soto Commission in 1935. Under the chairmanship of John R. Swanton, the
Commission examined a wide range of information including archives in the United
States and Spain, early maps, possible artifacts from the expedition, and historical
narratives. The result was a monumental volume by Swanton (1939) entitled The
Final Report of the United States De Soto Commission.
Since the De Soto Commission study, other researchers have further examined
de Soto’s route, adding significant new detail and accuracy from archeologieal and
historical information to theCommission’s findings (e.g., Hudson etal. 1984, 1989,
1990; Brain et al. 1974; Schambach 1989; Morse and Morse 1983; Kenmotsu et al.
1990; Bruseth and Kenmotsu 1991). Undoubtedly, the delineation of the expedition’ s
route is far more accurate today than it was in 1939 when Swanton’s report
appeared.
This is not to say that all aspects of the route have been worked out with equal
accuracy and detail. Disagreement on major segments remains, particularly for the
part of the army’s travel west of the Mississippi River. This is in part a result of the
untimely termination of the most valuable narrative by de Soto’s secretary, Rodrigo
Ranjel, whose day-by-day account ends abruptly while the expedition is camped at
the Mississippi River (Bourne 1904). Without this important source, the reconstruction of the route through southern Arkansas, Texas, and Louisiana is all the more
problematical. The discontinuation of the narrative also confirms the paramount
importance of archeology in verifying the expedition’s western route.
Recent analysis by Hudson, DePratter, and S m ith (1989), makes it clear that the
expedition landed in Florida at Tampa Bay and traveled through the northern part
of the state until winter (Figure 1). They spent the winter of 1539 to 1540 in present
day Tallahassee, and for the next two and a half years they wandered through the
Southeastern United States. During this time, they traversed today’s states of
Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, and
Arkansas.
In the summer of 1542, they entered Texas. De Soto had died of illness in
Arkansas, and command of the expedition had been assumed by Luis de Moscoso.
Several routes have been proposed for the expedition in Texas; the most recent is
the one offered by Bruseth and Kenmotsu (1991). According to this analysis, which
combines archeological, linguistic, and geographic data with historical narratives,
the expedition’s most likely route was south from the Red River along Trammell’s
Trace towards Nacogdoches (Figure 2). From here, they followed the Old San
Antonio Road to the Guadalupe River, at which point they abandoned hope of

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

69

Figure 1. Map showing the routes of de Soto (based on Hudson, DePratter, and Smith 1989
and Bruseth and Kenmotsu 1991 for the part through Texas) and Coronado (based on
National Park Service 1991).

reaching New Spain by an overland route. They then retraced their steps to the
Mississippi River, built several large barges, and sailed back to New Spain.
Arms and Supplies
Understanding the types of materials carried by the expedition is critical to the
assessment of possible de Soto artifacts found in Texas. The narratives provide the
main source of information, although they provide surprisingly few notations about
the army’s supplies. A detailed account by an anonymous member of the expedition,
referred to as a Gentleman of Elvas, was translated from the original Portuguese by
B uckingham Smith in 1866 (Bourne 1904), and a brief narrative by Luys Hernandez
de Biedma, also a member of the expedition, is useful but omits parts of the
expedition (Bourne 1904). A major treatise on the expedition produced by Garcilaso
de la Vega, known as the Inca (Varner and Varner 1951), is a romanticized version
of the expedition that was written years later. It is based on two now-lost written
accounts by members of the army, and on stories told to the Inca by a member of
the expedition. A careful comparison of the Inca and Elvas narratives shows that
Garcilaso also relied upon the Elvas narrative. Other roughly contemporary
historical documents, such as Obreg6n’s History of l 6th Century Exploration in
Western America (Hammond and Rey 1928), provide additional information.
There are contradictions among the accounts, such as discrepancies in the
number of men who landed; the Ranjel account notes that 570 men landed, Elvas
cites 600 men, and Biedma mentions 620 men (Swanton 1939:87). The most
discrepant source is by Garcilaso, who suggests that more than a thousand men

70

Texas Archeological Society

OKLAHOMA

Figure 2. Map showing the route of de Soto as proposed by Bruseth and Kenmotsu 1991.

landed, but his estimates are generally not considered accurate (Swanton
1939:87).
The expedition comprised individuals from several different vocations. Aside
from those with military backgrounds, there were two shoemakers, a sword cutler,
several tailors, a carpenter, and clergymen (Swanton 1939:81). Between 223 and
243 horses, a large number of hogs, and dogs were also brought ashore to
accompany the army (Swanton 1939:89).
The narratives suggest that the men had traditional European arms and armor.
The rodeleros, or swordsmen on foot, would have carried steel swords and shields

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

71

known as targets (Peterson 1956:115), and de S oto had a private guard of halberdiers
(Swanton 1939:86). A halberd was a weapon developed in thirteenth century
Switzerland consisting of a staff-mounted iron head with a lance for thrusting, an
axe for chopping, and a hook for dragging mounted soldiers from their horses
(Johnson 1988:126). The narratives also mention lances used by the army. These
probably were pikes with polearms--flattened and pointed iron heads on long
wooden shafts. We know from the accounts--particularly the Elvas narrative-that
the expedition also had ballasteros, men with crossbows, and arcabuceros, or
individuals using guns. The guns were probably wheellock or matchlock arquebuses ~eterson 1956:12-13).
Many of the soldiers had armor. Chain mail is mentioned in the accounts, and
full plate armor probably was also worn by members of the expedition (Peterson
1956:116). Another type of armor consisted of heavy quilted cloth. The horses had
armor as well, which could have been chain mail, plate, or the nonmetallic quilted
cotton cloth. Horses were one of the Spaniards’ major advantages over the Indians
(Swanton 1939:89), and they would have been carefully protected and guarded.
In addition to material related to fighting and self-protection, the expedition
brought items to trade to the Indians. Although the narratives do not provide much
detail about these materials, glass beads, mirrors, iron knives, and clothing were
traded or given as presents (Swanton 1939:55). Quite interestingly, at the province
of Cofitachequi in present day South Carolina, the de Soto expedition encountered
Indians with glass beads, rosaries with crosses, and iron axes--all of European
origin (Bourne 1904:100). Even at this early date, trade materials from previous
Spanish intrusions were making their way to interior Indian settlements.
Artifacts from the Southeastern United States
Detailed analysis of early European materials from the Americas during the
past three decades has identified several artifacts that are known to date to the
sixteenth century (Brain 1985a, 1985b; Smith 1987; Smith and Good 1982; Deagan
1987; Ewen 1989; Mitchem 1989, 1990). Excavations at the Martin site, identified
as de Soto’ s winter camp at the Apalachee town of Anhaica, has provided one of the
best inventories of items that might be expected in the archeological record from the
expedition. The site, in downtown Tallahassee, was discovered in 1987 by B. Calvin
Jones while he was looking for a seventeenth century Spanish mission (Ewen 1989,
1990).
A detailed analysis of artifacts from the site has yet to be published, but the
assemblage is known to include some distinctive items (Ewen 1990:88). The
Spanish ceramics include an early style of Spanish olive jar, types of majolica, and
an unnamed variety of lead-glazed earthenware with a soft, red, sandy paste. Several
glass beads were found, including gooseberry, blown glass, faceted amber, Nueva
Cadiz, and faceted Chevron types. Metal items included wrought iron nails and
tacks, a crossbow quarrel (tip), iron links of chain mail, and five coins. Two of the
coins have been dated between 1505 and 1517; the remaining three can be
temporally placed only in the sixteenth century or earlier 0~wen 1990:89).

72

Texas Archeological Society

Similar artifacts have been found elsewhere in the southeastern United States
and, although they do not necessarily indicate direct contact with the army, do
provide evidence of the passage of the expedition (Brain 1985a:99). In particular,
glass beads have been determined to be one of the best indicators of early Spanish
exploration (Ewen 1989:114). Two types of beads are particularly important and
have been found at several sites. The first is called Nueva Cadiz, named for an
archeological site with remains of a Spanish port town located off the coast of
Venezuela (Smith and Good 1982:10). The bead is usually multilayered and
multicolored, with the exterior color usually mostly blue or turquoise over interior
clear or white glass (Deagan 1987:162-163) (Figure 3). The Nueva Cadiz type has
been dated to the first half of the sixteenth century (Deagan 1987:163; Smith and
Good 1982:11; Mitchem 1989). These beads have been found at several sites from
Florida westward to Oklahoma (Figure 4). The Oklahoma example is unique in that
it is one of the only two Nueva Cadiz bead found west of the Mississippi River, and
it is a logical candidate for association with the Coronado expedition (Sudbury
1984:33). It is puzzling that more examples of these beads have not been found,
particularly in the Southwest. The beads are known from circum-Caribbean, South
American, and Mexican contexts where early Spanish exploration and colonization
took place. It is likely that some such specimens have been overlooked in Southwestern collections. This certainly could be a productive area for future research in
the identification of Coronado’s route, particularly through Texas, Oklahoma, and
Kansas where the route is less certain.
An equally distinctive bead that was traded by early Spanish explorers,
including de Soto, was the Chevron type--a multilayered bead with as many as
seven layers of red, white, blue, and sometimes green, glass (Deagan 1987:164165). The exteriors are usually blue, and the ends on many have been faceted to
expose the underlying colors (Figure 3). When viewed from the end, the facets
cutting through the glass layers form a star. Chevron beads date from the sixteenth
century through the beginning of the seventeenth century (Deagan 1987:165), so
they are not indicators only of de Soto and contemporary explorations, but of later
intrusions as well.
Chevron beads are widely distributed in the southern United States (Figure 4).
They have been found at the Parkin site in Arkansas (Klinger 1977; P. Morse
1981:71) and most likely reflect the movement of de Soto shortly after he crossed
the Mississippi into Arkansas. These beads have also been found at Hawikuh, New
Mexico (Smith and Good 1982:51). A star chevron bead, as well as other unidentified types, has been noted from central Kansas, and these beads probably mark the
presence of Coronado in the Southwest (Wedel 1959:500; Sudbury 1984).
Metal artifacts of types identified with de Soto have been found throughout
much of the Southeastern United States. Most are iron objects whose original forms
can be identified, but without doubt many more iron artifacts have rusted beyond
identification or were sufficiently modified by Native Americans that they can no
longer be recognized as Spanish in origin. Wrought iron chisels--thought to be
items given out by the de Soto exped ition--have been found at some early European

Bruseth --Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

73

Figure 3. Beads that are indicators of the presence of early Spanish explorers. Top row,
Nueva Cadiz glass beads; bottom row, faceted Chevron beads from the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries; beads from the sixteenth century typically would have seven layers
of glass.

contact sites; other metal arti facts of interest are a piece of plate armor from a burial
in the Tatham Mound in Florida (Mitchem 1990:56) and a sixteenth century twoedged hilt sword from the King site in Georgia (Hally 1988:56).
Halberds have been found from several sites in the central southeastern United
States (Figure 5), all but one from Arkansas or Mississippi. The significance of this
restricted distribution is not known but may simply reflect better reporting from
Arkansas and Mississippi. As noted earlier, de Soto had a guard of halberdiers
(Swanton 1939:86) and mention is made in the narratives of the loss of halberds on
at least two occasions (Dickinson 1987); other losses probably went unreported.
Chain mail, usually consisting of rusted iron links and, less often, of brass links,
has been found at Southeastern sites. Overall, though, the occurrence of chain mail
is rare. Chain mail armor apparently lost popularity during subsequent centuries and
was increasingly replaced by iron plate armor (Johnson 1988; Peterson 1956).
Another explanation for the dearth of chain mail found in archeological
contexts may be that much of it was discarded along the way. At the province of

74

Texas Archeological Society

de Soto

A tltrntic
Ocean

Gulf of Mexico
o Chevron Bead
u Nueva Cadz

Figure 4. Map showing locations of Nueva Cadiz and Chevron beads in the southern
United States (based on Smith and Good 1982, and Sudbury 1984).

de Soto

A tlantic
Ocez~

Gulf of Mexico

Figure 5. Map showing locations of Halberds in the southern United States (based on
Dickinson 1987).
Apalachee, Garcilaso describes a test the Spaniard tried on their coats of mail
(Vamer and Varner 1951:235-236). They had an Indian shoot an arrow through one
of their best mail coats placed over a basket. To their surprise, the arrow completely
penetrated the mail. They tried the experiment again, this time with two coats of
mail, and the arrow again penetrated the armor. The Spaniards then began using
quilted cloth "three or four fingers thick," which was found to offer greater

\

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

75

protection from native arrows. According to Garcilaso, the coats of mail were then
discarded (Varner and Varner 1951:236), although we know from the narratives that
not all mail was abandoned, since reference is made to its use later in the expedition
(Varner and Varner 1951:523).
Clarksdale bells have been found at several southeastern sites (Figure 6) from
Florida to Arkansas. These distinctive brass bells derive their name from the town
in Mississippi where a large number have been recovered (Brain 1985a:105). The
bells, made from sheet brass, have been found in sixteenth century Spanish contact
sites, not only in the Southeast, but also in the Caribbean (Mitchem 1989). A
Clarksdale bell found at the Carden Bottoms site in western Arkansas (Brain
1985a:Figure 5-3) is the authentic de Soto artifact found to date closest to Texas.

de Soto
Coronado

A tlantic
Ocean

Gulf of Mexico

Figure 6. Map showing the locations of Clarksdale bells in the southern United States
(adapted from Mitchem and McEwan 1988).

ARTIFACTS FROM TEXAS

Over a period of 50 years, several artifacts of supposed de Soto origin have been
reported from Texas (Figure 7). An effort was made to locate these items and to
reexamine them in the light of what we know today about materials used by the
expedition. Some artifacts could be located, but others have disappeared and could
be seen only in photographs or through written descriptions.
To assist in this examination, several authorities in the identification of early
European artifacts were consulted. The individuals who have graciously agreed to
provide their expertise for this paper are: Dr. Helmut Nickel, former Curator of the
Department of Arms and Armor at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York
City; Dr. Jeffrey Mitchem, Station Archeologist at the Parkin Archeological State
Park in Arkansas; and Mr. Jay C. Blaine, an avocational archeologist considered the

76

Texas Archeological Society

leading Texas authority on early French and Spanish artifacts. The opinions of the
authorities are not always in agreement. Consequently, their positions are presented
as accurately as possible, and the author’ s conclusions follow the discussion of each
artifact.
Chain Mail Gauntlet
In the late 1950s, Wilson W. Crook, Jr., a member of the Dallas Archeological
Society, was contacted by a young man who had found a chain mail gauntlet, or
glove, at the Elm Fork of the Trinity River near Dallas (Crook 1988) (Figure 8).
Crook visited the site where the glove was found and was told by the young man that
it had come from a gully about a meter (3 feet) deep in the alluvium of the Elm Fork
(Wilson W. Crook. Jr., 1990 personal communication). The author has examined
the gauntlet, which is part of the R. K. Harris Collection at the Smithsonian
Institution, and took several photographs (Figure 8).

Figure 7. Map showing the locations of possible early Spanish artifacts in Texas.

In an article on this and other possible de Soto artifacts from the Dallas area,
Crook (1988) stated that the gauntlet was sent for identification to the Department
of Arms and Armor at New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art. The result was that
"it was identified as a cheap 16th century gauntlet commonly used by poor soldiers
of the Mediterranean Latin Nations, originally on a leather gauntlet beneath the light
chain mail" (Crook 1988:109). A careful search for this letter was made by the
author in records of the Harris Collection at the Smithsonian Institution, but the
correspondence apparently has been lost.
The glove, which is only partially intact, covering only the thumb and two
adjoining fingers, is made of small metal rings, about 0.5 cm in diameter, butted

Bruseth --Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

77

Figure 8. Chain mail gauntlet from alluvium in the Elm Fork of the Trinity River near
Dallas.

together; the part of the glove that covered the last two fingers is missing. The
gauntlet is made of a nonferrous metal, and despite some apparent oil or grease
staining, shows no evidence of rust or tarnish.
Dr. Nickel was asked to view slides of the gauntlet, and provided the following
comments:
The mail gauntlet fragment, as far as I can see from your close-up slide, is
made up from butted rings, and not from rings riveted closed, as would
have been the unshakable rule in the 16th century. I think that this fragment
was part of a fencing gauntlet for the left hand. In a pinch, it would enable
a fencer to grab his opponent’s blade and immobilize it, while he could
thrust home. This was not exactly cricket, of course, and therefore the mail
would be covered by innocent-looking leather. Again, the date for this mail
could be anytime after 1600 [Nickel 1991].
Dr. Mitchem observed the same slides of the gauntlet, and noted that he has
seen quite a bit of mail from sixteenth-century contexts, including the
Martin site (the supposed de Soto campsite) in Tallahassee, and a number
of Caribbean sites. I’ve also examined examples in museums and collections in Spain. Real mail made for bodily protection is made of iron rings,
not silver or other metals. Its original purpose was to diffuse and deflect

78

Texas Archeological Society
blows by slashing weapons, so a tough metal was necessary. I also note by
careful examination of the close-up slide that the individual rings are made
by bending wire until the ends abut. Utilitarian mail is always constructed
of rings which are made by riveting the overlapping ends to make them
very strong [Mitchem 1991].
The same slides were sent to Blaine who observed that
the mail gauntlet of Harris may well be the third of the same kind from
Texas. Crook (1988) writes of one "quite like ours" found near Vernon,
Texas. Another, also closely matching the Dallas specimen in several
details, was found on the North rim of Blanco Canyon some 8.5 miles [13
km] S.E. of Floydada. Apparently there may be significant occurrence of
similar mail gauntlets in Texas. The Dallas gauntlet’s rings are in a
standard pattern but apparently not fastened together at their individual
ends. Current data indicates this cheaper kind of construction saw very
little use in Europe until quite late times. Such mail was much more
common in the East. In the U.S., archeological examples probably dating
to the latter 16th century do usually have overlapping and riveted ring ends
as original construction [Blaine 1991].

Blaine brings up the existence of other gauntlets from Texas sites. Through
the help of Ms. Nancy Marble, Chairman of the Floyd County Historical Commission, who was instrumental in the acquisition of the Floydada gauntlet by
the museum, the author obtained information on the gauntlet from the Floydada
area that bears not only on the Floydada glove, but also on the Dallas County
specimen. As part of this effort, Ms. Marble sent copies of newspaper clippings
and correspondence relating to the glove, and copies of this material were sent
to the Texas Historical Commission. Two of the letters are of particular interest;
the first is a letter dated February 17, 1966 by Dr. W. W. Newcomb, then Director of the Texas Memorial Museum. Newcomb, who had been asked to examine
the glove, responded,
This acknowledges receipt of the chain mail gauntlet. It is "International
mail," that is the pattern of five interlocking links, the ends of each round
link being pressed together rather than being riveted as was the case of
earlier European mail. This type of mail was cheaper and was used mostly
in Spain, France, and Italy. It apparently dates from the middle of the 16th
century into the 17th. I’m not satisfied about the metal used; it appears to
be zinc coated bronze, but this is a wild guess.
Blaine (1991) is correct in observing the similarities between the Dallas County
and Floyd County gloves. From Newcomb’s description and a newspaper photo
supplied by Ms. Marble, it can be seen that the two are quite similar, clown to the
pattern of the tear and the missing fingers. Attempts to locate the gauntlet from the
Vernon area failed because no local informant who knew of its existence could be

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

79

found. The author suspects that the glove Crook (1988) refers to as the Vernon
gauntlet may in fact be the Floyd County gauntlet.
A second letter on the Floyd County gauntlet written by Dr. Newcomb on
March 14, 1966 quotes from correspondence by R. K. Harris, of Dallas. Harris had
been asked to look at the gauntlet, and he responded to Newcomb as follows:
I do have a chain mail gauntlet from the Dallas area. It was found in the
Trinity River bottoms near Dallas [Crook (personal communication,
1990) has indicated that the glove was instead found along the Elm Fork,
a tributary of the Trinity River] after a large overflow of the river. It is the
same material and construction as the one sent to you. We sent ours to
Mexico City and they told us it was a chain mail gauntlet and probably
dated from the 16th or 17th century. Ours even has only three fingers
remaining like yours .... Three or four iron rings were found with ours but
the young man that found them said [they] were so rusty that they fell to
pieces.
This letter is also missing from the Harris Collection at the Smithsonian
Institution, and we cannot determine who in Mexico City made the identification
mentioned by Harris of the gauntlet from Dallas County.
What can be said about the Dallas County gauntlet today? As Nickel points out,
it does not fit the type of mail commonly used in the sixteenth century, and, as
Mitchem also observes, it is not similar to archeological specimens found in the
Southeast and elsewhere. However, it is worth noting that Obreg6n remarked that
the Coronado muster roll included swordsmen who carried armored gauntlets
(Hammond and Rey 1928:78-108). That the Dallas County gauntlet could have
served such a function--similar to Nickel’s suggestion--is a possibility, but it
appears that if the glove was made in the sixteenth century, it would most likely be
made of iron and have riveted links. The evidence seems to rule out the gauntlet as
a de Soto artifact.
Trinity River Tabar
An East Indian tabar found along the Trinity River during the early 1950s
is mentioned in two publications. The first is the September-October 1951 issue
of the Dallas Archeological Society’s Record, in which R. K. Harris reports on
the discovery of an "axe or mace looking implement." According to the article,
two boys playing along the banks of the Trinity River near Dallas discovered a
rusty piece of iron protruding from the bank, and, after they unearthed it and
removed the rust, they brought the piece to Harris, who was the local authority
on such items at the time, for identification. Harris photographed and drew the
object (Figure 9) and sent a photograph to the Metropolitan Museum of Art for
identification.
The letter from the Metropolitan Museum on the identification of the tabar was
located by the author during a search of the Harris Collection at the Smithsonian
Institution. Dr. Stephen V. Grancsay, then curator of the Department of Arms and

80

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Photograph of an East Indian tabar from the Trinity River in Dallas County.

Armor for the Metropolitan, examined Harris’s drawing and responded on September
28, 1951, "The weapon of which you sent a drawing is an East Indian battle axe
(tabar). There are in this Museum several examples of this general type of weapon,
including the knife which fits into the haft."
The tabar is a fighting axe used by East Indian soldiers that has a curved cutting
head, and sometimes, a square hammerhead or a shm~ened pick on the opposite side
(Byam 1988:32-35), although this part is missing from the Trinity River example.
A hollow handle conceals a dagger, providing another weapon. The surface of the
weapon may be inlaid with silver and gilt (Byam 1988:34-35), as seems to be the
case with the Trinity River specimen.

Bruseth -- Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

81

The comments on this artifact by the authorities contacted for this article were
largely in agreement. According to Dr. Nickel,
The battle axe found at the Trinity River is an East Indian tabar, as one of
my predecessors at the Metropolitan Museum must have told Mr. Crook,
some forty years ago. However, as to the dating of this tabar, I would prefer
not to call it "15/16 century" [as Crook (1988) suggests]. Though the
general shape of East Indian weapons has changed very little over the
centuries, it has to be kept in mind that great numbers of these traditional
arms were manufactured practically to the present day, not so much for
tribal warfare.., but for sale as tourist souvenirs in the local bazaars
[Nickel 1991].
Nickel goes on to comment that the photograph shows the specimen to be in
very good condition, and notes that its "unrusted" quality makes it doubtful that the
artifact had been in the ground since the time of the expedition. Although Harris
(1951 ) describes the tabar as being rusted when found by the boys, it is doubtful that
they could have cleaned it to its present"newlike" state; rather, the artifact probably
never was very rusted.
A photograph of the tabar was also viewed by Dr. Mitchem, who commented,

I can’t tell you much about the"tabar," except that is certainly isn’t typical
of weapons known to be associated with sixteenth-century expeditions. It
sure is fancy, and I have to defer to the Metropolitan people on its
identification. Battle axes of about this size and configuration were still
used as late as the first half of the sixteenth century, though they were no
longer part of the standard weaponry [Mitchem 1991].
And Blaine adds that while the tabar could date to the sixteenth century,
like Dr. Nickel I find the excellent condition begs for explanation where
the context supposedly is grounding for hundreds of years. Unless cached
in some very unusual way the pristine appearance of the surfaces, thin
edges and decorative detail is, to say the least, highly improbable for the
climate and soil conditions in the Dallas area [Blaine 1991].

Taken together, the evidence suggests that the tabar is an unlikely candidate for
the de Soto expedition. Such weapons, when found in sixteenth century contexts in
the Southeast, are typically of iron and rusted.
Trinity River Halberd

In his article on de Soto artifacts from the Dallas area, Crook (1988) briefly
mentions a "Medieval halberd" from the Trinity River, a metal object brought for
examination in the 1960s to R. K. Harris by a young couple who found it while
picnicking along the Trinity River. Crook (1988:109) describes the halberd as being
"similar to those used by the Tower of London beefeaters." Apparently Harris tried

82

Texas Archeological Society

to acquire the piece, and although the couple would not part with it, they did permit
him to photograph it. However, the author’s thorough search of the Harris Collection records at the Smithsonian failed to locate the photograph.
Without more information on this object--particularly a photograph or a
drawing--little can be said about its relationship to the de Soto expedition. As noted
earlier, halberds found in sites of the southeastern United States appear to relate to
the Spanish army. They were popular from the fourteenth through the seventeenth
centuries, and during this time they changed from simple forms resembling bills
(axelike) to more elaborate types used for pageantry (Brett 1894:112). Since
halberds were made for many years after the time of de Soto, the Trinity halberd
cannot be dated without more specific data.
Corsicana Spur and Key
In 1990, two early European arti facts were brought to the attention of the author
by Mr. William L. Young, an avocational archeologist from Corsicana. One, a 25cm-long spur, has a downward-curving shank, and has notably long spikes (7.5 cm)
forming the rowel (Figure 10). The specimen is very rusted, and one of the arms of
the heel band is missing. The other artifact is a 12-cm-long key and is also very
rusted. Both artifacts were found near the confluence of the Trinity River with
Richland or Tehuacana Creeks (Bill Young, 1991 personal communication).

Figure 10. Photograph of a spur found near Corsicana (courtesy of Bill Young).

Dr. Nickel (1991) suggests, in part based on the spur’s decorative curls, that it
and the key could date to the first part of the eighteenth century. Dr. Mitchem,
however, based on observations of archeological examples of spurs from the
Southeast and circum-Caribbean, believes

Bruseth m Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

83

the best candidate for a genuine sixteenth-century Spanish artifact is the
iron spur from Corsicana. It is a classic example of the typical type of spur
used by the conquistadors. The attached iron "scrolls," along with other
features, identify it as from this time period. I’ve seen both pictures and
archeological examples of very similar examples from sixteenth-century
contexts in the Caribbean and elsewhere [Mitchem 1991].
Dr. Mitchem referred the author to the discussion by Simmons and Turley
(1980:110-113) of Spanish Colonial spurs and other iron objects. According to
these authorities, the Corsicana specimen is a "conquistador spur," and they
illustrate a similar example from the Pecos Pueblo of New Mexico (Simmons and
Turley 1980:Plate 21). This type of spur was used by European knights in the late
Middle Ages and was brought into the New World by the conquistadors, hence its
name.
J. C. Blaine’s observations on the Corsicana spur parallel those of Dr. Mitchem.
I have come to believe this spur clearly reflects a 16th century Spanish style
origin. How early in that century this form came into significant use is not
presently secured. The style is generally accepted as that used by the
Conquistadors, although perhaps mainly because we can’t precisely
isolate an earlier Spanish style in the Americas .... In conu’ast to Dr.
Nickel’s observation of this particular spur... I presently find no reason
to support a "likely" date as late as the early 18th century. I’ve seen no
evidence for that so far from Texas and New Mexico sites of the 18th
century where some spur styles from the 17th century do persist into as late
as the early 18th century. However, that spurs styled like the [Corsicana]
specimen could still be produced that late is regrettably true. Even though
this spur may be of New World origin, this would not necessarily prevent
an early production. Hispanic smiths are known to have been active by the
1520s in our hemisphere [Blaine 1991].
What can be concluded about the Corsicana spur? Although the experts do not
agree, the experience of Blaine, who has examined thousands of European artifacts
from Texas and surrounding states, must be given priority. Moreover, his remarks
parallel Mitchem’s, and both lead to the conclusion that the Corsicana spur is
probably an old artifact; how old is difficult to say. Simmons and Turley (1980:111)
note that the conquistadors used these spurs, but they also indicate that they were
used later in borderland areas such as Texas, New Mexico, and California. The site
where this specimen was found needs archeological testing to obtain more information before we can make further progress on this issue.
Little information was obtained about the Corsicana key. Mitchem (1991)
observes that they have been found at Puerto Real, Haiti, but is not able to offer
more specific information. Blaine (1991) notes that the key has the "flavor" of
frontier blacksmithing, and was probably repaired or was made of poor quality
stock.

84

Texas Archeological Society
Longview Spur

During a visit to Longview in 1990, Dr. Norman Black told the author about a
possible de Soto spur from the area in the possession of Mr. Bill Fisher, proprietor
of a local hardware store. The author contacted Mr. Fisher, and, with his assistance,
was able to examine it. According to Mr. Fisher’s best recollection, the spur was
found in the 1920s in a field 8 to 10 km (5 to 6 miles) northeast of Longview, but
no more specific site information is available.
The artifact is 22 cm long, and has a rowel length of 7 cm (Figure 11). The shank
is straight, and the spur is made of a nonferrous, silver-colored metal. The surface
of the arms of the heel band and the shank are engraved with either parallel lines or
small leaf-shaped designs.
Concerning the Longview spur, Nickel observes that
it still preserves stylistic elements of the late 15th century in its straight
shank, and the thickness of the arch-shaped branches encircling the heel.
However, the length of the spikes of the rowel--while typical for the
Spanish spurs of the 17th and 18th century--might be excessive for a
period before the last quarter of the 16th century. Before 1600, footwear,
shoes and boots alike, was practically heelless, and these overlong spikes
would have made it most difficult to take even a few steps before

Figure 11. Photograph of a spur found near Longview (courtesy of Mr. Bill Fisher).

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

85

mounting. For this reason, even taking in account the conservatism of
Spanish fashion, it seems to be safest to date this spur to some period after
1600 [Nickel 1991].
Mitchem notes that he is
a bit suspicious of the Longview spur. It is so fancy and heavy that I would
think it more likely is 18th-19th century. Simmons and Turley [1980] note
that heavy, richly-ornamented spurs were typically used by Mexicans
during this period. The slide makes it look like it’s made of some alloy of
gold, possibly tumbaga (sometimes called guanin), an alloy of gold and
copper. If it is made of silver, it has definitely been cleaned or it would be
black with tarnish [Mitchem 1991].
Blaine comments
I have never encountered a spur quite like the one from near Longview.
Except for the large rowel, it certainly resembles what a greatly shortened
version of the 15th-16th century tilting spur would look like. The Longview
spur also lacks adequate strapping capability for early and hard usage and
would require such as a fully developed boot for adequately mounting. In
no way does it reflect early Hispanic practices in this respect and I believe
this is the more critical attribute here .... Overall the Longview spur adds
up a bit too modern to me. My guess is a 19th century origin parade kind
of spur but I lack some confidence here, especially judging from slides
only [Blaine 1991].

All of the authorities agree that the Longview spur is not an early sixteenth
century object, so it can be concluded that it is an unlikely candidate for a de Soto
artifact.
Chalicelike Ceramic Vessels from Camp and Franklin Counties
In a report on the prehistoric Tuck Carpenter site in Camp County, Turner
(1978:98-103) describes the results of excavation of a Late Caddoan Period Titus
phase site with several middens and a cemetery containing 44 graves. One of the
graves contained a chalicelike vessel--a small bowl with a podestal base of a form
similar to a communion chalice.
Since only one grave contained a vessel of this type, Turner researched
surrounding sites and contacted workers in Arkansas and Oklahoma about the
occurrence of other chalicelike vessels. He located two other examples, one from
the Johns site and one from the Gandy site, both within 20 miles of the Carpenter
site (Figure 12). No vessels of this type were reported by the contacts from outside
of Texas.
Turner (1978:103) suggests that the shape of the vessels was influenced by the
de Soto expedition. The evidence for this, beyond the obvious similarity in form, is
an uncorrected radiocarbon date for the Tuck Carpenter site of A.D. 15902-_60

86

Texas Archeological Society

0

1

[

i

0

1

i

I

2
I

INCHES

2 CENTIMETERS

Figure 12. Photograph of the chalicelike vessel from the Gandy site (41FK 4) (photograph
taken with the permission of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, where the
artifact is curated).

obtained on charred logs from a grave. The absence of other European artifacts
indicates that the site was occupied prior to major French and Spanish contact with
the Caddo that occurred in the region after about 1700.
Although Turner’s observations are intriguing, if the chalicelike vessel is a
result of DeSoto’s presence, we would expect to find other types of material
showing the army’s presence to be found, particularly in the graves. At sites in the
Southeast that show definite contact with de Soto, many items traded or left by the

Bruseth m Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

87

expedition made their way into mortuary contexts (e.g., Mitchem 1991; P. Morse
1981:69; Langford and Smith 1990). It could be argued, however, that at this point
in the expedition, the army was largely depleted of its supplies, and there was little
to be left for the Titus phase people.
Perttula (1989:100) notes the similarity of these vessels to stemmed glassware
examples used during the sixteenth century Spanish occupation in the circumCaribbean. He notes that the Tuck Carpenter site is in the general area included in
his plotting of the expedition’s route through eastern Texas. Thurmond (1990:233)
also notes the occurrence of these vessel forms and examines the possible connection of the de Soto expedition with the Titus phase. These artifacts seem to be
gaining acceptance as far as reflecting contact with the army, but some problems
remain. According to Elvas (Bourne 1904:97) during the battle of Mauilla, many of
the army’s supplies were burned, including "the ornaments for saying mass."
Consequently, it is difficult to know what articles the Spaniards would have had
with them to be copied. Perhaps the chalicelike vessels reflect native manufacture
of a form described by members of the expedition. If so, why are these objects not
found in sites in other areas visited by the expedition?
Mississippian Vessels t’rom the Honey Springs Site
In the October 1940 issue of the Dallas Archeological Society’s Record, was
an article written by Henry Hanna Jr. entitled "Most Interesting Dallas County
Campsite." The article describes the Honey Springs site (actually 41DL68 and
41DL71) located on terraces along the south side of the Trinity River in Dallas
County. The site gets its name from the presence of several springs in the vicinity
and the occurrence of honey bee hives in area trees (Hanna 1940:2). In addition to
the artifacts, Hanna states that "some Indian skeletons" were found along a creek
after a hard rain, evidently being washed out by the creek. A grooved axe was found
near the skeletons.
Of particular interest for the present paper is Hanna’s (1940:9) reporting of
several vessels and other artifacts found on a sandy slope of the site. The context and the conditions of discovery of the vessels are difficult to discern. Hanna
(1940:9) states that "thus far six whole specimens have been unearthed while
large parts of five others have been found--all within a space of ground three
by six feet. The depth at which this pottery was found was approximately two
and one-half feet."
He goes on to note that "the surface of this sandy slope has yielded many
interesting specimens." Three effigy heads made of pottery were found, which had,
no doubt, been broken from pottery vessels.
It is not clear from the article whether Hanna was involved in the discovery and
collection of the vessels and other associated artifacts or if he is reporting their
earlier unearthing. The answer to this question comes from the site form completed
by Forrest Kirkland in December 1940. Kirkland notes that Mr. Perry Overton
owned the land and states that the landowner dug up the vessels in 1934, some six
years before their reporting by Hanna.

88

Texas Archeological Society

Kirkland’s site form suggests that the vessels are Caddoan; Hanna made no
comments on their cultural affiliation, but simply observed that they were unusual
for Dallas County. The true significance of the vessels came years later when the
Dallas Archeological Society sent photographs for examination to the Ceramic
Repository at the University of Michigan. The result of this showed that the vessels
were"St. Francis Ware... known from the region of St. Francis County, Arkansas"
(Crook 1988:90).
Since the St. Francis River of northeastern Arkansas is one of the areas where
de Soto is thought to have traveled through the province of Casqui, even staying
at its principal town--the Parkin archeological site (Morse and Morse
1990:202)--the vessels were of great interest to the author. With the help of
Wilson Crook, Jr. and Daniel Prikryl, the latter an archeologist with the Texas
Historical Commission, the vessels and associated artifacts were found in the
possession of Mrs. Henry Hanna, the widow of Henry Hanna. We visited Mrs.
Hanna at her home in Dallas, and she kindly allowed the author to observe and
photograph the artifacts.
All of the vessels are small, ranging from 30 cm to nearly 70 cm in diameter,
and are of several forms. Three are bowls, two are jars, and one is a bottle. All
except the bottle are decorated with either nodes (Figure 13, A, B, D), strap
handles (Figure 13, D, E), or animal effigy appliqu6 (Figure 13, C); in this case
the effigy is a frog. Other artifacts in the Hanna Collection are two effigy

A

B

D

E

F

Figure 13. Ceramic vessels from the Honey Springs site (41DL68 and 41DL71 ); A and B
are bowls; C is a frog effigy bowl; D and E are jars, and F is a bottle.

Bruseth m Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

89

appendages broken from vessels, a strap handle, a long basalt celt, and two stone
discoidals.
To identify the artifacts in the light of current Mississippiperiod ceramic
typology, photographs of the vessels were sent to Dr. Dan Morse, of the Arkansas
Archeological Survey. According to Morse,
with the exception of one jar handle sherd.., and an unknown object
¯.. the artifacts could date within the period of AD 1400-1650. The
handle sherd is evidently Manly Punctate and should date circa late
13th and 14th century. The pottery and discoidals are fairly typical of
this region. The long basalt celt is rare but has been found here,
although the shape is atypical. There was a specialized basalt industry
centered in the Blytheville, Arkansas, region after AD 1400. The basalt was mined in the volcanic cones in the Missouri St. Francis Mountains .... The impression I get from your pottery is that the vessels
probably are from a site located in northeast Arkansas near the Mississippi River and as a group date essentially pre-De Soto (1450-1550)
rather than post-De Soto (1550-1650). They could represent the
Nodena Phase (thought to be the province of Pacacha) or possible
phases further south, all visited by the expedition before De Soto died.
The reason I say the Mississippi River rather than the St. Francis River
is based on the presence of the bowls with notched appliqud rim strips,
which are more characteristic of the "Memphis" sub-region .... However, I do not think these artifacts represent an assemblage obtained by
the De Soto Expedition. Broken and rather crude items are represented. Missing are more typical artifacts in use, including pottery,
about 1541 [Morse 1991].
Although the army had an entourage of hundreds of Indian slaves, many of
them women, who would have accompanied the expedition into Texas, it seems
doubtful that they would carry such an unusual assortment of vessels and other
objects. Morse (1991) notes that one miniature vessel must have been a toy, and
two other vessels are too small to have been cooking jars; they may have been
used for condiments. The frog effigy jar is the type of vessel used as burial
furniture for children. It seems doubtful that in Texas the expedition--desperately hoping to find its way back to New Spain--would be carrying nonutilitarian
vessels. Moreover, why would they have two ceramic effigy heads, a clay strap
handle sherd, stone discoidals--presumably gaming stones--and a large basalt
celt? The stone artifacts in particular would add unnecessary weight during the
march.
Although the evidence is insufficient to support a final conclusion, it seems
unlikely that the artifacts are from the de Soto expedition. They are more likely to
be artifacts from Arkansas, collected by a member of the Overton family or by
someone else and given to the family. Moreover, they seem to be from both grave
and nongrave contexts.

90

Texas Archeological Society
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

Nearly all scholars agree that the de Soto expedition passed through Texas, and,
with this consensus, it is only logical to expect that some archeological evidence of
the expedition will be found. None of the possible de Soto artifacts recovered in
Texas over the years can be unequivocally related to that army. The Corsicana spur
is probably the best candidate, but as noted previously, this type of spur was used
in later times, particularly in the borderland areas of New Spain. The chalicelike
vessels from northeastern Texas, although of native manufacture, may reflect
contact with the army. All of the other artifacts have sufficient temporal or
typological problems to rule them out as de Soto artifacts.
Since the army spent several months in Texas, why is there not more evidence?
To answer this we need to bear in mind some facts about the expedition. When the
soldiers reached Texas, they had been traveling for three years in the southeastern
United States. There is no mention in the narratives about handing out gifts or
trading with the Texas Indians, and quite possibly most--if not all--trade items
such as bells, beads, and iron chisels had been given out. In fact, the soldiers were
not only short of items for trade, but they did not have enough iron with them to make
horseshoes, so their horses went unshod (Swanton 1939:89). We also need to keep
in mind the fact that the soldiers in Arkansas, before deciding to head westward into
Texas, had lost their leader de Soto and their main interpreter Juan Ortiz, both of
whom died. With the death of Ortiz, they had difficulty communicating with the
Indians; for what used to be understood in "four words, it became necessary to have
the whole day" (Bourne 1904:147). Moreover, the expedition was down to about
300 fighting men and 40 serviceable horses (Swanton 1939:87). Therefore, on
entering Texas the expedition was probably left with only minimal military gear,
essential horse trappings, and personal items.
This is not to say that finding a campsite from the de Soto expedition, or
identifying a Native American archeological site with evidence of contact with the
army, is impossible. Both types of settlements existed in Texas, and both should
have left some archeological evidence. However, the search for these sites will
require very careful examination of the material evidence.
Probably the most likely artifact to expect from such a Texas site would be an
iron object. Much of the chain mail armor may have been left in Apalachee after it
was found to be ineffective against native arrows, but plate armor would have been
of considerable advantage against Indian weapons and would have been kept.
Remaining military weapons, such as halberds, crossbows, swords, and shields also
would have been important. Although these weapons were being carefully conserved because they could not be resupplied (Brain 1985a:103), some were
undoubtedly lost, as the narratives indicate; one only needs to look at sites in the
Southeast where weapons have been found (Smith 1987; Dickinson 1987; Hally
1988; Mitchem 1989, 1990).
Any metal items from the expedition would undoubtedly be in poor condition,
and might have been modified by Indians (e.g., Mitchem 1989:105). We may also

Bruseth -- Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

91

find objects of European type made out of local materials. For instance, Coronado
employed Native Americans to manufacture crossbow bolt heads out of indigenous
copper (Ellis 1957). We might expect the crossbow’s iron nuts, which served as a
release mechanism, to have been manufactured out of bone and be preserved in an
archeological context (Ellis 1957:211). Halberds, like the specimens from Arkansas, could also be present and identifiable as relating to the expedition.
We should be looking for other types of evidence as well. We know that a large
drove of swine accompanied the expedition. Upon de Soto’s death, the army
auctioned off his personal property, which included 700 hogs, to other members of
the expedition (Swanton 1939:90-91). The expedition also gave hogs to Indian
chiefs along the way (Swanton 1939:90-91), and the remains of these animals
should be present as rare elements in lists of archeological fauna.
The expedition started with 223 to 243 horses, and upon return to the
Mississippi River to build barges for sailing to New Spain, they had about 30 left
(Swanton 1939:89). Some of these horses undoubtedly died in Texas, and could
show up as a minor representation in the faunal assemblage of an otherwise
prehistoric site.
And finally, our best evidence of the expedition might come from
bioarcheological analysis of human skeletal remains. Early European expeditions
and attempts at colonization in the Americas introduced new diseases--measles,
smallpox, and influenza--the effects of which were devastating (Dobyns 1983;
Smith 1987). Ramenofsky (1987:69) calls the sixteenth century the disease century
of the Southeast, and notes that it was a time of dramatic population decline and
settlement relocation. These same diseases would have been carried or spread into
Texas and should be manifested in the archeological record.
Although it is difficult to identify specific disease-related skeletal pathologies
(Hutchinson 1990:64; Smith 1987:60), there are other ways to look for evidence of
epidemics. Efforts have been made to look at major shifts in settlement in Texas
during the sixteenth century (Perttula 1989; Thurmond 1990). Other types of
evidence, such as the increased incidence of mass burials or the large-scale use of
cemeteries during limited periods (cf. Smith 1987:60-68), need to be fully exploited. Perhaps the short term use during the Titus phase of large cemeteries,
interpreted by Perttula (1989:158) to be community graveyards, actually reflects
passage of the army. These cemeteries seem to have originated during the sixteenth
century and could reflect increased mortality from European diseases. Detailed
skeletal studies might help resolve this issue.
Evidence for traumatic death in skeletal remains should also be sought.
Although members of the expedition may have been short of supplies, they
seemingly had no limitation in their willingness to fight the native populations, and
the expedition had at least two major battles with Indians during the journey through
Texas. The first was at Naguatex along the Red River, and the other was during an
encounter with the Aays near San Augustine. Other encounters are likely but were
simply not reported in the narratives. Hudson, DePratter, and Smith (1988:130)
observe that incidents that became commonplace were less often recorded, and

92

Texas Archeological Society

small-scale battles are likely to have fallen into this category by the time the
expedition was west of the Mississippi River.
Recent work with skeletal remains in the Southeast at such sites as King in
Georgia (Blakely 1988), Tatham Mound in Florida (Mitchem 1990:56), and Parkin
in Arkansas (Murray 1989) has produced evidence of skeletons with wounds from
metal-edged weapons. Similar evidence of trauma should be found in cemeteries of
native groups in Texas.
In summary, although the possible de Soto artifacts from Texas are not
conclusive indicators of the expedition, other types of more definitive evidence
should be present in the archeological record, and efforts need to be made to search
for them. Our best clues of what to expect will come from sites in the southeastern
United States that have been shown to relate to the expedition. The expectations we
form for a Texas site, however, need to be tempered by the reality that by the time
the army reached the state its supplies of European manufacture had diminished.
Nonetheless, some evidence of the expedition should be present. Garcilaso notes
that the Indians scavenged the army’s abandoned camps, and any distinctively
European objects could have been carried away from de Soto expedition camp sites
and ended up in native sites in the area. Such items will be rare, and probably of
poorly preserved iron.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

First and foremost, I thank Mr. Wilson W. Crook, Jr. Although the final
conclusions of this study probably differ from what he would argue, he deserves
credit for his 1988 article that stimulated the author’s interest in this problem. Mr.
Crook also kindly assisted the author in locating the Honey Springs site and in
finding the vessels from the site.
Several other individuals have helped by freely providing technical expertise.
Dr. Helmut Nickel, Dr. Jeffrey Mitchem, and Jay C. Blaine all graciously examined
photographs of several of the possible de Soto artifacts from Texas, and their help
and expertise have been invaluable. Dan Morse looked at the Honey Springs vessels
and related artifacts and provided critical information regarding these items.
Although the author has ~ied to state the positions of these individuals accurately,
he takes full responsibility for any failure in rendering their opinions faithfully, and
certainly bears full responsibility for the final conclusions.
Daniel Prikryl also assisted the author in locating the Honey Springs site and
in finding the vessels from the site. Without his assistance and suggestions, this
important information probably would not have been uncovered. Mr. William L.
Young, avocational archeologist from Corsicana, brought the Corsicana spur and
key to the author’s attention and provided photographs. Dr. Norman Black,
Chairman of the Gregg County Historical Commission, brought the Longview spur
to the attention of the author; his assistance is greatly appreciated. I also thank Mrs.
Henry Hanna, who, on very short notice, agreed to let the author examine her late
husband’s collection of artifacts from the Honey Springs site.

Bruseth --Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

93

Thanks are also due to Dr. James Crocker, of the Smithsonian Institution. Dr.
Crocker helped the author locate the chain mail gauntlet in the R. K. Harris
Collection.
Several persons provided editorial advice for this paper. The author’s wife,
Toni Turner, reviewed the first draft and helped to render it more readable. Dan
Prikryl, Nancy Kenmotsu, and Tim Perttula also provided editorial advice, and their
comments have improved the manuscript. Finally, Jim Bonar produced the final
black and white photographs, and his help is appreciated.
Lastly, I want to thank Dr. Brian Babin, Commissioner with the Texas
Historical Commission. Dr. Babin is also a member of the United States De Soto
Commission and has been a constant source of encouragement on research into the
de Soto expedition.
REFERENCES CITED
Blaine, Jay C.
Letter to the Author dated August 7, 1991. On file at the Texas Historical
1991
Commission, Austin.
Blakely, Robert L. (editor)
1988
The King Site, Continuity and Contact in Sixteenth-Century Georgia. The
University of Georgia Press, Athens.

Bourne, Edward G. (editor)
1904
Narratives of the Career of Hernando de Soto in the Conquest of Florida. 2
Volumes. A. S. Barnes, New York.
Brain, Jeffrey P.
1985a The Archeology of the Hemando de Soto Expedition. In: Alabama and the
Borderlands’, From Prehistory to Statehood, edited by R. Reid Badger and
Lawrence A. Clayton, pp. 96--107. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
1985b

Introduction: Update of De Soto Studies since the United States De Soto
Expedition Commission Report. In: Final Report of the United States De Soto
Commission, by John R. Swanton, pp. xi-lxxii. Reprinted. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Brain, Jeffrey P., Alan Toth, and Antonio Rodriguez-Buckingham
1974
Ethnohistoric Archeology of the De Soto Entrada into the Lower Mississippi
Valley. The Conference on Historic Site Archaeological Papers, 7: 232-289.
Brett, Edwin J.
1894
A Pictorial and Descriptive Record of the Origin and Development ofArrns and
Armor. Sampson Low, Marston, and Co., London.
Bruseth, James E., and Nancy A. Kenmotsu
1991

Soldiers of Misfortune: The de Soto Expedition Through Texas. Heritage
9(4):12-17.

94

Texas Archeological Society

Byam, Michele
1988

Eyewitness Books, Arms and Armor. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.

Crook, Wilson W., Jr.
1988
Did Moscoso (Later Part of the De Soto Expedition) Reach the Trinity River in
the Dallas Region? The Record 42(3): 109-110.
Deagan, Kathleen
1987
Artifacts of the Spanish Colonies of Florida and the Caribbean 1500-1800,
Volume 1: Ceramics, Glassware, and Beads. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.
Dickinson, Sam
1987
Arkansas’ Spanish Halberds. The Arkansas Archeologist 25/26:53-62.
Dobyns, Henry F.
1983
Their Number Become Thinned. The University of Termessee Press, Knoxville.
Ellis, Bruce T.
1957
Crossbow Boltheads from Historic Pueblo Sites. ElPalacio 64(7-8):209-214.
Ewen, Charles R.
1989
Anhaica: Discovery of Hernando de Soto’s 1539-1540 Winter Camp. In: First
Encounters, Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, pp. 110-118.
University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
1990

Soldier of Fortune: Hernando de Soto in the Territory of the Apalachee. In:
Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on the
Spanish Borderlands East, Volume 2, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 8391. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Halty, David J.
1988
Archeology and Settlement Plan of the King Site. In: The King Site, Continuity
and Contact in Sixteenth-Century Georgia, edited by Robert L. Blakely, pp. 316. The University of Georgia Press, Athens.
Hammond, George P., and Agapito Rey (translators and editors)
1928
Obreg6n’s History of l 6th Century Explorations in Western America. Wetzel,
Los Angeles.
Hanna, Henry, Jr.
1940
Most Interesting Dallas County Indian Campsite. The Record 2(2):2-11.
Harris, R. K.
1951
French or Spanish or What Is It? The Record 10(1):2.
Hudson, Charles M., Chester B. DePratter, and Marvin T. Smith
1988
The Victims of the King Massacre: A Historical Detective’s Report. In: The
King Site, Continuity and Contact in Sixteenth-Century Georgia, edited by
Robert L. Blakely, pp. 101-134. The University of Georgia Press, Athens.

Bruseth ~ Artifacts of the de SoW Expedition
1989

95

Hemando de Soto’s Expedition through the Southem United States. In: First
Encounters, Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States,
1492-1570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, pp. 77-98.
University of Florida Press, Gainesville.

Hudson, Charles M., John E. Worth, and Chester B. DePratter
1990
Refinements in Hernando de Soto’s Route through Georgia and South Carolina.
In: Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on
the Spanish Borderlands East, Volume 2, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp.
107-119. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Hudson, Charles M., Marvin T. Smith, and Chester B. DePratter
1984
The Hemando Expedition: from Apalachee to Chialla. Southeastern Archeology 3:65-77.
Hutchinson, Dale L.
1990
Postcontact Biocultural Change: Mortuary Site Evidence. In: Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands East, Volume 2, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 61-70. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Johnson, Bryon
Arms and Armor of the Spanish Conquest: A Brief Description. Manuscript on
1988
file, Albuquerque Museum, Albuquerque.
Kenmotsu, Nancy A., James E. Bruseth, and James Corbin
1990
The Route of the de Soto Expedition through Texas. Paper Presented at a
Symposium on de Soto in the Caddoan Area, University of Arkansas Museum,
Little Rock.
Klinger, Timothy C.
Parkin Archeology, A Report on the 1966 Field School Test Excavations at the
1977
Parkin Site. The Arkansas Archeologist 16/17/18:45-80.
Langford, James B., and Marvin T. Smith
1990

Recent Investigations in the Core of the Coosa Province. In: Lamar Archaeology, Mississippian Chiefdoms in the Deep South, edited by Mark Williams and
Gary Shapiro, pp. 104-116. The University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

Milanich, Jerald T. and Susan Milbrath (editors)
First Encounters, Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the UnitedStates,
1989
1492-1570. University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
Mitchem, Jeffrey M.
1989
Artifacts of Exploration: Archeological Evidence from Florida. In: First Encounters, Spanish Explorations in the Caribbean and the United States, 14921570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan Milbrath, pp. 99-109. University
of Florida Press, Gainesville.

96

Texas Archeological Society
1990

Initial Spanish-Indian Contact in West Peninsular Florida: The Archeological
Evidence. In: Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands East, Volume 2, edited by David Hurst
Thomas, pp. 49-59. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

1991

Letter to the Author dated October 14, 1991. On file at the Texas Historical
Commission, Austin.

Mitchem, Jeffrey M. and Bonnie G. McEwan
1988
New Data on Early Bells from Florida. Southeastern Archeology 7:39-48.
Morse, Dan F.
Letter to the author dated July 10, 1991. On file at the Texas Historical
1991
Commission, Austin.
Morse, Dan F., and Phyllis A. Morse
1983

Archeology of the Central Mississippi Valley. Academic Press, New York.

1990

The Spanish Exploration of Arkansas. In: Columbian Consequences, Areheological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands East, Volume
2, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 197-210. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Morse, Phyllis A.
1981
Parkin, The 1978-79 Archeological Investigations of a Cross County, Arkansas
Site. Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series, No. 13, Fayetteville.
Murray, Katherine
Bioarcheology of the Parkin Site, Cross County, Arkansas. The Arkansas
1989
Archeologist 27/28:49-62.
National Park Service
1991
NationalTraiIStudy EnvironmentalAssessment, Coronado Expedition, Public
Review Draft. National Park Service, Denver Service Center.

Nickel, Helmut
Letter to the Author dated February 24, 1991. On file at the Texas Historical
1991
Commission, Austin.
Perttula, Timothy K.
1989

Contact and Interaction between Caddoan and European Peoples: The Historic
Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Records. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of
Washington, Seattle.

Peterson, Harold L.
1956

Arms and Armor in Colonial America 1526-1783. Stackpole, Harrisburg.

Ramenofsky, Ann F.
1987
Vectors of Death: The Archeology of European Contact. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Bruseth -- Artifacts of the de Soto Expedition

97

Schambach, Frank F.
1989
The End of the Trail: The Route of Hemando De Soto’s Army through
Southwest Arkansas and East Texas. The Arkansas Archeologist 27/28:9-33.
Simmons, Marc, and Frank Turley
1980
Southwestern Colonial Ironwork, The Spanish Blacksmithing Tradition from
Texas to California. Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa Fe.
Smith, Marvin T.
1987
Archeology ofA boriginal Culture Change in the Interior Southeast, Depopulation during the Early ttistoric Period. University of Florida Press, Gainesville.
Smith, Marvin T., and Mary Elizabeth Good
1982

EarlySixteenthCenturyGlassBeadsintheSpanishCoIonialTrade.Cottonlandia
Museum Publications, Greenwood, Mississippi.

Sudbury, Byron
A Sixteenth Century Spanish Colonial Trade Bead from Western Oklahoma.
1984
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 33:31-36.
Swanton, John R.
1939

Final Report of the United States De Soto Expedition Commission. 76th
Congress, 1st Session, House Document, no. 71. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C..

Thomas, David Hurst (Editor)
1990

Columbian Consequences, Archeological and Historical Perspectives on the
SpanishBorderlandsEast, Volume 2. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

Thurmond, J. Peter
1990

Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin Northeastern Texas and
Northwestern Louisiana. Studies in Archeology 5, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas.

Turner, Robert L.
1978
The Tuck Carpenter Site and Its Relation to Other Sites within the Titus Focus.
Bulletin of the Texas ArcheoIogical Society 49:1-110.
Vamer, John, and Jeanette Vamer (translators and editors)
1951

The Florida of the Inca. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Wedel, Waldo R.
1959
An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau ofAmerican Ethnology, Bulletin 174. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

