33

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

GUNS
by Jay C. Blaine and R. K. HARriS

Most of the features at the Gilbert Site produced parts of flintlock
guns and gunflints. The gun parts were made from iron or brass and
were manufactured in Europe as fro" as can be determined. Some of
the gunflints were European made, but most of them by far were
native made.
In the study of the firearms, authorative literature was used in an
attempt to search out reliably identified fusils (light muskets) and to
determine characteristics typical of given periods in England, France,
and Spain. Not all of the opinions published by authorities could be
used because contradictions were noted, sometimes within the work
of a single anthor. The observations used are those which seem
to hold true after examination of material from archeological sites,
independent research, and comparisons with published opinions.
The weapon parts described here all appear to be from smoothbore
flintlocks, the fusil or light musket (Figs. 26, 27) apparently being
the major class represented. The pa1~s were identified by comparison
with gun parts of known origin.
In some of the conclusions, reference will be made to the French
trade gun. No gun part described in this report can be positively said
to be of French manufacture, but both the historical record and
present typological knowledge suggest that many of them are of
French origin.
Many of the gun parts were cleaned of rust to look for makers’
marks or to attempt to determine original measurements; in some
eases, however, oxidation was so great that major cleaning was not
possible. Measurements made where extensive cleaning was done are
believed to be nearer to the original ones than those taken from parts
which could not be cleaned of rust.
Some of the gun parts were found in four caches as follows:
Cache No. 1, Feature 5: Cocks No. i, 2, 3, and 4, a sear, a mainspring, and a frizzen spring;
Cache No. 2, Feature 4: a cock, a ffizzen, and a frizzen spring;
Cache No. 3, Feature 4: a breech, a breech plug, and a frizzen;
Cache No. 4, Feature 8: Gunlocks No. 1, 2, and 3.
LOCK PLATES

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Features 4 and 5
Illustrations: Figure 28, e-f

34

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

2

"0

c

L

3

Y:

0

e,l

35

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

t:rlzze rl
/~

Fllishplln

coverg~7’°’;~iz:;~/~ock

plcLte

C
JCB

?IGURE 27.

Sketch showing the parts of a flintlock mechanism.

Lock Plate No. 1 (Fig. 28, f). This distal section of a lock plate
is broken at the mainspring screw hole, is flat in cross section, and
has a beveled edge. The ffizzen spring screw hole is countersunk on
the inside of the lock plate and shows no screw threads, indicating
the use of a hidden ffizzen screw. The lock plate is designed for a
removable flash pan.

36

FIGURE 28.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

Gun parts, a-d, £rizzens; e-f, lockplate.

Measurements were taken after major cleaning. The maximum width
of the lock plate fore section is 25 mm.
Lock Plate No. 2 (Fig. 28, e). This is a proximal section, broken
at the rear screw hole where a removable pan was once attached. It
is flat in cross section and has ronnded edges, the lower edge being
moderately curved.
It was attached with two screws. A screw hole for a tumbler bridle

EUROPEAN TRADE

37

GOODS

is present. There is no ledge, the tail of the pan having served as a
ledge. There is a center or upper lock screw hole where the pan tail
would be located inside the lock plate. No marking is visible on the
plate surface.
Measurements after major cleaning: maximum width, 27 ram.;
diameter of tumbler axle hole, 10 mm.
Remarks: Lock plate No. 2, probably manufactured between 1690
and 1740, is a rear section from a flintlock gunlock plate of good
quality. It does not fol!ow Hudson’s Bay Company’s specifications
for their "trade gun" gunlock.
The bridle lock was in use in England by 1660 on fine arms and
came into general use after 1700 except for lowest quality arms
(George, 1947: 12, 103). According to Gooding (1960: 93), "bridle
locks" were ordered in 1697 by Hudson’s Bay Company. The curvature of Lock Plate No. 2 would indicate it probably was manufactured
between 1690 and 1740 according to Peterson (1956: 36, PI. 38). The
lock plate is flat in cross section, and Gooding (1960: 85) states that
English trade guns used the "oval or rounded" form of lock plate from
the end of the 17th century on. Though the lock plate is broken at
the rear, the profile remaining doesn’t seem to allow room for a third
lock screw. By 1683 English civilian guns were using two screws to
attach the flint lock to the stock and Hudson’s Bay Company had to
specify three-hole round locks at that time (ibid.: 85, 93). Some feel
the use of a hidden frizzen-spring screw is an indication of a French
gun lock, but this trait by itself is not proof of origin (Hamilton,
1960a: 6-7).
FIIIZZENS

No. of Specimens: 8
Provenience: Feature t (3), Feature 2 (2), Feature 3 (1), Feature
4 (1), Feature 18 (1)
IUustrations: Figure 28, a-d
All of the frizzens are of the type with combined striking surface,
or "steel," and flashpan cover. The loci of measurements are shown
in Figure 28.
Frizzen No. 1 (Fig. 28, c). The steel is curved and has a rounded
top. There was no major cleaning.
Measurements: A, 38 mm.; B, 23 mm.; C, 9.4 mm.; D, 8 ram.
Frizzen No. 2. The steel is curved and has a rounded top. The
frizzen is broken at the pivot ann. The corners are eroded.
Measurements: A, 39 mm.; B, 23 mm.; C, 23q- mm.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Frizzen No. 3. The steel is curved (originally) and has a rounded
top. It appears that the fi’izzen screw had broken off in the fi’izzen
pivot arm, and punch marks indicate that an attempt to drive out the
broken screw was unsuccessful. Distortation of the frizzen suggests
that the exasperated repairman might finally have hit the pesky thing
a resounding whack in the middle and thrown it away.
Measurements made after major cleaning: A, 40 mm.; B, 23 ram.; C,
25 lnIn.; D, 7 mm.
Frizzen No. 4 (Fig. 28, a). The steel is curved and has a rounded
top. In general appearance this specimen resembles the three described
above but is heavier and would suggest a military frizzen. There was
no major cleaning.
Measurements: A, 46 ram.; B, 25 ram.; C, 27 mm.; D, 9 ram.
Frizzen No. 5 (Fig. 28, d). The steel is straight with partly
rounded top and is battered and eroded. The front of the frizzen
(opposite the striking surface) was formed fiat and has wide bevels.
It is trapezoidal in cross section. Traces of longitudinal grooves can
be seen on the striking surface. This fi’izzen appears to be fi’om a
miquelet type flintlock and is most likely of Spanish origin.
There was no major cleaning. Measurements: A, 33 mm.; B, 29 mm.;
C, 31 ram.; D, 13 ram.
Frizzen No. 6. The steel is curved with rounded top. There has
been no major cleaning.
Measurements: A, 38 ram.; B, 22 mm.; C, 24 ram.; D, 7 mm.
Frizzen No. 7 (Fig. 28, b). The steel is curved and has a rounded
top.
Measurements after major cleaning: A, 38 ram.; B, 24 mm.; C, 26
ram.; D, 8 mm.
Frizzen No. 8. The steel is curved and has a rounded top.
Measurements after major cleaning: A, 46 mm.; B, 25 mm.; C, 25
mm.; D, 7 ram.
Remarks: Three of the frizzens- Nos. 1, 2, and 6- are virtually
alike in size and form. According to the manufacturing standards of
the day, they probably would have been considered interchangeable.
They all may well have been made by the same manufacturer. Two
others- Nos. 3 and 7- are only slightly larger than the foregoing
and may have been used on the same size and type of weapon.
FRIZZEN SPRINGS

No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 3 (1), Feature 4 (2), Feature 5 (1), Feature
17 (1), Feature 20 (1)

39

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

d

FmURE 29. Gun parts, a-b, tumblers; c, tumbler bridle; d, sear spring;
e-f, sears; g-i, frizzen springs; j-],~, mainsprings; l-m, flashpans.
Illustrations: Figure 29, g-i
Frizzen Springs No. 1, 2, 4, and 5. These (Fig. 29, g, i) are not
notched for a bridle link and show no indication of use with an
antifriction device. They are designed for an exposed frizzen-spring
screw.
Frizzen Spring No. 3 (Fig. 29, h). Designed for a hidden frizzen-

40

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

spring screw, this specimen shows no indication of use with an
antifrietion device. Details indicate good quality workmanship.
Frizzen Spring No. 6. This spring, which had a hidden screw, shows
no evidence of use with an antifriction device.
Loci of frizzen sp~qng measurements:
A. Lower leaf: straight line distance from center of screw hole to
apex of outside bend.
B. Upper leaf: straight line distance from frizzen end of spring to
apex of outside bend.
C. Maximum width.
Measurements for the frizzen springs are as follows:
Spring No.
1
9,
3
4
5
6

33
35
38
33
33
33

A
mm..
ram.
ram.
ram.
ram.
mm.

B
43 mm.
43 mm.
49 ram.
43 mm.
42 ram.
43 mm.

10
9
10
10
9
10

C
mm.
ram.
ram.
ram.
ram.
mm.

Remarks: Frizzen Springs No. 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6 are comparable
in size and probably came from locks of similar size. Frizzen Spring
No. 3 is longer and may be from a larger lock or from one of higher
quality. Frizzen springs such as these evidently were in use prior
to 1785, and they continued to be used for several years after that
date, especially on military and poor quality locks (Held and Jenkins,
1957: 136; George, 1947: 116).
FLASHPANS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Features 4 and 5
Illustrations: Figure 29, 1-m
Flashpan No. I (Fig. 29, 1 ). This specimen is iron, is flat or shallow
V-shaped, and was removable from the lock plate. The flashpan was
secured to the lock plate by a tail with a screw hole at the rear
and by an oblique key surface at the front, with a flange on the
underside of the pan to contact the lock plate surface. There is no
provision on the pan for a frizzen bridle (or pan strap). The powder
trough has parallel sides, and there is a low flash shield, or fence, at
the rear of the pan.
Measurements after major cleaning: width (same as frizzen dimension "e"), 26 ram.; length from end of tail, or tang, to key surface,
37 mm.

41
EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

Flashpan No. 2 (Fig. 29, m). The description of this specimen is
generally the same as above. The tang screw is broken off in its
hole.
Measurements after major cleaning: width (same as frizzen dimension "c’), "24 ram.; length from end of tang to key surface, 40 ram.
Remarks: These flashpans exhibit none of the refinements that
were in general use on good quality flintlocks by 1785 (George, 1947:
114-115; Held and Jenkins, 1957: 136). Such refinements did not
usually appear on trade guns or military locks.
The Gilbert flashpans probably are from French trade guns. This
is in agreement with Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 39.139.3) who describe similar flashpans from the Womack Site and believe
them to be from French trade guns of a style in major use between
about 1720 and 1750.
TUMBLERS

No. of Specimens: g
Provenience: Features 1 and 5
Illustrations: Figure g9, a-b
Tumbler No. 1 (Fig. 29, a). This is an unbridled tumbler with
half: and full-cock notches. It was designed for use with a vertical
action sear and was keyed into the base of the cock. There is no
provision for a stirrup.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: tumbler axle
diameter, 7 mm.; squared end of tumbler axle across flats, 6 mm.;
length of squared end, 6 ram.
Tumbler No. 2 (Fig. 29, b). This specimen is the same shape as
the one described above. Its face is stamped VIII.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: tumbler axle
diameter, 7 mm.; squared end of tumbler axle across flats, 6 ram.;
length of squared end, 4 mm.
Remarks: These tumblers could be from good grade English guns
made prior to 1700, or they could be the unbridled form common to
lower quality locks made later than 1700 (George, 1947: 103). The
length of the squared portion of Tumbler No. 1 indicates that the cock
probably had a thick, round faee on the base.
TUMBLER BRIDLES

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 1
IUusCrations: Figure 29, c

42

TEXAS

ARCTIEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

This tumbler bridle has a graceful design which may be a clue to
French origin. One of the same style is shown in Denis Diderot’s
Encyclopedia, 1751-1765, illustrated in the article "Arquebusier" (Held
and Jenkins, 1957: Fig. 243).
MAINSPRINGS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Both from Feature 5
Illustrations: Figure 29, j-k
Mainspring No. 1 (Fig. 29, j). This specimen is an internal mainspring which is broken at the end of the lower leaf. The external
edges are beveled.
Measurements made after major cleaning: length of upper leaf
(straight-line distance from center of screw hole to apex of outside
bend), 39 mm.; maximum width, 11 m.; length of lower leaf to break,
72 mm.
Mainspring No. 2 (Fig. 29, k). This internal main spring has flat
edges. It is not designed for use with a tumbler stirrup.
Measurements after major cleaning: length of upper leaf, 33 mm.;
length of lower leaf, 73 mm.; maximum width, 10 mm.
NEAI/S

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Features 1 and 5
Illustrations: Figure 29, e-f
Sear No. 1 (Fig. 2.9, e). This is a horizontal pivot (vertical action)
sear with a pronounced back-rake on the trigger arm. The size and
shape indicate possible use in the same lock as Tumbler No. 1.
Sear No. 2 (Fig. 29, f). This is a horizontal pivot (vertical action)
sear with a pronounced back-rake on the trigger arm.
SEAtt

SPRINGS

No. of Specimens: 1
Prouenience: Feature 12
Illustrations: Figure 29, d
This sear spring was used with a vertical action sear.
Measurements: length of upper leaf (straight line distance from
center of screw hole to outside apex of bend), 22 ram.; length of
lower leaf (straight line distance from free end of spring to outside
apex of bend), 18 mm.

43

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

COCKS

No. of Specimens: 10
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 3 (1), Feature 4 (1), Feature
5 (5), Feature 6 (2)
Illustrations: Figures 30; 31, e-i
Except where noted, measurements were made after major cleaning.
Cock No. 1 (Fig. 30, a). This pistol-size cock has a wide comb
that is grooved for a tenon which projected from the missing upper
vise jaw. The cock base is flat and has beveled edges. The general
eurvature is sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced. There was no
major cleaning. A single engraved line borders the flat base of the
cock.
Measurements: A, 33 ram.; B, 64 mm.; comb width, 10 mm.
Cock No. 2 (Fig. 30, b). This cock has a wide, grooved comb and
a flat-faced base with beveled edges. The general curvature is
sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced. There was no major cleaning.
Measurements: A, 39 mm.; B, 72 mm.; comb width, 12 mm.
Cock No. 3 (Fig. 30, c). The comb is wide and grooved, the cock
base has a flat face with beveled edges; the gooseneek is not reinforeed. The general curvature is sharp, and a single engraved line
borders the flat base of the cock.
Measurements: A, 37 mm.; B, 71 ram.; comb width, 11 ram.
Cock No. 4 (Fig. 30, d). This cock has a narrow comb and a flatfaced base with beveled edges. The base is engraved with a singleline border, and there is a dim foliate design in the lower neck
area. The general curvature is sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 38 ram.; B, 73 mm.; comb width, 7 mm.
Cock No. 5 (Fig. 30, e). The only complete cock found at Gilbert,
this specimen has a narrow, tapered comb, a slotted upper vise jaw
that fits around the comb, and a vise screw with a slotted head. The
base has a flat face with beveled edges. The general curvature is
sharp, and the gooseneck is not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 37 mm.; B, 71 mm.; comb width, 7 mm.
Cock No. 6 (Fig. 31, e). The comb is wide and grooved. The
cock base has a flat face with beveled edges and is engraved with a
single-line border. The general curvature is sharp. The gooseneck is
not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 39 mm.; B, 73 mm.; comb width, 11 mm.
Cock No. 7 (Fig. 31, f). There is a slight step on the face of the
wide, grooved comb. The base has a flat face with beveled edges.

44

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

FIGURE 3 0. Gun cocks. In top row are front views, in bottom row side
views of the same specimens. Measurement loci shown at a.

The general curvature is sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 37 ram.; B, 70 ram.; comb width, 10 ram.
Cock No. 8 (Fig. 31, g). This cock has a wide, grooved comb and
a flat-faced base with beveled edges. The general curvature is extreme. The gooseneck is not reinforced. A single engraved line borders
the flat base of the cock.
Measurements: A, 34 mm.; B, 66 mm.; comb width, 14 mm.
Cock No. 9 (Fig. 31, h). The comb is wide and grooved. The cock
base has a flat face with beveled edges. The general curvature is
sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced.

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

45

FmuR~ 31. Gun cocks, a-c, upper vise jaws; d, vise screw; e-i, cocks. Second and bottom rows are front and side views respectively of the same specimens.
Measurements: A, 39 mm.; B, 76 mm.; comb width, 9 mm.
Cock No. 10 (Fig. 31, i). This cock has a wide comb but it is
not grooved. The base is flat-faced with beveled edges. The general
curvature is sharp. The gooseneck is not reinforced.
Measurements: A, 38 mm.; B, 66 mm.; comb width, 11 ram.
Iternarks: Hamilton (1960d: 154), quoting A. N. Kennard, states

46

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

that his cock types 1 and 9. (illustrated in his Figure 70) are typical
of the English cocks of the late 18th century. These cocks have a
flat face on the base with beveled edges, sharply curved necks, and
narrow combs. Cocks 4 and 5 from Gilbert appear to fit this description. However, it must be noted that no late 18th-eentury material
has been identified at this site. If they are English in origin they
apparently do not represent the English trade gun, for Gooding ( 1960:
85) states that locks for English trade guns were round from the end
of the 17th century to the end of the 19th century. Since it was
customary to use rounded base cocks on round locks, it would appear
that none of the cocks from Gilbert represents the English trade gun.
It is also unlikely that high grade late 18th-century English weapons
are present, for none of the ornamentation held to be typical of the
etass can be identified. For these reasons it is doubtful that Cocks
4 and 5 should be classed as late 18th century or as of English origin.
The balance of the disassembled cocks (Cock No. 10 is included
despite the absence of a groove) appear to fit Hamilton’s (1960d:
Fig. 71), eoek types, 4, 5, and 6, which are stated to be most popular
in this form in the mid-18th century. Hamilton also notes they can be
English, French, or from the European !ow countries.
It appears unlikely that the cocks from this site were manufactured
in England. As noted, the typical English trade gun is not represented in either group of cocks because the piano-convex co& base
is absent. Concerning better grade English locks and cocks, Hayward
(1963: 9,00) notes that the rounded surface was used by the English
.makers beginning in the last quarter of the 17th century and was not
generally superseded by the flat-faced units until the 1770’s. This persistence in English style is also confirmed by Joel Shiner’s research
at Fort Frederiea on St. Simons Island, Georgia (Shiner, ms.) The
thirteen fusil- and pistol-size cocks found there are all piano-convex.
They can be dated at approximately 1743 by Manuey’s (1959: 49, 51)
description of the blacksmith shop where this type was found, and
they are evidently of English origin. Hayward (1963: 49) has stated
that the French style in fashionable guns called for the flat cock between about 1700 and about 1750. Later, between about 1750 and
the French Revolution, high style accommodated both flat and convex
forms. ¯
Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 318-39.0, 332) have stated
a ease for the reflection of high French fashion in the design of guns
used in the French trade. They have also noted the influence of
French design on continental European gunsmiths, an influence which
apparently did not extend so strongly to the 18th-century English gun-

47

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

smiths, including those producing conimon-grade guns.
The group of cocks from Gilbert conforms to French fashion in gun
design of the mid-18th century, and they appear most likely to represent guns used in the French trade of that period.
Cock UrPER VISE JAws

No. of Specimens: 3
Provenience: All from Feature 5
Illustrations: Figure 31, a-e
Upper Vise ]ate No. 1 (Fig. 31, a). This jaw is notched to fit
around the comb, and the notch contains a step.
Upper Vise Jaw No. 2 (Fig. 31, b). The ventral face is slightly concave. A shallow notch designed to fit around the comb has a step in it.
Upper Vise Jaw No. 3 (Fig. 31, c). This specimen is so badly
eroded that details of its original form cannot be determined.
COCK

VISE

SCREWS

No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Features 5 and 7
Illustrations: Figure 31, d
Specimen No. 1. This screw has a slotted head. The threads have
been stripped.
Measurements: length, 44 ram.
Specimen No. 2. This specimen consists of the slotted head portion
only, the threaded part of the screw having broken off.
FLINTLOCK

GUNLOCKS

No. of Specimens: 3
,Provenience: Feature 8 (all three found together in a cache)
Illustrations: Figures 32, 33, 34
Because of severe oxidation only limited cleaning was attempted on
the gunlocks. Some areas were cleaned of the major rust build-up
where pertinent details and measurements were needed, but such
cleaning was halted at the estimated original surface. Measurements
and descriptive information for the gunlocks are given in Table 1.
Gunlock No. I (Fig. 32). The upper cock jaw, cock-jaw screw, frizzen, and frizzen screw are missing from this specimen. There is a
brass shim in the lower jaw screw hole. This consists of a half
cylinder of thin brass and appears to be an attempt by an Indian
to repair a stripped jaw screw or screw hole. The front lock screw
is broken off in its hole.

48

FIcue.~ 32.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Gunlock No. 1. Top, interior, and exterior views.

The tumbler has half- and full-cock notches and is engaged by a
vertically acting sear. There are no antifrietion devices on the frizzen spring or between mainspring and tumbler. The general description of the flashpan is the same as for Flashpan No. 1. The sear arm
does not angle back (no ’q3aekrake").

EUROPEAN TBADE GOODS

FIGURE 33.

49

Gunlock No. 2. Top, interior, and exterior views.

Gunlock No. 2 (Fig. 33). The upper cock jaw and cock-jaw screw
are missing from this gunlock as is the upper tumbler bridle screw.
The tumbler has half- and full-cock notches and is engaged by a
vertically acting sear. The sear arm has no backrake. The lock has no
antifriction devices between the frizzen and frizzen spring or between
the mainspring and the tumbler. Bridles are present on both frizzen
and tumbler. The frizzen "steel" is curved and has a rounded top with

50

FI~uRz 34.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Gunlock No. 3. Top, interior, and exterior views.

the front formed in two major longitudinal facets. Some traces of
brass appear in the rust on the upper front of the "steel." The tumbler
bridle resembles Bridle No. 1 but is larger and has a brace extending
from the inside surface of the lower extension to the lock plate.
Gunlock No. 3 (Fig. 34). The frizzen, frizzen screw, and cock-jaw
screw are missing from this gunlock. An upper cock jaw placed inside

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

51

the lock has been hung over the sear trigger arm by means of the
cock-jaw screw hole. This upper cock jaw is badly rusted and no tongue
can be detected on the back edge, but it is definitely intended for
use with a wide-comb cock. The upper jaw is concave on the under
surface as viewed from the side. The upper part of the cock is bent
toward the inside of the lock.
The mechanical details of this lock are the same as those for Lock
No. i.

Remarks: Side Plates No. 1, 2, and 10 have the same side, or lock,
screw hole measurements as Gunlock No. 1. Frizzen No. 3 would
probably fit Gunlock No. 1. Frizzen No. 7 would fit Gunlock No. 3.
Flashpan No. 1 would fit either of those gunlocks as would Flashpan
No. 2. Cocks No. 2, 6, 9, and 10 would fit either lock. Sear Spring
No. 1 would fit Lock No. 3. Various other parts would fit Locks 1 and
3 with only minor modification. In short, we have many parts apparently stripped from gunlocks similar in size and style to Gunlocks
No. 1 and 3.
The curvature of the lockplates would appear to indicate a pre1770 date for Gunlocks No. 1 and 3, according to Peterson (1956: 36,
pl. 88). The lockplates and cock bases are flat with beveled edges;
the combs are wide with central grooves; the flashplans are shallow
and faeeted underneath. Only two lock or side screws were used. These
details and others have been discussed previously in this report, and
at present it appears that Gunlocks i and 3 are typical of fusils used
in the French trade about 1750.
Gunlock No. 2 presents an enigma. The cock seems a bit short
for the gunlock and may be a replacement. As noted, the cock has a
narrow ungrooved comb, and the base has a flat face with beveled
edges. In the section on cocks, two generally similar specimens, Nos.
5 and 4, are discussed and reasons given for not automatically accepting a late 18th centreT English origin for them at this site. In fact,
except for the lack of a slight "step" on the front of the comb, these
three cocks can also be said to resemble those of French military guns
dating as early as 1728 (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1728, Modele 1733,
ModeIe 1746). It appears quite possible that some nonmilitary locks
may also have been manufactured with this simplified comb; possibly
some of them appeared in the French trade during this and later
periods. Also arguing against a late 18th century date is the fact that
the curve of the bottom edge of the lock plate indicates a pre-1770
date (Peterson, 1956: pl. 38). The presence of a pan strap (frizzen
bridle) as well as a tmnbler bridle, generally indicates a post-1700

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

52

date (ibid.: 35). We know that the English trade gunlock was fastened
to the gunstock by three screws during this period (Hanson, 1955:
36). However, such gunlocks were round in cross section (Gooding,
1960: 85) and Gunlock No. 3, while it does have three side screw
holes, is flat in cross section. In addition, it would be uncommon for
a pan strap to appear on an English trade gun-lock until about 1820
(Hanson, 1955: 36).
In short, it is the third screw hole that appears to be the major
crux of our problem. Without it, this gunlock could be considered
as generally best reflecting French design of good to high quality
during the period assigned. However, we have not thus far been able
to detect use of the third side screw in connection with 18th century
French gun design.
TABLE 1.
Characteristics of gunlocks.
Gunlock
No. 1
Lock plate proper
Cross section
Flat with beveled edges
Bottom edge-moderate curve
Two lockscrew holes
Three lockscrew holes
Location of center (or upper) hole behind
mainspring ledge
Location of center (or upper) hole in
mainspring ledge
Frizzen spring screw hole exposed
Flashpan: Flat "V"
Pan removable from lock plate
Frizzen
Curved
Bridled (strap on pan)
Not bridled
Frizzen Spring
Notched for frizzen bridle
(or pan strap)
Not notched for bridle link
Frizzen spring screw hidden
Frizzen spring screw exposed
Tumbler
Bridled
Not bridled
Cocks
Wide comb with groove
Narrow comb with no groove
Base: flat face with beveled edges
General curvature: sharp
Neck style: gooseneck (not reinforced)

Gunlock Gunlock
No. 3
No. 2

x
x
x
-

x
x
x

x
x
x
-

X

--

X

x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x

--

X

--

x

x
-

x

x
x

x
x

x
x
-

x

x
-

x

x
x
x
x

"--

X

x
x
x
x

x
x
x

53

EUROPEAN TIRADE GOODS

FIGURE 35. Gun parts, a-d, screws; e-f, lugs; g-J/~, ramrod guides; o, trigger; p, trigger plate; q, trigger assembly.
TRIGGER

ASSEMBLIES

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 7
Illnstrations: Figure 35, q
This complete trigger assembly, including the trigger, tligger plate,
and trigger pin, is intact and maintains the same relationship of one
part to another as when it was mounted in the stock. The trigger plate
is iron, with the trigger slot centered laterally. Without major cleaning, the muzzle (upper) end is 4 turn. thick. It has a lip projecting

TEXAS

54

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

from the bottom, or ventral, surface forward and a threaded hole
12 ram. from the lip edge. This plate tapers to 2 mm. in thickness at
the butt (lower) end.
Measurements: length, 61 mm.; width, 18 ram.
TRIGGERS

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 5
Illustrations: Figure 35, o
This trigger is similar to the one in the assembly described above.
TRIGGER PLATES

No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 6
Illustrations: Figure 35, p
This trigger plate is made of iron. The trigger slot is offset laterally
to the left in ventral view with muzzle end up. A threaded hole is
present in the upper, or muzzle, end. The plate is beveled toward the
inner surface.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: length, 62 ram.;
width, 14 mm. This specimen is 3 mm. thick at the muzzle end and
tapers to 1 ram. at the butt end. The hole is 6 ram. from the end.
SCREWS

No. of Specimens: 11
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 2 (2), Feature 3 (2), Feature
4 (1), Feature 5 (2), Feature 6 (1), Feature 20 (1)
Ilhtstrations: Figure 35, a-d
Screw No. 1. This is a side- or lock-plate screw which was used to
fasten the gunlock to the stock. It was not cleaned.
Measurements: length, 44 ram.; head diameter, 11 mm.
Screw No. 2. This side- or lock-plate screw was not cleaned.
Measurements: length, 42 ram.; head diameter, 11 ram.
Screw No. 3. This is a side- or lock-plate screw with a wedge-shaped,
threaded end. It was cleaned.
Measurements: length, 47 ram.; head diameter, 12 ram.
Screw No. 4 (Fig. 35, a). This tang screw is beveled under the head
and was countersunk into the tang. It passed down into a trigger plate
like the one described above and like the one on the complete trigger
assembly.

55

EUBOPEAN TRADE GOODS

Measurements: length, 46 mm.; head diameter, 10 ram.
Scret~, No. 5. This is a side- or lock-plate screw.
Measurements: length, 44 ram.; head diameter, 11 mm.
Scrmv No. 6. This lock screw was for securing a sear, an unbridled
frizzen, or a tumbler blidle.
Scretv No. 7. This lock screw probably was used on an unbridled
frizzen or a bridled tumbler.
Screw No. 8 (Fig. 35, d). This wood screw has the upper head surface rounded and the lower head surface beveled for countersinking.
This screw is suitable for securing a butt plate (George, 1947: 104).
Measurements: length, 28 ram.; head diameter, 11 mm.
Screw No. 9 (Fig. 35, c). This wood screw has a rounded upper
head surface.
Measurements: length, 25 ram.; head diameter, 8 mm.
Scrmv No. 10 (Fig. 35, b). This is a wood screw with rounded upper
head surface and beveled lower head surface. It is suitable for securing a butt plate to the stock.
Measurements: length, 36 ram.; head diameter, 9 ram.
Screw No. I1. This is a side- or lock-plate screw.
Measurements: length, 42 mm.; head diameter, 12 mm.
PINS

No. of Specimens: 2
Prouen.ience: Feature 1 (2)
Pin No. 1. This specfinen is cylindrical and has one end flattened.
It is bent. It probably was used to fasten a fitting (trigger guard,
barrel, etc.) to the stock by insertion through a perforated tongue, or
it may have been a pivot pin for a trigger.
Pin No. 2. This pin is cylindrical and was probably used to fasten a
fitting to the stock or to serve as pivot pin for a trigger.
Measurements: length, 38 ram.
LUGS
No. of Specimens: 4
Provenience: Feature 1 (2), Feature 4 ( 1 ), Feature 12 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 35, e-f
Two or three of these lugs (also called pin loops or wire loops)
were soldered onto, or set into, the lower surface of a barrel. Iron pins
passed through the holes in the lugs-and through the wood of the
stock on either side-fastened barrel and stock together.

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

RAI~IIAOD GUIDES

No. of Specimens: 16
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 2 (2), Feature 3 (4), Feature
4 (4), Feature 6 (1), Feature 7 (2), Feature 17 (1), Feature 18 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 35, g-n
Ramrod Guide No. 1. This is a lateral half of an intermediate or
upper guide made of sheet brass. In the center of the flange area is a
hole for pinning the guide to the stock.
Measurements: length, 28 ram.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 2. This guide is similar to the one described
above.

Measurements: length, 24 ram.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 3. This intermediate or upper ramrod guide is
made of iron and is flanged at the upper edges. There was no major
cleaning.
Measurements: length, 36 mm.; outside diameter, 13 mm.; thickness,
1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 4 (Fig. 35, g). This is an intermediate or upper
ramrod guide made of brass. It is tubular with two grooves filed, or
stamped, parallel to the edges on each end. There is a flange with a
centrally located hole for pinning to the stock.
Measurements: length, 20 mm.; outside diameter, 12 mm.; thickness,
less than 0.5 mm.
Ramrod Guide No. 5 (Fig. 35, i). This is an intermediate or upper
ramrod guide made of brass which may be described in the same way
as No. 4.
Measurements: length, 25 ram.; outside diameter, 11 ram.; thickness,
less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 6. This guide of sheet brass is broken and flattened. There is a pinning hole in the one remaining lip.
Measurements: length, 23 ram.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 7 (Fig. 35, m). Tubular and made of iron, this
guide is the terminal or lower guide used at the ramrod point of entry
to the stock, having a tail or finial on the lower end. Triple grooves
parallel the edges on each end. It has a flange with a centrally located
hole for pinning to the stock.
Measurements after major cleaning: length, 87 rnm.; outside diameter, 12 mm.; average thickness, 1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 8 (Fig. 35, n). Made of cast brass and tubular,
this is a terminal, or lower, guide used at the ramrod point of entry
to the stock. The finial is broken off. The flange is pierced for pinning.

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

57

Four longitudinal facets extend 20 mm. downward from the upper, or
muzzle, end. Grooves are present at both ends of the faceted area.
Measurements: length to break, 32 ram.; outside diameter, 10 ram.;
average thickness, 1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 9 (Fig. 35, h). Tubular and formed from thin
sheet brass, this is an upper or intermediate guide. Five small (2 ram.
wide), longitudinal, flat surfaces on the lower tube body extending to
within 1 ram. of the ends are apparently a result of the filing technique used on the tube. The upper edges are flanged and pierced for
pin fastening to the gun stock.
Measurements: length, 24 ram.; outside diameter, 11 mm.; thickness,
less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. I0. This upper or intermediate guide, originally
tubular but now flattened, was formed from thin sheet brass with
the upper edges brought together in a flange and centrally pierced
for pinning. A double groove parallels each end.
Measurements: length, 25 mm.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 11 (Fig. 35, k). This complete specimen is
virtually identical to No. 8. The plain finial tapers evenly to a point.
Measurements: length, 61 ram.; outside diameter, 11 rnm.; average
thickness, 1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 12. This fragment, made of iron, is probably
half of an upper or intermediate guide.
Measurements after no major cleaning: length, 34 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 13 (Fig. 35, 1). This complete terminal, or
lower, guide made of cast brass is flanged and centrally pierced for
pinning, l~emains of the iron pin are still in place. This guide is
similar to Guides No. 8 and 11 except that it is shorter in the tubular
portion.
Measurements: length, 62 ram.; outside diameter, 10 ram.; average
thickness, 1 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 14. Tubular and formed from thin sheet brass,
this is an upper or intermediate guide. The upper edges are flanged
and pierced for pinning. There is a groove parallel to each end.
Measurements: length, 24 mm.; outside diameter, 11 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 15. Flanged and pierced for pinning, this is an
upper or intermediate guide formed from sheet brass. It has been
flattened.
Measurements: length, 22 ram.; thickness, less than 0.5 ram.
Ramrod Guide No. 16 (Fig. 35, j). Made of iron, this intermediate
or upper guide is tubular with the upper edges flanged and centrally
pierced for pinning.

58

TEXAS

a

At/CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

I

FI6URE 36. Gun parts, a, b, d, e, barrels (total length of d not shown);
c, breech plug.

Measurements after no major cleaning: length, 30 ram.; approximate thickness, 1 ram.
Remarks: The ramrod guides found at Gilbert were probably
used in a combination of three to the gun- one upper guide, one
intermediate guide, and one lower or terminal guide. None of the
guides is "fluted," "ribbed," or marked in the manner of those used
on later Northwest guns.

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

59
BARRELS

No. of Specimens: 23 fragments
Provenience: Feature 1 (1), Feature 2 (3), Feature 3 (7), Feature
4 (4), Feature 5 (3), Feature 12 (2), Feature 14 (1), Feature 1S
(1), Feature 20 (1)
Illuscrations: Figure 36, a, b, d, e
Four of the barrel fragments are octagonal, 18 are round, and
one is of indeterminate shape. Most have been battered or flattened,
and one appears to have been reshaped into a stake. Only those
fragments which retain significant features are described in detail.
Barrel No. I (Fig. 36, a). This round muzzle section has a perforated fi’ont barrel lug soldered or sweated to it. The base of the
fi’ont sight blade, apparently silver-soldered iron, is set two inches
back from the nmzzle. The location of the barrel lug-centered 1.63
in. from the muzzle- indicates a full-stocked weapon.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: caliber at muzzle
approximately .60, or 20 gauge.
Barrel No. 2 (Fig. 36, d). This is an octagonal breech section
with the breech plug intact. The flats extend approximately 190 mm.
then merge gradually with the round part of the barrel. An exception
is the flat on top of the breech which extends the entire length of the
remaining barrel section. There is a sighting groove two inches long
on the breech-plug tang and rear of the breech. A slightly undercut
flat for a barrel mounting lug is filed into the undersurface of the
barrel, centered 195 mm. forward of the back of the breech. The end
of the breech-plug tang is triangular with convex sides, and the tang
screw hole is countersunk into the external surface. A touch hole is
present on the right side of the breech.
No major cleaning was attempted.
Measurements: diameter across breech at flats, 30 ram.; bore caliber .55, or 20 gauge.
Barrel No. 3 (Fig. 36, e). This breech section is octagonal in cross
section, with the bottom three flats poorly defined. Straight lines have
been engraved adjacent to, and parallel to, the four ridges bordering
the upper three flats. The touchhole is brass-lined.
Measurements were made after major cleaning: diameter across
breech at flats, 29 ram.; bore caliber .58, or 24 gauge.
Barrel No. 4 (Fig. 36, b). The barrel section which was originally
round has been partly flattened. A barrel mounting lug is in place on
the underside. One end of the section is slightly smaller in diameter

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

60

than the rest of the barrel. The smaller area is bordered by a welldefined shoulder.
BI~EECH PLUGS

No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 3 (2), Feature 4 (1), Feature 5 (2), Feature

ii (i)
Illustrations: Figure 36, c
Breech Plug No. 1. This is the tang end of a breech plug broken
across the tang screw hole. The screw hole is countersunk and has no
threads. The tang end is square.
Breech Plug No. 2 (Fig. 36, e). This piece has a lateral hole through
the rear body behind the screw portion. The screw hole in the tang
is countersunk and shows no threads. The tang is battered on one
upper edge and is bent at an angle, apparently the result of hammering to loosen and unscrew it from the breech. The tang terminates in a small, narrow-necked, simple finial.
Measurements made after major cleaning: overall length, 69 ram.;
maximum diameter, 29 mm. The threaded portion indicates use in a
bore of approximately .58 caliber, or 24 gauge.
Breech Plug No. 3. This specimen is broken across the tang at the
screw hole, which is countersunk and shows no threads. There is a
lateral hole through the rear body behind the screw portion.
Measurements were made after major cleaning. Maximum diameter
indicates use with a breech of approximately 9 mm. diameter. The
threaded portion indicates use in a bore of approximately .58 caliber,
or 24 gauge.
Breech Plug No. 4. This is the tang end of a breech plug that is
broken across the countersunk, unthreaded tang screw hole. It is
triangular with the lateral edges convex.
Breech Plug No. 5. This tang end of a breech plug, broken across
the screw hole, is of the same shape as - though slightly larger than Breech Plug No. 4. Its screw hole is not countersunk.
Breech Plug No. 6. This breech plug is broken across the tang at
the screw hole. The screw hole has no evidence of threads or of being
countersunk. The top of the tang is covered with a brass plate on
which some engraved design can be discerned despite considerable
battering and corrosion. There are three straight lines parallel to each
side of the tang, and between the two outer lines are remnants of a
cyma-like pattern. The tang has been hammered on one upper edge
and is bent in the direction that this part rotates to unscrew from
the breech.

EU~OPEANTRADE GOODS

61

Measurements were made after major cleaning. The threaded
portion indicates use in a bore of approximately .55 caliber, or 28
gauge.
Remarks: Breech sections No. 1, 9., 12, and 13 all measure more
than an inch in diameter across the thickest part, from flat to flat.
According to Hamilton (1960c: 126) breeches of that diameter
might be either from 18th-century trade guns or from 18th- or 19thcentury military muskets. None of the bores measured match those
of flintlock French or English military muskets, or of Colonial smoothbores (Hamilton, 1960e: 208). Typical Spanish guns have characteristics which identify them rather easily, and only one part of such
a weapon, a ffizzen, has been found at the Gilbert Site.
If these are, indeed, 18th-century trade guns, it seems likely they
were manufactured after the earlier part of the century. The smaller
bores (.44, .50, and .53 caliber) which Hamilton believes may characterize French trade guns of the late 17th and early 18th centuries are
not present here. Bores of .55 caliber are present, and Hamilton
(1960c: 129; 1960e: 208) believes this caliber may represent progression towards the .58 caliber and .62 caliber bores common to
trade guns by the 19th century. The 25 mm. diameters of the breech
areas would also appear to rule out the 19th-century Northwest
gun which has not been found, thus far, to exceed one inch across
the flats. (Hamilton, 1960c: 127)
These breech sections would seem to be from French or English
trade guns, probably dating near 1750. The breech plugs indicate by
their measurements that they were used with breeches of the same
dimensions and bores as those previously described, and the same
conclusions should hold true except for Breech Plug No. 5, which is
probably from a pistol. All of the tangs are designed to receive a
screw that passed downward into the trigger plate. Hanson (1955:
16) states that all early Northwest guns have the tang screws coming
from below.
Blna"

PLATES

No. of Specimens: 20
Provenience: Feature 1 (4), Feature 2 (3), Feature 3 (2), Feature
4 (1), Feature 5 (6), Feature 7 (1), Feature 8 (1), Feature i2 (1),
Feature 18 (1)
Illustrations: Figure 37
All the butt plates found at the Gilbert Site are made of cast brass
except Nos. 18 and 20 which are made of wrought iron.

62

FIGURE 37.

TEXAS

Butt plates.

ARCHEOLq)CICAL

SOCIETY

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

Butt Plate No. 1

63

(Fig. 37, h). This specimen is broken at the

toe of the plate and in the final section. The edges of the plate proper
are beveled; the plate is convex on the exterior surface and concave
on the interior, the interior surface showing marks that indicate
hammering was used to aid in contouring the plate. The portion of
the tang remaining is engraved with three parallel lines and a row
of marks resembling tiny arrowheads. A series of triangular marks
is based upon the center line. The center portion of the plate is engraved with an unstrung bow, arrow, quiver, and club. This type of
butt plate was usually attached to the stock by a countersunk screw
in the toe and a tongue and pin in the finial pol~ion. Both of these
sections are missing. The treatment of the edges indicates that the
finial was probably inlaid flush with the top of the stock, or comb.
Measurements: maximmn width, 46 mm.
Butt Plate No. 2 (Fig. 37, n). This toe section was partially cut
through from each lateral edge and then broken off. The exterior is
convex, the interior concave. The edges are beveled. Contouring hammer marks are present on the inside surface. The piece has oxidized
until it is ahnost black. It is stamped with a crown over an 1~.
Butt Plate No. 3 (Fig. 37, b). This finial, with a tongue for pin
fastening, is broken at the tang. The exterior surface is convex, the
interior surface concave.
Butt Plate No. 4 (Fig. 37, g). This finial, with a perforated tongue
for pin fastening, is broken at the tang. Engraved parallel lines along
the borders end in scrolls.
Butt Plate No. 5 (Fig. 37, e). This plate is broken at the tang
and below a beveled screw hole in the corner of the right angle bend
between the tang and the plate proper. The plate is convex on the
exterior sin-face and concave on the interior. The interior surface
shows marks that indicate hammering to aid in contouring the plate.
The edges of the plate are beveled. The tang was probably inlaid
flush with the comb of the stock. Three parallel engraved lines border
the tang, and an unstrung bow, arrow, quiver, and clnb are engraved
in the center of the tang. This plate was probably fastened with a
tongue and pin on the finial, a screw set flush in the heel, and probably
a second flush screw in the missing toe.
Measurements: width, 44 mm.; screw hole diameter, 10 ram.
Butt Plate No. 6. This toe section is broken through the lower screw
hole. The screw hole is beveled. The section is convex on the exterior surface and concave on the interior surface; the edges are
beveled. Hammer marks are present on the interior surface.
Butt Plate No. 7. This section of a butt plate has the heel and toe

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sections missing. It has beveled edges, is convex on the exterior,
and is concave on the interior. On the interior are marks which
indicate hammering to form.
Measurements: width, 46 ram.
Butt Plate No. 8 (Fig. 37, i, m). This plate is broken at the finial
on the tang. It is concavo-convex with beveled edges, and the exterior
concave surface shows the effects of hammering to aid in contouring
the plate. Engraved parallel lines which terminate in scrolls decorate
the border of the tang, and in the center is engraved an unstrung bow,
a quiver, and two dubs. There is a countersunk screw hole in the
toe of the plate. The plate was probably fastened with a flush or
round-head screw at the hole and a tongue and pin on the missing
finial. The toe is stamped with a crown over an R.
Measurements: width, 44 mm.; screw hole diameter, 10 mm.
Butt Plate No. 9 (Fig. 37, c). This finial is broken at the tang.
The interior is flat, the exterior convex. A tongue pierced by a single
hole is molded onto the undersurface. The finial is similar in form
and engraved design to Finial No. 3.
Butt Plate No. I0 (Fig. 37, 1). This finial is broken across the midsection of the plate proper. The edges are beveled, and the plate is
concavo-convex with hammer marks on the interior concave surface.
The toe section contains a crude, five-sided hole in the proper location
for a fastening screw.
Measurements: width, 44 ram.
Butt Plate No. 11 (Fig. 37, f). This finial is broken at the tang.
Convex on the exterior and concave on the interior, it is engraved
with a design similar to the one on Butt Plate No. 3.
Butt Plate No. 12. This finial is cut and broken at midsection.
The edges are beveled. Part of a countersunk screw hole is present.
Butt Plate No. 13 (Fig. 37, j). Broken at the base of the finial and
across the plate, this butt plate is concavo-convex and has beveled
edges. The tang is engraved with three single lines paralleling each
border that terminate in scrolls at the upper end. There is a double
set of triangular marks along the inner lines. The central element
consists of a quiver, an unstrung bow, an arrow, and a club. The
lower plate area is covered with light peck marks.
Measurements: width, 44 mm.
Butt Plate No. I4. This engTaved finial section is broken off at
one end and has been bifacially filed to a point at the other so as to
produce an arrow point.
Butt Plate No. 15. This piece is broken in the tang and in the body

EUROPEAN TI~ADE GOODS

65

below the heel. It is eoncavo-eonvex, and its edges are beveled. Corrosion is severe, but faint elements of an engraved design can be discerned. An engraved single line upon which is based a row of
triangular marks parallels each edge of the tang. Engraved in the
center of the tang are a quiver, an arrow, a bow, and perhaps a club.
Measurements: width, 41 mm.
Butt Prate No. i6 (Fig. 37, k). This is a piano-convex finial section
broken across the neck of the finial. A tongue molded on the under
surface is broken through the pin hole. The end of the finial was engraved with a design which is probably a simplified acanthus leaf.
Butt Plate No. I7. This is a finial section that is broken at both
ends. A tongue with a hole for pin fastening is present on the lower
surface. Each side is bordered by three engraved straight lines with
an elliptical form engraved in the center.
Butt Plate No. 18. This tang section, broken at the finial and in
the heel, is made of iron. It is convex on the exterior surface and
concave on the interior. A slightly raised ridge crosses the tang just
below the break at the finial. Rust damage has obliterated any engraving that may have been present
Measurements: width, 39 ram.
Butt Plate No. 19 (Fig. 37, d). This is a tang and finial section
that is broken at each end. The finial area is shaped and engraved i~
a fashion similar to Butt Plate No. 3. A double set of parallel lines
borders each edge, and, in the finial neck and tang area, a line of
triangular marks is strung along the inside line. The central tang area
was engraved with a military trophy design of drum and banners.
A molded tongue under the neck of the finial is broken through
the pin hole. The tang is concavo-convex and the lateral edges are
slightly undercut.
Butt Plate No. 20 (Fig. 37, a). A tang and finial section made of
iron, this specimen is broken or rusted through across the heel area.
The entire section is eoneavo-convex. There is a countersunk screw
hole in the tang.
Measurements: width, 46 ram.; screw hole diameter, 8 mm.
Remarks: In regard to decoration it is tempting to assume that
the engraved designs of bows, arrows, quivers, and elubs always have
a special connotation where encountered on gun parts from Indian
sites. Russell (1957: 113, 114) illustrates an early 19th-eentury English
trade gun by P. Bond with two such designs (one appears to incorporate a pipe). Hamilton (1960e: 140, item 3, row 1) shows a
design of bow, arrow, and quiver on a butt plate from a Little Osage

66

TEXAS AlqCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

site occupied from 1730 to 1775. Maxwell and Binford (1961: 101,
109,) illustrate a lock plate and a side plate from Fort Michilimackinac that are engraved with bow, arrow, and quiver. During the
first half of the 18th century some English sporting guns were deeorated with the huntsman’s bow, a sheaf of arrows, and sometimes a
club (George, 1947: 108, 153). Concerning the use of this general
motif by the French, a bow and quiver form part of the decoration
illustrated on Plate No. 6 of a French pattern book engraved by
Claude Simonin and published in Paris in 1685 (Hayward, 1963: P1.
91). The French pattern book of De Lacollombe, first published
about 1705 and again in 1730, shows a design combining an unstrung
bow, an arrow, and a club (,ibid.: P1. 93). Harris, Harris, Blaine, and
Blaine (1965: Fig. 16E) illustrate a bow, quiver, and clubs on a
butt plate from the Womack Site.
These data suggest that the earlier use of such decoration was not
dictated by demands of the Indian trade and, furthermore, that both
English and French gunmakers utilized the design. The design does
appear, however, on five butt plates and two side plates from the
Gilbert Site, which suggests that it was a major decorative motif oll
guns used in the French trade around the mid-18th centreT.
The butt-plate finials No. 3, 9, 11, and 13 all show a definite similarity to one in the pattern book of De Laeollombe (Hayward, 1963:
P1. 93). Although this particular finial pattern was available as early
as about 1705, there are no specimens of this design noted from
either the Angola Site or the Womack Site, both of which have
yielded gun parts thought to date before 1730 as well as later trade
material (Harris et al., 1965: 338, 340). All this suggests that buttplate finials bearing a bow-arrow-club design were rarely, if ever, put
on French trade guns prior to 1730. The pre-1730 butt plates from
the Angola Site, incidentally, are 6 or 7 ram. wider in the lower section
of the plate than the butt plates from Gilbert.
A strong resemblance in outline may be noted between the buttplate finials from the Gilbert Site and those of the 1733 model French
cavalry musketoon (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1773). Hamilton (1960c:
120, Fig. 52)illustrates a similar finial from a Little Osage site in
Missouri known to have been occupied between 1730 and 1775. This
tang and finial section is also engraved with a military trophy as is
specimen No. 19 from the Gilbert Site. A butt-plate finial similar
to the ones under discussion has been reported from Fort Miehilimackinac by Maxwell and Binford (1961: 104, Fig. 18a).
Butt-plate finials of this style, then, appear regularly around the

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

67

mid-18th century on sites where French trade is indicated. Designs
of military trophies and scenes of the chase were commonly used as
gun decorations in Continental Europe and England and do not by
themselves offer good evidence of origin.
Butt Plate No. 20 may be English. The finial itself resembles in
outline some of those from Fort Frederica on St. Simon’s Island,
Georgia, illustrated and described by Shiner (ms.). A butt-plate
tang from the Vinson Site in Limestone County, Texas- similar to
the Fort Frederica specimens- is believed to be fi’om an English
fusil dating from the 1740-1770 period. The English light service
smoothbore of the mid-18th century apparently shared some
characteristics with the Northwest gun intended for Indian ta’ade. It
must be noted, however, that the only resemblance the specimen
fi’om Gilbert bears to the foregoing is in the outline shape of the
finial. Comparison on such a limited basis offers at most only a
possible indication of origin and age.
Finial No. 4 resembles that on a complete brass butt plate from
the Spanish Fort Site as well as on a finial from the same site. The
complete plate has what is best interpreted as a shell-like design engraved below the finial neck. This particular design element often
appears as part of a rococo style that first appeared on French guns
in the 1730’s (Hayward, 1963: 48). Also, the narrow width of the
complete plate from Spanish Fol± would seem to place it in a post1730 time period (Harris et al., 1965: 341). The same conclusions
may be true for the finial from the Gilbert Site. Of rare occurrence
in Nortefio Focus sites, this design possibly represents either a minor
type or one which occurs late in the French gun trade.
Conclusions: Most of the brass butt plates are probably fi’om
French trade guns dating from about 1750. One finial section, No. 18,
could represent a somewhat earlier period. The method of securing
the butt plate to the stock by means of a tongue and pin on the finial
and with one or two countersunk screws (one in the heel, and/or
one in the toe) was employed on better grade English fusils fi’om
about 1700 onward (George, 1947: 104). This general form of butt
plate is also similar to that of the French style in 1724 (Neal, 1955:
17, Fig. 8). This style may also be found on various other types of
shoulder arms from England and the low countries. In contrast,
Spanish traditional style stocks of the period were square underneath
(Neal, 1955: 17). Such stocks usually employed a small right angled
plate on the heel of the butt.

TEXAS

68

FIGURE

38.

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Side plates.
SIDE PLATES

No. of Specimens: 9
Provenience: Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (2), Features 3 and 18 (1)
(two pieces that may fit together: one from Feature 3, the other
from Feature 18), Feature 5 (i), Feature 6 (2), Feature 12 (1),
Feature 14 (1)
IllusCrations: Figure 38
In describing side plates, the term "upper screw hole" is used to
indicate the hole in the upper area of the side plate at the point of
greatest width. In measuring the thickness of the side plates, measurements were taken at each end of the long axis of the part. All the
side plates are of east brass and are essentially flat-surfaced.
Side Plate No. 1 (Fig. 38, i). This is the front portion of a flat
side plate, extending from the upper screw hole to the front end.

EUROPEAN TIRADE GOODS

69

The edges are slightly undercut (i.e., beveled on the bottom surface), leaving the bottom surface smaller in area than the uppqr surface. This would simplify inlaying. The plate is decorated with a
single-line border and two opposed leaf-scroll designs, one of which
is interrupted by the break. The extreme front part of the plate
is engn’aved with two double-line elliptical forms and a ribbon-like
design.
Measurements: thickness, 1 to 2 mm.
Side Plate No. 2 (Fig. 38, d-e). This flat side plate consists of two
fragments that seem to fit together, one found in Feature 3, the
other in Feature 18. The plate is broken across the front screw
hole and in the area of the upper screw hole. An eng,’areal design
portrays a curl-tailed, collared dog on the left that is chasing an
impossibly large hare or rabbit on the right. The upper border of the
plate has an engraved scalloped line.
Measurements: thickness, 1 mm. to 3 mm.
Side Plate No. 3 (Fig. 38, c). This fragment is the proximal end of
a two-screw side plate with undercut edges. A single engraved line
strung with triangular marks borders the edges. Two parallel, vertical,
engraved lines transect the plate some 20 ram. from its proximal end.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 ram.
Side Plate No. 4 (Fig. 38, j). This specimen comprises a section
of flat side plate between the front and upper screw holes. The
edges are slightly undercut. It has an engraved leaf-scroll design
toward the front part; an unstrung bow with an arrow appear at the
proximal break, which interrupts the design. Along the upper and
lower borders are single engraved lines made up of tiny, closely
spaced triangles.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 ram.
Side Plate No. 5 (Fig. 38, h). This side-plate rear section, broken
at the upper screw hole, is flat with undercut edges. It was definitely
used with a two-screw lock. An engraved design, within a single-line
border, consists of what appears to be a basket containing a plant
and a blossom or bud. There is a small notch in the lower edge.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 2 ram.
Side Plate No. 6 (Fig. 38, g). In cross section this side plate is
slightly convex on the exterior surface and concave on the interior
surface. The edges are slightly undercut. Both ends are missing. The
borders are engraved with what are basically scalloped lines. The
break at the front end apparently interrupted a design or scene; in
the center is engraved an unstrung bow, a quiver, and two clubs. A
ribbon-like design was engraved across the plate between the center

70

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

design and the interrupted scene at the front end.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 ram.
Side Plate No. 7 (Fig. 38, f). This proximal end of an apparent
two-hole side plate is slightly convex on the extel~or surface and
concave on the interior surface. The edges are weakly undercut. Engraved double lines parallel the upper and lower edges, and there is
an engraved leaf-scroll design in the center.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 ram.
Side Plate No. 8 (Fig. 38, b). This is the front section of a side
plate shaped and engraved to resemble a dragon or serpent. The
edges are undercut. There are five round punch marks near the
broken end. The specimen has oxidized to a dark color.
Measurements: thickness, 1 mm.
Side Plate No. 9 (Fig. 38, a). This is a fragment of a flat brass
side plate shaped in a manner suggestive of a dragon or serpent.
Details of the engraving are difficult to interpret meaningfully.
Measurements: thickness, approximately 1 to 9, mm.
Bemarks: Side Plate No. 9 (Fig. 38, a) is definitely zoomorphic in
outline. Its profile is relatively complex with both the upper and lower
edges outlining a serpent or dragon shape. The engraved details
supplement this theme. Side Plate No. 8 (Fig. 38, b) possibly represents a highly stylized version of a zoomorphie outline. This is uncertain because the specimen is too incomplete. While "dragon" side
plates usually have an opening through a circular coil in the proximal
end, they are not considered as truly pierced for decoration.
The first flat plates of the "dragon" or "serpent" type began to
appear in the late 17th century and seem to have gone out of style
in general usage shortly thereafter, for by 179.0 the foliated side
plate was in fashion in English higher quality guns (George, 1947:
106-107). Hanson (1955: 57, P1. 1, B) i!lustrates a flat "serpent" or
"dragon" side plate from a 1700 period British all-purpose musket.
Hamilton (1960c: 135-136) illustrates flat, engraved dragon plate sections from a site known to have been occupied from 1730 to 1775
and assigns a tentative date of 1750 to this type dragon plate. The
examp!e from the Gilbert Site is of flat east brass. The outline was
produced in the casting and dressed by filing, but the surface is flat
and details are engraved.
In later versions, detai! was produced by casting in low relief, not
by engraving. Hanson (1955: 15-16) describes one of the earliest
known examples of a molded detai! dragon side plate on a Northwest
gun by Grice who was active from 1770 to 1780.

71

EUROPEAN T~ADE GOODS

Side Plate No. 9 from Gilbert does not match any of the more
common versions of dragon side plates.
Dragon Side Plate No. 8 shows a definite similarity to both the
1700 version (Hanson, 1955: 57, P!. 1, B) and the one assigned the
tentative 1750 date (Hamilton, 1960e: 135-136). It should date prior
to 1770 according to Blaine’s unpublished analysis of such side plates
from the Vinson Site.
The outlines of the other side plates exhibit gentle curves and
smal! steps and generally refleet the functional shape of a lock plate
but in decorative form. These plates also are solid- not pierced for
decorative purposes. Their engraving themes vary, primarily suggesting the hunt, floral, or foliate designs. According to George ( 1947:
111), this general type of side plate for English guns was in style
from approximately 1750 to 1775 on weapons such as the blunderbusses, fusils, and fowling pieces of "seeond quality." George (ibid.:
112) also points out that between 1790 and 1800 the side plate, as
such, was replaced by screw cups in the side of the English sporting
gain.
French use of the flat unpierced side plate of relatively simple outline began about 1715-20 on fashionable weapons. These early plates
were decorated in low relief by cast o1" chiseled designs (Hayward,
1963: 45).
Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965: 332) hypothesize that
fashionable French designs were often reproduced in an inexpensive
manner on weapons used in the French trade. A plate of designs by
Guerard shows decoration for flat side plates that appears intended, or
most suitable, for reproduction by engraving (Hayward, 1963: P1.
99.). Because of the apparent absence of flat unpierced side plates
at the Angola Farm Site, Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine (1965:
331) believe it unlikely that they were commonly used on guns in
the French trade prior to 1730. Such side plates appear to have been
current in the French trade around 1750.
TttlGGEt/

GUARDS

No. of Specimens: 9.9
Provenience: Feature 1 (4), Feature 2 (2), Feature 3 (5), Feature
4 (4), Feature 5 (6), Feature 6 (2), Feature 7 (1), Feature 11 (1),
Feature 12 (1), Feature 17 (1), Feature 18 (1), Feature 9.1 (1)
IUustratior~: Figures 39, 40
All measurements of thickness were made at the point of maximum
width of the guard section being described. Thickness measurements

79

FIcURE 39.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Trigger guards.

marked with an asterisk are for fragmentary, badly rusted, or battered specimens and do not reflect true maximum dimensions of the

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

73

original, complete trigger guard. All the trigger guards are made of
east brass except Nos. 2, 7, 10, 11, and 19 which are made of iron.
Trigger Guard No. I (Fig. 39, i). This trigger guard, broken in
the bow section, bears part of an engraved design on the bow which
has single-line borders and a leaf-scroll design in the center. The
fore tang, or forestoek plate, ends with a finial. In cross section the
shape of the tang is trapezoidal. It has a wide bevel on each side, the
unbeveled under surface being mounted next to the stock. A projecting
tongue with a hole through it is molded onto the under surface; the
tongue was inserted into a slot in the wooden stock, and a pin was
passed through the stock and the perforation in the tongue, thus
securing the front end of the trigger guard to the gun. A similar
perforated tongue or more commonly a hooked projection served to
secure the rear trigger guard tang to the stock.
Measurements: Front finial- maximum width, 19, ram.; maximum
thickness, 9. mm. Front tang-maximum width, 15 mm.; width at
base of bow, 12 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 2. This specimen is broken in the bow section
and in the rear tang. The borders of the bow are molded with a
slight ridge along each edge. The tang has wide bevels along the
edges, producing a trapezoidal cross section. This guard section is of
the same pattern as No. 1 but is made of iron rather than brass.
Measurements: Rear tang-maximum width, 13 ram.; maximum
thickness, 2 mm.; width at base of bow, 19. ram.
Trigger Guard No. 3. This trigger guard is broken at the front
base of the bow and in the forestock plate immediately before and
after the base of the bow. A tongue for pin fastening is present. The
forestock plate remnant is trapezoidal in cross section and has wide
bevels.
Measurements: Front tang-width at base of bow, 11 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 4. This tang fragment is round on one end
and broken at a screw hole on the other end. It is badly bent and is
semi-round in cross section.
Measurements: maximum width, 11 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 5. Broken at the neck of the bow and at the
rear tang, this specimen is trapezoidal in cross section.
Measurements: Width at base of bow, 19. ram.; maximum width
at break, 9 mm.~; maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 6 (Fig. 39, a). This specimen is broken in the
bow and in the rear tang. The bow is engraved with single-line
borders and a simple, rather formal, design in the center.
Measurements: Bow-maximum width, 19 mm.; maximum thick-

74

Ficur~ 40.

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

Trigger guards.

ness, 2 mm. Rear tang-width at base of bow, 12 mm.; width at
break, i0 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 7 (Fig. 40, f). This iron trigger guard is broken

EUROPEAN

TRADE GOODS

75

in the tangs before and after the bow proper. The bow and both
tangs are beveled, and the cross section is flatter than that of the
brass guards, although the pattern is similar. A tongue for pin
fastening is present.
Measurements: Front tang-maximum width (widened by battering), 15 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 ram.; width at base of bow, 13
ram. Bow-maximum width, 20 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Rear tang-width at base of bow, 15 mm.; width at break, 11 mm.;
maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 8. Broken in the rear tang at both ends, this
trigger guard is trapezoidal in cross section and has wide bevels. A
break on one end is at a narrow spot which was probably the neck
of a rear finial. A tongue for pin fastening is present.
Measurements: maximum width, 13 ram.; maximum thickness, 2
lnln.

Trigger Guard No. 9 (Fig. 39, f). This center section of a bow" is
broken at both ends. It is trapezoidal in cross section, has wide bevels,
and is engraved with a single-line border.
Measurements: maximum width, 17 mm.; maximum thickness, 9.
mm.
Trigger Guard No. I0. This is an iron forestock plate with a simple
round finial. It is broken at a beveled screw hole.
Measurements: Maximmn width of finial, 14 mm.; maximum thickness, 9, 1Tlln.
Trigger Guard No. 11. This is a front tang and finial section made
of iron.
Measurements: Finial- maximmn width, 11 ram.; maximum thickness, 9, mm. Tang--maximmn width, 15 ram.; maximum thickness,
9, ram.
Trigger Guard No. 19, (Fig. 40, d). This complete forestoek plate
and bow is broken in the rear tang. It is trapezoidal in cross section
and has wide bevels. A tongue for pin fastening is present in the
front section. The bow is engraved with a single-line border and
with an embellished leaf-scroll design in the center.
Measurements: Front finial-maximum width, 14 ram.; maxinmm
thickness, 3 mm. Front tang- maximum width, 15 mm.; maximum
thickness, 3 ram.; width at base of bow, 13 mm. Bow-maximum
width, 19 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 ram. Rear tang-width at
base of bow, 14 ram.; width at break, 11 mm.~; maximum thickness,
2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 13 (Fig. 39, c). This specimen is broken in

76

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

the bow and in the rear tang. It is trapezoidal in cross section and has
wide bevels. The bow is engraved with single-line borders and with
a formal design in the center.
Measurements: Bow-maximum width, 18 mm.; maximmn thickness, 2 ram. Rear tang-width at base of bow, 12 ram.; width at
break, 11 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 14 (Fig. 39, g). A rear finial section that is
broken in the tang, this specimen is trapezoidal in cross section and
has wide bevels.
Measurements: Tang-width across shoulders, 13 mm.; maximum
thickness, 2 ram. Finial- maximum width, 12 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 15. This trigger gnard, broken in the rear tang
and at the rear finial, is trapezoidal in cross section and has wide
bevels. A hooked tongue for pin fastening into the stock is present.
Measurements: maximum width, i2 mm.; maximum thickness, 2
into.

Trigger Guard No. 16 (Fig. 40, a). This center section of a trigger
guard bow is broken at both ends. Piano-convex in cross section, the
bow was expertly engraved with a leaf-scroll design enclosed in a
single-line border.
Measurements: maximum width, 19 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 17 (Fig. 40, b). This specimen is almost identical to No. 16, including measurements, but the scroll design is
slightly varied.
Trigger Guard No. 18. This center section of a guard bow was
filed bifacially into an arrow point. There is an engraved floral design
in the center. Triangular engraved marks are aligned along the singleline border.
Trigger Guard No. 19. This is probably a forestock plate section
including the finial, but it may be a butt plate finial instead. It is
made of iron and has rounded edges. It was designed for mounting
on the surface of the stock rather than for inlaying.
Measurements: maximum width, 13 ram.; maximum thickness, 2
inln.

Trigger Guard No. 20. This oxidized finial section of a forestock
plate is engraved and filed to produce the effect of acanthus foliage.
M easurements: maximum width, ii mm.; maximum thickness, 2
lnm.

Trigger Guard No. 21 (Fig. 39, e). This forestock plate, broken in
the plate and at the base of the finial, has a trapezoidal cross section

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

77

and wide bevels. Around the edges of the flat area between the bevels
is an engraved line with triangular marks spaced along it.
Measurements: maximum width, 15 mm.; maximum thickness, 2
mnl.

Trigger Guard No. 22 (Fig. 39, d). This trigger guard comprises
the bow and major portions of front and back tangs. The bow is engraved with single-line borders and with the same formal design in
the center as on Trigger Guard No. 13. The tangs are trapezoidal in
cross section and have wide bevels. The front tang has a perforated
tongue for pin fastening while the rear tang has a hook-shaped tongue.
Measurements: Front finial- maximum width, 11 ram. Front tangmaximum width, 15 ram.; width at base of bow, 12 mm. Bowmaximum width, 19 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 mm. Rear tangwidth at base of bow, 12 ram.; width across shoulders, 12 ram.;
maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 23 (Fig. 39, b). Broken in the bow and at the
front tang finial, this piece has the same design on the bow as Nos.
13 and 22.
Measurements: Front tang-maximum width, 16 mm.; maximum
thickness, 2 ram.; width at base of bow, 12 ram. Bow- maximum
width, 19 mm.; maximum thickness, 2 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 24 (Fig. 39, h). This piece is broken at the tip
of the front tang finial and at the beginning of the bow proper. Its
cross section is trapezoidal, and it has wide bevels. The pin is still
present in the tongue.
Measurements: Finial-maxinmm width, 11 ram.; maximum thickness, 2 mm. Tang- maximum width, 14 mm.; maximum thickness, 2
mm.; width at base of bow, 11 mm.
Trigger Guard No. 25. This specimen comprises a finial section only.
It has wide bevels and is trapezoidal in cross section.
Measurements: maximum width, 10 ram.; maximum thickness, 2
mm.
Trigger Guard No. 26. Broken in the plate and at the finial, this
forestock plate has a trapezoidal cross section. A tiny fish-like figure is
engraved on the piece and a hole has been drilled through the center
after the piece was manufactured. The plate has oxidized to a black
color.
Measurements: maximum width, 15 ram.; maximum thickness, 3
n’lm.

Trigger Guard No. 27 (Fig. 40, e). This piece is broken in the
bow and in the rear tang. In cross section the bow is plane-convex,

TEXAS

78

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

while the tang- having wide bevels- is trapezoidal. Each edge of
the bow is bordered with a double set of parallel engraved lines. A
small section of an engraved design surviving on the bow bears a
strong resemblance to the corresponding section of the design on
Guard No. 26.
Measurements: Bow-maximum width, 18 ram.*; maximum thickness,

4 Inln.~

Trigger Guard No. 28. This specimen is broken in the bow and in
the rear tang. The small surviving section of the bow indicates that
the original bow was engraved with single-line borders. The rear
tang has wide bevels and is trapezoidal in cross section.
Measurements: Tang-width at base of bow, 11 ram.; width at
break, 10 ram.*; maximum thickness, 2 ram.
Trigger Guard No. 29 (Fig. 40, c). This piece, consisting of a complete forestock plate and bow, is broken in the rear tang. The forestock plate and the rear tang have wide bevels, and both are trapezoidal in cross section. The forestock plate has a tongue, pierced by a
pin hole, molded on its inner surface. The bow section, piano-convex
in cross section, has been partially cut through on the external (convex) surface and is bent in two places. There are double engraved
lines paralleling each edge of the bow, and an opposed leaf-scroll
design is engraved in the center. Each bevel on the front tang is
engraved with a double set of parallel lines, and a small obscure
design is engraved in the center panel of the tang. The design of
the finial may represent a formalized acanthus leaf.
Measurements: Front finial-maximum width, 13 mm.; maximum
thickness, 2 mm. Front tang-maximum width, 15 mm.; maximum
thickness, 2 mm.; width at base of bow, 12 ram. Bow-maximum
width, 19 mm.; maximum thickness, 3 mm. Rear tang - width at base
of bow, 19. mm.; width at break, 11 mm.*; maximum thickness, 9.
Film.

Remarks: One iron forestock plate and finial section (Trigger
Guard No. 10) resembles one described by Hanson (1955: 16, 77, P1.
XXI, A) from an early Northwest gun sold by the Montreal independents and dated approximately 1770. The iron finials of Trigger
Guards No. 11 and 19 resemble finials illustrated by Hamilton
(1960c: 138, Fig. 51) from sites dated between 1730 and 1775.
One trigger guard bow section (No. 18) is considerably wider
than corresponding sections of other bows from the site. The center
element of an engraved floral design on this specimen is enigmatic, but
it may represent a flower or a wicker-type basket as seen from below.

EUHOPEAN TRADE GOODS

79

If the engraver set forth to represent a flower blossom, he took the
long way around and got lost along the way.
A trigger-gnard finial section (No. 20) with an acanthus design
has some resemblance to a finial illustrated by Hamilton (1960e: 140
and Fig. 52, second item) of the 1730-1775 period. There is also
some resemblance to two finials from Fort Miehilimaekinae illustrated
by Maxwell and Binford (1961: 122, P1. VI) and to those on a pair of
complete brass trigger gnards from the Angola Farm Site near Shreveport, Louisiana (personal observation of the authors). This may be
an earlier form than the plainer finials such as that on Trigger Guard
No. 12.
One rear tang finial (No. 25) is virtually identical in form to that
of the fusil de dragon French milital), model of 1733-34 (Boudriot,
1963: Modele 1733-34). The only major difference is that the military
model has a screw hole and the Gilbert specimen has none.
One forestoek plate section (No. 26) is decorated with a small
engraved figure having a fish-like head and a tail resembling that of
a sting ray, or perhaps, a serpent. The small size of the design, 4
ram. by 12 mm., suggests that this is an identifying insigDia rather
than merely a decoration. If that is true, it is quite likely that the gun
from which it came was not a common trade gun.
The trigger-guard sections may be classed into two groups: a group
comprising 21 stylistically similar specimens and a smaller group of
seven atypical ones. In the former group are portions of at least !1
individual trigger guards, two of iron and nine of east brass, that are
all of the same basic form. These were attached to the wooden stock
by means of a hook at one end and a perforated tongue at the other,
both molded on the inner surface of the guard. It is believed that
this form of trigger guard is characteristic of 18th-eentury guns.
On English fowling pieces of the early 18th century, one method
of securing the trigger guard in a groove on the stock was by passing
pins through perforated tongues molded on the inner surface of the
guard (George, 1947: 104). On a French trigger guard illustrated
in 1751-65 are a perforated tongue and a hook like those on the
Gilbert specimens (Held and Jenkins, 1957: 115). A Spanish stock
made in the "French style" in 1724 exhibits the style of trigger guard
-and butt plate, too- most eonnnon at the Gilbert Site (Neal, 1955:
17, Figs. 8, 10, 11). Another trigger guard of similar style dates
from 1706 (ibid.: 12, Fig. 1). Guards of this style seem to occur
more frequently on fusils or fowling pieces from the Continent
than on guns of the same period from England (George, 1947: PI.
IV, 3; P1. V, 2; P1. VII, 2, 3; P1. VIII, 1, 2, 3).

80

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

The trigger-guard finials from the Gilbert Site do not resemble
those on standard English sporting guns from approximately 1720
through 1800 (George, 1947: 107, 111, 112). They also do not resemble those on presumably English fusil trigger guards of about
1742 unearthed at Fort Frederica, Georgia (Shiner, ms.).
The Gilbert Site trigger guards are slighter than those of military
muskets of the 18th century. The designs engraved on the bows vary.
On three (Nos. 13, 22, and 23) appears an identical design, while
on another (No. 6) is a simpler version of the same. This design,
in its simplest form, somewhat resembles the Chevrolet automobile
trademark. A basically similar design occurs on two brass guard
bows from the Angola Farm Site and on two brass guard bows from
the Womack Site (Harris et al., 1965: 327). Similar design elements
appear in a book of French gunsmith patterns which was initially
printed around 1705 and reprinted in 1730 (Hayward, 1963: 297, P1.
93). Unfortunately for our study, the use of patterns from such books
was not confined to France: they were copied throughout Continental Europe. However, it appears that during the 18th century
the English did not make significant use of such design books except
on fine-grade guns (Harris et al., 1965: 320). The English trade
gun at that time was assuming characteristics of its own which do not
reflect the French decorative preferences.
What appears to be an earlier version of the typical trigger guard
at Gilbert occurs at the Angola Farm Site and at the Womack Site.
The Angola Fmxn Site evidently was occupied from about 1709 to
1729 (Swanton, 1911: 311, 314). The Womack Site has been tentatively identified as a Kichai village of 1719 (Halxis et al., 1965: 357360). The only complete specimens are two from the Angola Farm
Site.
Comparisons have been made of the thickness and width of some
corresponding sections of trigger guards from the Gilbert, Womack,
and Angola Farm Sites. These comparisons were based on the maximum width of the front tang, of the bow, and of the rear tang, together with thickness measured at the same points. These points of
maximum width were selected because they can be recognized, when
present, on fragmentary specimens. At the Womack and Angola Farm
Sites the dimensions are, on the average, wider and thicker than at
tile Gilbert Site. This factor, together with variations in decoration,
offers a possible method of separating trigger guards from French
trade guns of about 1720 from those of about 1750. Unfortunately,
the samples- particularly those from Womack and Angola Farmare too small for complete reliability.

EUROPEAN TIIADE

GOODS

81

Three of the Cilbert guard bows (Nos. 16, 17, and 29) are engraved with an opposed pair of leaf-scroll designs. This design appears also on a Gilbert side plate (No. 5) as well as on a side plate
from the Womack Site (Harris et al., 1965: Fig. 13, C) and quite
possibly is adapted from the pattern book of De Lacollombe (Hayward, 1963: P1. 93).
One guard bow (No. 12) has an engraved leaf-scroll design with
an incorporated shell-like element. The asymmetrical form of decoration in rococo style first appeared on French firearms in the 1730’s
(Hayward, 1963: 48). De Marteau added sheets to De Laco!lombe’s
book of designs, and one, dated 1749, includes leaf scrolls combined with shell-like forms much like that the Gilbert specimen
(ibid.: 94).
There is a definite resemblance in shape between the typical trigger guard from Gilbert and the trigger guards of the French cavalry
and ch-agoon model pistol, fusil, and musketoon of 1733-34. However,
the treatment of the finials on the Gilbert specimens is slightly different from that of the French military models; also the French military version used two screws to secure the rein" tang instead of a
molded hook as at Gilbert (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1733-34).
Thus the evidence strongly suggests that the typical trigger guard
from the Gilbert Site portrays the style used on French trade guns
about 1750. Finial No. 20 could well be h’om an earlier period. The
trigger guards seem to emerge as the most reliable single indicator of
18th-eentury French trade guns.
CUNFLINTS

The 114 gunflints can be divided into three categories: spall flints,
conventional flints, and native-made flints. Some specimens of European origin had been reworked by the Indians; these were classed on
the basis of original form whenever possible.

Spall Gunflints
No. of Specimens: 32
Provenien, ce: Feature 1 (4), Feature 9. (1), Feature 3 (9), Feature
4 (3), Feature 5 (5), Feature 6 (2), Feature 7 1), Feature 10 (2),
Feature 12 (3), Feature 16 (1), Feature 20 (1
Illustrations: Figure 41, a
The 32 spall gunflints are wedge-shaped. They are thick on the
back side and taper to a thin edge along the fi’ont. The back, or heel,
and the sides have been trimmed with secondary chipping. The front

TEXAS

FIGURE 41.
flints.

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Gunflints. a, spall type; b, conventional type; c, native-made

edge also was trimmed straight across when necessary. Except for
one black specimen, the spall gunflints are of light-colored chert and
flint, ranging from buff to light gray.
Hamilton (1960d: 73-79) has described a kind of spall gunflint
that was produced by a blow on a rounded cobble of chert or flint.
The spall flints from the Gilbert Site, however, were struck from prepared cores, not directly from cobbles. The major preparation of the
cores consisted of producing two planes or surfaces which intersected
at an angle of about 60 degrees. One of these prepared surfaces
served as the striking platform for removing the desired spall; the
other surface became the dorsal surface of the spall. (The terms
dorsal and ventral are used here in the usual archeological sense,
the ventral face being the surface of a flake or blade having the positive
bulb of percussion, the dorsal face the opposite one.)

EUROPEAN~ADE GOODS

83

Fourteen of the Gilbert spall flints exhibit a striking platform in
the heel area, prepared before the spall was struck from the core.
Secondary flaking has removed direct evidence of the striking platform from the rest of the specimens. Eleven of the spall flints,
including 9 of the 14 described above, clearly show the dorsal surface, the flatness of which together with the absence of a negative
bulb of percussion indicate that it was produced before the striking
platform was prepared for detachment of the spall flint. Secondary
and use flaking has obscured evidence of knapping technique on 21
of the spell flints.
According to Witthoft (cited in Hamilton, 1964: 52), the spall
gunflint is the predominant European form found in Indian sites
dating between 1650 and 1750.
Measurements: (size range based on complete specimens) length,
19 to 28 mm.; width across striking surface, 22 to 35 ram.; thickness,
6 to 11 ram.
Conventional Gunflints’
No. of Specimens: 13
Prover~ience: Feature 1 (3), Feature 3 (2), Feature 4 (2), Feature
5 (2), Feature 6 (1), Feature 8 (1), Feature 10 (1), Feature 12

(1)
Illustrations: Figure 41, b
Conventional gunflints were produced by sectioning specially prepared blades of flint. Such a section usually exhibits two or three
major facets on the dorsal side and one major facet on the ventral
side. The dorsal facets are segments of blade scars.
The longest bevel is trimmed in a straight edge where it meets
the opposite side. Opposite this straight edge is the back. The back
and adjacent sides were blunted by secondary chipping.
Of the 13 conventional gunflints found at Gilbert, all appear to be
French and all are made of honey-yellow flint, probably from such
sources as Loir-et-Cher or Indre, France.
The conventional gunflints all appear to be of the "French" type.
They exhibit the well rounded and closely flaked heel described as
characteristic of the type by C. S. Smith (1960: 46). The conventional gunflint was probably introduced to this country about 1680
(Hamilton, 1964: 55) but did not begin to displace the spall gunflint
until about 1750 (Witthoft, cited in Hamilton, 1964: 52).
It is important to note that the identification of French gunflints in
Indian sites cannot be taken as a reliable indication of French trade.

84

TEXAS

AI~CHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

As the French exported quantities of gunflints to other countriesincluding Holland, Spain, and England-traders from those countries must have sometimes distributed French-made flints to Indians
(Hamilton, 1960d: 74-75).
Native-made Gunflints
No. of Specimens: 69
Provenience: Feature 1 (10), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (19), Feature 4 (13), Feature 5 (12), Feature 6 (5), Feature 7 (2), Feature
12 (2), Feature 15 (1), Feature 18 (3), Feature 20 (1).
Ilhtstrations: Figure 41, c
The Indian gunflints were produced from flakes by secondary
flaking. Specimens of good workmanship are generally square to rectangular, thin, and bi-convex in cross section; all four sides are usually
worked to a fine edge. The material used is chert and flint, including
two specimens made of Kay County, Oklahoma, flint.
One specimen has a thin sheet of lead wrapped around it, leaving
one striking edge and the adjacent sides uncovered. A lead "cap" or
"grip" was sometimes used to aid in securing the gunflint firmly in
the jaws of the cock. Leather pads, however, were most commonly
used for that purpose (Caldwell, 1960: 198).
Indians produced rectangular, bifaeially chipped gunflints like
those from the Gilbert Site from the 17th century on according to
Witthoft (cited in Hamilton, 1960d: 73).
Measurements: (Range based on complete specimens) length, 12
to 30 mm.; width, 22 to 31 mm.; thickness, 4 to 10 mm.
LEAD BULLETS

No. of Specimens: 10
Provenience: Feature 3 (1), Feature 5 (3), Feature 12 (1), Feature 14 (1), Feature 18 (1), Feature 20 (1), Feature 21 (2)
This category of spherical lead bullets includes all specimens over
"Large Buck" shot size. Large Buck shot at 5/oz. is the largest size
shot listed in an early table (George, 1947: 211). Of the 10 bullets
found at Gilbert, only three are unfired and suitable for measuring.
All the bullets, however, were weighed to provide a basis for the
estimates of their caliber. Of course, the weights of any two balls
of the same caliber may vary somewhat because of such factors as differences in lead purity, sprue cutting, and bullet molds. In addition,
fired balls can be subject to weight loss because of bore and impact

EUROPEAN TRADE GOODS

85

abrasion. Hamilton’s system (1960c: !28-129, 132) was used as the
basis for the following estimates of bullet caliber and gauge, and
the probable bore they were meant for. The weight scale used is in
grains.
TABLE 2.
Specifications of lead bullets.
Feature
3
5
5
5
12
14
18
20
20
21

Specimen
Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Weight in
Grains

Caliber

203.1
234.5
252.4
268.5
143.5
243.0
131.0
228.5
196.0
255.6

.50-.53"
.53-.55*
.55*
.58*
.44-.45*
.55
.44
.53-.55*
.50-.53*
.55

gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.
gr.

Caliper
Probable Gun Bore Measurement
.55
.58
.58
.60

(32
(28
(28
(24

gauge)
gauge)
gauge)
gauge)

.58 (28 gauge)
.58 (28 gauge) "
.55 (32 gauge)
.58 (28 gauge)

9/16"**
7/16"**

9/16"**

* Fired, distorted
** Caliper measurement to nearest 1/32 inch
The .44 caliber bullets from Features 12 and 18 could be for a
rifle. However, no rifle barrel sections were found at the Gilbert Site.
LEAD

SHOT

No. of Specimens: 23
Provenience: Feature 1 (5), Feature 3 (11), Feature 4 (2), Feature 5 (5)
Of the 23 lead shot recovered, two deserve individual comment.
One had been fired in company with a loading of smaller shot which
left deep impressions on it. The closeness of the pattern indicates
that they were probably still in the bore during impact and suggests
a loose loading. The large shot was abraded against the inside of the
bore, and the resulting contour suggests a caliber of approximately
.69 for the bore.
The other shot singled out for special comment has been flattened
on one side and has a hole drilled through it. Evidently it was intended for use as a bead.
All of the shot were weighed in grains and assigned size designations in accordance with the early table of Ezekial Baker given in
George (1947: 211). Since the shot were sized by screening, shot
of the same "size" may vary somewhat in weight. In many instances
the sizes assigned do not correspond to modern tables. It is quite

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

86

possible that some of the lead shot were left at the site after the
Indian occupation as a result of later hunting. Data on shot size are
given in the following table, Table 3.
TABLE 3.
Specifications of lead shot.
Feature
1
1
i
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
5
5
5
5
5

Grains
3.5
4.3
7.4
10.3
60.0
0.9
2.0
2.2
3.0
3.3
4.3
4.5
4.8
5.5
5.9
48.5
4.8
10.2
1.2
3,7
8.8
80.7

No. of Shot per
Ounce (AVG.)
125
102
59
42
7
486
219
199
146
133
102
97
91
8O
74
9
91
43
365
118
50
5

Shot Size
No. 3
No. 2
B
BB
Small Buck
No. 8
No. 5
No. 5
No, 4
No. 3
No. 2
No. 2

No. 1
No. 1
No. 1
Musket Crape
No. 1
BB
No. 8
No. 2
BB
Large Buck
Drilled "bead"

