SKELETAL MATERIAL FROM THE COGDELL BURIAL
IN FLOYD COUNTY, TEXAS
GLEN H. DORAN AND ROBERT M. MALINA

The following text describes the skeletal material from 41FL45, the
Cogdell burial site.
MATERIAL

The skeleton was in excellent condition. A few elements of the hand
and feet were missing. There also was slight rodent damage,
especially to the orbits and nasal aperture. Greenish stains were
found on the left wrist, distal end of the left humerus, several ribs and
the left side of the skull. Large amounts of preserved flesh resulted in
the articulation of major portions of the skeleton including the
following:
I. Cranium and mandible.
If. Right scapula, clavicle, sternum, third through ninth
thoracic vertebrae, right humerus, radius, ulna, lunate,
triquetral, pisiform, first through seventh right ribs, and
seventh and eighth left ribs.
III. Left radius, ulna, pisiform, lunate, navicular, greater
multangular, and first metacarpal.
IV. Tenth through twelfth thoracic vertebrae, eleventh and
twelfth right ribs, right innominate and sacrum.
V. Left innominate, femur, patella, tibia, fibula, and all the
bones of the left foot.
VI. Right patella, tibia, and fibula.
The rest of the skeleton except a few hand and foot bones are present.
Measurements (Table 1] of the skeleton were taken following standard anthropometric techniques (Bass 1971}. The skeleton will be
displayed in the Floyd County Historical Museum and for this reason
complete disarticulation was not possible. Several estimates are included when accurate bone measurements were not possible.* Other
measurements were not possible due to the articulated condition of
the skeleton.
The skeleton is that of a male exhibiting the classic metric and nonmetric male characteristics (conformation of pelvis, mastoids, chin,
etc.). There is occasional minor lipping of the vertebrae and based
upon the maturational stages of the faces of the left and right os

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

66

TABLE I

(Measurements in millimeters)
176

Maximum length (glabella-occiput)

135

Maximum breadth of cranium

132

Basion-bregma height

88-90*

Minimum frontal breadth

142"

Bizygamatic breadth

124

Bicondylar breadth

111

Bigonial breadth

115

Total facial height

74

Upper facial height

56*

Nasal height

30*

Nasal breadth

40*

Orbital height (left)

45*

Orbital breadth (left)

322

Humerus (left)

238

Radius (left)

261

Ulna (left)

449

Femur [right)

357

Fibula [right)
*Approximation, accurate within 5 mm.

pelvis (pelvic casts) age was estimated to be between 35 and 45 years.
Based on regression coefficients for white males (Trotten and Gleser
1958) with the 0,06 cm, correction for individuals over 30years of age,
the stature was estimated to be between 168 and 173 cm.

DENTITION
The incisors show shoveling although this is obscured by the extreme dental attrition (dentine exposed over the major portion of the
incisors). Attrition is marked in the check teeth. All but the second
and third molars exhibit dentine exposure. More precise discussion
of the degree of dental attrition was not possible due to the articulation of the mandible and the cranium. The right canines are
both pushed labially, resulting in malocclusion.

COGDELL SKELETAL MATERIALS

67

PATHOLOGY
The skeleton appears free from pathology except for a slight
buildup and honeycombing of tissue on the proximal end of the right
fifth metacarpal, possibly the result of fracture or infection.

REFERENCES CITED
Bass, William M.
1971 Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual of the Human
Skeleton. Missouri Archaeological Society. Columbia, Missouri
Trotter, M. and G. C. Gleser
1958 A revaluation of the Estimation of Stature Based on Measurements of
Stature Taken During Life and of Long Bones after Death. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology, n. s., 16 (1): 79-123.
Texas Department of Highways and Transportation
The University of Texas at Austin

