319

The McFaddin geach Site on
the Upper Texas Coast
Ellen Sue Turner and Paul Tanner

ABSTRACT
McFaddin Beach (41JF50) is a section of beach on the Upper Texas Gulf
Coast that extends from Sabine Pass to High Island, approximately 35 km to the
west. The importance of the McFaddin Beach site lies in the relatively large
quantity of Paleoindian to Late Archaic projectile points, tools, and Pleistocene
faunal remains that have been documented from beach collections.

INTRODUCTION
This paper attempts to provide an overview of the McFaddin Beach area
(Figure 1), its historical environment and geomorphology, and a discussion of
the artifacts observed in the 27 collections brought to a conference held on
November !5-16, 1991, in Port Arthur, Texas (Hester et al. t992). Year around,
artifacts are collected from the narrow beach from the water line to the grass line.
Wind speed and direction, combined with tides and the physical condition of the
beach, have a profound effect on the deposition of artifactual material, and
hurricanes can alter the physical makeup of the beach dramatically. For years,
the cattle pen area was the area where most artifacts were washing up on shore
(Figure 2). Hurricane Alicia (1983) changed the cattle pen to a secondary collection area. Longshore currents and storm activity have caused considerable erosion of the beach through the years, as "each changing tide makes a new beach"
(Long 1977:5); this makes it impossible to predict the conditions of the beach on
any one day. Discovery of artifacts is by chance or as a result of tenaciously
walking the beach day after day, and year after year.
The condition of the artifactual materials collected, sometimes little altered
and minimally wave-worn, suggests that the artifacts redeposited on the beach
have eroded from a relatively short distance offshore. Most of the artifacts
collected fi’om McFaddin Beach appear to be close to two tributary streams
between High Island, 35 km west of Sabine Pass, and north of the ancient eastwest section of the submerged Sabine River valley (see Figure 1 and 2). Similar
types of artifacts have also been collected on the south side of Boliww Peninsula,
although they are not as numerous as at McFaddin Beach. Two known Clovis
points have been found in the Bolivar Peninsula area, specifically including one
Bulletin of the Texas Archeo!ogical Society 65 (1994)

320

Texas Archeological Society

Turner and Tanner m McFaddin Beach

321

<
©

"5
~9
~9

t~I)
~Z

322

Texas Archeological Society

on the east side of Rollover Pass, Gilchrist, Texas (D.S. Hubert, 1992 personal
communication).

ENVIRONMENT
McFaddin Beach must be viewed within the context of environmental
changes that have occurred in this area since first occupied by human populations. The geography, natural habitats, plant and animal life, climate, and human
settlement around any archeological site on the upper Texas coast have changed
significantly over the time span considered in this paper.

Geography and Habitat
Any effort at Paleogeographic reconstruction of the upper Texas coast
continental shelf of the Trinity estuary must take into consideration the significant changes in configuration of the terrain over past millenia. Lawrence E. Aten
(1983:137) says:
Paleoindian or Early Archaic archeological data found on the present
terrestrial margin of the coast generally will represent human activities
conducted in an interior environment--not a coastal environment--and
the observed adaptive technologies, population densities and site types
will correspond to the original environment, not to the present
environment.
Site function will influence the kinds of lithic tools used and discarded at
any given site, and thus the Clovis points and blades from McFaddin Beach
suggest that hunting at or near the area was a major activity in Paleoindian times.
However, there is no way of knowing if coastal resources were being utilized
because most coastal habitat dating earlier than the Middle Archaic period is
either buried or submerged. Fishing camps would show only very limited evidence of lithic tool production. Therefore, without stratigraphic control on the
stone tools, a Paleoindian tool assemblage at McFaddin Beach cannot be defined
at this time, nor is it possible with the site data to make an evaluation of the place
of McFaddin Beach within the fundamental patterns of hunter-gatherer settlement along the upper Texas coast. Nevertheless, "[i]t seems reasonable to assume that it was the scene of hunting forays emanating from either the coast or
from the interior woodland to prey on herding animals" (Aten 1983:149).

Climate
Changes in climate on the upper Texas coast are also evident. Geologic and
vertebrate paleontological data indicate that the Late Pleistocene environment

Turner and Tanner ~ McFaddin Beach

323

was cooler and wetter with differences minimized between winter and summer.
This weather pattern evolved into an environment with warmer, drier, and more
varied seasons of temperature and precipitation. Finally, the subhumid, seasonal
environments of the present day evolved some 3000 years ago (Aten 1983:154).

Geology
The major river valleys in the region are the Sabine and the Neches (see
Figure 1). Nelson and Bray (1970:55) discovered that the Sabine, Neches,
Catcasieu, Trinity, and San Jacinto rivers, plus their coastal plain tributaries,
constituted a coordinate river system between !3,000-11,000 years B.P. In the
period between 18,000-9000 years B.P., sea level rose as much as 9 m/year,
inundating the former Sabine River valley (an alluvial habitat presumably
heavily utilized by man). The inundated valley is now about 32 km south of the
present shoreline, making a long, brackish-water estuary of the valley (Nelson
and Bray 1970).
Seismic work and core sampling of the sea bottom by geologist John
Anderson of Rice University discovered that beginning about 6000 years ago,
the coast of Galveston moved as much as 20 miles inland; this took between
200-1000 years (Nichols 1989). Underwater sandbanks off the Texas coast,
ancient barrier islands that were submerged virtually intact rather than eroded,
indicate that sea level at times has risen rapidly. The submerged barrier islands
would have disappeared through erosion if sea level had risen gradually. "We
can tell it happens pretty fast because there’s nothing in the way of a coastal
barrier between Sabine Bank and the present shoreline" (Nichols 1989:40A).
Anderson also noted that a "steady rise of about 1 mm per year may have been
interrupted by surges of tens of feet in a few hundred years" (Nichols 1989:40A).
Detailed studies of geomorphological change and sea level rise at
McFaddin Beach (Pearson 1983; Aten 1983) place the coastline during Clovis
times about 80 km to the south and 120-140 m below the present sea level. The
continental shelf was cut by a deeply entrenched Sabine River, flowing through
earlier deltaic deposits formed by the Trinity River, which had abandoned the
area around 20,000-25,000 years ago. The geology of the locality known as
McFaddin Beach:
consists of transgressive barrier beach sand overriding a 3 m thick
section of Middle Hotocene marsh sediment which, in turn, overlies the
Pleistocene Beaumont Formation at a depth of about 1 1/2 m below
mean Gulf level. The Beaumont Formation and the Middle Holocene
marsh are being exhumed all along the shoreface which extends downward to more than 6 m below mean Gulf level and is about 1 km
wide... McFaddin Beach is a locality of considerable potential which
probably is associated with a Late Wisconsin-Early Holocene valley
wall scarp setting and related drainage formed by extension of the

324

Texas Areheological Society
Sabine-Neches river system out onto the continental shelf (Aten
1983:152).

ARTIFACTS
Russell J. Long’s (1977) report is the primary source of information on the
artifacts from McFaddin Beach. A retired biology professor from Lamar University, octogenarian Long still gives mini-courses on avocational archeology combined with collection, classification, and identification of specimens from the
beach. His dedication has enhanced the importance and scientific worth of the
extensive beach collections.
The McFaddin Beach archeological and paleontological artifacts are presently eroding from submerged relict deltaic landforms: an upland area not fully
inundated by rise in sea level until 2800 years B.P. (Pearson 1983). Wave action
transports the dislodged materials and deposits them on the present-day beach.
The older artifacts tend to be little wave-worn whereas the younger types are
heavily rolled, implying that erosion has relatively recently cut into older deposits. Since the artifacts are found in an environmental setting substantially different from that in which they were formed, it is difficult to organize the collections
in terms of conventional archeological classifications. The available data are also
too limited for describing distributional patterns. Nevertheless, there is value in
viewing Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late Prehistoric occupations as broadly characterizing the three most recent phases of Texas’ northern Gulf Coast history
(Aten 1983:142).

Chronology
Paleoindian
The earliest known inhabitants of Texas during the Pleistocene (correlating
geologically with the Late Wisconsin to Early Holocene periods) can be linked to
the Clovis Complex dating around 9200 B.C. Paleoindian artifacts from
McFaddin Beach include over 70 Clovis points (Figure 3a-d), some of great
length, and a single Folsom point. Three of the large ( 120+ mm in length) Clovis
points are very similar in workmanship and raw material. These were found in
close proximity on the beach, and two were found within days of each other; this
raises the possibility that a cache was disturbed and at least some of its contents
washed onto the beach (Hester et al. 1992).
The distinctive Clovis fluted point is widespread in the state and was, at
least in some cases, used in mammoth hunting. The Folsom Complex, dating
around 8800-8200 B.C., is characterized by Folsom fluted points and is known
from sites where now-extinct forms of bison were killed and butchered (e.g.,
Bonfire Shelter in Val Verde County [Dibble and Lorrain 1968]). Although

Turner and Tanner n McFaddin Beach

325

©

0

©

G
©

e~
©

~5
o

©
=L)

E~
©
.<

ct~

>

o

~8

326

Texas Archeological Society

fluting ceases to be an important Paleoindian point trait after Clovis and Folsom,
later Paleoindian points maintain an overall tanceolate, parallel-sided form; they
often have careful parallel-flaking with the basal edges dulled to facilitate halting
(Turner and Hester 1993).
Other Paleoindian diagnostics from McFaddin Beach include Scottsbluff,
San Patrice, Dalton, Pelican, Golondrina, Plainview, Angostura, and untyped
lanceolates--several of which cannot be precisely dated (Figure 4a-f). Dalton
and San Patrice, found in all McFaddin Beach collections, may date around 8000
B.C. in East Texas. Another projectile point type from 41JF50, Pelican, is found
in both Northeast and Southeast Texas, possibly contemporaneous with San
Patrice (Turner and Hester 1993:174). Plainview points are found in South Texas
at around 8200-8000 B.C., and are associated with kills of extinct bison at the
Plainview and Bonfire Shelter sites. By around 8000 B.C., animals of the Pleistocene era such as mammoth, bison, camel, horse, and sloth had disappeared. In
East Texas, Scottsbluff points are common, and are thought to date to around
6500 B.C. In lower South Texas, hunters and gatherers used Golondrina points
that have been radiocarbon dated at 7000 B.C. (Turner and Hester 1993).

Archaic

Much of Texas prehistory is subsumed within the long span of huntinggathering cultural patterns known collectively as the Archaic. It begins around
6000 B.C., and is notable for changes in projectile point styles and tool types,
different site distributions and kinds of sites, and the adoption of grinding implements and groundstone ornaments; all these changes reflect increasing populations utilizing the abundant plant and animal resources of environments similar
to that of modern times.
While details of the Archaic sequence vary from region to region within
Texas, it is generally divided into Early, Middle, and Late Archaic periods. Each
period is defined by specific projectile point styles (Turner and Hester 1993).
The Early Archaic (6000-2500 B.C.) at McFaddin Beach is represented by such
types as Bell (see Figure 4g), Trinity, and Carrollton (Table 1). During the
Middle Archaic (2500-1000 B.C.) in Texas, certain regions are typified by a
few distinctive projectile point types. In Southeast Texas, Gary and Kent dart
points are major types in the McFaddin Beach collections, although they continued to be made through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1993:265).
Other Middle Archaic forms include Pontchartrain, Evans, Pedernales, and
Tortugas types (Turner and Hester 1993). The Late Archaic projectile point
forms found in the McFaddin Beach collections include Ellis, Desmuke, Lange,
and Yarbrough types.
Table 1 lists the types of projectile points found in 39 collections from
McFaddin Beach. The majority of the 2000+ projectile points from the collections
are Archaic forms such as Big Sandy, Bell, Gary, Evans, Pedernales, and Poverty
Point-related specimens such as Pontchartrain, Epps, and Delhi.

Turner and Tanner -- McFaddin Beach

327

B
C

A

D

G
F

E
Figure 4. Paleoindian and Archaic dart points from McFaddin Beach: a, Dalton, Pau!
Tanner collection; b, Pelican, R.J. Long collection; c-d, San Patrice, Paul Tanner
collection; e-f, Scottsbluff, Paul Tanner collection; g, Bell, Paul Tanner collection. Drawn
by Paul Tanner.

328

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1.
Projectile Point Types
Identified at McFaddin Beach

Angostura (1)

Frio

Pelican (3)

Bell (1)

Gary (13)

Perdiz

Big Sandy (5)

Godley (5)

Plainview (7)

Butverde (1)

Hardin

Pontchartrain (2)

Carrollton (12)

Hell Gap

Pryor Stemmed

Clovis (5)

Keithville

San Patrice (9)

Dalton (9)

Kent (11)

Scottsbluff (12)

Delhi (1)

Kirk

Tortugas

Desmuke

Lange (6)

Trinity

Early Stemmed (1)

Marshall

untyped lanceolate (3)

Early Stemmed lanceolate

Milnesand

Williams (4)

Edgewood

Morhiss

Woden (7)

Elam

Motley

Yarbrough (9)

Epps (3)

Palmer (5)

Evans

Palmillas (6)

Folsom

Pedernales

The junior author has some 300 dart points and tools collected from the
beach over the past 11 years. While it is not possible to quantify the archeological data from all 39 collections, Tanner’s specimens are indicated in parentheses
to give some idea of the diversity in a single collection.
Of the 160 projectile points in Tanner’s collection, approximately 34 percent are Paleoindian types, with the remainder Early to Late Archaic projectile
point forms. Also in the collection are 45 Archaic projectile point fragments, two
preforms, and a bone dart point.
A wide variety of stone tools are also found in McFaddin Beach collections
(Table 2; those in Tanner’s collection are designated in parentheses). A few
comments are in order on these artifacts. Recent studies have shown that coreblade technology was important in Clovis times (Collins 1990; Collins and
Headrick 1993). The distinctly curved Clovis blades (Figure 5a) were evident in
a number of McFaddin Beach collections. Young and Collins (1989) describe a
cache of Clovis blades found near the Trinity River in Navarro County.
Groundstone tools such as bola stones and gorgers (Figure 5b-c) are characteristic of Archaic to Late Prehistoric assemblages along the upper Texas coast.

Turner and Tanner ~ McFaddin Beach

329

B

A

C

Figure 5. Stone Tools from McFaddin Beach: a, Clovis blade, Paul Tanner collection; b,
Gorget, Paul Tanner collection; c, Bola Stone, Bobby Broussard collection. Drawn by
Paul Tanner.

Bola stones and gorgets are well known artifact types in the Poverty Point
Culture (Ford and Webb 1956).
Very little lithic debris has been found in the McFaddin Beach area. However, it is difficult to spot small flakes in the beach gravel and broken seashells
that have become mixed with old road bed material, construction debris, refuselike ship ballast stones, concrete debris, and broken beer bottles. Only a few
arrowpoints and pottery sherds have been found at McFaddin Beach.
No naturally occurring deposits or outcrops of chippable stone are native to
this part of the upper Texas coast, and all of the points and tools are made of chert
and fossil hardwood that had to have been imported from other areas (Larry

330

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2.
Stone Tool Types
found at McFaddin Beach

Albany Bifaces
Small blades (7)
Gorget (1)
Hammerstones (12)
Two and Four Beveled
Bifaces (3)

Backed blades (1)
Blade cores (1)
Graver (1)
Grooved hammerstones (2)
Utilized Flakes (10)
Crescent-shaped Biface (1)

Spall blades (4)
Bola Stones (4)
Gunflints
Pitted Stones (2)
Petrifed Wood Tools (8)
Scottsbluff drill (1)

Stone Awl (2)
Dalton Drill (1)

Banks, 1991 personal communication). Two Clovis points found at 41JF50 are
made of a tan fossil palmwood. Banks also observed that 90-95 percent of the
raw materials are Central and East Texas cherts and petrified wood. The single
Folsom point found was of Keokuk variety, Boone Chert, from eastern Oklahoma. X-ray Fluorescence analysis at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory found
the source of one obsidian Archaic-style contracting stem biface to be
Zacualtipan, Hidalgo, Mexico, more than 1000 km to the south (Hester, Asaro,
Stross, and Gianque 1992).

FAUNAL MATERIAL
Many large Pleistocene vertebrate fossils, some associated with man elsewhere in North America, are found on the beach. Fossils from this area range in
color from yellow to brown to ebony. Tannin from organic matter gives a dark
hue to fossil remains, suggesting they were deposited in a river oxbow filled with
organic matter. Some fossil teeth are blue, indicating they were imbedded in
Beaumont Formation deposits, which represent Trinity River delta formations at
the end of the mid-Wisconsin interglacial stage. Teledyne gave a radiocarbon
date of 11,100 + 750 B.P. on a piece of elephant tusk, either mammoth or
mastodon, collected from the beach (Long 1977:7). This denotes a megafaunal
presence at McFaddin Beach during the Clovis occupation.
Fossil turtle shell is the most common specimen found in the McFaddin
Beach collections. Foot bones and molars of horses are also common but hoof
cores are very rare. Deer remains are next in frequency with antler elements most
commonly represented. Mammoth molars are more common than those of mastodon; however, a complete mastodon or mammoth molar is rare, and both are

Turner attd Tanner ~ McFaddin Beach

331

usually fragmented by wave and surf action. No prehistoric human remains have
been found to date at McFaddin Beach.
Long (1977:16) lists a few fossils that were possibly human-modified: a
notched turtle shell fragment, a highly polished awl (Figure 6a), and a sliver with
a chipped edge (Figure 6b). Recently, two mammoth teeth with modified sides
(possibly used as scrapers) have been found at McFaddin Beach (Figure 7).
The tooth enamel has been worn to the level of the dentine on the modified
mammoth teeth. Point A-A’ in Figure 7 shows abrasion marks, and a shallow
groove has been worn in this section of the piece; both sides have apparently
been used.
The following Pleistocene fossils have been identified by Russell (1975)
from McFaddin Beach:

giant armadillo
camel
deer
mammoth
peccary
saber-toothed cat

alligator
capybara
gar
manatee
prairie dog
tapir

bear
catfish
horse~
mastodon
rabbit
turtle

beaver
cotton rat
jaguar
opossum
raccoon
sloth~-

bison
coyote
llama
otter
snake

DISCUSSION
The present land area is slowly subsiding and the ocean is rising about 1
mm each year along the upper Texas coast. These factors, combined with storms,
the construction of jetties, and the dredging of the Sabine-Neches ship channel,
have interrupted the natural flow of solid material carried from rivers and
longshore currents. The amount of beach sand in the collection areas has
diminshed, exposing beach gravel and artifacts. In recent years, the County
Highway Department has used beach material and natural sand dunes for road fill
and some industrial concerns have used beach material for flood protection
structures. The Texas Department of Transportation has driven sheet piling in
this area to help stabilize the beach.
The practical difficulties for investigating the submerged prehistoric
archeological deposits in the gulf environment are formidable. Eventually,
investigation of offshore deposits may be warranted, but it is likely that most
archeological data to be acquired in the foreseeable future will come as a

Equus cf. fi’aternus; Equus complicams; Equus cf. pacificus. See Gidley 1901,
Quinn 1957, and Lundelius 1972.
2 Megalonyx jeffersoni and Eremotherium. See Leidy 1853, Stock 1925, and Gazin
1957.

332

Texas Archeological Society

/

/
/

=

o

o~

Turner and Tanner ~ McFaddin Beach

333

5CM

Figure 7. Mammoth tooth from McFaddin Beach with modified sides (A-A’), Paul Tanner
collection. Drawn by Paul Tanner.

consequence of environmental protection activities by offshore oil and gas
industry. Until there is some idea of what material remains exist--by
discovering sites with materials that demonstrablY constitute Paleoindian and
Archaic period assemblages--we cannot develop hypotheses about the
relationships between tool assemblages, habitats, territories, and the social and
natural environments of early upper Texas coast inhabitants (Aten 1983).
In spite of the obvious difficulties in investigating the McFaddin Beach site,
the carefully documented collections in existence do make a tremendously useful
resource for the study of stone projectile point typology and technology on the
upper Texas coast. A large body of data from McFaddin Beach is already in the
archives; avocational archeologists and collectors from the area have completed
drawings, measurements, and source determinations for over 500 projectile
points for the Texas Archeologica! Research Laboratory (TARL) archives at The
University of Texas at Austin. Dee Ann Story, Lawrence E. Aten, Kenneth M.
Brown, Thomas R. Hester, and the authors have taken extensive photographs of
collections from the site that can also be found on file at TARL.

334

Texas Archeological Society
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank Danny Sessums and The Museum of the Gulf
Coast, Dr. R. J. Long, J. W. Coen, Bobby Broussard, Stephen Brisco, and Tod
Clark for the loan of their artifacts for illustration. We also wish to acknowledge
Odis and Beverly Beckham, the first to collect and document fossils and lithics
from McFaddin Beach.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1983

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.

Collins, M. B.
Observations on Clovis Lithic Technology. Current Research in the Pleisto1990
cene 7:73-74.
Collins, M. B. and P. J. Headrick
1993

Comments on Kelly’s Interpretation of the "Van Autry’" Cores. La Tierra
19(4):26-39.

Dibble, D. S. and D. Lorrain
Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County, Texas. Mis1968
cellaneous Papers 1. Texas Memorial Museum, Austin.

Ford, J. A. and C. H. Webb
1956
Poverty Point: A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers of
the American Musewn of Natural Histoly, No. 46, Part 1. American Museum
of Natural History, New York.
Gazin, C. L.
Exploration for the Remains of Giant Ground Sloths in Panama. Smithsonian
1957
Institution Annual Report Publication No. 4272:341-354. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Gidley, J. W.
1901
Tooth Characters and Revision of North American Species of the Genus
Equus. American Museum of Natural Histoly Bulletin 14:91-140. American
Museum of Natural History, New York.
Hester, T. R., M. B. Collins, D. A. Story, E. S. Turner, P. Tanner, K. M. Brown, L. D.
Banks, D. Stanford, and R. J. Long
Paleoindian Archaeology at McFaddin Beach, Texas. Current Research in
1992
the Pleistocene 9:20-22.

Turner and Tanner m McFaddin Beach

335

Hester, T. R., F. Asaro, F. Stross, and R. D. Giauque
On the Beach: Trace Element Analysis of an Obsidian Artifact from Site
1992
41JF50, Upper Texas Coast. La Tierra 19(2):2-5.
Leidy, J.
1853

A Memoir on the Extinct Sloth Tribe of North America. Smithsonian Institution Contributions to Knowledge 7:2-66. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

Long, R. J.
McFaddin Beach. The Patillo Higgins Series of Natural History and Anthro1977
pology No. l. Spindletop Museum, Lamar University, Beaumont, Texas.
Lundelius, E. L.
1972
Fossil Vertebrates from the Late Pleistocene Vertebrate lngleside Fauna, San
Patricio County, Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, Report of Investigation 77:1-74. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Nelson, H. F. and E. E. Bray
1970

Stratigraphy and History of the Holocene Sediments in the Sabine-High
Island Area, Gulf of Mexico. In: Deltaic Sedimentation: Modern and Ancient,
edited by J. P. Morgan, pp. 48-72. Special Publication 15. Society of Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists.

Nichols, B.
The Rising Tide. Researcher links Antarctic ice to retreat of Texas coastline.
1989
The Dallas Morning News, March 26, pp. 37A, 40A.
Patterson, L. W.
!993
The Archeology of Inland Southeast Texas: A Quantitative Study. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 61:255-280.
Pearson, C. g.
The Archaeology and Paleogeography of the McFaddin Beach Site, Jefferson
1983
County, Texas. Paper presented at the Minerals Management Service, Fourth
Annual Information Transfer Meeting, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Quinn, J. H.
Pleistocene Equidae of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, Report of hwes1957
tigations 33:1-31. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas,
Austin.
Russell, J.
1975

The Identification of the Pleistocene Fossils from McFaddin Beach. Master’s
thesis, Lamar University, Beaumont.

336

Texas Archeological Society

Stock, C.
1925

Cenozoic Gravigrade Edentates of Western North America with Special Reference to the Pleistocene Megalonychidae and Mylodontidae of Rancho La
Brea. Carnegie blstitute Publication No. 33 ! : 1-206. Carnegie Institute, Washington, D.C.

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. 2nd Edition. Gulf Publishing Co., Houston.

Young, B. and M. B. Collins
1989

A Cache of Blades with Clovis Affinities from Northeastern Texas. Current
Research in the Pleistocene 6:26-28.

