REPORT ON AN UNKNOWN TYPE
OF IMPLEMENT
By ROBERT E. FORRESTER, JR.

Since beginning active collecting in 1936, the writer has
found several whole and broken implements of a type apparently not mentioned in the literature. These implements have
been found in sufficient numbers and sufficiently dispersed
areally to rule out the probability of their being either "sports"
or eccentric pieces, or a highly localized product. The pieces
covered under this report are primarily from Stephens and
Shackelford counties in north-west central Texas, with one
(Fig. 28: H-B) from eastern Comanche County and two fragments from burnt-rock middens in Bell County. A complete
piece of this type is reported to be in the Witte Museum in San
Antonio, Texas, and another has been reported as being from
a site on the Red River north of Wichita Falls, Texas. The
writer has seen neither.
These items represent an accumulation of 15 years of fairly
active collecting from surface sites and burnt-rock middens,
always in non-pottery areas. They further represent all the
broken and unbroken specimens found with approximately 40,000 broken and unbroken artifacts of all types. This is only
7/100 of 1% of all artifacts found.
Their true place in time and space may not be examined
too deeply here, as the writer’s collecting has largely been confined to collecting in the above mentioned counties, which leaves
a vast area of Texas with no reports. The impression is gained
that they date from the Archaic period, at least in origin if
not in final classic form, but there is yet insufficient evidence
to be positive. The full area of their distribution and relative
numbers need to be determined by reports of members from
other areas. It is hoped that readers will examine their co!lections for examples of this type, and send reports with illustrations to the Department of Anthropology, University of Texas,
Austin, Texas, in order to properly evaluate them.

o6

’~

C’-I

o

x

124

Texas Archeological Society

This implement on superficial examination appears to be a
spoke-shave type of scraper worked into the edge of a slim
triangular knife. This item may best be described by having a
standard for viewing in which the point is down, with the surface showing the strongest beveled edge facing the observer.
The widest portion (or base) is thus the uppermost end. There
is one relatively straight side with the opposing edge having a
scraper-form concavity, lending a lop-sided appearance to the
piece. There is invariably one projection or "spur" at the base
end overhanging the concavity. Approximately 80% have the
spur on the right side, with the remaining 20% to the left.
This would roughly correlate with the Texas figures (from the
writer’s collection only) of approximately 90% "right" beveled
stemmed dartheads and 90% "left" beveled triangular dartheads, which probably reflects the proportion of left-handed
Indian craftsmen, which in our present population is said to be
one person in nine.
Approximately one-half (46%) possess a second beveled edge
on the same face, opposite the edge with the strongest bevel
and the spur, resulting in a flat underside with a rounding upper face (Fig. 28: 379, D, E, & H). Thirty-three per cent have
the opposing edge on the underside beveled, but not so strongly
as the primary bevel. This results in a lozenge-shaped crosssection as is seen in reamers, double-pointed four-edged
"knives," etc. (Fig. 28: A, B, N, P). The remaining 21% show
no beveling other than the strong primary bevel, resulting in a
knife-like edge opposite the beveled edge (Fig. 28: H-B, K-4,
C, & F). In all cases, when handling them, one can easily determine a flat and an opposite "round" face to the blade.
Base edges, when worked at all, usually appear carelessly
finished or battered.
Lengths range from seven to fifteen centimeters, averaging
ten centimeters. The maximum widths vary from 2.2 centimeters to 4.5 centimeters, averaging 2.9 centimeters. The narrowest portion of the blade, usually at mid-point, ranges from
0.9 centimeters to 2.8 centimeters, averaging 1.4 centimeters.

Report of an Unknown Type of Implement

125

These pieces have a length: maximum width ratio averaging
3.1:1, and a length: minimum width ratio averaging 5.3:1. The
maximum: minimum width ratio is 2.3:1.
When a piece is found broken, the distance from base edge
to the break averages 4.2 cm. This break-distance: maximum
width ratio is 1.5:1. This ratio applied against unbroken items
would show a theoretical break point at 58 % of the length from
the point. This would leave 42% of the large end remaining.
In simpler terms, the breaks actually occurred at approximately
the center of the piece.
72% appear to have been made on a previously finished triangular blade; the remaining 28% appear to have been made
with only this implement in mind (Fig. 28: G, H, K, S, T).
Eighty-two per cent have the base worked; the remaining 18%
(Fig. 28: G, H, I4) show no appreciable base working.
Only two items in this group were not surface finds. Both of
these (Fig. 28: G, Q) were dug from Archaic levels (?) of
Central Texas burnt-rock middens. Item Q. has been eroded at
each end by fire action.
Sixty-six per cent of the specimens have straight bases, 22%
have concave bases, and 16% have convex bases. The points in
all cases show abrasion and wear. The tips are not finely pointed,
and appear to have been deliberately made blunt in some cases
(Fig. 28: K-4, O, T). The strongly beveled edge in most cases
shows considerable wear and use, as in scraping.
The primary item of interest is that these tools were used as
prying instruments in addition to scraping, and probably this
prying was of greater use than the scraping function, to judge
from the type of breakage from lever action.
1. In all save one instance, the breaks are at right angles to
the long axes of the blades, rather than at a diagona! as is seen
in most broken drills, reamers, etc.
2. The point being polished, worn and even battered seems to
indicate that the point was introduced with difficulty into a
small, abrasive opening.

126

Texas A~’cheological Society

3. Experiments with broken flint tools which the writer
clamped in a vise, and slowly forced past their breaking points,
indicate that in all cases there are certain consistent characteristics to the break to show on which face the force was exerted.
These characteristics when applied to the tools in question show
that 80% had the force applied to the round surface of the
blade. Thus, if the point were immobilized in a narrow aperture
with the round face uppermost, the pressure was downward.
Conversely, if the fiat side were uppermost, the pressure was
from underneath pulling up. The first is the simplest and commonest type of lever.
This high ratio of breaks from pressure exerted on the same
side suggests a specific use, probably highly specialized. The
lack of symmetry, eccentric shape, blunt point, and specialized
type of break rules out several possibilities for use, including
drills, reamers, borers, knives, and spoke-shave scrapers (as a
primary function). It does not rule out such possibilities as
wood-groovers (trough-makers), sotol-peelers (if such were
needed), marrow-extractors and bone scrapers, and musselopeners. In every case, sites producing these pieces also produced numerous mussel shells, most having one end battered off
or a small hole punched through the wall. The writer is of the
opinion that these tools could have served very well to pry open
a mussel which previously had been broached by battering or
punching, and suggests the name of "mussel-opener" in lieu of
a more logical term.
6229 Malvey Avenue
Fort Worth 16, Texas

