SOME THOUGHTS ON HOAXES AND FAKES
ROBERT F. HEIZER

ABSTRACT
The long history of hoaxes and frauds in archeology is reviewed, and
some modern-day examples are examined. Such problems are only one of
the manifestations of the ever-increasing trend of site destruction and the
loss of archeological information.

Professional archeologists are often (perhaps most often) not the
individuals who make the initial discovery of an important archaeological site. Part of the price that archeologists must pay for
working in a field of inquiry which has popular appeal is that of
having the general public becoming interested and entering, usually
uninvited and often without sufficient training, into the search for
and collection of prehistoric materials. Unlike most other nations, the
United States does not claim federal ownership and control of antiquities. The result of this, abetted by a situation where the public has a
good deal of spare time, money, and the ability to transport itself, is
that a large number of citizens have turned to do-it-yourself archeology, an avocation commonly referred to as "pot-hunting." Some
professionals, and organizations that are largely professional in their
membership and aims, have drawn a sharp distinction between
amateurs (however well meaning they may be) and professional archeologists (American Antiquity, Vol. 27, pp. 137-138, 1961). Such
professions of faith may do more harm than good, since they can have
the effect of amplifying the "natural" antipathy between the two
groups rather than drawing them together to work toward a common
aim. Amateurs and collectors increasingly tend to organize themselves into archeological "societies" which are regretably all too often
nothing more than pot-hunting clubs with social activities and the
good-fellowship of showing their arrowpoints (usually arranged in
floral designs in picture frames) to fellow members. A spirit of competition and rivalry between such groups is not unknown. Thus we
have rival non-professional collector groups who compete for the
limited supply of archeological materials not only between themselves but also with the professional archeologists (Nickerson 1962)
and the trained amateur archeologists. There is no need to recite the
dreary tale of plundered local archeological sites, since each area of
the United States has experienced this destruction of the unique
record of the past. The failure of many state and federal agencies to
protect archeological sites, and their refusal to investigate and prosecute persons known to despoil sites on public lands, is a similar tale of

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

crying over spilled milk, with little prospect of improvement
(Agogino and Sachs 1960).
Where this unregulated, and often unprincipled, activity of relic
collectors can really hurt is when they decide to "fool the experts"
and create a hoax. The motivations of persons who claim to have
found, or deliberately introduce an extraneous bone or artifact into a
deposit with the hope and intent of leading the unsuspecting finder to
believe that the specimen was in situ, are no doubt as varied as the
number of occurrences. Some such attempts to defraud are so clumsy
and inept that they are readily recognizable as such (e.g. McKelvey
1947; Rieth 1970). Others are better done and are motivated by a
genuine effort to mislead. Archeologists know and talk about these, I
am sure, but they should perhaps be rather more on their guard than
they seem to be. A few examples will serve to illustrate some dangers
of hoaxes, plants, and frauds.
In the Far West the oldest hoax is that of the Calaveras skull, said to
have been found at Altaville in 1866 lying in Pliocene gravels at a
depth of 130 feet (for bibliography, see Heizer 1948:3-7). The great
American geologist, Josiah Dwight Whitney, bit hard on this hoax,
and its true nature was not fully and finally exposed until nearly half a
century later. A second probable such hoax, possibly engineered as
the Comstock Mining District’s answer to California’s claim, was the
little known Ophir skull (Reichlen and Heizer 1966). The famous
Piltdown hoax was also finally and completely exposed after nearly a
half century of debate and controversy. There was another fraud, not
unlike Piltdown, which was perpetrated on the "father of prehistory,"
Boucher de Perthes, who in 1863 became the victim of the hoax of the
Moulin Quignon human jaw said to have been found by workmen in
the Pleistocene gravels (Oakley 1964:111-116). Lubbock
(1878:360-61) in his Pre-Historic Times, the first general book on
prehistory, observed that archeologists were already facing the problem of forged Paleolithic flint tools. Boucher de Perthes "bit" on faked
stone handaxes in 1863 (Rieth 1970:34).
Mexico today is a country where the manufacture of beautiful but
fake stone carvings and magnificent pottery imitating prehistoric
forms thrives. This industry is fed and encouraged by European and
American collectors. Such items do not have to be laboriously planted
in sites and t~en discovered; they are merely made, sent to American
and European dealers, and sold with solemn promises of their
genuine nature to gullible buyers. No great harm is done by this kind
of exploitation; and most archeologists and museum directors are
aware of some of the kinds of objects being made for this trade.
Museums, despite their care in not acquiring forgeries, are at times

HOAXES AND FAKES

193

fooled. A notable case is that of the three magnificent terracotta
sculptures of Etruscan warriors acquired by the Metropolitan
Museum of Art between 1915 and 1921, and not proved until 1959 to
be modern forgeries (yon Bothmer and Noble 1961). Some of the ways
in which fakes have been detected are explained by Easby and Dockstader (1964), Hoving et. al. (1968), Stross (1960), Rieth (1970), Wakeling (1912), Plenderleith (1952) and Ekholm (1964).
The problem is somewhat different, however, when we come to
allegations that an artifact of significant type, and claimed to have
been found in its original position in an important site, is suspected of
having been planted there. The Clovis fluted point said to have been
found at Lewisville, Texas, in what was interpreted as an ancient
hearth has been claimed by several prominent archeologists to have
been planted, a statement which has been rejected as untrue by one of
the discoverers. Where do we stand, then, on the Lewisville Clovis
point? The archeologists who have published their belief that the
Lewisville Clovis point was planted should produce the evidence
they presumably have; otherwise we may never know whether or not
this kind of chipped tool was or was not being made in Texas over
37,000 years ago. Whether, as I believe, but as some others doubt, the
Lewisville hearths are nothing more than carbonized nests of pack
rats (Heizer and Brooks 1965) and have nothing to do with man, is
beside the question. There is still that Clovis point whose legitimacy
is in doubt, and since this question presumably can be answered, this
should be done by persons claiming to be in possession of the true
facts.
More recently at Valsequillo, Puebla (Mexico), Dr. J. L. Lorenzo
(1967) has stated that many of the stone artifacts found by the Harvard
University expedition and said to have an antiquity of 40,000 years or
more were deliberately planted by the workers. The charge is serious
and it can have only one effect -- to throw doubt on any and all
artifacts found by the American excavators. Until Lorenzo’s charges
can be proved to be true or in error, or until some other excavator finds
more artifacts at Valsequi!lo under conditions which admit of no
question of their being in situ, no decision is possible as to the
presence of ancient man at this locality. Attempts by the American
investigators to refute Lorenzo’s charges (e.g. Irwin-Williams n.d.) do
not settle the problem -- they merely enlarge it.
A happier outcome of an attempt to defraud archeologists in Oklahoma is briefly, and forthrightly, denounced by Leonhardy (1966,
preface). In this case no harm was done because the perpetrator was
discovered and "confessed his misdeed."
A final class of "fakes" are the ones which were not, or presumably

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

were not, made with the intention to fool or mislead archeologists.
Among these is the famous "dolmen" in New Jersey and the obviously
modern petroglyphs reported from seven localities in California and
Nevada and where some 73 symbols are inscribed (Elsasser and Contreras 1958). Here it is suggested that their makers were motivated "on
behalf of some organization which set great store on mystical rites, or
would encourage the placing of the symbols in the hope that at some
future date they might constitute evidence, for example, of the presence of migrants from ’lost continents’ such as Atlantis or Mu."
As time passes and private collectors acquire more and more of the
finite supply of archeological materials, archeologists will of necessity have to dep end upon those collectors who p ermit their hoardings
to be studied to determine the kinds of prehistoric materials which
occur in certain areas where proper archeologicat investigation was
not carried out before the disappearance of the important sites. Some
amateurs do adopt professional methods to the extent, at least, of
cataloguing their collections, but many depend upon their memory or
assumption that a shoebox of uncatalogued artifacts were all found at
the same spot. The opportunity for mixture and error is so obvious
that it does not require comment, but the pertinent point here is that
any misplaced item which is not recognized as such becomes, automatically, a hoax -- an unwitting one, but nevertheless a possible
¯ source of error. It is my belief that there should be greater efforts made
by responsible archeologists to encourage private collectors to refine
their collecting techniques and to catalogue their materials. Only to
the extent that collectors can be successfully encouraged to adopt the
minimally required practice of making a record of the context of their
finds can we ever hope to salvage something useful from the tremendous destruction which they have wrought. The cost professionals must reckon in refusing to communicate with collectors and
amateurs is the loss of information whose uniqueness alone should be
sufficient reason to justify the effort.

HOAXES AND FAKES

i95

REFERENCES CITED

Agogino, G. A. and S. Sachs
1960 The Failure of State and Federal Legislation to Protect Archaeological
Resources. Tebiwa, Vol. 3, pp. 43-46.
yon Bothmer, D. and J. V. Noble
1961 An Inquiry Into the Forgery of the Etruscan Terracotta Warriors in the
’Metropolitan Museum of Art. Metropolitan Museum Papers No. 11.
Easby, D. T. and F. J. Dockstader
1964 Requiem for Tizoc. Archaeology, Vol. 17, pp. 85-90.
Ekholm, G. F.
1964 The Problems of Fakes in Pre-Columbian Art. Curator, Vol. 7, pp.
19-32.
Elsasser, A. B. and E. Contreras
1958 Modern Petrography in Central California and Western Nevada.
University of California Archaeological Survey Report No. 41:12-18.
Heizer, R. F.
1948 A Bibliography of Ancient Man in California. University of California
Archaeological Survey Report No. 2.
Heizer, R. F. and R. A. Brooks
1965 Lewisville--Ancient Campsite or Wood Rat Houses? Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology Vol. 21, pp. 155-165.
Hoving, T. P. F. et. al.
1968 The Game of Duplicity. Metropolitan Museum of Art, Bulletin Vol. 26,
pp. 241-252.
Irwin-Williams, C.
n.d. Comments on Allegations by J. L. Lorenzo Concerning Archaeological
Research at Valsequillo, Puebla. Paleoindian Institute, Eastern New
Mexico University, Miscellaneous Publications.
Leonhardy, F.
1966 Domebo: a Paleo-Indian Mammoth Kill in the Prairie-Plains.
Contributions of the Museum of the Great Plains, No. 1. Great Plains
Historical Association, Lawton, Oklahoma.
Lorenzo, J. L.
1967 Sobre metodos arqueologicos. Instituto Nacional de Anthropologia e
Historia, Boletin No. 28, pp. 48-51.
Lubbock, J.
1878 Pre-Historic Times, as Illustrated by Ancient Remains, and the Manners and Customs of Modern Savages. 4th ed. London, F. Norgate.
(First edition, 1865).
McKelvey, N.
1947 Rome on the Range. Westways, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 12-13.
Nickerson, G. S.
1962 Considerations and Problems of Vandalism and Pot-Hunting in
American Archaeology. Montana State University, Anthropology and
Archaeology Papers, No. 22.
Oakley, K. P.
1964 The Problem of Man’s Antiquity: an Historical Survey. Bulletin of the
British Museum (Natural History), Geology, Vol. 9, No. 5.
Plenderlieth, H. J.
1952 Fakes and Forgeries in Museums. The Museum Journal, Vol. 52, pp.
143-148.

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Reichlen, P. and R. F. Heizer
1966 The Ophir Skull from Virginia City, Nevada. University of California
Archaeological Survey Report, No. 66, pp. 85-100.
Rieth, A.
1970 Archaeological Fakes. Praeger, New York.
Stross, F.
1960 Authenticity ofRelics Determined by Analysis.Analytical Chemistry,
Vol. 32, pp. 17A-24A.
Wakeling, A. F.
1912 Forged Egyptian Antiquities. London.
University of California, Berkeley

