175

A Summary and Discussion of Additional Findings
at the Gilbert Site, an Eighteenth-Century
Nortefio Occupation in Rains County, Texas
Jay C. Blaine

ABSTRACT
The Gilbert site, characterized in the 1967 Bulletin ofthe TexasArcheological
Society as an eighteenth century component of the Nortefio focus, was thought to
be a village of the Tawakoni, Kichai, or Yscani Indians. A large sample of trade
goods at the site was thought to be French, and its analysis constituted a major
contribution to knowledge of those artifacts. Subsequent investigations offer
alternatives to some conclusions and add new dimensions to the site’s interpretation.

INTRODUCTION
A formal investigation of the G ilbert site (41RA 13) was initiated in the summer
of 1962 by the Texas Archeological Society (TAS). The first group dig organized
by the TAS, this project was the immediate predecessor of what has become the
annual TAS Field School. The published results of this work comprise Volume 37
of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (Jelks 1967), and readers of this
article are urged to familiarize themselves with that important study.
Preliminary testing had yielded metal artifacts, possibly dating to the eighteenth or early nineteenth centuries, which were associated with native-made
pottery and lithics. Once the probable extent of the nonnative artifact recovery was
realized, one primary goal was to identify the time period involved. Other early
goals were to attempt specific identifications and the most likely sources of these
nonnative goods. The earlier testing had revealed some remnants of flintlock
firearms that could have been made at any point in a long time span. Examination
by specialists of a very similar but limited sample of flintlock firearms and other
artifacts presumed to be trade goods from the Pearson site (41RA5) had not clarified
the problem of sources or isolated a very useful time span for that site (Duffield and
Jelks 1961:77-79). The Pearson site, also in Rains County, was assigned to the
Nortefio focus.
The Nortefio focus was proposed to link several different sites apparently
occupied during some part of the eighteenth or early nineteenth centuries by groups
of"Southern" Wichita-speaking peoples. The scope of the archeological evidence
indicated that the Gilbert site also could be assigned to the Nortefio focus.
The shared language, Wichita, is one of the four languages of the Caddoan
peoples (the others are Caddo proper, Pawnee, and Arikara); the associated tribes
are the Taovaya, the Tawakoni, the Yscani, the Waco, and the Wichita proper. The
Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog&al Society 63 (1992)

176

Texas Archeological Society

Kichai are also included in the Nortefio focus although they spoke a separate
Caddoan tongue and were less well known (Newcomb 1961:250). The collective
term, Nortef~os (Nations or peoples of the North), was a label created by the
eighteenth century Spanish authorities mainly for lumping together the contrary
Texas Wichita-speaking groups and their affiliates. The label generally included
varied tribes who were known to the Spanish in provincial Texas but who lived to
the north of San Antonio, beyond effective Spanish control. Story (1985:85-86) has
now confined use of the term Norteho to a descriptive role for isolating the body of
archeological evidence attributed to the southern Wichita peoples themselves.
The Gilbert site, it is now realized, was to offer an unusually rich opportunity
for archeological observation of a group of Native Americans during a period when
both their own traditional tools and livelihood strategies, and those then available
through European contacts, were flourishing. Because the time span appeared to be
reasonably well limited and the site was mostly intact, the process of acculturation
in particular, surely would be happening here and should be clearly visible.
However, it is probable that we failed to realize the full potential of this opportunity.
Now, some 29 years later, no comparable Texas contact period site has been studied.
In addition, some major questions arising from the study of the site still remain
unanswered and require further consideration.
EARLY PROCEDURES AND FINDINGS
The Gilbert site has yielded the premier artifact sample presently known and
studied from among the Texas sites assigned to the Nortefio focus. However
probable it might appear, a Nortefio affiliation in the ethnohistorical sense is less
secure. Under "Conclusions" in the Gilbert site report, the probable tribal identification of the occupants is identified as Tawakoni, Kichai, or Yscani (Jelks
1967:244); subsequent authors have also suggested either Kichai again (Rohrbaugh
1982:54), or Caddoan (Skiles et al. 1980:9-10).
The Historic occupation of the site was estimated at between about 1730 and
1770, based on analysis of time-sensitive remains of firearms and glass beads. The
eventual recovery of a 1749 French coin, drilled for use as a pendant but essentially
unworn, helped emphasize the probable mid-eighteenth century context. Proposals
that the bountiful European goods found at the Gilbert site were primarily derived
from the French trade also were to prove valid.
Although there was to be a five-year delay before the excavation results would
be published, TAS members continued work at the site, and the additional artifact
sample was incorporated into the final report. In addition, the Harrises and the
Blaines used pertinent data gained from investigations at Gilbert to help clarify the
analysis of the Historic period artifacts from the Womack site, also assigned to the
Nortefio focus. (The Womack site would see earlier publication [Harris et al.
1965:287-363]).
With permission from the Gilberts, R. K. Harris and the author continued
testing at the Gilbert site on an intermittent basis after 1967. A detailed examination

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

177

of 19 more French trade hatchets recovered by Blaine from the site after 1966 has
been published (Blaine 1988:111-117), as have more summaries of the findings at
the Gilbert site (Richmond et al. 1985:128-129; Fox 1983:42-45).
Feature 8
Feature 8, the most prominently mounded feature on the site (Figure 1) was not
tested by the TAS, probably because of three large potholes there. In March 1965,
a slumping of one lower face in the most central pothole slightly exposed what
proved to be the end of a flintlock gunlock. A 3-foot (0.92 m) test square excavated
down to the gunlock exposed two more gunlocks nested atop the first. The
uppermost gunlock was at the contact between an overlying red clay deposit, some
26 cm thick at this point, and a dark brown sandy deposit that contained this cache.
The red clay zone was capped with a sandy loam layer 5 to 8 cm thick; the maximum
thickness of the red clay cap in the test square was 39 cm.

@

@

METERS

Figure 1. Plan of the Gilbert site, Upper Sabine River drainage, northeastern Texas.

178

Texas Archeological Society

The fill excavated above the gunlocks had very few artifacts, but the dark brown
zone contained several broken deer bones, one broken end scraper, and a fragment
of smoothed sandstone. Despite the ordinary nature of this part of the feature, the
three gunlocks themselves may justify extra consideration for Feature 8 in the future
(Blaine and Harris 1967:47-52).
Only the most easily removed parts (the upper cock jaws and their screws)
were missing from two of these gunlocks; the jaw screw was missing from the third
gunlock, but the upper jaw was present (see flintlock musket diagrams in Jelks
1967:Figures 26 and 27), although it had been moved to the inside of the gunlock
and hung loosely over the sear arm. This particular placement indicated that the
gunlock had been laid in place with some care and not simply tossed to the ground.
This gunlock also has no frizzen. The close association and placement of these three
gunlocks also argue against their random disposal onto a trash midden.
These gunlocks were the only relatively complex firearms components in the
site that had not been completely disassembled. Several other gunlocks here are
traceable only by their often widely separated parts, so this cached group may have
special significance in the function of this feature, perhaps reflecting a version of
the "killed" offerings that are sometimes associated with burial rituals.
Feature 20
Soon after the Gilbert report was submitted for publication, testing at Feature
20 revealed the only unmistakable storage pit found there. Unlike the two pit
features of undetermined function found during the TAS investigations (Jelks
1967:14-15), this was a classic bell-shaped pit (Figure 2). The pit’s bottom was 101
cm below the surface; the lower half had been excavated 52 cm into the basal red
clay. Virtually all of the bone found was in the lower 29 cm of pit fill; all were deer
bones except for a few pieces of box turtle shell. Although the pit fill had a very high
ash content, including some small pieces of charcoal and four fragments of burned
bone, there was no evidence of any general burning of either the artifacts in the fill
or the pit walls and floor. At the very bottom of the pit was one slightly damaged
clay elbow pipe with a slight spur at the hee!, typical of those found elsewhere in the
site (Jelks 1967:Figure 66).
The lowest 29 cm of pit fill also had such Historic period artifacts as one
Cornaline d’Aleppo glass bead in bugle form, a fragment of probable mirror glass,
several small fragments of disintegrated iron, and a fragment of a European spall
gunflint. This same sample of fill also contained nine pieces of unmodified stone,
two stones altered by abrasion or pecking, 67 small chert flakes and chips (four of
Florence chert from northern Oklahoma), six small end scrapers, two distal tips of
arrowpoints and one reworked Fresno point of Florence chert, three sherds (one
probably Womack Engraved), and a few small pieces of bark.
Except perhaps for the bone component, the pit fill seems characteristic of the
refuse to be expected from a series of housekeeping efforts in a limited area of the
site. Prior testing in Feature 20 itself did not indicate anything suggesting a floor
level. From surface to clay, the deep sand matrix had a clean, almost sugary,

Blaine m Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

179

J

/

\

/

\

I
\
\

I
I

i

i

\

0

t
0

1 FOOT

i

I
1 METER

Figure 2. Plan and profile of the bell-shaped pit in Feature 20 at the Gilbert site.

-)¢

180

Texas Archeological Society

composition without midden staining or apparent lensing. This sand zone averaged
39 cm in depth and, except for one firearm part, the upper 21 cm of sand contained
no artifacts. The remaining 18 cm down to the clay contained the balance of the
artifacts in these sands. Since as many as three small Gary points were also found,
it appears probable that the excavations in the feature area also sampled prehistoric
deposits.
LATERPROCEDURES

The Blaines worked at the Gilbert site until the 1980s, when the appearance of
survey markers for the Lake Fork Reservoir that was to be constructed by the Sabine
River Authority terminated the investigations.
In the earlier post-TAS dig phase, all of the excavations were confined to the
areas around the known features. However, several excavation units were still open
and soon attracted attention from non-TAS members. The site was especially
vulnerable to the public; it had several different owners who had long allowed
access to fishermen. On one memorable day, Harris and Blaine underwent hours of
very close scrutiny by a series of nonfishermen who approached, one by one, from
the river bottoms. These folk, it developed, were lookouts for a very large game of
chance that was taking place nearby. We were both pleased to have been judged
although obviously eccentric, apparently not a threat.
Early use of a metal detector at the site merely resulted in locating the TAS’s
kitchen trash pit, according to R. King Harris, and a few years were to pass before
increasing signs of such use by others became obvious again. Fortunately, by that
time at least most of the more easily detected metal artifacts had been located,
mapped, removed, and conserved by Blaine. Two of the later collections made by
others who used metal detectors eventually became available for examination and
recording. In each of these samples, a fragment was found to cross-fit one collected
by Blaine. Regrettably, no specific recording of locations, context, or any other
associations had been done by these collectors. The scope of their combined
samples, apparently collected over a very limited number of visits, highlights the
impact that skilled metal detector operators can have on a Historic period site. This
was especially notable in the bias towards the recovery of the copper alloy artifacts
in comparison with those in the controlled collection. These nonferrous artifacts are
preferred by collectors because they are judged as initially more attractive, can be
polished up, and do not soon fall apart in collection displays. The more experienced
operators commonly can tell the difference between these brass and iron metals
without excavation and usually will ignore the least desired iron objects, passing
over iron objects comparable in size to a small nail.
One of these outside collections contained seven pieces of brass round stock in
three different diameters; one at 3.7 mm, three at 5.3 mm, and three at 6.3 mm. The
longest piece was 50 mm and the shortest 14 mm long. All are, then, characteristic
of remnants left over from forming C bracelets from stock. A single such bracelet
was found in the TAS excavations (Jelks 1967:Figure 46a). Only this outside

Blaine ~ Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

181

collection provided evidence that wire of at least three different diameters was being
supplied to the site as stock and that bracelets were made at the site. This emphasizes
how scant and vulnerable the evidence of some function s can be in the archeological
record. It seems probable that the evidence of this particular workshop was found
in one very small area and that the workshop was the product of one individual.
Once it became evident that sporadic disturbance of the site was continuing
from year to year, a form of salvage investigations was initiated. This procedure was
undertaken with serious misgivings, however, because it had to involve extensive
use of the metal detector, and any degree of justification for its use was again based
on the need to salvage information from the site before it became totally disturbed.
Since the use of the metal detector is vulnerable to abuses if no proper controls
are maintained on the findings, care was taken to maintain satisfactory controls at
this level. Up to this time, attempts to maintain the customary controls during the
post-TAS excavations themselves were frequently thwarted. In cases where a test
pit could not be excavated, recorded, backfilled, and concealed in one visit, it
became all too common to find that these excavations had been thoroughly shoveled
through by others before they were completed. Sometimes there was no evidence
of screening; possibly the goal in these instances had been worms for fishing. Here
also, as is often the case, weekend excavations were soon trampled by pastured
cattle.
A set of improvised controls was created in an attempt to reduce the regrettable
impact on the site resulting from the location and removal of metal artifacts through
detector use. Once an object was located as precisely as possible, very minimal
disturbance of the matrix was done to reach it. In this site the vast majority of such
artifacts detected were less than 13 cm deep and were excavated by trowel.
Commonly the artifacts were small enough that an area no more than 8 or 10 cm in
diameter was disturbed, and the nature of matrix in this area was recorded, as was
the position of the artifact if it was not parallel to the general ground surface. The
depth below surface was recorded, and any other objects from the area of disturbance were assigned lot designations. All earth excavated from the standard tests
was sifted through quarter-inch screen and, at the maximum, in the absence of
recognized soil zoning or cultural levels, troweled or shoveled in 6-inch (about 15
cm) levels.
For mapping, each artifact location was plotted by using a prismatic compass
and a tape measure, then recorded on a master site map (this map is on file with the
author and is available to appropriate persons). The entire historic archeological
area of the Gilbert site was remapped for consistency and to include the newer
locations. A partly arbitrary diameter of twenty feet (6.1 m) was assigned for each
midden excavated by the TAS, and any findings outside these 20-foot circles that
were in apparently undisturbed areas were recorded and mapped individually
(Figure 1).
After factoring out the metal objects of recent age, about 580 artifacts recovered
throughout the site by use of the metal detector were mapped. More than nine
percent of the artifacts from the limited area that had been opened for retrieval of

182

Texas Archeological Society

the metal were accompanied by other artifacts, such as animal bones and/or
potsherds or lithics. It is certain that there were some other potentially useful
associations, but they were not obvious because of the severely restricted size of
each retrieval excavation.
However, there were other indications of hidden features. Mapping of the metal
signals revealed cluster patterns that indicated specific subareas with possible
features. The mapping of metal artifacts also revealed that the eighteenth century
area of the Gilbert site is about a third larger than had been previously known (Figure
1); the added territory and the main part of the site appear to be essentially
homogenous. There are seven new cases of cross-fitting broken brass firearms parts
from separate parts of the site. Features 2 and 4 of the TAS excavations were linked
in this way to matching pieces found deep in the extended site area; the pieces of the
Feature 2 match were 190 meters apart.
The 580 metal artifacts found in the more recent investigations at the Gilbert
site represent a diversity of tools. The fu!l range of the 240 firearms specimens
include butt plates, trigger guards, side plates, barrels, gunlocks, rampipes, sears,
and screws, and a single escutcheon (see below). S mall fragments of kettle brass and
iron account for more than 216 more artifacts (including six brass kettle lugs),
followed by 48 folding- and case-knife fragments, four of which were complete
knives. Iron axes or hatchets are represented by 19 pieces (see Blaine 1988), and
there are 16 bridle bit pieces, including rings, mouth and cheek bars, bridges, two
"figure 8" links, and one port. There are eight iron hoes in the metal detector sample,
seven possible Spanish sword fragments (2 blades, 4 guards, and 1 pommel), and
seven iron scrapers manufactured from larger pieces of metal. Rounding out on the
metal assemblage are five awls, three pairs of scissors, three iron projectile points
(two are arrow sized and the third is a spear), and a single skewer.
The two most outlying metal clusters tested proved to be midden concentrations with no obvious surface indications; the areas involved had never been in
cultivation, and neither midden had been capped with clay. These features were
designated F-B 3 and F-B4, and their contents, although fewer in numbers, generally
matched well with those from features excavated by the TAS. Again, however, there
was no evidence of postmolds, floor surfaces or suitable depressed sections,
fireplaces, or other structural features noted in the excavated areas. A few clay
lumps were identified, but not enough to assume the existence of wattle and daub
houses; the occasional daub impressions were small, probably from grasses or very
slender twigs. The bits of daub found in at least six other features at this site were,
as was customary, presumed to be from clay-plastered houses (Davis et al. 1967:1415). More recently, however, the assumption that such daub always indicates houses
or huts in the Caddoan-speaking area has been seriously questioned (Gilmore
1986:23-24).
It seems clear now that any future attempts to clarify details of site usage should
focus on the intermidden areas rather than on the middens themselves, for larger
areas need to be exposed to make it possible to recognize possible postmold
alignments and to evaluate activity areas. For example, of the later sample of 19

Blaine ~ Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

183

more French trade hatchets reported at the Gilbert site, only three were closely
associated with midden concentrations (Blaine 1988:111-117).
At least two noteworthy categories are now added to the Gilbert site artifact
inventory: hoes and swords. Five French trade hoes and parts of at least three sword
hilts, all from the same type of sword, have been identified in this later sample. Two
of the hoes (Figure 3) were found nested or cached together with a box turtle
carapace in Feature F-B3, but neither hoe shows any signs of use or damage, perhaps
indicating that this midden may have been among the last to have been used; or the
absence of wear might indicate that no tasks required hoes. These hoes are of
different types; both are among the eighteenth century forms reported from the
Trudeau site in Louisiana, another site strongly oriented to supplies from French
sources (Brain 1979:144-148). In the sample from Gilbert, since one of these hoes
bears the same stamped C B mark that is found on one of the French trade hatchets,
we know that both types originated from the same manufacturer. Regrettably, there
is nothing else these marks can tell us at this time beyond indicating that the hoes,
together with many other items used in the French trade, probably were supplied
from production intended for the domestic French market.
The sword remains include parts of three or more individual sword guards and
onepommel, as well as two possible blade fragments (Figure4). These swords were
of the regulation Spanish cavalry broadsword type commonly in use by 1750
(Brinckerhoff and Chamberlain 1972:79-80).
The metal artifact sample from the site assemblage is now severely skewed, but
real benefits have been gained from the sample. Enough additional firearms remains
have been added to the original sample that both personal and French trade types can
be isolated at the site, as can those of probable military origin. Among the French
trade guns themselves, even the different grades of quality indicated in lists of
supplies for French Louisiana can be demonstrated, so the high quality of the fusil
hardware at Gilbert, some of which have thoroughly professional hand engraving
and design, is very evident (Figure 5). The decorative escutcheon is the only
example known from the site, and the sideplate is the only complete version from
Gilbert. The formidable depth and validity of the overall French trade gun sample
from the Gilbert site has been clearly established.
The count for firearms pieces from recent investigations was 240; in addition,
32 more have been verified in other collections, so the total is now 440 firearms
pieces from the Gilbert site. However, this figure is somewhat misleading because
the larger parts--the barrels in particular have invariably been reduced to several
pieces. Their thinner-walled sections can be flattened with relative ease and often
tend to split into halves that make convenient stock for tools such as projectile points
and scrapers.
Taking various combinations into consideration, it can be estimated that at
least 20 individual firearms were discarded and reduced to parts and fragments
here. Why were they discarded? Springs are elements of these flintlocks that are
especially susceptible to breakage, and the mainsprings are the most frequently
broken; five of at least nine found so far are broken. That leaves four such

184

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

0
!

I

!

3 CENTIMETERS
J

Figure 3. Photograph illustrating the two different types of trade hoes cached in Feature FB3 at the Gilbert site.

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

0
1

I

1

185

3 CENTIMETERS
l

Figure 4. Photograph of parts of a Spanish sword hilt and a drawing incorporating a bilobate
shell guard (adapted from Brinckerhoff and Chamberlain 1972: 80-82).

186

Texas Archeological Society

3 CENTIMETERS
I

0

t,

0
!

3 CENTIMETERS
I

Figure 5. Photographs of an engraved silver(?) escutcheon, above, and a brass sideplate for
fusils, below, both from the Gilbert site.

weapons that apparently were discarded for other reasons. There has been only
one obvious barrel failure--a ruptured muzzle---typical to this day of the damage resulting from firing similar guns when they are plugged with mud or snow.
Too, an eventual wearing of the frizzen face from repeated abrasion by the
gun flint can remove the necessary case-hardened surface and result in sparking
failure, but this fault probably will not be traceable on archeological specimens.
In several cases from other sites, the threaded parts of side screws and cock jaw
screws have been moderately flattened; since these threads were almost worn
away, the flattening probably was a logical field expedient for tightening the

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

187

mechanism in the absence of replacement parts or threading tools. The long
service lives of at least some of these shoulder guns from Gilbert are demonstrated by the fact that some of the engraved decorations have almost disappeared
from the brass furnishings as a result of polishing alone.
A list of supplies for the Colony of Louisiana in 1733 includes parts for
gunlocks for trade guns (Brain 1979:300-301), including cocks, frizzens, and
unspecified springs.
The Nature of the Occupation
Considering the size of the Gilbert site and the affluence reflected by the sheer
quantity and nature of the European goods found there, it seems almost proven that
this was a sedentary village, but a village usually needs to be a year-round
occupation site for a substantial part of its population. Villages commonly have
structures for shelter, which can be expected to leave construction signs in the
ground. The need to shelter and feed most of the population at a given time,
especially during long winter months, calls for extensive use of fire hearths and
storage pits. The demographics of a village population probably will result in a
relatively significant death rate, often manifested by burials and even cemeteries.
Identification of pottery-making sites and task-specific work by women are also
excellent indicators of permanent villages.
A broad menu of seasonality factors in the archeological record, including
construction of substantial shelters, winter-oriented procurement of food, and the
presence of agricultural tools, provides markers that indicate a relatively permanent
village, as contrasted with the more limited attributes of shorter-term occupations.
The data on the Gilbert site, by these criteria and at the present stage of investigation,
apparently do not demonstrate an occupation at the village level. Without question,
however, there was an occupation at a very intensive level and probably of a special
nature.
When definite seasonal preferences can be traced in the occupation of sites,
they can be used to help distinguish between the relatively permanent villages and
signi ficantly shorter-term usage o f si tes. Lorrain (1967:234), studying the estimates
of age at death for 11 of the white-tailed deer at the Gilbert site, and assuming that
the fawns were born in May or June (Lorrain 1967:231), concluded that they were
taken throughout the year. However, Gregory (1973:245) points out that these data
are based on Florida deer and that they may not apply to northeastern Texas where
the climate and vegetation environments are different. In support, Gregory (1973)
offers examples of fawn births in seasons other than May or June for Louisiana.
More recent data using deer teeth for this purpose support an estimate of a late
winter or early spring kill season for the remains of three out of four white-tailed
deer from one trash pit at the mid-eighteenth century Trudeau site in the Lower
Mississippi Valley. Here a di fferent seasonal estimation technique was used, which
depended on the local ecology and, most especially, on the average dates of the first
and last killing frosts (Spiess 1988:418-419). In both examples, only a very limited
selection of the deer teeth was suitable for these estimates; therefore, for these and

188

Texas Archeological Society

the above reasons, a larger data base with emphasis upon more environmental
factors seems warranted.
R. K. Harris reported finding plum pits in at least one midden at the Gilbert site
(Gregory 1973:246). The Blaines also found plum pits in two more features.
Gregory (1973) notes that this fruit ripens only in late summer in Texas.
The Blaines found pieces of box turtle shell in the Feature 20 pit and many
pieces in F-B3 and F-B4; at least eight of the other features contained similar
remains. These terrestrial turtles are not active and available except in late spring,
summer, and early fall, as are their kin on the site to this day.
Although limited, these floral and faunal data also lend stronger support for
a general spring-to-fall season of occupation than for an occupation that continued through the winter months. In Gregory’s (1973:240-245) discussion of his
original model for an eighteenth century Caddoan hunting camp, this summer
period meshes quite well with the two stages of a seasonal round lived in encampments that were located away from the major village base and its agricultural resources and demands. Still, there is no reason to deny the possibility that
some episodes of occupation could have taken place in winter months, especially in view of the bell-shaped pit in Feature 20, and that some deer could
have been taken then as needed.
Gregory (1973:238-240), after examining the Gilbert site report, proposed that
its interpretation as a village site did not fully utilize other important data. For
Gregory, the findings suggested not a permanent village, but rather some type of
hunting camp with emphasis on gathering deer hides, and with one or two
seasonality phases that centered on the summertime.
In the analysis of animal remains, Lorrain (1967:225-229) counted the remains
of at least 127 white-tailed deer from only four of the middens. Half or more of these
deer carcasses were complete when they were brought into the site, but the general
absence of caudal vertebrae indicated that most hides were removed from the site,
and it was suggested that these were traded forEuropean goods. Gregory (1973:239)
states that the proposed occupation period for the site (about 1730 to 1770) coincides
well with the time of the maximum Louisiana trade for deer hides by the French. It
is worth noting here that the sheer size (418) of the original sample of end scrapers
also lends extra support to a fully implemented deer hide operation on a commercial
scale.
Gregory’s proposed Caddoan hunting camp model for the mid-eighteenth
century provides a valuable outline for comparing the attributes found at Gilbert
with those characteristic of a relatively permanent village occupation. However,
some details of a basic hunting camp model probably are too limited to accommodate the needs and composition of a workforce engaged in commercial hide
procurement as seems to be the case at Gilbert. For example, it appears probable that
a higher degree of task sharing might be called for under these special circumstances, and so there could be more female (or family?) participation there than
would be expected in the customarily male-dominated activity levels suggested by
Gregory (1973).

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

189

If future investigations fail to find house patterns at Gilbert, it should not be
assumed that there was no effective form of shelter there. Gregory (1973:239-240),
lacking adequate documentation on this aspect of seasonal Caddoan hunting
practices, used pertinent shelter data from the Pawnee--their kinsmen to the north.
For shelter in the summer encampments of their seasonal rounds, the Pawnee used
generally oval frameworks of small saplings covered with skins. A description of
the use of small field tents of deer skins by a Petit Caddo chief is quoted by Gregory
(1973:248), and elsewhere, the Caddo have been known to use temporary shelters
when hunting; their use of skin tents near Natchitoches, Louisiana, is also suggested
in French archival records (Kniffen et al. 1987:115).
The direct archeological evidence for such shelters under most conditions,
would be easily missed. With this forewarning, however, and with some emphasis
now on the areas between middens, more very careful work at Gilbert could still
provide answers needed for the fullest understanding of the types of activities that
took place there.
Evidence of agriculture that would be expected at a village, such as milling
stones or metates, manos, mortars for plant processing, and tools for cultivation
such as hoes, has not materialized so far at the Gilbert site. One bison scapula hoe
and one mano comprise the total of native tools that could have direct agricultural
applications. Even so, this mano, or muller, could be prehistoric, since it was found
in the same square and level in Feature 20 as a Gary projectile point. That leaves only
the five complete iron trade hoes, four of which show no evidence of use on their
sharp working edges; the fifth apparently was broken up for its metal. These tools
probably were brought directly to the site by a trader with a somewhat generalized
inventory. Another possibility is the diversion by theft--not uncommon in those
times--of a load of goods intended and more suitable for trade elsewhere. In any
case, the abandonment of apparently unused tools in the site remains puzzling.
There is no obvious sign of any loss of knapping skills among the makers of the
lithic artifacts found at the site; the Fresno arrowpoints and native-made gunflints,
for example, are finely crafted. The metal points also appear to be native-made, but
they are comparatively few in number. Some kinds of cherts are still being imported
from distant sources, and lithic scrapers far outnumber iron scrapers.
Despite the remarkable concentration and array of European goods at the
Gilbert site, the material evidence of other cultural adaptations has not been easy to
understand. Perhaps the best clues to these adaptations can be found in the alteration
of metal artifacts. Blaine (1988:116), in examining the trade hatchets from Gilbert,
noted from their condition that they were used primarily used for working metal
rather than wood. At Gilbert, there is a very strong pattern of experimentation with
metals; virtually everything of metal that could be cut and/or broken into smaller
pieces has been reduced, but as yet there is no readily discernible pattern of selective
removal from the site or of on-site use of many of the metal artifacts that may have
been produced.
The two trigger guards of brass from Feature F-B4 (Figure 6) seem to illustrate
this treatment of metal; these guards have been broken into smaller parts, and,

190

Texas Archeological Society

0
~,,

3 CENTIMETERS
I

I

l

Figure 6. Photographs of two broken, but almost complete, brass fusil trigger guards from
Feature F-B4, Gilbert site.

except for one rear finial, the only missing parts are the guard bows. Many virtually
identical segments of bows and finials broken from the same kinds of brass trigger
guards were scattered around the site, but they have not been modified further. This
situation may be analogous to cracking open a cobble of unfamiliar stone to see if
something of use is revealed by or because of the reduction process. In the absence
of a proper metal-working tool kit, the experimental hacking and breaking of large
units of metal into more useful smaller ones may simply be an application of an old

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

191

technology to a new medium, but the thoroughness and repetition of this particular
activity seems to reflect behavior more than simple curiosity.
Story’s team examined the pottery from Gilbert and drew several very
important inferences (Story et al. 1967:186-187). Among these are the suggestions
that "a single integrated socio-cultural group" accounted for the historic Native
American ceramics. Most of the decorated pottery was Caddoan in tradition, and
some types can be identified with the Historic Caddoan peoples in Texas. However,
the great diversity of the ceramics precludes a strictly local origin for the pottery
assemblage, and the fact that many vessels had been repaired or otherwise modified,
suggests that local pottery making, if any, was rather limited, and that acculturation
was possibly causing their replacement with European vessels.
Story and her colleagues (Story et al. 1967:187) also believe that the Gilbert
sample of plain pottery with bone and shell tempering was not typical of Late
Caddoan or Historic Caddoan ceramics. However, data now available indicate a
probable flux in Caddoan ceramic traditions at this particular period.
Gregory (1973) compared the native Caddoan pottery from Los Adaes with
pottery from other sites in northwestern Louisiana that were at least in part
contemporary with Gilbert. He found bone to be the major tempering agent, with
shell combinations following in frequency. In addition, Gregory found that the
major use of bone tempering was most evident after about 1740. Since he also found
that bone tempering was less common in the contemporary Caddo sites to the east,
he proposed that this trait originated among the more westward Caddoan groups;
this proposal is supported by more recent data from East Texas (H. F. Gregory,
personal communication, 1991).
All European containers found at Gilbert, except for a few bottle fragments,
were kettles (cooking vessels) of copper alloy. Examination of the reported sample
of bail ears from these thin metal vessels indicates that there were at least five kettles,
and at least four more can be isolated from the newer sample. All nine or more of
these containers are broken, and a few of the pieces were used as raw material for
ornaments, chiefly tinkler cones. From the evidences of wear, including some
repairs of the bail holes, it is obvious that these kettles saw much service before they
failed.
Oddly, it seems that there is no evidence of cast iron kettles at Gilbert, although
they were available through trade by this time. Judging from both the repaired
native-made pottery and the copper alloy metal kettles, some factors (including
mobility?) were causing considerable attrition among both of these classes of
containers. The sturdier iron kettles appear to have been especially desirable
because of their durability, but did their increased weight make them liabilities in
extended special-purpose encampments, so were the sturdy iron vessels left behind
in the more permanent village?
When the Gilbert site was occupied, that part of Texas had been well within
Spanish borders for many decades, but this was a mere technicality and did not
involve any real Spanish presence or influence. The amount of physical evidence
from Gilbert that can be identified as probably of Spanish origin is virtually

192

Texas Archeological Society

submerged in a sea of French trade material. With the exception of the horse gear,
only one firearms part, five parts of sword hilts (Figure 4), pieces of handle plate
from a belt knife or short sword, and four case-knife blades with spike tangs are the
sum of Spanish evidence at Gilbert. The latter two types of artifacts were linked to
Spanish origins since publication of the Gilbert site report in 1967 (e.g., Blaine
1982:123-125). The blades from the swords that are represented only by their hilts
probably underwent the conversion into metal spears and lance blades that has been
commonly documented as a practice of Native Americans in the Historic period.
Each of two brass parts of firearms pictured in the 1967 report was stamped with
a slightly different CrownR mark (Blaine and Harris 1967:Figure 37), and two more
pieces with Crown R marks, also brass gun furniture, have been excavated from
Feature F-B4. In this case, the two marks are apparently identical; all four parts are
broken but still do not appear to be stout enough to have come from military
firearms. Where enough of the shape has survived, the parts are consistent with
French civilian or trade shoulder gun styles. Although there apparently is no logical
connection or proof of any direct linkage, it must be noted that a Crown R mark was
required on military swords and guns produced for the Spanish crown by Royal
Ordinance beginning in 1728 (Brinckerhoff and Chamberlain 1972:30).
During the occupation of the Gilbert site by Native Americans, the policy of the
Spanish government still prohibited the supplying of firearms to the Indians of this
province (Bolton 1914, Vol. I:40). Just how efficiently the French traders circumvented this policy is dramatically underscored by the firearms sample from Gilbert.
Among the large array of French fusils tracked so far, there is only one example each
of English and Spanish firearms. The latter is represented by a single part--a
miquelet frizzen. One such frizzen, apparently modified into a scraper, has come
from the Spanish Fort locale in Montague County, Texas, and it is possible that the
Gilbert frizzen arrived on the site as a single part that was intended for similar
modification.
The seemingly casual discarding of so many useful metal objects, including
several undamaged knives at Gilbert, implies a remarkable degree of affluence, and
this generous example of waste is repeated in other categories of artifacts. The
indicated lack of interest in husbanding some of these resources suggests that the
possibility of shortages in supplies was not being seriously considered; this in turn
could imply that suppliers of such goods were actually on the site. The traders may
have been there for the sole purpose of bartering for hides, and perhaps even to
participate directly in the hunting and processing of the hides. However, the
descriptions of the living habits of French traders and/or woods runners of this
period lend no support to the possibility that their presence can be recognized solely
through archeology.
CONCLUSIONS
Although we have gained extra insight into their behavior and activities, the
tribal identity of the Native Americans who left all these clues at Gilbert remains

Blaine -- Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

193

uncertain. The data now best support two most promising lines of inquiry; one leads
through the southern Wichita to the Tawakoni, Kichai, or Yscani, as originally
suggested by Jelks (1967), and is supported by the general Nortefio character of the
archeological evidence. The other line o finquiry leads through the Caddoan groups.
The nature and frequency of the affiliations with Caddoan pottery traditions seem
especially telling at Gilbert, and even in quantity alone, the difference between the
amount of pottery used at Gilbert and in the more westerly, roughly contemporaneous (about 1750) and plains-oriented Nortefio sites at the Spanish Fort locale is
startling. Although native ceramic pipes are well represented in both places,
evidence for pottery among the Nortefios to the west is quite scarce in comparison
with the sample from the Gilbert site. Mobility alone should not have been a
significant factor, since both groups had horses and/or mules.
It is possible that what now appear to be definite Caddoan influences at Gilbert
may yet reflect the participation of an ethnological Nortefio sponsor; this would be
the Kichai, who are normally associated with the southern Wichita under the same
Nortefio umbrella, but are the least well known with that designation.
Rohrbaugh (1982:51-61) examined the possible origin of the Kichai with
emphasis on the native ceramics in the Arkansas River basin and hypothesized that
both the Gilbert and Womack sites might be identified with the Kichai. He quotes
Swanton (1942:54), who observed that the Kichai as a group habitually attached
themselves to the Wichita or their affiliates, or to the Caddo. Apparently the
language differences were not a real barrier, and these peoples apparently were
unusually mobile and adaptable. If this is a true characterization of the Kichai, it
follows that Kichai material culture might, at any given time, strongly reflect
influences from either or both southern Wichita or Caddo sources. At Gilbert, then,
it is also possible that we are seeing the results of one of these Caddo-Kichai
collaborations.
At present, one approach seem s most likely to help clarify problems like the one
at Gilbert. Such an approach would require a timely effort to further seek out,
identify, and analyze Caddoan habitation sites of the eighteenth century; any
additional emphasis should focus on the sites closer to the western fringes of the
Caddoan heartland. These habitation sites are unusually vulnerable to destruction
because of their high metal content and the uncontrolled use of metal detectors by
pothunters.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I express special gratitude to the John C. Gilbert and Lennon Gilbert families
for permitting continuing investigation of this site over a period of several years.
Hiram F. Gregory very generously allowed me to excerpt information freely from
his unpublished dissertation, which was especially relevant to this study. I also
express appreciation for the influence of the late R. King Harris, who urged my full
participation at Gilbert and encouraged this neophyte in many other ways. And
fundamental, as always, has remained the contribution of my wife, Jerrylee M.

194

Texas Archeological Society

Blaine. Although not always as eager about archeology as some of us, Jerrylee has
always worked generously, intelligently, and effectively to give direct support to
those of us who are more eager.

REFERENCES CITED
Blaine, Jay C.
1982
Analysis of Armaments and Associated Items. In: Excavations: 1981-1982,
Presidio de Nuestra Sehora del Pilar de Los Adaes, by Hiram F. Gregory with
Jay C. Blaine and S. Morrison. Office of State Parks, Baton Rouge.
1988

Trade Hatchets from the Gilbert Site. The Record. Fiftieth Anniversary Edition,
42(3): 111-117. Dallas Archeological Society.

Blaine, Jay C., and R. King Harris
1967
Guns. In: The Gilbert Site, A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas, edited
by Edward B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 37:33-86.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1914
Athanase de Mdzikres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-!780. 2 vols.
Arthur H. Clark, Cleveland.
Brain, Jeffrey P.
Tunica Treasure. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnol1979
ogy, Volume 71. Harvard University, Cambridge.
Brinckerhoff, S. B., and P. A. Chamberlain
Span&h Military Weapons in Colonial America 1700-1821. Stackpole Books,
1972
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
Davis, E. Mott, Kathleen Gilmore, L. Harper, R. King Harris, Edward B. Jelks, Charles A.
Smith, Jr., and B. Yancy
1967
The Site. In: The Gilbert Site, A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas,
edited by Edward B. Jelks. Bulletin of the TexasArch.eologicalSociety 37:1-15.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961
The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County,
Texas. Archeology Series, No. 4. Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin.
Fox, Daniel E.
1983
Traces ofTexas History : Archeological Evidence ofthe Past 450 Years. Corona,
San Antonio.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1986
French-Indian Interaction at an 18th-Century Frontier Post: The Roseborough
Lake Site, Bowie County, Texas. Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas
State University, Contributions in Archeology No. 3. Denton.

Blaine ~ Additional Findings at the Gilbert Site

195

Gregory, Hiram F.
1973
Eighteenth Century Caddoan Archeology: A Study in Models and Interpretation.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Harris, R. King, Inus M. Harris, Jay C. Blaine, and Jerrylee Blaine
1965
A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack Site,
Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin ofthe Texas Archeological Society 36:287-363.
Jelks, Edward B. (editor)
1967
The Gilbert Site, a Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeolog ical Society 37:1-248.
Kniffen, F. B., Hiram F. Gregory, and G. A. Stokes
1987

The Historic Indian tribes of Louisiana From 1542 to the Present. Louisiana
State University Press, B~ton Rouge.

Lorrain, Dessamae
1967

Animal Remains. In: The Gilbert Site, a Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern
Texas, edited by Edward B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
37:225-243.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Richmond, Jean A., William L. Richmond, and John W. Greer
1985
Texas Archeological Society Field Schools, 1962-1982. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 54:105-184.
Rohrbaugh, C.L.
An Hypothesis for the Origins of the Kichai. In: Pathways to Plains Prehistory:
1982
Anthropological Perspectives of Plains Natives and Their Pasts, Papers in
Honor of Robert E. Bell, edited by Donald G. Wyckoffand Jack L. Hofman, pp.
51-61. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoir No. 3. Oklahoma City.
Skiles, B. D., James E. Bruseth, and Timothy K. Pertmla
1980

A Synthesis of the Upper Sabine River Basin Culture History. The Record
(Newsletter of the Dallas Archeological Society) 36(1):1-10.

Spiess, A.
1988

Appendix H: Archaeozoology of a Tmdeau Trash Pit. In: Tunica Archaeology,
by Jeffrey P. Brain, pp. 418--422. Papers of the Peabody Museum ofArchaeology and Ethnology, Volume 78. Harvard University, Cambridge.

Story, Dee A.
1985

The Walton Site: An Historical Burial in McLennan County, Texas. Central
Texas Archeologist 10: 66-96.

196

Texas Archeological Society

Story, Dee A., B. Barber, E. Barber, E. Cobb, H. Cobb, R. Coleman, Kathleen Gilmore, R.
King Harris, and Norma Hoffrichter
1967
Pottery Vessels. In: The Gilbert Site, A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern
Texas, edited by Edward B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
37:112-187.
Swanton, John R.
1942

Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 132. Washington, D.C.

