Joseph B. Wilson
ABSTRACT
An extensive campsite in Fayette County (Texas) is located on a terrace
above Little Pin Oak Creek. This creek is a few miles north of the Colorado River.
The terrace consists of a clay base overlain by sand. The sand unit is approximately
one meter in depth, but varies due to depressions, ridges, and other features of the
clay. In February 1976, a test pit yielded a large Clovis point near the day base.
The point was evidently broken during manufacture. Its excellent, unabraded
condition indicates that it was not transported by stream action. Subsequently, a
connected, excavated area of 76 sq m yielded rock hearths, cores, preforms,
flakes, scrapers, gouges, Historic material, and approximately 30 spear points and
arrow points. Point types range from Paleoindian to Neo-American. The stratigraphy seems to be well preserved. Flaking debris occurred at the Paleoindian and
later levels. Indications are that the site is a stratified, multicomponent campsite.

INTRODUCTION
Site 41FY53 is located on a small farm in northwest Fayette County,
approximately three miles northwest of Winchester. It is on a sandy terrace
above Little Pin Oak Creek, about three miles north of the Colorado River.
The site runs along the creek for at least 300 m and is approximately 50 m
wide. Site elevation is approximately 100 m above sea level and about 10 m
above the creek bed. The sand is usually 1 m in depth. However, thickness
varies because of fluctuations in the clay base. Although not always flowing in
dry seasons, the creek never goes completely dry. The area is fertile, with
grasses, brush, and oak, pecan, and other trees. This region was woodland in
the late Pleistocene (16,000-14,000 BP), changing to savannah in the early
Holocene (10,000-6,000 BP) (Shafer, 1977:Figs. 1,2). Excellent chert is
abundantly available in the creek bed and on the slope below the terrace.

EXCAVATIONS
Surface collections of artifacts from 41FY53 and nearby sites (41FY54/
55/104) began about ten years ago. In February 1976, a test pit at 41FY53
yielded a large Clovis point. It was found in light gray sand at about 80 cm
depth, approximately 15 cm over the clay. Two large flakes (of different

136

Texas Archeological Society

chert), a few small black nodules (probably manganese ore), and a few small
gravel pebbles were in the same light sand above the clay.
From the surface to about 50 cm, the earth was darker and charcoal
stained. This deposit contained a number of fire broken rocks, a few chert
flakes, and a few natural gravel. The burnt rock formed an apparent layer at
approximately 45 cm. Other test pits showed a similar depth and stratigraphy,
with a number of Archaic and Neo-American projectile points in the upper
layers.
In July 1976, a test pit gave the first indication of the fluctuations in the
clay base. Its depth was 175 cm and there were considerable quantities of the
same black mineral in the lower sand. Connected excavations were begun in
this deeper area, about 8 m away from the Clovis point discovery.
Areas of I to 6 sq m were excavated at a time. Sediment was troweled
through arbitrary depth intervals of from 5 to 20 cm (as seemed appropriate to
the stratum being worked) and sifted through I/4 in mesh. Thus far, 67 sq m of
a projected 8 x 10 m rectangle have been excavated. An adjoining 9 × 1 m
test strip also was excavated. Its purpose was to extend the ridge profile
yielded by the west side of the basic rectangle.

~
~OL/~ADo
~"

FAYETTE

FY 53

CTY:

Fig. 1 Map of Texas showing location of Fayette County and site 41FY53.

Wilson -- Little Pin Oak Creek

137

Projectile points, cores, blades, scrapers, preforms, lithic debris, and fire
broken rocks were found at all levels. A number of larger and smaller rock
hearths were found, usually at median (probably Archaic) depth. A few
pieces of bone and animal and human teeth were discovered. Charcoal was
similarly rare, but a number of small pieces (up to a few cm in length) were
found.
The lowest sand typically contains small numbers of relatively large flakes
and other lithic artifacts, a few burnt rock fragments, and a few small natural
gravel. The upper part of the clay base (to a depth of about 15 cm) contains
similar materials but in greater isolation.
Figure 2 shows a north south profile along the west boundary of the
rectangle and the test strip. Reasons for clay base fluctuations are as yet
unclarified. The deeper areas (as at X-Z) seem to be pits rather than a channel. The ridge at R/S runs along the south wall of the rectangle for 8.5 m. The
shallowness of the sand to the north is typical for the vicinity of the rectangle,
as the clay rises towards the watershed. However, the apparent small channel
at P is not typical and still unexplained.
The shallowness of the test strip is also unusual, since test pits on both
sides of it have shown the more typical 90 to 130 cm depth. This shallowness
is probably due to the fact that the test strip runs towards a ridge of the slope.
The clay base at this point is part of a secondary watershed that is perpendicular to the creek.

ARTIFACTS
The excavation yielded a considerable quantity of important artifacts and
information. Besides flakes, cores, preforms, scrapers, blades, gouges, and
other tools, the rectangle yielded 30 projectile points of varied types.

o

Little

Pin

Oak

Creek

Site

Fayette County, Texas

Fig. 2 North-South profile of site 41FY53.

i

2m3

4

5

vert, exag,: 2:1

(41 FY53)

138

Texas Archeological Society

The chronological stratigraphy apparently is basically well preserved. Paleoindian artifacts occur on the clay surface and in the light sand above it,
followed by Archaic (e.g., Pedernales points), Neo-American (e.g., Scallorn
and Perdiz points), and Historic (e.g. metal knives, shell casings, a spur)
materials.
Careful analysis of all the materials is necessary to verify the stratigraphy.
Moreover, further considerable quantities of valuable materials from other
areas of the site are available from previous surface collections and test pits.
These materials can be used cautiously to augment materials from the current
excavation.
The Clovis point is made of opaque tan chert. Its length is 11.0 cm,
unbroked total length would have been about 13 cm; maximum width 4.2
cm; basal width 3.3 cm; maximum thickness 1.0 cm. There is one fairly large
flute on one face of the base and two smaller ones on the other face. Evidently, after putting in the flutes, the knapper was finishing the distal end
when a misstroke broke the artifact.
There is a small protrusion on the lateral edge at the breakage line which
was probably being trimmed at the time of the fracture. Base edges were not
smoothed, indicating that smoothing would have been added last. The spear
point is in perfect condition; a razor like edge along the upper part of the
fracture line is undisturbed. Evidently, the point was not transported by natural or human forces.
A large Plainview point was located on the clay base, about 10 m from the
Clovis one. This point is made of slightly translucent gray brown chert. Its
length is 5.6 cm, estimated total length 7.5 cm; maximum width 3.0 cm; base

CM
1

1
I

2
.... [

3
4
, I ............ t

5
I

Fig. 3 Clovis (below) and Plainview points (front and back; slightly reduced),

Wilson - Little Pin Oak Creek

139

width 2.6 cm; maximum thickness .75 cm. The basal edges were smoothed.
The edge flaking of the blade above the base was beveled, on the right side of
each face, leaving a slightly serrated edge.
Considerations of lateral outline and thickness seem to indicate that the
beveling is original and not the result of resharpening. However, microscopic
examination of the fractured distal end indicated some minor reworking
(Eileen Johnson, personal communication). The point was evidently broken
during use as a projectile. The concussion broke the top and shaft pressure
spalled bits of one side of the base, along the lateral and base edges.

SUMMARY
The Little Pin Oak Creek site is clearly a multicomponent campsite. There
is evidence of lithic manufacture from all levels (Paleoindian to NeoAmerican) and apparently well preserved, chronological stratigraphy. Besides the unfinished Clovis, at least one possible channel flake (with associated flakes nearby) was found in the Paleoindian sand layer. Careful
analysis will probably reveal others.
At a different part of the site (about 50 m away), a large base fragment was
found. It had a flute in one face which turned into the stone, breaking the
artifact. There is, thus, good reason to believe that thorough study of the
materials collected will show that Paleoindian fluted point knapping was being
conducted at the site.

CM

Fig. 4 Clovis (below) and Plainview points (front and back; slightly reduced). Dots
indicate extent of lateral grinding; arrows indicate spall.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Tunneli’s study (1977:143) of such knapping listed only two sites with this
kind of evidence in the state. The possible channel flake and possible fluted
base differ from the Folsom materials which form the basis of Tunnell’s (1977)
work. They may represent Clovis fluting techniques (Curtis Tunnell, personal
communication).
In the upper layers, such things as cores, arrow point preforms, and unfinished Scallorn points testify to later flint working activities.
The Fayette County location of the site is noteworthy, placing the Paleoindian campsite into the Upper Coastal Plain of Eastcentral Texas. Shafer
(1977:194) stressed the scarcity of Paleoindian "big game hunter" sites east
and south of the Balcones Escarpment, i.e., off the High Plains. Site 41FY53
is evidently a site of this type. Also, surface finds of Clovis and Plainview
points in Fayette County were reported at the Meier site (Meier and Hester,
1972, 1976) about 30 mi east of 41FY53.
The current excavation at the Little Pin Oak Creek site is continuing; it is
hoped that a complete report will be ready in 1980. Furthermore, other areas
of the site offer promising prospects for future excavations.

ACKNOWLEDG EMENTS
! am grateful to a number of people for their help: to Eileen Johnson for consultations about
some of the excavated materials and for editorial advice; to Joel Shiner for a number of site
visitations, consultations, and other help, especially excavation supervision of most of the test
strip; to C. Vance Haynes and Robert Laury for a site visitation (arranged by Shiner) and consultations; to Thomas Hester and Curtis Tunnell for consultations; to Conrad Johnson for site
visitations, auger samplings, and aerial photography; to J.B. Sollberger, Margie Lohse, and
Bernard Naman for helping dig the test strip; and finally to Lohse, David Dibble, Frank Hole,
Vance Holliday, Robert Mallouf, Alan Skinner, and William Mayer-Oakes for brief but valuable
consultations.

REFERENCES CITED
Meier, Carl J. and Thomas R. Hester
1972
Notes on the Meier Site, Fayette County, Texas. Bulletin of the Lower
Plains Archeological Society, 2:69-71.

1976

Paleo-lndian Artifacts from the Meier Site, Southeast Texas. La Tierra,
3(1):16-19.

Shafer, Harry J.
Early Lithic Assemblages in Eastern Texas. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
1977
Paleoindian Lifeways. The Museum Journal, 17:187-197.
Tunnell, Curtis
1977
Fluted Projectile Point Production as Revealed by Lithic Specimens from
the Adair-Steadman Site in Northwest Texas. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
Paleoindian Lifeways. The Museum Journal, 17:140-168.

