139

The Goldsmith Site (41WD208): Investigations of the
Titus Phase in the Upper Sabine River Basin, Wood
County, Texas
Timothy K. Perttula, Bob 19. Skiles, and Bonnie C. Yates

ABSTRACT
Salvage and test excavations at the Goldsmith site (41WD208), on Dry Creek
in the Upper S abine B asin of East Texas, yielded significant information on a Late
Caddoan Titus phase house site with an associated trash midden and cemetery. On
the basis of similarities in material culture and s tylistic ceramic motifs, the site may
be but one in a cluster of comparable and contemporaneous sites nearby that are
considered part of the Three Basins subcluster. Single homestead/farmsteads are
the most common type of Late Caddoan settlements in the Upper Sabine Basin.
However, the scrutiny of professional and avocational archeologists has been
concentrated on the cemeteries associated with the homesteads and has overlooked
sites such as Goldsmith, which also hold considerable potential for the investigation of Late Caddoan subsistence systems, local and regional settlement patterns,
and changes in sociopolitical organization.

INTRODUC~ON
The Goldsmith site, a Late Caddoan Titus phase hamlet in the Upper Sabine
River Basin, Wood County, Texas, was discovered in the fall of 1984 when a service
road was cut through the area to a well pad in the Quitman Oil Field. During
construction of the well platform, which had been built up from fdl dirt bulldozed
from a deep road cut, disturbed archeological materials were found, and a local
collector reported that large fragments of ceramic vessels had been found on the
surface.
On close examination of the cut, the collectorfound a pottery vessel in situ in
the bank. Subsequent digging by the collector exposed nine more pottery vessels
and two greenstone celts that were in an ENE-WSW-oriented burialpit. As is typical
for Caddoan burials excavated in the highly acidic, sandy soils of the Piney Woods,
no traces of human bone were preserved in the burial pit. Other burials or clusters
of pottery vessels were removed in random potholing by unknown individuals who
dug in an area about a meter north of the f’trst burial; these discoveries stimulated
a spate ofpothunting at the site. Within a few days, a 10-meter-wide area around the
fhst burial and a nearby midden had been pockmarked by dozens of potholes.
Skiles made a reconnaissance of the site more than a month after the initial
disturbances in order to assess the condition and character of the archeological

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61 (1990)

140

Texas Areheological Society

deposits. At that time, it was noted that the roadcut had bisected a small, dense
midden deposit about 30 meters to the southeast of the area where the ceramic
vessels and burials had been disturbed (Figures 1, 2). Many potholes had been
dug along the edges of the midden, but, because of a large pile of trees that had
been put there when the roadway was cleared, most of the midden was protected
by its inaccessibility.
Pothunting apparently subsided after the initial discoveries. However, in the
interest of preserving the midden and remaining cemetery areas, the owner of
the property agreed to try to curb further vandalism by installing a locked gate
and No Trespassing signs on the road to the site. Unfortunately, though, within
the month many additional potholes had been dug in the cemetery area and the
midden, and it became clear that the site could not be adequately protected or
preserved by these measures. Considering the likelihood that the site would be
destroyed by uncontrolled pothunting, due in part to its ready accessibility, it
was decided to recover as much data on the site as was possible in lieu of preservation. These limited investigations, in which Dr. James Bruseth, then Director of the Archaeology Research Program at Southern Methodist University,
played an integral role by devising a field strategy and encouraging the work,
were carded out in January and September 1985, by Skiles and Perttula, with
volunteer assistance from Mr. Robert Turbeville and Ms. Peggy Trachte.

Figure 1. The cemetery area at the Goldsmith Site (41WD208).

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

141

Figure 2. The midden area at the Goldsmith Site.

NATURAL SETTING
The Goldsmith site is on Dry Creek, a permanent tributary of Lake Fork Creek,
in the westem part of the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas. The floodplain of Lake Fork
Creek is about 7 km downstream from the site, and it is 20 km further from the
floodplain to the confluence of Lake Fork Creek with the Sabine River in southcentral Wood County. The headwaters of Dry Creek and its tributaries are 5 to 10
km to the north-northwest of Goldsmith; the creek flows generally southward from
Coke, Texas to its confluence with ~e Fork Creek due south of the town of
Quitman, Texas (Figure 3).
Three major biotic communities have been recognized on the western part of
the Gulf Coastal Plain in East Texas: the Oak-Hickory or Post Oak Savannah, the
Blackland Prairie, and the Oak-Hickory-Pine forest or Piney Woods (Blair 1950).
The Post Oak Savannah is a narrow southwest-northeast-trending belt of woodland
that ap~ars to mark a natural transition zone between the more xeric (drier)
Blackland Prairie to the west and the Oak-Hickory-Pine Forest to the east (Ktichler
1964). The Goldsmith site is within the modern boundary of the Piney Woods.
The Piney Woods consist of medium tall to tall deciduous trees with shortleaf
and loblolly pines; they are typically on upland fine sandy loam soils with adequate
moisture storage. In some cases, the presence of pine represents a subclimax
vegetational association or fire disclimax (Gould 1969). Poorly drained soils in the
biotic community may create a favorable habitat for prairie, dominated by big
bluestem, little bluestem, switchgrass, and Indiangrass (Marietta and Nixon 1984).

142

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Map of Wood County, Texas, showing the location of the Goldsmith site.

The Sabine River and its tributary floodplains form bottomland communities of hardwood and swamp forests. Basic components of the floodplain hardwood forests are sweetgum, water oak, overcup oak, willow oak, and cottonwood.
Other trees commonly found in the alluvial floodplain are green ash, black willow, American elm, river birch, and American hornbeam (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers 1975). Swamp forests on the floodplain have overstories of black
tupelo, elm, overcup oak, and green ash. These areas are inundated, except during
periods of prolonged drought. This swamp forest is most extensive in the floodplain of the Sabine River, but patches of it also grow on the very wet tributary
creekbottoms (e.g., Nixon et al. 1983).

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

143

The East Texas part of the western Gulf Coastal Plain is within the
Austroriparian province defined by Blair (1950)i Included in the 47 species of
mammals, 39 species of reptiles, and 17 species of amphibians are many that
reach the limits of their ranges in the southeastern United States. Exploitable
species have been generally summarized by Thurmond (1981 :Table 2), Bruseth
and others (1977:Tables 4, 5), and, for the Big Cypress and Upper Sabine basins, by Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc. (1984).
The climate of the Upper Sabine River Basin is humid, with average winter
temperatures of 8°C (47°F) and summer temperatures of 28°C (83° F); droughts
are not uncommon. The first freeze in winter usually comes between mid-November and December 1, and the last freeze, in mid-March (Arbingast et al.
1973:19). Mean annual precipitation varies from about 115 to 125 mm in the
Upper Sabine Basin (Texas Almanac 1986). Periods of maximum rainfall come
in the spring and fall seasons.
East Texas paleoenvironmental and climatic conditions are poorly known,
and only limited evidence of past environments has been acquired that is pertinent to reconstructing the Late Holocene (2000-200 years B.P.) environmental
setting at the Goldsmith site (e.g., Bryant and Holloway 1985). Preliminary
analyses of Late Holocene pollen samples suggest a dry-moist-dry episodic pattern in the Late Holocene comparable to the Northeast Oklahoma data from the
Cross Timbers, Osage Savannah, and Cherokee Prairie districts (Hall 1982; Reid
and Artz 1984). Pine, in particular, becomes one of the major constituents of the
pollen record at Ferndale Bog in Southeast Oklahoma about 1000 B.P., invading the area at about 1800 B.P. (Albert 1981). Pollen records from the Buck
Creek Marsh in the Big Sandy Creek basin of Wood County suggest that pine
invaded the valley between 1810 and 1130 B.P. and was the dominant overstory
species by about A.D. 500 (Holloway 1987).
Dendroclimatic reconstructions are more specific than pollen records in
determining proxy climatic data from the last 500 years and have the potential
to be extended to the period between 1,000 and 5,~ years ago (Stahle, Cook,
and White 1985). Drought reconstructions using annual tree ring chronologies
from old-growth baldcypress indicate that there were many wet and dry spells
comparable to twentieth century events between about A.D. 1500 and 1700, the
estimated range of time when the Goldsmith site was occupied. In particular,
droughts of more than 10 years have been estimated around A.D. 1555, 1570,
1595, and 1670, separated by wetter periods around 1540, 1600, 1620, and 1665
(Stahle, Cleaveland and Hehr 1985:Figure 3b). The period between A.D. 1549
and 1577 has been suggested as representing the worst June drought in the past
450 years (Stahle, Cleaveland and Hehr 1985:532). The variation and intensity
of climatic fluctuations is of singular importance to the Late Caddoan inhabitants of the Goldsmith site because of their presumed dependence upon maize
agriculture as a subsistence base &erttula et al. 1983:96).
The Goldsmith site is on the edge of an upland landform overlooking the
Dry Creek floodplain. A relict channel of Dry Creek, called Blue Lake by local

144

Texas Archeological Society

residents, runs along the base of the steep upland slope about 100 meters
southeast of the site. Blue Lake is a permanent water source that has never
completely evaporated even in the hottest and driest summers (H. B. Goldsmith,
personal communication).
PREVIOUS RESEARCH AND CULTURAL SETTING
Archeological research in the Caddoan area, of which the Upper Sabine Basin
is a part, has a lengthy history that is impractical to summarize here (see S tory 1978;
Webb 1978). The reader is referred to Perttula et al. (1986:35-59) for an overview
of the history of previous archeological research investigations in the Upper Sabine
River Basin.
In the immediate vicinity of the Goldsmith site, the University of Texas
conducted investigations between 1930 and 1934, led by A. T. Jackson, M. M.
Reese, and A. M. Wilson. The fieldwork concentrated primarily around Quitman
in the Dry Creek and Lake Fork Creek basins (Reese 1931; Wilson and Jackson
1930). Eighty-two sites were identified, 12 of which were the subject of burial
excavations and midden and structural mound trenching (Table 1). Several of
the sites, particularly J. H. Reese (41WD2) and L. L. Winterbauer (41WD6),
closely resemble Goldsmith in ceramic assemblages and community/settlement
patterning, and all three are now recognized as generally contemporaneous Titus
phase occupations. What was evident even in research sponsored by the University of Texas was the concentration of archeological sites in the Dry Creek-Little
Dry Creek basins, a situation that has not been altered since in the years of archeological research conducted in Wood County.
Not until the 1950s did Late Caddoan settlements in the area around Quitman
receive renewed attention. In 1959 Robert Turbeville, an avocational archeologist in Mineola, Texas, excavated 15 burials from a Titus phase cemetery at
41WD19 on Dry Creek, 1.2 km west-southwest of Goldsmith. This led to further work by Turbeville in Wood County at 41WD44 and 41WD206, Titus phase
middens and cemeteries on Dry and Muddy creeks, 0.6 and 2.5 km north and
northeast of Goldsmith, respectively (Figure 4). This work has provided significant information on Late Caddoan settlement patterns in the Upper Sabine River
Basin (Skiles et al. 1980).
In 1975, Southern Methodist University’s Archaeology Research Program
began fieldwork in the proposed Lake Fork Reservoir on Lake Fork Creek and
tributaries in Wood, Rains, and Hopkins counties, about 25 to 40 km from
Goldsmith. Several of the sites chosen for excavation in 1976, 1978, and 1979 had
Late Caddoan components, including the Glen (41WD524), Gilbreath (41WD538),
Killebrew (41WD495), Sandhill (41WD108), and Spoonbill (41WDI09) sites
(Bruseth et al. 1977:127-138; Bruseth and Perttula 1980, 1981).
Sites of this period were classified as components of the Forest Hill phase, a
local manifestation of the Titus phase in the Caney Creek drainage system (Bruseth
and Perttula 1981:142). The only absolute date obtained on a Forest Hill phase

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

145

Table 1. Excavations of Titus Phase Sites in Wood County, Texas by The
University of Texas, 1930 to 1934

Location

Site

Features

Estimated Period
of Occupation

Little Dry Cr.

J.H. Reese (41WD2)

Trash midden,
3 burials

Late Caddoan,
Titus phase

Little Dry Cr.

Earl Jones (41WD3)

Midden mound

Late Caddoan,
Titus phase

Lake Fork Cr.

L.L. Winterbauer
(41WD6)

Trash midden,
Dog burials

Late Caddoan,
Titus phase

Dry Creek

A.N. Vickery
(41WDll)

Mound

Uncertain

Little Dry Cr.

M.E. Day (41WD10)

Trash midden,
Dog burials

Late Caddoan,
Titus phase

Brushy Creek

Minnie Garrison
(41WD 16)

Trash midden,
Mound

Early Caddoan
and Late Caddoan,
Titus phase

settlement is a radiocarbon date of A.D. 1470&-_80 (TX-3473, uncorrected) (J.
Bruseth, personal communication) from the nearby Steck site (41WD529) midden.
As an adjunct to the fieldwork in Lake Fork Reservoir, several sites in the Lake
Fork Creek Basin outside the project area have been investigated by Southern
Methodist University. The Steck (41WD529), Burks (41WD52), and Pine Tree
(41WD51) sites have well-preserved Late Caddoan habitation features and both
faunal and floral remains that have provided useful comparative information for
understanding the Late Caddoan archeological record in the Upper Sabine River
Basin (Hockensmith 1977; Perttula et al. n.d.).
INVESTIGATION OF THE CEMETERY AREA

We decided to concentrate our work at the Goldsmith site first on the cemetery
area (Figure 5), because most of the surreptitious digging had been done there, and
more vandalism was anticipated. The midden was at least partially protected by the
trees that were piled upon it.
We probed the cemetery area systematically on a closely spaced grid before any excavating, in order to locate any remaining burials and to plan future
work. Pothunters were so active that it was not deemed advisable to leave burials partly excavated, and, since the amount of work planned had to be limited in
accordance with our resources, a stainless steel "whip antenna" about 2 meters
long was used to probe randomly in the areas directly adjacent to the first burial

146

Texas Archeological Society

& 41WD529

41WD44
A

N

I kilometer

41WD206

41WD51
A

41WD208
Goldsmith

\

:

i

41WD2 & /

41WD52
A

WD19

Figure 4. Map of the Dry Creek Basin showing the location of the Goldsmith and other Late
Caddoan Titus phase sites.

removed by the collector. This was simply a test to ascertain the suitability of
the soil for probing, but within 15 minutes a ceramic vessel was detected about
2 meters northeast of the first burial removed by the collector. A shovel test
about 30 cm in diameter was excavated to a depth of about 1 meter to confirm
the existence of the vessel. Further concentrated probing revealed a subsurface
declivity in the clayey sand B-horizon that was a pit feature oriented generally
east-west with several other vessels in it. In this area the A-horizon is a tan sand
about 80 cm thick, and the underlying B-horizon subsoil is a mottled yellow
clayey sand.
A 2.40-by-2.40-meter unit was centered over the burial pit and pottery vessels
of Burial No. 1 (Figure 6). After removing pothole backdirt piles from the surface,
the unit was excavated by shovel skimming in about 2.5-cm-thick levels. No pit
outline was detected in the light tan, coarse loamy sand A-horizon until just above
the B-horizon at about 78 cm below the surface. The upper parts of several vessels

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

147

/
0

~0

0

o

> 0
o ,.c

I
I
I
I

x

0

LUQ.

E20

~o

o~

148

Texas Archeological Society
Unit 2

Unit I
.......,-.-.-.-.-,-.-.

Burial
2

Datum A

:::::::::’"’"’"’"" " Burial I

N

0,
21
I
I meters

Figure 6. Plan of excavations in the cemetery area.

were also reached at this level. The bottom of the burial pit extended 35 cm into the
B-horizon subsoil (Figure 7).
The burial pit, which measures 1.85 by 1.00 meters, contained seven ceramic
vessels distributed over the chest area and along each side of the individual (Figure
8). No traces of bone were noted, but on the basis of several studies of Late Caddoan
Titus phase mortuary patterning (Thurmond 1981; Turner 1978; Bell 1981) it was
assumed that the individual was placed in extended, supine position and oriented
with the feet to the west. With the burial were seven vessels: one Harleton Applique
jar (Vessel 1), four Ripley Engraved carinated bowls (Vessels 2-4, 6), one Nash
Neck-Banded jar (Vessel 5), and a single WilderEngraved bottle (Vessel 7). A large
part of Vessel 4 had been freshly broken and was missing. Several recently broken
sherds from a large red-slipped Ripley Engraved carinated bowl were underneath
the remaining fragments of Vessel 4. This corner of the burial pit apparently had
been recently disturbed, although the nature of the disturbance could not be
determined.
After Burial No. 2, about 5 meters west-northwest of Burial No. 1 (see Figure
6), was located, a 2-by-2-meter unit was laid out over the burial pit. No burial
pit outline could be detected until, at 70 cm below the present ground surface,
the B-horizon, into which the burial extended about 10 cm, was reached. The
burial pit measured 2.25 by 1.15 meters, and was oriented NE-SW (Figure 9).
Again, no bone was preserved in the pit, but it is assumed that the head was
oriented roughly toward the northeast in conformance with Burial No. 1 and all
known adult Titus phase burials in the Dry Creek drainage.
Grave goods were distributed irregularly throughout the Burial No. 2 pit below
presumed shoulder level. Two greenstone celts were in the pelvic area, and a group
of four arrowpoints (three Maud and one Bassett type), and an engraved ceramic
elbow pipe with a flaring bowl, were between the legs at about the knee level (see
Figure 9). Two roughly shaped tools of locally available ferruginous sandstone were
at the feet; these may have been used as digging tools in the preparation of the burial
pit. Another group of four Maud arrowpoints was placed along the left (east) edge
of the burial pit. A possible Talco arrowpoint was recovered on the B-horizon

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

149

if)

E

\

0

0

E
0

150 Texas Areheological Society

2
I

3

6

ers

Figure 8. Plan of Burial No. 1, showing locations of grave goods. Numbers refer to
vessels listed in Table 9.

contact level only 50 cm outside the burial pit, and a Maud arrowpoint was found
on backdirt from the burial pit. Both are assumed to be displaced from Burial No.
2 (Table 2).
All of the pottery vessels in Burial No. 2 were substantially complete except for Vessels No. 5 and 6. These two vessels had apparently been stacked or
nested near the feet, and were crushed when a large tree root grew through them,
for large parts of these vessels are missing. Vessels were in the shoulder and
feet areas of the burial pit.

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

0
I

151

25 centimeters
I

Figure 9. PlanofBurial Pit 2, showing locations of Grave Goods. Numbers 1-9 refer to vessel
numbers listed in Table 11. Numbers 10 and 11 are ferruginous sandstone tools, Number 12
refers to an engraved flaring bowl ceramic elbow pipe and four arrowpoints, Number 13, to
two greenstone celts, and Number 14, to four Maud arrowpoints.

Cemeteries of the Dry Creek Drainage
Cemeteries of the Dry Creek drainage are usually small in size, averaging 10
individuals (subadults and adults) each; children were placed in pits below house
floors. Cemeteries in Dry Creek are small when compared to Late Caddoan
cemeteries along Big Cypress Creek and its tributaries (Turner 1978; Thurmond
1981). Burials are single, extended inhumations with burial goods--ceramic
vessels, petaloid celts, ceramic elbow pipes, and arrow points--at the sides,

152 Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Contents of Burial No. 2 at the Goldsmith Site
1 Engraved ceramic elbow pipe

2 Ferruginous sandstone tools

5 Ripley Engraved carinated bowls

2 Greenstone celts

1 Wilder Engraved bottle

8 Maud arrowpoints

1 Taylor Engraved bottle

1 Talco arrowpoint

2 Nash Neck-Banded jars

1 Bassett arrowpoint

shoulders, and about the heads of the individuals. Ceramic vessels used as grave
goods include not only locally manufactured Ripley Engraved, Wilder Engraved,
McKinney Plain, and Maydelle Incised, but also wares such as Avery Engraved and
Simms Engraved that may have been manufactured on the Red River and exchanged
with Titus phase groups in the Upper Sabine River Basin (Thurmond 1985:193).
The small size of the cemeteries, their demographic profiles of roughly equal
adult male and female representation, few adolescents, and no children, plus limited
evidence for internal rank differentiation, all are indicative of the type of mortuary
population expected in family units occupying a household for only a short period
of time ~ose 1984:240; Shafer 1981:156). Burials in the household cemeteries
occur as single interments in patterned arrangements of burials oriented and placed
by spacing considerations that are duplicated in cemeteries from each of the Titus
phase spatial clusters (e.g., Thurmond 1981, 1985).
According to Thurmond (1981:455-456),

adolescents were buried with more offerings than children or infants, and
with fewer offerings than adults. The graves of males often contain clusters
of arrowpoints in patterns suggesting quivers of arrows, and those of
females contain polishing stones or more numerous pottery vessels. Items
of exotic material . . . are extremely rare. The occurrence of graves
containing very large numbers of artifacts is also quite limited.
In the absence of identifiable skeletal remains from the Goldsmith site, the
grave goods suggest that Burial No. 1 was probably an adult female and Burial No.
2 was an adult male. However, without a body of data on grave goods associations
in cases where skeletal material permits determination of age and gender, this can
be considered only the merest suggestion.
Because grave goods at Goldsmith are comparable to those in more intensively
investigated Titus phase cemeteries (Table 3), mortuary practices are probably the
same throughout the Cypress Cluster, as noted earlier by Thurmond (1981).
Included in the total of artifacts at the Goldsmith site are data from a local collector
on a third burial that had been exposed in the road cut. That burial contained one
small plain jar, one large utility jar with incised lines at the rim/body juncture, five

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

153

Ripley Engraved bowls, one Simms-like bowl form, aplain compound bowl similar
in shape to some of the Avery Engraved and Ripley Engraved forms noted in the Dry
Creek basin (e.g., Suhm and Jelks 1962: Plates 2B, 64, 65), and one greenstone celt.

Table 3. Grave Goods From Four Titus Phase Cemeteries

Site

Mean No.
Ceramic
Vessels
Per Burial

Mean No.
Projectile
Points
Per Burial

Mean No.
Total
Specimens

Burials

Reference

Tuck Carpenter

9.2

4.34

14.8

44

Turner 1978

Taylor

8.3

5.09

14.5

71

Thurmond 1981

Alex Justiss

7.3

6.88

15A

25

Bell 1981

Goldsmith

8.66

3.33

13.7

3

This report

TEST EXCAVATIONS AT THE GOLDSMITH SITE TRASH MIDDEN
Test excavations were conducted at the Goldsmith site trash midden in an
attempt to obtain a controlled sample of artifacts and ecofacts associated with the
nonmortuary life of the people who used the cemetery. Midden excavations in Titus
phase occupations in the Upper S abine River B asin are still rather limited, compared
to cemetery excavations, but they are obviously a necessary priority in attempts to
arrive at a balanced understanding of Titus phase lifeways.
The midden, which was estimated to cover about a 50-square-meter area, had
been partially disturbed by road construction and illegal digging, and many sherds,
fragments of bone and mussel shell, and charcoal flecks were noted on the backdirt
of the potholes.
The goals of the test excavations were (1) examine the subsurface context of
the archeological deposit and assess its integrity, (2) obtain stratigraphic artifactual
data, and (3) find in situ ceramic sherds of suitable size for thermoluminescence
dating. Only a few areas in the midden were accessible for test excavations because
of pothunter disturbances along the midden edge exposed in the roadcut. However,
an area near the roadcut that was outside these disturbed areas and did not require
extensive clearing (see Figures 2 and 5) was chosen, and two 1-by-l-meter units
were cleared and excavated in arbitrary 10-cm levels to 40 to 50 cm below the
surface.
Stratigraphy and Character of the Midden
Stratigraphy was relatively simple in the midden (Figure 10). Exposed first was
a 9-to-14-cm thick, gray, organic-rich A-horizon plow zone in which cultural

154

Texas Archeological Society

materials, particularly ceramic artifacts, occur in quantity. Underlying the plow
zone is a dark gray to black (10YR3/2-10YR2/2) charcoal- and ash-mottled midden
deposit 12 to 23 cm thick. The midden contains extensive amounts of ceramics and
bone, as well as charred nutshells and fragments of freshwater mussel shell.
Ceramics in the midden are larger than in the plow zone, but are not necessarily more
common by number or weight. The densest accumulation of cultural materials is at
the base of the midden, which is extensively disturbed by rodent krotovinas
(burrows) and root action as well. A thermoluminescence sample of a Ripley
Engraved bowl with a scroll motif was recovered from 28 cm below the surface in
the midden, but a date could not be obtained because the sherd had anomalous fading
(e.g., Aitken 1985:54-59). The midden rests on a gray-yellow sand subsoil in which
cultural materials are quite common; sterile deposits were not reached in these
limited test excavations.
I

Unit 2

I

Unit I

1

.... ". ". ". "." ." ~ ". "." ." ." .". ". " ", "’..:,. i." , i ." : :=TE.:~::.’.’.;~.’: =’:-,-.!. :. ". " ".". "." ." .". ".

i.:)::

¯ "::".’." "2.’I:’: "".’"’’:-:-’."-’.;:.,’:’~:’;:.".*"-:-’..:..:’;’-0°/.°;-~

...:::.o:-....o.....:....

" ..... .°:,’.’.

"....’*."~""..*’* .".
~~i!"’:"
".~.....
". "*":""’"’"’:’"’..
"." ......
2:-:-’.’*"t’::"’’""""
.. . °"..:."-°.2..’2.’..-."~..
-. :.2.. -’.l’;
z :"¯.’~’~~’."~~’~"~".~’~’"~1"
.’.~’-". "~"~"""*’~:::’"’~’"."
"~’.’~’.~.’~’~’2~""’":...". °’. . ’..."

y////Yi/’//////,

~Krotovino
Q Root

0
I

25 centimeters
I

Figure 10. Stratigraphic profile in the midden at the Goldsmith site.

Zooarcheological Remains in the Upper Sabine Basin

Zooarcheological assemblages recovered from the Taddlock (41WD482) and
Steck (41WD529) sites in the Upper Sabine Basin document the fact that considerably heterogenous faunal populations were present about A.D. 1000 to 1600
(Perttula and Bruseth 1983; Perttula et al. 1983). Recovered from Taddlock were
faunal elements from 16 species of mammals, 12 species of birds, 8 species of
reptiles or amphibians, and 9 species of fish. Several of the bird species were not
permanent East Texas residents, including the pied-bill grebe, green-wing teal, and
yellow-shafted flicker, but the majority of the animals recovered from Taddlock are
year-round inhabitants of East Texas. The habitat range of species indicates that
most animals were associated with an open oak-hickory forest with many grassland

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

155

areas, which is to be expected, since the Taddlock site is in the Post Oak Savannah
~erttula and Bruseth 1983:11). The most common species represented at Taddlock
are deer, racoon, beaver, squirrel, jackrabbit, opossum, turkey, carp sucker, freshwater drum, and catfish. Similar arrays of exploitable species can be expected in the
Dry Creek basin, since both the Piney Woods and discrete stands of pine are
typically faunal-poor habitats, and the majority of species hunted would be in
upland hardwoods and bottomland forests.
Dog was recovered at the Steck site in the Piney Woods (Perttula et al. 1983)
and was an important component of prehistoric and historic hunting forays in the
region (Yates 1986). Bear and bison, utilized historically by Caddoan peoples in
East Texas (Swanton 1942:134-137), were present in the western part of the Gulf
Coastal Plain. Bison were never very common in the East and North Texas prairies,
however, until the late 1703s (see Flores 1985:114), and there is no concrete
evidence of the exploitation of bison in the Upper Sabine Basin until the eighteenth
century (Lorrain 1967:Table 11).
Faunal Remains in the Goldsmith Site Midden

Faunal remains were common throughout the Goldsmith site midden deposit,
averaging 143 elements per m3. Species identified are white-tailed deer, dog, pocket
gopher, turkey, and land turtle. In character, the faunal assemblage from Goldsmith
resembles that recovered from the nearby Steck site, a single component Late
Caddoan occupation (Perttula et al. 1983:Table 4).
All of the six identified deer elements are burned or charred and represent parts
of the carcass that have very little meat (i.e., the distal metapodial, a calcaneum with
butcher marks, astragalus, and phalanx I). These elements are lower leg bones that
may have sustained f’tre damage when exposed to roasting of a hind leg. Long-bone
fragments of deer-sized mammals constitute the majority of the unidentified faunal
elements, and 83 percent of these are also burned. Only two deer are indicated in the
small sample: an adult individual, represented by the lower leg bones and a vertebral
fragment, and an immature individual represented by a scapula fragment that was
also burned.
The canid remains indicate three individuals. Each identified element is from
an individual of a different age group based on skeletal development. A fetal or
neonatal canid is represented by an unburned left distal humerus, an immature but
older dog is identified by an unfused proximal metapodial (burned), and a small but
fully adult individual is represented by an unburned lumbar vertebra. None of these
elements is directly assignable to the domestic dog, but dog remains have been
recorded in burials from several Late Caddoan sites in Wood County, including
S teck, L. L. Winterbauer, M. E. Day, Pine Tree Farm, and the Dog site (Hockensmith
1977; Wilson and Jackson 1930; Robert Turbeville, personal communication).
Two elements--a left coracoid process and a left tarsometatarsus---of a single
wild turkey (Meleagris gallopavo) were recovered in the midden; both elements
have been burned. Based on the size of the coracoid process it seems likely that the

156

Texas Archeological Society

turkey was a small female; turkey-size burned and unbumed faunal elements were
also noted in the zooarcheological assemblage.
One box turtle (Terrapene sp.) is represented by 14 elements, 10 of which have
been burned. Both carapace and plastron fragments were recovered in the midden.
The pocket gopher (Geomys bursarius) is represented by a relatively complete and
unburned skull; this individual, a burrowing animal, is probably the result of
postoccupational intrusion.
Mussel shell and gastropods were present throughout the midden in small
quantities; the mussel shells, most likely procured from Dry Creek, were primarily
fragmented valves that cannot be identified to species.
Floral Remains
Charred hickory and pecan nutshells were observed in the coarse-screened
(quarter-inch) debris. Flotation samples were not obtained during this phase of
excavations, but would be essential to an accurate characterization of the paleobotanical assemblage at the Goldsmith site (e.g., Perttula et al. 1983).
Artifact Assemblage in the Midden and Burials
Considering the limited extent of the investigations at the Goldsmith site, a
substantial amount of cultural debris was recovered in the midden deposits and
burials. Plain and decorated sherds were especially common, but lithic debris and
ecofactual remains were also present throughout the midden (Table 4), and whole
vessels and complete, unbroken stone tools were found in the burials.
Lithic Artifacts

A small lithic assemblage of unmodified debris, fire-cracked rock, and several
modified or completed tools has been recovered from the midden. Lithic tools and
debris occur at a density of about 80 arfifacts/m3, which is low compared to Archaic
and Early Caddoan occupations in the Upper Sabine River Basin. Other Late
Caddoan assemblages in the basin, however, share this functional/technological
characteristic with the Goldsmith site (see Bruseth and Perttula 1981:Table 6-4;
Perttula 1984). Most of the lithic debris and fire-cracked rock is probably associated
with a Late Archaic occupation rather than with the Titus phase occupation, since
lithic artifacts are scarce in Late Caddoan sites in the Upper Sabine River Basin.
The lithic debris is dominated by raw materials that are locally available,
including OgaUala quartzite from upland gravel sources. Other quartzites constitute
7.6 percent of the assemblage, and cherts, another 9.1 percent. Chert raw materials
are gray, tan, and brown cherts of local origin, and a creamy white chert of unknown
provenience. This white chert, with discernible black inclusions, closely resembles
the Frisco chert (Banks 1984:85) that comes from the Arbuckle Mountains of
southeastern Oklahoma and is available as close as the gravels of the Red River
below the mouths of the Blue River and Clear Boggy Creek in Lamar and Fannin
counties, Texas. Inspection of Frisco chert from Marshall County, Oklahoma, in

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates -- Goldsmith Site

Z

e,i

"0

r~

8~

e,l

6

I!

i

~~

lu~

I

!

e,1

=
=

g:

o

,.o

,-~

’

’

’ t~l

’ ,--~

, ~"q

i

r~

<
0

II

157

158

Texas Archeological Society

collections at the Oklahoma Archeological Survey confirmed the similarity. This
raw material is found in a number of assemblages, primarily of Middle-Late Archaic
attribution, in the Upper Sabine River Basin (Perttula et al. 1986).
Eighty-two percent of the lithic debris consists ofnoncortical tertiary elements;
only one primary element (cortex covering the entire dorsal surface) and 11
secondary elements (cortex present on the dorsal surface of the piece) were noted.
The high frequency of tertiary elements and the small size of the lithic debris
indicate that tool maintenance and resharpening activities are primarily responsible
for the composition of the lithic debris assemblage. This is consistent with the
probable functional nature of the Late Archaic occupation at Goldsmith.
Tools identified from the surface and the midden excavations are one ferruginous sandstone mano, one quartzite hammerstone, one unifacially modified piece
made of a local gray chert, one chert straight-stemmed dart point (or projectile point/
knife), and two arrowpoints. The dart point is a resharpened implement, possibly of
the Yarbrough type (Johnson 1962). The arrowpoints, manufactured of local cherts
from the Uvalde gravels, resemble the Maud and Bassett types common in the Titus
phase, and were also recovered in Burial 2 (Figure 11, c-n).
In Burial No. 2 were found eight Maud, one Talco, and one Bassett arrowpoint
(Table 5). A few pieces of lithic debris were also recovered in the burial fill,
including five chert (four of which were noncortical), one Ogallala quartzite (a
cortical element), two quartzite (one of which is a cortical element), and one
ferruginous sandstone cortical element. In shovel skimming above Burial No. 1, a
Gary variety Camden (see Schambach 1982:Table 7.2) projectile point was found
(Figure 11, A), together with a single, small (less than 4 cm long and wide) quartzite
burned rock, five tertiary elements of chert (two of which have use-wear patterns),
and a fragment of a pitted hematite stone. None of this lithic material found while
excavating Burials No. 1 and 2 seems def’mitely relatable to the Titus phase
occupation at the Goldsmith site.
The two celts from Burial No. 2 were made by pecking and/or flaking large
cobbles of greenstone (a siliceous shale lithic raw material available only in the
Ouachita !vlountains of southeastern Oklahoma [Banks and Winter 1975:27]), then
grinding and polishing the face and bit of the tool. They have tapered poll ends,
convex bit profiles with angles between 65 and 75 degrees, and bit widths ranging
from 4.6 to 5.1 cm. The celts (Figure 12, A, B) are 9.8 cm and 12.6 cm long and
resemble the Type I and II celts def’med at the Roitsch (Sam Kaufman) site in Red
River County (Ferring 1969:88-89); Type II celts were the most common type at
Lake Fork Reservoir Caddoan sites (Bruseth and Perttula 1981). The ferruginous
sandstone tools are cobble-sized pieces of raw material that have been minimally
shaped by percussion-flaking along the edges of the piece (Figure 12, C, D). Some
cortex remains on both tools, but only remnants are visible on the circular, more
extensively worked example. No use-wear can be seen along the worked edges to
indicate that they might be digging tools.
The high frequency of the use of local lithic raw materials, the recovery of
Archaic Period projectile points (including those found by collectors), the presence

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

0

159

3 CM

A

B

m

Figure 11. Chipped stone tools from the Goldsmith site.

of fire-cracked rock, and the appearance of a Frisco-like white chert in a nonburial
context all point primarily to an Archaic age. Middle and Late Archaic assemblages
in Lake Fork Reservoir, 20 km to the west, are notable for the use of local materials

160

Texas Archeological Society

uO 0

+

+

X

+

~D 0 0

-I-

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

.... ~...~

. . ~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~~o~oooooooo.~.~ ~

II
+

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

B

A

D

C

Figure 12. Celts and ferruginous sandstone tools from Burial No. 2.

161

162

Texas Archeological Society

in the reduction and production of lithic tools (Bruseth and Perttula 198 l:Table 69; Perttula 1984:Table 7.3), particularly in comparison to Caddoan assemblages
dating between A.D. 1000 and 1400. Densities of fire-cracked rocks decrease
noticeably after about A.D. 800 in the same set of sites. The Frisco-like white chert
has been identified in Early Archaic to Late Archaic contexts in several sites in the
Big Sandy Creek basin east of the Goldsmith site (Perttula et al. 1986), most
noticeably in putative Early and Middle Archaic components at the Trammell Crow
Pond site (41WD185). The Frisco-like white chert is not a common raw material in
the Big Sandy Creek basin, but its periods of use may well aid in the chronological
ordering of Archaic assemblages in the absence of datable materials.
Ceramic Artifacts
Ceramic sherds are the most common artifacts in the Goldsmith midden,
occurring in quantifies of as many as 460 sherds/m3. Considering this estimated
density, the midden probably contains about 9,000 sherds, all probably deposited
within a relatively short time span.
Three hundred sixty-eight sherds have been recovered from the midden or its
surface (Table 6). Grog-tempered sherds comprise 93 percent of the assemblage,
followed by grog/grit-tempered sherds (3 percent), and grog/bone and bonetempered specimens (2 percent). Five sherds have no discernible temper. These
differences in temper correspond to those in Late Caddoan occupations at Lake Fork
Reservoir and in the Dry Creek basin in Wood County. Bone is most commonly used
as an aplastic in Early Ceramic period and Early Caddoan period occupations,
ranging between 7 and 70 percent in ceramic assemblages at Lake Fork Reservoir
(Bruseth and Perttula 1981 :Table 5-7). At the S teck site, bone temper was present
in only 0.5 percent of the sherds, whereas bone was noted in 0.3 percent of the sherds
from the contemporaneous Late Caddoan Pine Tree Farm site (J. E. Bruseth,
personal communication, April 1987).
Inspection of cross sections of grog-tempered sherds suggests that more finely
crushed grog is used almost exclusively in Ripley Engraved vessels, and occasionally in the manufacture of Nash Neck-Banded or LaRue Neck-Banded jars. The
coarser paste with grog/grit temper is confined to sherds of the utility ware types
Harleton Appliqu6, Karnack Brushed-Incised, and McKinney Plain (Suhm and
Jelks 1962) with appliqu6, or brushingiappliqu6. These paste differences presumably relate to technological and functional variability in the way these kinds of
vessels were made and designed to be used (e.g., Steponaifis 1984:85-114).
Decorated sherds comprise 24 percent of the ceramic assemblage and are
dominated by engraving, neck banding, and various forms of appliqu6 (’fable 7).
Roughly 80 percent of the 34 rims are decorated, which is an additional measure of
the pervasiveness of decorated vessels in the Titus phase occupation at the
Goldsmith site.
All of the engraved sherds with rolled or folded rims characteristic of the Titus
phase lip treatment on carinated bowls are identified as Ripley Engraved (Figure

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site
oO

Z

0

~

0

0
tO

0

.<
©
o

Ox
~0
Cq

cq

0

Z

0

o~
Ox

o
o~

Z
.<
"0

0

0

o

D~
0

o

©

"6
0

163

164

Texas ArcheologicaI Society
Z

o,.~

{3

¢’4

"0

0

0

(3

rz

0

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

165

13). Stylistic motifs are generally difficult to determine because the sherds are so
small, but motifs that could be identified include the scroll, scroll and circle, and the
interlocking horizontal scroll (Thurmond 1985: Figure 3). These motifs are common in Three Basins subcluster sites of the Titus phase defined recently by
Thurmond (1985:193).
Other treatments of the engraved sherds include a red hematite slip (see Ferring
and Perttula 1987) on both interior and exterior surfaces (4.7 percent of the engraved
sherds), and the painting of engraved lines with hematite and kaohn (9.3 pementof
the sherds). Only 2.2 percent of the plain body sherds have a red hematite slip.
Neck-banded sherds are derived from everted rim LaRue or Nash NeckBanded jars (Figure 14, c--e, h). Surface treatment of the neck-banded jars includes
both smoothed rim coils and regularly crimped rim coils. The partially smoothed
neck-banded sherds are tempered with fine grog paste; the remainder have been
tempered with a much coarser grog. The neck-banded sherds comprise 22 percent
of the decorated sherds, compared to engraved sherds, which comprise 49 percent
of the decorated sherds. Sherds were designated LaRue/Nash Neck-Banded because it was not possible to differentiate the neck-banded sherds consistently
according to the criteria proposed by Suhm and Jelks (1962:93, 111).
The high frequency of neck-banded sherds from the Goldsmith site is comparable with other Titus phase occupations in the Dry Creek and Little Dry Creek
localities of the Three Basins subcluster, including the Steck and J. H. Reese sites
(Hockensmith 1977; Wilson and Jackson 1930). However, this comparability is not
duplicated at the Caney Creek localities in the Lake Fork Creek drainages (Bruseth
and Perttula 1981; Thurmond 1985), where only 3 to 11 percent of the decorated
sherds from the different middens at the Killebrew and Gilbreath sites have neck
bands (Table 8).
Apphqutd sherds are probably derived from the McKinney Plain and Harleton
Apphqu6 utility wares (Figure 14, f, g). The appliqu6 on plain rims usually consists
oft-diets and nodes that are placed so they divide the rims of large jars into quarters.
The appliqu6 fillets are placed vertically from just below the hp to halfway to the
rim-body juncture. Multiple inverted fillets (Figure 14, g) are also characteristic of
locally produced McKinney Plain (see Bruseth and Perttula 1981:Figure 5-8a, c);
these are placed directly below the lips of the vessels. Appliqu6 also is used in
combination with incised, brushed, and punctated decorations on Maydelle Incised,
Kamack Brushed-Incised, and Harleton Appliqu6 types of the Titus phase (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:65, 85, 103).
Brushed sherds are infrequent in sites of the Three Basins subcluster. At the
Goldsmith site, only 8 percent of the decorated sherds are brushed; at the Swauano
Creek and Big Cypress Creek subclusters they account for 40 to 60 percent of the
utility vessels (e.g., Thurmond 1985:193). However, brushing is much more
common in the Dry Creek locality during the Titus phase than it is in the Caney
Creek locality 10 to 15 km to the west (Table 8). At Goldsmith, brushing is both
vertical and horizontal, with vertical brushing of the body most frequent. One

166

Texas Archeological Society

0

5 CENTIMETERS

Figure 13. Engraved sherds fzom the Goldsmith site midden.

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

i

167

....
b

0

1.... ~

i

-[

4 CENTIMETERS

t

Figure 14. Neck-banded, applique, brushed, incised, and punctated sherds from the
Goldsmith midden.

168

Texas Archeological Society

o.
o

P,

t~

o.
o

t~

o

L

t",l

o

o

o
"o
o

~..

on

t~

0

r~

¯o

<

o

on

~

~

~

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

169

Karnack Brushed-Incised sherd was identified from the midden; the other sherds
from the midden are body sherds from Bullard Brushed, Maydelle Incised, and
Harleton Appliqu6 utility jars.
Punctated and incised sherds are derived from the Maydelle Incised type
(Figure 14 a, b). The incised motifs are predominantely cross-hatched bands on
the rims. Nodes and horizontal rows of stick and fingernail punctations are associated with the incised lines on the rim band. Bodies of these Maydelle Incised vessels, which include everted rim jars and carinated bowls (relatively
uncommon), range from plain to brushed (see Suhm and Jelks 1962:103).
The sixteen vessels found in Burials No. 1 and 2 comprise eight Ripley
Engraved carinated bowls, one Harleton Appliqu6 jar, two Wilder Engraved
bottles, one Taylor Engraved bottle, three Nash Neck-Banded jars, and a carinated bowl of typical Ripley Engraved form, but decorated only with a single
engraved line on the vessel interior (Table 9). All of the vessels are grog tempered, but the amount of grog added to the paste is variable in and among the
different types. Polished brown and black is the most common color, and none
of the vessels has been slipped. White and red pigments have, however, been
applied to the engraved designs on seven of the eight Ripley Engraved bowls,
and on one of the Wilder Engraved bottles.
The Ripley Engraved carinated bowls have been divided into two size groups:
(1) small, with orifice diameters less than 16 cm or heights less than 9 cm (Figure
15, D, E; Figure 16, H, I); and (2) large, with orifice diameters greater than 25 cm
and vessel heights between 13 and 18 cm (Figure 15, F, G; Figure 16, A). Decorative
motifs vary within the two groups, although the scroll and circle (Thurmond
1985:Figure 3) is the most common bowl-rim motif (Figure 17). This motif is
present on 63 percent of the Ripley Engraved bowls, and the nested triangle,
interlocking scroll, and continuous scroll motifs account for the remainder of the
assemblage (Table 9). The frequency of these motifs is consistent with Thurmond’s
(1985:193) description of the Three Basins subeluster of the Titus phase. At the
nearby J. H. Reese site, the scroll and circle motif is most com mon in the large vessel
sample (at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory) from the cemetery
excavated by A. T. Jackson, followed by the continuous scroll, interlocking scroll,
and a single example of the pendant triangle motif (Vessel No. 6).
A single example of Wilder Engraved (see Suhm and Jelks 1962:Plate 78M for
an example from the J. H. Reese site) was found in each burial at the Goldsmith site.
These are rather squat bottles with narrow, tapering necks (Figures 15, B and 16, C),
decorated on the bodies with engraved spirals with hooked, excised arms. Vessel
No. 7 in Burial No. 1 has red pigment in the engraved lines. Wilder Engraved is
considered a local resident pottery type of the Three Basins subcluster (Thurmond
1985), although it is relatively uncommon compared to Ripley Engraved.
A black polished Taylor Engraved bottle with a spool neck and a flaring lip
(Figure 16, D) was recovered from Burial No. 2. Engraved spirals cover the entire
body. The Goldsmith example is very similar to Taylor Engraved bottles from the

170

Texas Archeological Society

~0~
0

--’"

N

O~

.4

,1
o~

0

0

0

o

©
r~

m

~r

oo

[-

o’)

o.

t-

kO

°~

v~
L

m

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates -- Goldsmith Site

~
5.~o~~ = ~o~
~ ~.-~
~

O~

e4

Z
©

~ ~.~

O~

O~

O~

171

172

Texas Archeological Society

~

¯~ ~
o

~

~~

O~

o~

o

e,I

©

<

~D

©

q

4,a

q

o

U"~

oO

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

0

©

oO

173

174

Texas Archeological Society

A, Burial 1, Vessel I

C, Burial 1, Vessel 5

Figure 15. Ceramic vessels A-G from Burial No. 1

B, Burial 1, Vessel 7

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

D, Burial 1, Vessel 2

E, Burial 1, Vessel 6

I

F, Burial 1, Vessel 4

G, Burial 1, Vessel 3
Figure 15, Continued.

I

I

3 CM
!

175

176

Texas Archeological Society

A, Burial 2, Vessel 7
B, Burial 2, Vessel 9

5 CM
[,ltlll

C, Burial 2, Vessel 4

Figure 16. Ceramic vessels A--G from Burial No. 2.

D, Burial 2, Vessel 8

Perttula~ Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

E, Burial 2, Vessel 5

F, Burial 2, Vessel I

G, Burial 2, Vessel 6

Figure 16, Continued.

177

178

Texas Archeological Society

H, Burial 2, Vessel 2

0
! !

I

3 CENTIMETERS
I

I, Burial 2, Vessel 3

Figure 16, Continued.

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

179

A Burial I, Vessel 4
Scroll and circle

B Burial 1, Vessel 6
Scroll and circle

C Burial 1, Vessel 3
Scroll and circle

D Bm-ial I, Vessel 2
Nested Triangle

E Burial 2, Vessel 5
Scroll and circle

F Burial 2, Vessel 1
Scroll and circle

G Burial 2, Vessel 6
Scroll and circle

H Burial 2, Vessel 3
Continuous scroll

Figure 17. Motifs on Ripley Engraved carinated bowls from Burials No. 1 and 2.

Culpepper site in Hopkins County, Texas (Scurlock 1962:Figure 7 a, b). At that site,
Taylor Engraved occurs in association with vessels of Ripley Engraved, Womack
Engraved, Simms Engraved, Hodges Engraved, and Avery-like Engraved.
The Harleton Appliqu6 jar ~igure 15, A) from Burial No. 1 has soot deposits and organic residue on both interior and exterior vessel surfaces, prob-

180

Texas Archeological Society

ably from use over an open fire (e.g., Hally 1986) before it was put into the
grave. The rim of the vessel has single rows of punctations at the lip and at the
rim/body juncture, separated by cross-hatched incised lines. On the body are
four incised "herringbone" motifs; these are adjacent to sets of vertical appliqu6
that run from the rim/body juncture to near the base.
There are two distinct varieties of Nash Neck-Banded represented in the
vessels from the Goldsmith site. The first has appliqurd fillets on the upper body,
as well as appliqurd parentheses at the top of the rim (Figure 15, C); the second
has appliqu&l chevrons on the upper body. Both are found on vessels from Burial
No. 2 (Figure 16, A, B), which have vertical appliqu~l fillets on the bodies, and
appliqurd nodes or lugs at the tops of the rims. Similar neck-banded and
appliqurd vessels and sherds have been recovered at the J. H. Reese site and
from several sites on Caney Creek in the Lake Fork Reservoir (Bruseth and
Perttula 1981:Table 5-10).
Vessel 2 from Burial No. 2 is a polished, carinated bowl of similar shape to
Ripley Engraved vessels, with a well-defined rounded and rolled lip. It is not
decorated, however, except for a single engraved line on the interior of the vessel
at the rim/body juncture or carination (Figure 16, H).
Short-stemmed and short-bowled elbow pipe forms have been found in Late
Caddoan archeological sites in the Quitman area (Jackson 1933:71 and Plate 16).
The elbow pipe from the Goldsmith site has been decorated by two horizontal
engraved panels on the bowl, and by two engraved lines on the stem (Figure
18). Both sets of engraved lines were filled with white pigment, but the pigment
is poorly preserved. The pipe stem is 37 mm long, and the bowl is 23 mm high.
The lip profiles for both bowl and stem holes are flattened; the lips are from 3
to 5 mm thick. Grog temper was used as an aplastic in the sandy paste and,
although weathered, the pipe appears to have been polished. The bowl diameter
is about 37 mm; the exterior stem diameter is only 25 mm, and the interior stem
hole is about 4 mm in diameter.
Daub and Burned Clay
Small eroded pieces of daub and burned clay were recovered from the surface of the disturbed trash midden and from the test excavations. Both categories of fired clay are relatively amorphous, but pieces identified as daub, unlike
the burned clay, have stick and grass impressions. The daub is assumed to be
pieces of clay-plastered wall and thatch, probably from a burned structure. The
burned clay may be of the same origin, although that is difficult to ascertain
without more contextual information from the site as a whole.
Only five pieces of daub and fourteen pieces of burned clay have been
identified from the trash midden. Since ninety percent of these pieces come from the
top 20 cm of the midden deposits, including the disturbed plow zone (see Table 4),
any burning, and hence accumulation of daub/burned clay, took place at the end of
the deposition of the midden rather than at the beginning of the occupation when the

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates m Goldsmith Site

181

4 CM

0

Figure 18. Elbow pipe from Burial No. 2.

midden began to accumulate. The impressed daub specimens resemble those
identified from Late Caddoan Titus phase contexts at the Killebrew site, Midden A
(Bruseth and Perttula 1981:98), where it seemed likely that narrow-bladed grasses
were used for thatching on the house walls.
Summary of the Midden
The overall composition of the Goldsmith site trash midden ceramic assemblage compares favorably with that from the Steck site 2.5 km northeast
(Hockensmith 1977) in the relative ranking and frequency of the decorative
categories (Table 8). From this information, it is possible to infer that the Steck
and Goldsmith sites are probably contemporaneous, within +25 to 50 years,
manifestations of a Titus phase occupation in the Dry Creek locality. Ceramic
assemblages in the Caney Creek locality are different, but, because of the lack
of absolute dates for the Late Caddoan Period in the Upper Sabine Basin ~erttula
et al. 1987), it cannot be determined yet whether this is a result of temporal and/
or social differences (e.g., Thurmond 1985). On the basis of the stylistic motifs
on Ripley Engraved in the Caney Creek locality (see Bruseth and Perttula
1981:Figure 5-7), it is suspected that these ceramic variations in vessel decorations denote different social groups that reflect generally contemporaneous Titus
phase occupations. Based on the one radiocarbon date from the Steck site, it is
estimated that the Goldsmith occupation took place from between A.D. 1400 at
the earliest to about 1550 to 1600 at the latest.

182

Texas Areheological Society
CONCLUSIONS

Late Caddoan Titus phase sites are common in the Wood County part of the
Upper Sabine Basin, primarily in the Dry Creek and Caney Creek drainages and
along Lake Fork Creek between the confluences of these two creeks (Skiles et al.
1980:Figure 6; Thurmond 1985:Figure 6). The settlements are distributed almost
exclusively along tributaries and headwater areas rather than along major streams.
In the Caney Creek drainage, Titus phase sites are known at least as far north as the
Attaway site (41HP15) near Como. Similar Late Caddoan settlement patterns are
apparent in Harrison and Rusk counties on creeks like Hatley Creek in the South
HaUsville Mine Project (LaVardera 1985), Martin Creek (Clark and Ivey 1974), and
Potters Creek directly to the north (Webb et al. 1969). Thurmond (1981:Table 54)
has documented settlement locations for the Titus phase in the Cypress Creek basin
that also emphasized intermediate and minor-sized basins, including headwater
areas adjacent to springs.
There is no apparent settlement hierarchy in the local Titus phase, although
occupations at the Steck and M. W. Burks (41WD52) sites (Perttula et al. n.d.) may
represent large settlements (cf., Thurmond 1981:100). Possible substructural mounds
in the Dry Creek and Lake Fork Creek basins at the J. D. Conger (41WD8) and A.
N. Vickery (41WD11) sites trenched by A. T. Jackson in the early 1930s may date
to this period, but that work yielded little cultural and stratigraphic information. If
these possible substructural mounds are of Late Caddoan age, it is possible that they
represent local civic-ceremonial centers like McKenzie [41WD55] (Granberry
1985) in the Upper Sabine Basin that date before A.D. 1500 (Story 1981:149;
Thurmond 1981:Table 52).
The basic type of Titus phase site in the Three Basins subcluster is a small
settlement of one to several homesteads or farmsteads. These are marked by trash
and household middens that must have been deposited during an occupational
episode of at most 20 to 50 years (see Good 1982). The character, extent, and content
of local Late Caddoan trash middens (Table 10) reflect a basic similarity not only
in the length and type of occupation, but also in the activities relating to refuse
disposal at that time.
The house at the Goldsmith site was probably destroyed by the road construction, since it was probably located between the trash midden and the cemetery. It
is also unfortunate that an accurate estimate of the number of burials in the cemetery
cannot be made since ideally,
the relative duration of the hamlets (settlements) can be measured by the
number of graves in the cemeteries and relative temporal placement of
each hamlet can be determined by sedating mortuary assemblages [S hafer
1981:156].
The ecofactual remains from trash middens would contribute important subsistence information on the Titus phase if a larger, statistically reliable sample could
be obtained (e.g., Grayson 1984; Jones etal. 1983). This could be accomplished

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

183

Table 10. Comparison of Late Caddoan Trash Middens
Estimated Midden Content

Site

Area
(m2)

Volume
(m3)

%
Sample

Ceramic
Sherds

Lithic
Artifacts

Bone
Debris

Goldsmith

49

19.6

4.1

9000

15001

3000

Steck

81

24.0

22.7

9200

900

2500

Killebrew
midden D

180

36.10

5.0

9700

3900

+2

1Counts are probably inflated because of Archaic Period occupations at the site.
2Faunal materials are not quantified in Bruseth and Perttula (1981).

with the excavation of about 20 to 40 percent of the midden (4 to 8 m3) if the faunal
densities from our work at the Goldsmith site are representative.
Subsistence remains with interpretive significance for the Titus phase are still
limited to the Steck site (Perttula et al. 1983), although well-preserved remains are
known at several other sites that have as yet received little professional attention.
Floral evidence suggests that the tropical cultigen maize (Zea mays L.) is a dietary
staple, andbeans (Phaseolus vulgaris) were also an important food source. Nuts and
seeds available in local environmental settings were also gathered, but may have
been of less importance in the Titus phase than they were between about A.D. 1000
and 1400 (Crane 1982; Perttula and Bruseth 1983). Vertebrate species identified
from the Wash midden at the Steck site include deer, turkey, cottontail, jackrabbit,
squirrel, and beaver, as well as several dog burials. Turtle and fish remains were also
present but were relatively uncommon compared to the mammals and birds
(Perttula et al. 1983); deer and turkey were the dominant species at the Steck site.
The Late Caddoan archeological sites in the Dry Creek and Caney Creek
drainages of the Lake Fork basin have been included in the recently defined Cypress
Cluster, which is thought to be
the archeological manifestation of a series of social groups banded
together in a socio-political structure analogous to and at least partially
contemporaneous with thatofthe Hasinai to the south and the Kadohadacho
to the northeast. Four subclusters . . . are believed to represent the
individual component groups comprising this affiliated group [Thurmond
1985:196].
The Three Basins subcluster comprises Titus phase occupations on Caney and
Dry creeks in the Upper Sabine River Basin, and headwater areas of Little Cypress,

184

Texas Archeological Society

Big Cypress, and White Oak creeks. More recently, sites attributable to the Three
Basins subcluster have been identified in the Big Sandy Creek valley (Perttula et al.
1986). The suggested dating of the Cypress Cluster to between A.D. 1600 and 1700
(Thurmond 1985:192) is as yet untested by absolute dating methods. A corrected
date ofA. D. 1470&-_80 from the Steck site may mean that the Three Basins subcluster
developed at an earlier date than is consistent with current chronological frameworks for the Cypress Cluster. Obtaining thermoluminescence and radiocarbon
dates from sites such as Goldsmith or Steck is vital to the acquisition of new
information on the development of the Cypress Cluster and the Titus phase. The
primary units of analysis--the hamlet cemeteries--limit to some extent the precision and reliability of diachronic analyses in the Titus phase. The likelihood or
possibility of frequent shifting of settlements on a generational basis suggests that
a large number of sites would be identified within the four subclusters that are
actually sequent to (rather than contemporaneous with) other known sites.
Synchroneity between and within subclusters is much more difficult to demonstrate
with a series of archeological components in this situation than are intraphase
diachronic changes.
Nevertheless, the definition of the Cypress Cluster, an archeological unit with
specific implications for the recognition of sociopolitical groupings, indicates that
Late Caddoan sites in the Upper Sabine River Basin can be studied within an
analytical framework superseding basic settlement patterning questions. This is
because recognition of the Cypress Cluster is an initial attempt in East Texas
archeology to relate archeological units to regionally meaningful sociocultural
variables that have specific archeological implications (e.g., Thurmond 1985). If
differences between the Dry Creek and Caney Creek localities have more than
temporal significance, that is, if they represent archeological manifestations of
contemporaneous constituent groups (Story and Creel 1982) within the Three Basin
subcluster, sites such as Goldsmith will be important contextual units for investigation in further studies of Late Caddoan prehistory. Their short occupation spans,
their potential for developing close-order and f’me-scale sedations, and the possibility of obtaining economic information at an analytically useful level (the
individual farmstead or homestead), are ideal for investigating intraregional and
interregional settlement, sociopolitical organization, and adaptive variability between about A.D. 1400 and 1700. The individual farmstead or homestead is the most
common type of Late Caddoan settlement in the Upper Sabine Basin, but one that
until recently has received little professional archeological scrutiny. Hypotheses
about the formation, development, and eventual disintegration of Late Caddoan
sociopolitical groupings in East Texas can be evaluated, where appropriate, with the
type of Late Caddoan archeological record known to exist at sites such as Goldsmith
throughout the Dry and Caney Creek localities.
Attempting to model archeological contemporaneity for the Titus phase as a
whole will certainly require a more comprehensive chronological data base than
now exists if sociopolitical interpretations and considerations of adaptation are to
be seriously considered, for as Story (1981:152) has pointed out,

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

185

certainly the Caddoan area is neither environmentally or culturally homogenous. Different processes could have been in operation simultaneously and it must be established, not assumed, that the sequence of
cultural change in one locale applies to another.

We hope our research at the Goldsmith site will contribute to a better understanding
of the Three Basins subcluster of the Titus phase in the Dry Creek basin of East
Texas, and serve to initiate more systematic and long-term research on Late
Caddoan archeology in the Upper Sabine Basin and throughout East Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful for the cooperation and assistance of several people during the
work at the Goldsmith site. The owners of the site, the Goldsmith family, permitted
access and shared our concern that the site be protected if possible. We especially
thank Gene Goldsmith, Dr. J. Paul Goldsmith, and H. B. Goldsmith. James E.
Bruseth helped with the access negotiations and facilitated the initial work. He also
provided information about the Steck and Pine Tree Farm site ceramic assemblages
that proved useful in the Goldsmith analysis. Mr. Craig Lacy and Mr. Robert
Turbeville assisted Skiles in gathering information about the site after its initial
exposure, and Ms. Peggy Trachte provided support during the excavations in the
poison-ivy-covered midden. We also thank Mr. Gerald Blow for drafting the maps.
Dr. C. Reid Ferring helped considerably in the editing of the manuscript, and in
improving its structure, but we remain responsible for the content and final form of
the paper.
REFERENCES CITED
Aitken, M. J.
1985
Thermoluminescence Dating. Academic Press, London.
Albert, L. E.
Ferndale Bog and Natural Lake: Five Thousand Years of Environmental
1981
Change in Southeastern Oklahoma. Studies in Oklahoma’s Past No. 7. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, J. R. Buchanan, W. L. Hezlap, T. G. Jordan,
C. T. Granger, and C. P. Zlatkovich.
Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at
1973
Austin.
Banks, L. D.
Lithic Resources and Quarries. In: Prehistory ofOklahoma, edited by R. E. Bell,
1984
pp. 65-95. Academic Press, New York.

186

Texas Archeological Society

Banks, L. D., and J. Winter
1975
The Bentsen-Clark Site, Red River County, Texas: Preliminary Report. Texas
Archeological Society, Special Publication No. 2.
Barnes, V. E. (Project Director)
1965
Geologic Atlas of Texas, Tyler Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Bell, M.
1981

The Alex Justiss Site: A Caddoan Cemetery inTitus County, Texas. Texas State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation Highway Design Division
Publications in Archaeology Report No. 21. Austin.

Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bruseth, J. E., and T. K. Perttula
1980
Archaeological Research at Lake Fork Reservoir: Excavations at the Howle
Site and Site Testing. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas.
1981

Prehistoric Settlement Patterns at Lake Fork Reservoir. Texas Antiquities
Permit Series, Report No. 2. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin, and Southem Methodist University, Dallas.

Bruseth, J. E., J. T. Bagot, K. M. Banks, and M. A. McKinley
1977
Archaeological Research at Lake Fork Reservoir: Site Inventory and Assessmenu Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program, Research Report No. 87. Dallas.
Bryant, V. M., and R. G. Holloway
1985
A Late Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the
Pollen Evidence. In: Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American
Sediments, edited by V. M. Bryant and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American
Association of Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas.
Clark, J. W., and J. E. Ivey
1974
Archeological and Historical Investigations at Martin Lake, Rusk and Panola
Counties, Texas. The University of Texas at Austin, Texas Archeological
Survey, Research Report 32.
Crane, C. J.
Plant Utilization at Spoonbill, an Early Caddo Site in Northeast Texas.
1982
Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 7:81-97.
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc.
1984
The Cultural Resources Investigations at the Henry W. Pirkey Power Plant
and South Hallsville Lignite Mine Transportive Systems Re-Route, Harrison
County, Texas. Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc., Document No. 83434,

Austin.

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

187

Ferring, C. R.
1969
Pecked and Ground Stone. In: Archaeological Investigations at the Sam
Kaufrnan Site, Red River County, Texas, edited by S. A. Skinner, R. K.
Harris, and K. M. Anderson. Southern Methodist University, Contributions
in Anthropology No. 5, Dallas.
Ferring, C. R., and T. K. Perttula
1987
Defining the Provenance of Red-Slipped Pottery from Texas and Oklahoma by
Pelxographic Methods. Journal of Archaeological Science 14:437--456.
Flores, D. L. (editor)
1985
Journal of an Indian Trader: Anthony Glass and the Texas Trading Frontier,
1790-1810. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Good, C. E.
Analysis of Structures, Burials, and other Cultural Features. In: The Deshazo
1982
Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Volume I, edited by D. A. Story, pp. 51-112.
Texas Antiquities Permit Series, No. 7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.
Gould, F. W.
1969
Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Study. Texas A&M University,
Miscellaneous Papers, College Station.

Granberry, D.
1985

Eight C-14 Dates from the McKenzie Mound, 41WD55. The Record, Newsletter of the Dallas Archaeological Society 40(2):4-9.

Grayson, D. K.
1984
Quantitative Zooarchaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Hall, S. A.
1982
Late Holocene Paleoecology of the Southern Plains. Quaternary Research
17:391-407.
Hally, D. J.
1986
The Identification of Vessel Function: A Case Study from Northwest Georgia.
American Antiquity 51:267-293.
Hockensmith, C. L.
1977
The Steck Site: A Titus Focus Midden, Wood County, Texas. Paper presented
at the 1977 Caddo Conference, Natchitoches, Louisiana.
Holloway, R. G.
1987
Pollen Analysis of Sediment Core from Buck Creek Marsh, Wood County,
Texas. In: Introduction to the Richland Creek Archaeological Project, edited by
J. E. Bruseth and R. W. Molt. Appendix A, Volume I of the Richland Creek
TechnicalSeries. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

188

Texas Archeological Society

Jackson, A. T.
1933
Some Pipes of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 5:69-86.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1962
The Yarbrough and MiNer Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a Preliminary
Definition of the LaHarpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
31:141- 284.
Jones, G. T., D. K. Grayson, and C. Beck
1983
Artifact Class Richness and Sample Size in Archaeological Surface Assemblages. In: Lulu Linear Punctated: Essays in Honor of George Irving Quimby,
edited by R. C. Durmell and D. K. Grayson. University of Michigan, Anthropolog&al Papers of the Museum ofAnthropology, No. 72:55-73, Ann Arbor.
Kilchler, A. W.
Potential Natural Vegetation of the Conterminous United States. American
1964
Geographical Society Special Publication 36. New York.
LaVardera, L. T.
1985
Backhoe Trenching at 41HS282, South Hallsville Project, Harrison County,
Texas. North American Consultants, Inc., Dallas.
Lorrain, D.
Anlmalremains’In:TheGilbertSite’editedbyE’B’Jelks’Bulletin°ftheTexas
1967
Archaeological Society 37:225-243.
Marietta, K. L., and E. S. Nixon
1984
Vegetation of an Open, Prairie-Like Community in Eastern Texas. Texas
Journal of Science 36:25-34.
Nixon, E. S., R. L. Ehrhart, S. A. Jasper, J. S. Neck, and J. R. Ward
Woody, Slreamside Vegetation of Prairie Creek in East Texas. Texas Journal of
1983
Science 35:205-213.
Perttula, T. K.
1984
Patterns of Prehistoric Lithic Raw Material Utilization in the Caddoan Area: The
Western Gulf Coastal Plain. In: Prehistoric Chert Exploitatiort---Studies from
the Midcontinent, edited by B. M. Butler and E. E. May. Southern Illinois
University-Carbondale, Center for Archaeological Investigations, Occasional
Paper 2:129-148.
Perttula, T. K., and J. E. Bmseth
1983
Early Caddoan Subsistence Strategies, Sabine River Basin, East Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 28:9-21.
Perttula, T. K., B. D. Skiles, B. C. Yates, and J. E. Bruseth
n.d.
Archaeological Investigations at the Burks Site (41WD52), a Late Caddoan
Occupation in Wood County,Texas. MS in preparation.

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

189

Perttula, T. K., C. J. Crane, and J. E. Bruseth
1983
AConsiderationofCaddoanSubsistence.SoutheasternArchaeology 1:89-102.
Perttula, T. K., B. D. Skiles, M. B. Collins, M. C. Trachte, and F. Valdez, Jr.
1986
’"riffs Everlasting Sand Bed": Cultural Resources Investigations at the Texas
Big Sandy Project, Wood and Upshur Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Reports of Investigations No. 52, Austin.
Perttula, T. K., R. R. Turbeville, and B. D. Skiles
1987
New Thermoluminescence and Radiocarbon Dates from the Upper Sabine
River B asin, East Texas. Texas Archeology 31 (2):7-9.
Reese, M. M.
1931
Report on Miscellaneous Sites in Wood County, Texas. MS on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
Reid, K. C., and J. A. Artz
1984
Hunters of the Forest Edge: Culture, Time, and Process in the Little Caney
Basin. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Studies on Oklahoma’s Past No. 13,
NorlTlan.

Rose, J. C.
1984
Bioarchaeology of the Cedar Grove Site. In: Cedar Grove: An Interdisciplinary
Investigation of a Late Caddo Farmstead in the Red River Valley, edited by N.
L. Trubowitz. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Research Series No. 23:227256. Fayetteville.
Schambach, F. F.
1982
An Outline of Fourche Maline Culture in Southwest Arkansas. In: Arkansas
Archeology in Review, edited by N. L. Trubowitz and M. D. Jeter. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Research Series No. 15:132-197. Fayetteville.
Scurlock, J. D.
1962
The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeast Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 32:285-316.
Shafer, H. J.
Archaeological Investigations at the Attaway Site, Henderson County, Texas.
1981
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:147-179.
Sidles, B. D., J. E. Bruseth, and T. K. Perttula
1980
A Synthesis of the Upper Sabine River Basin Culture History. The Record,
Newsletter of the Dallas Archaeological Society 36(1): 1-12.
Stable, D. W., E. R. Cook, and L W. C. White
1985
Tree-Ring Dating of Baldcypress and the Potential for Millennia-Long Chronologies in the Southeast. American Antiquity 50:796-802.

190

Texas Archeological Society

Stable, D. W., M. K. Cleaveland, and J. G. Hehr
1985
A 450-Year Drought Reconstruction for Arkansas, United States. Nature
316:530-532.
Steponaitis, V. P.
1984
Technological Studies of Prehistoric Pottery from Alabama: Physical Properties
and Vessel Function. In: The Many Dimensions of Pottery: Ceramics in
Archaeology and Anthropology, edited by S. E. Van Der Leeuw and A. C.
Pritchard, pp. 79-127. Universiteit van Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
Story, D. A.
1978
Some Comments on Anthropological Studies Concerning the Caddo. In: Texas
Archeology: Essays Honoring R. King Harris, edited by K. D. House, pp. 4668. Southern Methodist University Press, Dallas.
1981

An Overview of the Archaeology of EastTexas. Plains Anthropologist 26:139156.

1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In:
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford. University
of Michigan, Anthropological Papers of the Museum of Anthropology, No.
75:19-56. Ann Arbor.

Story, D. A., and D. Creel
1982
The Cultural Setting. In: The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas,
Volume I, edited by D. A. Story, pp. 20-34. Texas Antiquities Permit Series No.
7. Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.
Suhm, D. A., and E. B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Special
Publication No. 4.
Suhm, D. A., A. D. Krieger, and E. B Jelks
An Introductory Handbook ofTexas Archeology.BuUetin of the Texas Archeo1954
logical Society 25.
Swanton, J. R.
1942
Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 132. Washington, D.C.
Texas A/manac
1986
A.H. Belo Corporation, Dallas.
P.
Archeology of the Cyl~e~ Creek Drainage Basin, Northeastern Texas and
Northwestern Louisiana. Master’s thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texa.( at Austin.

Thurmond, J.

1981

1985

Late Caddoan Social Group Identification and Sociopolitical Organization in
the Upper Cypress Basin and its Vicinity, Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 54:185-200.

Perttula, Skiles, and Yates ~ Goldsmith Site

191

Turner, R. L.
The Tuck Carpenter Site and its Relation to Other Sites within the Titus Focus.
1978
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:1-110.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District
1975
Carl L. Estes Lake, Sabine River, Texas: Draft Environmental Statement. U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District.
Webb, C. H.
1978
Changing Archaeological Methods and Theory in the Tram-Mississippi South.
In: Texas Archeology: Essays Honoring R. King Harris, edited by K. D. House,
pp. 19--45. Southern Methodist University Press, Dallas.
Webb, C. H., F. E. Murphey, W. G. Ellis, and H. R. Green
The Resch Site, 41HS16, Harrison Cotmty, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
1969
Archeological Society 40:3-106.
Wilson, A. M., and A. T. Jackson
1930
Reconnaissance in Wood County, Texas, August 10 to 24, 1930: Field Notes.
MS on f’tle, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Yates, B. C.
Vertebrate Faunal Remains. In: French-Indian Interaction at an 18th Century
1986
Frontier Post: The Roseborough Lake Site, Bowie County, Texas by Kathleen
Gilmore. North Texas State University, Institute of Applied Sciences, Contributions in Archaeology No. 3:107-131, Denton.

