325

An Examination and Appraisal of Malakoff Heads
No. 1 and No. 3
Thomas H. Guderjan
ABSTRACT
The three boulders known as the Malakoff Heads, found more than 50 years
ago in gravel quarries, were thought by several professional people to be the work
of Pleistocene man, but intensive archeological work has turned up no new
evidence of related materials. Indeed, careful and detailed examination of the
heads by the author leads to the conclusion that none of the three heads is the work
of early man.

INTRODUCTION
The Malakoff Heads, also called Malakoff Man, have been enigmatic since
their discovery more than 50 years ago. These three boulders were found in gravel
quarries near Malakoff, in Henderson County, Texas, along Cedar Creek in the
Trinity River Basin. Interpretations of the carved anthropomorphic images have
ranged from evidence ofpre-Clovis man to outright frauds. Though the finds could
well have faded into the obscurity of a small footnote to archeology, claims that they
are authentic persist in nonprofessional journals (Agogino 1987) and in Texas
newspapers (Greene 1986).

History and Context of the Finds
The first of the three Malakoff Heads was found on November 2, 1929, by
workers in Pit No. 1 of the Texas Clay Products Co.’s quarries 8 km (5 miles) from
Malakoff. On November 4, 1929, Head No. 1 was moved to the company’s offices
in Malakoff. Five days later it was reported to E. H. Sellards at the University of
Texas, who visited the site on November 26, 1929 (Athens Daily Review 1967).
Sellards was apparently convinced of the authenticity of the find and prepared an
article for American Antiquity that he later withdrew, expecting that more and better
evidence would soon surface (Sellards 1941). Sellards determined that Head No. 1
had come from an Eocene formation underlying the 50,000-to-100,000-year-old
Trinity gravels (Athens Weekly Review 1930). Since the head was friable, a gum
arabic solution was used to arrest its decay on January 4, 1930.
Malakoff Head No. 1 is a calcareous, ferruginous sandstone concretion
measuring 41 by 36 cm and weighing 44.5 kg (Sellards 1941). Head No. 1 is the most
distinct of the three, with the eyes, ears, mouth, nose, and eyebrows of a human
carved in the stone (Figure 1).
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

326

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Malakoff Head No. 1. (Courtesy of the Texas Memorial Museum.)

Guderjan m Malakoff Heads

327

As Sellards expected, a second head was found in September 1935 in Texas
Clay Products Pit No. 2, very near the fh’st find. Head No. 2 measures 38 by 31 cm
and weighs 28 kg. This image is not as distinct, since it has only carved eyes and
mouth (Figure 2). Head No. 2 was also found by workmen and reported to Sellards,
who believed it too was authentic.
Excavations of the Works Progress Administration (WPA) were then undertaken by Glen Evans, of the University of Texas, from April to August 1938 and by
George Shafer from May 1939 to July 1940. In November 1939 Head No. 3 was
found in situ at Texas Clay Products Pit No. 1 at a depth of 6.5 meters. This boulder
has a 51-cm diameter and weighs 61 kg ~igure 3). However, no cultural remains
were found either in association with or in the vicinity of the boulder. Despite the
extremely crude appearance of Head No. 3, Sellards was still again convinced that
it was the work of prehistoric man (1941).
Contrary to newspaper reports, Sellards did not specify a date for the finds.
However, based upon his analysis of the terraces and fauna from the excavations,
he placed the gravels in the Pleistocene (1941). The redating of the Trinity River
terraces to the Late Pleistocene or Quaternary (Slaughter 1962), has led some
archeologists to consider that a Paleoindian date for the heads is feasible (Parker
Nunley, personal communication).
Other Similar Finds
Since 1935, no new evidence for related materials has come from the Malakoff
region, despite intensive archeological work (Story 1965; Richner and Lee 1977;
Richner and Bagot 1978; Guderjan 1981). However, a smaller carved stone effigy
is in the possession of Mary Ann Perryman, of Athens, Texas (personal communication). It has not been examined, but judging from her oral descriptions, this head
is no more than an ecofact. Although no other confirming evidence has been found
in the region, several similar finds have been reported from other areas.
In 1987, a human effigy was brought to the attention of Larry Pete at San Jacinto
College South by Bebe Morgan; it had been found near Cross Plains in Callahan
County and was purportedly given to her uncle by an "old Indian" who originally
found it. This sandstone sculpture is much smaller than the Malakoff Heads. It
measures 30 by 18 cm and weighs 10 kg (Larry Pete and Bebe Morgan, personal
communications). The Morgan Head has Negroid features that are much more
distinct than those of the Malakoff Heads.
Although both are carved human effigies, no relationship is assumed between
the Morgan and Malakoff heads. However, A. C. Greene reported that"in 1928 what
was termed ’a finely sculptured sandstone head, wearing a conical shaped cap’ was
found near a gravel pit south of Cross Plains in Callahan County, the head having
similarly shaped eyes [to a Xipe-Toltec figurine] and a patina indicating ’some
age’" (Greene 1986). Both of the Callahan County heads seem to bear a general
relationship to Olmec heads from Veracruz.

328

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

Figure 2. Malakoff Head No. 2. (Courtesy of the Texas Memorial Museum.)

Guderjan ~ Malakoff Heads

Figure 3. Malakoff Head No. 3. (Courtesy of the Texas Memorial Museum.)

329

330

Texas Archeological Society

George Agogino reports that two other carved effigies have been found in
South Texas and northern Mexico. One, which he states is quite similar to Malakoff
Head No. 1--weighing 41 kg, and measuring 31 cm across--was found during
dredging of the Rio Grande floodplain in 1963 (Agogino 1987). Another was found
in 1965, 30 km south of Juarez, Mexico, from a "deep earth deposit" (Agogino
1987). This one was smaller, only 36 by 33 cm and weighed 14 kg.
Supporters and Detractors

Opinions regarding the validity of Malakoff Man vary greatly. Sellards
believed them to be evidence of Pleistocene Man (1941),but it must be remembered
how different from now the view of early Americans was at that time. Only recently
had the Folsom site been authenticated, and the concept of great antiquity for
American Indians was being validated. Yet, Slaughter’s restudy of the Trinity
terraces has led some to believe that Malakoff Man may be related to early
Paleoindians. Agogino considers the heads "pale copies" of the Olmec heads and
places them in the Archaic period (1987). Glen Evans, who interviewed the discoverers of Heads No. 1 and 2, was convinced of the authenticity and antiquity (Story
1960:176).
Recent investigators in the Cedar Creek-Trinity River region have been less
positive. Jeff Richner chose simply to avoid discussing the topic (Richner and Lee
1977; Richner and Bargot 1978), and this author once termed Malakoff Man" a
likel y fraud," though he had not yet examined the actual heads (Guderj an 1981 ). Dee
Ann Story has recently taken the most diplomatic of all approaches, saying that it
"remains a matter of opinion" (MS, 5-52), but she clearly doubts that Head No. 3
is man-made (MS, 5-51).
AN EXAMINATION AND APPRAISAL OF HEADS NO. 1 and.3

The issues raised in evaluating the authenticity of MalakoffMan are clear. First,
are the heads man-made? Second, if so, then by whom and when? Finally, if they
are authentic, then what meaning do they have? There is a consensus that Heads No.
1 and 2 are indeed man-made, so the first concern in these cases may be considered
to be satisfied. Head No. 3, however, is not nearly as well accepted.
In May 1989, this author was able to examine the Malakoff Heads No. 1 and
3 at the Texas Memorial Museum. Head No. 2 is stored in Corsicana, Texas and was
not examined.
Head No. 1

Malakoff Head No. 1 was examined to determine whether evidence existed
regarding the technology used in its manufacture. Several facts indicate that it was
quite recently made with modern metal tools. First, the nose was formed by abrading
the areas on both sides. The nose is much more heavily oxidized than are either of
the sides, where very little oxidation has occurred. This lack of oxidation is an

Guderjan ~ Malakoff Heads

331

indication that the abrading was done fairly recently.
The eyes, mouth, and ears of Head No. 1 were made by chiseling into the
sandstone with a very thin, sharp, hard object that was then twisted to remove
material from the stone, but it is unlikely that a stone or bone tool could have been
used repeatedly as a gouge in this manner without shattering. In the left eye there
are two marks of a pointed gouge used this way, in the mouth there are 10 to 13, in
the right eye there is one, and, more importantly, there is also a rectangular gouge
mark in the left eye that measures nine thirty-seconds by five thirty-seconds of an
inch ~igure4), only one thirty-second of an inch larger than a common quarter-inch
steel chisel. Furthermore, the left eye has been stained darker than the surrounding
oxidized surface in an apparent attempt to disguise the work of the modem maker.
The only conclusion that can be reasonably drawn from this examination is that
Head No. 1 was made with metal tools, probably at the time of its discovery. This
author can only conclude that Head No. 1 is a forgery.

Figure 4. Macrophotograph of left eye of Head No. 1, showing gouge marks from a
metal tool.

Head No. 3
There are several indications that Head No. 3 is not man-made. In fact, only
two areas of Head No. 3--the mouth and right eye--are potentially man-made. In
the mouth area there are vague marks that may have been made by a back-and-forth
cutting action, but calcareous material has formed in the eye, and, further, sedimentary quartzite crystals or some type of similar deposits have formed in a crack in
the eye and are large enough that they protrude into the eye. Since Head No. 3 was

332

Texas Archeological Society

found in a gravel deposit rather than its original geologic context, it is highly
improbable that these crystalline deposits formed since any reasonable (Quaternary) time of possible human manufacture. Further, a clear shovel mark has
produced a spall, which has not oxidized, but extends to the eye. All of this indicates
that Head No. 3 is not chemically active in its present state and that there is little
likelihood of rapid crystalline formation in the past. It is more likely that the
quartzite crystals formed within the rock in its original geological context (some bed
of cemented ferruginous sandstone) and that the"eye" is the result of natural erosion
around the crystals.
In the light of the extreme crudeness of this specimen, it is quite unlikely that
it ever would have been considered man-made had it not been for the tantalizing
possibilities offered by the first two specimens. The almost irrefutable evidence-presented by the crystalline deposit---of the very great antiquity of the mark that has
been called an eye, Head No. 3 can be assessed only as an ecofact without any
archeological meaning.
SUMMARY

Despite subsequent finds similar to the Malakoff Heads, no other confirming
evidence for their authenticity has been found in the Cedar Creek-Trinity River area
where they were found. The only possible exception is the Perryman specimen,
which has not been examined. The case for authenticity of the Heads has rested upon
their clearly man-made nature and faith in the information given by the "discoverers" of the Heads No. 1 and 2.
The case for the provenience of Head No. 3 is strong, considering the wellcontrolled circumstances of its discovery. However, it is almost certainly an ecofact
without archaeological significance. The case against the great antiquity that has
been claimed for Head No. 1 is as strong. The use of metal tools in the English system
of measurement indicates small likelihood that Head No. 1 predates November
1929.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Elaine Sullivan, of the Texas Memorial Museum, facilitated and joined in the
examination and photography of Malakoff Heads No. 1 and 3. A. C. Greene,
Roberta McGregor, Bebe Morgan, Mary Ann Perryman, Larry Pete, and Dee Ann
Story graciously shared information with the author.
REFERENCES CITED
Athens Daily Review
1967
Malakoff Man Described as One of Oldest Art in Americas.August 12, 1967.

Guderjan ~ Malakoff Heads

333

Athens Weekly Review
1930
Image Found at Malakoff Thousands of Years Old. February 20, 1930, 1.
Agogino, G. C.
1987
The Large Stone Heads from MalakoffTexas! Their Age and Cultural Origins.
The Thesopian 25:2-6.
Greene, A. C.
1986
The Mystery of Texas’ Sculptured Heads. Houston Chronicle, 10-11, October
26.
Guderjan, T. H.
1981
Archeological Investigations in the Forest Grove/Big Rock Areas: NorthCentralTexas. Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.
Richner, Jeffery, and J. T. Bagot
1978
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin. Archaeology Program,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Richner, Jeffery, and Reed Lee
1977

Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Survey at Tennessee Colony Lake 1975.
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.

Sellards, E. H.
1941
Stone Images from Henderson County, Texas. American Antiquity 7:1:29-38.
Slaughter, Robert, W. N. Koos, L. A. Putnam, and W. D. Mitchell
1962
Report No. 48. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of Texas.
Story, D. A.
1965
Archaeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 36:163-251.
1990

Cultural History of the Native Americans. Chapter 5 in Archeology and
Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, Vols. 1 and 2, by Dee Ann Story, Janis
A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D. Gentry
Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard. Arkansas Archeological Society
Research Series, 38, pp. 63-366

