The Columbian Quincentenary:
Archeological and Historical Perspectives from Texas
Timothy K. Perttula

ABSTRACT
This issue of the Bulletin of the TexasArcheological Society presents a series
of archeological and historical perspectives on the Columbian Quincentenary
(1492-1992) in Texas.

The year 1992 is the 500th anniversary of the first of four voyages of
Christopher Columbus, or Cristobal Colrn (Taviani 1991), to the New World.
Although these voyages have been frequently characterized as voyages of discovery, in truth they were voyages that initiated contacts and encounters among vastly
divergent cultures and peoples of the same world (Milanich and Milbrath 1989;
Viola and Margolis 1991). These encounters began the process of profound cultural,
environmental, and technological changes that have since reverberated around the
world. Garcilaso de la Vega, el Inca, himself the son of a Spanish conquistador and
Incan royalty, wrote that"there is only one world, and although we speak of the Old
World and the New, this is because the latter was lately discovered by us, and not
because there are two" (Garcilaso de la Vega 1966, I:9).
To recognize the significance of these New World encounters and to shed light
on the "social, demographic, ecological, ideological, and human repercussions of
European-Native American encounters" (Thomas 1991 :xv), the Texas Archeological Society decided to focus the 1992 Bulletin on the legacy of Columbus as seen
in Texas. This is an opportunity, foremost, to delve into the complex and diverse
historical and archeological records relating to the first encounters between the
Europeans and the Indians in Texas after 1492. Also of importance is exploration
of the role of the Native Americans in the history of Texas, as well as the
examination of some of the main--although often neglected--consequences of
these contacts (such as the introduction of disease and declines in population) for
the indigenous peoples of the state. This focus on the archeological and historical
implications of the Columbian Quincentenary in Texas can rightly help to reveal to
a wide audience the many cultural achievements of the Native Americans and
Europeans who lived and continue to live in the state of Texas, and of their
encounters and exchanges through time. It is hoped that communication of this story
will help "to educate the public about the remarkable archeological legacy left by
Texas’s original inhabitants" (Shafer 1986:6).
In these papers, the authors describe this process of encounters between Native
Americans and Europeans in various regions of Texas. The initial entradas and

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 63 (1992)

2

Texas Archeological Society

encounters, from the Panhandle region to the Gulf Coast--when the Spanish
explorers first contacted such important Native American groups as the Caddo, the
Karankawa, and the Jumano--are discussed by Diane Rhodes, Joseph P. Sanchez,
James E. Bruseth, and Robert S. Weddle. Elizabeth A. H. John, together with
Weddle and Sanchez, "excavates" further into historic documents and texts (e.g.,
Ramenofsky 1991) to illuminate later seventeenth and eighteenth century explorations by the S panish and French in Texas. Their work clearly brings out the historical
significance of European-Indian political and economic relationships that contributed to the success of both Spanish and French colonial pursuits and Native Indian
lifeways (see also Castafieda 1936; John 1975; Weddle 1985, 1991 for excellent
studies of European-Indian interrelationships from the sixteenth to the nineteenth
centuries in Texas).
Archeological investigations conducted in Florida, the southeastern United
States, and the Caribbean during the last ten years (Milanich and Milbrath 1989;

COMANCIIE

LmAN
APACHE

ATAKAPAN

o
I
o

]00 MILES

_-~_~

T--J

IOOKILOMETERS

--

Gulf of Mexico

-- " ~ ~

Figure 1. Map of Texas showing locations of Historic Indian Groups from about the
sixteenth to mid-eighteenth centuries (adapted by Rick E. Jarnigan from a map drawn by
Kathy Roemer).

Perttula ~ The Columbian Quincentenary

3

Thomas 1990) have made it possible to understand well the material culture of the
European explorers and colonists who ventured into Texas. Cathryn A. Hoyt, James
E. Bruseth, and Diane Lee Rhodes review the record of material culture, discuss the
types of artifacts to be expected on archeological sites in Texas that are associated
with Spanish explorers such as Coronado and de Soto, and, in the case of Bruseth
and Rhodes, use the available evidence to suggest the routes these explorers
probably took across the state. The difficulty in tracing these routes seems to be due
to the scarcity of sixteenth century European artifacts on Indian sites of that period,
to the limited archeological investigations of Historic Indian sites, and to the effects
of European diseases that contributed to massive population declines and group
movements between the time of initial European contact and the earliest reliable
Spanish and French documents (for the impacts of disease in the Spanish Borderlands, see many of the papers in Thomas 1989, 1990, and 1991 and Cook and Lovell
1991).
Jay C. Blaine, Kathleen Gilmore, Robert A. Ricklis, Nancy A. Kenmotsu, and
James E. Bruseth use the archeological evidence uncovered from Wichitan, Caddo,
and Karankawan sites dating to the contact period to examine European-Indian
relationships in Texas. Their papers demonstrate the cultural diversity of the Native
Americans who lived in Texas, the types of interactions these groups had with
Europeans at different times, the material evidence of those interactions, and the
nature of the changes in aboriginal cultures that resulted from colonization, disease,
the introduction of missions, the development of the fur trade, and other processes
(see also Hester 1989; Perttula 1991).
Hester (1991), Kniffen, Gregory, and Stokes (1987), Campbell (1988), Salinas
(1990) and Smith (1992), as well as the references cited in the various articles in this
volume, are only a selected sample of the recently published scholarly literature on
the Indians of Texas. The study of this literature is a good way to begin to
comprehend the history and archeology of the indigenous inhabitants of Texas since
the "discovery" of the New World.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I particularly thank the various authors who willingly volunteered to contribute
to this volume and met the tight deadlines for production. I also appreciate the
opportunity Jimmy L. Mitchell, Editor of the TAS Bulletin, provided me when he
asked me to assemble these papers. Bonnie Yates and Beth Ogden Davis performed
yeoman editing duties, and I gratefully acknowledge their assistance.
REFERENCES CITED
Campbell, Thomas N.
1988
The Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico: Selected Writings of
Thomas Nolan Campbell. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

4

Texas Archeological Society

Castafieda, Carlos E.
1936
Our Catholic lteritage in Texas, 1519-1936. Volume I, The Mission Era: The
Finding of Texas, 1519-1693. Von Boeckmann-Jones, Austin.
Cook, Noble David, and W. George Lovell (editors)
1991
"SecretJudgementsofGod":OldWorldDiseasesinColonialSpanishAmerica.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Garcilaso de la Vega, el Inca
Royal Commentaries of the Incas. Translated by Harold V. Livermore. 2 vols.
1966
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Hester, Thomas R.
1989
Texas and Northeastern Mexico: An Overview. In: Columbian Consequences,
Volume 1. Archaeological and Historical Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands West, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 191-211. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Hester, Thomas R. (editor)
Ethnology of the Texas Indians. Volume 7 of the Spanish Borderlands
1991
Sourcebooks, general editor, David Hurst Thomas. Garland, New York.
John, Elizabeth A. H.
1975
Storms Brewed in Other Men’s Worlds: The Confrontation ofIndians, Spanish,
and French in the Southwest, 1540-1795. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Kniffen, Fred B., Hiram F. Gregory, and George A. Stokes
1987
The Historic Indian Tribes ofLouisiana from 1542. Louisiana State University
Press, Baton Rouge.
Milanich, Jerald T., and Susan Milbrath
1989

Another World. In: First Encounters: Span&h Explorations in the Caribbean
and the United States, 1492-1570, edited by Jerald T. Milanich and Susan
Milbrath, pp. 1- 26. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History,
No. 9. Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida Press,
Gainesville.

Perttula, Timothy K.
1991
European Contact and Its Effects on Aboriginal Caddoan Populations between
A.D. 1520 and A.D. 1680. In: Columbian Consequences, Volume3. TheSpanish
Borderlands in Pan-American Perspective, edited by David Htrrst Thomas, pp.
501-518. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Ramenofsky, Ann F.
1991
Beyond Disciplinary Bias: Future Directions in Contact Period Studies. In:
Columbian Consequences, Volume 3. The Spanish Borderlands in Pan-American Perspective, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. 431-436. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Perttula -- The Columbian Quincentenary

5

Salinas, Martin
1990

Indians ofthe Rio Grande Delta: Their Role in the History ofSouthernTexas and
Northeastern Mexico. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Shafer, Harry J.
The Future of Texas Archeology. Texas Archeology (Newsletter of the Texas
1986
Archeological Society), 30( 2): 1-6.
Smith, F. Todd
1992

On the Convergence of Empire: The Caddo Indian Confederacies, 1542-1867.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station. In press.

Taviani, Paolo Emilio
1991

Christopher Columbus: Genius of the Sea. Italian Journal 5(5-6):5-37. Italian
Academy Foundation, New York.

Thomas, David Hurst
1991

Cubist Perspectives on the Spanish Borderlands: Past, Present, and Future. In:
Columbian Consequences, Volume 3. The Spanish Borderlands in Pan-American Perspective, edited by David Hurst Thomas, pp. xv-xxii. Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Thomas, David Hurst (editor)
1989

ColumbianConsequences, Volume 1.ArchaeoIogicalandHistoricalPerspectives
on the ,Spanish Borderlands West. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

1990

Columbian Consequences, Volume 2.Archaeological and Historical Perspectives
on the Spanish Borderlands E(~s’t. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

1991

Columbian Consequences, Volume 3.7"he Spanish Borderlands in Pan-American
Perspective. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Viola, Herman J. and Carolyn Margolis (editors)
1991

Seeds of Change: A Quincentennial Commemoration. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.

Weddle, Robert S.
1985

Spanish Sea: The Gulf of Mexico in North American Discovery, 1500-1685.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

1991

The French Thorn: Rival Explorers in the Spanish Sea 1682-1762. Texas A&M
University Press, College Station.

