Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:147-178

1981

Harry J. Shafer

ABSTRACT
Archeological investigations were carried out in 1975 by the Aggie Anthropological Society at
the Attaway Site (41HEl14), a late Caddoan (Frankston Focus) locality discovered eroding into
Lake Palestine in Henderson County, Texas. Lakeshore erosion processes destroyed or displaced most archeological materials but exposed a midden area and numerous pottery vessels
thought to mark a small cemetery. Test excavations were conducted to confirm the existence of
the cemetery, test for undisturbed deposits, and retrieve an artifact sample from the midden area.
Analysis of the lithic collections yielded new information on the procurement and reduction
techniques associated with the late Caddoan lithic technology. Sherd and vessel analyses also
revealed that the vessel assemblages from the midden and cemetery were qualitatively different;
the midden contained predominantly jar sherds embellished by wet paste decorations while
vessels associated with the mortuary area consisted mostly of bowls decorated with engraved
designs. Attaway is interpreted as being a late Caddoan farming hamlet occupied long enough
for an estimated five to seven individuals to be interred in the associated cemetery.

ATTAWAY SITE (41HEl14)
The Attaway site was recorded by Southern Methodist University (SMU) as
X41HE13 during the course of their salvage work in the Lake Palestine basin
(Anderson, 1971:Table 1). The locality was described as being a "sherd scatter" located on low knolls on a terrace projection 20 ft above the floodplain of
the Neches River at an elevation of 360 ft above mean sea level. The area of
occupation is at the east end of a long peninsula of land surrounded by a wide
floodplain created by the confluence of Flat Creek and the Neches River (Fig.
1). The floodplain and eastern end of the peninsula now are submerged by
the waters of Lake Palestine; the exposed land feature is known as Henderson Point (Fig. 2). The site covers an area of about 100 by 75 m and lies in an
upland microenvironment (Anderson, 1971).

Anderson (1971:37)

described "sherd scatters" as
"sites at which only sherds were found; the number varies from 1-32, and sites vary
considerably in extent; most cover less than 50 square meters. Some of these may
represent outposts at farmed fields. In the absence of hunting tools, tool manufacture,
and ground stone tools they are presumed not to have been hunting and gathering
camps or base settlements".

The prehistoric cultural materials once were buried in a sand mantle overlying a sterile orange mottled clay along the east slope of the knoll. Sand depth
varies on the knoll from a few centimeters near the crest to nearly a meter

148

Texas Archeological Society

LAKE PALESTINE
RESERVOIR

Site

o2..
J

3

SCALE : MILES

Fig. 1 Location of the Attaway Site (X411IE13) relative to Lake Palestine.

along the eastern edge. At the time of the TAMU investigations, the eastern
front of the knoll was inundated from the original bluff slope to about midway
to the knoll crest. Evidently, most prehistoric cultural material was on the
eastern most portion of the knoll, that portion most affected by the lake.
In 1975, the shoreline occurred east of Bluewater Road about 75 m from
the knoll crest where a lake cabin recently had been constructed (Figs. 2, 4).
Inundation of the eastern portion of the knoll and erosional effects of this
inundation process virtually destroyed the in situ deposits at the site. A series
of diagrams illustrating the destructive processes are shown in Figure 3.

Shafer - Attaway Site

149

<

%

FLAT
BAY

Fig. 2 Location of the Attaway Site relative to the present landformso

The presumed conditions before inundation are shown in Figure 3-1. As
the waters of the rising lake level began to creep upslope along the basal clay
and saturate the overlying sands that contained cultural material, water
movement through the sand created a quicksand effect as far inland as the
waters extended on the clay (Fig. 3-2). The quicksand condition was observed by the author south of the site. Once the sand became water saturated,
it was quickly undermined and eroded into the lake (Fig. 3-3). Cultural material then was subjected to shoreline and wave turbulence; cultural features

150

Texas Archeological Society

7

water

water

]

SAND

[]

QU’CKSAND

EFFECT

[]

REWORKED

[]

RED

SAND

CLAY

Fig. 3 Idealized scheme showing the adverse effects of beach erosion at the Attaway
Site.

and context of the archeological material were destroyed. Features such as
grave pits that penetrated into the red clay were scoured by the wave action
and their contents, such as pottery vessels, either were broken or completely
displaced.
Conditions observed at the Attaway site in October 1975 are shown in
Figure 3-4. The sand mantle had eroded away producing an irregular bank

Shafer - Attaway Site

beach

151

ridge

ATTAWAY
StaTE

[]

D

[]
LEGEND:
]

Modern

Structure

[]

Test Square

[]

Midden

1

f

Area

N
[]

Cemetery

]

Lake Shore
o

io

i

METERS

Fig. 4 Generalize map of the Attaway Site.

fronting a beach of basal clay, reworked sand, driftwood, and typical lakeshore trash. From the description provided by the Attaways (finders of the
site), at least some of the pottery vessels had been displaced from their original location by wave action. It was suspected that the vessels were part of a
mortuary assemblage associated with a late Caddoan cemetery, but shoreline
erosion had scoured the graves, leaving little intact material. At the very least,
it was hoped that grave pit outlines could be located in order to confirm the

152

Texas Archeological Society

cemetery assumption; at the very most, it was hoped that the number of
graves could be determined and other site features located.

ENVIRONMENT
A detailed description of the environment of the Lake Palestine area is in
Anderson (1971:5-13) and Anderson et al. (1974:4-7). Certain general aspects of the environment relevant to the present study are reviewed.
Lake Palestine is near the western border of a zone of mixed pine-oak forest, with
predominantly sandy soils, in a region of 40-46 inches of rainfall per year. Summers are warm and long, with approximately 260 frost-free days between March
and November (Anderson et al., 1974:4).
Anderson et al. (1974:6) lists four major soil types within the lake area: 1)
alluvial sandy Ioams of the bottoms; 2) fine brown sandy Ioams and loamy
sands of the uplands; 3) red fine sandy Ioams of moderate to low fertility
which occur in the eastern uplands~ and 4) infertile loamy soils on upland
slopes. The soil type associated with 41HEl14 is included in category 2.
Lithic resources which were available locally include ferrugenous sandstone from the Neches Formation and fine grained quartzite, petrified wood,
and some small chert pebbles. The materials occur in Pleistocene gravels,
especially along the western border of the river bottoms (Anderson et al.,
1974:7).

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Archeological History
Archeological work began in the upper Neches Valley in the 1930’s under
the sponsorship of the University of Texas and the Works Progress Administration (WPA). Numerous archeological sites were investigated during this
decade and quality of work varied considerably. The basic objective of these
endeavors was the acquisition of large collections of artifacts, especially pottery vessels. This early work resulted, however, in an awareness of regional
differences in ceramic variation and mortuary practices (Jackson, 1936,
1938).
Ceramic collections were used by Krieger (Suhm et al., 1954:151-227) to
define several prehistoric cultural units (termed foci) following the Midwestern
Taxonomic System. The Alto, Frankston, and Allen foci incorporated the
upper and middle Neches River areas. The Alto Focus was defined largely on
the basis of the massive WPA excavations at the George C. Davis site in
Cherokee County (Newell and Krieger, 1949~ Story, 1972~ Shafer, 1973).
The Frankston and Allen foci were defined on the basis of excavation samples
from the A. C. Saunders, Omer and Otis Hood, Isabel Donnell, W. W. Ellis,
J. M. Cook, Jim Allen, and Patton sites among others (Suhm et al.,
1954:184-189).

Shafer - Attaway Site

153

The first archeological survey of the upper Neches area was conducted in
1957 under the auspices of the National Park Service River Basin Surveys
(Johnson, 1961) in the Blackburn Crossing (now Lake Palestine) basin.
Johnson (1961) reported 35 archeological sites, all but one of which yielded
ceramics. Preliminary ceramic classification revealed that most sites belonged
to the Frankston Focus although one was defined as an Alto Focus site.
Archaic sites were represented by a single example.
A more intensive archeological survey was conducted in the Lake Palestine
basin by SMU in 1969 and 1970 (Anderson, 1971). A total of 98 sites were
located within the reservoir area including 85 ceramic sites. Only eight of
Johnson’s (1961) sites were rerecorded. A small number of middle Archaic
sites were noted and interpreted as "intermittently used hunting sites" (Anderson, 1971:iii).
The SMU survey was structured in a problem oriented manner with the
primary aim the establishment of a settlement model for the Caddoan occupations that could be tested by an excavation program. Survey conditions
generally were poor and the field parties had difficulty in confirming the Iocation of Johnson’s (1961) sites due to heavy vegetation and time of year.
Despite these shortcomings, sites were arbitrarily grouped into seven descriptive/functional classes: chipping scatter, hunting station, gathering station,
gathering camp, sherd scatter, base camp/settlement, and base settlement.
Sites were placed into one of these categories based on field observations
regardless of the survey conditions, topographic setting and visibility, and
surface exposure of the site at the time of the survey. Ethnographic sources on
the Hasinai Caddo were reviewed to obtain an indication of site variability and
a "settlement model" was formulated with the archeological and ethnographical data.
Using information derived from the 1969-70 survey, SMU selected 10 sites
for partial excavation to test the settlement model. More specifically, the
stated objectives for the Caddo sites were:
¯ . . to determine the settlement-types represented by excavated sites. The proce-

dure is to discriminate between alternative elements of a settlement model proposed from survey data and the ethnographic accounts of the Hasinai. The alternatives, which have been proposed on the basis of surveys, are base
settlements, temporary camps and hunting stations. Their ethnographic equivalents are swidden hamlets, fishing camps and hunting camps or stations (Anderson et al., 1974:2).
The predicted Archaic settlement model was described as follows:
It was initially proposed that the Archaic occupation of the Upper Neches River
consisted of transient hunting camp sites where bifacial tools were made, with
other economic and technological activities expected at a base camp or gathering
camp being minimal. It was suggested that these camps were part of the seasonal
cycle of hunting bands whose territory extended to central Texas (Anderson et al.,

1974:183).
Data from three excavated sites were used to test the Archaic model. The
findings indicated that the Archaic settlements were more intensively used
than initially was anticipated. This situation implied that the patterns of activities probably were more generalized rather than specialized, regimented behaviors. Excavation results failed to confirm the predicted Caddoan settlement model (Anderson et al., 1974:178-188) as Caddoan sites essentially
were described in the end as being "base settlements".

154

Texas Archeological Society

Prehistory
The prehistory of East Texas is divided into four periods (Story, 1981):
Paleoindian (12,000 - 8000 B.P.), Archaic (8000 to 2150 B.P.), Early
Ceramic (2150 B.P. - 1250 B.P. [A.D. 700]), and Late Prehistoric (1250
B.P. - 250 B.P.; A.D. 700 - A.D. 1700). Not all periods are defined in the
upper Neches drainage, presumably due, in part, to previous research emphasis and poor site visibility.
The earliest assemblage to be consistently represented is the Late Archaic.
Known Late Archaic sites, or sites in which the Late Archaic assemblage are
well represented, include 41HE19, Mitchell (41HE18), Forest Drive
(41HE184), and Beach (41AN62)(Johnson, 1961; Anderson et al., 1974).
These sites characteristically are situated on prominent knolls or ridges and
usually are in proximity to permanent streams and several different environmental zones. The material assemblage is dominated by lithic artifacts. The
non specialized foraging adaptation left few formal or specialized tools.
Dart points signaling the use of the spear and spear thrower are the most
diagnostic artifacts. The reductive process of their manufacture produced a
series of bifacial forms and residual flake debris that dominate most Archaic
assemblages. Uniface tools are not common and there is a general lack of
formal tools other than projectile points. Dart point types which occur include
Gary, Ellis, Kent, and Castroville like. Ferrugenous sandstone and hematite
cobbles exhibiting one or more surface depressions are common at most sites,
including the Archaic locations.
Story’s (1981) Early Ceramic Period has not been defined in the upper
Neches but is known to occur in the middle portion of the drainage (Shafer,
1973:27-33; Arnold, 1973; Creel, 1979:145-148). It is recognized on the
basis of sandy paste pottery which usually occurs with a Late Archaic lithic
assemblage containing Gary and Kent dart points.
The earlier phase of the Late Prehistoric Period is represented meagerly in
the present site inventory for the lake basin. Sites 41SM73 and 41HE81
(Mitchell) yielded ceramics recognized as Alto Focus forms and arrow point
types Alba, Friley, and Steiner (Johnson, 1961; Anderson, 1971; Anderson
et al., 1974), indicating some exploitation of the upper Neches area at this
time. The Alto Focus is the dominant cultural unit is the middle Neches,
centering around the large mound complex settlement at George C. Davis
(Newell and Krieger, 1949).
The dominant cultural assemblage in the upper Neches is the late phase of
the Late Prehistoric Period, notably sites yielding ceramics diagnostic of the
Frankston Focus (Suhm, et al., 1954:184-189). Diagnostic ceramics include
Poynor Engraved, Hume Engraved, LaRue Neck Banded, Maydelle Incised,
Killough Pinched, Bullard Brushed, Fulton Aspect effigy bowls, and elbow
pipes. Possibly intrusive pottery includes Taylor Engraved and Ripley Engraved. These types are associated with the Titus Focus assemblage, a contemporary cultural unit northeast of the research area.
Arrow point forms are almost exclusively Perdiz. Other artifacts common to
this assemblage includes large, expertly thinned, lozenge or lenticular shaped
bifaces and celts that are typically short and thick, exhibiting unsmoothed

Shafer - Attaway Site

155

peck marks over much of the surface except the bit and extreme poll end.
These celts are usually of Ouachita sandstone from eastern Oklahoma or
western Arkansas.
Frankston Focus sites generally appear superficially as sherd and lithic scatters on sandy knolls or ridges in proximity to permanent water and arable
uplands. Attempts to define functional variability between such sites were not
successful (Anderson, 1974:178-188). This lack of success suggests that the
most visible archeological remains are those of small farmsteads or hamlets,
judging from the diversity of ceramic vessels indicated in most sherd samples.
Cemeteries associated with these sites usually are small, containing one or
more graves, although large cemeteries are known (Omer and Otis Hood;
Suhm et al., 1954). Graves generally are oriented east-west with the corpse
extended on its back with its head to the east. The mortuary assemblage
includes ceramic vessels, pipes, arrow points, bifaces, ochre, celts, mussel
shells, and other shell artifacts.
Two mound sites, A. C. Saunders (Jackson, 1936) and Pace McDonald
(Story, 1981), are associated with the Frankston Focus. A. C. Saunders
(Jackson, 1936) consisted of an ash mound, measuring approximately 2 m
thick and some 30 m in diameter, which was largely devoid of artifactual
refuse; a midden area that reached a thickness of almost I m was associated
with a large, circular structure measuring about 14 m in diameter. The midden contained a wide range of refuse including sherds, pipes, lithics, and
faunal remains. Accumulation of the midden and ash deposits evidently required a considerable span of time as Jackson (1938) was able to show a
significant temporal change in pipe forms from the midden. He compared the
site to descriptions of Hasinai temples and interpreted the remains as being
those of a Hasinai fire temple.
Discussion
Both SMU settlement models proved to be too simplistic and idealistic to
explain the variability or lack of it in the archeological record. The models are
both static with regard to time and culture process and thereby lack necessary
evolutionary flexibility. The region witnessed at least two separate prehistoric
adaptive systems. The Archaic emphasized a broad spectrum adaptive pattern that used virtually all available land surface. By contrast, the Caddoan
adaptations, including the Alto and more specifically the Frankston Focus
peoples, were more specialized with their pursuit of agriculture. While their
adaptive pattern also undoubtedly utilized much of the land, supplementing
their farming with gathering and hunting, they were tethered to the fields
much of the year in a manner that necessitated maintaining a permanent
residence nearby.
These permanent villages or hamlets were the focal point of family activity
despite occasional forays to forage or hunt. They were necessarily permanent
because of the need to work fields during planting and harvesting and protect
stored foods between harvesting seasons. Because most activity was centered
around the hamlets, these locations yield the most obvious archeological
remains. Artifact assemblages, subjected to functional analysis, predictably
will reflect the relative degree of permanency.

156

Texas Archeological Society

Agricultural activity was largely a community enterprise. However, early
chroniclers were not specific as to land clearing methods or how many years it
took to exhaust a particular field. Although described as swidden or slashand-burn agriculture (Anderson et al., 1974:1), actual farming methods
largely are unknown. Presumably, settlements frequently were moved as
needed to open new fields, replacing old, exhausted ones. Former fields may
have later become settlements; former Archaic encampments may have become fields or locations for hamlets; locations of former hamlets may have
been choice locations for later fields. Critical resource localities such as those
used for the procurement of nuts, fish, lithics, etc. likely would have been
used by both adaptive systems.
Land use practices of the two systems, while qualitatively different, predictably would overlap to some degree given the 6,000-7,000 years of prehistoric activity; favored localities critical to settlement trends of both systems
would be the most visible archeologically. These sites also would show a
mixing of assemblages. Special activity locations such as a traditional stopping
place for a passing group of hunters, or where a family group might choose to
fish at a favored spot, would likely either be masked by activities of previous or
subsequent groups or be beneath the level of archeological visibility, especially surface surveys.
Findings from the previous archeological survey and excavations indicate
that the most frequently encountered sites in the area are Frankston Focus
hamlets. The suggested explanation for their high frequency is due to their
being hamlets which were occupied only long enough to exhaust sufficiently
the fields located in the proximity. The population density, while several times
that of the Archaic Period, probably was never very high. Due to the frequent
shifting of the settlements during the 300-400 years spanned by the Frankston Focus, a large number of settlement sites resulted from this pattern. More
permanent and specialized community integrating sites such as the A. C.
Saunders (Jackson, 1936) and Pace McDonald (Story, 1981) mound complexes served to maintain a quasistratified social structure. These sites most
likely represent temple precincts that served a catchment of hamlets in the
proximity.
The relative duration of the hamlets can be measured by the number of
graves in the cemeteries and relative temporal placement of each hamlet can
be determined by seriating mortuary assemblages. Given the prehistoric land
use practices and transformation processes operating on the East Texas
cultural resources, short term foraging of hunting locales predictably would lie
beneath the level of archeological visibility. Nevertheless, models for late
Caddoan settlement, subsistence, and procurement behaviors can be formulated and tested with a rigidly designed and realistic sampling program combined with analytical techniques aimed at delineating the functional realms of
the surviving material culture elements.

Sharer - Attaway Site

157

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
Despite the extensively displaced condition of the archeological materials
observed during the first inspection, additional investigations were warranted. Field investigations were aimed toward achieving several objectives:
1) test the area where the Attaways had recovered the pottery vessels to
determine if additional, intact materials were present and if grave outlines
could be detected in the underlying clay; 2) test the intact portion of the knoll
between the beach and crest in an attempt to locate undisturbed midden
deposits; and 3) make an extensive surface collection along the beach in
order to retrieve a representative sample of ceramics and lithics.
These objectives were fulfilled. Although the site was found to be almost
completely destroyed by wave action and inundation, data were recovered
that allowed for a confident assessment of the site with regard to its cultural
identity and function. Furthermore, new information on mortuary behavior
and ceramic vessel function for the Frankston Focus was gained.
Description of Work
Three 2 m test pits were placed selectively between the crest of the knoll
and the present bluff line to search for in situ midden materials (Fig. 4). These
test pits were excavated in 15 cm arbitrary levels; the bottom of each level was
troweled and examined for cultural features. Sterile clay was encountered
between 30 and 45 cm in each of the test pits and only a trace of cultural
material was observed.
A concentration of sherds and flakes interpreted as a midden area was
observed along the shoreline 30 m north of the area where the Attaway find
was made. Both surface and screened samples were made to recover a representative collection. The sampling involved screening heavy fraction beach
erosion debris using I/4 in hardware cloth to recover smaller lithic items. Excavation units were not established since the materials were not in situ.
Cemetery Area
The area designated by the Attaway find was assumed to be a cemetery
area since complete ceramic vessels typically mark such situations in the late
prehistoric Caddoan sites (Johnson, 1961). The near absence of midden
refuse except for an occasional sherd or flake along the shore would argue for
a specifically designated mortuary area removed from village activity. Test
pits were placed to examine for traces of burial pit outlines which may have
penetrated the erosion resistant basal clay formation.
Excavation in the cemetery area consisted of establishing several arbitrarily
sized units, 1 x 2 or I x 1 m, in an area adjacent to the Attaway finds. These
test units, labelled A - G, were excavated in one level, usually about 10 cm in
depth, removing the redeposited beach sand down to sterile clay. Two disturbances, designated as Features I and 2, were recorded, which confirmed the
existence of burial pits. A general plan of this excavation is shown in Figures 4
and 5.

158

Texas Archeological Society

FEATURE 1
This feature consisted of a slight pit disturbance, interpreted as being a
burial pit remnant, that extended approximately 10 cm into the basal clay.
The feature was located across the southern end of Unit C and extended
slightly into adjoining units E, F, and G (Fig. 5). The pit contained the following items tightly clustered together: four Fulton Aspect effigy vessels, one
large carinated Poynor Engraved bowl, one Iongneck Poynor engraved bottle
(Fig. 10), one flare rim elbow pipe (Fig. 9E), and a cluster of nine Perdiz arrow
points (Fig. 7).
The arrow points were tightly grouped and pointing approximately west.
The north edge of the pit disturbance also suggested a general east-west
orientation for the grave. If the arrow points were part of a quiver and the
arrow shafts were parallel to the long axis of the grave, then their placement
would correlate with the grave orientation.
The mortuary assemblage also may provide some indication of the
individual’s status in life. The function and symbolism of the four effigy vessels, carinated bowl, and bottle are unknown; but the pipe and arrow points
may signify that the individual was a male.
FEATURE 2
A remnant of another burial pit was located in Unit D (Fig. 5). A small,
crudely executed Poynor Engraved bowl was the only surviving artifact.

ARTIFACT ASSEMBLAGE
The intrasite context for most of the artifactual material generally is poor,
having been displaced by erosion and recovered from the beach area. However, the assemblage is revealing and provides data on late Caddoan behavioral patterns. Brief descriptions of the artifacts are presented; taxonomic
designations follow those of Suhm et al. (1954) and Suhm and Jelks (1962).
If data on the original vertical position of the artifacts were available, temporal changes might be observable in the lithic and ceramic samples. Such
data are largely missing due to both natural and recently man made (i.e.,
rising waters of Lake Palestine) transformations of the archeological situation.
General horizontal information was maintained, however, by sorting the artifacts by their respective provenience lots. These lots included Test Pits and
Trench A (grouped together), Mortuary Area, and Midden Area. Sorting on
this basis served to demonstrate quantitative and qualitative differences between the midden and mortuary areas.

Lithic Artifacts
The lithic collection contains a small sample of bifacial artifacts (mostly
stemmed projectile points), two pitted stones, and a moderate sampling of
flaking debitage. Examples of lithic artifacts are illustrated to scale in figures 6
and 7; general horizontal provenience is provided in Table 1.

Shafer -- Attaway Site

ATTAWAY

159

SITE

[] unit

t

[] burial pit

N

[] pottery vessels
[] attaway excavation
0
2
met~

Fig. 5 Map showing location of excavation units and features.

GARY (N

= 2)

Both specimens have contracting stems, triangular blades, and weak shoulders. One is of tan
chert (Fig. 6A), flaked from a thick blank; the second specimen (Fig. 6B) is of silicified wood,
shaped mostly by pressure flaking.

ELAM (N = 1)
This specimen has a short blade, short and faintly expanding stem, and a straight base (Fig.
6C). Material is olive chert.

Texas Archeological Society

160

C
D

A

H

0
i
i

J

Fig. 6 Lithic Artifacts. A, B. Gary; C, Elarn; D, Castroville-like; E-I, Perdiz; J, K,
utilized flakes.

CASTROVILLE LIKE (N = 1)
This basally notched specimen has a parallel sided stem with a straight base (Fig. 6D). Barbs
are squared. The preform was thinned by soft hammer retouch but the blade was reworked to an
asymmetrical form. Material is gray chert.

Shafer -- Attaway Site

Fig. 7 Perdiz points from Feature 2.

161

162

Texas Archeological Society

B

F

!

Fig. 8 Ceramic forms represented in the Attaway Site assemblage.

PERDIZ (N = 20)
These points are typified by contracting stems, pointed base, and barbed blades (Fig. 6E-I).
Sixteen are of chert, nine of which were recovered from Feature 1 (Fig. 7). Of these, six are of
gray chert and three tan chert. Three of the remaining specimens are of quartzite and one silicified
wood.

DART POINT FRAGMENTS (N = 3)
One specimen is a corner notched fragment of gray chert; another is a quartzite fragment of a
Yarbrough (?) point with a slightly expanding stem and indented base. The third specimen is a
distal tip of silicified wood exhibiting a serrated lateral edge.

BULBAR STEM (N = 1)
This specimen is a thin, tan chert flake which was corner notched to form a bulbar stem with a
rounded base. The blade is broken.

Shafer - Attaway Site

163

~CM
,,i

Fig. 9 Pottery vessels and pzpe.

BIFACE FRAGMENTS (N = 5)
Two specimens are distal fragments of chert and quartzite bifaces; two others are medial
fragments of chert bifaces; and one is a silicified wood biface failure. The core for the latter
specimen was evidently a polishing stone as one surface exhibits at~ition and polish prior to
reduction.

UTILIZED FLAKES (N = 3)
One specimen is an oval biface retouch flake trimmed around most of the circumference (Fig.
6K) ; it is slightly polished on one surface. The second specimen is a gray chert flake which also is
the product of biface retouch and displays a damaged edge. (Fig. 6J). The third specimen is a tan
chert flake with retouch along one edge.

164

Texas Archeological Society

!
!
!
!

!

i

\
\

\
\

Fig. 10 Poynor Engraved bottle from Feature 2.

Shafer - Attaway Site

~11~
’~

~11~
~ttm

~aaqD uej.
siuam~md a~leld
poo/~ pa!j!alad
a~!z~a~n0
~aaqo ~mO

1aaqD ue±
(qano~ai~I aa~!~)
:aatutu~H ~JoS
poo!y~ pa!t!alad

ol

~,1

p~

p~

~aaqo ~mO
l~aqD UKL
:aatutu~H pa~H
alS~l!qa(l
auols pal~!d
saatl!nbs~t saaa!d
Sa~l~Inl paz!l.qfl
s:~uatug~ad aaeJ!~l

~11~
~ll~
~11~

tuais a~qln~l
z!paad
¯ 8m:-I lu!od la~(l
all!aO~S~D
tu~IR
fiae9
.o

s~u!od algaaOad

"s"

d~±SVd 80d

0o
e-

g
o

~11~
¯~ll~
¯~11~
~11~

165

166

Texas Archeological Society

PII~CES ESQUILLI~ES (N = 1)
This small specimen is a tan chert flake exhibiting bipolar battering similar to that described
elsewhere as pi~ces esquill~es (or battered bipolar pieces) (Shafer, 1973:112, 113). Battering is
the direct result of simultaneous impact on both ends, suggesting that the specimen was used as a
wedge.

PITTED STONES (N = 2)
Both of these are small cobbles exhibiting a single depression or pit on one surface. One is of
ferrugenous sandstone with a pit measuring 3 cm in diameter and 5 mm deep. The second
specimen is of hematite, with a pit measuring 2.5 cm in diameter and 5 mm in depth.

DEBITAGE (N = 832)
The debitage is listed in Table I by category and material. Debitage consists of residual flake
materials resulting from reduction of cores or bifaces during the course of tool manufacture.
Flakes reveal specific atlxibutes of both the parent core and kind of percussor used. Flake terminology follows that of Shafer (1973:83-95).
The most striking thing about the 41HEl14 debitage sample is that the flakes are almost
exclusively the residue of biface thinning, a marked contrast to the findings at the George C.
Davis site (Shafer; 1973:118). Biface blanks were relatively large to begin with and the thinning
technique was soft hammer flaking. This procedure is indicated by lipped striking platforms
produced by the characteristic bending fracture associated with the use of a soft hammer.
Most of the chert represented by the soft hammer flakes is intrusive tan and gray material. The
gray chert varies considerably in color but includes specks of white fossiliferous inclusions, blue
black with olive specks, opaque gray without fossils, and gray translucent chert. Virtually identical cherts were observed by the author in the Leon River drainage in Bell and Coryell counties
and along Hog Creek and Bosque River in McLennen County. The thinning flakes rarely retain
remnants of cortex of the parent core.
The preponderance of soft hammer flakes produced by thinning large biface preforms may
suggest an intermediate step in an exchange system operating through this portion of the Neches
River Valley. The absence of primary flaking debris of intrusive cherts, high incidence of interior
flakes without cortex, and biface failures may indicate that preforms were imported in a thinned,
but unfinished state. The cache of chert bifaces from George C. Davis (Shafer, 1973:235-237)
made of annealed chert possibly from western Bell County is an example of the kind of staging
indicated in the Attaway site debitage. Very large chert bifaces were recovered from archeologically contemporary sites in east Texas (Jackson, 1938); source of these intrusive objects has not
been documented.
The debitage sample is very revealing especially in terms of technology and the amount of
intrusive material. The use of local resources, namely small chert pebbles, silicified wood, and
fine grained quartzite, is meager. This situation suggests that the Caddoan occupants of the
Attaway site had ready access to excellent quality cherts from Central Texas. Precisely how these
were acquired is not known; but identifiable Caddoan ceramics, including elbow pipes, are
known from the sheltered canyons of the Leon River in Bell and Coryell counties (Miller and
Jelks, 1952), the area where the cherts occur.

BURNED QUARTZITE (N = 51)
Fragments of burned quartzite, presumably the result of quartzite being used for heat conducting purposes, were recovered from the midden area. The quartzite specimens were small cobbles
evidently collected from nearby gravel deposits.

Ceramic ArtT"facts
The ceramic sample consisted of sherds recovered from test excavations
and surface collections and complete or restorable vessels from the mortuary

Sharer -- Attaway Site

167

area. The source for the major portion of the sherd sample is the midden
located about 30 m north of the burial area. Sherds from the midden area are
given special attention to test for behavioral differences that presumably relate
to household use on one hand and to vessel selection for burial lots on the
other. Contextual data for the ceramics are less than ideal due to three major
factors: absence of vertical provenience data; displaced nature of the mortuary assemblage which prevented sorting out most individual grave lots and
preventing a thorough examination for sexual and status differences; and
eroded nature of the sherds sample preventing sorting into confident typological units.
Special attention is given in the analysis to vessel form and mode of decoration characteristic of each form. The assumption is that form and possibly
mode of decoration are somehow related to function. Since the ceramic sample is derived from two behavioral contexts, midden and mortuary, it may be
possible to relate the differences between the assemblages to behavioral (i.e.,
functional) differences. For example, further assuming that the midden sample is a function of household use of ceramics and the frequency of breakage
for a particular vessel form is related to the frequency and manner of its use,
then the midden sample expectedly would yield a high number of vessels that
functioned in daily household activities (Anderson et al., 1974:7-10). The
mortuary sample, on the other hand, represents an entirely different set of
selective behaviors and is biased by choices of those individuals responsible
for its original selection.
Attempts to assign function to Caddoan ceramics are met with severe constraints due to several factors. Foremost is the lack of preservation of good
archeological context for household assemblages or for any assemblage outside of mortuary contexts. Subfloor caches and floor context pottery virtually
are nonexistent in the Caddoan area; thus preventing the recovery of
ceramics from primary functional contexts such as sometimes encountered in
the American Southwest. Furthermore, ethnographic details on ceramic use
especially are meager.
Ethnographic sources note that large earthenware pots were used for cooking and storage (Swanton, 1942:157-158~ Griffith, 1954:102). Griffith
(1954:104) states that "The Indians fashioned large vessels for the storage of
water and for cooking, and smaller ones resembling crocks, bowls, and
plates, for cooking and serving."
Major data sources for determining artifact function are wear patterns and
residue stains on sherds and vessels (Shafer and Taylor, 1980). Preservation
of organic materials on pottery in East Texas generally is poor. Sherd surfaces
typically are eroded to the extent that use wear almost always is absent. The
only exception occurs on vessels extensively used in cooking liquid foods
where a sooty residue is preserved on the exterior.
Despite these handicaps in making functional assessments, one source of
preserved information that can be used to define functional sets is form. Roles
within sets, however, cannot be specifically defined. Vessel forms represented in the Attaway site sample are shown in Figure 8. They are grouped
into four basic sets: bowls, jars, bottles, and pipes.
Three bowl forms are present: carinated bowls with high rims that typically
are curved or slant inward (Fig. 8B~ Poynor Engraved) or outward (Fig. 8A;

168

Texas Archeological Society

Taylor Engraved); bowls with high, straight, or out flaring rims with small
bodies (Fig. 8D, E); and effigy bowls (Fig. 8C). Bowls are engraved and
formal types included Poynor for forms A, B, and D; Taylor Engraved for
forms A and E; and Ripley Engraved for form D (Fig. 8). Traces of red or
white pigment characteristically occur in engraved lines; examples of the effigy form (C) have traces of red pigment. Bowls presumably functioned for
serving and possibly for storage (large bowls) based on ethnographic (Griffith,
1954:102, 104) and form considerations.
Jars occur in two forms: a deep jar with an out flaring rim; and cylindrical
jars with approximately straight or slightly out curved rims. Jars sometimes
are outfitted with strap handles, lugs, or nodes. Decoration always was applied while the paste was wet. It includes such modes as brushing, incising,
punctating, pinching, combination punctating-incising with brushing, punctating with brushing, and incising with brushing. Rims may be decorated by
incising, punctating-incising, punctating, neck banding, pinching, or brushing. Bodies most often are brushed but also may be punctated or pinched.
Formal types probably include Maydelle Incised, LaRue Neck Banded, and
Killough Pinched.
Jars may have functioned in several capacities, depending upon their size.
Large jars may have served in cooking, heating, and storage. Cooking is
demonstrable on the basis of sooty residue observed on the jar shown in
Figure 9D; this may have been the main function served by jars of this particular form (Linton, 1944). Decorative modes which occur on jars result in
roughening the exterior to increase the surface area possibly to aid in heat
absorption. Smaller jars may have been used to reheat small quantities of
food although direct evidence of this is lacking except for the presence of strap
handles or lugs. These may have aided in removing vessels from the fire or
suspending the vessel over a fire.
Bottles also occur in two basic forms. One is a cylindrical, slightly constricted form with a short neck and an out flaring rim (Fig. 8H.). The second
form (Fig. 81) is characterized by a long neck and globular body. Both have flat
bases. Decorative motifs exclusively are engraved and usually embellished
with red pigment in the lines.
Pipes are typically elbow forms with short stems and flared bowls.

SHERD SAMPLE (N = 2494)
Sherds were sorted largely on the basis of decorative mode: brushed, incised, engraved, etc~
These data are listed in Table 2 by major provenience lots (i.e., Test Pits, Burial Area, Midden);
spatial relationship of these lots is shown in Figure 4. Test pits and Trench A are peripheral to the
burial and midden area and yielded only a trace of refuse. The major comparable samples came
from the midden area.
Formal type classification was recognizable (but not always quantifiable) for certain sherds and
includes Poynor Engraved, Hume Engraved, Maydelle Incised, LaRue Neck Banded, Killough
Pinched, and Fulton Aspect effigy bowls~ Vessel forms represented in the midden sample include
bowl forms A, B, and C; jar forms F and possibly G~ and pipe form J. A wide range of vessel
forms may be present but vessel identification is made difficult by the small size and eroded nature
of most sherds. Bottles, for example, are based on technological attributes but frequency to other
engraved vessels cannot be measured. Rim forms are used as the most confident guide for vessel
classification along with mode of decoration.
The sherd sample outside the midden area is small and therefore excluded from further
analysis. Sherds from the midden comprise the bulk of the sample. These sherds are assumed to

Shafer - Attaway Site

uapp!Ki

ea~v 6~en]JolAl
¢xa

S]!d ]saL

09

"a~Eo

£

CO

o

~.~ ~ ~.~
~u3

=_ ~

f--

169

1 70

Texas Archeological Society

be the product of household activities and therefore given special attention. The total midden
sample is 2452 sherds. Since most of these have been subjected to beach erosion, their condition
usually is poor. Eroded specimens that could not be sorted further numbered 237 specimens and
were subtracted from the overall total giving a working sample of 2215 sherds.
Sherds whose decorative techniques were applied while the paste was wet, a characteristic of
jars (brushing, incising, punctating, pinching, neck banding), account for over 60% of the total.
Engraved and effigy sherds characteristic of bowls account for less than 5% of the sample. The
predominant vessel form represented in the midden is the jar while bowls and bottles are rare.
Pipes occur but also are rare.

MORTUARY ASSEMBLAGE (N = 22)
The mortuary sample consists of data on a total of 21 pottery vessels and one pipe. Fourteen
of the vessels are from the Attaway collection; the remainder and pipe are in the TAMU sample.
Descriptive data on these vessels admittedly are poor due to several factors. The Attaway sample
was not available for reanalysis at the time of report preparation; original photographic records
are incomplete. The TAMU vessels either have not been restored or are too fragmentary for
restoration. Only minimal metric data are available. Information on the vessels include formal
type designation, vessel form description, and measurements on the TAMU vessels. Certain
vessels are illustrated to approximate scale in Figures 9-12. Vessel measurements are presented
in Table 3.

BOTTLES (N = 3)
Two bottles were recovered from the Attaway and one from the TAMU investigations. Two
are Form I and have long necks and globular bodies; one is an elongated Form H bottle. The two
Form I specimens are Poynor Engraved (Figs. 9A, 10) and the Form H specimen is plain.

JARS (N = 3)
Jars are from the Attaway collection. One is Form F exhibiting a punctated-incised rim decoration and a lightly brushed body (Fig. 9D). It is classified as Maydelle Incised. A second sample is
a variant of Form F. It is a small jar with a band of random fingernail punctation around the rim
and two small, thick loop handles. The third specimen is a Form G jar, nearly cylindrical in form
with random punctation over much of the exterior surface. The rim on this specimen is approximately straight.

BOWLS (N = 15)
Four carinated bowls are from the Attaway collection. One of the bowls is Form A and the
remainder are Form B. Form B specimens are Poynor Engraved while the Form A example is
classified as a Taylor Engraved bowl. Four of the carinated bowls also are large (over 35 cm in
maximum rim diameter) and two are small (less than 15 cm in maximum rim diameter).
Form C effigy bowls constitute the largest single vessel category and number eight specimens,
four from each collection. They have opposed appendages but most were broken, either from
use or by wave action. The surviving appendages are contrasting. One side displays a cockscomb
effigy while the opposite side is a fiat tab or tail effigy (Fig. 11). These bowls appear to be bird
effigy vessels. Another characteristic is the presence of three or four broad engraved lines
enhanced by red ochre encircling the rim. These lines usually terminate at the appendages. Form
C bowls characteristically are deep with fiat bottoms and straight rims.
Form E bowls are represented by two specimens, both from the Attaway collection. One (Fig.
12A) has a short rim that joins a globular body and is engraved with a well executed circle within
an extended circle motif. This bowl probably is a well executed Poynor Engraved example. The
second specimen has a higher rim that flares outward slightly and a globular body (Fig, 12B). The
design is a circle with an engraved cross within a series of partial circles, a motif characteristic of
Ripley Engraved. The design is repeated four times around the vessels.

Sharer - Attaway Site

171

Fig. 11 Fulton Aspect effigy bowls (Form C).
The Form E bowl (Fig. 9C) is from the Attaway collection. It has a high, out flaring rim and
short, globular body. The rim exhibits an engraved band consisting of a series of interlocking
scrolls. Both the vessel form and the design are characteristic of Taylor Engraved.

172

Texas Archeological Society

0

l

8
Fig. 12 A, Poynor Engraved (Form D) bowl. B, Ripley (?) Engraved (Form D) bowl.

Shafer - Attaway Site

ad/~I

oo

o

aaua~a~aEl

>>

>>>>>

~0

~000

o~

~tl[~!aH

~a}auu~!G

uu~o~lassaA

o~o~o
~.~

mm~

oooo

173

174

Texas Archeological Society

PIPE (N = 1)
The pipe (Fig. 9E) is an elbow form with a flared bowl. The base or heel of the pipe is sharply
angled in profile and rounded when viewed from above. It is decorated with five rows of tiny
punctations extending from the midline of the bowl around the end of the opposite side. Three
raised bands of punctations form the collar for the stem. Jackson (1936:168) notes that pipes of
this form are late in the midden at the A.C. Saunders site, which seems to be an exclusively
Frankston Focus deposit. Assuming that Jackson’s (1936) chronological trend is correct, the pipe
may signal a late Frankston Focus placement for the site.

SUMMARY
Archeological investigations at the Attaway site revealed the presence of a
badly disturbed late Caddoan settlement which yielded ceramics and other
artifacts diagnostic of a Frankston Focus assemblage (Suhm et al., 1954:184189). The site was first recorded during the course of a SMU survey of the
Lake Palestine basin and was defined as a sherd scatter. This assessment was
based on only a brief surface inspection of the locality and not confirmed by
subsurface investigations. The TAMU investigation revealed two spatially and
functionally separate activity areas within the site (midden area and cemetery
area), each exposed by beach erosion. Test excavations confirmed the existence of burial pits in the cemetery area but failed to locate undisturbed midden
deposits.
Artifact assemblage includes both lithic and ceramic specimens. The lithic
sample consists mostly of debitage produced by retouching large biface preforms of imported chert. It is suggested that this hamlet also participated in an
exchange system that involved, among other things, acquiring biface preforms from Central Texas and reducing and trading them to other villages that
had little or lacked access to Central Texas cherts. Certain residual flakes
subsequently were utilized either as tools or were fashioned into stemmed
arrow points. Several dart point specimens were found in the lithic sample
from the midden area. These may represent either a thin Archaic scatter on
the knoll or items collected by the late Caddoan peoples for raw material.
Evidence of an extensive Archaic occupation at the site is lacking.
Ceramics were recovered from both the eroded midden area and the cemetery. The ceramic analysis was directed at determining functionally separate
areas within the site that could provide information on the more general
nature of the site itself. Sherd analysis from the midden indicated that most
vessels were jars decorated by wet paste techniques (e.g., brushing, incising,
punctating, neck banding, pinching, etc.). Bowls and bottle sherds were uncommon. Formal types represented in the midden included Maydelle Incised, Bullard Brushed, Killough Pinched, Poynor Engraved, LaRue Neck
Banded, and Fulton Aspect effigy bowls.
Twenty one vessels were recovered from the cemetery area as a result of
the investigations by both the Attaways and TAMU. Bowls represent the
predominant form and Fulton Aspect effigy bowls notably were common (8
of 21 vessels). Four bowls were recovered from Feature 1, a burial pit. Three
jars were recovered from the cemetery. Pottery types in the mortuary as-

Sharer - Attaway Site

175

semblage included Poynor Engraved, Taylor Engraved, Ripley Engraved,
Fulton Aspect effigy vessels, and Maydelle Incised.
It was not possible to determine precisely how many individual graves were
once present in the cemetery. The TAMU investigations located the remains
of two burial pits and the Attaways located what they described as "three
clusters of vessels." These clusters may represent individual grave lots. If so,
at least five graves may have been present in the cemetery, doubtfully more
than seven judging from the small size.
The two ceramic lots were contemporaneous. Differences in forms represented in the two areas are attributed to differences in the related behaviors
that produced the respective ceramic samples. The high percentage of jars in
the midden compared to the low percentage of engraved bowls or bottles is
attributed to the frequency and nature of jar uses in the everyday life of these
late Caddoan peoples. Bowls and bottles probably were represented equally
in a household assemblage at any one point in time but jar use was such that
these vessels were more likely to be broken. Lack of preservation of Caddoan
house floors and associated artifact assemblages negates the opportunity of
constructing a comparable household assemblage of vessels from archeological data that might be represented in a house at any one time.
The mortuary sample, by contrast, represents a much more biased sample
with regard to Caddoan behavior as each vessel was specifically selected for
use as burial furniture. Some may have been containers but others, such as
two effigy vessels from Feature 1, seemingly were placed one in the other.
Why certain vessels were selected for burial inclusion will never be known; but
a factor analysis of mortuary assemblages in the Frankston and Titus foci
areas might reveal a common sequence of vessel selection. It may be that the
mortuary assemblages were intended to mirror a mini-household assemblage
envisioned to take care of the needs of that specific individual.
Sexual status also may be a factor in vessel selection. It seems to have at
least partly determined the assemblage of nonceramic artifacts such as pipes,
arrow point clusters, and celts, all of which presumably denote male status.
The function of certain pottery vessels such as the effigy bowls is unknown.
Anderson et al. (1974:Figure 10) suggested that these vessels were incense
burners but evidence to support this function is lacking. The characteristic
deep form and straight rim with opposed appendages should perhaps be
viewed as being something other than merely aesthetic ornaments.
Dating the remains at the Attaway site within the temporal span of the
Frankston Focus is tenuous at best. Chronometric dating techniques have not
been applied to Frankson Focus material, further complicating the dating. A
review of the dates for the various Caddoan ceramic assemblages to better
assess the temporal placement for the Frankston Focus is beyond the scope of
this study. Ninety seven radiocarbon dates were reported from George C.
Davis, an early Caddoan site (Story and Valestro, 1977; Creel, 1979). Statistical analysis of these data allowed Story and Valestro (1977) to date confidently the Davis site Caddoan occupation from A.D. 780 - A.D. 1260.
The origin of the Frankston Focus population is unknown. Evolution from
the Alto Focus populations at the Davis site (Story 1972, 1981) is not demonstrable. The earliest Caddoan settlements in the upper Neches are few and

176

Texas Archeological Society

seem to correlate with the Davis site occupation with regard to similarities in
ceramics. Story (1981) argues that the Davis site settlement was established
by agricultural peoples moving westward from the Red River Valley. It is
possible that the Frankston Focus peoples followed the same course or
perhaps were from the Sabine Valley. Some time overlap cannot be ruled
out. However, since Alto ceramics are absent from Frankston Focus sites, it is
assumed that the latter settlements are temporally separate. Furthermore, the
Frankston Focus settlements probably date after A.D. 1300, possibly after
A.D. 1400.
By seriating ceramic attributes from specimens obtained from pure and
mixed Frankston and Allen foci sites, Shafer (1968) was able to demonstrate
a general evolution from one assemblage to the other. Allen Focus sites are
associated with European trade materials and therefore are assumed to date
sometime after A.D. 1650. Given these minimum and maximum age ranges,
it is possible to tentatively place the Frankston Focus in the time between A.D.
1300 and A.D. 1650.
Eventually, it may be possible to identify temporal variability within the
Frankston Focus with more detailed attribute studies on ceramics available
from mortuary and midden samples. An attribute study conducted in 1968
(Shafer, 1968) was on mortuary vessels from five sites in the upper Neches
Valley: Omer and Otis Hood, J. M. Cook, Freeman, Jim Allen, and Patton.
Results of this analysis allowed a temporal seriation of the five sites.
Attempts were made to compare the ceramic attributes from the Attaway
site with those in Shafer (1968). Attaway ceramic attributes more closely
compare to those of the Omer and Otis Hood site which was the earliest of the
five in the study sample. This information does not provide any indication of
the relative age of the Attaway site, but only that of the five sites, the ceramics
compare closer as an assemblage to the Hood site. Sites used in the 1968
study lie south of the Lake Palestine basin. The northern location of the
Attaway site may help to explain the occurrence of presumably intrusive
ceramics from assemblages (Titus Focus) located along Cypress Creek
(Suhm et al, 1954:189-190).

CONCLUDING STATEMENT
Archeological remains at the Attaway site are interpreted as being those of
a small late Caddoan farming hamlet. The settlement was occupied long
enough for a recognizable midden area to accumulate and for the family
groups to bury an estimated five to seven individuals in the associated cemetery. The temporal duration of the occupation is unknown but doubtfully
would be more than two generations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author was contacted in the fall of 1975 by Susan Forsgard, then a Texas A & M University (TAMU) anthropology student from Tyler, and informed of an archeological find along the
shores of Lake Palestine, Two residents from Tyler, Jim and Sally Attaway, had discovered

Sharer - Attaway Site

177

several Caddoan pottery vessels eroding from the shoreline along the western portion of the lake.
Further exploration by them revealed several more vessels. The Attaways recognized the relative
importance of the find, notified Forsgard of their discovery, and agreed to accompany representatives from TAMU to the site for further investigations.
The effort to salvage archeological data from a late prehistoric site exposed along the shores of
Lake Palestine was made possible by the awareness shown by the Attaways. Whatever significance this project may have on illuminating facets of late Caddoan prehistory or bringing to light
archeological mistakes of the past in the upper Neches River region, the credit belongs to them.
The participation by all individuals involved in this project was strictly on a volunteer basis.
Field work was conducted on two weekends during October, 1975, by members of the Aggie
Anthropological Society headed by Thomas Stearns and operating under the overall supervision
of the author. TAMU students who contributed their time and energy to the field work include
Donna Chapman, Kathy Cushman, Susan Forsgard, Stan Grysinski, Elaine Hughes, John Ippolito, John Oeffinger, Lawrence Rearick, Reed Smith, and Thomas Stearns. Laboratory processing was facilitated by Elaine Hughes, Mary McMillan, Lisa Niederauer, and John Oeffinger. Staff
archeologist Edward P. Baxter coordinated much of the field activity. Roger Coleman drafted
figures 1-4 and prepared the artifact drawings for figure 6.
Since the site location was on land under the jurisdiction of the Upper Neches River Municipal
Water Authority, an application was made to acquire an antiquities permit in the event that
artifact collections or subsurface investigations were warranted. Antiquities Permit 98 was issued
by the Antiquities Committee to TAMU allowing further investigations at the site.
The interest and assistance shown by all of those individuals mentioned above are greatly
appreciated. The ideas, interpretations, and shortcomings of the report, are, however, solely
those of the author.

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, Keith M.
1971
Archaeological Resources of Lake Palestine, Texas. Report submitted to
the National Park Service by the Department of Anthropology, Southern
Methodist University, Dallas.
Anderson, Keith M., Kathleen Gilmore, Olin F. McCormick, III, and E. P. Morenon
Archaeological Investigations at Lake Palestine, Texas. Southern Meth1974
odist University Contributions in Anthropology, 11:1-203.
Arnold, J. Barto, III
George C. Davis Site Ceramic Analysis: Excavations of 1968-1970. Mas1973
ters thesis, University of Texas, Austin.

Creel, Darrell
1979
Archaeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas, Summer, 1978. Report submitted to the Texas Antiquities Committee by the Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A & M
University, College Station.
Griffith, William J.
The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans, 1687-1772.
1954
Middle American Research Institute, Publication, 12 (41-168): 1-165.
Jackson, A. T.
1936
A Perpetual Fire Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, 8: 134-174.
1938

Fire in East Texas Burial Rites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, 10: 77-113.

1 78

Texas Archeological Society

Johnson, LeRoy Jr.
An Archeological Survey of Blackburn Crossing Reservoir on the Upper
1961
Neches River. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. 31: 213-238.
Linton, R.
1944

North American Cooking Pots. American Antiquity, 9(4): 369-380.

Miller, E. O. and Edward B. Jelks
Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County,
1952
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, 23: 168-217.
Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger
The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
1949
Society for American Archaeology, 5: 1-255.
Shafer, Harry J.
1968
Toward an Application of the Modified Wheat-Gifford-Wasley Taxonomy to Fulton Aspect, Frankston and Allen Focus Pottery. Paper presented at the 1968 Caddoan Conference, Arkadelphia, Arkansas.
1973

Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.

Shafer, Harry J. and Anna J. Taylor
1980
Form and Uses of Mimbres Classic Black-on-White at the NAN Ranch
Ruin, Grant County, New Mexico. Paper presented at the 45th Meeting
of the Society for American Archaeology, Philadelphia.
Story, Dee Ann
A Preliminary Report of the 1968, 1969, and 1970 Excavations at the
1972
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Report of Field Research Conducted Under National Science Foundation (GS2573 and
3200) and Interagency Contracts between the University of Texas at Austin, the Texas Building Commission and the Texas Historical Survey
Committee submitted to the National Science Foundation.
1981

An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist, (in
press).

Story, Dee Ann, and Sam Valestro
Radiocarbon Dating at the George C. Davis Site, Texas. Journal of Held
1977
Archaeology, 4(1): 63-89.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
Handbook of Texas Archaeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeologi1962
cal Society Special Publication, 1: 1-299.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
1954
Archeological Society, 25: 1-562.

Swanton, John R.
1942
Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin, 132: 1332.

