Laboratory Procedures for the Care of Prehistoric
Ceramic Collections
Elaine R. Hughes

ABSTRACT
With increasing awareness of the long-term research and educational potential of
archeological collections has come increasing concern about their proper care. The need
for preservation applies to all artifacts and materials collected, but ceramic collections
need special attention because they appear to be immune to decay and misuse. Ceramic
artifacts are often processed by outdated laboratory methods that eventually damage their
integrity. This paper introduces alternatives for cleaning, labeling, repairing, and housing
ceramic materials. With the application of proper techniques, ceramic collections can be
maintained for future educators and researchers.

INTRODUCTION
Most of the time professional and avocational archeologists practice extreme diligence when recording and excavating sites, taking great care to protect
and preserve valuable research data. One would expect similar care to be taken in
the processing of artifacts, but this is not always the case. Artifacts are often
hastily cleaned and restored, and, after the termination of research, it is not uncommon for these materials to be placed in dead storage. The term dead storage
usually means any out-of-the-way enclosure, such as a basement or attic, where
collections receive little or no maintenance.
Any collection will deteriorate if stored carelessly; ceramic materials in
particular will suffer abraded surfaces, postexcavation cracks, enlargement of
missing areas, and complete breakdown or peeling of adhesives. This kind of
damage greatly limits the educational and research potential of collections, since
eventually it renders the artifacts too fragile to handle, thus rendering the collection inaccessible (Ford 1977: 2-3).
Careless storage of ceramic collections is unacceptable, for these collections are irreplaceable. The objects may be all that has ever been collected from,
or all that remains of, a site--a significant fact since prehistoric sites are limited
in number, and the overall quality of sites is deteriorating due to increased pothunting activity and lack of government support of antiquities laws (Collins and
Green 1978:1055-1059). These factors, together with recent government regulations limiting collection rights, have resulted in a gradual trend toward reutilization of collections by researchers (Norick 1982:2-6; Ford 1977:1).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985 for 1983)

332

Texas Archeological Society

Because the research potential of archeological collections extends beyond
initial study, it is the duty of the archeologist to ensure the future integrity of the
artifacts, and this can be accomplished only if sound laboratory procedures are
used. However, determination of what constitutes adequate procedure is not always easy, since artifacts must be protected from damage for an indefinite length
of time. Early archeological collections in museums are an invaluable source for
study of methods.
This article is based on field laboratory experience and is intended to alert
both avocational and professional archeologists to the danger of employing certain laboratory procedures when dealing with prehistoric ceramic collections.
Harmful methods are often used because they appear to solve particular problems, but there are usually other more suitable methods that will not result in
damage to the artifacts. The alternatives recommended here are suggestions and
will not necessarily meet the needs of every situation. In fact, they are based on
the meeting of several conditions.
The first condition is that the ceramic materials are stable, i.e., the sherd
bodies are not deteriorating. (The methods for dealing with unstable ceramics
will not be dealt with here; this report is concerned with general laboratory
methods rather than specific conservation techniques.) If unstable ceramic materials are encountered, consult a conservator or research the literature (for example, Dowman 1970; Lins 1976; Grist, Lormans, and Lynn 1982).
The second condition is that the pigments are not water soluble and the ceramic materials are not sensitive to chemicals. Paint solubility can be determined
by rubbing the surface of the sherd with a wet cotton-tipped applicator while observing the reactions under a 10-power microscope. Tests for chemical sensitivity
can be conducted in the same manner (Wilson 1968; Shepard 1976). If solubility
or sensitivity is noticed, consult a conservator.
The last condition is that cleaning is in factdesirable. Sherds or wares that
are destined for use-wear studies, trace-element analysis, and dating should not
be cleaned. If the ceramic material meets these conditions, the procedures outlined below are appropriate for dealing with typical Texas pottery types and most
southwestern wares.
Throughout laboratory processing it is important that workers record all
treatment dates, treatments, preservatives, and adhesives used on artifacts. No
one should assume that any treatment or conservation effort will be the final one.
Documenting what has been done to an artifact will aid future technicians in their
efforts to determine what methods will best reverse the effects of inappropriate
treatments.
CLEANING CERAMIC ARTIFACTS
If a ceramic artifact is covered with soil it is difficult to analyze characteristics such as design, use wear, and surface treatment, but harsh and abrasive
cleaning, as, for instance, with a toothbrush, can obliterate those attributes (Figure 1). Although some toothbrushes are soft, many of them rival wire brushes in
their abrasive ability, and, because of this, toothbrushes should never be used for
cleaning prehistoric ceramic artifacts. The recommended procedure is to use clean
water and fingers or a natural sponge, and, for soil lodged in corrugated or incised areas, a soft 1-inch paintbrush or a natural sponge. Clay deposits that re-

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

333

Figure 1. Southwestern sherd showing damage from cleaning with a toothbrush. Part
of the design has been obliterated, and the remaining painted surfaces are covered with
fine striations.

Figure 2. Reverse side of part of a Mimbres bowl, showing labels that were applied
before the sherds were found to fit together.

334

Texas Archeological Society

main after hand washing can be removed best with a 5 percent sequestering agent
such as sodium hexametaphosphate. According to Dr. Don Hamilton, of Texas
A&M University (personal communication, 1983), all traces of this chemical
should be removed by flushing with water after treatment, since it can soften pottery paste.
Removal of calcium carbonate (lime) is another problem. This deposit is
usually evidenced by a rough white-to-gray film that obscures the surface of the
sherd. A common mistake when cleaning is removing these deposits by mechanical means such as a toothbrush, and we have seen what damage that can cause in
Figure 1. Chemical methods are preferable, since they remove the calcium carbonate with minimal damage to ceramic surfaces.
Several acids will remove lime from ceramics (Dowman 1970), but hydrochloric acid, due to its easy availability, is the one most frequently used. (Muriatic
acid is hydrochloric acid; the difference in name is due to grade and price.)
A 10 percent solution of hydrochloric acid will remove calcium carbonate,
but the solution should be applied only when sherds are completely wet. The
water prevents the acid from soaking into the body of the sherd, where it will
cause future damage. After the acid treatment, sherds should be flushed with running water, since leftover acid will turn them yellow. Because hydrochloric acid
dissolves calcareous materials, it should not be used on sherds that have bone or
shell temper. If sherds with shell or bone temper are encountered, a conservator
should be consulted.
A preferable alternative to acids for the removal of calcium carbonate is a
chelating agent. A 5 to l0 percent solution of EDTA tetrasodium will remove
calcium carbonate, but not with the speed of acid.
Procedures for marking artifacts vary widely, but ceramics are most commonly labelled with india ink. This type of label is difficult to remove because
the ink soaks into the sherd. Normally, removal of labels is not a matter of concern; however, several things should be considered. First, labeling is often done
by persons who are not experienced enough to avoid labeling over diagnostic features, with the result that labels have to be removed and relocated. Second, areas
that are nondiagnostic at the time of initial cataloging may be found to be diagnostic later on. Third, after labeling, pieces are sometimes found to fit together
(Figure 2).
Fortunately, india ink labels can be removed if they have been applied in
accordance with a two-coat system using polyvinyl acetate (PVA), a thermoplastic synthetic resin that resists crosslinking when exposed to light and high
temperatures. These factors make the labeling process reversible (Dowman 1970:
61-64). The first coat of PVA prevents the ink from soaking into the sherd; the
second coat, applied over the india ink, protects the number.
Correction fluid for typewritten copy (such as the Liquid Paper brand) is
often used on dark artifacts so black ink will show up; the correction fluid shquld
not be substituted for the first coat of PVA. Correction fluid has a tendency "to
peel with age and, when removed, usually leaves a white residue that is difficult
to clean off. On dark artifacts white ink should be used instead of india ink, but it
is important to note that not all I~rands of white ink are suitable, and all require
constant stirring. (Pelikan is the brand successfully used at The Museum, Texas
Tech University.)

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

335

The question of thickness of the two-coat PVA solution now arises. Clear
fingernail polish (a type of PVA), a favorite among archeologists, varies in
quality and viscosity, is expensive, and is usually too thick for labeling. Thick
solutions of PVA are not desirable, since the differences in expansion and contraction rates of ceramic material and thick PVA at different temperatures sometimes cause the nail polish to peel off.
In an experiment conducted at The Museum, Texas Tech University, 10, 15,
and 20 percent solutions of Vinac B 15 (a type of PVA; see Appendix) in acetone
were tested to determine which solution was thick enough to prevent ink from
soaking into the sherds, yet thick enough to expand and contract with the sherds.
The weakest solution that met these requirements was 20 percent Vinac B15.
Krylon Clear Acrylic 1301 (Acryloid B72 in toluene) also was tested, but it was
equivalent to 15 percent Vinac B15 and allowed ink to soak into the sherds.
The second most popular method for marking ceramic materials is by attaching tags to them. Tags attached by string are acceptable, but their use is limited to vessels with handles or narrow necks. Adhesive-backed tags should never
be used; those that adhere well will, when peeled off after a few years, leave
adhesive residue on ceramic surfaces, which is not easily removed and can result in
permanent dark stains. Tags with less adhesive usually fall off after a few years.
REPAIRING CERAMICS
The first concern in the repairing process is to remove all traces of soil and
calcium carbonate from surfaces and edges. Vessels may fall apart after restoring
if edges are not clean, and surfaces that remain obscured by these deposits will
require more cleaning in the future. Removal of surface deposits should proceed
as described above, but edges usually require diligent cleaning with a paintbrush.
The second and most important concern is piecing the vessel together. The
method used most often is to glue sherds together as they are found, but, unless it
is done by one who has had extensive prior experience, randomly gluing sherds
together seldom produces satisfactory results. Another method sometimes employed in the field is gluing vessels together in situ; this practice is discouraged
because the vessel is usually deformed as a result of having been buried so long
in the ground.
A correct beginning step for piecing a vessel together is to arrange the sherds
so they radiate outward from the base (Figure 3). Reconstruction should begin at
the base, with the gluing together of two or three sherds. If the base is not correctly glued together, each successive sherd will magnify the error, so it is important to check alignment of the sherds at every stage of the reconstruction process.
After the base sherds have set up, successive sherds are added until the vessel is
complete (Figure 4) (Wolff 1960; Wilson 1968; Larney 1971; Rye 1982).
The type of adhesive used depends upon the size and condition of the vessel. For example, the main concern with Mimbres vessels (a Southwestern ware),
since they are nonporous, is the size of the vessel and the strength of the adhesive, but the main concern with Caddoan material (an East Texas ware), which
is porous, is the viscosity of the adhesive.
The adhesives most commonly used by archeologists are Duco and Elmer’s
Glue-All. Duco is a cellulose nitrate adhesive that sets up quickly and remains
reversible, but it also breaks down quickly, due to a plasticizer deficiency (Mibach

336

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Correct beginning for piecing a vessel together.

Figure 4. The vessel shown in Figure 3, after it was pieced together.

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

337

1975:58). This means that after a few years, artifacts may become too fragile to
handle because of the brittle state of the Duco. Duco is not the worst adhesive to
use, but it is certainly not the best for repairing vessels.
Elmer’s Glue-All has fortunately become less popular over the past few years.
It was once made from casein (a phosphoprotein of milk), but 10 to 15 years ago
the Borden Co. changed the formula to a polyvinyl acetate (PVA) emulsion. Normally, after, drying, PVA emulsions are soluble in PVA solvents such as acetone,
toluene, and lower alcohols (alcohols of low molecular weight), but this is not
true for Elmer’s Glue-All. The Borden Co. recommends water as a solvent and
claims that other solvents will "set the glue more" (Borden Co., personal communication 1982). However, Elmer’s Glue-All is only slightly soluble in water, so
it should be considered irreversible and therefore inappropriate for repairing
purposes.
Other brands of PVA emulsions and solids in a range of grade and viscosities
have been used by conservators for several years (UNESCO 1968). Vinac B25
(see Appendix) is the PVA used by the Anthropology Department, Texas A&M
University, and by The Museum, Texas Tech University. A 20 to 25 percent solution of Vinac B25 in acetone is adequate for most repairs, but, prior to gluing,
sherd edges should be coated with a 5 to 10 percent solution of Vinac B25. The
PVC coating will consolidate and thus protect the edges of the sherds that are
ground down whenever two sherds are casually fitted together and taken apart,
and will prevent the adhesive from soaking into the body of the sherd, creating a
plane along which future breaks are more likely to occur than they are along the
join (Figure 5).
Glued pieces can be set to dry in a sand box or a foam-padded box. Clothespins and rubber bands can be used to maintain correct alignment of the sherds,
but adhesive tape should never be used to hold pieces together. If the tape is
strong enough to support the sherds, it will also pull off some of the ceramic
surfaces (Figure 6).
After repair, all traces of adhesive should be removed from ceramic surfaces. A common misconception is that adhesive smeared over surfaces will help
to hold a vessel together. This is not true, and the adhesive can cause serious
problems after a few years (Figure 7), for removal of the adhesive at this time
will leave damaged areas that will require the expensive services of a conservator. It is best to avoid this situation by cleaning extra adhesive from ceramic
surfaces.
REPAIRING REBROKEN SURFACES
When a vessel starts to disintegrate due to rebreakage or breakdown of the
adhesive, it should be taken completely apart by loosening the joins between the
sherds with the solvent recommended by the adhesive manufacturer. (It is at this
time that one appreciates whatever conservation records have been kept.) As the
adhesive softens, the sherds should be pulled apart, starting at the rim. Before
the pieces are reglued, all of the adhesive residue must be removed or the resulting joins will not be as tight as before. Once the residue has been removed, repairing can proceed.
Vessels should not be "temporarily" mended with adhesive tape in the belief
that time will be found later for a permanent job. This is a mistake, for quite

338

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. A sherd that was repaired with Duco. When the piece accidentally rebroke, it
broke not along the join (A), but at the plane marking the extent of the absorption of
the Duco (B).

Figure 6. Masking tape removed from a sherd, showing particles of the ceramic
surface (black spots) adhering to the tape.

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

339

Figure 7. Damage caused by adhesive that was smeared over slipped ceramic surface
when the vessel was repaired. The adhesive has peeled up, taking the surface with it.

Figure 8. Part of an olla, showing the effects of leaving bookbinders’ tape on the
surface for 12 years. Note the adhesive stain on the lower left sherd.

340

Texas Archeological Society

often the vessel is forgotten (Figure 8). If a vessel is found that has been taped
and forgotten, the tape should be removed as soon as possible. The procedure
used for removal will depend upon the type of tape and the length of time it has
been on the vessel. For example, removing fresh masking tape will only pull off
parts of the sherd’s surface, but removing old masking tape will pull off surfaces
or leave an adhesive stain or both. Applicaton of a water poultice will facilitate
removal of the fresh masking tape, but a water poultice and toluene or other solvents are required for removal of old masking tape and the stain it leaves.
Acetone would not remove the adhesive stains from the olla shown in Figure 8,
but some success was achieved by using toluene (Joan Gardner, personal communication, 1982). If these problems are to be prevented, the use of any type of
adhesive tape should be avoided in ceramic repair.
CONCERNING RESTORATION
After or during the process of repair, it is sometimes necessary to fill in
missing areas. Whether plaster of paris or Poly-filla--a durable substitute for
plaster of paris (see Appendix)--is used, edges should first be coated with a 5 to
10 percent solution of PVA. If the vessel ever breaks or if missing pieces are
found after restoration is complete, the supporting materials can be removed
easily.

HOUSING CERAMIC COLLECTIONS
The process of excavation removes archeological materials from relatively
stable environments. To prevent deterioration, excavated artifacts, especially repaired vessels, should be placed in environments that allow them to reestablish
chemica! stability, or equilibrium. It is a state not easily achieved, but its importance cannot be overemphasized; for this a collection room must have controlled
temperature, light, and humidity. Under uncontrolled conditions adhesives will
peel, become irreversible, or break down completely. These problems occur
more frequently and are more pronounced when poor adhesives such as Duco
have been used, but even good adhesives will deteriorate in adverse environments. No amount of conservation or preservation effort will make an artifact
immune to its environment. A poorly conserved collection in an environmentally
controlled setting will almost always fare better than a well-conserved collection
in dead storage. For the best results, ceramic materials should be housed, not
stored.
Equal in importance to the environment is the arrangement of ceramic material in collection rooms. Boxes or cabinets are adequate for sherds, but whole
vessels, regardless of form, are best housed on open shelves with dust-blocking
muslin curtains. This is especially important in humid environments where
pockets of high relative humidity can form in enclosed areas (Werner 1963:
594-595). Shelves should be padded, and, when possible, vessels should be
placed on covered rings of rope or in padded boxes. The padding prevents vessels
from rocking, which grinds down ceramic surfaces. Vessels should never be
stacked or stored on rims; both practices could put stress on glued joints, and
storing on rims increases the amount of handling vessels receive, since they must
be flipped over for viewing. Finally, vessels should be stored with spaces between
them so they do not touch one another.

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

341

It is not possible to cover every detail of adequate housing in this short article; for further information readers are referred to Guldbeck 1976; Lewis 1976;
Guthe 1977; Reese 1977; Burcaw 1979; and Dudley and Wilkinson 1979.

CONCLUSION
A recent trend, due in part to current government regulations and accelerated pothunting activity, is toward the reutilization of collections by researchers,
so the time has passed when archeologists can avoid responsibility for the postexcavation condition of the artifacts they recover. It is the archeologist’s responsibility to ensure the integrity of collections by utilizing appropriate laboratory
methods and by providing adequate housing. The suggestions put forth here
should aid archeologists in determining what methods will best serve
their needs.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank Sylvia Bento, Karen Gardner, George Michaels, Erwin Roemer,
and Roger Colemen for reviewing the manuscript. Gentry Steele, of Texas A&M University, edited parts of the manuscript and helped with the photography. Nicky Olsen photographed several of the artifacts, and Dory Funk aided in the research. Eileen Johnson, of
The Museum, Texas Tech University (TTU), and conservators Joan Gardner and Donny
Hamilton, both of Texas A&M University (TAMU), supplied information and guidance.
In addition, without the use of collections at The Museum, TTU, and the Anthropology
Department, TAMU, the research would not have been possible. I would especially like to
thank Suzanne Wilson for suggesting the topic and reviewing the manuscript.

APPENDIX
Sources for Materials
Polyvinyl Acetate (PVA)
Vinac BI5 and Vinac B25: Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., Chemicals Group, EO.
Box 97, Calvert City, KY 42029; (502) 395-4181.
AYAF and AYAT: Union Carbide Corporation, 120 S. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, IL
60606; (312) 454-2000.

Support Material
Poly-filla: Conservation Warehouse, Materials Limited, Box 2884, Sparks, NV 89431;
(702) 331-9582.

REFERENCES CITED
Burcaw, G. Ellis
1979 Introduction to museum work. 4th ed. American Association for State and I..o~,al
History, Nashville.
Collins, Robert B., and Dee F. Green
1978 A proposal to modernize the American Antiquities Act. Science 202(12):
1055-1059.

342

Texas Archeological Society

Dowman, Elizabeth
!970 Conservation infield archaeology. Methuen, London
Dudley, Dorothy H., and Irma Bezold Wilkinson
1979 Museum registration methods. American Association of Museums, Washington, D.C.
Ford, Richard I.
1977 Systematic research collections in anthropology: an irreplaceable national resource. Report of a conference sponsored by the Council for Museum Anthropology, Peabody Museum, Harvard University.
Grist, Jehon, Jennifer Lormans, and Susann Lynn
1982 The conservation of the Hearst/Reisner pottery collection at the Lowie Museum.
Council for Museum Anthropology Newsletter 6(3):7-12.
Guldbeck, Per E.
1976 The care of historical collections: a conservation handbook for the nonspecialist.
2nd ed. American Association for State and Local History, Nashville.
Guthe, Carl E.
1977 The management of small history museums. 2nd ed. American Association for
State and Local History, Nashville.
Larney, J.
1976

Ceramic restoration in the Victoria and Albert Museum. Studies in Conservation
16:69-82.

Lewis, Ralph H.
1976 Manual for museums. U.S. Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.
Lins, P. Andrew
1976 Ceramics and glass. Museum News reprint. American Association of Museums,
Washington, D.C.
Mibach, E. T. G.
1975 The restoration of coarse archeological ceramics. Conservation in Archaeology
and the Applied Arts, IIC, pp. 55-65.
Norick, Frank A.
1982 The reburial controversy in California. Council for Museum Anthropology Newsletter 6(3):2-6.
Reese, Rosemary S.
1977 A bibliography on historical organization practices: care and conservation of
collections, edited by Frederick L. Rath, Jr., and Merrilyn R. O’Connell. American Association for State and Local History, Nashville.

Rye, Owen S.
!982 Pottery technology: principles and reconstruction. Taraxacum, Inc., Taraxacum,
Washington.
Shepard, Anna O.
1976 Ceramics for the archaeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication
609. Washington, D.C.

Hughes--Care of Ceramic Collections

343

United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
1968 The conservation of cultural property with special reference to tropical conditions. UNESCO, Museums and Monuments Series 2. Switzerland.
Werner, A. E. A.
1963 Scientific methods in the examination and conservation of antiquities. The
Smithsonian Report Jbr 1962 4566:593-694.
Wilson, Shari
1968 Restoring pottery. Curator 11(2): 154-164.

Wolff, Eldon
1960 Pottery restoration. Curator 3(1):75-87.

