285

The Canyon Creek Site (41OC13):
A Component of the Southern
Plains Equestrian Nomad
Archeological Complex
Harry J. Shafer, John E. Dockall, Douglas W. Owsley,
and Thomas S. Ellzey

ABSTRACT
The Canyon Creek site is an historic Plains Indian child burial, with
associated material items, discovered in a fissure cave in Ochiltree County,
Texas. The burial contained the accoutrements of mid-nineteenth century horse
nomad culture, placing it in the broader context of Native American equestrian
cultures of the Southern Plains. Topics treated include determining tribal
identity, dating, and defining the Southern Plains equestrian nomad
archeological complex. This unique material complex was created through
mutual interaction between Native Americans, and the Spanish, French, and
Anglo-Americans.

INTRODUCTION

This paper describes a mid-nineteenth century equestrian nomad burial and
associated artifacts excavated from a small solution cave (41OC13) on a tributary of Wolf Creek in Ochiltree County, Texas. A comparative study of like finds
in the Southern Plains of Texas and Oklahoma shows that a distinctive Southern
Plains Indian materia! complex grew out of the adoption of equestrian technology and European trade by many native groups (Kroeber 1963:76-80).
The archeology of Late Historic Native American culture (1800-1875) in
the Southern High Plains consists of two complimentary assemblages: (1) isolated burials, and (2) artifacts, traces of houses, and mortuary remains from
settled villages. The isolated burials are associated with equestrian nomads, and
may relate to any one of several groups, including the Plains Apache, Kiowa,
Comanche, southern Cheyenne, and southern Arapaho. The ancestral affiliation
of the materials from prehistoric settled villages in the Texas Panhandle is
unknown, but those in the South Plains, north central regions of Texas, and
western Oklahoma, may relate to certain Plains Caddoan groups (Baugh 1991).
Historically, Plains Caddoan sites in Texas are identified as occupied by Wichitaspeaking groups, and they have been grouped under the heading of the Nortefio
focus (Duffield and Jelks 1961:71-72).
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 62 (1994for 1991)

286

Texas Archeological Society

The Wichita adopted the horse by 1700 and played important roles in the
acquisition and trade of horses to other Indian groups, Anglo-Americans, and
Spanish, but they did not become nomadic wanderers. Instead, they maintained
their agricultural fields and gardens up to the time they were removed to Indian
Territory (Newcomb and Field 1967).
There has been no such archeological designation for the more nomadic
groups that ranged into the Southern High Plains in the nineteenth century.
These equestrian hunting/raiding nomadic groups in the Texas Panhandle and
Southern High Plains, were mainly Comanche, Kiowa, Kiowa Apache, southern Cheyenne, and southern Arapaho, all of whom quickly adopted the horse
by about 1700. These equestrian groups became so efficiently mobile that little
material residue was left behind at their encampments to mark them for the
archeological record. The tipi poles, covers, bedding, containers, and other everyday essentials were carried from camp to camp with the aid of horses. Not
surprisingly, only two of these settlements have been identified archeologically,
the Sand Pit and Sandstone Ledger sites, both in the Mackenzie Reservoir basin
(Willey et al. 1978; Willey and Hughes 1978). The archeological presence of
these equestrian nomads is, however, more frequently noted by an occasional
human burial accompanied by personal adornments, horse trappings, and other
belongings. The burial associations constitute a purely Indian expression even
though the materials were acquired through trading among, or raiding against,
Mexican, French, or Anglo-Americans.
The archeological identity of this historic Native American material complex comes almost exclusively from mortuary data. A limited number of Late
Historic Plains Indian burials have been documented in the Southern Plains of
Texas and western Oklahoma. Reported burials/sites in Texas include:
Yellowhouse Canyon (Newcomb 1955), White (Suhm 1962), W. H. Watson
(Ray and Jelks 1964), Cogdell (Word and Fox 1975), Morgan Jones (Parsons
1967), Merrell (or Long Hollow Burial) (A. J. Taylor, personal communication
1988), several finds near Ozona (Hester 1968), and the Canyon Creek burial
reported herein. In Oklahoma, reported historic Plains Indian burials include the
Rabbit Hill (Pearson 1978), Poafpybitty (McWilliams and Jones 1976), and
Jared (Jackson 1972) sites. The location of these finds are shown in Figure 1.
Unpublished records are available on about 10 additional burials in Texas mentioned in Word and Fox (1975); efforts are being made to thoroughly document
some of these burial sites (A. J. Taylor, personal communication 1988).

PREVIOUS APPROACHES TO STUDYING
HISTORIC PLAINS INDIAN BURIALS
Previous studies of Historic Plains Indian burials have tended to be site
specific, with two rather limited goals beyond a basic description of the findings.

Shafer et aL ~ The Canyon Creek Site

i

287

288

Texas Archeological Society

The first was to assess the date of the burial based on associated artifacts, and
the second was to determine tribal affiliation.
Dating historic burials on the basis of associated artifacts is a standard
archeological procedure utilizing associated European trade goods, buttons,
weapons, hoes, knives, or other objects. All of the historic burials cited above
date to the nineteenth century. We have employed the same method to date the
Canyon Creek burial.
Determining tribal identity is a more difficult task. The double burial at the
Poafpybitty site was identified as Kiowa based on a local Comanche informant
and comparative studies; the Jared burial was identified as Comanche on the
basis of literary and historic records (Jackson 1972), although it could be Kiowa.
The Rabbit Hill burial was identified by Pearson (1978) as Kiowa Apache using
archeological and photographic evidence. Yellowhouse Canyon, Cogdell, Morgan Jones, and White were probably Comanche, but there is no way of being
certain of any of the Texas cases.

CANYON CREEK BURIAL (41OC13)
The Canyon Creek burial was discovered by Matthew Sell and a friend,
Craig Gingerich, in the winter of 1987 while exploring the cave for evidence of
prehistoric artifacts. Shafer, Ellzey, and Owsley visited the site in the summer
of 1988 at the request of the landowner, and planned for future investigations.
The site consists of two small horizontal fissure caves (Figure 2A) formed
in the dolomite caprock. The burial was in the larger cave (Figure 2B). These
small caves are vigorously defended during the warmer seasons by a rather large
population of black widow spiders and rattlesnakes. Primarily for that reason,
the burial was not excavated until November 1988 (during a blizzard) by Shafer,
Ellzey, Owsley, Brian S. Shaffer, and David Tucker.
The floor of the burial cave contained a shallow fill with exposed bedrock
along the west wal!; a natural crevice in the floor on the’east side was filled with
fine wind-blown sediment. The burial was placed in the deepest deposit of fill in
the cave. The floor sloped downward about 1 m toward the entrance from the
place of the burial.

Excavation

Prior to excavation, Ellzey and David Tucker mapped the cave (Figure 3),
and the burial area. Excavation focused on the burial itself, which was exposed,
photographed, drawn, and removed for analysis. All fill was screened through a
1/16-inch mesh; approximately 11 kg of soil was collected and water or dry
screened through 1/16-inch mesh at Texas A&M University to recover glass
beads and microfaunal remains.

Shafer et aL ~ The Canyon Creek Site

289

A

B
Figure 2. A, Canyon Creek caves (41OC13) showing burial site (arrow); B, Canyon Creek
burial cave interior and burial location within the cave (arrow).

290

Texas Archeological Society

Copies of maps, drawings, notes, and photographs are on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin. The
material culture items were returned to the landowner.

The Burial
The burial was that of a child approximately five years old. The body and
associated items were covered with a mounded layer of dolomite cobbles (see
Figure 2B). There is some evidence to suggest that the entrance of the cave was
walled up, as a linear mound of dolomite cobbles lay across the entrance at the
time the site was first visited by the authors in the summer of 1988 (see Figure 3)
A packrat nest had been constructed among the dolomite rocks covering the
burial. This nest was extensively used as evidenced by packed fecal and other
organic material among the rocks. Termites had badly damaged most of the
wooden articles, and the percolating moisture undoubtedly contributed to severe
deterioration of all organic material.
The body was placed in a shallow pit dug into the eolian fill along the south
wall of the cave (see Figure 3), approximately 6 m from the entrance. The body
was placed in a semi-flexed position on its left side with the head to the east and
facing south (Figures 4, 5).
Numerous artifacts were placed with the body (see Figure 4), including a
"killed" adult saddle frame, a complete child’s saddle frame, a bridle (represented by the bits and fragments of leather straps), a wooden stirrup frame, a
wooden ladle, a silver ring, and two copper rings. Items of adornment include 23
copper bracelets, of which 10 were on the right forearm, 12 were on the left, and
another was against the right side of the skull near the occip!tal; the latter was
probably wom as a hair ornament similar to that found with the Cogdell burial
(Word and Fox 1975). A small red leather beaded pouch or bag (probably a
tobacco pouch) was found in the chest area; the item’s position suggests that it
was suspended around the neck.
Textile impressions on one of the bracelets of the right arm, the pattern of
bead distribution, and a concentration of fibrous organic material beneath the
burial all suggest that the corpse was dressed in cloth. No remnants of the cloth
remained, however, but three brass buttons were recovered.
A single string of white glass beads was found scattered about the head;
presumably these were once threaded into the hair. White beads and blue beads
were found along the south side of the burial pit, primarily between the left
hand and the knees. These beads may have embellished a type of garment.
The only other concentration of beads was around the beaded leather pouch
noted above.
An iron bridle bit was placed over the chest area. Fragments of leather
straps, presumably from the bridle reins, were also found near the bit and in front
of the face.

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

291

Figure 3. Location map and map of plan of burial cave showing location of burial. Note
cobble concentration at entrance suggesting that the cave may have once been sealed.

An adult saddle frame was broken and scattered about the area over the legs.
The breakage appeared to be deliberate as the pommel and cantle were both
snapped at the fork.
A child-size saddle frame was placed intact along the north side of the grave
against the skull. Inside the side boards of this saddle frame was a wooden ladle
placed upside down. On the west side of the saddle was the wooden frame of a
stirrup. Against the top of the stirrup was a copper ring.

Human Osteology
The inventory and analysis of the human remains from the Canyon Creek
site was provided by Owsley at the Department of Anthropology, Smithsonian
Institution, Washington, D. C.

292

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Photographs of burial showing some of the associated artifacts.

Bone preservation is excellent, and the skeleton is nearly complete. The size
of the skeletal elements, dentition (including the presence of deciduous teeth and
unerupted permanent teeth), and open cranial sutures indicate that the skeleton is
that of a five year old child. Age was determined using the dental calcification
standards of Moorress et al. (1963a, 1963b). Lengths of the long bone diaphyses

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

10

20

I

I

293

30 CM

I

SCALE

N

Figure 5. Diagram showing position of the body and placement of associated artifacts: l,
child’s saddle; 2, wooden ladle; 3, stirrup; 4, adult saddle parts; 5, copper bracelets; 6,
copper rings; 7, iron bit; 8, leather bridle/head stall fragments; and 9, beaded pouch.

(left side) were consistent with an age of 4.5-5.5 years (Ubelaker 1978) and were
as follows: humerus (166 ram), radius (129 ram), ulna (143 ram), femur (233
mm), tibia (184 mm), and fibula (187 mm).
The mild wear on the deciduous teeth and the general craniofacial morphology (i.e., form of the zygomaxillary suture, shape of the nasal aperture, prominence and angle of the nasal bones, absence of a nasal sill, shape of eyes, and
straightness of the palatine suture) are characteristic of Native Americans of the
Plains. In addition, radiographs of the unerupted permanent maxillary incisors
reveal the shovel shape that is a typical trait of Native Americans.
It is difficult to determine sex with certainty in a child so young. Characteristics of the pelvis (i.e., pubic symphysis and sciatic notch morphology)

294

Texas Archeological Society

that enable sex determination of adults have an intermediate expression in this
child, and thus have little diagnostic value. The mental eminence of the mandible, however, is squared and blunt, the gonial angle is acute (116 degrees),
and the ascending ramus is relatively wide. These traits are characteristic of
males.
The cranium is virtually complete, lacking only part of the right zygomatic
process. Traces of rodent incisor marks are apparent on the orbits, zygomae,
and right mandibular condyle. Such gnawing caused the missing and crumbling
portions of the right zygoma and zygomatic process. The vault displays
asymmetrical areas of thinning of the parietals, temporals, and occipitals (i.e.,
arachnoid granulations/pachyonian depressions). There is no evidence of cribra
orbitalia or ectocranial porosis, and hence no indication of malnutrition, iron
deficiency anemia, hookworm infestation, malaria, and other such causes of
these conditions.
The maxillary deciduous canines and incisors are missing (postmortem
loss), but the permanent teeth are visible in the gubernacular canals. Maxillary teeth present and erupted include the left and right deciduous first and
second molars; the left permanent molars are present but unerupted. Mandibular
deciduous teeth present and erupted include three incisors, both canines, and
first and second molars (an unerupted permanent tooth is visible below the
missing left first incisor). The left permanent first and second molars and the
right second molar are present and unerupted; the right first molar is partially
erupted. The deciduous teeth display minimal occlusal surface abrasions and
only mild deposits of calculus. There is no evidence of caries or alveolar
abscessing. The left mandibular first deciduous molar displays three roots, a
rare occurrence.
Missing postcranial elements include the scapulae, clavicles, sternum, coccyx, patellae, right humerus, and a few ribs and vertebrae. Examination of the
bones revealed no indication of congenital or developmental abnormality, nor
of lesions resulting from disease or trauma. However, X-rays of the tibiae and
femora show the presence of several faint transverse lines of arrested growth
(Harris lines) (Garn et al. 1968). One corresponding set, which formed during
infancy, is evident in the proximal and distal tibiae and the distal femora. These
lines reflect an episode of disturbed long bone growth, followed by recovery,
and probably were caused by an illness or a period of severe malnutrition. Green
stains are apparent on the radii and ulnae, being more vivid on the left than
the right (archeological data on the burial indicate that the bracelets on the
arms are the cause of the stains on the arm bones).
In conclusion, examination of this burial indicates that the skeleton is that
of a subadult, possibly a male, about five years of age. The child was in good
health at the time of death, and the skeleton reveals nothing about the possible cause of death, as no lesions or abnormalities are present.

Shafer et al. ~ The Canyon Creek Site

295

ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

The artifacts recovered from 41OC13 are described, and examples illustrated, in this section of the article. Limited documentary research was conducted
to provide a broader context of analysis and preliminary interpretations and
inferences.

Horse Gear
Horse gear includes two Indian-made saddles, a wooden stirrup frame, an
iron bridle bit, and fragments of a leather bridle or headstall.

Iron Bridle Bit

This specimen is a Spanish spade type bit that exhibits curation and repair
(Figure 6). The bit is made of iron and is heavily rusted and pitted, but has been
conserved by Dr. D. L. Hamilton and Georgia Fox at Texas A&M University.
The roller on the spade is missing, but the crosspiece for the roller is still present.
The curb chain is also missing but one hook for this chain is present. A piece of
iron wire has been added to the spade part of the bit and connects and fastens
both cheekpieces to the spade. This may indicate repair of an otherwise nonfunctional bit. The cheekpieces have a series of perforations that form two
convex rows. The upper row is comprised of 11 holes and the inner row of four
holes. The spade is scalloped along the edge and convex in cross section. The bit
measures 32.6 cm between the cheekpieces.

Leather Bridle or Headstall Fragments (Figure 7; N=12)
There are five fragments of leather headstall or bridle fragments that are
2.5 cm in width. The remaining seven specimens are small non-diagnostic fragments. Two of the longer fragments have a series of small diagonal notches on
one side. Presumably, this was to facilitate fastening the end of the strap into a
buckle that is no longer present. There are four other specimens that have a series
of stitching holes around their edges. Rivet or brad holes are present on two
specimens. No buckles or rivets remain on any of the strap fragments.

Child’s Saddle ~igures 8-10)
Pommel (Figure 9A)
The pommel was manufactured from the fork of a small tree or branch that
resembles cottonwood. Remnants of bark still remain on the underside of the V.
The top of the pommel is notched.

296

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 6. Spanish spade type iron bridle bit.

10
Figure 7. Leather bridle or head stall fragments.

Shafer et aL -- The Canyon Creek Site

297

At the ends of the forks on each side of the pommel are pairs of notches
for lashing the pommel to the side boards of the saddle. One fork is incomplete and has only one set of notches. The complete fork had two notches.
The first set is 12 cm from the top of the pommel, and the lower set of notches
is 3.5 cm below the upper set. The upper pair of notches on the broken fork
is 12.5 cm from the top of the pommel. Overall dimensions for the pommel
are: height 12.5 cm, and 15 cm distance between the forks of the pommel.

Cantle (Figure 9B)
The cantle is manufactured of the same wood type as the pommel. The
top of the cantle is carved flat and is spatulate in shape. As with the pommel,
the cantle was also carved from the fork of a small tree or limb; bark is also
present. The back surface of the cantle top is convex while the interior is
slightly concave.
One fork is incomplete due to decay, while the other fork is complete.
There are two pair of notches on the complete fork. The upper pair of notches
is 13.5 cm from the top of the cantle. The lower pair of notches is 4 cm below
the upper pair.
Binding impressions are present across the broad outer surface of the complete fork, between the notches. Microscopic examination revealed traces of
decayed leather over part of the cantle.

Complete Side Board (Figure IOA)
This sideboard was constructed of cottonwood. This piece is concave/
convex along the long axis, being probably hand-contoured. A series of binding holes were prepared at each end of the side board. The same hole pattern
was used on both ends.
Microscopic analysis of the holes indicated they were made by burning
(cf. Ewers 1980:Figure 52a). It is possible that the holes were first burned into
the wood with a red-hot metal rod or awl and then reamed out to their present
diameter. The holes were not produced biconically. Hole diameter ranges from
0.5-0.6 cm. A small bit of decayed leather is still present on one end of the
side board, evidence that the saddle frame was once wrapped in rawhide. Linear
binding impressions are still visible in this region. Rodent gnawing and decay
have damaged much of this piece.
Dimensions for this side board are: Length, 30.7 cm; width of ends, 8.7
cm; width of middle, 7.8 cm; thickness: ends, 0.8 and 0.79 cm; middle, 0.63
cm.

298

Texas Archeological Society

0

10

20cm

Cantle

Pommel

Figure 8. Drawing of child’s saddle showing articulation of parts (pommel, cantle, and
side boards).

Incomplete Side Board (Figure lOB)
This specimen was constructed of the same material as the complete side
board and has the same binding hole pattern and method of hole manufacture.
This piece is badly decayed.

Shafer et aL ~ The Canyon Creek Site

o

5

lo

Cm.

A

10
Cm.

B
Figure 9. A, child’s saddle pommel; B, child’s saddle cantle.

299

300

Texas Archeological Society
Stirrup (Figure IOC)

The stirrup was manufactured of four separate pieces, all of cottonwood.
There is one rectangular portion (stirrup tread), two sides of a bentwood construction, and a narrow strip (2 cm wide) across the top bridging both side pieces.
The bottom portion is hand-shaped and measures 9.0 cm front to back and 8.7 cm
side to side. It is 0.7 cm in thickness. Each side of this piece is beveled to
accommodate the stirrup arch construction.
The sides of the stirrup were also cut and shaped by hand. The upper portion
that forms the arch is bent and tapered to shape. The dimensions of the side parts
of the stirrup are: Side part A: length, 8.1 cm; width, 8.0 cm; thickness, 0.6 cm;
Side part B: length, 8.7 cm; width, 7.4 cm; thickness, 0.5 cm.

Adult Saddle
Structurally, the adult saddle is virtually identical to the child’s saddle, only
larger in scale. No components of the adult saddle are illustrated, but measurements and verbal descriptions are presented below.

Pommel
The pommel was probably manufactured from the fork of a small cottonwood tree. This specimen is in two pieces, and is incomplete, but there are traces
of the original leather or hide cover in crevasses of the wood.
A series of two notches is present on the complete fork. The first pair is 22.3
cm from the top, and the second pair of notches is 4 cm below the first pair. The
lower pair is actually a single large groove partially encircling the distal area of
the fork. No binding impressions were present.
The length of the pommel is estimated to have been about 27.5 cm. Estimated width between the forks of the complete pomme! is 25.5 cm.

Cant/e
The cantle of the adult saddle was constructed of mesquite. It also was
carved similarly to the cantle of the child’s saddle described above. Both forks of
the cantle are complete. Apair of grooves, carved with a metal tool, is present at
the distal end of each fork. The upper groove is 22.5 cm from the top of the
cantle. The second groove is 4 cm below the first groove. Much of the bark still
remains on the surface of the cantle. The length of the cantle is 25.5 cm. Width
between the forks is 24.5 cm.

Shafer et al. ~ The Canyon Creek Site

0

,5

30t

10

Cm.

A

o

5

lO

Cm,

B

o

5

lO

Cm,

C
Figure 10. A, B, side boards to child’s saddle; C, wooden stirrup frame from child’s
saddle.

302

Texas Archeological Society

Complete Side Board
This side board (probably of cottonwood) is mostly complete, but is severely warped and damaged by cracking and rodent gnawing. Traces of decayed
leather covering still remain on the side board.
A set of seven binding holes are present on each end of this piece. Hole
diameter ranges from 0.4-0.7 cm. Holes were created by burning with a red-hot
metal rod or awl, and then by reaming the hole to its present shape. The hole
pattern follows very closely that for the child’s saddle. The estimated length of
this specimen is about 44 cm.

DISCUSSION OF HORSE GEAR
The spade bit is not common in eighteenth and nineteenth century
archeological collections from the Southern Plains (Jay C. Blaine, personal
communication, 1993). According to Blaine, the spade bit is more common in
Spanish colonial areas of Sonora and southern Arizona. The Canyon Creek
specimen may have been acquired through trading with, or raiding among,
Spanish/Mexican settlements in New Mexico or northern Mexico. Trading
expeditions between the Southern Plains Indians and the New Mexico settlements
and Comancheros are well documented (Berlandier 1969:120; Haley 1935;
Kenner 1969; Levine 1991), but so was raiding in northern Mexico (Campbell
and Field 1968:129). Kenner (1969:85) specifically mentions saddlery as one of
the items of Comanchero trade.
Both of the Canyon Creek saddles are unquestionably of Indian origin.
The style is comparable to that which the Blackfoot called "prairie chicken
snare saddle" (Ewers 1980:81). According to Grinnell (1923, I:207, cited in
Ewers 1980:92), this type of saddle was an invention of the Kiowa and was
in common use in the middle decades of the nineteenth century.
According to Ewers (1980), there were basically three types of Indian
saddles. The oldest form was the "pad saddle" made by stuffing soft skin pillows with animal hair. The pad saddle was mostly used by men. The second
type of saddle was the woman’s saddle, which consisted of forked pieces laced
to two side boards. The pommel and cantle were each curved outward at the
top, and were characteristically high relative to the third type of saddle, the
prairie chicken snare saddle. The difference between the woman’s saddle and
the prairie chicken snare saddle is that the pommel and cantle are low rather
than high on the latter. The sideboards and girting were much the same. The
two saddle types are related, and Ewers (1980) believes the style was derived
from Spanish pack saddles.
William Soule, a frontier photographer, photographed a saddle of the prairie
chicken snare type on a southern Cheyenne horse sometime between 1868-1874
(Belous and Weinstein 1969:75). Another example taken from a Comanche raid

Shafer et al. ~ The Canyon Creek Site

303

on Corpus Christi is illustrated by Berlandier (1969:Figure 18). This raid must
have taken place between 1827 and 1835 when Berlandier was in Texas, and
suggests that the prairie chicken snare saddle dates as early as the first quarter of
the nineteenth century.
Ewers (1980:80-81) states that saddle making was done by women. In
making the Cheyenne prairie chicken snare saddle,
a woman softened two sections of antler from flesh killed elk or
blacktail deer in warm water to rend them pliable. The sections were
then bent and cut to the desired shape, one for the pommel and the
other for the cantle. Some women burned holes near each end of the
section of antler for tying it to the wooden side boards; others made
two horizontal grooves and passed the tie strong through these grooves
and holes burned in the sideboards. The saddle was then covered with
green rawhide and protected from warping while the rawhide was
drying by the same methods used in making all-wood saddles.
While antler was used among the northern Cheyenne and other Northern
Plains groups, wood was substituted in the Central and Southern Plains. The
senior author, however, has observed a saddle of this type with antler used
for the pommel and cantle in the Clarendon Museum in Clarendon, Texas. Also,
an elk horn pommel and cantle attributed to mid-nineteenth century Comanche
are in the Museum of the Great Plains collections in Lawton, Oklahoma (artifact numbers 61.119.4a and 4b; Joe S. Hays, personal communication, 1994).
The Canyon Creek Cave saddles were identical in construction to the
Cheyenne saddle except that wood was used rather than antler. The types of
woods (mesquite and cottonwood) would also place their manufacture in the
Southern Plains. The prairie chicken snare saddles were all-purpose saddles
used for riding and as pack saddles. The prairie chicken snare saddles also
help to date this burial to the mid-nineteenth century (1825-1875). Excellent
examples of women’s saddles and a prairie chicken snare saddle are in the
Panhandle Plains Historical Museum in Canyon, Texas.
Word and Fox (1975) list horse gear, second to glass beads, as the most
common items found with historic Southern Plains Indian burials. Saddles, bits,
bridles, and bridle trappings have been found singularly or together.
The inclusion of saddles as grave items was a known practice of the
Comanche (Jackson 1972; Yarrow 1881); however, the trait was also well
known among other Southern Plains groups, and thus does not provide a reliable means of identifying the tribal affiliation of any particular burial.
Adult-size prairie chicken snare saddles were found with adult males at
the Merrell and Owens sites in Floyd County, Texas (Anna J. Taylor, personal
communication, 1988; Tunnell 1984). These saddles constitute the only other
examples of the prairie chicken snare saddle currently known from the archeological record.

304

Texas Archeological Society

Saddles of either Mexican or western American style with prominent
rounded horns have been recovered from several nineteenth century Southern
Plains burials. The nomenclature for these kinds of saddles varies according
to the source. A "Santa Fe" style Spanish saddle was associated with the adult
male burial from the Cogdell site in Floyd County (Word and Fox 1975). A
saddle, identified by Word and Fox as a probable "Santa Fe" style saddle, was
found with the White site burial in Yoakum County (Suhm 1962); another
possible "Santa Fe" or western style saddle was found with the Jared site burial
(Jackson 1972).

Utensil
Wooden Ladle or Drinking Vessel (Figure 11)
This artifact is of cottonwood or a similar species. The general shape of the
ladle is oval and the handle is broken. The bottom of the cup is badly decayed
from packrat urine. A hole was drilled into the handle at its juncture with the
body. This hole is 0.7 cm in diameter. A small portion of the end of the handle is
still present and the estimated handle length is 3.5 cm. Dimensions: Length, 22.5
cm; width, 12.6 cm; depth, 6 cm; thickness is highly variable.
Wooden utensils were not uncommon among the various Plains horse nomads. Markoe et al. (1986:115, 164) illustrate two examples of wooden containers identified as Sioux and Yanktonai Dakota, respectively.

Beaded Leather Pouch
A small beaded leather pouch was recovered from the upper chest area. The
object appeared as a mass of beads covering and partially adhering to, two or
more layers of very decomposed leather. Because of its deteriorated condition, it
was not possible to determine if the leather was native-tanned. The interior side
of the leather was dyed red.
The majority of the beads in the collection, except for the blue and white
beads found along the left side of the body and the white beads around the head,
came from this pouch. The specific bead pattern was not discernible, although a
partial pattern was preserved that consisted of a block of red beads against a
block of white beads. Partial patterns also can be seen in the X-ray photograph
(Figure 12). The outer surface decoration included eight hair pipe beads and
larger glass beads. The pouch was fringed with strings of beads; small iron
tinklers tipped the ends of each fringe.
A small mass of a brown organic substance was between the layers of
leather, presumably the contents of the pouch. Microscopically, this substance
has the powdered consistency of snuff with small (ca. 1 mm) pieces of leafy

Shafer et aL -- The Canyon Creek Site

0

5

305

lO

Cm.
Figure 11. Wooden ladle.

structure. Samples of this material were collected for positive identification,
although superficially the substance appears to be tobacco.

Discussion
An undecorated leather pouch, similar to that from Canyon Creek, was
found at the White site that contained vermillion (Suhm 1962). Beaded pouches
were common accoutrements carried by the nineteenth century Plains Indians,
and were used to carry tobacco, medicines, strike-a-lights, and paint. Numerous
examples of "tobacco," "medicine," or strike-a-light pouches are present in the
ethnographic collections at the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum at Canyon,
Texas. Figure 13 illustrates two of these ethnographic specimens from the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum collected in the late nineteenth century; one
(see Figure 13A) was identified as Plains Apache. We cannot be certain that the
Figure 13 examples are in fact pre-reservation specimens. In the latter part of the
nineteenth century, Fort Sill Apaches (including Chiricahua) made such bags for
Anglo-American traders (Joe S. Hays, personal communication, 1994). Hays
feels that many of the bags labeled as "ethnographic specimens" in various
museums today were produced by the Fort Sill Apaches. The bags from the
Panhandle Plains Historical Museum are illustrated here simply to give the
reader a general idea of the likely appearance of the Canyon Creek specimen.
A similar pouch (probably Dakota) is illustrated by Markoe et al. (1986:152).
Will Soule photographed Comanche adorned with similar pouches (Belous and
Weinstein 1969:105, 109).

306

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 12. X-ray photograph of remnants of beaded leather pouch. Note mass of iron
tinklers just above the ring.

Shell and Glass Beads
Tubular Shell Beads (N=8; Figure 14A)
Although the specimens have suffered from slight weathering, some retain traces of a high polish. Three of the eight specimens appear to be full
length hair pipes, while five appear to be either reworked fragments or shorter
examples.
Length of the full-sized specimens ranges from 4.6-5.5 cm. Outside diameters range from 0.69-0.8 cm. Inside diameter averages 0.2 cm. The length of
the five short specimens ranges from 1.1-1.6 cm. Outside diameter ranges from
0.7-0.78 cm. Inside diameter also averages 0.2 cm. A remnant of a red string
was found inside one of the larger hair pipes.
These specimens compare in both dimensions and appearance to similar
artifacts from the White site (Suhm 1962:92-93). A breast plate made of hair

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

307

B
Figure 13. Two late Southern Plains Indian beaded leather pouches for tobacco and/or
strike-a-lights: A, beaded pouch, ethnic identity unknown (length, 15.2 cm; width, 11.4
cm); B, Plains Apache beaded pouch (length, 14.0 cm; maximum width, 12.7 cm; width at
top, 8.2 cm). Note the use of iron or silver tinklers on fringe of both specimens.
Photographs courtesy of the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum.

pipe beads was recovered from the Yellowhouse Canyon Burial (Newcomb
1955); three hair pipe beads were associated with the Cogdell burial (Word
and Fox 1975).
These shell beads or "hair pipes" were probably manufactured from the lip
of Strombus gigas (cf. Ewers 1957:42). According to Ewers (1957:42), the
manufacture of these artifacts began between 1776 and 1798. Manufacture was

308

Texas Archeological Society

D

¢

B

F

A

,}

© @¢
N

M
0

0
.......

P

Q
i;

.......

....

Figure 14. Shell beads and glass beads: A, tubular shell beads; B-Q, examples of glass
beads. B, IVal3; C, D, IIa59; E, IVa9; F, IIa41; G, Ifl; H, IIa7; I, IIa!4; J, WIb; K, IIIf2;
L, WIb2; M, WIcl; N, WId; O, WIcl l; P, WId; Q, unidentified green glass beads.

dominated by the family and descendants of William Campbell of Pascack (Park
Ridge), Bergen County, New Jersey. Ewers (1957:74) states that the distribution
of these artifacts to Plains Indians by U.S. Government agencies occurred prior
to 1850. Shell hair pipes are also listed among the items traded to the Indians
by the U. S. sponsored Indian trading factories (Peake 1954:45-81). The
widespread use of these ornaments in breastplates followed their mechanized
production in 1850.

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

309

Glass Beads (N=2500+)
The identification and classification of the glass beads associated with the
burial follows that developed by Kidd and Kidd (1970). Although previous studies of beads from Historic Native American sites in Texas have used the bead
classification developed by R. K. Harris and others, and systemized by Harris
and Harris (1967) (for example, Suhm 1962; Word and Fox 1975; Harris et al.
1993), we chose to use Kidd and Kidd (1970) since it is a more recent study
and provides more specific information on nineteenth century bead types. This
classification system is based upon manufacture methods and physical attributes
of the beads.
Prior to classification, all beads were separated according to manufacture.
Two basic methods of manufacture were noted among the beads: tubular or
drawn and wire wound (cf. Kidd and Kidd 1970; Harris and Harris 1967:134138). Tubular beads are mass-produced whereas wire wound beads are individually hand-crafted.
The analyzed bead sample consists of those specimens found within the
loose fill of the burial and during water screening of the burial fill (Table 1).
An unknown number not included in this sample remain attached to a small
beaded pouch (see Figure 12).

Tubular or Drawn Beads
Ifl (N=7) (Figure 14G)
There are six blue beads and one black bead of this type. These are
monochrome tubular beads whose surfaces have been faceted by grinding. The
ends were broken irregularly and smoothed slightly. The blue beads were
manufactured from clear glass while the black specimen is of an opaque glass.
The beads are hexagonal in shape and range in size from 5.8-8 mm in diameter.
The diameter of the hole ranges from about 1-3 mm.

IIa7 ~=4) (Figure 14H)
These are black beads; an opaque glass was used in the manufacture of
these specimens. Bead diameter ranges from 4.4-4.9 mm, and hole diameters are
about 1 mm.

Ila14 ~=1796) (Figure 14I)

This type is a white circular bead made from an opaque glass. There are
two general sizes of this bead represented. The smallest size is represented by
1781 specimens. Bead diameter for this size ranges from 2.3-3 mm, and their

310

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1.
Glass Bead Attributes

Type

Shape*

Color

Technique Exterior**

Interior**

Total

Percent

Ift

F

Blue

Drawn

5.8-8.0

1.3

6

0.24

Ifl

F

Black

Drawn

5.8

1.3

1

0.04

IIa7

C

Black

Drawn

4.4-4.9

1.0

4

0.16

IIal4

C

White

Drawn

2.3-3.0

<1.0-1.0

1781

71.26

IIal4

C

White

Drawn

5.0-5.5

1.0-2.0

15

0.60

IIa41

C

Robin
Egg Blue

Drawn

3.0-3.7

1.0

123

4.92

IIa59

C

Rose
Wine Red

Drawn

2.0-4.0

<1.0-1.0

364

14.56

IIIf2

F

Blue/
Blue

Drawn

6.0-9.0

1.5-2.0

17

0.68

IVa9

C

Red/
White

Drawn

3.0

<1.0

101

4.04

IVa!3

C

White/
Gray

Drawn

2.0-3.0

<1.0-I.0

44

1.76

WIb

R

Red

Wound

7.5

1.5

1

0.04

WIb2

R

White

Wound

6.0-7.0

1.5-2.0

13

0.52

WIb2

R

White

Wound

8.0-9.0

2.0

14

0.56

WIcl

O

White

Wound

6.0-7.0

1.5-2.0

10

0.40

WIc 11

O

Ultramarine

Wound

7.4

1.5

1

0.04

Blue
WId

C

Robin
Egg Blue

Wound

12.0

2.0

1

0.04

WId

C

Robin
Egg Blue

Wound

8.5

2.0

1

0.04

UID

R

Green

Unknown

7.5-8.6

2.0

2

0.08

*F=faceted; C=circular; R=round; O=oval
** In mm

Shafer et al. ~ The Canyon Creek Site

311

hole diameter is approximately 1 mm. The larger size group is represented by
15 specimens. Bead diameter for this group ranges from 5-5.5 mm and hole
diameter ranges from 1-2 mm.

IIa41 (N=123) (Figure 14F)
This is a robin’s egg blue circular bead type manufactured from an opaque
glass. Bead diameter ranges from 3-3.7 mm and the hole diameter is 1 mm.

Iia59 (N=364) (Figure 14C, D)
Rose wine red is the color of this circular bead type; a clear glass was used
in bead manufacture. Size variation is greatest among this group of circular beads
than for any other bead group, as bead diameter ranges from 2-4 mm, and hole
diameters are about 1 mm.

IIIf2 (N=17) (Figure 14K)
This type is a bichrome tubular bead that has had the surface facetted by
grinding. The general appearance of this type is the same as that for type Ifl,
the only difference being the use of two glass colors. The body of this type
has a light blue or ultramarine color and was manufactured of clear glass. The
core is a light aqua blue of translucent glass. The beads are hexagonal in shape
and diameters range from 6-9 mm, with hole diameters from 1.5-2 mm.

IVa9 (N=101) (Figure 14E)
This is a bichrome circular bead type with a scarlet red exterior of clear
glass and a white core of opaque glass. Bead diameters are 3 mm and hole
diameters are about 1 mm.

IVal3 (N=44) (Figure 14B)
This is also a bichrome circular bead type with a white exterior of white
translucent glass and a gray core of clear glass. Bead diameters range from 2-3
mm, and hole diameters range from less than 1 mm to 1 mm.

Wire- Wound Beads
Wlb (N=I) (Figure 14J)
This is a clear, dark red, glass bead. The ends of this bead are slightly
collared as a result of the manufacture process of winding glass upon a wire.

312

Texas Archeological Society

Bead diameter is 7.5 mm, and it has a hole diameter of 1.5 mm.

WIb2 (N=27) (Figure 14L)
This monochrome round bead type is represented by two basic size categories. The smallest group (N=13) is manufactured from an opaque white glass.
Bead diameters range from 6-7 mm, and hole diameters range from 1.5-2 mm.
The larger group (N=14) is also manufactured from a white colored glass. In two
specimens, a translucent white glass was used; in all others a white opaque glass
was used in manufacture. Bead diameter ranges are from 8-9 mm, with hole
diameters of 2 mm. The ends of most of the beads are collared from the manufacture process but most of them have been reduced by grinding.

WIcl (N=10) (Figure 14M)

This is a monochrome oval bead type manufactured from an opaque white
glass. Bead diameter ranges are from 6-7 mm, and hole diameters range from
1.5-2 mm. The ends of these beads have been ground smooth and no collars are
evident.

WIcll (N=I) (Figure 140)

This is a clear, ultramarine blue bead. It has a bead diameter of 7.4 mm, and
a hole diameter of 1.5 mm. This specimen is broken and incomplete on one end.
The opposite end is slightly collared but has been ground smooth.

WId (N=2) (Figure 14P)

This is a monochrome donut-shaped bead type. One specimen is manufactured from an opaque robin’s egg blue glass. Bead diameter is 12 mm and hole
diameter is 2 mm. The ends of this bead have been ground very smooth. The
second specimen is manufactured from a clear, ultramarine blue glass. The ends
of this bead are not as highly ground as the larger specimen. Bead diameter is 8.5
mm and hole diameter is 2 mm.

Miscellaneous Unidentified Beads (N=2) (Figure 14Q)
These specimens are round beads manufactured from a clear green glass.
Both specimens are highly flawed by numerous internal fractures as if they had
been subjected to decrepitation from heat or weathering. None of the other bead
types exhibit this feature. These beads are very well shaped but could not be
identified as being either the drawn or wire wound variety. Bead diameter ranges

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

313

are from 7.5-8.6 ram, and hole diameters are 2 ram. One of the two beads is
slightly collared at the ends.

Discussion
Glass trade beads are the most frequent item found in Historic Native
American sites. The use of glass beads among Native Americans was predominately to embellish clothing, and items carried such as small pouches, parfleches,
quivers, and body ornamentation. The manufacture and distribution of glass
trade beads is well documented. Orchard (1929), Ewers (!957), Woodward
(1965), and Schieber (1994) provide references to the study of glass beads in
the Plains, while Duffield and Jelks (1961), Harris and Harris (1967), Word and
Fox (1975), and Harris et al. (1993) are relevant glass bead studies from Texas
sites.
In a recent analysis of the glass bead assemblage from the Pitchfork
Rockshelter site (48PA42) in northwestern Wyoming, Schieber (1994) provides
convincing evidence of the utility of beads as chronological indicators in historic
Plains Indian burial sites. Pitchfork Rockshelter is a probable early nineteenth
century Crow Indian double burial. The bead assemblage consisted of over 1,000
small tubular or drawn pony beads. There were also 21 monochrome necklace
beads (Schieber 1994:37-38). Detailed measurements and statistical analysis of
all complete beads (n=1034) has provided useful data that can be effectively
drawn on to assess other Plains Indian burials with substantial bead assemblages.
The Canyon Creek burial, with its large bead assemblage, provides an excellent
comparative data set. Even though the level of detail in analysis differs between
Canyon Creek and Pitchfork Rockshelter, it is felt that significant statements can
be developed regarding the temporal span of the Canyon Creek bead assemblage
from Schieber’s (1994) information.
Schieber (1994:38) briefly discusses the "pony bead period" from about
1800 to 1840-1850 as a time when there was a distinct preference among native
groups on the Northern Plains for larger embroidery or pony beads for design
work. These beads are characterized by outside diameters of 3.0-5.0 mm. In the
middle of the nineteenth century, there was a shift in preference for the smaller
seed beads with outside diameters of 2.0 mm or less.
The more significant characteristics of the bead assemblage from Pitchfork
Rockshelter include: a limited color range; larger bead sizes (interior and exterior
diameters); and the presence of large monochrome necklace beads without polychrome bodies. The latter have been observed in Plains Indian burials dating
after 1840-1850 (Schieber 1994:40). There was also a greater recorded variability in the dimensions of the various bead types.
The bead data from Canyon Creek can be compared to these temporal
indicators to establish a general bead chronology for the site. Table 1 presents the
bead data from Canyon Creek for comparison with Pitchfork Rockshelter and
other Historic Indian assemblages.

314

Texas Archeological Society

Schieber (1994) reported that color variation among the small embroidery
or pony beads at Pitchfork Rockshelter was limited to four main bead colors:
white (67 percent), turquoise (21 percent), red with white centers (8 percent), and
black (4 percent). The total number of pony beads in the analyzed sample at
Canyon Creek is 2445 (97.8 percent of the tota! bead sample). Colors represented
among the pony beads from the site include white (73.2 percent), red (14.9
percent), blue (5 percent), red with white centers (4.1 percent), and black (0.2
percent). All of these are drawn beads.
The larger wire-wound beads (n=41) correspond to Schieber’s (1994:38-40)
description of large monochrome necklace beads. This category represents only
1.6 percent of the Canyon Creek bead sample, with white beads predominant.
Ultramarine blue and robin’s egg blue beads were apparently used for contrast.
Large monochrome necklace beads at Pitchfork Rockshelter represented about
2.1 percent of the assemblage.
Conclusions regarding the Canyon Creek beads are similar to those of
Pitchfork Rockshelter, and can be summarized by the following: (1) there is a
predominance of pony bead sizes with exterior diameters between 3.0-5.0 mm;
(2) color variation is limited; (3) there is a range of variability in the sizes of the
pony beads (see Table 1); and (4) large monochrome necklace beads are present
to the exclusion of necklace beads with polychrome bodies. Based on these
general similarities with Pitchfork Rockshelter, the Canyon Creek bead assemblage most probably represents the time period from 1800 to 1840-1850.

German Silver Finger Ring (N=I; Figure 15A)
This ring was manufactured from a single strap of German silver that is 5.6
mm in width and 0.9 mm in thickness. The ends of the ring do not meet, but taper
towards each other. The interior and exterior of the ring are heavily pitted.
Interior diameter is 12.3 mm. The ring was recovered in the proximity of the
beaded pouch.

Copper Rings (N=2)
Two small copper rings (adult finger-size) were found in proximity to the
child’s saddle and stirrup. Unfortunately, these specimens were lost during the
process of conservation, and were not available for description or precise measurement. Available information about the specimens indicates they were about 6
mm wide and bent into a circle about 14 mm in diameter.

Copper or Brass Jingle or Shoe Button (N=I; Figure 15B)
The specimen consists of two parts, a globose or spherical front and a diskshaped back portion. The shank attached to the back is a small oval loop 0.46 cm

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

315

in diameter, and is of a small gauge wire. No decoration is present on the dorsal
surface of the jingle. Dimensions: diameter, 0.98 cm; height, 0.72 cm.
This specimen compares favorably in size and appearance to similar artifacts from the White site (Suhm 1962:91 and Figure lj). Shoe buttons commonly
were used in the nineteenth century by Southern Plains Indians to adorn clothing,
added to the ends of fringes similar to the metal tinklers, tied to the ends of
thongs used to string hairpipe breastplates, or were used as components in
breastplates (Joe S. Hays, personal communication 1994).

Copper Bead (N=I; Figure 15C)
The copper bead was found near the right hand of the burial. The bead
consists of a small rolled rectangle of copper whose edges are not completely
flush, resulting in a 0.28 cm gap. Dimensions: length, 0.73 cm; diameter, 0.58
cm; thickness, 0.15 cm.

Cone-shaped Iron Tinklers (N=48)(Figure 15D)
There were 48 whole and fragmentary iron tinklers associated with the
small beaded pouch or bag. The condition of all specimens is very poor due to
rust. The approximate length of these tinklers is 2 cm. The edges of the tinklers
are flush and not overlapping. One specimen has a type WIb2 bead still articulated with the larger end, suggesting that these beads were strung below the iron
tinklers on the same strands. There are various types of beads still encrnsted onto
the surfaces of some of the tinklers but they display no particular pattern.

Discussion
Iron tinklers frequently tip the fringes of beaded items, especially small
beaded pouches or bags as can be seen in the specimens illustrated in Figure
13 from the Panhandle Plains Historical Museum. All of the eight pouches
examined by the senior author in the Ethnographic Collections at the Panhandle
Plains Historical Museum had tinklers tipping the fringe.

Small Brass or Copper Shank Buttons (N=3)
There were three small brass or copper dome-shaped buttons with stamped
designs on the exterior surface of the dome. Designs on two buttons are characterized by a series of four stamped floral designs (Figure 15E-F). These
designs are single flowers with stem and leaves that encircle the button. One
button has a stamped line encircling the dome (Figure 15G). Beyond this line,
at the edge of the button, are a series of connected diamonds encircling the

316

Texas Archeological Society

B

A
L

0

L
0

D

G

F
0

lcm

Figure 15. A, silver ring; B, brass jingle; C, rolled copper bead; D, iron tinklers that tipped
the fringe on the beaded leather pouch; E-G, copper or brass shank buttons.

Shafer et al. ~ The Canyon Creek Site

317

button. The button edge is rolled or crimped to create a shoulder. Al! designs
were machine or die stamped.
The buttons are about 10.4 mm in diameter and about 3 mm in height.
All shanks are of the same material as the buttons and are of a small gauge
wire. They were not attached to the buttons. The three buttons compare closely
with Olsen’s (1963) type I button. He dates these buttons from 1830 to the
present time.

Copper Wire Bracelets (N=23; Figures 16-17)
There were 23 pulled copper wire bracelets with the individual. Five of
these had designs filed or chisel-cut into the outer surface (Figure 16B). Rollout drawings of each decorated bracelet (identified by lot number) are shown
in Figure 17. One bracelet has a central zone of X’s bordered by a zone of
deep perpendicular notches (41OC13-18). At the ends of this bracelet a diagonal or zig-zag line has been cut into the surface. Another decorated bracelet has a design at one end characterized only by alternating zones of diagonal
cut lines and plain zones (41OC13-11). The design of the third bracelet is
composed of alternating zones of perpendicular cut lines and dihedral flat
hammered zones (41OC13-14); there are two zones of each. The fourth decorated bracelet has one zone of diagonal cut lines at one end (41OC13-10). The
final bracelet has a continuous series of perpendicular filed notches or lines
along the entire length (41OC13-9).
There are only three bracelets that do not exhibit evidence of cold hammering to flatten the round cross-section of the wire; none of these are decorated. The interior diameter of twenty-one complete bracelets ranges from 46.4
mm to 60 mm with an average of 56.5 mm. Wire diameters vary from 2.02 to
3.22 mm (Table 2).

Discussion
Word and Fox (1975) list copper bracelets behind horse gear as the third
most common item of inclusion in Historic Plains Indian burials in Texas. Copper bracelets were standard dress items among the females in the latter half
of the nineteenth century, as can be seen in Will Soule’s 1868-1874 photographs of the Wichita, Comanche, Kiowa, Kiowa Apache, Cheyenne, and other
Southern Plains groups (Belous and Weinstein 1969). The degree to which men
and children were ornamented with these items is difficult to tell, but six were
decorating the hair of the Cogdell site burial (Word and Fox 1975). If bracelets were used as hair ornaments only in males, then the single bracelet about
the head of the Canyon Creek child may provide further confirmation to
Owlsey’s skeletal observations that it was a male. However, the use of copper wire bracelets for the sexual identification of nineteenth century Southern

318

Texas Archeological Society
Table 2.
Dimensions of Copper Bracelets

No.

Flattened

Width

Thickness

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
!2
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
no

3.60-3.70
3.30-3.38
3.25
3.40-3.57
2.90-3.20

3.41-3.48
2.64-2.80
2.66-3.02
2.76-3.13
3.38-3.60

3.45-3.65

3.18-3.33

2.44-2.57
2.84-3.01
2.87-3.01
3.67-3.56
3.51-3.55
2.05-2.38

2.74-2.85
4.03-4.09
2.60-2.81
2.38-2.71
3.13-3.28
2.33-2.53

3.52-3.68
2.57-3.09
3.52-3.68

2.96-3.17
3.10-3.40
3.17-2.96

4.22-4.50
3.69-4.05
4.10-4.48

3.50-3.71
2.82-3.33
3.38-3.75

Diameter

2.02-2.18

2.69-2.88

2.57-2.98

NOTE: Measurements in mm.

Plains Indian burials is certainly inconclusive (Table 3), although the sample
is admittedly small.

DATING THE CANYON CREEK SITE BURIAL
The time of burial was about 1830-1850 based on the associated artifacts.
First, the native-made prairie chicken snare saddle is a style that was in vogue
about the mid-nineteenth century according to Ewers (1980:92), and Berlandier
(1969) documents Comanche use of this saddle type shortly after 1825. Second, the brass buttons are of a style that dates after 1830 (Olsen 1963). Third,
the shell hair pipe beads are also consistent with an 1830s date. Finally, the

Shafer et aL ~ The Canyon Creek Site

319

A

B
Figure 16. A, copper wire bracelets; B, decorated copper wire bracelets.

predominance of 3.0-5.0 mm diameter pony beads with a limited range of
colors, and the absence of seed beads less than 2.0 mm in diameter, dates the
burial from about 1800 to ca. 1840-1850. Given this information, and the fact
that horse nomads were all removed to reservations by 1875, the favored date
range for the Canyon Creek burial is from about 1830 to 1850.

320

Texas Archeological Society

E

_ ¢j
tO

~J

g
0

0

2

o

7

7

!

qp.

o

o

O

J

0

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

321

Table 3.
Distribution of Copper-wire Bracelets in
Southern Plains Burials
Sex/Age

No. of Bracelets

Male?/Child

23

?/Child

70

Female?/Child

260+

Male/Adult

0

Long Hollow
(Taylor 1975)

Male/Adult

0

CogdeU

Male/Adult

6

Female/Adolescent

0

Female/Adult

16

Site/Source
Canyon Creek
(this paper)
White
(Suhm 1962)
W. H. Owens
(Tunnell 1984)
Yellowhouse Canyon
(Newcomb 1955)

(Word and Fox 1975)
Morgan Jones
(Parsons 1967)
W. H. Watson
(Ray and Jelks 1964)

TRIBAL IDENTITY
Despite the tribal diversity among the Indians of the Southern Plains in
the nineteenth century, the equestrian nomadism structured around buffa!o
hunting, raiding, and trading, resulted in the adoption of a common material
culture. Efforts to define tribal identity on the basis of associated artifacts, dates
for the burials, and locations have not been successful (Word and Fox 1975).
One simply cannot be sure on the basis of associated artifacts. Such items as
horse trappings (saddles, bits, and ornamentation), personal items (beads,
buttons, tinklers, pendants, breastplates, copper bracelets, copper and silver
rings, among others), implements (hoes, knives, and mirrors), weapons (guns,
lances, and bows) were all essentially the same since they were derived from
the same Spanish, French, and Anglo- American sources.

322

Texas Archeological Society
The inclusion of saddles as grave items was a known practice among the

Comanche (Yarrow 1881; Jackson 1972). However, the trait was also well
known among other Southern Plains groups, and thus saddle remains do not
provide a reliable means of identifying the tribal affiliation of any particular
burial.
Although specific groups ranged in loosely recognized geographic areas,
these could hardly be defined as territories in the anthropological sense. The
mobility made possible by the horses carried groups of raiders hundreds of miles
from their residential locale (Campbell and Field 1968). Treaties between the
Comanche and Wichita in the 1740s, and between the Comanche, Kiowa, and
Kiowa Apache in 1790, allowed for mixed parties and common sharing of
territorial ranges and resources after that time (Newcomb and Field 1967).
The location of the Canyon Creek site is in the general area of the Kiowa
and Kiowa-Apache hunting range in the early and mid-nineteenth century. According to Wallace and Hoebel (1952:7), this area was also the domain of the
Comanche. Newcomb (1961:Map 3), however, places the Kiowa and Kiowa
Apache in the northern Texas Panhandle in the nineteenth century. Based on the
general lack of success in assigning confident tribal identity to Historic Southern
Plains Indian burials, we feel that it is more fruitful to examine the collective
process of assimilation and change for these cultures using the burial complex as
a means of documenting this process. For that reason, we prefer using the term
equestrian nomads for the archeological remains of these various groups.

SOUTHERN PLAINS EQUESTRIAN NOMAD
ARCHEOLOGICAL COMPLEX
The geographic distribution of the Southern Plains Equestrian Nomad Archeological Complex is based on the known distribution of isolated nineteenth
century burials with equestrian accoutrements (see Figure 1). The range includes
the Southern High Plains and the adjacent prairies to the east.
In comparing the Canyon Creek material assemblage with those documented
from Historic Plains Indian burials (Word and Fox 1975), there is a notable
similarity in the associated material culture. A comparative list is shown in
Figure 18 (adapted after Word and Fox [1975] and Olive [1990]). Specific
groups had ways of expressing their identity through material expression (dress,
beadwork patterns, etc.), but whatever these stylistic ideosycracies were, they
rarely can be identified archeologically.
This Southern Plains Indian material assemblage is clearly structured
around equestrian technology and nomadism. It was on the basis of material
culture that Wissler (1934) and Kroeber (1963) defined the Plains culture area.
The material complex in these Southern Plains burials is distinctive enough
to warrant archeological recognition beyond the point of simply determining
the age of a burial, or attempting to determine its tribal affiliation. As noted

Shafer et al. ~ The Canyon Creek Site

323

previously, the equestrian nomad sites can also be distinguished from those
of the seasonally nomadic horticultural groups such as the Wichita. The archeological assemblages of the latter has already been defined as the Nortefio
Focus (Duffield and Jelks 1961).
The incorporation of the horse and all of its associated material assemblage
had an enormous effect on Plains Indian culture and value systems (Wissler
1914; Mishkin 1940). The horse transformed these cultures from hunter-gatherer
band or tribal farming groups to mobile pastoralists with direct means of acquiring wealth and status.
An adaptation to horse nomadism resulted in profound changes in subsistence practices and economic systems, and radically altered warfare, raiding, trading, marriage patterns, and even the kinship system of these Southern
Plains groups. Matrilineal agriculturally-oriented groups on the periphery of
the Plains became patrilineal or bilateral to accommodate the changes in the
economic system brought about by the introduction of the horse (Mishkin
1940:5-23).
Wealth among the Southern Plains Indians was measured by the numbers of
horses individuals possessed (Mishkin 1940:5-23). Berlandier (1969:44), for
example, stated that the poorest native owned six to eight horses, while the
richest had 30 to 40 or more. One Comanche, Big Fall by Tripping, owned
15,000 horses and 300-400 mules. A person’s acquired status was defined largely
on the number of horses owned; women could own horses also, but they did not
have the same freedom to acquire horses as did men.
Bride price was paid with horses (Wallace and Hoebel 1952:134); debts
were paid with horses (Wallace and Hoebel 1952:226). Horses became a medium
of exchange (Mishkin 1940:22; Wallace and Hoebel 1952:241), and killing
another’s favored horse was considered murder and treated as such (Wallace and
Hoebel 1952:233).
The similarity in material culture was also brought about by the frequent
mixing of the various tribal groups. For example, the Wichita and Comanche
formed an alliance about 1740; the Kiowa and Comanche became close allies
following the marriage of a Kiowa chief, E1 Roncon, to a Comanche woman
(Berlandier 1969:108); the southern Arapaho became closely affiliated with
the southern Cheyenne and Comanche in the early nineteenth century.

TRADE
Trade involving Southern Plains horse nomads has been discussed by Word
and Fox (1975:52-56). Their discussion centers mainly on the trading relationships of the Comanche, Spanish, and New Mexicans, including the Comancheros.
Perhaps the most active traders among the Native Americans of the prairie
woodlands and Plains in the later part of the eighteenth and the first three
quarters of the nineteenth century were Anglo-American traders.

324

Texas Archeological Society

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

325

326

Texas Archeological Society

Mutual trading between nomadic bison hunters and sedentary groups on
both sides of the High Plains, which extended well back into prehistoric times,
helped to set the stage for the evolution of the Southern Plains horse nomad
complex (Baugh 1991; Creel 1991). Mutualism, as defined by Spielmann
(1991:5), is "the exchange of material items or services to the benefit of all
participants in the interaction." Spielmann (1991) goes on to say that such relationships create interdependence among the participating groups with regard to
the goods and services each provides the other.
In the prehistoric Southern Plains, mutualism involved the trade of bison
hides and meat to the Southwestern pueblos in exchange for agricultural products and less important material items such as pottery, cotton cloth, obsidian,
and turquoise (Creel 1991); similar exchanges went eastward via the Plains
Caddoan people. The adaptation to the Southern Plains ecology by Apache
and Comanche groups was much the same with regards to resources used, and
in relationships with the Pueblo people. The differences in extent of trade may
have been defined by the degrees of mobility. Mutual trade between the pueblos
and Apache, Comanche, and Plains groups continued, and indeed may have
increased over that of the prehistoric groups. Apaches, and later Comanches,
became extensively involved in trade first with the pueblos, and then later with
the New Mexican Spanish/Mexican settlements (Levine 1991).
The material culture of these plains Indians was structured around the
horse and designed for mobility. Because the Indians had a beast of burden
larger than the dog, the amounts of material accumulations increased. So too
was their ability to amass items within their enlarged sphere of exchange. Trade
items provided by the Southern Plains Indians were animal hides (bison, deer,
and antelope), smoked and dried meat, tallow, horses, and slaves for the
Spanish. These commodities were highly sought by the Spanish, French, and
Anglo-American traders, and formal trading industries were established by each
to obtain these resources from the Native Americans (Peake 1954).
Hide traders had ventured out from the European settlements in Louisiana
since the early eighteenth century, and trading fairs were established at French
and Spanish settlements. Licensed American traders such as Philip Nolan and
Anthony Glass trespassed into Texas territory in the late eighteenth-early nineteenth century to trade among the Wichita and Comanches for horses and hides
(Flores 1985).
In exchange, the American traders supplied the Indians with: knives,
hardware--wire, files, copper pails, weapons, powder, ammunition, alcohol,
brown sugar, tobacco, hatchets, combs, corn, sword blades (for use as lance tips),
cloth, cinnabar, glass beads, trinkets, and mirrors. These French, Spanish, and
Anglo-American traders worked mostly among the Caddo and Wichita, but
Comanche, Kiowa, and other groups were included in these frontier trading fairs
and expeditions (Berlandier 1969:47-48; Flores 1985:30).
The U. S. Government established approximately 30 trading factories for
the Indians from 1795-1822 (Peake 1954:1-25). Factories in close proximity

Shafer et al. m The Canyon Creek Site

327

to the Southern Plains who furnished licensed traders included: Natchitoches,
Bayou Pierre, Sulphur Fork (all along the Red River), Arkansas Post, and
Spadra Bayou (a!ong the Arkansas), Marias de Cygne in western Missouri,
and Fort Osage, Arrow Rock, and Belle Fontane on the Missouri River (see
Figure 1). These trading factories furnished such items as: guns, whiskey, cloth,
thread, blankets, jewelry, silver, brass rings, wire, plumes and ostrich feathers, rouge, vermilion, looking-glasses, brass kettles and pots, knives, pieces
of copper and brass, tin pans, tin cups, jugs, crockery, glasses, mugs, forks,
spoons, candle molds, bullet molds, bellows, sugar, salt, flour, raisins, tea,
coffee, even spices which were used as otter and beaver bait, drugs, medicines, spectacles (green-glass spectacles mentioned), tobacco, pipes, tomahawk
pipes, wampum of clam and conch shell, broaches, hair pipes, and animal traps,
powder, powder horns, gunflints, shot, and blacksmith and carpenter tools.
Special order guns and canes were manufactured for gifts to ranking Indians
(Peake 1954:45-81).
In addition, a short-lived private trading post, the ruins of which were near
the famous Adobe Walls, was established on the Canadian River in the Texas
Panhandle by the Bent, St. Vrain and Company about 1840 (Baker and Harrison
1986:13-14). Its purpose was to trade with the Comanche, Kiowa, and Apaches,
but it was forced to close due to the hostilities of some of the roving bands. The
U. S. Government continued to supply the Comanche and Kiowa reservation
groups through Indian Agency commissaries established in Indian Territory after
1869 (Crouch 1978).

SUMMARY
The Canyon Creek burial dates to about 1830-1850, and is identified as
belonging to a Southern Plains equestrian nomad culture based on associated
artifacts. The child was identified as a Native American about five years old at
the time of death, and was probably a male. The skeletal analysis showed no
abnormal physical characteristics.
The archeological materials associated with equestrian nomad burials in the
Southern Plains constitute a distinctive archeological complex. The complex
includes an array of items obtained through European interaction that were
utilized as part of the horse pastoralism, and as tools, weapons, embellishments
of material items, as well as dress decorations. This material expression is a
uniquely Native American adaptation despite the dependence on European
sources for the raw materials and manufactured items. Thus far, the archeology
of this complex is derived exclusively from mortuary assemblages. Historic
Plains Indians burials have been recorded intermittently throughout the Southern
High Plains and in western Oklahoma.
Although the sources of material culture and uses of the horse are similar
to that of the prairie Caddoan groups such as the Wichita (and previously defined

328

Texas Archeological Society

archeologically as the Nortefio focus in Texas), there are differences in the
overall material expression resulting from different subsistence/settlement
patterns between the two groups. For example, pottery, tobacco pipes, agricultural products, storage pits, fixed housing, and formal cemeteries with
extended burials--generally oriented east-west with the head to the east (Schmitt
1952)-- are found in the Nortefio settlements (Bell and Bastian 1967; Duffield
and Jelks 1961; Story 1985). These features are either absent or obscure among
the highly mobile nomads. When one considers the larger scale economic system
that involved the nomadic and seasonally sedentary groups on one hand, and
the Europeans (Spanish, French, Mexican, and Anglo-Americans) on the other,
the differences between the horse nomads and the Plains village farmers become
less clear.
The economic foundation for the mutual trade between the Plains nomads
and European traders was established in Late Prehistoric times. The exchange
networks involved the pueblos in the Rio Grande Valley with bison hunters of
the High Plains. Prairie Caddoan groups also became involved prehistorically
with the Plains nomads, and through them, with the pueblo peoples.
The mutual exchange continued throughout the historic period. Formalized"
trade with the Indians became so important to the U. S. Government that considerable capital was invested in building an economic dependency with both the
nomads and village farmers. By the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, this mutualism expanded eastward as the Southern Plains Indians became
the major suppliers of horses, hides, and tallow to the U. S~ Government trading
companies (Peake 1954). The U. S. Government furnished the goods necessary
for the continuation, and eventual overexploitation, of the hide and tallowyielding animals. While generating a market for the trade items, the U. S. and
Mexican trade supplies also were directly responsible for creating a unique
historic Native American Southern Plains culture that is represented
archeologically as the Southern Plains equestrian nomad archeological complex.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Mr. Richard Sell for bringing the find to the
attention of Ellzey and requesting that the burial be documented by professional
archeologists. Mr. Sell also made available the entire site artifact collection to the
authors for conservation and analysis. The artifacts loaned to the senior author
have been returned to the landowner.
We also acknowledge the assistance of Brian Shaffer, David Tucker, and
Greg Mason in the excavation and mapping of the site. Dr. Don Hamilton and
Georgia Fox conserved, stabilized, and restored the artifacts; Dr. Don Hamilton
provided the X-ray of the beaded pouch remnant; Dr. John Jones identified the
woods; and Lynne O’Kelley drafted the figures and artifact drawings. We are
especially grateful to Mr. Rolla Shaller of the Panhandle Plains Historical

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

329

Museum, Texas A&M University at Canyon, for providing photographs of the
beaded pouches. These photographs, together with the X-ray photo provided by
Dr. Hamilton, helped us to confidently identify this artifact. Dr. Joe S. Hays of
the Museum of the Great Plains in Lawton, Oklahoma, provided especially
helpful comments on the manuscript, as well as information on prairie chicken
snare saddle parts in the museum collection and the identification of beaded
bags. Jay C. Blaine provided identification of the iron bridle bit.
Lastly, but certainly not least, we owe special thanks to Anna J. Taylor, who
graciously shared her files and information on unpublished finds of historic
Indian burials in the Southern Plains, particularly the Long Hollow (or Merrell)
and Owens sites. The authors, however, take full responsibility for any error of
fact or interpretation.

REFERENCES CITED
Baker, T. L. and B. R. Harrison
1986

Adobe Walls: The History and Archeology of the 1874 Trading Post. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.

Baugh, T. G.
1991

Ecology and Exchange: The Dynamics of Plains-Pueblo Interaction. In: Farmers, Hunters, and Colonists: Interaction Between the Southwest and the
Southern Plains, edited by K. A. Spielmann, pp. 107-127. University of
Arizona Press, Tucson.

Bell, R. E. and T. Bastian
1967

Preliminary Report Upon Excavations at the Longest Site, Oklahoma. In: A
Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R.
E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 54-118. Final Report to the
National Science Foundation Grant GS-964.

Belous, R. E. and R. A. Weinstein
1969

Will Soule: Indian Photographer at Fort Sill Oklahoma 1869-74. The Ward
Ritchie Press, Los Angeles.

Berlandier, J. L.
1969

The Indians of Texas in 1830. Edited by J. C. Ewers. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.

Campbell, T. N. and W. T. Field
1968

Identification of Comanche Raiding Trails in the Trans-Pecos, Texas. West
Texas Historical Association Year Book 44:128-144.

Creel, D. G.
1991

Bison Hides in Late Prehistoric Exchange in the Southern Plains. American
Antiquity 56( 1):40-49.

330

Texas Archeological Society

Crouch, D. J.
1978

Archaeological Investigations of the Kiowa and Comanche Indian Agency
Commissaries, 34-Cm-232. Contributions of the Museum of the Great Plains,
Number 7. Museum of the Great Plains, Lawton, Oklahoma.

Duffield, L. F. and E. B. Jelks
1961

The Pearson Site: A Historic bMian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Archaeology Series 4. Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas, Austin.

Ewers, J. C.
1957

Hair Pipes in Plains Indian Adornment. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 164, pp. 29-85. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

1980

The Horse in Blackoot Indian Culture. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 159 (reprinted in 1980). Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington D. C.

Flores, D. L.
1985

Journal of an bMian Trader: Anthony Glass and the Texas Trading Frontier,
1790-1810. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Garn, S. M., F. N. Silverman, K. P. Herzog, and C. G. Rohmann
1968

Lines and Bands of Increased Density: Their Implications to Growth and
Development. Medical Radiography and Photography 44:58-88.

Grinnell, G. B.
1923

The Cheyenne hMians, Their History and Ways of Life. Yale University
Press, New Haven.

Haley, J. E.
1935

The Comanchero Trade. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 37 (No. 3):157176.

Harris, R. K. and I. M. Harris
1967

Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks,
and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 129-162. Final Report to the National Science
Foundation, Grant GS-964.

Harris, R. K., I. M. Harris, and J. E. Smith II
1993

Glass Trade Beads and Native Made Beads. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:142-147.

Hester, T. R.
1968

Notes on Some Historic Indian Artifacts Found Near Ozona, Texas. Newsletter of the Midland Archeological Society (June 1968):2-4.

Jackson, J. B.
1972

The Jared Site: A Comanche Burial at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. Plains Anthropologist 17(58):316-325.

Kenner, C. L.
1969

A History of New Mexican-Plains Indian Relations. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.

Shafer et al. -- The Canyon Creek Site

331

Kidd, K. E. and M. A. Kidd
1970

A Classification System for Glass Beads for the Use of Field Archaeologists.
Canadian Historical Sites, Occasional Papers in Archaeology and History
1:45-89.

Kroeber, A.
1963

L.

Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. University of California Press, Berkeley.

Levine, F.
1991

Economic Perspective on the Comanchero Trade. In: Farmers, Hunters, and
Colonists: Interaction Between the Southwest and the Southern Plains, edited
by K. A. Spielmann, pp. 155-170. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

McWilliams, R. K. and W. K. Jones
1976

The Poafbybitty Site: A Late Nineteenth Century Kiowa Burial from Southwestern Oklahoma. Plains Anthropologist 21 (71): 13-28.

Markoe, G. E., R. DeMallie, and R. B. Hassrick (editors)
1986

Vestiges of a Proud Nation: The Ogden B. Read Northern Plains Indian
Collection. Robert Hull Fleming Museum and The University of Nebraska
Press, Lincoln.

Mishkin, B.
1940

Rank and Wapfare Among the Plains Indians. Monographs of the American
Ethnological Society 3. J. J. Augustin Publisher, New York.

Moorman, E. H. and E. B. Jelks
n.d.

Field Journal of Survey of Inspirition Point, Turkey Creek, and De Cordova
Bend Reservoirs, 1953. Unpublished field notes in the Palo Pinto County file,
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas-Austin.

Moorress, C. F. A., E. A. Fanning, and E. E. Hunt, Jr.
1963a

Formation and Resorption of Three Deciduous Teeth in Children. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology 21:205-213.

1963b

Age Variation of Formation Stages for Ten Permanent Teeth. Journal of
Dental Research 42:1490-1502.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1955

An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 26:155-189.

1961

The Indians of Texas From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas
Press, Austin.

Newcomb, W. W. and W. T. Field
1967

An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the Wichita Indians in the Southern Plains.
In: A Pilot Study of Wichita bMian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled
by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 240-331. Final Report to
the National Science Foundation Grant GS-964.

332

Texas Archeological Society

Olive, B. W.
1990

Protohistoric Burial Practices in the Panhandle of Texas. Unpublished manuscript on file at the Center for Environmental Archaeology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.

Olsen, S. J.
1963

Dating Early Plain Buttons by Their Form. American Antiquity 28:551-554.

Orchard, W. C.
1929

Beads and Beadwork of the American Indians. Museum of American Indian,
Heye Foundation, New York.

Peake, O. B.
1954

A History of the United States Indian Factory System: 1795-1822. Sage
Books, Denver.

Parsons, M. L.
Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens Counties, Texas, During

1967

the Winter, 1966-67. Archeological Program Report 7. State Building Commission, Austin.
Pearson, C. E.
The Rabbit Hill Site:A Late Nineteenth Century Southern Plains Indian
Burial at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological

1978

Society 27:171-177.
Ray, C. N. and E. B. Jelks
1964

The W. H.Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 35:127-141.

Scheiber, L. L.
1994

A Probable Early Nineteenth Century Crow Burial: The Pitchfork Rockshelter
Reexamined. Plains Anthropologist 39( 147):37-52.

Schmitt, K.
1952

Wichita Death Customs. Chronicles of Oklahoma 30(2):200-206.

Spietmann, K.A.
1991

Interaction Among Nonhierarchical Societies. In: Farmers, Hunters, and
Colonists: Interaction Between the Southwest and the Southern Plains, edited
by K. A. Spielmann, pp. 1-17. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Story, D. A.
1985

The Walton Site: An Historic Burial in McLennan County, Texas. Central
Texas Archeologist 10:66-96.

Suhm, D. A.
1962

The White Site: An Historic Burial in Yoakum County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 32:85-119.

Taylor, A. J.
1975

A Report on the Long Hollow Burial Site. Unpublished manuscript on file
with the author.

Shafer et aL -- The Canyon Creek Site

333

Tunnell, C. D.
1984

Field Notes: Historic Indian Burial in Floyd County, Texas. Copy on file in
the Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.

Ubelaker, D.H.
1978

Human Skeletal Remains: Excavation, Analysis, Interpretation. Taraxcum,
Washington D.C.

Wallace, E. and E. A. Hoebel
1952

The Comanches: Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.

Willey, P. S. and J. T. Hughes
1978

The Sandstone Ledger Site. In: Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir, edited by
J. T. Hughes and P. S. Willey, pp. 254-266. Archeological Survey Report 24.
Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Austin.

Willey, P. S., B. R. Harrison, and J. T. Hughes
1978

The Sand Pit Site. In: Archeology at Mackenzie Reservoir, edited by J. T.
Hughes and P. S. Willey, pp. 233-253. Archeological Survey Report 24.
Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Austin.

Wissler, C.
1914

The Influence of the Horse in the Development of Plains Culture. American
Anthropologist 16( 1): 1-25.

1934

North American Indians of the Plains. Third Edition. Handbook Series No. 1.
American Museum of Natural History, New York

Woodward, A.
1965

Indian Trade Goods. Oregon Archaeologica! Society Publication No. 2.

Woolsey, A. M.
1936

Reconnaissance along the Brazos River in Palo Pinto and Young Counties,
June 9 to June 12, t936. Unpublished field notes in the Palo Pinto County
File, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas-Austin.

Word, J. H. and A. Fox
1975

The Cogdelt Burial Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 46:1-63.

Yarrow, H. C.
1881

A Further Contribution to the Study of the Mortuary Customs of the North
American Indians. In: First Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology for the
Smithsonian Institution, 1879-1880, pp. 87-203. Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D. C.

