The Dillard Site: A Late Prehistoric Plains Village
Site In Cooke County, Texas
Ernest R. Martin

ABSTRACT
Archeological investigations were conducted in 1985 in Cooke County, Texas,
on an alluvial terrace where a prehistoric site had been discovered on the north
side of Fish Creek near its junction with the Red River. The site was occupied
between ca. A.D. 1100 and 1450 (the Late Prehistoric I and II periods). The
village site was occupied by peoples who were possibly the precursors of
some historic Wichita bands. Village occupants took part in a number of
activities: hunting, gathering, fishing, horticulture, food storage, pottery manufacture, housing construction, basket-making, clothing production, making and
maintaining weapons and tools, and trading with other villages.

INTRODUCTION
This article concerns archeological investigations at the Dillard site
(41CO174), named after one of the landowners, Mr. Dutch Dillard. The site was
discovered in 1985 on an alluvial terrace where Fish Creek once had emptied into
Red River. Today’s river channel lies 0.8 km east of the site. Another creek,
Bearhead, also joins Fish Creek near this point and borders the west side of the
site (Figure 1). The site is some 20 km northwest of Gainesville, Texas, and 2.4
km downstream from the Hubert H. Moss Lake dam. The site is accessible only
via a private road through the Dillard-Monroe Ranch.
The labor involved in the investigation of this site was accomplished by the
author, an avocational archeologist, with the help of friends, family, and other
interested volunteers. Excavations at the Dillard site were undertaken to primarily recover information about, and also corroborate the existing data concerning,
Late Prehistoric cultures in the Red River valley of North Central Texas.

NATURAL AND CULTURAL BACKGROUND
Regional Environment
The Dillard Site is on an alluvial terrace within a broad forested valley
formed by the erosion of the Fish-Bearhead creek systems and the channel of
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 62 (I994 for 1991)

106

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Top: Aeria! view of the Dillard Site, looking south. Bearhead Creek is on the
right, Fish Creek on the far side, and the former Red River channel is on the left; Bottom:
A view of the site taken near the junction of Bearhead and Fish creeks.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

107

Red River. Located in extreme North Central Texas, the site lies midway between
the Eastern Cross Timbers and the Grand Prairie geographical regions. The
unique micro-environmental setting of the Red River crosscuts these two larger
geographic units: heavily wooded limestone hills and bluffs next to flat, sandy
terraces at the river bends and where major streams enter.
The alluvial terrace was probably formed at the time of one of the three
terrace-cutting episodes that have occurred regionally during the last 9000 years.
The alluvial downcutting may have resulted from great amounts of runoff created by abundant local precipitation as well as spring snowmelt from the northwestern tributaries of Red River (Gilbert 1980:15).
The general shape of the deposits of deep sands above the terrace shelf
suggests subsequent localized deposition by floods. During these later flood
episodes, the river current by the site moved away from a high rocky bluff 300
m north of where the tributary waters of the Fish-Bearhead system enter the Red
River. These backwater conditions resulted in the deposition of great amounts
of fine river sand on the terrace, forming a high ridge along its length, ending
with a promontory on the southeast end overlooking Fish Creek.
The soil type at the south end of the site is the Teller series, a deep welldrained loamy soil formed in alluvial deposits. As one approaches the hill on
the north end of the site, the soil changes to the Venus series. This is also a
deep, well-drained loamy soil, but it formed through erosion of thick beds of
calcareous loamy sediments. The soil along the banks of Fish and Bearhead
creeks is Frio clay loam, common to low terraces and floodplains in this area
(USDA Soil Conservation Service 1979:60-62).
The surrounding bluffs are comprised of three primary geological layers.
The lowest is a narrow band of Cretaceous (Comanche series) sandstone. This
is overlaid with a narrow band of Goodland limestone, and the highest part of
the bluffs is capped with a harder layer of Kiamichi limestone (Lorrain 1969:5).
The valleys are wooded in most areas with deciduous oaks and hickories, walnut, and pecan, especially near the streams and hillsides. The upland plateau is
sparsely wooded, but covered with many native grasses that once were common on the tall grass prairies of North Central Texas.
The local climate has probably not changed much over the past 800 years
(see Collins and Bousman 1993). Current average low temperatures in January
are 32° F, while the average high temperature for July is 96° (Texas Almanac
1988). The annual rainfall averages about 110 cm (Gainesville Daily Register,
April 1992). This environment would lend itself very well then, as it does now,
to dry land farming.
The variety and population of the fauna in the area is not as great as it was
in the past when the site was occupied, but most of the native animals are still
present. Animals indigenous in former times, but not present today inc!’:de:
American bison, pronghorn antelope, mountain lion, gray wolf, black bear, and
the wapiti or elk (Kawecki and Wyckoff 1984:13). Among the animals still
observed today are: whitetail deer, coyote, gray fox, opossum, skunk, mink,

108

Texas Archeological Society

bobcat, beaver, ringtail cat, rodents (fox squirrel, cottontail rabbit, jackrabbit,
ground squirrel, cotton rat, harvest mouse, white-footed mouse, mole, shrew),
western box turtle, snakes (bullsnake, western diamondback rattlesnake, glossy
snake, copperhead, cottonmouth water moccasin, diamondback watersnake, king
snake, blue racer, chicken snake), bull frog, eastern fence lizard, glass lizard,
salamanders, turkey, quail, and a host of migratory wild fowl.
The waters of both the creeks and rivers contained native fishes, reptiles,
mollusks, and aquatic plants. Some fauna likely available during the Late Prehistoric period would include: alligator gar, catfish, shad, drum, buffalo, white
bass, bream, sunfish, rock bass, paddlefish, alligator snapping turtle, soft shelled
turtle, red eared turtle, freshwater mussels, and crayfish.
Major flora in the surrounding forests comprise post oak, pin oak, burr oak,
red oak, blackjack oak, bois d’arc (osage orange), cottonwood, pecan, black
walnut, hickory, hackberry, hawthorne, ash, juniper, elm, willow, poplar, sycamore, and salt cedar. Among the flora found at water’s edge, or within the
water, are cattails, arrowroot, duckweed, watercress, and wild grapes.

ARCHEOLOGICALBACKGROUND
It has long been established that the Red River valley of North Central
Texas was periodically occupied by prehistoric hunters and gatherers for many
thousands of years. By about A.D. 700, farming groups began to settle in parts
of the region, especially along the Red River (e.g., Brooks 1994a).
It was once a common notion that the development of farming societies in
the Southern Plains was a product of new influences created when migrants from
the eastern woodlands (i.e., East Texas) brought new technologies with them,
forcing the existing inhabitants to move elsewhere. Current thinking suggests
that settlement-subsistence changes were due more to an exchange of ideas with
adjacent sedentary groups, ultimately resulting in population increases and social organizational changes (Story 1981:146). In either case, these cultural
changes directly affected the lifestyles of prehistoric inhabitants in the North
Central Texas region. Prikryl (1990:77) refers to this as the Late Prehistoric I
period, and it lasted from about A.D. 700 to A.D. 1250. During this time, permanent and semi-permanent villages, both large and small, began to appear near
springs and on large stream terraces in all major fiver valleys in North Texas
and southern Oklahoma. In Cooke County, the sites concentrate on the Cross
Timbers-Grand Prairie boundary in the Elm Fork drainage, and on terraces and
stream valleys near the Red River.
The bow and arrow technology was introduced in the Late Prehistoric I
period. It was a great improvement in weaponry over the dart-atlatl. Arrows had
an improved accuracy and longer range than darts, thus increasing the hunter’s
success. Bow and arrow utilization spawned new hunting techniques since an
arrow, unlike a dart, could be accurately launched from a crouched, hidden

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

109

position, or from a tree, allowing the hunter to get a closer shot at his target.
Such an improvement increased the chances of success when game was plentiful, and thereby decreased the need to move often to obtain enough meat for
each community. The appearance of this new technology, coinciding with a resurgence of bison populations on the Southern Plains, significantly increased
the available food supply. As a testament to their hunting successes, bison bones
began to appear with greater frequency from village sites that were inhabited
during this period (Lynott 1979).
Large herds of bison had been rare on the Southern Plains for several centuries, but around A.D. 1 I00, they began to appear in greater numbers (Hughes
1988:7). It has been proposed that bison herds pushed southward into Texas
three times during the Holocene, between 10,000 to 6000 or 5000 B.C., between
2500 B.C. and A.D. 500, and between A.D. 1200 or A.D. 1300 to 1500 (Dillehay
1974). Bison herds, which required large amounts of fresh water to both drink
and wallow in, would be more commonly found near the vicinity of the large
streams and rivers during the drier months, when only these larger streams held
sufficient water. Bison were more likely hunted and killed at ford areas when
they sought out these streams, instead of by stalking the herds on the open tallgrass prairie and plains.
The introduction of horticulture probably had the greatest influence upon
village populations and settlement locations than did any other major cultural
changes that occurred during this period (Prikryl 1987:173). Farming, supplemented by more efficient hunting, supplied a larger population with not only its
immediate needs, but produced enough surplus to allow the populace to place
less emphasis on a seasonal-round subsistence pattern. Although hunting and
gathering forays continued throughout the Late Prehistoric periods, the village
remained as a permanent base camp and was unlikely to have been completely
abandoned at any time (Lorrain 1969).
The technology involved in the manufacturing of ceramics may have been
introduced to North Texas from two different areas. These areas included East
Texas, where pottery crafting began about A.D. 200-300 (Story 1981), and the
Plains, where crafting techniques were learned from Southwestern potters. Pottery vessels, being fragile and easily broken, were not as practical for highly
nomadic cultures, and evidence for their manufacture and use is typically observed when a population became somewhat sedentary. This is one explanation
for its increased use in agricultural societies on the Southern Plains, although
the technology for pottery manufacture might have been available much earlier.
The raw materials necessary for the production of pottery, red clay and pulverized mussel shells, were abundant along the Red River and its tributaries.
The establishment of villages on the banks of the large navigable streams
increased the chances of contact with other contemporary Late Prehistoric cultures, and opportunities for trade (Brooks 1994a). Trade items originating considerable distances from North Texas have been found associated with Late
Prehistoric cultures in the Red River valley, including: stone tool types and raw

110

Texas Archeological Society

materials, Olivella and conch shell, and pottery from the Southwest and the
Caddoan Area. The Red River was analogous to a natural highway that could
be followed by pedestrians or navigated by dugout canoe (Albert 1984:1).
This indigenous population evolved an agriculturally-based Plains Village
lifestyle, but increased their dependence upon bison hunting during the Late
Prehistoric II period (Prikryl 1990), or what Krieger (1946) defined as the
Henrietta Focus. These people may have been the forebears of some of those
more northern groups of the Nortefio Focus in North Texas, and along with the
descendents of the nearby Washita River phase, are possibly part of the ancestral
stock of the Wichita Indians (Duffield and Jelks 1961:73-75; Blaine 1990).
These innovations were well entrenched in Plains Village groups in North
Central Texas. Sites of this period, from ca. A.D. 1250-1700 (Prikryl 1990:80),
have tool assemblages that are characteristic of the Southern Plains Village
cultural tradition (e.g., Brooks 1994a).
The artifact assemblage and recognizable features that were found at the
Harrell Site, the type site for the Henrietta Focus, includes: arrowpoints of
Fresno, Washita, Alba, Scallorn, Cliffton, and Young types; drills; scrapers (end,
side, and oval); gravers; gouges; worked flakes of obsidian, quartz crystal, and
Alibates dolomite; cores; sandstone abraders, manos, and metates; elbow pipes
and fragments; bone awls and fish hooks; deer ulna and antler flaking tools; hoe
blades of bison scapulae; unperforated shell hoes; Nocona Plain shell-tempered
pottery; trade sherds from southeast New Mexico and the Frankston phase of
East Texas; hammerstones; bifaces; four beveleff and two beveled knives; spokeshaves; tubular bone beads; Olivella beads; fossil crinoid beads; mussel shell
beads; and pottery beads (Krieger 1946:103-119). Other important traits noted by
Krieger (1946) were post molds on the site indicating permanent house structures, the placement of burials in the village midden, the absence of burial goods,
the appearance of multiple burials with missing body parts, and a wide range in
burial depths.
The artifact assemblage from sites labeled Henrietta Focus in the central
Red River valley has characteristics of both the Southern Plains and eastern
Caddo cultures. Artifacts recovered from the Dillard site and other Lake Texoma
area sites that may have been traded or exchanged with Caddoan peoples are:
deer jaw sickles, hide grainers, pottery, shell beads, Reeds Spring chert, novaculite, copper, and long-stemmed pottery pipes. Although these items only occasionally occur in Late Prehistoric II period sites in the upper Brazos and Trinity
River drainages, they occur quite frequently in the middle Red River valley (Bell
1980; Albert 1984).
While most Late Prehistoric II village sites seem to be small, some sites
appear to have covered several acres; most sites range between one and five acres
in size (Krieger 1946:138). While the villages were the focal points of community life, nearby seasonal campsites and farmsteads were regularly maintained
for the purposes of farming, hunting, and gathering. These associated sites were
probably occupied only during the warmer times of the year. They were also

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

111

more common in the earlier Late Prehistoric I period (e.g., Lorrain 1969:106).
Five such suspected satellite sites have been discovered by surface surveys and
test sondages surrounding the Dillard site.
Although historic Wichita villages were of similar size, they sometimes
chose favored sites as gathering places, usually in the fall, where the people
could have the opportunity to visit, trade, and hunt bison. The villages at these
times could become quite large, extending more than a km along a river or
stream bank (Smith 1959:526). This is a practice that might have commenced in
the Late Prehistoric II period, because such activity would have allowed the
villagers to have more regular encounters with other Plains Village groups,
especially after the large bison herds appeared on the Southern Plains.

SITE SETTING AND DISCOVERY
No major archeological site had been previously reported near the immediate confluence of Fish Creek in northwestern Cooke County, Texas, and the Red
River. One large site and some smaller associated sites were discovered and
excavated upstream on Fish Creek in 1966 by Southern Methodist University
before the completion of the Moss Lake dam (Lorrain 1969). The largest, the
Chickenhouse site (X41CO6), was thought to be a permanent base village, while
the smaller surrounding sites were used seasonally as camps for farming, hunting, and gathering. It was concluded that the occupation of the sites occurred
around A.D. 850-1000.
Radiocarbon dates were obtained on charred corncobs from the
Chickenhouse site. These dates were A.D. 1280, 1360, 1470, and 1630. These
dates were considered too young for the anticipated age of this site (Lorrain
1969:111), and that the process of fractionation in carbon isotopes, which occurs
in corn, was responsible for the false later dates. It is currently thought that
radiocarbon dates from corn remains that have not been corrected for fractionation, consistently yield dates about 200 years too young (see Bowman 1990:2021). This entire site, however, had been a farmhouse and chickenhouse complex
for the previous 75 to 80 years. The increased amount of organic debris deposition, the application of fertilizers, and the regular tilling of the garden located
there, may have increased a contaminant’s filtration into the soil, thus affecting
the tested sample while in situ (Joukowsky 1980:448).
The Chickenhouse site is 5.6 km upstream from the confluence of Fish
Creek with the Red River. I suspected that if there was suitable terrain farther
downstream, a similar significant Late Prehistoric site should be discovered
there. The most probable location of such a site was thought to be near where
Fish Creek merged with the Red River.
In May 1984, a terrace bench at the present confluence of Fish Creek and
Red River was surveyed, but the area was too low in the floodplain to be
suitable for sustained human occupation. The highest level of this terrace was

112

Texas Archeological Society

5.4 m above the present normal level of Red River. Fish Creek enters the river
from the north at an acute angle with the west bank (Figure 2). The land
between the creek and the river is a floodplain covered by small salt cedars
interspersed with occasional groups of larger hardwood trees. The elevation of
this area ranges between 2.4 to 3.6 m above the river level, and the terrain is
prone to regular flooding. A decision was made to survey an area about 2.5 km
upstream on Fish Creek, where a higher, flat, contour elevation was observed
on a topographical map.

/
/

4100174

MOSS

Scale in Feet
0

2000

4000

Figure 2. General Location of the Dillard Site (41CO 174).

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

113

On May 31, 1985, after obtaining permission from the landowner, the site
was located within an hour. While driving through a pasture on the north side
of Fish Creek, a high, gently sloping alluvial terrace was observed running northsouth on the eastern side of the pasture. The south end dropped off sharply about
60 m from Fish Creek. Another stream, Bearhead Creek, entered Fish Creek
about 90 m southwest of the terrace. Later, after interviewing the landowner, it
was learned that the previous owner had recounted that the river channel had
run along the eastern edge of this terrace until around the 1890s, when increased
soil erosion and resultant silting from area farming had presumably changed the
river’s course. Fish Creek now follows the west bank of the former river channel to its junction with the present river channel (see Figure 2).
The total area of the site is approximately five acres, of which about 50
percent has been previously cultivated. The southern end of the site was relatively undisturbed from cultivation. A small roadcut had been made running
laterally away from the site on its eastern edge. This allowed vehicles to drive
down from the terrace to the lower river bottoms. Most of the cultural deposits
at the Dillard site had been covered with 30 to 35 cm of sterile sand that was
either blown onto the site from the riverbank during dry periods, or deposited
during post-occupation floods (see below). Although a part of the site had been
under cultivation at one time, the plow zone rarely reached the occupied strata.
In the unplowed areas of the site, original surface features--such as depressions
and rises that were possibly formed during the prehistoric occupation--are still
evident on the present surface.
Confirmation that the site had a prehistoric occupation was accomplished
by excavating a small test pit on one of the higher points of the terrace. Lithic
debris, mussel shell, charcoal, bone fragments, and one pottery sherd were recovered. Plans were made to begin excavation in the fall of 1985 after site
mapping and surveys were completed.
The elevation of the site is 670.1 feet above mean sea level. This elevation places the site approximately 9 m above the normal present day level of
Red River, making this an area well above normal flooding. However, a
record flood did occur while the site was being excavated in June 1987. The
water then reached an elevation of 675 feet, and was the greatest Red River
flood in this area.

GOALS AND PURPOSE

The limited archeological investigations previously completed on sites
along this part of Red River, although well done, have not provided a sufficient
sample of material culture remains and features to be truly representative of the
cultures that left them. Although a good general knowledge of the Late Prehistoric cultures in North Texas and southern Oklahoma has been attained, there
are many details about these groups that have not been learned. While perhaps

114

Texas Archeological Society

not as culturally complex as the Caddoan cultures of East Texas, Southern Plains
villagers represented an era of high cultural achievement for the prehistoric
Native Americans who lived in what is now Cooke County, Texas.
The Dillard site (41CO174) was apparently occupied continuously for a
period perhaps as long as 400 years, but during only the Late Prehistoric I and
II periods. This provides an excellent opportunity for comparative investigations
of the nature of Late Prehistoric artifact assemblage changes through time along
this part of Red River, and in this relatively unknown Southern Plains locale.
The site is also unusually well preserved. The abundance of charcoal and other
available carbon sources at this site provided good samples for radiocarbon
dating. The site had no subsequent occupation after the Late Prehistoric II period, and the samples were expected to be free of organic contamination. Bone
and plant remains were also preserved in quantity.
Several research problems concerning the Late Prehistoric period in North
Central Texas were of interest in our investigations of the Dillard site. When
beginning the excavations, it was hoped that new information could be obtained
that would shed some light on the following questions:
o What were the social relationships between neighboring contemporary
Plains village groups? By using archeological data obtained from previous
excavations on Fish Creek (Lorrain 1969), periods of occupation of the two
sites could be compared in several ways. Were these sites utilized before,
during, or after the occupation of the Dillard site? If the periods of occupation did overlap, were there exchanges of food, raw materials, or finished
items between the villages at this time?

¯ Are there discernible differences in the artifact assemblages between the
Dillard site and other adjacent Late Prehistoric sites (whether in the Red
River valley or not), and if such differences exist, what do they imply about
cultural affiliation and variations in lifestyles?
¯ What types of raw materials and finished items were available through trade
to the people of the Late Prehistoric era in this area? Where were the
original sources of these trade items, and by what means did they arrive?
Increased contact with other groups through trade likely would increase the
chances of spreading new concepts from different cultural foci, and such
cultural exchanges may have significantly affected the lifestyles of Late
Prehistoric Plains Villagers during the time they changed from a semisedentary to a sedentary society.
¯ What was the nature of the burial customs that the Late Prehistoric groups
of this area employed in their culture? Insights regarding the ceremonial
practices of these people would be obtained with these investigations.
Grave offerings are rare from burial sites in North Texas and southern
Oklahoma, and when burial offerings are present, shell beads are the predominate items.

Marlin m The Dillard Site

115

The Dillard site contains important archeological data. An obligation was
recognized when work began to excavate and preserve on record a small part of
this site before indiscriminate relic collecting, future agricultural operations, or
possible gravel mining ventures damaged or destroyed it. By revealing the
wealth of new, and significant, archeological information that can be recovered
from this site, it is hoped that this will create a heightened awareness of its need
for preservation for future generations to appreciate and learn from.

METHODS
Excavations at Dillard began on September 15, 1985. Two permanent datum
points were established and a contour elevation map was plotted (Figure 3).
Eleven sondages were excavated to roughly define the extent of the site, and to
assess the density of cultural materials. These sondages were placed at wide
intervals along the length of the terrace ridge, as well as near the bluff of the
former river channel. Occupational debris extended 202.5 m along the terrace,
but was concentrated mostly at the south end nearest the junction of Fish Creek
with the old river channel.
The sterile orange-colored overburden was well defined, and was removed
by hand using a sharpshooter. A square-ended shovel was employed to level unit
floors at the top of the occupied zone, after which the soil was removed in 2-inch
(5 cm) layers using a trowel or shovel. The soil was damp in the winter, which
aided the identification of soil and cultural features. The dampness allowed the
soil to be easily scraped, and it usually screened easily. The excavation was
unencumbered by large tree roots or rocks. All dirt removed from the excavation
was screened through either a 1/4-inch or 1/8-inch mesh screen. The screened
soil was bagged and labeled by unit and level, then transported to the backyard
lab and washed on 1/8-inch screens. The debris was cleaned of sticks and roots,
and then dried and bagged for sorting.
Due to the depth of the cultural zone, 1.5 x 1.5 m units were used to allow
for more working room within an individual unit. The depth of the excavations in
the areas of the site used for dwellings varied between 0.95 and 1.05 m in depth.
Cultural features and larger artifacts were plotted on overview maps; lithic
flakes, small fragments of charcoal, small potsherds, hearthstone fragments less
than 3 cm in size, and small bone fragments recovered through screening, were
not plotted. However, all of the unplotted items were recovered by unit and level.
The plan for subsequent block excavations was based upon information
gathered from the sondages. The accumulation of village debris increased from
the center of the terrace to the southeast edge of the site. Based upon this
information, it was decided to locate the major excavation on the end of the
terrace as it began to slope downward toward the old river’s edge. If there was a
deep midden accumulation here as indicated by test sondages, a much larger
sampling of artifacts could be obtained that would be best representative of the

116

Texas Archeological Society

i
\
,\
g

Contour Interval, One Foot
i

i
|00

PEET

[] Sondage one~
[] Sterile Z
Occupation Zone

8

Figure 3. Initial excavations at the Dillard site.

lifestyles of these Plains Villagers, as opposed to a more restricted sample that
could be gathered from a similar-sized excavation within the village proper.
Photographs of the floors of each excavated unit were made, and a mosaic
of the entire block showing structural remains, etc., was assembled for future
reference. Photographs of each block’s stratigraphy, selected objects in situ, and
the general progress of the excavations, were also taken.

Martin n The Dillard Site

117

STRATIGRAPHY
The sterile overburden covering the site ranged from 30-37 cm over most of
the site area, with the exception of one area in Block 3 where it was almost
nonexistent. The darkly stained soil of the occupation zone varied between 60
and 65 cm in thickness.
The overburden covering the site was mainly deposited during the dry
summers, when prevailing south winds whipped loose sand from the river’s
edge. Additional deposition of this sterile layer came in the form of silt from
post-occupation floods. In either case, the sand settled mainly on the more
protected lower slopes on the ridge’s northern side, and tended to settle less on
the more exposed southern areas and prominent points.
No identifiable stratification could be discerned in the occupied zone except
for a few widely scattered lenses of ash and lightly colored sand. Cultural
features such as post molds and hearths were abundant. Clearly, the occupation
zone had been disturbed by cultural activities, and in many places the primary
deposits had been disrupted by house and hearth construction in addition to
burial and refuse deposition. To keep records of vertical context, three 15 cm
thick arbitrary stratigraphic levels were assigned, beginning at the top of the
occupied zone, with level four including all materials more than 45 cm below the
top of Level 1.
The soil present in the occupation zone at the Dillard site consisted of fine,
moist sand infused with small bits of red clay and mussel shell, along with an
abundance of charcoal, ashes, and organic humus. The normally tan-orange color
of the sand was changed into a dark brown, almost black color by anthropogenic
means, and in many areas had a slight gummy texture when damp.

FEATURES
Block 1
The first block was a linear trench measuring 1.5 x 9 m (Units F-1 to K-1).
The block ran in a northwest/southeast direction to follow the orientation of the
terrace ridge on the northeast edge of the site (Figure 4). The excavation of this
block indicated that the area had been used for repeated housing; that is, an area
where dwellings or other buildings were constructed, torn down, and rebuilt over
a period of many years of continuous occupation. Scattered post molds were
identified throughout this block, but they had no definable pattern to suggest the
types or sizes of former structures (Figure 5). Expansion of this block would
probably yield more information about the types and sizes of the structures, but
the limited work force prohibited doing so at the time.
The post molds in Block 1 ranged in size from 5 to 20 cm in diameter. There
was an abundance of fragmentary, burned hearthstones throughout the block,

118

Texas Archeological Society

@

Datum B

¯ 0..
3 meters
I 0 feet

Block I.
.,%.

m
.

¯

Block 3.

\
Figure 4. The relationship of the three blocks to each other.

with a noticeable concentration of larger fragments recovered from unit H-1 (see
Figure 5). These pieces were accompanied by thousands of charcoal fragments
and ash mixed with the soil. This suspected hearth area was next to one of the
larger post molds, suggesting that it might have been near the center of a house.
Hundreds of fragments of animal bones were found scattered throughout
the block. Tools made from animal bone were also recovered here, particularly

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

t 19

f

1.5 m (5 feet)

Post holes
Hearthstone

Projectile po irLt
Bone fragment
Bead

Flint tool
Charcoal
Pottery sherd
Shell fragment
Flint nodule
Bone tool

Figure 5. Block 1: Overview of structural remains.

in unit J-1 where two bone awls, two deer jaw sickles, and two deer ulna flaking tools were found (Figure 6). Four arrowpoints and an unusually large amount
of lithic debris were also recovered from this grid, indicating that this was once
an often-used work area. The broken bones of bison and deer were the most
frequent faunal remains from Block 1. Fish, mussels, turtle, turkey, and rodent
bones comprised the balance of the identifiable animal remains. Large numbers

120

Texas Archeological Society

of small mammal and bird bones were also recovered from the block. Plant
remains from Block 1 included charred walnut, hickory, pecan, and hackberry
shells.

Figure 6. Top: The zone of occupation in Block 1 contrasted with the lighter colored
overburden; Bottom: Deer jaw sickle in situ, Level 3, Unit J-l, Block 1.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

121

An unusual cluster of fossilized oyster shells was recovered from a unit in
Level 4 of Block 1. Their use, or significance, if any, has not been determined,
but they are not naturally found in the sandy alluvium of the site. Their likely
origin is the limestone deposits of the surrounding bluffs or the limestone gravel
of Bearhead Creek.

Block 2
The excavation of Block 2 took place during the second season of work
at the Dillard site, and began on September 26, 1986. This block was located
some 4.5 m southwest of Block 1 on the opposite side of the terrace ridge
(see Figure 4).
The excavation of this block had two purposes. One was to explore that
part of the site nearer the point of the terrace, where cultural materials were
shown by sondages to be more concentrated. The other goal was to uncover a
wider area in an attempt to locate and delineate any structural remains that would
be overlooked in trench excavations. Six 1.5 x 1.5 m units were eventually
excavated in Block 2. More units were planned, but an interruption caused by a
June 1987 flood damaged equipment and grid walls, while depositing a foot of
muck in the floor of the excavation, delayed further work at the site for three
months. All damage had to be repaired before the excavation of the block could
continue.
In Units E-5, E-6, and F-6, a hearth was uncovered. Other large stones were
scattered nearby (Figure 7). Small bits of charcoal were found in and around the
stones, and the stones themselves had the characteristic gray color of burned
limestone. One of the hearthstones was the broken half of a mano.
The dark occupation zone of Block 2 became thicker and sloped upward
towards the present ground surface as the excavation approached the southwest
end of the terrace. This thicker layer of cultural debris is characteristic of a
midden or communal refuse heap. Cultural materials such as animal bones and
lithic debris, pottery sherds, and hearthstones increased in numbers as the excavations progressed in this part of Block 2. The numerous post molds uncovered
in all of the levels of Block 2 indicate that throughout the occupation of the
site, several structures had been erected here, but only one possible house pattern could be identified. The intermittent dumping of trash at the end of the
terrace may have begun when these first houses were constructed, and continued until the site was abandoned.
The occupation zone in Block 2 was similar in depth to that of Block 1, but
generally the sterile overburden was shallower: the overburden ranged from 2528 cm in depth. The shallowest overburden was present along the southeast edge
of the block.
Block 2, like Block 1, also was an area where houses had been constructed
successively over many years. Because of the limited area of the excavation, no

122

Texas Archeological Society

complete outline of post molds was identified consistent with the size of a
house’s circumference (Figure 8). Although not entirely exposed, the linear
curvature of some post molds suggests a structure with a diameter of
approximately 6.6-7.5 m. A rock hearth (Feature 1) was located near the center
of the post pattern (see Figure 7).

~nest Mar~in

Figure 7. Block 2 plan map showing features, postmolds, and artifact locations.

An unusual soil feature was observed in Unit D-5: a long, dark, curved stain
2 x 87 cm in size. It is most likely the burned remains of a narrow piece of
wood from the house superstructure, or alternatively a debris-filled animal
burrow.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

123

Figure 8. Top: Block 2 postmolds, view to the southwest; Bottom: postmolds in the wall
and floor of Unit D-6.

The cultural zone in Block 2 was generally thicker than that found in Block
1:65-70 cm. Animal bone fragments, charcoal, and small burned hearthstone
fragments were greater in Block 2 than Block 1. Bison and deer again dominate

124

Texas Archeological Society

the identifiable faunal remains. In the two lower levels, deer bones appear almost
exclusively, with bison bones appearing more often in the higher, younger, levels
of the cultural deposit. Other identifiable faunal remains included turtle, fish,
mussel, turkey, snails, rabbit, rodent, and dog.
Plant remains from Block 2 included charred hulls of walnuts, hickory nuts,
pecans, and chestnuts. In Unit E-6 at Level 4, adjacent to some larger hearthstones, charred wood and five fragments of charred corncob were also recovered.
This was the first positive evidence of horticulture at the site. The corn had at
least six to eight rows of kernels per cob. One cob fragment appears to have
seven rows, but examination of modern "Indian maize" also displays this scar
near the end of the cob when two rows of kernels fail to develop.
The artifact assemblage from Block 2 comprised 10 arrowpoints of the
following types: Washita, Scallorn, Bonham, and Fresno. One Washita point
recovered from unit E-6 was made of obsidian. Other items recovered from
Block 2 were: notches, a bison digging tip, bone awls, fossilized oyster shells,
adzes, bifaces, scrapers, deer jaw sickles, abrading stones, unifaces, milling stone
fragments, a mano, a flaking tool (deer ulna), and ochre stones from the local
Woodbine Sand Formation.
Several large sherds of Nocona Plain ceramics were recovered from this
block. Fragments of the rim and enough of the body were recovered to show that
they were from a large vessel (35 cm in diameter) of local manufacture. Another
pottery sherd was identified as part of a pipe bowl.
A fragment of reddish colored hematite was also found in Block 2. This
piece contained a section of a dril! hole and was ground and smoothed on the
unbroken surface. The soft nature of the stone suggested that it had been heavily
ground to obtain pigment.

Block 3
The excavation of Block 3 began on November 20, 1987. A decision had
earlier been made to locate this block nearer the point of the terrace, southeast of
the previous blocks (see Figure 4). This part of the site was considered a suitable
area for a refuse dump as it is near the edge of the terrace, and would have been
out of the way of most village activities. The first 1.5 x 1.5 m unit in Block 3
began in Unit A-3 (Figure 9). The block exposed a thick midden infused with
faunal remains, pottery, lithic debris, and stone tools.
As excavations began, it was noted that the sand overburden was virtually
absent. The dark soil of the occupation zone was encountered within 2 cm of the
surface, and cultural debris was also recovered just beneath the surface. Shortly
after the removal of this superficial layer had begun, the left anterior section of a
human skull (Burial 1) was uncovered. The remaining surface sod in the unit was
carefully removed and the burial was lightly exposed to determine its extent and
position. The most superficial part of the skull was 23.75 cm below the present
ground surface.

Martin n The Dillard Site

125

T.5 m (5 feet)
POS t holes
tlear thstone

Projectile po i n:l;
Bone iYagmen ~

J,

e

Flint ~ooi
Charcoal
Po t I;ez’y sherd
x
o
Bolle

tool

Figure 9. Block 3 plan map showing features, burials, postmolds, and artifact locations.

Buffall
This burial contained the nearly complete skeleton of a 2.5-3.5 year old
child. The body was flexed and lying on its right side (Figure 10). The burial was
oriented with the head pointing east. The skull had apparently sustained fractures
to the left temporal, left parietal, and right occipital areas (Albrecht, this volume,
did not note fractures, however). This was not apparently due to ground weight
compression as the skull retained its normal shape and form. The bones were
well preserved, especially when considering the young age of the child and the
shallow depth of the grave.
The fracture of the skull had displaced the position of the left temporomandibular joint, forcing the lower jaw forward and to the right. This position

126

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 10. Left: Burial 1; Right: Burial 2.

forced the lower right lateral incisor into crossbite. The primary maxillary central
incisors had been lost postmortem. Both root sockets were intact, showing that
no root resorption had begun before the loss of these deciduous teeth. All but six
of the ribs were missing, and five of those were on the right side. The bones of
both hands were present, but the foot bones were missing. Due to the shallow
position of this grave it is probable that it was disturbed by animals shortly after
its placement.
Three roughly-finished arrowpoints of undetermined types were recovered
near the right knee of Burial 1 (Figure 11). The points are on flakes worked
only on the edge to outline their shape. Possibly made by the child, they may
represent the remains of a toy bow and arrows placed with the child at the time
of burial; these were the only possible funeral offerings found with this burial.
After the general extent and position of the burial had been determined, the
entire 1.5 x 1.5 m unit was uniformly deepened, leaving the burial in place on a
pedestal. When the excavation of the floor reached 48.75 cm bs, another burial
was found directly below Burial 1.

Burial 2
Although Burial 2 was positioned almost directly below Burial 1, there was
no intermixture of bones between the two (Figure 12). Both burials were confined to distinct burial pits separated by 10 to 12 cm of soil. Within this soil layer,

Martin -- The Dillard Site

10

A

,I

127

12

El

C

Figure 11. Three arrowpoints recovered near the knees of Burial 1.

a large piece of clean charcoal was recovered that was the first one submitted for
dating (see below). It is likely that a part of Burial 2 was encountered during the
excavation of the pit for Burial 1, as there is some evidence of minor disturbance
of some bones (misplaced right humerus, left ulna, and fibulas).
Burial 2 was a 4.5-5.5 year old child. The sex could not be determined with
certainty due to the age at death. The body had been placed in a prone position
with the lower legs bent back toward the head. The toes of either foot were
turned toward the other, and the feet were above the pelvic bones (Figure 13).
This burial was also oriented to the east. Like the bones of the child above it, very
little bone deterioration was observed on most bones of Burial 2, the exceptions
being the ends of long bones, fibs, and pelvic bones. Generally, the remains are
in a good state of preservation, and the dissolution noted is not unexpected due to
the young age of the child.
Most of the fibs are present and in a normal anatomic relationship to the
spine, also present and intact. The bones of the left arm and hand are undisturbed,
except for the ulna, which had been moved from its original position. The left
hand was folded back behind the body, over the left hip and near the feet. The
distal end of the fight humerus was lying over the right lower inferior border of
the mandible, while the bones of the fight forearm were 28 cm away from their
normal articular surfaces with the humerus. The right radius and ulna were in
anatomic relationship to each other, as well as being in proper relation to the
bones of the fight hand.
The position of tile skull of Burial 2 was nearly face down. The cranial
bones had settled, and the entire skull was flattened antero-posteriorly. This
can be attributed to the ground weight on the incompletely ossified skull and/
or to damage that occurred during the excavation of the pit for Burial 1. The
maxillary anterior central incisors were both missing as a result of normal
deciduous exfoliation.

128

Texas Archeological Society

¢

A
’,

~Go~let-l~,nd

t~ck

ace_.

Burial I, 24 m(9.5 in.)
Burlal 2, 50 cra(19.5 in.)

F~sseI-shei]
elavicl~
digits

Post holes

~

I

~)

t

1 meter

lle~tI’ ths tone

projectile ])oilrl;
l]olle

l’l_’ ~lllell I;

1} e l-!,d

0

Flint tool

f~

Charcoal
Pottery

sherd

Shell fragment

x

Flint nodule

o

Bolle i;ool

Figure 12. Plan map of Block 3, Unit A(-3).

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

Burial 3, 61 cm(24 in)

Burial 2, 50 cm(19.5 in.)

Gorget-bead necklace

Q ,,

f’ost holes
lies!"

ths

tone

. Projectile
Bone

I meter
pOilLl:

fraglnen t

Dead

o

Flint

tool

Charcoal
Pottery

Shell

"*~
~,

sherd

;~

/’ragmen ~

Flint llodule
]]Olle

c:~

o

tOO1

Figure 13. Burials 2 and 3, Unit A(-3).

129

130

Texas Archeological Society

The burial of this child was accompanied by grave goods of unusual rarity
and beauty. Accompanied by a strand of small drilled disk beads was a doubledrilled, engraved gorget made of a marine whelk shell. Their position around
the neck of the child at the time of the burial implies that they were part of a
shell necklace. The gorget was carved to represent an effigy of a human hand
(Figure 14). During the process of excavating Unit A(-3) to allow for complete
exposure of Burial 2, a third skull was encountered in the unit’s north corner at
60 cm bs (see Figure 13).

Burial 3
Burial 3 was an adult male at least 55 years old. The body had been placed
in a supine position with the head turned to face the left shoulder. The knees were
slightly flexed and angled to the left. The left arm bones were lying across the
lower part of the abdominal area, but the bones of the left hand and the distal
sections of the left radius and ulna were missing (Figure 15). Some of the
missing skeletal parts were recovered during excavation of the surrounding soil
up to a meter away, suggesting rodent activity was responsible. The skull of this
skeleton is remarkably well preserved and shows advanced ossification of the
sutures; the other bones are exceptionally hard and well preserved, and on some
surface areas the ivory color of fresh bone has been retained.
The right ascending ramus and genial area of the mandible had been fractured. Instead of being a simple crack through the bone, the ramus fracture was
splintered halfway through. The zygomatic arch was cracked, and the appearance
of it and the ramus fractures are consistent with those that could have occurred at
or shortly after the time of death, although Albrecht (1994) considered the
fractures healed.
The teeth are badly worn from mechanical abrasion, and exhibit dental
decay. Wearing away of the dental enamel, and the softer dentin layer, exposed
the pulp on no less than 11 teeth, rendering them non-vital and subject to
periapical abscesses. The presence of a fistula scar on the right anterior maxilla
represents the final stages of an infectious process that took many years to form
after the associated tooth became non-vital. Evidence of two lost molars and
subsequent healing are present. The effects of moderate generalized periodontal
disease can be observed, and this is not unexpected in an individual of this age
where carbohydrates (corn) are present in the diet, and oral hygiene is nonexistent.
Three Olivella shell beads and four small drilled columella beads were
found with this burial. No arrowpoints or arrowpoint fragments were found in
proximity to the burial.
Shortly after discovering Burial 3, the tibia, fibula, and the distal end of the
femur of a very young child were exposed directly over and 20 cm above the
lower legs of Burial 3. Designated Burial 4, the position of this skeleton prevented the complete exposure of Burial 3 until a later date (see Figure 15, left).

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

! 31

Figure 14. Top: Marine shell
gorget in situ, showing its
relationship to right humerus
and skull of Burial 2; Bottom:
View of gorget after removal of
humerus.

132

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 15. Left: Burial 3; Right: Burial 4.

The burials found up to this point had been encountered within the first 1.5
x 1.5 m unit. To complete the exposure of both burials 3 and 4, unit A-3 was
excavated (see Figure 9).

Burial 4
Burial 4 was a very young child approximately 1.5-2.5 years of age. The
long axis of the body was laying 10 degrees south of west and in a slightly flexed
position. Most of the bones were present but were quite fragile due to incomplete
ossification. The burial was undisturbed and was not associated with Burial 3. A
distinct and separate burial pit was observed above the lower legs of Burial 3.
The uppermost part of Burial 4 was 40 cm bs (see Figure 15, right).
As expected in the skeleton of a young child, the skull had settled from
ground pressure, but generally it was intact. Most of the maxillary teeth were
missing from other than natural causes, and they were not found during the initial
exposure of the burial. As in Burial 3 however, some complete deciduous teeth
were found in the soil surrounding Burial 4. Rodent activity is the most probable
cause of their displacement.
A large necklace consisting of 405 small (4 mm in diameter), drilled, shell
disk beads was found in situ around the neck of the remains of this child. The
shell used to make beads was marine in origin, but the type of shell has not been
determined; no other burial offerings were found with Burial 4.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

133

Burial 5

Upon removing the uppermost layers of soil in the next unit, A-3, the fifth
burial was encountered lying alongside and 10-12 cm higher in elevation than
Burial 3. It was well separated from it (Figures 13 and 16).
Burial 5 contained the complete remains of an adult male about the same
age as Burial 3. Despite their proximity to each other, Burial 3 and Burial 5
appear to represent separate interments. No grave offerings of any kind were
found with this burial.
The skeleton of Burial 5 was flexed, oriented in a northeast direction, and
lying on its right side. The lower legs were bent tightly against the thighs. The
left arm bones were extended behind the body with the left hand positioned near
the buttocks. The right arm was extended in front of the body with the right
hand positioned between the thighs. The head was turned to the right, nearly
face-down. Most of the bones of this skeleton were exceptionally dense and hard
(Figure 17).
The dentition of Burial 5 was the worst encountered in any of the burials
found at the Dillard site. All of the molars on the maxilla had been lost except
one, the left first molar. This remaining molar was non-vital due to occlusal wear
into the pulp, causing the development of a periapical abscess. Advanced periodontal disease was also observed: The area in which the other maxillary molars had been lost antemortem showed evidence of chronic bone infection. This
was most likely due to the infection of residual root tips, preventing the bone
from healing completely. The remaining maxillary teeth were severely worn,
and their bone support was affected by moderate to severe periodontal disease.
This person had lost four teeth on the mandible while still living, with
subsequent healing occurring. Of the remaining 12 mandibular teeth, nine of
them had periapical abscesses either from decay or excessive wear. Based upon
the physical evidence of extensive dental disease, this person was in an unusual
amount of discomfort most of the time. The presence of dental caries in this
individual is characteristic of a diet high in carbohydrates that provides the
energy source for the growth of harmful bacteria (Morse 1978:40).
A very large post or small storage pit was found below Burial 5. It extended
1 m below the burial and was 25 to 36 cm in diameter.

Burial 6

Burial 6 was located in the northwest comer of Unit A-3. This burial seems
to have been disturbed prehistorically and reinterred because of the disarticulated
nature of the remains. Only a small part of this burial was located within this unit,
so the excavation was expanded in unit B-3 to expose it. The exposed burial
included only a radius, the second cervical vertebra, vertebral fragments, a skull
fragment, one scapula, two calcaneus bones, two ribs, and five teeth (see Figure
17). A large tubular bone bead was recovered among the bones. The burial was

134

Texas Archeological Society

Burial 6 (disturbed)
51 cm, (20 in.

Burial 5
53 can, (21 in.)

Post holes
]lear ths tone
Pro3ec tile I,O irLt
Bone fragment
Bead
Flint tool
Charcoal

I meter

l
e

/:~
a

Pottery sherd

#

Shell fragment
Flint llodule

×
o

Bone tool
Figure 16. Burials 4-6, Unit A-3, Block 3.

Martin m The Dillard Site

135

Figure 17. Burial 5 (left) as it was found in Unit A-3, Block 3. The bones of the left hand
were missing, possibly as a result of digging the grave for Burial 4. Burial 6 (right) was
discovered in the north corner of Unit A-3. It is either a reburial or a case of a burial that
had been disturbed by later prehistoric digging in the area.

photographed, its position recorded, and it was then covered with dirt until
complete excavation and removal could be accomplished.
The excavation was now expanded on the southeast side nearer the point of
the terrace ridge. This was in keeping with the original excavation plan, which
would allow for the interim covering of the block with plywood and waterproof
taws. A shallow drainage ditch was dug around the excavation to channel off
heavy rainwater.
When unit B(-3) was staked out, a distinct depression in the ground was
noticed within the staked boundaries. This depression was about 75 cm wide and
15 cm deep. This had not been noticed before due to the tall grass, and the laying
of the plywood covers over this area when working in the block. On closer
inspection, three similar depressions were observed scattered across the point of
the terrace.

Burial 7
An unusual amount of hearthstones were immediately encountered during
the excavation of unit B(-3). In the area of the aforementioned depression, a solid
layer of large hearthstones was uncovered. These stones were placed closely
together with large amounts of charcoal and ashes interspersed between and

136

Texas Archeological Society

beneath them (Figure 18). The layer of hearthstones was about 15 cm beneath the
surface, and extended west into Unit A(-4). The large rocks exposed and removed during the excavation of the first unit of this block [A(-3)] were also
associated with this rock layer.
A scapula, clavicle, and proximal third of a humerus were uncovered 60
cm bs along the southwest wall of unit B(-3). The bones had been obviously
disturbed, and were that of a juvenile. The rest of the burial lay within the adjacent unit B(-4). Labeled Burial 7 (Burial 7A in Albrecht [1992, 1994]), the
bones were left in situ on a pedestal against the wall until Unit B(-4) could be
excavated.
A characteristic burial fill had been encountered from the rock layer to the
depth of Burial 7, and it was initially assumed that this soil was associated with
Burials 1, 2, and 7. However, mixed soil/burial fill continued below the level of
Burial 7, and it was concluded that another burial probably lay deeper in the unit,
and that Burial 7 had been previously disturbed by the digging of this subsequent, but yet unexplored grave. Unit B(-4) was excavated to expose the remainder of Burial 7.
Burial 7 was badly disturbed. The body had originally lain on its right side
with the left leg fully extended and the right one slightly flexed. The left leg
was complete, but only the lower part of the right leg remained. These bones
represented the only undisturbed part of this burial. It was discovered later that
the rest of the bones had been dislodged by prehistoric gravediggers, who had
attempted to pile the loose bones back into the area of the original grave after
digging a later one.
The burial was that of a child who died between the age of 6.5-7.5 years (see
Albrecht, this volume). The burial was too badly disturbed to offer any clue as to
the cause of death. The body had been originally oriented in an east-west direction with the head to the east. The skull, which had originally faced north, seems
to have been moved nearer to the pelvis, and was positioned facing south when
found (Figure 19). Other incidental bones (vertebrae, fingers, and ribs) had also
been piled on the feet and legs of this burial. The left one-third of the mandible
was found beneath the skull; the remaining two-thirds was missing. As with the
other burials, artifacts were found mixed in the burial fill, but they were not
considered intentional grave goods.

The Mass Burial (Burials 8-12)
Beginning about 75 cm bs, perforated Olivella shell beads were found in
Unit B(-3). These seem to have increased as the excavations neared the skeletons, and they were most abundant in and around the bones themselves.
When the excavation of Unit B(-3) reached 87.5 cm, the occipital portion of
an intact skull was encountered. Before the day was over, three other skulls had
been located in this grave. The bones of two arms, articulated at the elbows, were

Martin -- The Dillard Site

h~n ulna

/

E~est Martin

\.,

Post holes

~

Positions of the larges~

Ilearthstone

(2~

hearthstones

ProjecLile

Bo~e

poird;

fragment

1

Flint tool

~

Pot I;ery sherd

#

Shell fragment

×

nodule

Bone tool

o

just

they

beneath

- ¯ "

weft,

Lhe

A thick layer of char-

~

Charcoal

Flint

found

as

present g~oand surface.

~

o

Bead

137

coal and ashes were just;
beneath the rock layer.
^.

B.

t~[........................
,i:

l

," ~i~.~~7//~

As

SW

it f tKJt A(3)

Figure 18. Plan of Unit A(-4), B(-4), and A(-3), and profile of SW wall of Unit A(-3).

found among the first two skullsl The next day, a fifth skull was discovered
(Figure 20). The burial pit bottom was reached immediately below this last skull,
at a depth of 1.35 m.
Cleating of the skulls revealed that five intact skeletons lay below them, but
only two of these skulls were positioned in a normal anatomic relationship to the
cervical spine. The others were well separated from the postcranial skeleton. The
skeletons consisted of three females and two males (Albrecht 1994:Table 1).
It should be mentioned at this point that the individual remains found in this
mass grave were labeled numerically in the order of appearance of their skulls.

138

Texas Archeological Society

Most of the other bones had settled within a 15-17.5 cm thick layer. Later, with
additional dirt removal and exposure of more skeletal details, the skeletons were
matched with the displaced skulls (Figure 21). The displaced skulls were matched
to their respective skeletons by using the laws of deduction, observation of the
undisturbed anatomic positions of the bones, and by identifying the sex of each
skull and pelvis.
This detailed cleaning of the remaining dirt from the bones revealed evidence suggesting the perimortem decapitation of some of the five people.~ Cervical vertebrae were found dislodged or missing. The skulls of three of the bodies
had been displaced from 25 to 55 cm, and as much as 57 cm higher up in the
burial fill from their respective postcranial counterparts, while most of the
smaller, more easily disturbed bones, still remained in their proper anatomic
positions (Figures 22-23).
Burial 8
The first two skulls discovered were labeled Burials 8 and 9. They were
positioned high in the burial, 79 and 89 cm bs, respectively, and 48 and 58 cm
from the floor of the gravepit. The disarticulated arms found associated with
these skulls belonged to Burial 8, a 16-20 year old female lying extended on the
north side of the mass grave (see Figure 21). Hers was the most disturbed of all
the bodies, with only the torso and legs remaining intact, and she was positioned
on the left side against the northwest wall of the gravepit. The fact that both the
left and right arms were found articulated high in the burial fill suggests
perimortem disturbance, rather than postmortem movement of the bones by
animal or human disturbance. The mandible from this body was never found.
Most of the digits of a dismembered hand thought to belong to this burial were
found below the right femur of Burial 11. Around 40 Olivella shell beads were
found scattered among the ribs and legs of Burial 8. There were no other offerings identified with this burial.

Burial 9
The displaced skull farthest from its respective skeleton was Burial 9.
This skull was the second one encountered after the discovery of the mass
grave, and its placement was the highest of any of the remains within the
grave pit, but the skeleton was found in a prone position below Burials 8, 10,
and 11. The mandible was intact and laying 25 cm away near the skull of

Albrecht’ s (1994) examination of Burials 8-12 did not uncover clear perimortem evidence
of decapitation, but a few skeletons of Plains Village age have been found in the Southern
Plains with evidence of traumatic death, including decapitation (Brooks 1994b; Bovee
and Owsley 1994).

Martin -- The Dillard Site

Post holes
Hearthstone
Projectile poi~%
Bone fragment
Bead
Flint %ooi
Charcoal

139

~,____
1

meter

£
o

Pottery sherd

Shell fragment
Flint nodule
Bone too!

x

o
="-

Figure 19. Plan of Burial 7 and 13, Unit B(-4), Block 3.

Burial 8 (see Figure 21). The arms were extended below the body. The most
superior part of the skull was 57.5 cm above the floor of the burial pit, and
it was lying on top of the arm bones of Burial 8 (see Figure 22).
The appearance of skull 9, with its prominent brow ridges, supraorbital
foramina, and heavy jaw structure, was decidedly male. Positive proof of the
correct matching of this skull to the remaining headless skeleton came when
the pelvis was removed and definitely confirmed to be that of a male. The
estimated age at the time of death is between 30 and 34 years.

140

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 20. Top: A view of the mass burial during its excavation. Bottom: A lateral view of
the displaced skulls, seen at eye level looking south.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

141

A

..=:m

t meter

Figure 21. Overview of the mass burial matching the skulls to their respective bodies.

By measuring the remains in situ with the skull replaced in its approximate
normal position, the height of this person was estimated to be around 1.6 m.
The teeth that remained were in fair condition, and exhibited moderate wear;
several had been avulsed at or after the time of death. Olivella beads were
discovered among the bones of the upper torso, and conch beads were found
near the feet.

Burial 10
The apparently intact skeleton, Burial 10, was that of a young male 27 to 34
years old. He appears to have been in perfect health with a complete and healthy
dentition. Except for the aforementioned displaced body parts (the two arms and

142

Texas Archeological Society

o

0

0
"0

°~

>

>

oo
0

.Q

0

0

Martin -- The Dillard Site

143

Figure 23. Left: A view of the
mass burial as seen looking east;
Bottom: A large drilled columella
bead in situ near one of the skulls
in the mass burial. Most of the
beads were found near the feet of
the five skeletons.

144

Texas Archeological Society

skulls of Burials 8 and 9), he was lying extended on the right side above all of the
other bodies, with the superior part of the skull at 107 cm bs. The cause of death
of this man is not evident from examination of the remains (Albrecht 1994). The
skeleton appears to be complete, and unlike the four other skeletons placed
below this one, all of the bones are in their proper positions. He was slightly
larger in stature than the other male from this grave, with his height estimated to
have been around 1.65 m. Two conch beads were found near the pelvis of this
individual, and five were found near the feet (see Figure 23).

Burial 11
The skeletal remains of Burial 11, a female, were lying in a prone position
atop Burials 8 and 9, but below that of Burial 10. The remains were 20 cm above
the floor of the grave and 118 cm bs. The right leg was slightly extended with
the knee bent.
Hundreds of Olivella shell beads were recovered near the neck and chest
area of the skeleton, and the skull was displaced forward. The mandible was
still in its normal position with the spine, while the cranial portion of the skull
lay 30 cm away. This woman was small in stature, about 1.53 m tall, and from
17-21 years of age when she died. The arms were extended at her sides, and a
bracelet containing 43 more Olivella beads was found around the bones of the
left wrist. The missing part of the mandible from Burial 7 was found near the
skull of Burial 11.

Burial 12
Burial 12 was that of a 35-44 year old female. Hers was the first body to be
placed within the mass grave. Her burial posture was drastically different from
the others placed around and above her, in that she was buried face down in a
fully flexed position. The knees were drawn up to the shoulders, and the bones of
the arms were at her sides with the hands under the chest (see Figure 21).
Although she appeared to have been decapitated, the head had been placed next
to the body, and very close to what would have been a normal anatomic position,
although it had tipped forward during the subsequent placement or settling of the
other bodies. The weight of the ground had flattened the skeletal remains (excepting the skull), and most were only 5 to 7.5 cm above the floor of the burial
pit. The exact amount of separation of the skull from the cervical spine could not
be measured because the first four cervical vertebrae were missing, and the
remaining three may have been fractured. Blackened encrustations preserved on
the skull of Burial 12 are very similar to those observed on the skulls of Burials
8-9, and 11.
Between the feet of the individuals in the mass grave was found an unusual lump of greenish-yellow clay, 5 x 7.5 cm in size. It resembles very closely

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

145

the size and color of clay nodules occasionally found in Caddoan graves excavated in East Texas and Arkansas. This may have been a burial practice adopted
by contact with the people from this area. It was noticed that smaller particles
of this clay, caught in the screen during washing, produced a bright green paint
when wet. Iron oxide-bearing ochre stones were also found close enough to the
bones to be considered possible burial offerings.
An occasional small drilled columella bead was found in the mass grave.
Fourteen were recovered scattered in the grave fill, and in association with the
upper torso of Burials 9 and 11. Larger columella beads were found around the
feet and legs of the five individuals, and in the surrounding grave fill. Twentyeight of these were eventually found there, suggesting they were attached to
anklets, the leather ties on footwear, or for decoration of the same.

Burial 13
The scattered bones of a child between 3.5-4.5 years of age were discovered while deepening the excavation of Unit B(-4). The bones were within a 60
cm area, which was 75 cm bs, and 50 cm southwest of the undisturbed leg of
Burial 7 (see Figure 19). The bones were extremely small, but were well preserved, as were all of the other bones discovered at this site, As one might expect, no intact skull of this child was found, but several large, extremely thin
fragments were recovered. The bones were not in normal anatomic relationship
to each other, and they had been disturbed after the body had decomposed. This
disturbance could have taken place during the digging of the grave for Burial 7,
or during subsequent digging of a hole to deposit refuse. Rodent or other animal burrowing may also account for this disturbance.
The unusual preservation of the skeletal material was quite evident as each
burial was discovered and excavated. When some of the skulls were cleaned
and examined, even the tiny ossicles of the middle ear were found in perfect
condition.

SUMMARY OF THE MASS GRAVE
When the damp earth was being dusted from the surface of the bones of
the mass burial, they were coated with what appeared to be a thin layer of ashes.
Upon seeing this, the first impression was that these people had been partially
burned before their burial. However, there were no remnants of charred material associated with this ash coating, and the bones were of a uniform color and
density when brushed off. This gray-white powder may represent the byproducts
of a reaction of the decaying organic remains with minerals contained in the
soil (Morse 1978).
The facial areas of the skulls had an intermittent black encrustation that did
not firmly adhere to the bone. Many teeth, either loose or still in their sockets,

146

Texas Archeological Society

had blackened root surfaces. These areas do more closely resemble charred
remains. If these discolorations are a result of actual burning, it was not done to
the point that the bone itself was charred. When the black crusty material is
removed, the bone retains the same appearance as the surrounding unblackened
areas. Whether this also represents some sort of reaction with the soil, or is
evidence of burning prior to burial, requires further analysis. Neither the white
ash-like coating, or blackened encrustations, appeared on any of the bones representing single interments.
The reason these five people died at the same time and were buried together
is open to speculation. The most obvious observation to be made concerning this
mass burial has to do with the possible mutilation by dismemberment and decapitation of most of the bodies. The positions of two skulls and two arms at such
distances away from the postcrania suggest this, but visual examination of the
remains showed no cut marks or other positive evidence of perimortem injury
(Albrecht 1992, 1994).
If murder and mutilation were involved in the deaths of these people, it
may be presumed to have been the result of actions by a group of marauding
hostiles during a raid. If it can be assumed that the individuals interred in the
mass burial did not die of natural causes, their burial postures suggest they were
buried very soon following their deaths. The missing second, third, and fourth
cervical vertebrae of three of the skeletons may explain why cut marks were
not evident on the skulls if decapitation occurred through the neck. Evidence
for perimortem decapitation is seen in other Late Prehistoric Plains Village
burials (e.g., Brooks 1994b), and is rarely found in Caddoan cemeteries in the
Great Bend area of Red River (as at the Crenshaw Site (3MI6) in Miller County,
Arkansas [Durham and Davis 1975]). Other instances of this type of mutilation
has been reported from Henrietta Focus sites (Krieger 1946; Lorrain 1969).
The absence of grave offerings such as pottery vessels and fine chert weapons and tools is characteristic of Plains Village burials. What is not characteristic is the presence at Dillard of so many marine shell beads with the mass
grave. The positions of many of these beads suggests that they were in strands
when the bodies were buried. At least three strands were identified in situ around
the headless body of Burial 11. Around the left wrist of this body was a bracelet of Olivella beads. Other beads were not only found intimately associated with
the skeletons, but were scattered within the burial fill, as if they had been thrown
in as the bodies were being covered. Rodent activity probably accounts for some
scattered beads being recovered beyond the perimeter of the burial. The only
other items found in this grave that can possibly be identified as burial offerings were the ochre stones, a bone hairpin, and the lump of green clay. Although
accidental occurrence of these items in the burial fill is possible, they were recovered intimately associated in the same layer with the bones.
The tragedy surrounding the death and subsequent burial of these five
people was likely a very important and well-remembered event in the community. Whether their deaths were a result of a raid on the village proper, or upon

Martin m The Dillard Site

147

a small group at an outlying camp away from the protection of the village, the
incident was immediately known and the burial quickly accomplished. Since the
bodies were carefully positioned within a small amount of space, with one in a
fully flexed position, their burial may have taken place within a few hours of
their deaths, before rigor mortis had occurred.
After the skeletal remains in Block 3 had been fully exposed, professional
archeologists from several Texas universities and the Texas Historical Commission were invited to examine the remains in situ. Alternative ideas and different
interpretations were discussed concerning the various burials and their possible
causes of death. The confinement of the burials to such a small area is consistent with the burial patterns at the Harrell site (Figure 24). Intrusions by later
burials at the Harrell site were common, and three mass burials were discovered. In these mass burials, skulls were missing and mandibles were either disarticulated or missing (Krieger 1946). They were all restricted to a small area in
the center of what Krieger refered to as "the brow of the terrace," interpreted to
mean an outward projection of the terrace itself.
After examination by the professional archeologists, and all pertinent measurements and photographs had been taken, the burials were removed and the
bones individually wrapped and cataloged. They were transported to the National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, where complete osteological analysis, including DNA recovery and sequencing, is being directed
by Dr. Doug Owsley (see Albrecht 1992, 1994).

ADDITIONAL WORK IN BLOCK 3
Nine and one-half additional units were excavated in Block 3 (see Figure
9) after uncovering the mass grave. For the most part, these units were adjacent
to those in which the burials were confined, and were excavated to further
define the extent of the cemetery area. The sterile soil below the occupation
zone in the remainder of Block 3 was encountered in most places from 91-106
cm bs.
No additional intact burials were discovered in these adjacent units, but
some bones from the burials already discovered, and possibly from still undiscovered burials, were recovered (Albrecht 1992, 1994); four large columella
beads were associated with them. A total of 176 additional human bones and
teeth were recovered from these adjacent units. These bones had been transported from intact burial remains by rodent tunneling. Most of the bones were
digits and teeth, but patellas, vertebrae, skull fragments, and rib fragments were
also recovered. Many of these displayed rodent gnawing.
In the east corner of Unit C(-3), a dark soil stain mixed with charcoal,
hearthstones, shell, clay, and bone fragments was noted. This continued through
the sterile layer in the remainder of the unit (at 86 cm), and resembled burial
fill. Further excavations in adjacent units C(-2) and D(-2) indicated that this

148

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 24. A view of the entire cemetery area in Block 3, looking northwest. Burial 7 is in
the lower part of the picture and Burial 6 is at the top.

feature was a large storage pit measuring 1.37 x 1.52 m in diameter and 2.28
m deep. The storage pit was filled with the same types of cultural debris found
elsewhere in the midden deposits of Block 3. The bottom third of the pit had
been undercut, resembling the bell-shaped pits found at other Late Prehistoric

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

149

Figure 25. Plan and Profile of the Storage pit in Block 3.

Plains Village sites on the Southern Plains (Figure 25). A charcoal sample
suitable for dating was recovered from the 203 cm level of this pit (see below).

ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS AND QUANTIFICATIONS
The discussion of the artifacts found at the Dillard site is divided into five
main groups: chipped stone, ground stone, ceramic, shell, and bone. This includes

150

Texas Archeological Society

consideration of the suspected provenance of the raw materials from which the
artifacts have been made.
The artifact classifications and descriptions of the artifacts recovered at
Dillard are based on information from three primary sources: (a) the identification of stone artifacts was based upon Turner and Hester (1985); (b) the bone
tools and shell artifacts mainly from Bell (1980); and ceramic identifications
from Suhm and Jelks (1962).

CHIPPED STONE TOOLS
The most common stone tool type at the Dillard site is the projectile point
(N=101) (Tables 1-3). With one exception, all of the projectile points are
arrowpoints; a Gary dart point was found at 188 cm bs in the storage pit in Block
3. The different age ranges of the recovered points suggest that this site was
probably occupied by prehistoric groups from the Late Prehistoric I through the
Late Prehistoric II periods (see Prikryl 1990). Dart points are infrequently found
in deposits from Late Prehistoric I period sites on the Southern Plains. The
absence of underlying Archaic deposits permits a clearer understanding of the
associated tool assemblage for these periods.
The most common arrowpoint type is the Washita point (N=41) (Turner and
Hester 1985). Many of these Washita points are of a serrated style (Figure 26)
that is relatively common at sites on the Elm Fork of the Trinity River near Lake
Lewisville (Daniel J. Prikryl, personal communication 1993). The Washita points
averaged 1.9 cm in length and 1.25 cm in width.
The lithic materials used in the manufacture of the points originated from
sources over a wide geographical area. Most of the artifacts were made of highquality chert, but coarser-grained local quartzites or silicified sandstones,
commonly called sugar quartz, were also used. Identifiable raw materials include
green chert of the Reeds Spring Formation and novaculite from the Ouachita
Mountains of western Arkansas and southeastern Oklahoma, Edwards Plateau
chert, Alibates, Ogallala quartzite, agatized wood, and obsidian (Banks 1990).
The most common source of obsidian in this area is from Obsidian Ridge in
northern New Mexico (Hughes 1989:194).
The Fresno (N=26) was the next most prevalent point type (Turner and
Hester 1985). This type was more common in the later part of the site’s occupation, and technically they are generally crudely made compared to other
arrowpoint forms. The Fresno points average 2 cm in length, while their width
was 1.35 cm. The lithic types utilized for Fresno points were predominantly local
quartzites and coarse-grained cherts.
The remaining arrowpoint types found were divided between the Bonham
(N=5) and Scallorn (N=9) types, with one Agee, one Cliffton, and 11 unidentified examples also present (Turner and Hester 1985). The Scallorn and Bonham
points typically occur in Late Prehistoric I period occupations, and/or the early

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

A.

B.

C.

D.

F.

G.

llo

i.

151

>
J.

L.

Figure 26. Chipped stone artifacts from Block 1 (see Table 1 for more information).

part of the Late Prehistoric II period. Agee points are rarely found this far west,
and are most commonty found in the Great Bend area of the Red River near
present day Texarkana.
Other stone artifacts recovered from the Dillard site included bifaces,
uniface endscrapers, uniface sidescrapers, gravers, drills and spokeshaves
(notches) (see Tables 1, 2, and 4). A utilized flake of quartz crystal was also
found. These chipped stone tools are commonly found in prehistoric Plains
Village sites on the Southern Plains. The appearance of wood and bone working tools (e.g., the uniface, graver, abrader, and notch) evidences bow and arrow and bone tool manufacture on this site. This type of assemblage would be
expected in a village whose occupants relied heavily upon hunting not only for
their own immediate sustenance, but for stockpiling a surplus to get them
through lean times.
Flakes of lithic debris recovered from Block 1 totaled 1352 pieces, and
these were mainly from deeper strata in units J-1 and K-1. Many of the projectile
points recovered from this block also came from unit J- 1 (see Table l). Two bone

152

Texas Archeological Society
Table 1.
Chipped Stone Artifacts from Block I

Type

Unit

Depth

Material

Figure 26

Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita

F- 1
I-1
I-1
I-1
J- 1
J-1
J- 1
I- 1
J-1
J-1
H-1
F-1
F-1

94
86
79
76
86
38
48

cm
cm
cm
cm
cm
cm
cm

Chert
Edwards

A
B

Reeds Spring
Chert
Edwards

C
D
E
F

51
41
66
72
77

cm
cm
cm
cm
cm

Washita
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
UID*
Uniface
Uniface
Biface

68 cm

Quartzite
Chert
Chert
Chert
Chert
Ogallala qtz.

G
H
I

Chert

J
K
L

Quartzite

M

*UID = unidentifiable arrowpoint

Table 2.
Chipped Stone Artifacts from Block 2
Type

Unit

Depth

Material

Washita
Washita
Washita
Scallorn

D-5
E-6
E-6
E-6
E-5

91 cm
96 cm
90 cm
101 cm

Reeds Spring
Quartzite
Obsidian
Chert

66 cm
46 cm

Quartzite
Quartzite
Chert

Bonham
Fresno
Fresno

E-5
E-6

UID*
Washita
Washita
Uniface
Uniface

E-5
F-6
E-6
D-6
F-6

Uniface
Uniface
Biface
Biface

F-6
F-6
E-6
D-6

*UID = unidentifiable arrowpoint

43 cm
76 cm
71 cm
76
79
66
70
54
60
64

cm
cm
cm
cm
cm
cm
cm

Figure 27
A
B
C
D
E
F

Quartzite
Chert

G
H
I

Quartzite
Reeds Spring
Agatized wood

J
K
L

Chert
Chalcedony

M
N
O

Red chert
Reeds Spring

P

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

153

pressure flakers were also found in this unit, suggesting that this part of the block
was probably a work area at one time. The presence of many complete,
apparently, usable artifacts is most likely the result of simple loss.
The artifact assemblage from Block 2 was very similar to that of Block
1, in that the predominant point type is the Washita, and there were few other
tools besides arrowpoints (Table 2). Fresno, Scallorn, and Bonham arrowpoints
comprise the remaining projectile point types recovered from Block 2 (Figure
27).

A
A.

B.

G.

H.

I.

J.

K°

@ @
7j °

i:!.

Figure 27. Chipped stone artifacts from Block 2 (see Table 2 for more information).

Because burials in Block 3 were placed in a dense midden, it was difficult to
distinguish between artifacts placed with the burials and those that had been
accidentally lost or thrown away. Cultural debris that had been deposited on the
surface of the refuse heap, ended up deposited deep in the ground as burial fill
when the graves were backfilled. Subsequent disturbance by rodent activity
scattered some items further.
The numbers of chipped stone artifacts was much higher in Block 3 than
in blocks 1 and 2 (Table 3). This artifact increase is probably related to the

154

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

quantities of midden in Block 3, as more items were deposited. In other words,
the items recovered from Block 3 were both accidentally dropped here during
periods of intense occupation, but sometimes brought to this area of the site to
be thrown away.

2cra

,

A.

I.

B.

J.

C.

D.

K.

L°

F.

G.

H.

M.

N.

O.

P.

E.

Q.

R.

S.

T.

U.

V.

W.

X.

Y.

g.

aa.

bb.

cc.

dd.

ee.

ff.

gg.

hh.

ii.

jj.

oo.

pp.

qq o

rr.

kk.

ss.

ll.

tt.

rN~.

uu.

Figure 28. Arrowpoints from Block 3 (see Table 3 for more information),

nn.

VV.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

A.

B.

I.

J.

Q.

Ro

Y.

Z.

c.

K.

D.

L.

E.

F.

G.

H.

M.

N.

O.

P.

S.

T.

U.

V.

W.

X.

aa.

bb.

cc.

dd.

ee.

ff.

155

2cm

gg.

Figure 29. Projectile points from Block 3 (see Table 3 for more information).

Although many projectile points and tools were found in the area of the
burials in Block 3, only three arrowpoints have been identified as burial offerings (see Figure 11). The rest were deposited or lost in the area, and some were
interred in deeper deposits during excavation for trash dumping or burial placement. Since most of the points were broken, and generally recovered in shallower deposits than the human remains, it is unlikely that they were intentionally
placed there as burial offerings. No projectile points were found in a context as
to suggest that they were the cause of death of any of the individuals. When
projectile points are found as grave goods in a burial, a common custom among

156

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3.
Projectile Points in Block 3

Type

Unit

Depth

Material

Illustration

Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Washita
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno

A(-2)
A(-3)
A(-3)
A(-3)
A(-3)
A(-5)
A(-5)
A(-5)
A(-5)
A(-6)
A(-6)
A-3
A-3
A-3
A-4
B-3
B-3
B-3
B(-3)
B(-4)
B(-4)
C(-2)
C(-2)
C(-2)
C(-2)
C(-2)
C(-4)
D(-2)
D(-2)
B(-4)
B(-2)
A(-3)
A(-3)
A(-3)
A(-3)
A(-4)
A(-4)

81 cm
56 cm
76 cm
99 cm
66 cm
86 cm
69 cm
71 cm
76 cm
61 cm
76 cm
102 cm
76 cm
76 cm
79 cm
74 cm
69 cm
81 cm
58 cm
81 cm
127 cm
76 cm
79 cm
102 cm
109 cm
132 cm
81 cm
155 cm
99 cm
74 cm
81 cm
46 cm
30 cm
51 cm
36 cm
41 cm
43 cm

Chert
Edwards
Chert
Quartzite
Alibates
Quartzite
Alibates
Quartzite
Quartzite
Reeds Spring
Quartzite
Chert
Chert
Quartzite
Quartzite
Novaculite
Novaculite
Chert
Quartzite
Reeds Spring
Edwards
Chert
Quartzite
Quartzite
Chert
Quartzite
Chert
Novaculite
Chert
Novaculite
Ogallala qtz.
Edwards
Reeds Spring
Chert
Quartzite
Chert
Quartzite

Fig. 28A
Fig. 28B
Fig. 28C
Fig. 28D
Fig. 28E
Fig. 28F
Fig. 28G
Fig. 28H
Fig. 28I
Fig, 28J
Fig. 28K
Fig. 28L
Fig. 28M
Fig. 28N
Fig. 280
Fig. 28P
Fig. 28Q
Fig. 28R
Fig. 28S
Fig. 28T
Fig. 28U
Fig. 28V
Fig. 28W
Fig. 28X
Fig. 28Y
Fig. 28Z
Fig. 28aa
Fig. 28bb
Fig. 28cc
Fig. 28dd
Fig. 29A
Fig. 28ee
Fig. 28ff
Fig. 28gg
Fig. 28hh
Fig. 28ii
Fig. 28jj

Martin -- The DiUard Site

157

Table 3 (Continued).
Type
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Fresno
Scallorn
Scallorn
Scallorn
Scallorn
Scallorn
Scallorn
Scallorn
Scallorn
Bonham
Bonham
Bonham
Bonham
Agee
Cliffton
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.

Unit

Depth

A(-5)
A-3
A-4
A-4
A-4
B-3
B-3
B(-4)
C(-2)
C(-2)
C(-2)
C(-3)
C(-4)
B(-2)
C(-3)
B(-3)
B(-4)
B(-4)
B(-4)
A-4
A-4
A-4
A-3
B(-4)
B(-4)
C(-4)
D(-2)
A(-3)
A-4
A-4
A(-5)
A(-4)
A(-3)
A(-3)
A(-3)
A(-3)
B(-2)

46 cm
58 cm
53 cm
43 cm
50 cm
51 cm
53 cm
61 cm
56 cm
56 cm
102 cm
53 cm
46 cm
50 cm
86 cm
125 cm
97 cm
89 cm
76 cm
78 cm
81 cm
91 cm
66 cm
71 cm
79 cm
76 cm
165 cm
76 cm
77 cm
83 cm
66 cm
89 cm
86 cm
36 cm
36 cm
39 cm
84 cm

Material
Quartzite
Chert
Novaculite
Chert
Chert
Chert
Quartzite
Reeds Spring
Chert
Edwards
Quartzite
Chert
Quartzite
Chert
Brown Chert
Novaculite
Lt. Gray Chert
Tan Chert
Red Chert
Gray Chert
Tan Chert
Lt. Gray Chert
Oga!lala qtz,
Lt. Gray Chert
Tan Chert
Lt. Gray Chert
Novaculite
Quartzite
Gray Chert
Lt. Gray Chert
Ogallala qtz.
Quartzite
Edwards Chert
Lt. Gray Chert
Pink Chert
Edwards Chert
Red Chert

Illustration
Fig. 28kk
Fig. 2811
Fig. 28mm
Fig. 28nn
Fig. 28oo
Fig. 28pp
Fig. 28qq
Fig. 28rr
Fig. 28ss
Fig. 28tt
Fig. 28uu
Fig. 28vv
Fig. 29B
Fig. 29C
Fig. 29D
Fig. 29E
Fig. 29F
Fig. 29G
Fig. 29H
Fig. 29I
Fig. 29J
Fig. 29K
Fig. 29L
Fig. 29M
Fig. 29N
Fig. 290
Fig. 29P
Fig. 29Q
Fig. 29R
Fig. 29S
Fig. 29T
Fig. 29U
Fig. 29V
Fig. 29W
Fig. 29X
Fig. 29Y
Fig. 29Z

158

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3 (Continued).

Type
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Unident.
Gary Dart

Unit

Depth

B(-2)
C(-3)
C(-2)
D(-2)
D(-2)
A(-5)
D(-2)

67 cm
56 cm
69 cm
147 cm
177 cm
74 cm
188 cm

Material

Illustration

Petrified Wood

Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.

Quartzite
Quartzite
White Chert
Edwards
Tan Chert
Ogallala qtz.

29aa
29bb
29cc
29dd
29ee
29ff
29gg

Caddoan groups, they are usually in a cluster (probably a quiver) placed near
the body. The only instance in which this occurred was with Burial 1, where
three arrowpoints were found together near the knees.
Except for the Agee point, all of the stone artifacts recovered from the
Dillard site are consistent with those from other Late Prehistoric Plains Village sites in North Central Texas and South Central Oklahoma (Krieger 1946;
Lorrain 1969; Brooks et al. 1985). The frequency of the Washita type at this
site is perhaps more common than at other Late Prehistoric sites in this area,
but may simply be related to an increased intensity of hunting during the
period when they were made. The different styles of points found at the site
were produced at different periods by different artisans to comply with favored methods of mounting and lashing the point to the arrow shaft. The
differences in size and shape of points of the same type probably had very
little association with its intended use, but were more likely dictated by the
size and workability of the stone blank. All would bring down a deer, bison,
or man equally as well.
Almost all of the other chipped stone artifacts from the Dillard Site consisted of various tools used for working bone, shell, wood, and animal hides, or
for food preparation (Figures 30 and 31). These types of tools were relatively
common in each block (23-38 percent) (Table 4).
Simple, unworked flakes, freshly struck, were also used for miscellaneous
tasks, attested to by the many small flakes along the tool edges that were evident under magnification. Uniface endscrapers and sidescrapers may have been
for working either hides or wood. Bifaces were used for woodwork and food
preparation. Wood was one of the most abundant natural resources available to
the Native Americans, and they clearly took advantage of this resource. Stone
tools from Dillard suggests the manufacture of several different wooden items
that could have been produced by using these tools: the most obvious of these
are arrow shafts and their bow counterparts.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

159

2em

A.

B.

C.

D.

L~J ,,

G.

M.

H.

N.

I.

O.

.

S.

T.

U.

%:

!i I’

\

!~

V.

W.

X.

Figure 30. Chipped Stone Tools (see Table 4 for more information).

Pecked and Groundstone Artifacts
These artifacts were made primarily of native stone and produced by
means other than percussion flaking (Table 5). Examples from the Dillard
site included milling stones (metates) and the manos that were used to mill
and process domestic and wild plants. Alhough no intact milling stones were
recovered, the eight fragments found were thin and flat, and were made from
dark sandstone and silicified sandstone. Eighteen whole or fragmented manos
were found in all blocks, but were particularly common in Block 3. These

160

Texas Archeological Society

A.

H°

S.

D.

C.

B.

I.

E°

J.

K.

F.

L.

N.

M.

Figure 31. Bifaces (see Table 4 for more information).

Table 4.
Stone Tools from Block 3

Type
Drill
Drill
Drill
Endscraper
Endscraper
Endscraper
Endscraper
Endscraper
Endscraper
Endscraper
Graver
Graver
Graver
Notch*
Notch*

Unit

Depth (cm)

B(-4)

76
94

C(-2)
B(-2)
A(-3)

68
101

A(-5)
B(-2)
C(-4)
C(-3)
A(-3)

73
79
70

B(-4)
B(-4)
A(-3)
B(-2)
B(-4)
A(-5)

58
61
65
68
79
63

61
78

Material

Figure

Quartzite
Quartzite
Quartzite
Lt. Gray chert

30A
30B

Alibates
Agate

30E
30F
30G
30H
30I

Chert
Edwards
Reeds Spring
White chert
Ogallala qtz.
Dk. brown chert
Ogallala qtz.
Black chert
Edwards

30C
30D

30J
30K
30L
30M
30N
300

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

161

Table 4 (Continued).
Type

Unit

Depth (cm)

Material

Figure

Notch*
Notch*
Notch**
Notch**
Notch**
Notch*
Notch*
Notch*
Scraper
Biface
Biface
Beveled
Biface
Biface
Biface***
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface
Biface

A(-5)
B(-4)
A(-5)
C(-3)
B(-3)
B(-4)
B(-4)
B(-4)
A-4
A-3
B-3

55
72
58
79
112
85
80
86
70
67
74

Jasper
Chert
Brown chert
Edwards
Ogallala qtz.
Quartzite
Novaculite
Reeds Spring
Reeds Spring
Novaculite
Chert

30P
30Q
30R
30S
30T
30U
30V
30W
30X
31A
31B

A-4
A-4
A-4
A(-5)
A(-5)
B(-4)
B(-3)
B(-3)
B(-2)
D(-2)
D(-2)
D(-2)

82
86
75
90
88
72
96
88
70
140
110
98

Ogallala qtz.
Chert
Chert
Quartzite
Chalcedony
Edwards
Reeds Spring
Reeds Spring
Quartzite
Edwards
Chert
Chert

31C
31D
31E
31F
31 G
31H
31I
31J
31K
31L
31M
31N

* Unifacial

**Bifacial

***Preform

Table 5.
Pecked and Groundstone Artifacts

Block

Mano

Milling Stone

Block 1

Abrader

Ochre

Celt

3

3

-

Block 2

3

2

4

5

-

Block 3

15

6

14

74

I

162

Texas Archeological Society

also were made of either sandstone or silicified sandstone. Other examples of
milling stones were found at nearby Late Prehistoric satellite encampments.
Other artifacts in this category include sandstone and limestone abraders,
used for smoothing wood, bone, or shell. One was made from a fossilized portion
of mammoth or mastodon tusk, the remains of which are commonly found in the
Fish Creek valley.
Cretaceous concretions containing cores of red or yellow ochre hematite
were used as sources of pigment. They have also been mentioned as being one of
many ritually significant burial offerings placed in Mississippian period graves
(Spencer and Jennings 1965:76). Most of the examples were battered open and
scraped with abrading stones to obtain the pigment. Although these were found
in all of the blocks excavated, they were most numerous in the area of the burials;
some were also present as burial offerings.
One fragment of a celt, made from an unidentified black stone, was found in
Block 3. The ground surface is very flat and highly polished.
Large amounts of lithic debitage and fire-cracked hearthstones were recovered in the three blocks, with about 70-80 percent of these remains found in
Block 3. The frequency of lithic debitage and burned hearthstones is presented
by unit in Table 6.

CERAMIC ARTIFACTS
The ceramics from the Dillard site include small amounts of trade ware as
well as locally manufactured wares. Most of the locally made ware has been
identified as Nocona Plain, characterized by an abundant shell temper that was
usually leached out, leaving a pitted and porous surface (Suhm and Jelks 1962).
Also present in significant quantities were sherds similar in appearance to that of
Nocona Plain, but with a temper made up of crushed limestone. The color and
softness of these limestone fragments lead one to think that the source of the
temper came from the abundant crumbling hearthstones that had deteriorated
from the heat of cooking fires. In some examples, mixtures of both mussel shell
and burned limestone were used as the tempering medium.
The exterior surfaces of the Nocona Plain type sherds vary in color from
medium brown to dark gray. The interior surfaces are consistently darker, and
sometimes a black carbonaceous deposit appears on the inner surface. There is
no incising, engraving, applique, or any other type of decoration present on
Nocona Plain. The surfaces are fairly smooth, but are not well polished. Many
pits (from the leaching of the shell) can be observed on the surface of those
sherds tempered only with mussel shell, while those samples tempered with both
shell and limestone (or limestone only) have a smoother, less porous surface.
The thickness of the sherds ranges from 4 to 9 mm, with an average thickness
of 7 mm.
Several sherds of a cord-marked pottery were identified, principally from

Martin ~ The Dillard Site
Table 6.
Other Stone Artifacts
Block

Flakes

Hearthstone >3 cm Diameter

Unit F- 1

174

Unit G-1
Unit H-1
Unit I-1

150
130
150
491
257

27
52
39
35
37
23

1352

2!3

Unit D-5
Unit D-6
Unit D-7
Unit E-5
Unit E-6
Unit F-6

112
124
139
134
174
134

80
114
153
186
92
115

Totals

817

740

269

130
538
267

Block 1

Unit J- 1
Unit K- 1
Totals
Block 2

Block 3
Unit A(-2)
Unit A(-3)
Unit A-3
Unit A-4
Unit A(-4)
Unit A(-5)
Unit A(-6)
Unit B(-2)
Unit B-3
Unit B(-3)
Unit B(-4)
Unit C(-2)
Unit C(-3)
Unit C(-4)
Unit D(-2)
Totals

301
336
445
647

396
463

413
144

292
147

264
349
863
871
203
260
270

171
73
496
720
94
184

88

62
75

5723

4108

163

Texas Archeological Society

164

Block 3 (Table 7). The exterior surfaces of these sherds are buff in color and are
decorated with many linear cord incisions and impressions having been pressed
or stamped into the surfaces of the soft clay. The cordmarking generally runs in
one direction on the vessel, but sometimes the pattern is quite random (Figure
32b). The sherd wall thickness of the cord-marked pottery ranged between 8-11
ram. The temper is grit and pulverized bone. The texture is coarse, but not
crumbly. The cores are uniformly dark gray.
Of the total ceramic sample (N=759), 45 percent are Nocona Plain with
shell temper. Over 30 percent of the total is Nocona Plain with shell and limestone temper, while 19.4 percent is tempered with just limestone. Nocona Plain
rim sherds represent 3.4 percent of the total, and cord-marked pottery 1.4 percent. Five sherds from ceramic pipes from blocks 2 and 3 were also recovered
(see Table 7).

Table 7.
Ceramic Artifacts

Rim

Cord-m~ked

Nocona-shell

Nocona-limestone

Nocona-sfl*

Block 1

1

-

35

12

14

Block 2

4

1

68

7

28

Block 3

21

10

238

128

187

Block

* s/l=shetl/limestone temper

The cord-marked sherds are all from the body of globular jars. The other
physical traits such as general thickness, temper, color, and surface treatment, fit
the description of Lindsay Cordmarked. This is a typical ware found in Plains
Village sites in South Central Oklahoma (Brooks 1994a:44), particularly the
Washita River phase. The cord-marked sherds also have similarities to Borger
Cordmarked, an Antelope Creek phase type. The time frame in which Borger
Cordmarked was produced ranges from about A.D. 1100 to A.D. 1500 (Hughes
and Hughes-Jones 1987:22). Cord-marked tradeware also appears in other Late
Prehistoric sites on the Great Plains and Woodland areas of the United States and
Canada (Suhm and Jelks 1962:15).
The method used to manufacture Nocona Plain type ceramics involved
coil construction followed by hand-shaping and smoothing. Some specimens
with rougher surfaces were possibly made using the paddle and anvil method.
Sometimes a slip was applied. Although no complete or near complete vessels were recovered, enough sherds were retrieved to identify the sizes and

Martin ~ The DiUard Site

165

E
E

o

E

¯ r~

=_

©

m

Z

~5

=_
©

c~

©

=_
ca

©

z

0

G’3

"6
~q

E

o

166

Texas Archeological Society

a.

b.
~9

11

c.
,12

cm

Figure 33. Ceramic Rim forms from the Dillard site; vessel interiors to the right.
shapes of two vessel forms of Nocona Plain with three different rim forms
(Figure 33).
One vessel form is a cooking pot or storage jar with vertical sides and a
rounded globular body. Orifice diameters are estimated at about 37.5 cm, and
complete vessels could have had 3 to 5 liter capacities depending upon their
depth (see Figure 32c).
The other vessel form identified is a small bowl with a depth of about 6.5
cm and a width of 14 cm (see Figure 32d). A sizeable section of one bowl was
found in the Unit B(-3) fill above the mass burial, but the placement is not
believed to be intentional.
Complete vessels of Nocona Plain pottery are practically unknown, but one
unbroken specimen of apparent trade ware was found in Titus County, Texas
(Suhm and Jelks 1962:115). Pottery was not included as burial offerings in the
areas where Nocona Plain was made, and subsequently, few examples have
survived.
One other sherd of tradeware recovered was a rim section of a Caddoan
water bottle. The exterior and interior surfaces are chocolate brown in color,
and the exterior surface has been polished. In cross section, the core is bluishgray, changing to an oxidized bright red just beneath the outer surface. The
piece is 2 x 3 cm in size and comprises about one-sixth the circumference of
the rim. The thickness of the wall is 3.5 mm. Fine grained sand is the only
inclusion visible in the paste. There is no decoration on the rim, but based
upon similar descriptions, Wilder or Taylor Engraved bottles are possibilities
(Suhm and Jelks 1962).
Besides pottery sherds, pipe sherds were also found at the Dillard site (two
sherds from Block 2 and three from Block 3). Two fragments were pipe bowls,
and the others were sections of the stem (14 mm in diameter) and stem/bowl
junction (Figure 34). The ceramic pipe fragments were very hard and dense. The
color is black on broken surfaces with evidently small amounts of shell temper
showing on one sherd. A buff-colored slip had been applied to the surface.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

167

Figure 34. Ceramic pipe sherds.

In general, the pipe fragments do not resemble the pottery assumed to be
locally made (Nocona Plain). Rather, the style is that of a type known as the Red
River pipe (Bell 1980:99), although shell temper is usually not used with the Red
River pipe. These types of Red River pipes were made from ca. A.D. 800-1400,
and those from Dillard resemble later varieties (after ca. A.D. 1200).

SHELL ARTIFACTS
The shell artifacts from the Dillard site fall into two primary categories:
local mussel shells of freshwater origin and land snails of the Rabdotus genus,
and altered marine shells obtained through trade. None of the snail shells had
been altered for utilitarian or decorative use. Although the occurrence of mussel
shells and Rabdotus snail was frequent throughout the excavations, no lenses of
either were noted.
Two different species of mussels were harvested from the creeks and Red
River near the Dillard site. Both types were altered and utilized as digging tools;
a hole was perforated near the center of the shell to facilitate hafting onto a
handle. The unhafted shells may also have been used as gravedigging tools.
Their use as hide scrapers is also possible, but this cannot be proven due to
excessive deterioration of the edges.
Two complete halted mussel shell hoes, and three fragments, were recovered in the Block 3 cemetery (Figure 35). Also, twelve unaltered exampJes
showing evidence of wear were found. Many more shell fragments were found in
the blocks (Block 1 = 25; Block 2 =11; Block 3 = 349) to indicate the degree to
which they were harvested for food.
The discovery of 991 marine shell beads, and an engraved marine shell
gorget in effigy of a human hand, evidences regular contact with Eastern cultures
where these types of ornaments are commonly found. All of the marine shell
artifacts recovered occurred as burial offerings or were part of the attire of those

168

Texas Archeological Society

E
©

o

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

169

buried (Table 8). The likely origin of the identifiable shell types was in the
waters around Florida, on both the Atlantic and Gulf sides. Artifacts of engraved
shell appear in Mississippian period sites throughout the southeastern U.S. as far
north as the Crable site in Illinois, and as far west as the Sanders and Valley Mills
sites in Texas (Phillips and Brown 1978:xi). Shell beads have been found at other
Late Prehistoric sites across eastern Texas and Oklahoma, and have been reported as far west as the Plains Village Edwards site in Beckham County,
Oklahoma (Gilbert 1980:72).
The symbol of the hand has been linked to the "Southern Ceremonial
Complex" (SECC) or "Southern Cult," terms that have been used to describe a
common group of design elements and suspected religious practices prevalent
throughout the Southeast during the Late Prehistoric period (Phillips and Brown
1978:169). It is uncertain if the hand gorget from the Dillard site represents a
SECC artifact or association. This piece (Figure 36) does resemble four gorgets
removed from the Craig Mound at the Spiro site, and other Southeastern ceremonial centers, but the motif lacks the eye symbol engraved on the palm as often
occurs when associated with SECC burials (Hamilton 1952:206-208).
No refuse fragments of marine shell have been identified in the excavation
debris from Dillard; indicating that the shell artifacts were not likely manufactured at the site. The presence of artifacts of marine origin supposedly associated with the SECC may merely represent the trade of such goods (originating
somewhere in the Southeast), the motifs being the paraphenalia of Southeastern
ceremonialism, instead of evidence suggesting the adoption of Southeastern
religious practices on the Southern Plains.
The shell artifacts discovered at Dillard were probably traded in their
finished state (cf. Brain 1988). The presence of bison hair textiles and robes
from the Craig Mound at Spiro is suggestive that bison products among
Mississippian groups may have been obtained by trading with Plains cultures
(Hamilton 1952:265). Without regard to the original significance of the gorget,
its presence does suggest that the people at the Dillard site did have contact
with, and did carry on trade with, other contemporary societies from the
Southeast.
The raw materials used for some of the marine shell artifacts discovered at
Dillard were from two different shell species. These were a species of the
Olivella genus, native to the southern Atlantic and Gulf coastal waters, and a
species of the whelk shell, probably Busycon perversum, native to the southern
Florida coast (Phillips and Brown 1978:27).
There are only two places along the Gulf of Mexico from which the shell
for this artifact would have come. It came either from the western Gulf, near
present Vera Cruz, Mexico, or from the eastern Gulf on the coast of Florida
(Brain 1988). The total lack of evidence of the Mesoamerican connection lends
more credence to a Florida-based trade network (Spencer and Jennings 1965:73).
The workmanship and attention to detail involved in the production of the
gorget is excellent, and this is practically unknown for items from North Central

170

Texas Archeological Society

Q

Figure 36. Top: Engraved Shell gorget from the front; Bottom: Engraved Shell gorget
from the back. Note dissolution along one edge of the gorget.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

171

Table 8.
Marine Shell Artifacts

Burial Association

2

Small Disk Beads

68

3

4

Mass (8-12)

405

Sub-total

473

Columella (Large)

-

28

28

Columella (Small)

4

13

17

Olivella Shells

3

470

473

-

1

511

992

Engraved Gorget
Total

1
69

7

405

Texas. Because of the geographical area in which this necklace was found, it is
an important archeological find, but one should not discount the fact that it is
also a beautiful example of prehistoric Native American art.
The piece was probably obtained in its finished form via a trade route up
the Red River. Other engraved marine shell gorgets have been found in the Red
River Valley in previous years, but none have been found as far west as Dillard.
Since 1911, only 15 engraved shell gorgets, and 19 plain and engraved cups,
have been reported from various Caddo sites along the Red River, ranging from
the Belcher site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana, up river to the Sanders site in Lamar
County, Texas (Phillips and Brown 1978:163-168).
The edges of the gorget are all rounded and well finished. On the convex
surface are engraved abstract designs of unknown meaning or significance (see
Figure 36). The dimensions of this piece are 5.5 x 7.5 cm. The average size of
the 68 small drilled beads found accompanying the gorget was 1 x 5 mm.
The four different types of shell beads found with the burials at the Dillard
site were small drilled disk beads, small drilled columella beads, larger columella
beads, and beads made from the whole Olivella shell (Figures 37, 38). The disk
beads were made from small fragments of drilled shell that were strung and wetsanded on sandstone to round the edges. The columella beads were made from
drilled sections of central spiral of a whelk shell (Figure 39).
The utilitarian nature of most objects that are placed in prehistoric graves
usually is sufficiently straightforward to offer clues as to their intended use by
the deceased in the afterlife. Such an intended specific use for the marine shell
ornaments for the deceased can only be determined by learning about the social
and religious importance these objects represented to the people while they were

172

Texas Archeological Society

A.

Bo

®
D°

Figure 37. Shell Beads: A, Olivella shell bead; B, large drilled columella bead; C, small
drilled columella bead; D, drilled shell disk beads.

living. While their presence in the burials may indicate nothing more than the
simple act of burying property belonging to the deceased, the fact that exotic
Gulf coast shell artifacts were included is connotative of the social position of
some of the individuals at Dillard.
The importance the inhabitants of the Dillard site placed upon the possession of these beads is evident by the abundance of them when compared to
contemporary burials from this area. This practice of including such items
with human burials can be found among Caddoan groups throughout eastern
Texas and Oklahoma, but has been found only infrequently to be associated
with Late Prehistoric burials on the Southern Plains (Brooks et al. 1985:61;
Brooks 1994a).

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

173

Figure 38. Marine Shell Beads from the Block 3 burials: A, Olivella shells; B, drilled disk
beads; C, large and small drilled columella beads.

BONE ARTIFACTS
Two primary categories of bone artifacts, faunal remains and worked bone,
will be discussed. Worked bones are those faunal remains that have been
intentionally modified for tool use or ornamentation. Faunal remains comprise

174

Texas Archeological Society

(

J

4

Figure 39. Manufacture of Columella beads (from Holmes 1883:Plate XXIX): 1, crosssection of the shell Busycon perversum; 2, the extracted columella in its unfinished state;
3, roughly dressed pin of a type used on the Pacific Coast; 4, completed pin of the type
common in Central Mississippi Valley sites; 5, finished cylinder pointed at both ends; 6,
the manner of dividing the cylinder into sections for drilling and shaping beads.

the broken and unbroken animal bones from the byproducts of butchering and
processing animals for food.
Soil conditions, and the depth at which most of the bone artifacts from the
Dillard site were recovered, together created almost an ideal environment for the
preservation of bone. This was particularly true of the worked bone. Worked
bone is usually hard cortical bone which has been shaped, sanded, or polished.
Bone artifacts from Dillard are still quite durable, and most resemble fresh ivory
in their appearance and hardness.
The non-worked faunal remains (n=5241) were divided into three categories: deer bones (N=661), bison bones (N=146), and bones from other
animals (Table 9). Deer bones were about 4-5 times as prevalent as bison
bones. The deer remains were either from very young or very old deer. The
preservation of non-worked bone fragments is less remarkable, but is still
much better than is commonly seen in North Central Texas. The pits and
fissures present in broken bone fragments probably allowed for greater moisture and plant root penetration, resulting in more decalcification from dissolved acids than that found on a smooth, polished surface (Klein and
Cruz-Uribe 1984:7). Fat or oil was possibly rubbed into a bone tool’s worked
surfaces to enhance its flexibility.
Expert identification of a representative example of other faunal remains
revealed a variety of animals used for food (Table 10). These remains were
scattered over the different excavation areas, but were concentrated in the midden
areas of Block 3.

Martin -- The Dillard Site

175

Table 9.
Faunal Remains

Block

Deer

Bison

Other Animal

N

1

85

23

541

649

2

84

36

725

845

3

492

87

3168

3747

Percent

12.6

2.7

84.7

5241

Manufactured bone artifacts at this site were not abundant (N=33), but a
representative sample was recovered to illustrate the various types of bone tools
used by Plains Villagers during the Late Prehistoric period. The most common
bone artifact recovered was the bone awl. Four complete specimens (mean length
= 9.4 cm) and eight broken fragments were found (Table 11). One had an
unusually hard and sharpened point (Figure 40b). These tools were most likely
used to perforate hides in preparation for sewing into bags or garments. They
also could have been used in the manufacture of baskets or matting (Bell
1980:61). Three of the awls from Dillard retained the joint end of the bone as a
handle (Figure 40b-d), while all of the others were made from split sections of
bone (Figure 40a, e-m).
A bone hairpin or fastener of clothing was recovered from the mass burial
near the waist area, and between the skeletal remains of burials 8 and 9. It was
9.5 cm in length, and has been chipped and ground to shape, but was damaged by
rodent gnawing. It is blunted on both ends, and undecorated (Figure 41a).
Three flaking tools, used in the production of stone projectile points and
other tools, were found in association with an unusually large amount of lithic
debris in Block 1. All three of these flaking tools had been made from deer ulnae.
One had a long working point, while the other two had been shortened for more
power and control (Figure 41b-d). Six fragments of deer antler were also found,
and these were probably used for the same purpose (Figure 41e-j).
Three deer jaw sickles were recovered during the excavations, two of which
were recovered intact in Block 2 (Figure 42a, b). These tools were used mainly
for cutting grass, cane, and reeds to be used in basket weaving, matting, or house
thatching. They could also have been used for harvesting both wild and domestic
crops, as well as for shelling kernels of corn from the cobs. On each specimen the
condyle had been removed from the mandible to simplify the fastening of a short
handle to the ramus. The deer jaw sickle is commonly found in Plains Village

176

Texas Archeological Society
Table 10.
Identified Fauna from the Dillard Site
Mammals
White-tailed Deer

Odocoileus virginianus

Bison

Bison bison

Raccoon

Procyon lotor

Fox Squirrel

Sciurus niger

Jackrabbit

Lepus californicus

Cottontail Rabbit

Sylvilagus floridanus

Cotton Rat

Sigmodon hispidus

Wood Rat
Pocket Gopher

Neotoma floridana
Geomys cf breviceps

Swift Fox

Vulpes vulpes

Domestic Dog (shortface)

Canis familiaris

Birds
Wild turkey

Meleagris gallopavo

Great blue heron

Ardea herodias

Black-crowned night heron

Nycticorax nycticorax

Reptiles
Snake, two species
Pond slider
Box turtle
Softshell turtle

Trachemys scripta
Terrapene carolina
Trionyx sp.

Amphibians

Frog, two species

Ranasp.

Fish
Gar

Lepisosteus cf osseus

Bowfin

Amia calva

Buffalo

Ictiobus sp.

Catfish

Ictalurus sp.

Drum

Ap!odinotus grunniens

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

177

Table 11.
Bone tools and ornaments
Type

Unit

Length

Figure
40D

Awl

B(-3)

7.5 cm

Awl

C(-3)

11.5 cm

40B

Awl

B(-4)

8.5 cm

40A

Awl

A(-5)

10.0 cm

40C

Awl (Fragment)

E-6

3.7 cm

40H

Awl (Fragment)

B-3

2.0 cm

40L

Awl (Fragment)

B(-3)

3.0 cm

40J

Awl (Fragment)

D-5

3.0 cm

40I

Awl (Fragment)

J-1

4.8 cm

40G

Awl (Fragment)

J-1

2.7 cm

40K

Awl (Fragment)

F-1

1.7 cm

40M

Awl (Fragment)

I-1

6.5 cm

40E
41A

Hairpin

A(-3)

9.5 cm

Bone flaker

K-1

8.5 cm

41C

Bone flaker

J-1

9.0 cm

41B

Bone flaker

J-1

8.0 cm

41D

Deer jaw sickle

K- 1

12.0 cm

42A

Deer Jaw sickle

J-1

11.0 cm

42B

Antler tine

J-1

2.5 cm

41J

Antler tine

B(-2)

2.3 cm

41F

Antler tine

B(-2)

2.3 cm

41G

Antler tine

B-3

2.0 cm

411

Antler tine

D(-2)

2.3 cm

41E

Antler tine

A-4

1.6 cm

41H

Hide grainer

H-1

6.5 x 6 cm

44A

Bison ulna tool

D-7

20.0 cm

44B

Bone bead

A-3

3.7 cm

43E

Bone bead

C(-4)

1.2 cm

43F
43A

Fishhook blank

B(-4)

3.5 cm

Fishhook blank

C(-2)

3.2 cm

43B

Fastener

C(-4)

lxl cm

43D

Bone disk

B(-2)

0.8 cm dia.

43C

Unidentified

D(-2)

6.0 cm

40F

178

Texas Archeological Society

H

M

Figure 40. Deer Bone Tools: A-E, G-M, awls; F, Unidentified tool.

sites (such as the Washita River phase), as well as on Caddoan sites in Oklahoma
and Texas (Bell 1980:71).
The production of fishhooks at Dillard provides some insight on the importance of fish in the Plains Village diet on the Red River. Fish could occasionally
be obtained by capturing them in shallow pools, but the manufacture of handline
tackle to catch them suggests that they were regular food items on the menu. The
unfinished fishhook blank found intact at the Dillard site measured 11 x 33 mm
with a 4.5 x 10 mm hole cut toward one end (Figure 43a). This artifact is
extremely well preserved. The other fishhook fragment was found in the storage
pit in Block 3.

Martin m The Dillard Site

Q

0

179

180

Texas Archeological Society

A

B!

Figure 42. Deer Jaw Sickles showing front and back views of the modified ramus used for
hafting.

Two bone beads were recovered during the excavations in Block 3. One was
made from a bird leg or wing bone, measuring 5 x 13 mm in size. The other one
(7 x 37 mm in size), associated with the disturbed Burial 6, was made from a
small mammal leg bone (Figure 43e-f).
The use of the most unusual bone artifact has not been determined. It was
cut from a section of flattened bone (2 mm in thickness) into a square shape
roughly 10 x 10 mm. Into two opposing sides were cut two deep notches, 2.5 x
2.5 mm each. One face of the artifact has been scored several times with a stone
tool (Figure 43d). My hypothesis is that it was used as a fastener, much like a
button. A thong or sinew could be tied tightly around the "button," being held in
place by the notches, with the knot against one of the flat sides. This in turn could

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

181

D

Figure 43. Miscellaneous bone tools and ornaments: A-B, fishhook blanks; C, unidentified
disk; D, button or fastener; E-F, beads.

be tied onto clothing by passing the two ends through two holes and tying them
from the reverse side.
A small, round disk of bone was found in Block 3. Less than a cm in
diameter, it had been sanded and shaped on all surfaces. Its intended use is
unknown (Figure 43c).
A flattened section of cancellous bone from a bison femur is identified
as a hide grainer (Figure 44a). Fashioned from the end of the bone, the flat
spongy surface was used like an abrader to smooth the surface of hides that
were being prepared for bedding or clothing (Bell 1980). The artifact measured 56 x 65 x 37 mm. These bone tools have been found on protohistoric
Wichita sites in Oklahoma.
A digging tip made from the ulna of a bison was found in Block 2. Marks on
the tool as a result of hafting show that it was fastened to a handle and used like a
shovel (Figure 44b). Bison tibia digging tips are common artifacts in Plains
Village sites, especially in the Washita River phase (Bell 1980:75).

182

Texas Archeological Society

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

183

EVIDENCE OF COPPER

A fragment of human cranium recovered from Unit A(-4) was stained a
bright blue color. This stain permeated the entire bone fragment (8 x 10 x 2 mm
in size). It was suspected that this staining resulted from the presence of metallic
copper, perhaps in the form of a bead, some of which had corroded on or near the
surface of the bone fragment. As the original source of the suspected copper was
not recovered or had corroded away, a simple chemical test was devised to
confirm the presence of the copper ion.
Metallic copper oxidizes in the soil through corrosion. The resulting anhydrous copper sulfate is colorless, but in the presence of moisture changes to the
characteristic blue color of the pentahydrate, represented by the following chemical equations:
Cu2 + H2SO4 = CuSO4 + H2
CuSO4 + 5H20 = CuSO4.5H20
colorless

blue

When the pentahydrate is dissolved in water, the cupric ion actually has the
formula [Cu(H20)412. If excess chloride ions (from HC1 or other very soluble
chlorides) are dissolved in the solution, the color becomes green. The green color
is attributed to an equilibrium mixture of blue and yellow ions, represented by
the equation:
[Cu(H20)412 + 4C1 = [CUC1412 + 4H20

blue

yellow

When the bone sample was tested under controlled conditions, the presence of
copper ions was confirmed (Kennan and Wood 1966:517).
It is not a total surprise to find evidence of copper use in North Central
Texas during this period. The availability of the metal at large prehistoric
Caddoan trading centers, where other trade materials from Dillard probably
originated, substantiates this.

MATERIAL ASSOCIATIONS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
The perception that the Dillard site was continuously occupied for several
hundred years has a direct bearing upon the manner in which artifacts and
remains were deposited. Although cultural debris was present throughout the
occupation zone, it was most abundant in levels 2-3: lithic debris, pottery sherds,
and broken animal bones were all consistently more numerous in these layers.

184

Texas Archeological Society

Burned and broken hearthstones were also more plentiful in levels 2-3, except in
the center of the cemetery area where many large stones were concentrated near
the surface.
Fresno arrow points are found generally in more recent deposits at the site,
along with Washitgt points, and these points are diagnostic of the Late Prehistoric
II period. Scallorn, Bonham, and Gary dart points are diagnostic of the Late
Prehistoric I period. Thus, the arrowpoint distributions suggest the multi-component nature of the site.
The average thickness of the occupational deposits was 66 cm (Figures 45
and 46). This is unusually deep when compared to the the nearby Chickenhouse
site and other Late Prehistoric sites in the area (Lorrain 1969). This evidence,
coupled with the recovery of projectile points made over several hundred years,
suggests that the site may have been consistently occupied for many generations
(Figure 47). Profile layers displayed no sterile lenses or changes in soil color
within the occupied zone. The only soil color changes noted were post molds,
darker areas where ashes and charcoal were concentrated, and small intrusive
areas of lighter soil introduced by burrowing rodents.
Many ochre stones of two primary colors were recovered throughout the
excavation of the site, but they were most numerous in the areas of the burials.
The stones originated in the Cretaceous formation of the Trinity and Woodbine
Sands in which gas pockets from organic decay formed. These voids became
filled with a soft brick red or yellow ochre hematite that can be scraped or ground
into a powdered pigment. Ochre is found in abundance in both the Eastern and
Western Cross Timbers of Cooke and Montague counties. The prevalence of
these stones at this site suggests common use either for personal adornment
(body painting), or for the coloring of pottery or clothing.
With the exception of Burial 1, there were no arrowpoints found directly
associated with this or any of the other burials in the cemetery. The artifacts
thought to be burial furniture, either as part of the person’s attire or placed in a
ceremonial context, included all of the marine shell beads (at least four necklaces and one bracelet), the shell gorget, ochre stones, a lump of green clay, the
three roughly made arrowpoints, two bone beads, and a bone hairpin.

CHRONOLOGY AND RADIOCARBON DATES
Since the excavation of the Dillard Site was undertaken as a personally
funded project, only two radiocarbon samples have been analyzed from the
several collected samples. More samples will be analyzed as finances permit. In
an attempt to obtain the most reliable results, the largest and cleanest of the
samples collected were submitted to the University of Texas Radiocarbon Laboratory for analysis.
The samples tested were both charcoal, primarily still in lump form, and
they were not affected by root contamination. Sample A came from a 13 cm

Martin -- The Dillard Site

~""

~"

"

D’~

J

~

o"

*¢y,~

-’.,4.,.

185

o,iiI

,..r,

o
0

’7

.,..-.-:-:

%°°°°%%

r.,)

0
0

,.°°.

oo
©

]
°
!i’
(-q

o
o
ca

186

Texas Archeological Society

Martin -- The Dillard Site

Point Type

A.D. 500

Gary Dart
Scallorn

750

1000

1250

187

1500

->

<

>

Bonham
Cliffton
Washita
Fresno
Agee

>

.>

Figure 47. Age ranges of projectile points from the Dillard Site.

layer of soil separating Burial 1 and Burial 2 in Block 3, Unit A(-3). Burial 1
was directly above Burial 2. This position rules out disturbance or intrusion as
a cause for the origin of the sample, and definitely associates the sample with at
least one of the burials at the site. The sample was collected at 55 cm bs.
Sample B was recovered near the bottom of the large storage pit, 213.4 cm
bs, in Units C(-2) and D(-2), Block 3. The age of this sample should help
determine the time of pit abandonment and document the beginning of its use as
a trash depository.
The isotope corrected date obtained for Sample A was 680 + 110 years B.P.
(Tx-6179), and Sample B was 622 + 58 years B.P. (Tx-8022). These correspond
well with my estimates of the age of the samples (A.D. 1150-1350) when they
were submitted for analysis.
These dates were further analyzed by using a radiocarbon calibration computer program to make probability predictions of the ranges of occupation
(Stuiver and Reimer 1993). The program calculates minimum and maximum age
ranges (Method A), and their probability distributions (Method B) for the calibrated radiocarbon dates (Table !2).
Taking Sample B as an example, the values found by Method B can be
interpreted as follows. With a one-sigma error range, 85 percent of the area under
the probability distribution is within the combined age range Cal. A.D. 13001370 (or 85 percent of the error curve for one sigma). With a two-sigma error
range of 95.4 percent, 100 percent of the area is within the age range A.D. 12901420 (Stuiver and Reimer 1993).

188

Texas Archeological Society
Table 12.
Radiocarbon Calibrations

Sample A, Corrected date, 680 + 110 B.P.
Minimum of calibrated age ranges/Age intercepts/Maximum of calibrated age ranges
le cal. AD 1260

(1290) 1407

2e cal. AD 1157

(1290) 1440

% area enclosed

Cal. A.D. age ranges

Relative area under
probability distribution

68.3 (le)

A.D. 1260-1410

1.00

95.4 (2e)

A.D. 1150-1450

0.97

Sample B, Corrected date, 622 + 58 B.P.
Minimum of calibrated age ranges/Age Intercepts/Maximum of calibrated age ranges
le cal. AD 1293 (1330, 1350, 1360, 1370, 1390) 1408
2e cal. AD 1281 (1330, 1350, 1360, 1370, 1390) 1430
% area enclosed

Cal. A.D. age ranges

Relative area under
probability distribution

68.3 (le)

95.4 (2e)

A.D. 1300-1330

.42

A.D. 1340-1370

.43

A.D.1380-1390

.15

A.D. 1290-1420

1.00

SUMMARY
The occupation of the Dillard Site occurred continuously over a period of
350 to 400 years, beginning around A.D. 1100. This encompasses part of both
the Late Prehistoric I and Late Prehistoric II periods (Prikryl 1990). Prehistoric
phases that existed during this time on the Southern Plains and western edges
of the woodlands include: Sanders, Spiro, Haley, Henrietta, Frankston, Titus,
Antelope Creek, Custer, Optima, and Washita River (Brooks et al. 1985; Brooks
1994a).
The prolonged occupation of the Dillard site, but the limited amount of
work conducted there, prohibits estimating what the population was at any given
period, but it may have been greater during the deposition of levels 2 and 3 since

Martin -- The DiUard Site

189

they contain the highest artifact densities. The longevity of the site as a
permanent village may be attributed to its favorable location. Another village
site with surface finds of artifacts comparable in age has recently been discovered in a field south of, and directly across, Fish Creek from the Dillard site.
It is concentrated on a large terrace 665 to 675 feet in elevation, and extends
south from the prehistoric mouth of the creek. It is conceivable that at times
both terraces were occupied simultaneously as part of one village; thus the
village population at the time of occupation could be much larger than originally
thought.
Because of the geographic position of the Dillard site, and the site artifact
assemblage, it is not considered a "classic" Henrietta Focus site. The origin of
the Late Prehistoric inhabitants of North Central Texas, and of the Henrietta
Focus, has never been firmly established, nor has a core area been described in
which its distinctive cultural characteristics may have developed. The area encompassing the Henrietta Focus might best be described then as part of a cultural
"buffer zone" between the wooded east and the prairie west. The cultural materials found at Dillard display some characteristics of both traditions.
The boundaries of this buffer zone extend from around Wichita Falls,
Texas, in the west, to Bonham, Texas in the east, and from Denton, Texas to the
south, northward to about Ardmore, Oklahoma; that is, the middle Red River
Valley and areas 50-70 km either side of it, and the upper tributaries of the
Trinity and Brazos rivers (Krieger 1946:87). Different villages within this area
seemingly adopted many characteristics of neighboring cultures, dependent upon
their geographic location. Those villages located in the eastern part of the zone
display more eastern traits, while the opposite is true of those villages located on
the plains further west (Wyckoff 1970:104). Subtle regional differences in artifact assemblages from these sites can be observed when collections from eastern
and western Plains Village sites are compared (Brooks 1994a).
One example of this regional variability is the difference in the styles and
numbers of milling stones found on Late Prehistoric Plains Village sites in North
Central Texas. Those examples found on eastern sites are smaller and shallower
than the more massive and deeper ones found on contemporary sites 60-80 km
west of Dillard (Krieger 1946:108). Milling stones are less numerous on eastern
sites when compared to those in the west, where hundreds of broken and complete examples have been observed scattered on site surfaces. One unrecorded
site in Montague County also has dozens of milling holes pecked into the large
stationary boulders at the edge of a bluff. A comparative decrease in the numbers
of milling stones in the area of the Dillard site, can best be explained by a change
to wooden mortars and pestles for processing grain. This change from stone to
wooden implements was an idea that spread from the east and perhaps did not
become well established in the western areas (Vehik 1989).
Another discernible difference at the Dillard site is related to the geographical terrain. This part of the Red River valley provided the populace with more
available deer than bison to hunt. The forested hills and isolated valleys were not

190

Texas Archeological Society

favorable terrain for large gregarious groups of bison, although their numbers
had increased on the Southern Plains during the Late Prehistoric period. The
large percentage of deer bones as compared to bison remains recovered from all
levels of the Dillard site substantiates this. The tendency to rely more heavily on
deer populations for meat is a characteristic of the more easterly situated Plains
Village groups, who were agriculturally oriented while those to the west relied
more strongly on bison (Brooks 1994a:43).
Another dissimilarity is with the types of lithic trade materials found on
eastern Henrietta Focus sites with those from sites further west. Many eastern
sites, particularly those around Lake Texoma, are dominated by lithics from
eastern Oklahoma and Arkansas (Albert 1984). Lithic material originating at
sources in West and Southwest Texas occurs most often on Late Prehistoric sites
located west of western Cooke County. Geographical location would logically
dictate this since the cherts, chalcedony, and jasper occasionally found at most of
these sites originated as cobbles washed down from the western drainages into
the Red River.
There are no ceremonial or burial mound complexes on the Red River west
of the Caddoan Harling Site (41FN1) in Fannin County, Texas (Davis 1970:4255). Temple and burial mounds are associated with the more important religious
and social centers of the Caddo, but not all Caddoan groups built both temple or
burial mounds. It makes sense that prosperous villages like the Dillard site,
located on the western fringe of the moundbuilding areas and well outside the
main sphere of Caddoan influence, would not have started this practice, even
after some period of contact and interaction. Less affluence and more difficult
en,cironmental conditions would not easily allow a frontier society the wherewithal to invest energy in ceremonial activities such as mound building. Also,
ceremonial mound centers are traditionally located in areas where mound building and associated religious practices evolved over a period of centuries (Albert
1984:15-17). Nevertheless, the absence of mounds at Late Prehistoric sites in
North Central Texas does not preclude the possibility of the inhabitants possessing similar religious ceremonies and basic beliefs as those practiced in Caddoan
societies (Albert 1984:15). Influential Late Prehistoric villages like Dillard are
identifiable archeologically, as are non-moundbuilding Caddoan centers.
Given these observations, it is believed that the people of the Dillard site,
and other nearby villages identified with the Henrietta Focus, were the progeny
of the original Late Archaic inhabitants of North Central Texas. Contact with
their surrounding neighbors, and their own adaptations, resulted in the development of sedentary villages, horticultural economies, and, to a lesser extent, bison
hunting as a means to increase food production. This contact and influence
increased as the dependence upon the eastern cultural centers became less important to those Caddoans living on the western frontier, and contacts with Plains
inhabitants became more frequent. Thus, Plains Village groups in the eastern part
of North Central Texas were different from more northern and western Plains
Village farmers.

Martin ~ The Dillard Site

191

One of the original goals of the investigation concerned the amount of
social contact and interaction that occurred with neighboring villages, such as the
Chickenhouse site. Corrected dates from Chickenhouse (A.D. 1080, 1160, 1270,
and 1430) indicate that occupations at both sites were largely contemporaneous.
The artifacts from Chickenhouse are quite similar to those from Dillard in style
and frequency: bone awls, fishhook debitage, whetstones, abraders, retouched
flakes, scrapers, worked bison bones, knives, drills and bone beads. A variety of
lithics were identified at both sites with non-local Edwards chert, quartz crystal,
Alibates dolomite, and obsidian represented. Milling stones and manos were not
abundant from either site. Cache pits, post molds, and hearths were much the
same at both sites. The few clay pipe fragments from the two sites were nearly
identical in size, material, and color, and were of a style and craftsmanship of
Caddoan design (Bell 1980:98).
The only controlled excavation of a burial from Chickenhouse was of a
middle-aged female buried in a semi-flexed position. The skull, left hand, and
left wrist was missing and appeared to have been lacking these body parts when
buried. The mandible was present. Two other burials were located by a dragline
removing gravel after the excavations had terminated, but the bones were removed and given away before examination (Lorrain 1969). This one burial,
however, shares with many of the Dillard site burials the fact that they also were
missing some of their body parts.
The pottery from Chickenhouse was nearly all Nocona Plain. The rim forms
were the same as most of those at Dillard, with large cooking vessels common
at both sites. The thickness, temper, and method of manufacture were alike, but
the body shapes of the vessels from Chickenhouse are more globular or ollashaped. Some vessels from this site have massive flattened bases; no bases were
found at the Dillard site. A few sherds of cord-marked ceramics were recovered
at both sites. Limestone was sometimes used as temper in the pottery samples
from both sites.
The types of projectile points differ at the two sites. Most notable is the
greater percentage of Scallorn points, and the Eddy arrowpoint type, at
Chickenhouse. Illustrated examples of the Eddy type appear to be a variety of the
Alba type (Turner and Hester 1985). Several dart points were also found at
Chickenhouse, and these together with the Scallorn and Eddy types, suggest that
this site’s occupation began before that of the Dillard site, where only one
contracting stem dart point was found.
Based upon the comparison of the artifacts and radiocarbon dates, it can
be reasonably assumed that the two sites were partly contemporaneous. Owing to the proximity of the sites, there was probably some contact between the
two neighboring Late Prehistoric villages in the Fish Creek Valley. The relationship of the prehistoric villages with other neighboring settlements would
not likely have been competitive or hostile, but raids by hostile groups probably did occur, particularly during times of drought when food supplies were
decreased over wide areas.

192

Texas Archeological Society

No artifacts of marine shell were found during the Chickenhouse excavations, this being the only other major difference between the artifact assemblages
of the two sites. Those from Dillard were found associated only with burials
dating to the Late Prehistoric II period. The burial from Chickenhouse did not
contain beads and other grave goods, but six bone beads were recovered during
excavations elsewhere on the site (Lorrain 1969).
There is an abundance and variety of other trade items found at the Dillard
site. Those obtained through eastern trade networks were probably channeled
through locations near the Great Bend of the Red River and the middle Arkansas
River, where lithic materials, pottery vessels, and marine shell ornaments were
amassed at commercial centers like Spiro and Sanders (Schambach 1993). Sites
like Dillard had greater access to trade goods from the east because of their
proximity to the Red River. After exchanges were made at key trading points
along the river, a wider dispersal of the trade goods was probably achieved
through local barter with widely dispersed groups.
The Dillard site existed at a time when trade and commerce was at its height
between Southeastern cultures. The large numbers of marine shell artifacts found
at several civic-ceremonial sites suggests that beads, beaded clothing, and other
shell items were important symbols of trade and exchange during this period
(Kopper 1986:167). It is very possible that occupants of the Dillard site acted as
intermediaries between traders traveling by river and groups living away from
navigable streams. Its strategic location at the junction of Fish Creek and Red
River, and the imposing view of the village itself, would provide an easily
recognizable landmark for unfamiliar travelers going upriver in dugout canoes.
Probable trade materials at Dillard include stone, shell, pottery, and copper.
The lithics identified in the debris included quartz crystal, novaculite, Zipper
chert, and Bigfork chert from the Ouachita Mountains of Southeast Oklahoma,
and both Keokuk and Reed Springs varieties of Boone chert from the Western
Ozarks (Banks 1990; Albert 1984:73-75). Lithics from west or southwestern
sources include Edwards chert from Central Texas, black translucent obsidian,
probably from New Mexico, and Alibates dolomite from near Amarillo on the
Canadian River; Alibates is also found in river gravels downstream from the
quarries. Other items were copper from the Great Lakes area, marine shell beads
and a gorget of whelk shell from the Gulf and Atlantic coasts, and cord-marked
pottery from possibly the Washita River or Antelope Creek phases. The farranging extent of such a trade network is impressive, even in modern times, and
emphasizes the generally accepted notion that Henrietta Focus peoples, and other
Plains Village cultures, had adequate contacts and opportunities to obtain imported items and raw materials.
The suspected building outline of a structure in Block 2 of the Dillard site
is similar to those described at Chickenhouse: the floor areas were circular or
ovoid in shape and moderately sized, being approximately 6 to 6.5 m in diameter (Lorrain 1969). The outer framework of the structures at both sites was
supported by an inner framework made of three or four large posts, 15 to 18 cm

Martin -- The Dillard Site

193

in diameter. Smaller post molds along the perimeter of the structures provided
the foundation for thatching, and thus the structures would have resembled the
~,o ,,1 ,,la~V11,~ ,, ,u,,lu,~ ~,~,ut,~ kO,~l~O ¯ :,,,, j. ,_,e,~ut l,ltu,,~,t posts may represent support poles for bedding frames and storage racks. Beginning at the
bottom, bundles of cut cane or grass were vertically tied to this framework construction and were lashed in tiers until the entire house was thatched (Newcomb
and Campbell 1982:34). These were very durable dwellings of surprising longevity. A 1956 reproduction of a similar dwelling at Indian City near Anadarko,
Oklahoma, is still in good repair. Many structures were erected at the Dillard
site, as evidenced by the numerous post molds exposed in the blocks. The most
intense areas of house construction were concentrated on the highest parts of
the terrace. Garden plots and outdoor work arbors probably surrounded the central living areas where the houses were located.
Milling stones, agricultural tools, and the remains of charred corncobs are
conclusive evidence for the practice of maize agriculture at this site. Other crops
were probably grown, such as beans, squash, sunflowers, or tobacco, but flotation analysis is needed to confirm this. Other plant food resources included
walnuts, pecans, hickory nuts, and chestnuts; no acorns were found despite the
thousands of oak trees of varying species in the surrounding forests. Wild edible
or medicinal plants were probably also brought back to the village and tended to
in the garden plots. However, foraging was still an important food source,
particularly in the springtime when domestic surpluses were near depletion and
the field crops were not ready for harvest.
Snares or nets were likely employed to capture small game animals and
fowl, while the bow and arrow was reserved for the larger game. The bow and
arrow is the predominate weapon to be positively identified as having been made
and used at the Dillard site. The main projectile point type was the Washita,
many a serrated variety. Also common was the Fresno type, and this point was
generally recovered from the upper midden deposits.
The burials at the Dillard site were confined to a very small area on the
southern point of the terrace, nearest the junction of the creek with Red River.
This area contained deep midden deposits overlaying two abandoned storage
pits. The storage pits eventually fell into disuse, and were filled with trash either before or about the same time as the burial interments. This area continued
to be subsequently used as both a refuse dump and cemetery. So much refuse
continued to be deposited here that the whole terrace point became elevated 3060 cm higher than adjacent village areas. It was here, many years after the initial occupation of the site, that the last burials were placed in the highest
elevation of the refuse heap.
The absence in the Henrietta Focus burials of pottery vessels and weapons as grave goods is significantly different from contemporary Caddoan
phases further east (Perttula 1992). Although marine shell artifacts are often
found in Caddoan burials, they are rarely seen in Plains Village burials. In
almost all instances at the Dillard site, they were the primary burial offerings.

194

Texas Archeological Society

These objects either represented great wealth and importance to the survivors
(important enough to lavish upon the dead), or the beads and ornaments were
the possessions of the deceased. The in situ positions of most of the beads
indicates they were worn as necklaces, anklets, and bracelets. The widespread
dispersal of many of the Olivella beads suggests that some of them may have
been sewn on to garments for decoration, but rodent disturbances may also
account for this.
Personal adornment with exotic jewelry was a popular custom and probably a sign of social status among the inhabitants of the Dillard site. Almost 70
percent of the burials were adorned with some sort of bead ornamentation. The
ages of those buried with such finery ranged from 2 to 60 years. The sex of the
individuals apparently had no bearing on who wore the bead necklaces, but
beads that appear to have been sewn to the clothing were found only on or near
the remains of two women.
The body positions of the interments at Dillard were flexed, partially
flexed, or extended, with the heads directed generally to the east or northeast.
Most Caddoan burials are extended, but flexed and semiflexed burials also
rarely occur (Turner 1978). The direction bodies are buried is not uniform
among most burials on the Southern Plains, but most are placed in a flexed or
semi-flexed position.
Two of the intact skulls from the Dillard site had fracture injuries confined
to the facial areas, resulting in avulsed teeth, with associated fractures of the
maxilla, mandible, and cranium. No cut marks were observed on the surfaces of
the skulls in the areas of this trauma. Some additional fracturing may have
occurred many years postmortem because of ground settling and movement.
Besides the possible dismemberment of four of the five individuals in the mass
burial, their skulls have blackened encrusted areas on the surfaces as if they had
been partially burned or scorched. This may be related to the ectocranial porosis
present on most of the skulls. Some burials had other missing body parts (such
as a mandible and humerus) and they were removed without leaving any
recognizable cut marks on the connecting bones.

CONCLUSION
The topographic location of the Dillard site fits the ideal prerequisites for
a site existing during Late Prehistoric I and II periods: near a source of fresh
water; a major, navigable stream was nearby; and the immediately surrounding
terrain was heavily wooded. It is also situated above the normal floodplain on
the second river terrace, and the soil is a fine, sandy loam that is fertile, drains
well, and is easily tilled (cf. Albert 1984:132-133).
Certain archeological evidence from the Dillard site is suggestive of interaction with Caddoan groups. This includes maize agriculture, sedentary lifestyle,
items obtained by trade from Mississippian cultures, housing that was similar

Martin m The Dillard Site

t95

to Caddoan construction, and Caddoan style tobacco pipes. Similar cultural traits
are shared with the nearby Washita River phase, namely: maize agriculture,
comparable arrowpoint assemblages, Nocona Plain and Lindsay Cord-marked
pottery, sites situated on river terraces, more deer remains than bison, as well as
the appearance of trade goods from both the Caddoan Area and from areas to
the west and southwest (Kawecki and Wyckoff 1984; Brooks et al. 1985).
The archeological record from the Dillard site does resemble the Washita
River phase more than any Caddoan tradition phase, but major differences are
noted. Pipes from the Washita River phase are usually stone elbow pipes, a
typical Plains Village style, and the houses instead of being circular in floor plan
are rectangular (Brooks et al. 1985:18). No burial goods were found with
Washita River phase burials, as is generally true of the Henrietta Focus and other
Late Prehistoric burials on the Southern Plains.
The location of the Dillard Site in the riparian forests of the Red River, in
reality, a western extension of the Eastern Cross Timbers, was an area geographically more suited to eastern than western cultural adaptations. The more
abundant food resources in the area of the site led to the adoption of a more
sedentary lifestyle, and its proximity to the river afforded the inhabitants easy
access to traders from the east, and first chance at the available goods.
It is hoped that additional investigations of Late Prehistoric sites of North
Central Texas and South Central Oklahoma will recover more evidence revealing the extent of Caddoan interaction in this area, and what effects this had on
the lifestyles of indigenous occupants. Periodic contact with far-ranging traders
may have helped to spread ideas as well as material goods, suggesting that other
Plains Village sites may have had stronger ties with contemporary eastern groups
than was once believed.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The excavation of the Dillard Site was conducted with the assistance of
various interested individuals who provided many man-hours in troweling,
screening, recording, and bagging the occupational debris. This includes: Gary
Young, Terry Zunk, Steve Brammer, Vicki Kiester, Karen Hott, David Bryant,
Billy Booher, Rick Enderby, Diana Enderby, Micheal Enderby, Laura Flushe,
Jack Walker, Sandy Idom, and Ona B. Reed. Members of the "Introduction to
Archeology" classes of Cooke County College also assisted on two occasions.
A great deal of help was provided by my two sons, Brandon and Dustin Martin,
and by my wife, Marsha. My friend Albert Redder visited the site and offered
assistance in the interpretation of findings. My thanks also to George Bryant
for arranging and piloting an aerial survey of the site and surrounding areas. I
am particularly grateful to the landowners, Mr. and Mrs. Dutch Dillard and Mr.
and Mrs. Don Monroe, without whose interest and cooperation this project could
not have been undertaken.

196

Texas Archeological Society

Special recognition goes to Dan Prikryl, William Martin, Robert Brooks,
Dan McGregor, Duane Peter, and Bob Skiles, who all visited the site and aided
in the interpretations of the remains. The help of Milton Bell, who photographed
the artifacts, is appreciated. I would also like to thank Bonnie Yates, then of the
University of North Texas, for providing the faunal analysis, Sam Valastro of
the University of Texas Radiocarbon Lab for his assistance in dating samples
from the site, and to Dr. Tim Perttula for his help in editing this paper.
The most helpful assistance to me during this excavation was provided by
my good friend Richard Schroeder, whose untimely death in 1990 was a personal tragedy, and in whose memory this work is dedicated.

REFERENCES CITED
Albert, L. E.
1984
An Archeological Survey Along the Red River: The Kemp Bottoms Area,
Bryan County, Oklahoma. Archeological Resource Survey Report, No. 19.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Albrecht, F. J.
1992

Osteological Analysis of Human Skeletons from the Dillard Site (41CO 174),
North Central Texas. Submitted in partial satisfaction of the requirements for
the degree of Master of Forensic Science, George Washington University,
Washington, D.C.

1994

Osteological Analysis of Human Skeletons from the Dillard Site. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 62:201-217.

Banks, L. D.
1990

From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Review of Lithic Sources in
the Trans-Mississippi South, the Southern Plains, and Adjacent Southwest.
Memoir No. 4. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Oklahoma City.

Bell, R. E.
1980

Oklahoma Indian Artifacts. University of Oklahoma Stovall Museum,
Norman.

Blaine, J. C.
1990

Lecture, Spanish Fort Revisited. Dallas Archeological Society, Dallas, Texas.

Bovee, D. L. and D. W. Owsley
1994

Evidence of Warfare at the Heerwald Site. In: Skeletal Biology in the Great
Plains: Migration, Warfare, Health, and Subsistence, edited by D. W. Owsley
and R. L. Jantz, pp. 355-362. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington,
D.C.

Martin m The Dillard Site

197

Bowman, S.
1990
Radiocarbon Dating. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Brain, J. P.
1988

The Great Mound Robbery. Archeology 4 (No. 3): 18-25.

Brooks, R. L.
1994a Southern Plains Cultural Complexes. In: Skeletal Biology in the Great Plains:
Migration, Warfare, Health, and Subsistence, edited by D. W. Owsley and R.
L. Jantz, pp. 33-50. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

1994b

Warfare on the Southern Plains. In: Skeletal Biology in the Great Plains:
Migration, Warfare, Health, and Subsistence, edited by D. W. Owsley and R.
L. Jantz, pp. 317-323. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Brooks, R. L., R. R. Drass, and F. E. Swenson
Prehistoric Farmers of the Washita River Valley: Settlement and Subsistence

1985

Patterns During the Plains Village Period. Archeological Resource Survey
Report, No. 23. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Collins, M. B. and C. B. Bousman
1993

Qauternary Environments and Archeology in Northeastern Texas. In: Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited
by N. A. Kenmotsu and T. K. Perttula, pp. 49-67. Cultural Resource Management Report 3. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Davis, E. M.
1970

Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Red River Basin in Texas. In:
Archeological and Historical Resources of the Red River Basin, edited by H.
A. Davis, pp. 25-65. Research Series No. 1. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.

Dillehay, T. D.
1974

Late Quaternary bison population changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19:180-196.

Duffield, L. F. and E. B. Jelks
1961
The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Archeology Series 4. Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, Austin.
Durham, J. H. and M. K. Davis
Report on Burials Found at Crenshaw Mound "C", Miller County, Arkansas.
1975
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society 23:1-90.
Gainesville Daily Register
1992

Rainfall Totals over the Last Ten Years. April 1992.

198

Texas Archeological Society

Gilbert, C. M.
Oklahoma Prehistory. University of Oklahoma Stovall Museum and the
1980
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Hamilton, H. W.
1952
The Spiro Mound. The Missouri Archaeologist 14:20-208.
Holmes, W. H.
Art in Shell of the Ancient Americans. Bureau of Ethnology, 2nd Annual
1883
Report, pp. 185-428. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Hughes, J. T.
A Chronology of Hunting Cultures on the Southern Plains. Texas Archeology
1988
32 (No. 3):7.
Hughes, R. E.
1989
Notes on Obsidian from the Fort Hood Area of Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 59:193-199.
Jelks, E. B. (editor)
1967
The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 37.
Joukowsky, M.
A Complete Manual of Field Archeology, Tools and Techniques of Field
1980
Work for Archaeologists. Prentice Hall Press, New York City.

Kawecki, P. L. and Wyckoff, D. G. (editors)
Contributions to Cross Timbers Prehistory. Studies in Oklahoma’s Past, No.
!984
12. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.
Keenan, C. W. and J. J. Wood
1966
General College Chemistry. Harper and Row, New York.

Klein, R. G. and K. Cruz-Uribe
1984
The Analysis of Animal Bones from Archeological Sites. Prehistoric Archeology and Ecology Series. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Kopper, P.
The Smithsonian Book of North American Indians (Before the Coming of the
1986
Europeans). Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Krieger, A. D.
1946
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas With Extension of
Puebloan Dating to the Mississippi Valley. Publication 4640. University of
Texas, Austin.

Martin -- The Dillard Site

199

Lorrain, D.
1969
Archeological Investigations in the Fish Creek Reservoir. Contributions in
Archeology, No. 4. Southern Methodist University, Department of Anthropology, Dallas.
Lynott, M. J.
1979

Prehistoric Bison Populations of North Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 50:89-101.

Morse, D.
1978

Ancient Disease in the Midwest. Reports of Investigations, No. 15. Illinois
State Museum, Springfield.

Newcomb, W.W. and T. N. Campbell
1982
Southern Plains Ethnohistory: Re-examination of the Escanjaques, Ahijados,
and Cuitoas. In: Pathways to Plains Prehistory: Anthropological Perspectives of Plains Natives and Their Pasts, edited by D. G. Wyckoff and J. L.
Hofman, pp. 29-43. Memoir No. 3. Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Duncan.

Perttula, T. K.
1992
"The Caddo Nation": Archaeological and Ethnohistoric Perspectives. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Phillips, P. and J. A. Brown
1978

Pre-Columbian Shell Engravings from the Craig Mound at Spiro, Oklahoma.
Part One. Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.

Prikryl, D. J.
1987
A Synthesis of the Prehistory of the Lower Elm Fork of the Trinity River.
Masters Thesis, University of Texas, Austin.
1990

Lower Elm Fork Prehistory-A Redefinition of Cultural Concepts and Chronologies Along the Trinity River, North Central Texas. Report 37. Office of
the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Schambach, F. F.
1993

Some New Interpretations of Spiroan Culture History. In: Archaeology of
Eastern North America: Papers in Honor of Stephen Williams, edited by J. B.
Stoltman, pp. 187-230. Archaeological Report No. 25. Mississippi Department of Archives and History, Jackson.

Smith, R. A. (translator and editor)
1959
Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discovery Made by Him of
Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 62
(Nos. I-4).

200

Texas Archeological Society

Spencer, R. F. and J. D. Jennings
The Native Americans: A Prehistory and Ethnology of the North American
1965
Indians. Harper and Row, New York.

Story, D. A.
An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist
1981
26(92): 139-156.
Stuiver, M. and P.J. Reimer
1993
Extended ~4C Database and Revised CALIB Radiocarbon Calibration Program. Radiocarbon 35:215-230.
Suhm, D. A. and Jelks, Edward B.
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Joint Publication, Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication 1 and Texas Memorial Museum
Bulletin No. 4. Austin.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,.
1985
Austin.
Turner, R. L.
1978
The Tuck Carpenter Site and its Relation to Other Sites within the Titus
Focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:1-110.
United States Department of Agriculture, Soi! Conservation Service
1979
Vehik, S.
1989

Soil Survey of Cooke County, Texas. Washington, D.C.

Woodland Manifestations and Caddo Culture. Paper presented at Caddo
Conference, Norman, Oklahoma, March 3, 1989.

Wyckoff, D. G.
1970
Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Red River Basin in Oklahoma. In: Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Red River Basin,
edited by H. A. Davis, pp. 67-134. Research Series No. 1. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

