Component Analysis for Archaic Sites
JOEL L. SrnNER
ABSTRACT
Before one talks about loci, or other time-space units, he should understand the components from which they are built. This study attempts to
define components in terms of more comprehensive typological and technological traits.

INTRODUCTION
One of several new trends in American archaeology is the attempt
to do prehistoric studies within the framework of anthropology.
Although archaeologists have discussed this on the theoretical level
since the end of World War II, it has only been since 1965 that the
techniques have developed that will really permit it. These techniques
include the study of stone technology, a modern typology for tools, and
new ways of comparing and ordering data. More than anything else
the techniques are used not just to study material objects, but to study
the people that made them.
There is little to gain fi’om pointing out the futility of continuing
with the older form of taxonomy. Foci based on two or three material
culture traits are not steps toward understanding past cultures.
Despite protests to the contrary, there is no possibility nor intent for
this kind of archaeology to progress beyond the art history of projectile points.
Foci that are intended to reflect the behavior of people and not
just groupings of material objects must be based on sound components. Sound components rarely emerge from excavations and surveys
that stress only stratigraphic analysis and collection of a few typological tools. Instead the component must be based on the specific
material culture of one group of people. It is precisely the same concept that is embodied in the word assemblage which was defined as
"the surviving material culture of a single resident group over a short
period of time at a specific locality" (Marks, Wendorf and Shiner,
1967).
In theory, the focus ought to be the surviving material culture of
a society over a period of time so short that cultural evolution would
be no major factor. Seasonal specialization, however, would be considered.
Many of the southwestern and southern plains sites are on the
surface and cover vast areas. More often than not, it is difficult or
impossible to determine where one camp ends and another begins.

9,16

FICURE 1.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Site 25, fire hearth just beginning to erode.

Any collections from one of these sites runs the risk of including
artifacts of distinct periods or of more than one society. No end of
confused data could emerge, especially in mistakened associations.
Small, isolated, single component sites that were quite rich in tools
and other artifacts would be ideal for discovering the material culture
array of a local group. Unfortunately, sites of that quality are rare, and
we must work with the larger units.
It is the purpose of this paper to indicate how it may be possible to
isolate components from these large sites. The approach is simple
enough. One should collect and analyze as small an area as possible,
but one large enough to provide an adequate statistical sample of
behavioral traits. The area collected should be one which still shows
a considerable degree of intact structure. In other words, where use
areas and fire hearths are still discernible (Fig. 1). The list of traits

COMPONENT

217

ANALYSIS

should be considerably enlarged by recognizing that there are many
stone tools usually ignored by American archaeologists, and huge
amounts of material that clearly define the processes of stone tool
manufacture. There is no reason to believe that these behavioral
traits are of less importance than projectile points.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
For severa! reasons study collections were made within the Tamaulipas area (Ka’oeber, 1939). Sites were available, they were "rich",
and they were relatively undisturbed by cultivation or by collectors.
This area is the brush country of south Texas and northern Mexico,
south of the Frio River, northeast of the hills around Monterrey, and
west of the Gulf Coast. In previous literature, the area was included
in a hastily conceived Baleones Phase (Kelley, 1960), or divided into
ill-defined Falcon and Mier Foei. These divisions rested on little geographical and less archaeological information. The present study does
not pretend to rectify the situation or to substitute new "culture area"
concepts. It is only the beginning of a series of studies within an area
of reasonably uniform environment.
The Tamaulipas Area is dominated by two things: the relatively
flat to slightly hilly brush expanse, and the dendritic drainage pattern
centered on the Rio Grande. Overall, there is a gradual shift from
drier and more open country in the west to more vegetation in the
east. There are several repeated microenvironments. One of these, the
Rio Grande Floodplain, seems to be of minor importance as regards
settlements. Only a few small sites show on the terrace surfaces or in
the buried silts. The banks may have been used, however, for hunting
and gathering. Three other mieroenvironments are worth mentioning
at this time: the low floodplains of the major creeks, the extensive
brush "’flats" and the hilltops. Each of these offered certain ecological
advantages (Newton, 1968). The floodplain and hills served as areas
for foraging and as a source of raw materials for stone tools. The
"flats" were normally used as camp sites as well as ~for hunting and
gathering.
Site 9,5 lies immediately beside Santa Isabel Creek about 25 miles
northwest of Laredo, and within the highest area of the floodplain.
All indications were that floodwaters had frequently covered the site,
but not before the undisturbed features themselves had been covered
with soil and grass. The hearths and associated artifacts were eroding
for the first time when the collection was made. Two contiguous
hearth areas were collected here in order to obtain an adequate
sample of artifacts for a hypothecated component.
,,:

218

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Cut-bank of small creek. All deep cuts show A, B and C soil
horizons. When present, cultural materials are found only in the A horizon.
FIGURE 2.

Site 26 is in the identical position, geologically, but on the opposite
side of the creek, some 200 meters southwest of site 25. The hearths
and artifacts are eroding from an in situ position in the terrace where
they had been buried with minimum disturbance. Two contiguous
hearths provided a collection of artifacts numerically adequate for
comparison with those from Site 25. It is not the intent of this article
to argue for a specific number of artifacts as being an "adequate"
sample, but rather good results have been obtained in Europe and
Africa with collections of over 100 tools plus the accompanying debris
and debitage.
Site 27 lies on the surface of the flat valley some 600 meters east
of the Santa Isabel Creek. The site is larger than 50 meters in dianaeter, but parts of it are still buried beneath the alluvium and the

COMPONENT

219

ANALYSIS

limits are not determinable. Although this area of occupation is at a
considerable distance from the actual creek bed, its elevation is little
more than two meters above the high flood plain of the creek. Much
of the area between the site and the creek is low flood plain and
unsuitable for permanent occupation.
Incidentally, the settlement patterns along Santa Isabel strongly
suggest that the elevation of the flood plain, the entrenchment of the
creek, and the amount of summer thunder-shower runoff may have
changed but little since Archaic times. Not more than one occupation
level may be seen in any given cut-bank (Fig. 2).
The surface of the site is thickly strewn with debris and debitage.
In almost the center of the site are the remains of a small LatinAmerican farm house, and the local public road runs right beside the
site. Point hunters have worked this and other sites in the area for
more than two generations, but each major rain uncovers new material. The collection was made immediately after a series of heavy rains
in the strip of just exposed materials at the east (upslope) edge of
the site.
Site 9,7 no longer shows the structure of an undisturbed site, but
was apparently deflated at one time and re-covered by grass and soil
(Fig. 3). Parts of it were eroding again when the eo!leetion was made.
The artifacts collected, are not necessarily from any given hearth, but
were collected within an area large enough to provide a reasonable
sample.
Since early and late sites appear together in the same microenvironments and are both absent from others, it may be assumed that there
has been little change in the topography since Archaic times. This
increases the possibility of overlapping camp sites. Indeed, where any
erosion, whether aeolian or fluviatile, has taken place on the flats,
camp debris is usually visible. Almost every ranch house in the entire
area is located on or quite near a major prehistoric site.
A great many, possibly most, of the sites in the area are marked by
fire hearths. Varner (1968) noted such concentrations of fire-broken
rock over considerable areas of northern Nuevo Leon and eastern
Coahuila. The hearths described in this paper are similar in size,
three to five feet in diameter. Scattered about each hearth are quantities of tools, debris, debitage and use-retouch artifacts.

THE ARTIFACTS
The assumption is that the artifacts are associated with the hearth
and are the products of a single group and of a relatively short span
of time. If this is true, other hearths in the vicinity may have been

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICALSOCIETY

r

FIGURE 3. Site 27. Cultural materials have recently eroded from the
coluvium but the site had obviously been deflated at an earlier time.
occupied by members of the same group. Such a hypothesis cannot
be tested by comparing projectile points because statistically meaningful samples would not be obtainable (Table I). By adding scrapers
and the so called "knives", the samples can be increased but rarely
can it reach significant levels with only these tools being considered
(Table II).
The enlarged trait list used in this experiment is believed to include
sufficient artifacts with which to make comparisons among systematic
collections. It includes tools which qualify as such because they are
modified in certain systematic ways. As far as it is possible and practical to do so, type names based on suspected use have been abandoned.
This eliminates such categories as "knife" and opens the possibility
that some of these are stages in manufacture. Pieces that have been

C01~PONENT

ANALYSIS

221
TABLE I
Projeetile Points
Site
27

Site
26

Site
25

Abasolo-Catan
Tortugas-Matamoros
Pandora
Shumla
Marcos-Ensor
Langtry

5
1
0
5
1
0

5
5
1
0
5
1

5
1
3
1
0
0

Perdiz
Scallorn

0
0

0
1

1
0

TABLE II
All Tools
Site
27
End-Scrapers
Side-Scrapers
Multiple-Edge Scrapers
Denticulates
Projectile Points
Foliates
Biface Preforms
Gouges
Burins
Truncations
Notches
Choppers
Gravers
Retouched Flakes

3.5%0
9.1
2.2
6.5
7.4
17.4
19.1
1.7
0.9
1.7
3.5
0.9
1.3
24.8

Site
26

Site
25

1.87o
6.5
0.6
6.5
10.7
25.0
19.6
4.2
1.8
0.6
2,4
1.2
0.0
13.7

0.870
3.8
3.1
5.3
12.2
15.3
14.5
3.8
2.3
2.3
8.4
0.8
0.8
24.4

called spokeshaves elsewhere are referred to herein as notches in
order to protect against unwarranted speculation. In addition, the
study includes among the tools such things as burins, dentieulates,
truncations and retouched (intentional) flakes. Most discussions of
the Archaic ignore these. Scrapers are divided into categories based
on morphology rather than on material (Table II).
There are three other categories besides the tools. They are debris
(cores, ehips, cortex flakes and bifaee thinning flakes), debitage
(flakes suitable for chipping into tools) and use retouch flakes (flakes
that show wear patterns on edges). This group of non-tools which
may range from S0 to 9070 of all artifacts, provides the main sample
for comparison and contrast with other collections.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

FICURE 4. Scrapers: a, end-scraper (nosed); b, end-scraper; c, and e,
multiple-edge scrapers; d, side-scraper; f, side-scraper (tranverse); g, multiple-edge scraper (dejetd).
Scrapers from all three sites are similar. A very few are made on
cortex or simple secondary flakes. The majority are shaped by flaking
over the convex or "upper" face and around the edges. One long edge,
sometimes two edges, are beveled and finely retouched. Bulbs of
percussion often are truncated away or have been reduced by flat
retouch. Some of the side scrapers can be classified as simple, some
as transverse and some having multiple edges (Fig. 4).
Foliates are larger than projectile points, but otherwise similar to
the Abasolo-Catan and Tortugas-Matamoras types (Fig. 5). These
are finished pieces that have been both thinned by billet and finished
by pressure retouch.
The biface preforms may have been intended as projectile points or
something else, but they were not completed.
Truncations are flakes or blades whose proximal or distal ends have
been removed by deliberate chipping. One purpose of truncation
is bulb reduction, but the reason for distal truncation is not known.
The so called "gouges" would seem to include several varieties. No
information is available on what these tools represent (Fig. 6).
Choppers show bifacial work along one or more edges, plus evidence on both faces of the edge that they have been used for chopping.

223

’

................

Ficur~ 5. Projectile points: a, b, c, and d, Site 25; e, f, g, and h, Site 26;
i, j, k, and 1, Site 27.

Denticulates are large and well made, obviously by intent since
they display many evenly spaced "teeth" (Fig. 7).

|
FIGURE 6.

FIGURE 7.

Various gouges.

Denticulates.

-

COR~PONENT ANALYSIS

9,9,5

b

e

....

c

g

h

FIGURE 8. Burins: a, b, c and e on snapped flakes; d and f on truncations;
g and h on snapped projectile points.

Burins are on snapped flakes (Fig. 8 a, b, c, e), on truncations (Fig.
8 d, f) and on snapped projectile points (Fig. 8 g, h).
Classification of retouched flakes is difficult, especially in distinguishing these deliberately made tools fi’om the use-retouch pieees.
The key to the problem is not to make any decisions until all of the
artifacts have been examined. The deliberate retouch will stand out
as patterned and regular, and the chipping will be of the same direction and force. Use retouch normally produces finer chips that are
more irregular in spacing, direction and relative size.
Artifacts in Table III include debris, an inclusive term for the
unwanted and unused "trash" left over from making tools and usable
flakes or blades. Debitage could be called "blank flakes or blades" as
these pieces have not been altered further by chipping or by use.
Table IV lists the breakdown of the debris. Bifaee thinning flakes
(Fig. 9 a, b) show a faceted platform which is indeed a part of the
opposite face of the bifaee. It is undoubtedly a product of a billet and
is from the second stage of a biface production (Fig. 9 e, d). The
first stage is demonstrable as percussion, the second as billet-thinning
and the third as pressure retouch.

TEXAS

9.9,6

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

TABLE III
Other Artifacts
Site
27
Debris
Debitage
Use Retouch
Tools
Total Specimens

43.5%
32.7
6.7
17.1
1342

Site
26
48.2%
32.8
6.7
13.3
1364

Site
25
70.6%
16.0
5.9
7.5
1738

TABLE IV
Debris

Bifaee Thinning Flakes
Cortex Flakes
Cores
Chips

Site
27

Site
26

Site
25

7.5%
9.3
6.3
20.4

6.4%
9.8
4.2
27.8

6.7~
11.0
5.4
47.5

Although cortex flakes are occasionally made into tools (scrapers
or denticulates) the practice is to classify unmodified specimens as
debris.
Cores are self-explanatory, but chips sometimes cause problems in
classification. Chips include material removed from cores or material
removed from flakes or rubble in the process of making something
else. These chips are too small or too irregular to be used as raw material for producing most of the tools in the collection. Admittedly, some
arbitrary decisions must be made in regard to dimensions, but these
can be reduced by studying the tools.
RESULTS
Now that the typological tools have been listed and the technological attributes calculated, we may proceed to the direct comparison of the three sites. It should be recalled that each site collection
contains over 1340 artifacts and over 130 tools.
Compare the projectile points in Table I. The three sites have
equal numbers of the Abasolo-Catan continuum, but that proves
nothing. These so-called types have no temporal or spatial significance.
The other forms of identifiable points show no pattern of similarity or
significant difference. Obviously, a dozen or so identifiable points are
of little use in comparing and contrasting sites. But, this may be the
largest sample available in a real component (material remains of a
local gToup).

COIN/IPONENT

227

ANALYSIS

b

c1

FIGURE 9. a and b, biface thinning flakes; c, biface ruined by overshot
thinning flake; d, overshot thinning flake.
Compare the tools in Table II. This time there can be little doubt
of the extraordinary resemblance among the three collections. Each
tool, with only one exception, is represented at each site in reasonably
similar frequencies.
The technological attributes reveal extremely close resemblances
between sites 27 and 26, but an apparent difference between these
two and site 25 Table III. The difference resolves itself into a considerably larger anlount of chips in the latter site (Table IV).
The conclusion must be that the three collections are similar in so
many ways that they can hardly be other than components of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

same abstraction: the material remains of a society over a relatively
short period of time.
Unless the environment has changed considerably since these sites
were occupied, I would conclude that the camps are primarily for
foraging. Projectile points suggest hunting. The present abundance of
reptiles, crayfish, freshwater mussels, various seeds, roots and fi’uit
suggest that gathering might have been productive.
There is ethnographic evidence from other areas (Collier, Hudson,
and Ford, 1949.:38 and Shiner, 1961) that suggests that the hearths
may be the remains of small earth ovens. If true, this may add to the
probability that various roots as well as meat were cooked. From the
condition of the fractured rock, it is quite probable that each earth
oven was used only once, certainly not more than twice. Thus, a single
hearth and associated debris may be the result of only a few days of
residence.
Almost every site in the San Isabel drainage that has not been
deflated conforms in gross structure to those described in this paper.
The exceptions are flaking stations among the low gravel-covered
hills and quite small concentrations without hearths. The latter are
nearly always associated with quantities of small thin "arrow" points,
and are considered to be later than the Archaic stage.
CONCLUSIONS
The social organization of a group of people camping together will
depend upon a great many things. Season, activity, kinship system,
basic economic patterns, environment, organization of the whole
society, all will affect the size, nature and organization of the camp.
The patterns of the debris vary also according to these influences.
Ideally, I suppose, a component should be the material remains of
a central base camp where most of the important activities are
originated, to which most of the economic products are brought, and
where most of the artifacts are made. The science of archaeology has
not yet demonstrated the existence of such sites for the Archaic period.
This paper has suggested that more thorough descriptions and
analyses of smaller systematic collections can lead to a better understanding of what small groups were doing. In this study, logistic
problems did not permit the recording of scatter patterns, a technique
which would have added the dimensions of structure to the other
dimensions of typology and technology.
The study does, however, show that the behavior patterns of certain small groups, as reflected by their artifacts, can in certain situations, be amazingly similar. The things made and the techniques of

29,9

COh~[PONENT ANALYSIS

making them are so nearly alike that a good case could be made for
calling them all components of the same environmental adaptation.
This implies that each of these individual collections are the material
remains of members of the same society at about the same time, who
were engaged in just about the same activities.
It is believed that the use of techniques such as those described in
this paper will permit archaeologists interested in the Archaic or
Paleo periods to resume the study of the people instead of being side
tracked into pure taxonomy of tools. These techniques do not answer
the main aims of archaeology which are history and process. They
are steps in the direction of the prerequisite to these, namely description.
REFERENCES CITED
Collier, D., A. Hudson, and A. Ford
194"9. Archaeology of the Upper Columbia Region. University of Washington
Publication in Anthropology, Vo!. 9 #1.
Kelley, Col. Thomas C.
1960 The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt Rock Midden, Travis County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31, Austin,
Texas.
Kroeber, A. L.
1939 Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. University of
California Publication in American Archaeology and Ethnography, Vol.
38.
Marks, Anthony, Fred Wendoff and Joel Shiner
1967 Memorandum to the Symposium on Terminology, Sixth Pan-African
Congress, Dakar.
Newton, Milton B., Jr.
1968 The Distribution and Character of Sites, Arroyo Los Ohnos, Starr
County, Texas. The Bulletin of the Texas ArcheologicaI Society, Vol.
38, Dallas, Texas.
Shiner, Joel L.
1961 The McNary Reservoir: A Study in Plateau Archaeology. River Basin
Survey Papers, #23, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin #179.
Varner, Dudley M.
1968 The Nature of Non-Buried Archeological Data: Problems in Northeastern M[exico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 38.
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas

