PREHISTORIC RITUAL SKULL BURIALS
AT THE CRENSHAW SITE (3 MI 6),
SOUTHWEST ARKANSAS
MARY LUC:AS POWELL

ABSTRACT
One hundred and eight loose human teeth representing 16 adult
individuals were recovered from an antler pile and ash bed at
Crenshaw, a Coles Creek-Mid Caddo ceremonial center in southwest
Arkansas. A cluster of eight skulls was excavated from a plaza area
north of these features. Seventeenth century ethnographic accounts
describe a ceremony involving ritual burial of heads taken by the
Hasinai Caddo of East Texas in raids against enemy villages.
Osteological analysis suggests that the Crenshaw remains represent
such trophies of war.

The Crenshaw site is a large ceremonial center in southwest
Arkansas, dating from the Coles Creek to Mid-Caddo periods (ca.
900 A. D. to 1400 A. D.) (Hoffman 1970). It is located near the Great
Bend of the Red River, about 20 miles northeast of Texarkana, and
includes six mounds, at least five cemeteries and 20 acres of
discontinuous midden around and under the mounds. A number of
isolated skulls have been excavated from the open area south of
the mounds, known as "The Plaza of the Skulls".
In 1969 Dr. Frank Schambach of the Arkansas Archeological
Survey conducted excavations in the off-mound area south of
Mound D. Two highly unusual features were discovered. The first
(Feature 1) was a rectangular mass of deer antler approximately 4
by 4 meters and some 40 centimeters thick, composed of 2420
antlers from white-tailed deer. No skeletal material or artifacts
were found in this feature; however, human teeth and bits of
cranial bone were scattered around the southeast perimeter.
The second feature (Feature 6) was a bed of ash roughly 8 by 9
meters and 30 centimeters thick, which Schambach identified as a
temple floor (Schambach n.d.). The ash contained a large number of
loose human teeth and cranial fragments scattered apparently at
random. An isolated human mandible was recovered from a small
pit (Feature 8A) at the northern edge of the bed.
Both features have been radiocarbon dated from wood charcoal
to around 1000 A.D. (see Chart below). The artifact assemblage
from the ash bed corresponds to the Millers Crossing Phase, the
earliest Caddo Phase identified in western Arkansas (Schambach

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

n.d.). The two features are aligned horizontally in a precisely
adjacent manner, with no overlapping of their lateral margins; this
alignment offers further support that they were contemporaneous.
Radiocarbon Dates from Wood Charcoal
Sample Number
TX
TX
TX
TX
TX

1351
1352
1353
1360
1356

Date
A.D. 1000 _ 50
A.D. 1010 _+ 50
A.D. 1100_+ 50
A.D. 980_+60
A.D.

990_+60

The human teeth scattered around the antler pit represent a
minimum of six adult individuals, identified by six left maxillary
canines. Their distribution coincides with the locations of clusters
of human cranial fragments in five out of the six cases. Of the 35
teeth from this area, only four (11%) are mandibular, an
unexpectedly low proportion. The 73 teeth from the ash bed
represent at least ten adult individuals, identified by ten left
maxillary first molars. They were evenly distributed within the
horizontal boundaries of the ash bed, but concentrated more
heavily in the central vertical level. Thirty-three teeth (45%) came
from this level, as compared with 24 teeth (33%) from the upper
level and 16 teeth (22%) from the lower level. Again, only 13 (18%)
of the teeth are mandibular. There were no mandibular teeth at all
in the lower level, directly beneath the heaviest concentration of
artifacts and teeth in the ash bed.
The absence of postcranial skeletal material cannot be attributed
to differential bone preservation, as a great quantity of small
animal bone was recovered by screening the ash. It seems more
probable that a number of human skulls were separated from their
bodies and brought to this spot to serve some purpose in connection
with the antler pile and ash bed.
A group of eight skulls had been donated to the Arkansas
Archeological Survey in 1968 by the landowner, Lon Rayburn. He
had exposed these in the midden-free area 40 meters north of the
ash bed, known as "The Plaza of the Skulls". He reported that over
the past few years he had found some 30 skulls, placed singly or in
groups in pits without postcranial material or artifacts, in this
portion of the site. Isolated skulls are not uncommon at Caddo sites;
they have been discovered at Spiro (Brown 1966), Belcher (Webb
1959), and Ferguson (Rose and Powell n.d.), to name only a few. At

PREHISTORIC RITUAL SKULL BURIALS

113

the end of the 17th Century, the Spanish priests Espinosa and
Casanas observed a ceremony of the Hasinai Caddo in East Texas
which involved the ritual burial of the "heads of victims taken by
the Hasinai" in raids against enemy settlements (Griffith 1954:
132}. It is not out of the question that a similar ceremony was
performed by the Caddo who inhabited the Crenshaw site several
centuries earlier. In view of the evidence, it seems perhaps the
most reasonable explanation for these bodiless skulls.
Espinosa refers to these war trophies alternately as "heads" and
"skulls". Examination of the eight skulls revealed certain features
which indicate that these, at least, were buried as "heads," i.e.,
with the flesh still covering the bone. In all eight, the mandibles
were in normal articulation with the crania, both at the temporomandibular joints and at the occlusal edges of the anterior teeth.
Such articulation would be unlikely in skulls buried without their
connecting tissue. A more striking feature is the presence of the
first cervical vertebra in articulation with the occipital condyles of
four of the eight skulls. A fifth skull preserved its articulation with
both the first and second cervical vertebrae. Fragments of the
hyoid bone were recovered from the dirt beneath the mandibles of
two skulls. The three skulls apparently lacking these associated
bones were the most badly crushed of the eight, and it is possible
that fragments of vertebrae and hyoid were present but
unidentified. These cervical vertebrae would not normally preserve
their close articulation with the condyles at the base of the skull in
the absence of connecting tissue, nor would the hyoid maintain its
position below the mandible. They would not necessarily be
dislodged during decapitation, due to their close proximity to the
base of the skull and the thickness of the surrounding musculature.
None of the skulls bore marks which could be interpreted as
fleshing cuts or scrapes. Several showed signs of gnawing by
rodents, but this is common for buried skeletal material from
western Arkansas and does not necessarily indicate exposure of
the bone before burial.
Six of the skulls were sexed as male and two as female. These
decisions were based upon standard features of cranial
morphology listed by Bass (1971) and Krogman (1973), including the
supraorbital ridges and margins, prominence of the forehead and
parietal regions, the shape of the orbits and the chin. General
indicators of robusticity such as the mastoid process and crest, the
external occipital protruberance and nucchal area, the temporal
lines, lateral diameter of the mandible head and its thickness at M2
were also considered. These eight individuals fell within the ranges

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of size and robusticity observed in Caddo populations from
Ferguson, Hedges, Copeland Ridge and other sites in western
Arkansas (Hynds and Powell n.d.; Rose and Powell n.d.).
Age estimations were based upon dental eruption, attrition and
degree of closure of the cranial sutures (Krogman 1973}. One skull
was aged at 17 to 25 years, because of incomplete eruption of the
third molars and light wear on the erupted teeth. Another was
placed in the 40 to 45 years old category because of advanced
attrition, numerous resorbed sockets and the almost complete
ectocranial obliteration of the coronal, sagittal and lambdoid
sutures. Of the remaining six, two were aged at 20 to 30 years and
four were aged at 30 to 40 years. The majority of the molars from
the antler pile and ash bed showed similar attrition and would be
placed in the last two age categories.
The inclusion of two female skulls among a group of probable
war tropies is not inconsistent with the practice of warfare among
the Indians of this area, as observed by early European
chroniclers. The Hasinai customarily returned from battle with the
heads and scalps of both male and female enemies. Joutel reported
of them that "of the 48 persons (taken in a Hasinai raid) they gave
quarter only to some young children" and that the war party
returned to their village "loaded with heads..." (Swanton 1942:
186). The selection of the most robust male skull to crown the
cluster of eight was surely deliberate, in view of this interpretation.
Only one of the skulls showed any notable pathology: the
parietals and upper occitipal area of the top skull were thickened
to 11/2 times their normal size. This condition was accompanied by
extensive osteoporotic pitting of the cortex in these parts. Taken
together, these pathological changes suggest a fairly severe degree
of anemia (Jane Buikstra 1976, personal communication).
Dental pathologies were also minimal among these eight
individuals. Forty-five caries were observed in a total of 228 teeth,
for a mean rate of 5.6 caries per individual and 0.2 caries per
tooth. Only one individual had no caries at all. The molars offered
the preferred site for carious involvement, due to their greater
surface area and complexity. These rates are similar to those
observed for other populations from western Arkansas, dating from
the Mid to Late Caddo periods (Hynds and Powell n.d.; Rose and
Powell n.d.). Two individuals exhibited alveolar abscesses, and the
oldest of the group had lost five teeth who sockets had been
completely resorbed. Calculus was common in all individuals
except one, the youngest of the eight, but it generally appeared as
stains rather than as three-dimensional deposits.

PREHISTORIC RITUAL SKULL BURIALS

115

Three anomalous traits were observed in these eight skulls:
Carabelli’s cusp, congenital absence of the third molar and
exostoses of the external auditory canal. The first two traits are
under strict genetic control and do not appear responsive to
environmental stimuli (Goose and Lee 1971; Brekhus, Oliver and
Montelius 1944). Clinical studies of the exostoses of the external
auditory canal indicate that they are more frequent among groups
of closely related persons than among random members of a
population. Environmental pressures seem to exert some influence
on their actual expression, however (Hrdlicka 1935).
The accessory tubercules on the mesiolingual aspect of the
maxillary molars known as Carabelli’s cusps appeared in two of
the eight dentitions, an incidence rate of 25 per cent. Rates of
incidence for these discrete traits among other western Arkansas
populations range between 43% and 27% for the two Coles Creek
period populations represented at Mounds C and F at Crenshaw, to
14% for the Hedges and 19% for the Copeland Ridge populations,
two Late Caddo sites on the Ouachita River. The trait was observed
on eight of the 37 undamaged maxillary molars from the antler pile
and ash bed at Crenshaw, a rate of 22 per cent. These rates may
be skewed by the admittedly small sample sizes, but they do appear
to confirm the findings of recent dental researchers that this trait
is not so uncommon among Mongoloid populations as was once
believed, provided that a11 levels of its expression are scored: the
pit, the groove and the cuspule, as well as the complete cusp
(Kraus 1959: 123).
The rates of incidence for the two other traits appeared to be
unusually high for this group of eight skulls, when compared with
most of the other western Arkansas populations mentioned earlier
in this paper. Observations of these discrete traits meet the
requirements for a binomial distribution, in that each trait can be
scored simply as present or absent {Thomas 1976). Rates of
incidence for these two traits were calculated for the populations
represented at the Hedges, Copeland Ridge and Ferguson sites and
for Mounds C and F at Crenshaw. Using these rates for
comparison, probabilities for obtaining the seemingly high rates
observed in the eight skulls were calculated using the binomial
density function {Thomas 1976).
Three of the eight skulls showed congenital absence of at least
one third molar, for an incidence rate of 37.5 per cent. In one case,
the left lateral maxillary incisor was also absent. Both of these
features are considered to be related expressions of the same
genetic factors {Brekhus, Oliver and Montelius 1944). Combining

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the populations of the Hedges and Copeland Ridge sites, the incidence observed for this trait was nine per cent. The probability
for obtaining a sample with an incidence of three out of eight
cases, or 37.5%, from such a population is 0.0215, a very low probability. A similarly low probability exists for obtaining this 37.5%
incidence rate from a population such as the Coles Creek period
sample from Mound F at Crenshaw. The incidence for the Hedges
sample alone was somewhat higher, and the probability for obtaining the rate observed in the eight skulls rose to 0.0755. At the 0.05
level of significance, therefore, the sample of eight skulls does not
differ for this one trait from the population represented at the
Hedges site.
Four of the eight skulls displayed exostoses or bony outgrowths
in the external auditory canals, an incidence rate of 50 per cent.
This condition is clinically noted to be more prevalent in males, and
if expressed in females is more frequently unilateral than bilateral
(Hrdlicka 1935). The Crenshaw sample reflected this sexual
distribution. Combining the Caddo samples from the Hedges and
Ferguson sites with the two Coles Creek period samples from
Mounds C and F at Crenshaw, the probability for obtaining a
sample with an incidence rate of 50% was calculated to be 0.0046,
an extremely small probability. Once again, however, the Hedges
sample alone provided a higher rate or incidence, 40%, and
therefore the probability for obtaining a sample of eight with an
incidence rate only 10% higher was calculated to be 0.2322, or
nearly one in four chances.
The results of these comparisons appear to indicate that the
population represented by the eight skulls was more similar to a
population such as that represented at the Hedges site than to
other populations in western Arkansas, on the basis of these two
discrete traits. However, the small sample size, as well as the
chronological discontinuity between these two sites, makes any
conclusions based upon these observations extremely tentative.

SUMMARY
One hundred and eight loose human teeth were recovered from
Feature 1, an antler pile, and Feature 6, an ash bed, at the
Crenshaw site. These represent a total of 16 adult individuals who
were apparently decapitated and their skulls brought to the site to
serve some purpose related to these two features. A group of eight
skulls excavated from the "Plaza of the Skulls" at the same site,
representing six males and two females, probably suffered the

PREHISTORIC RITUAL SKULL BURIALS

117

same fate. Osteological analysis indicated that these skulls were
buried while still covered with flesh. Ethnographic accounts of the
Hasinai Caddo of East Texas at the end of the 17th Century
indicate that these skulls may represent war trophies. Comparisons
based on binomial probability of the eight skulls with skeletal
material from other western Arkansas sites suggest a closer
biological affinity with populations from the Ouchita River Valley
than with the Coles Creek period populations represented at the
Crenshaw site, on the basis of two non-metric traits. However, the
samples are too small to draw any meaningful conclusions regarding biological distance between these populations. Such studies
must await the recovery of large, well-documented skeletal series
from this area, if questions of cultural affinity are to be answered
from the skeletal record.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Drs. Frank Schambach, Jane Buikstra, Jerome C.
Rose and Martha A. Rolingson for their advice and encouragement.
Particular thanks go to Sandra Scholtz, who introduced me to the
mysteries of binomial probability.

REFERENCES

CITED

Bass, W. M.
1971 Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual of the Human
Skeleton. Missouri Archaeological Society, Columbia.
Brekhus, P. l., C. P. Oliver and G. Montelius
1944 A Study of the Pattern and Combinations of Congenitally Missing
Teeth in Man. Journal of Dental Research, Vol. 23, pp. 117-131.

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Brown, J. A.
1966 Spiro Studies: Volume 2, The Graves and Their Contents. University
of Oklahoma Research Institute, Norman.
Goose, D. H. and G. T. R. Lee
1971 The Mode of Inheritance of Carabelli’s Cusp. Human Biology, Vol.
43, pp. 64-69.
Griffith, W. J.
1954 The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans 1687-1772.
Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University, New
Orleans.
Hoffman, M. P.
1970 Archaeological and Historical Assessment of the Red River Basin
in Arkansas. In: Archeological and Historical Resources of the Red
River Basin, edited by Hester A. Davis. Arkansas Archeological
Survey Research Series, No. 1, Fayetteville.
Hrdlicka, A.
1935 Ear Exostoses. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 93, No.
6, pp. 1-100.
Hynds, B. and M. L. Powell
n.d. Skeletal Analysis of 69 Burials from Arkansas. Paper read at the
Caddo Conference, March 1975, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Kraus, B. S.
1959 Occurrence of the Carabelli Trait in Southwest Ethnic Groups.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 117124.
Krogman, W. M.
1973 The Human Skeleton in Forensic Medicine. C.C. Thomas,
Springfield, Illinois.
Rose, J. C. and M. L. Powell
n.d. Analysis of Human Skeletal Material from the Ferguson Site.
Manuscript on file with the Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Southern Arkansas University, Magnolia.
Schambach, F. F.
n.d. Deer Ceremonialism in Early Caddo Culture: Evidence from the
Crenshaw Site in Southwest Arkansas. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Southern Arkansas University, Magnolia.
Swanton, J. R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo
Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 132.
Thomas, D. H.
1976 Figuring Anthropology. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Webb, C. H.
1959 The Belcher Mound: A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish,
Louisiana. Memoirs of the Society for American Archeology, Salt
Lake City.

