65

The Vinson Site (41LT1)
A Nortefio Focus Indian Village
In Limestone County, Texas
James E. Smith H
with contributions by
Jay C. Blaine, Kathleen Gilmore,
R. King Harris, and Inus M. Harris

ABSTRACT
The Vinson Site is ahistoric Indian village located in Limestone County, near
present day Mexia. It was excavated by The University of Texas at Austin, the
Texas Archeological Society, and local archeological societies over a twenty year
period. The findings of these investigations suggest that the Vinson Site was
inhabited during the last quarter of the eighteenth century by people who shared
many of the cultural traits assigned to the Nortefio Focus, which, in turn, has been
attributed to Wichita-speaking groups in Texas. Well-det’med house patterns were
found at the site along with English and French trade goods, and certain information recovered from the site suggests that it was used primarily during the late fall
to spring seasons.

INTRODUCTION
The initial discovery of the Vinson Site was made by Edward B. Jelks and
Lathel Duffield. They found the site using historical references to a village located
on an eminence known as La Tortuga (the Turtle) near a large spring (Bolton
1914). The land on which the site is located was at that time leased by Mr. Noil
Vinson, who in addition to giving his permission to excavate on the land, donated
a large number of documented artifacts for study, and assisted in the subsequent
excavations of the site.
The first excavation, which began in October 1961, was by the University of
Texas at Austin under the direction of Edward B. Jelks. House 1 was excavated
over a period of two years, being completed in February 1963. In that same year,
members of the Dallas and Tarrant County archeological societies, working under
the direction of Lathel Duffield and Dessamae Lorrain, excavated House 3.
Preliminary results of the work were reported by Lorrain (1963). During this same
period of time, Mr. Vinson carried out excavations in House 2.
In June 1964, the Texas Archeological Society (TAS) conducted a field
school in Limestone County, Texas, at the Vinson Site. The primary purpose of
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64 (1993)

66

Texas Archeological Society

the field school was to obtain more information on the historic Indian campsite.
An additional objective was to teach field methods to the TAS members and
acquaint them with the archeology of the area.
The field school was much smaller and, therefore, very different than it is
today. The maximum attendance was about 65 people. Several professional
archeologists served in the capacity of "head" archeologist during the two week
field school: Dr. Dee Ann Story guided the first and last portions of the dig and
Drs. Dave Dibble and E. Mort Davis were in charge during its middle portion.
Between 1964 and 1975 houses 4, 7, and 8 were identified. Mr. Vinson
continued working at the site by excavating all of House 4 and parts of Houses
7 and 8. To date, there have been no analyses or publications on this work.
The final field work on the Vinson Site was done in the late 1970s by groups
from the Tarrant County and Central Texas archeological societies who worked
on two structures (House 5 and House 6). This work was under the supervision of
the senior author. Part of the property has now been purchased by a private
individual and a house built on it. The remainder of the property was purchased by
the Archaeological Conservancy and will be protected.
Since 1964, the Vinson site artifacts and manuscript have been worked on by
various individuals. This article primarily updates these analyses, when feasible,
and mainly deals with excavations done at the 1964 field school and the excavation of House 5 by the senior author; information from Mr. Vinson’s work is
included where appropriate.
OBJECTIVES OF THE 1964 TAS FIELD SCHOOL
Few Historic Native American archeological sites have been discovered in
Texas. Even fewer can be associated with archival and historical documents. The
possibility that the Vinson site belongs to both of these categories certainly makes
it an important site to investigate.
After the excavation of Houses 1 and 3, it was apparent that the site needed to
be examined more thoroughly to learn about the historic Wichita-speaking Indians
who were believed to have occupied this site. The 1964 TAS Field School was set
up to pursue this goal. The following objectives guided the field school work:
(1) Study the house patterns.
At the time of the 1964 field school, previous excavations at two historic
sites in Texas thought to be affiliated with Wichita speakers (Gilbert and Pearson)
had yielded no house patterns; only one house pattern was excavated at the
Stansbury site. Additionally, no work had been done in the 1930s on the possible structures at a fourth site, Womack (Figure 1). The excavation of the first
three houses at Vinson showed that excellent house patterns were preserved. One
of the houses was oval in shape while the other two were almost circular, and
thus further excavations were necessary to find out which, if either, was the more
typical house shape.

Smith and others -- The Vinson Site

67

°AMAmLLO

T
,

E~X

A

~

i

S

" J"

\\

’

L{i

Figure 1. Selected Historic Indian Site Locations in Texas.

(2) Obtain a better sample of the artifacts.
Another problem to be addressed was the relative scarcity of artifacts at the
site. A larger sample needed to be retrieved to determine the frequency of the
various types of aboriginal and European goods at Vinson. To investigate the
hypothesis that there might be two cultural components at the site, a nomadic
Tonkawa Indian occupation of the late eighteenth century and a Tawakoni village
there in the first half of the nineteenth century, more temporally diagnostic
artifacts had to be acquired.
(3) Explore the area between structures for features.
At the time of the TAS field school, little was known about the character of
these intra-site areas. Exploration there would have the potential to increase our
knowledge of the layout of a typical Wichita village, and possibly locate areas
with concentrated cultural materials that might have been camping sites of the
Tonkawa.
(4) Determine the cultural affiliation and occupation date of the site.
The primary purpose of this objective was to determine if this was the site of
the 1830 Cherokee battle described by Wilbarger (1889).

Texas Archeological Society

68

DESCRIPTION OF SITE
The site, located on the top of Tehuacana Hill (Figure 2), is in an open field
on the north bank of an intermittent spring-fed creek. The spring, located about
four hundred meters west of the site, is the main water supply for the community
of Tehuacana. The spring-fed creek joins Tehuacana Creek, part of the Trinity
River watershed, about 1.2 km southeast of the site. The springs have been an
important location in historic times as attested by their inclusion on many midnineteenth century maps of the area.
The field in which the Vinson site is situated has been occupied at various
times from the 1700s to the 1930s, when an old farmhouse located in the middle of
the site burned. The field has also probably been cultivated by Ang!o-American
settlers since the Civil War. Artifactual debris from this late occupation is abun-

I

@
!
!

41LT1A
\

tUACANA
\

\

/

0
,

0.5
I

miles

!
°

¯ "-~ -,.S

!

o.

Figure 2. General Location of the Vinson Site.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

69

dant around the old house site, marked now by an old well casing and portions of
the fireplace.
The known site covers about 25 acres ~igure 3) but the land east of the site
has not been fully investigated; there are no surface indications of Historic Indian
occupation in this area. Possible Historic Indian houses are suspected in the area
nearer the springs (Noil Vinson, 1976 personal communication).

Figure 3. 1964 Site View, showing Backhoe Trenches.

Around the springs numerous Archaic period and Late Prehistoric period
artifacts have been recovered. West of the springs, a large gravel operation has
erased any Irace of occupation that may have been present there. There have also
been undocumented reports that one or more Historic Indian houses have been
found around some of the buildings in the main part of Tehuacana northwest of the
site (Noil Vinson, 1976 personal communication). A recent survey in the
Tehuacana vicinity conducted by Daniel J. Prikryl (1990) produced no additional
evidence of Historic Indian campsites.
GEOLOGY OF SITE
The Vinson Site is located on a prominent outcrop of Upper Cretaceous
limestone in this area of relatively flat topography. This outcrop is along the

70

Texas Archeological Society

Mexia-Talco Fault Zone, which is similar to the Balcones Fault Zone to the west
(Sheldon 1979:152). The rocks of the Upper Cretaceous consist primarily of
marls, shales, chalks, and limestones; sands and conglomerates also occur.
The limestone outcropping at Tehuacana is the type locality for the Kincaid
or lower formation of the Midway group. The Kincaid Formation has been given
the name Tehuacana Limestone (Sellards et al. 1932:532-533).
The natural stratigraphy of the site consists of a loose, tan sandy plow zone
(strata A) with occasional stream pebbles. In strata B, below the plow zone, the
color is only slightly lighter but the sandy soil is more compacted. There are
numerous stream pebbles mixed with the sand. At a depth of 46-60 cm, a layer of
reddish brown clay (strata C) is encountered. This clay is slightly gritty and hardpacked with occasional water-worn pebble inclusions. Beneath this zone- at a
depth of 90-120 cm - is strata D, a fine-grained and hard-packed sand. This zone
extends to at least 150 cm below surface, and grades from a reddish-tan sand
mixed with nodules of clay to a light tan sand.
The large amount of rodent activity at the site has sufficiently mixed the
strata C clay with the strata A and B sands to create a very hard-packed soil during
dry, hot weather. This was the situation during the 1964 TAS Field School.
WICHITA ETHNOHISTORICAL CONTEXT
There have been many disagreements concerning the location of Quivira
(the land of the Wichita), but most scholars have concluded that it lay in the great
bend of the Arkansas River in what is now South Central Kansas (Newcomb and
Field 1967:244). Probable Wichita-speaking Native Americans were first discussed by Coronado in 1541 as living in the province known as Quivira. The
Coronado narratives described the people as being village-dwelling agriculturalists who also hunted bison.
In 1601, Don Juan de Ofiate led a large expedition into the Quivira province, leaving a good description of some aspects of Wichita culture, including a
detailed discussion of their houses and means of agriculture. In 1718, JeanBaptiste Brnard, Sieur de la Harpe was given a grant to explore along the Red
River and to establish trade with the Spaniards living in what is now Texas and
New Mexico. He established a post on the Red River near Texarkana. This post
was maintained until after the Louisiana cession in 1762, giving the French a
great deal of influence among the Indians of Texas and acting as an effective
barrier to the Spaniards (Bolton 1914, Volume 1:35). Any attempt to decrease the
French trade among the natives during this time was met with hostility toward
the Spaniards by the Indian tribes. In 1763, it was boasted that a French flag had
flown over one of the Tawakoni villages for 40 years.
It appears that groups of the Wichitas had migrated into the Central Texas
area by 1750 and were either directly or indirectly receiving French arms and
ammunition during that period. So although the boundary of Spanish territory
during the first half of the eighteenth century lay near the Red River, North and

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

71

North Central Texas was effectively in the hands of the French traders (see
Bolton 1915).
In April 1757, a Spanish mission and presidio was established on the San
Saba River near present Menard, Texas, to establish trade and communication
with New Mexico and to serve the Apache Indians. In March 1758, the
Comanche, Tawakoni, Kichai, and others, attacked the settlement to protest the
alliance of their Apache enemies and the Spanish. The following year, Don
Diego Ortiz Parrilla led a force northward to punish the northern Vibes for their
depredations (Allen 1939). He first attacked a Tonkawa village in Central Texas
before arriving at a fortified Taovayas village on the Red River; this was probably one of the four aboriginal sites in Texas and Oklahoma collectively known
as Spanish Fort (Newcomb and Field 1967; John 1992). Parrilla’s attack on the
village was unsuccessful with a loss of 52 men and two cannons.
Parrilla’s account of the expedition substantiates the influence of the
French traders. He states that a French flag was flown from the center of the
palisaded area and that the Indians were well supplied with French muskets
and ammunition.
Soon after the defeat of Parrilla, Father Calahorra, the missionary at
Nacogdoches, went to two Indian villages on the Sabine River at their request
(Johnson and Jelks 1958). These tribes were the Tawakoni and Yscanis, two of
the vibes that had participated in the massacre at San Saba, but who now wanted
to make peace. Duffield and Jelks (1961:78) state that the Pearson Site may
represent this village complex, but they do note that there is disagreement about
the dating of the site to the 1750s-1760s.
By 1765, after Louisiana was transferred to Spain, the Tawakonis and
Yscanis had become friendly with the Spanish, although the Taovayas on the
Red River continued to raid San Saba chiefly in pursuit of the Apache. During
the late 1760s, Spain reorganized its colonial government as a result of the
Louisiana cession, re-evaluating military and mission settlements. Licensed traders also replaced the free French traders and restrictions were placed on firearms
and other items no longer suitable for hostile tribes. These restrictions were a
blow to the Wichita who had been important middlemen themselves in a trade
system, causing a decline in their stature and in their relations with the Spanish
(Harper 1953).
By the summer of 1771, the Wichitas and Tonkawas were desperate for
trade (Newcomb and Field 1967:272). Athanase De Mdzi~res was now lieutenant-governor at Natchitoches. M~zi~res concluded peace treaties with these Vibes
and made a tour of their country in 1772 to cement the alliance as well as to
investigate rumors of English traders among the Indians (Bolton 1914; Newcomb
and Field 1967:273). Leaving Natchitoches, he traveled to the villages of the
Kichai, Yscani, and Tawakoni now on the Trinity River. Continuing westward,
he traveled through the area between the Trinity and Brazos rivers. He probably
did not pass near the Vinson Site, but his narratives generally indicated that the
Tonkawa inhabited this area.

72

Texas Archeological Society

Upon reaching the Brazos River near present day Waco, Mrzi~res visited
two Tawakoni villages.1 Proceeding up the Brazos River about two hundred miles,
he encountered a Wichita village. Going northeast to the Red River, he made his
final stop at the Taovoyas village before turning south to San Antonio. Bolton
(1914, Volume 1:122) states that this was one of the most notable Colonial
explorations in Texas. Mrzi~res’ report gives a good picture of the tribes living in
Central Texas in the last half of the eighteenth century. When discussing many
aspects of the culture of the Tawakoni and Tonkawa tribes we have relied on
Mrzi~res’ account and other eyewitness sources.
Mrzi~res’ second visit into the central and northern part of Texas came in
the spring of 1778. Spain wanted to unite the northern tribes to destroy the
Apache. A visit into the heart of these villages was seen as an important move
by Mrzi~res to unify the tribes while the plan was being considered by authorities. Mrzi~res traveled from San Antonio to the new pueblo of Bucareli on the
Trinity River. Going north eighteen leagues (about 50 miles), he visited a village of Kichai.
Turning west for fifteen leagues (about 40 miles), Mrzi~res (Bolton 1914,
Volume II: 192) states:
... I arrived at the place which the natives call La Tortuga [The Tortoise].
It is an eminence which commands a broad valley and gives rise to a
large spring of crystalline water [This is believed to be the eminence on
which the Vinson Site is located]. The Tancaques [Tonkawas] live in its
neighborhood, not in permanent houses and in a village, but underneath
(tents of) skins, and in various bands which are directed, maintained, and
moved by the caprice of their petty chiefs and leaders [brackets added].
Continuing west, he again visited the Tawakoni village on the Brazos River
near Waco. Following the Brazos River north, he found another settlement of
Tawakoni above the first. Jelks (1970:277-283) offers evidence that this second
site is the Stansbury Site, the location of the Flechado Village of Tawakoni Indians
later described by Mrzi~res (see Figure 1). From this village, Mrzi~res went along
the western side of the Cross Timbers to the Red River and the two Taovoyas
villages. Whether these are at the same location as the palisaded village attacked
by Parrilla in 1759 has not been verified. It was on this trip that Mrzi~res learned
that the English traders were making inroads among the Wichita tribes (Bolton
1914, Volume II:207).
A year later, in September 1779, Mrzi~res made a third trip through the
northern tribes on his way to San Antonio. Traveling the same route from the
Trinity River to the Brazos River as the year before, he must have traveled by La
~Watt (1969:208) provides a map showing the location of a major Waco village at
the Falls of the Brazos during the mid-1800s. Three other sites, Stone, Waco Village
under downtown Waco, and Gas Plant, show evidence of Historic Wichita occupation
near Waco, Texas.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

73

Tortuga but made no mention of the village there. Before reaching a Tawakoni
village on the Brazos River, he encountered a large party of Tonkawa, whose chief
was an Apache named E1 Mocho (The Maimed) because he had lost an ear.
M6zi~res tried to persuade E1 Mocho to build a village in the area. The chief
acknowledged that the Govemor of Texas had urged him to do the same, to which
M6zibres stated (Bolton 1914, Volume II:271):
¯.. true to his word, he [El Mocho] has proposed to establish himself in
the pleasant site of La Tortuga as soon as he should return from Bexar,
where the above-mentioned chevalier governor had, again, called him;
that, the news of my march having reached him, he had suspended his
own; that he remains all the firmer in his decision [brackets added]¯
There is no indication, however, that a village was actually established by the
Tonkawas at La Tortuga as E1 Mocho had promised.
MdziEres continued on his route through the Tawakoni village on the Brazos
River to San Antonio by the way of the San Xavier River (now the San Gabriel
River). M6ziEres noted a bad epidemic, perhaps of smallpox, had hit the Tawakoni
very hard. Also, in 1779 the Tawakoni village on the Trinity River was abandoned
and the group joined the other village on the Brazos River (Newcomb 1961:250).
In October 1787, Pedro Vial set out to pioneer a route from San Antonio to
Santa Fe (Loomis and Nasatir 1967); his trip may have given us a good clue to
whom the occupants of the Vinson Site were. According to Newcomb and Field
(1967:282), Vial struck the Tawakoni village on the Brazos River on October
24th, but no one was there. He did find the Tawakonis on the 29th of October, and
Vial went to the house of Quiscot [Quiscat], their chief. The main village of
Quiseat was located on the Brazos River in the vicinity of Waco. Vial seems to
have found them at a temporary camp 12 leagues (about 30 miles) west of the
Brazos.
Vial had been at Quiscat’s village before, but apparently when it was at a
different location. It was not at the place on the Brazos River that MdziEres visited
in 1772, 1778, and 1779 (Bolton 1914, Volume 1:144) but was found on a small
tributary. Newcomb and Field (1967:282) note that Vial was extremely sick and
might not have been accurate in describing his exact location.
Staying with the Tawakonis until December 15th, Vial recovered from his
illness (Vial 1787:7). He then left the village and headed north along the Brazos
River until he reached the Red River east of the Taovayas-Wichita village
(Newcomb 1961:283; Vial 1787:8). Based on distances and locations, it seems
unlikely that Vial could have traveled north along the Brazos River and have hit
the Red River east of the Taovayas village. Another possibility, if Vial was indeed
at the Vinson site, is that he traveled up the Trinity River¯ This would have easily
brought him to the Red River east of the Taovayas-Wichita village. Vial stayed
through the winter at the village, and went on to Santa Fe in the spring.
During the 1780s, Spain had difficulty keeping English traders out of Texas.
In 1785, in an effort to maintain good relations with the Tawakonis, the Spanish

74

Texas Areheological Society

governor invited Chief QuiscaL some of his tribe, and eighteen Kichais to San
Antonio to receive gifts.
Another smallpox epidemic hit the Wichita tribes in 1801. This epidemic
affected them severely, with perhaps half of the tribe dying. This epidemic,
coupled with continuing battles with their Indian enemies throughout the early
part of the ninteenth century, caused further declines in the population of the
Wichita groups.
During the first half of the nineteenth century, the Wichitas were generally at
peace with the United States and Texas. They fought mainly with Osages and
other Indian war parties from the north. In 1861 John Henry Brown (Texas
Almanac 1861:79) wrote about an intertribal fight between the Tawakoni and
Cherokees in 1830. His source was "these facts I obtained in 1842 from an old
Spaniard who composed one of the party, and I have little doubt but they were
furnished by him with fidelity."
According to Brown, the Cherokee attacked the Waco Indian village on
the Brazos River in 1829 to recover horses and other bounty stolen from them.
After several hours of fighting, a group of Tawakoni from a nearby village rode
up and drove off the attackers. A year later the Cherokees, still upset at their
failure to recover their horses, fitted up a war party of 125 warriers to attack the
Tawakoni. Brown (Texas Almanac 1861:79) says the Tehuaeanas were divided,
living in different villages:
One of them and perhaps their most esteemed locality, was at the southern point of the hills of the same name, now in the upper edge of
Limestone County, and the present residence of of Messrs. Boyd and
Moore? Around these springs, there is a large amount of loose limestone
on the surface, as well as in the hills, and the whole surrounding country
is one of rare beauty and loveliness. The Tehuacanas [Tawakoni] had
erected small enclosures of these stones about three feet in height,
leaving occasional spaces about two feet square resembling the mouths
of furnaces [brackets added].
These stone enclosures were covered with buffalo skins and poles, and served as
places of retreat in time of attack.
Although the Tawakoni outnumbered the Cherokees in the 1830 attack, they
were surprised while playing ball and were soon driven into their shelters. After
the Tawakoni had taken refuge in their enclosures, the Cherokee used brush to
burn them out and kill them. According to the History of Navarro, Henderson,
Anderson, Limestone, Freestone and Leon Counties: (1893): "At this time and on
to the time of the revolution in 1836, the Tehuacanos [Tawakoni] had headquarters

2According to NoilVinson (1976 personal cormnunication), the Moore house was near
the springs.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

75

at Tehuacana Springs in the present territory of Limestone, for they rebuilt their
council house." The same source also states that by 1844 the village was gone and
only white settlers were in the area around the springs.
During the 1840s the Wichita and Tawakoni groups roamed the area between
the Brazos and Trinity rivers. According to P. M. Butler (1846), the Waco,
Wichita, and Tawakoni had been committing depredations upon Texas settlements for the last year (see also Neighbors [1847a, 1847b] for a substantiation of
this statement). In 1855 the Wichita groups were settled on a reservation on the
Brazos River near the mouth of the Clear Fork three miles east of Graham, Texas.
In 1859 they were removed to Oklahoma. Today, they number several hundred
and live in western Oklahoma.
HISTORICAL REFERENCES

Tawakoni (also spelled Tehuacana, Tuacana, and Touacana)

The Tawakoni Indians belong to a group of culturally related tribes known
collectively as the Wichita. The Wacos, Taovayas, Wichita proper, and others
included in this group spoke a common language. The origin of the word Wichita
is unknown, for it is not the Wichita’s term for themselves (Newcomb 1961:249).
The Spanish usually included the Wichita groups among the "Norteios"
(Nations or peoples of the North). M6zi&es described the Tawakoni in 1772:
... (the women) are industrious, devoting themselves to the cultivation of
the soil .... The women make the houses, prepare the food, plant the
fields, tan the skins, gather the crops, and work unceasingly, while their
husbands are never employed except in war or hunting .... They are
most cruel with their prisoners, whose flesh they eat after having killed
them with long and unheard of torments, horrible to mankind .... They
are cheerful, affable, and docile in their manner, compassionate toward
the sick, orphans, and widows, respectful to their elders, generous towards strangers, kind to guests, but in general more revengeful for injury
than grateful for benefits... (Bolton 1914, Volume I:285-289).
The above descriptions are of a settled, organized, agricultural group living in
villages much like that at the Vinson site.
The descriptions of the Wichita villages are of particular interest. Ofiate,
on his expedition to the Quivira in 1601, described the typical Wichita house:
"They (houses) were all round, built of forked poles and bound with rods, and
on the outside, covered to the ground with dry grass. Within, on the sides, they
had frameworks or platforms which served them as beds on which they slept.
Most of them were large enough to hold eight to 10 persons" (Bolton 1916:260).
Castafieda in 1541 (Winship 1896:528-529) and La Harpe in 1719 (Margry
1888:294-295) provide basically the same house descriptions. This type of house
was used by the Wichita until the twentieth century (Newcomb 1961:255). Several

76

Texas Archeological Society

historic descriptions, including Marcy (1866:157), indicate that the Wichita houses
ranged from 30 to 40 feet in diamater.
Newcomb (1961:256) also indicates that Wichita houses had arbors for
summer work and sleeping, and also platforms for drying meat. Padilla, in 1820,
(Hatcher 1920:57) described the Tawakoni houses in the same manner as above
and added that "their granaries are underground. In them they preserve their seeds
for two years."
Sanchez in 1828 (Sanchez 1926:266) further states that "In winter the
women hide the agriculture products in holes which they make in the ground and
the whole tribe sets out to hunt the buffalo and wild bison." Mrzi~res (Bolton
1914, Volume 11:286) and La Harpe (Smith 1959:531) descriptions support this
last statement that the Wichitas abandoned their villages en mass during the winter
months to hunt buffalo, returning only in time for spring planting.
The above accounts indicate, then, that Wichita-speaking groups built large,
permanent houses and had an agricultural lifeway complemented with large game
from the hunt. It is also well-documented that they left their summer village to
hunt for bison during the winter months.
MAPS

A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory has a section
that describes maps with information on the possible location of Wichita-speaking
groups (Newcomb and Field 1967:304-309). Newcomb and Field’s research was
conducted at the Texas State Archives in Austin, in the Library of Congress, and
the National Archives in Washington, D. C. Some of these maps that might pertain
to the Vinson Site are described below.
Maps prior to 1800 were stylized and contained many scale errors. One,
Nicolas de la Fora’s map of the Rubi inspection in the fall and winter of 17671768, locates an Indian village midway between the Trinity and the headwaters of
the Navasota rivers. This would be in the correct location for the place known as
La Tortuga, where the Vinson Site is located, but since there is no identification on
the map naming the village, the identification is not certain.
Maps of the period from 1807 to 1846 generally located at least one and
sometimes as many as three Waco Indian villages on the Brazos River near the
present city of Waco. No map shows a village of Tawakoni Indians at the location
of the Vinson Site, however. The only one of these to show any Indian villages in
the vinicity of the Vinson Site is the 1829 Stephen F. Austin map. Newcomb and
Field (1967:306) describe this map as showing "Pueblos of the Hueco and
Tahacanos... on both sides of the Brazos River south of its juncture with the
Bosque River. Kichais Indians are situated on the Tortuga, a tributary of the
Trinity River." On most maps of the period, however, the Kichais were located to
the east of the Trinity River.
Whether "the Tortuga" refers to the Vinson site location, whether the map
was incorrect in the location of the Kichai village, or whether the village was

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

77

actually a Tawakoni village is not known. However, had a Tawakoni village
existed for any length of time at the Vinson site during the first half of the
nineteenth century, it seems likely that it would have been documented on more
than one map. This is emphasized by the fact that the springs were known and
shown on many maps of the late nineteenth century.
EXCAVA~ONPROCEDURES
In the work prior to the 1964 TAS Field School, a primarj datum was
established on a well casing near the eastern edge of the field. It was assigned an
arbitrary elevation of 100 feet but was not given horizontal coordinates as each
house was excavated as a discrete unit. A site map was made in 1964 with alidade
and plane table locating the primary datum and any known features within the site.
The measurements for excavations were done in feet and inches.
For the field school a grid was staked out using the same well casing as the
primary datum (the well casing used as the primary datum was not on either base
line and no coordinates for the primary datum are known). Two lines, a N500 and
W500, were established. All features from the earlier work were located on this
grid. House 5 (excavated in the late 1970s) and House 6 were also located on this
grid and excavations there used the well casing as the primary datum. House 7 and
House 8 were located on a copy of the original 1964 site map by Mr. Vinson, and
their accuracy is uncertain.
Using a tractor with a backhoe, a series of 17 trenches, 46-60 cm deep, were
excavated to help locate features prior to the beginning of the Field School
investigations ~igure 4). It was hoped that with careful and extensive trenching, a
better idea of what was between the houses would be obtained, and would be
successful in locating additional houses.
Each trench was carefully inspected and any disturbance that might indicate
the presence of a cultural feature was recorded in the trench profiles. It was
decided to trench Feature 25, believed at that time to be a house found by Mr.
Vinson, to gain a better understanding of how such features would look in the
trench profiles.
Hand excavations were done primarily with shovels, while trowels were
reserved for when artifacts were found in situ, at the contact layer between zones,
and near the floor and walls. Since the ground was extremely dry and "as hard as
concrete" during the Field School, not all dirt was screened. Dirt that was screened
was put through one-quarter inch hardware cloth, with a sample of the fill washed
through one-sixteenth inch window screen in an effort to recover glass trade
beads. No records are available that indicate the percentage of dirt that was
screened through one-quarter inch mesh or the percentage of dirt sampled for fine
screening. Apparently only beads were retained from the fine screening, as no
material other than beads was available for analysis. All artifacts recovered in the
1964 TAS Field School were put into sacks which were properly labeled with grid
coordinates. The artifacts were later inventoried and assigned catalog numbers.

78

Texas Archeological Society

HOUSE 3

FEATURE 26

+
NS00
WS00

N700
TIO

4-

NSO0
WTO0

\
HOUSE 2

NSOO
W600

W400

WSO0

\

J

F£ATURE 29

N500

ff

W300
Tll

W500
4-

N300

HOUSE 4"

T15
WSOO

T16

Figure 4. Site Map showing trenches and their relationship to Houses 1-8 and other features.

Excavation conditions were better in the late 1970s when House 5 was
investigated. All dirt was screened through one-quarter inch hardware cloth and
approximately 50 percent of that was fine-screened.
FEATURES
A total of 15 features have been identified from the various Vinson site
excavations. All features were excavated as separate units and recorded on the

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

79

master site map. Cache Pits 1, 2 and 3 in this report were originally recorded as
Feature 25-1, Feature 31, and Feature 32.
House 1 (grid coordinates N425/W650)

The description of House 1 excavations is summarized from an unpublished
manuscript written by Dessamae Lorrain (1963). House 1 was excavated under
the direction of Edward B. Jelks on several field trips from October 1961 to
Februrary 1963. It was outlined by a narrow trench that followed the house’s
perimeter. The interior of the house was then divided into six arbitrary sections.
Sections one and two at the northern end, and section six at the southern end,
were dug by six-inch (15.6-cm) levels from the ground surface. After drawing
the profiles and noting the stratification, it was decided to excavate the remaining three sections by distinct soil units. Where the soil units were thin or not
easily separated, excavated levels combined two, but never more than two, soil
units.
House 1 was oval in outline ~igure 5). It measured about 30 feet (9.2 meters)
in length and 12 feet (3.6 meters) in width at ground level; its long axis was
oriented northwest-southeast. The floor of the house was dug about 18 inches (46
cm) into the clay subsoil. Neither the floor or walls showed any signs of deliberate
preparation.
Six post molds, and a possible seventh, were found in the floor of the house,
according to the field documentation of the structure. There was cedar wood still
remaining in five of them (see Figure 5). The posts form an inner oval ring
approximately 2.5 feet (75 cm) from the outside wall. In addition, there was a
support post equidistant from the east and west walls and 12.5 feet (3.8 meters)
from the north end. The balk around one of the center stakes was not excavated
and there may have been another post to balance the previously mentioned north
support post.
Two circular ash lenses and a fire pit were found in the southern half of the
house. The first, and original, fireplace extended below floor level. It was a basinshaped depression approximately 2.5 feet (75 cm) in diameter and four inches (10
cm) deep. It was equidistant from the east and west house walls and between 7.5
(2.3 meters) and 10 feet (3.05 meters) from the south end. The clay below it was
burned to a depth of approximately 1.25 inches (3 cm). Five inches (13 cm) above,
and partly overlapping the central fireplace, was the first ash lens. It apparently
represents a later second floor level. This floor could not be clearly identified in
most of the house. This lens was smaller than the fire basin, 1.67 feet (51 cm) in
diameter, and only 1.25 inches (3 cm) deep, but the dirt under the lens was also
burned to a depth of 1.25 inches (3 cm). A second ash lens was also found on this
second floor; it was about the same size and the dirt beneath it was also burned
(see Figure 5).
Although no entryway was identified, Dr. Harry Shafer (1984 personal
communication) remembered a packed clay area associated with House 1. It was
located in the middle of the north side of the structure, and led from the top of the

80

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

@

Outline of
house

at

ground
surface

®

0

I

@

Post

(~ Char red

wood

Figure 5. House I Plan View.

clay zone to the bottom of the house pit. The packed clay area was not shown,
however, in the field plan drawing made of House 1.
The profdes show that the house burned. The layer of burned clay and
charcoal was six inches (15.6 cm) to one foot (31.2 cm) thick around the walls, but

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

81

lensed out toward the center of the house; it sloped downward from the walls to
the center of the house. There were no impressions of sticks or grass in this burned
layer. There were, however, a few lumps of grass-impressed daub found in the
upper layers of the house fill.
In the two center sections, burned beams were found just above the burned
clay. They measured up to two feet (61 cm) in length and up to six inches (16 cm)
in diameter. With few exceptions, the burned beams were oriented upward and
outward toward the walls. It appears that the side walls of the house had collapsed
and then were followed by the burning inner framework that fell over them.
Above the burned clay layer and the burned beams was a gray sandy clay
midden with a large amount of bone refuse. The depression formed by the burned
house obviously had then been used as a refuse pit. After the refuse had almost
reached the top of the ground surface, a layer of sterile red clay was placed over it.
The clay was deliberately placed there by humans, but why it was done is
unknown. One possibility is that the depression was used as a landfill for the clay
excavated during the building of a new house.
House 2 (N440/W660)
House 2 had been discovered and partially excavated by Mr. Vinson before
the beginning of the 1964 Field School. Further excavations during the field
school were done in the hopes of obtaining another house plan, establishing the
range of house styles at Vinson, and determining if the different house shapes
represented: (a) occupations by different groups who may have lived at the site at
different times or (b) represented different structure functions.
House 2 was trenched to obtain a profile of a known house as an aid to
identifying other structures in the remainder of the trenches. Trench 5 cut eastwest through the north half of the house to a depth of 2.5 feet (75 cm). Mr.
Vinson had reached the floor of House 2 in only a small portion of its southern
section but had removed much of the central fill. Since the major objective here
was to obtain the floor plan, the backhoe was then used to clean out portions of
the housefill.
House 2 was a circular structure built inside a shallow pit ~igure 6). The
house was 15 feet (4.6 meters) by 17 feet (5.2 meters) in diameter. The floor was
dug approximately 18 inches (46 cm) into the clay and was four feet (1.2 meters)
below the present ground surface. The pit for the structure originated in what was
the plow zone.
The structure had a circle of seven posts with a possible eighth post on the
southeast edge of the circle (see Figure 6). These posts were located from 18 to 30
inches (46-77 cm) from the edge of the structure depression and ranged from 2.55.5 inches (6.5-14 cm) in diameter.
The eighth possible mold is considered only a possible post because it was
shallower and not as distinctive as the others in color. If the eighth post is included
in the wall support ring, then the structure post pattern would lack only the
southwest post of the ring. This portion of the ring is located in the shallower

82

Texas ArcheologicaI Society

~)Charred
(~ Possible

wood
.t~

post

@ Post

.=

edoeoft.~~
Z-=

~,~,~,/o~ I

floor

---. -~
\

,/

\

/

\

/

/

,,,,

\

@

/

\

/

@
Trench

5

\

@0
I
I

0-

@ Q

f
/

©

/

/
/

/
/

/

@

/

@

I

/
t"

0

I

/

I

,

,

5

,

,I

Feet

Figure 6. House 2 Plan View.

0

3
Feet

v’~.:
Outside

o,;oor
Figure 7. Profile of House 2.

edge

I

~,

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

83

portion of the house that may have been destroyed by plowing or other types of
disturbances.
Additional posts were located within one foot (30 cm) of two of the wall
support posts (see Figure 6). These double post arrangements might represent
repair work on the structure, but it seems unlikely that the double posts on the east
side would represent repairs, since one appears to be outside the discernible limits
of the floor. A possible explanation for the pattern would be that the extra post is
part of an entryway.
Inside the wall support ring were four roof support posts. Another double
post arrangement, possibly from the replacement of one of the roof support posts,
was found in the bottom of Trench 5 (see Figure 6). All the roof support posts
were between 4.5-5.5 feet (1.4-1.7 meters) from the edge of the structure. A total
of 14 or 15 posts were found in this structure; seven of them still contained wood
fragments.
No definite entrance was found, although one was carefully searched for
during the excavations. The most probable location for the entrance is on the
eastern side of the structure: this area is next to the double post arrangement
mentioned before and the soil is definitely more compact than the rest of the
structure. There is also a slight rise in the floor elevation there, and the occupational debris and organic staining found on the floor extends outward from the
structure.
A clay ridge was noted along the outside of the structure in several areas
(Figure 7). This embanking of dirt may have aided in keeping the inside of the
structure dry. The fire pit was located near the center of the house and was circular
with a two foot (61 cm) diameter (see Figure 6); the pit was six inches (15.6 cm)
deep. The hearth was completely removed to search for a post mold under the
hearth, but none was found. Several burned beams were found on the floor near
the center of the house. Due to the previous excavation of the house, most of the
beams in the shallower outer edges of the house had been removed or destroyed.
The fragments of baked clay scattered throughout the fill suggests that clay, or
chinking, may have been used to some extent in the house construction, although
they were not present in great numbers. No grass impressions were noted on the
baked clay pieces.
Although the excavations during the field school recorded no bone midden,
Mr. Vinson reported finding a great number of animal bones near the top of the
structure fill It appears that this house was also a refuse dump. No clay layer was
reported by Mr. Vinson, however, covering the bone refuse.
House 3 (N790/W730)
The description of House 3 was also summarized from an unpublished
manuscript written by Lorrain (1963). House 3 was excavated in the spring of
1963 by the Dallas and Tarrant County archeological societies under the direction
of Dessamae Lorrain and Lathel Duffield. The house had earlier been discovered
and partly dug by Mr. Vinson. Since the structure appeared to be fairly small with

84

Texas Archeological Society

simple stratigraphy, and the soil was impossibly hard, it was decided to excavate
House 3 as a single unit. The dirt had to be carefully loosened with hand picks and
removed with shovels. Due to the hardness of the dirt clods, only an unknown
portion of it was screened through one-quarter inch mesh screen. Trowels were
used near the floor and walls.
To maintain vertical and horizontal control two stakes were established on a
north-south line, while a third stake for elevation was located at the eastern edge of
the house. A plan map of the house was drawn, and the elevations were recorded
relative to the ground level at the elevation stake. However, the elevations were
not related to a primary datum. A record of the soil zones in the structure was made
but no profiles were drawn.
House 3 had a subsurface floor like House 1, but there the resemblance
ended. This house was almost circular (Figure 8), with an east-west diameter of 23
feet (7.0 meters) and a north-south diameter of 25 feet (7.6 meters). The floor, with
a central fire basin, was approximately one foot (30 cm) below ground level. The
fire basin had a diameter of two feet (61 cm) and a depth of 1.25 inches (3 cm)
below the floor. A circle of 12 post holes occurred from 2.5 to four feet (73-122
cm) inside the outer edge of the house pit. Ten of these had cedar wood still
remaining in them. Two other posts were found on either side of the fire basin; no
wood was found in them. The size of these posts is unknown, but the descriptions
of them suggest that they are the size of central support posts; however, the field
notes state that "they appear too big for posts."
As with House 1, Shafer (1984 personal communication) remembered a
packed clay area that may have served as an entry ramp for House 3. This packed
clay area was on the west side of the structure, and ran from the top of the clay
zone to the house floor pit.
This house had been burned and there was a concentration of charcoal
between each post hole and the walls of the house. As with House 1, there were a
few lumps of grass-impressed daub.
The stratigraphy of House 3 was very simple. Above the floor and the
charcoal, there was a 0.5 foot (15.6 cm) thick, gray bone refuse midden concentrated in the southern half of the house with a 0.5 foot (15.6 cm) thick sterile clay
layer above it. The house appears to have been burned, abandoned, and used as a
refuse pit.
House 4 (N280/W420)

House 4 was approximately oval in shape, roughly 37 feet (11.3 meters)
through the east-west axis and 20 feet (6.1 meters) along the north-south axis. This
structure had been discovered and partially excavated by Mr. Vinson. The remaining structure excavations were done during the 1964 field school. A backhoe was
used to first clean out the excavated backdirt from the previous work and to cut a
trench along the major axis of the structure, as well as to excavate four trenches
perpendicular to the major axis in an effort to locate the edges of the structure. Due

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

85

/

/
/
/

/
/
/

/
/

Figure 8. Plan View of House 3.

to the hardness of the soil and time constraints, most of the work in this feature
was done with pick and shovel. No indication is given in field school records as to
the amount of soil matrix put through screens.
The house was oriented almost due east-west along its long axis. As shown in
Figure 9, most of the northern half of the house was excavated by the end of the
field school. Only test trenches were put in the southern part of the house.
The structure was almost four feet (1.2 meters) below the present surface
and two feet (0.6 meters) into the clay layer. Nine definite posts were located,
with seven along the north and east edges, while two posts were found in the
middle of the structure. This oval-shaped house is similar in floor plan to House
1, because it apparently had two rings of wall support posts along with the center
roof support posts.
A burned clay floor was located in House 4 when Mr. Vinson’s excavations
were cleaned up. The floor is roughly in the center of the house and may be all that

86

Texas Archeological Society

@

@

Figure 9. Area Excavated at House 4, and projected house outline.

was left of the central fire hearth. A few burned beams were present in the western
part of the structure; however, a considerable charcoal layer was identified just
above the house floor.
The trenching of House 4 facilitated the profiling of this structure (Figure
10). As noted in the profiles, the structure had no bone midden or clay cap. The
floor is not perfectly level, nor is it a clearly prepared surface. The clay ridge that
was seen around the outside of House 2 was not found in House 4.

e

nu.o.

Figure 10. House 4 Profile.

. ¯ Q~,.,~ IJ~t~l,

.°6v ch=~©o=t

F,=t

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

87

House 5 ~560/W520)
House 5 was located in 1976 by the author and Ralph Vinson, brother of the
land leasee. It was primarily excavated by trowels and a double screening procedure using one-quarter inch mesh wire and then window screen, with all cultural
materials being saved. The structure was excavated in 3 x 3 foot (0.92 x 0.92
meters) units, utilizing six inch (15.6 cm) levels. It was hoped these methods
would allow a more complete sample of artifacts associated with the structure or
midden layer to be recovered, and allow for more complete structural and stratigraphic details to be documented. Additional goals of the excavations included
locating the structure’s entrance, and defining structural features outside the pit
portion of the structure.
House 5 was located after observing cultural materials that had been brought
to the surface by pocket gophers. The house was near the well casing used as the
primary datum; the well was close to the old farmhouse that had burned. Consequently, the upper fill of House 5 produced an large quantity of artifacts from the
later historic period occupation at the site. Only a sample of identifiable and
possibly temporally diagnostic artifacts were collected from this historic deposit.
At the time excavations began in 1976, there were no time constraints. The
excavations were conducted on selected weekends over a five year period. In
1981, however, the access to the property was lost, and the field was leveled by
machinery to return it to pasture. Approximately 80 percent of the house had been
excavated up to that point.
House 5 was a large oval structure measuring 34 feet (10.4 meters) along its
major axis and 18 feet (5.5 meters) along its minor axis (Figure 11). The major
axis was oriented 16 degrees west of magnetic north. The floor of this structure
was unprepared, 3.67 feet (t. 1 meters) below the present surface, and excavated
approximately 2.83 feet (0.86 meters) into the clay.
Six definite posts were recorded inside this structure; all had wood remaining
in them. There were no post molds identified. Four possible small posts with small
amounts of wood were found along the edge of the house, and a fifth possible post
was present near the hearth (see Figure 11). There was not enough wood remaining in any of these to form the circular post shape and no post molds were found.
From the pattern of the definite and possible posts, it appears that this
structure had posts just inside the depression that supported the outer wall, as well
as interior support posts in some undetermined pattern. Two of the central interior
posts had been burned.
Although the floor had not been formally prepared, portions could be easily
identified by the presence of a burned orange clay and charcoal-stained surface.
This surface did not cover the entire floor, but was mainly identified in the central
and northern portions of the house. Inside this area were two pits dug into the floor
(Figure 12). One might be a storage pit. It had a diameter of 10 inches (26 cm) and
a depth of one foot (31 cm). The sides of the pit were straight with no burned clay
inside; the pit was also empty of artifacts. This pit may have been used for storage.

88

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 11. Plan View of House 5.

’~

Tan

Plow

zone

sand
Charcoal

Bone

Burned
Brown
some

stained

layer
clay

sandcharcoal

5

0

I,,r,I
Feet

Figure 12. Profile of House 5. Note two pits in floor of house.

layer

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

89

The second pit (20 inches [52 cm] in diameter) appeared to be the central fire
hearth. The sides were straight and fire-baked, and dug into the floor to a depth of
13 inches (34 cm). However, no ash or charcoal was found in the pit.
Immediately above the floor was a thin layer of charcoal flecks and charcoalstained soil indicating that the house had burned. With the exception of three rocks
near the hearth there were no artifacts on the floor of the structure. The house had
apparently been cleaned out before it burned.
After the house had burned, it was used as a trash pit. Most of the artifacts
recovered from the house came from this midden, with the exception of the glass
trade beads, which came from all parts of the fill. The midden, consisting mainly
of deer and bison bone, was six inches (15.6 cm) above the floor and followed
the contour of the house (see Figure 12). It averaged six to eight inches (15.620.4 cm) thick in the southeastern quadrant of the structure and thinned to the
west and north.
The fill above the midden contained more historic material associated with
the old farmhouse than it did aboriginal artifacts. Several ash lens in this upper
strata represent post-Indian occupational debris (see Gilmore, this volume). Gopher activity mixed the artifacts in the upper fill such that levels had little cultural
meaning. The bone bed stopped their activity, allowing this zone and those below
it to remain essentially undisturbed. There was no clay cap on the midden although
some areas of the fill contained small clay lenses. These may represent baskets of
clay that had been dumped into the refuse pit.
No definite entry for House 5 was identified. There was, however, a clay
slope to the floor in the southeastern portion of the structure. With the proximity of
the hearth area to that wall, it seems likely that this may be the entrance.
The trench through the northern end of the structure (see Figure 11) revealed
two large pieces of burned wood and large areas of burned clay just inside the
depression of the structure. The trench extended past the edge of the structure,
where a rise in the clay subsoil was located on the outside edge of the depression
similar to that found in House 2.
House 6
During the testing for House 5, one 3 x 3 foot (0.92 x 0.92 meters) test unit
was put down 60 feet (18.3 meters) northwest of the datum for House 5. This unit
was excavated to a depth of 2.5 feet (76 cm) without hitting the clay subsoil. In
1980 the senior author decided to do additional testing to see if a structure might
be present in that area. A second test unit was excavated 20 feet (6.1 meters) west
of the first, but the clay subsoil was encountered at a depth of 10 inches (26 cm). A
one foot (0.3 meters) wide trench was excavated to follow the clay subsoil until
the edge of the house depression was discovered.
A six foot by six foot (1.8 x 1.8 meters) unit was then excavated to verify the
nature of the depression. The clay dropped sharply to a depth of 20 inches (52 cm)
below the surface. There was a very large amount of charcoal in contact with the
edge of the depression. The clay had been baked orange as it was in the north end

90

Texas Archeological Society

of House 5. One post was found that was six inches (15.6 cm) in diameter and
completely burned. No artifacts, except for a few beads, were found in the
excavations and permission to excavate further on the property was lost before
additional work could be done.
Houses 7 and 8
Two houses, designated 7 and 8 for this report, were partially excavated by
Noil Vinson. They are located at grid coordinates N650/W500 and N650/W370,
respectively. Both houses were reported to have been located by the presence of
bone brought to the surface by gophers, perhaps indicating a midden was present
inside the depression. No records were kept on these excavations and no other
information is available concerning these structures.
Cache Pit 1
Cache Pit 1 is a bell-shaped feature found at the intersection of Trenches 3
and 4 in the area designated Feature 25. The pit was floored with small cedar
saplings (Figure 13 and 14).
The fill of this pit was removed in one foot levels with the clay floor being
reached at a depth of 3.5 feet (1.07 meters), two feet (0.61 meters) into the clay
subsoil. The floor and opening of this pit was approximately five feet (1.52
meters) in diameter. The sides were not straight, but sloped in at the top then back
out toward the bottom (Figure 15a). The floor of the pit was lined with closely
spaced and partially charred wood fragments oriented in a southwest by northeast
direction across the floor (see Figure 14). These charred fragments were about 1.5
inches (4 cm) in diameter. The patterned placement of these wood fragments
suggests they are remnants of flooring rather than a collapsed covering or roof. It
should also be noted that the bulk of the flooring was charred, but no ash or burned
clay was found in association. The artifacts in the cache pit fill consisted of a few
trade beads, bone, and non-descript metal.
Cache Pit 2

Cache Pit 2 is a bell-shaped pit found in the east wall and floor near the south
end of Trench 9. Trench profiles indicate that the pit originated in the plow zone
and extended two feet (0.61 meters) into the clay zone (see Figure 15b). The pit fill
was a gray sand with specks of charcoal throughout.
The feature was excavated in one foot (31 cm) levels. Post-aboriginal nineteenth and twentieth century artifactual materials were recovered from the top
portion of the fill, while only bone was recovered from the lower part of the pit.
The pit’s largest diameter was 3.67 feet (1.1 meters) along the north-south
axis and 3.8 feet (1.2 meters) along the east-west axis. The depth of the pit from
the plow zone to the floor was 2.33 feet (0.71 meters).
About nine inches (23 cm) above the floor, the gray sand fill became more
red and compacted, until what appeared to be its flat bottom was encountered.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

Figure 13. Cache Pit i showing cedar sapling floor lining.

Charred

Figure 14. Plan map of Cache Pit 1.

wood

91

92

Texas Archeological Society

Su r f a c e,,..,~,

Plow

zone

I
Plow

Lined

Zone

b

Plow

Zone

c

1

I
Feet

Figure 15. Profiles of Cache Pits: (a) Cache Pit 1, (b) Cache Pit 2, and (c) Cache Pit 3.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

93

Excavations continued until a thin statum of charcoal was exposed. This charcoal
layer was cedar bark strips about two inches (5 cm) wide that covered the entire
floor of the pit (Figure 16), although the grain pattern of the cedar bark lining had
no common direction. Several pieces of bone fragment were found in contact with
the floor.
While it was first thought that the cedar bark material had burned in situ, a
closer examination of the soil samples in the laboratory showed two distinct layers
of charcoal in which none of the matrix appeared to be clearly fired. If the
vegetable material was not burned in situ, it is hard to explain how the carbonized
strips could have been deposited in the pit without fragmenting them. It is also
unclear what the hard packed, red clay layer above the actual floor of the pit really
represents.
Cache Pit 3 (N550/W621)
Cache Pit 3 is a bell-shaped storage pit found in the profile of Trench 2.
Unlike the other two cache pits identified at Vinson, Cache Pit 3 was not lined.
The pit was approximately three feet (0.91 meters) in diameter and extended some
2.5 feet (0.76 meters) below the plow zone; the mouth of the pit originated in the
plow zone (see Figure 15c). Due to a lack of time at the Field School this feature
was not excavated.

Figure 16. Clay cap and floor of Cache Pit 2.

94

Texas Archeological Society

FEATURE 26

TRENCH 2

N

’97.02’

+
97.20"

DEPRESSION

97.59"
DEPRESSIOH

POST MOLD

WOO0
ELEY.
95.52"

Figure 17. Poslartolds and depressions with Feature 26.

MISCELLANEOUSCULTURALFEATURES

Feature 25 (N570/W570)
The area around the intersection of Trench 3 and Trench 4 had a vague, but
extensive, deposit of cultural refuse designated Feature 25. Several small depressions, including Cache Pit 1, were included in this feature. No determination was
made as to the function of any of these features with the exception of Cache Pit 1,
since they were not investigated during the Field School.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

95

Feature 26 (N765/W605)
At the beginning of the 1964 TAS Field School, this area contained a number
of potholes that were the result of many people removing "bead dirt" to take home
for screening. Mr. Vinson had indicated that this area contained the highest
concentration of beads he knew of at the site.
Trenches 1 and 2 were cut through the area in an effort to locate any houses,
if they were present. The profiles revealed no structural depressions, so additional
test trenches and units were opened to the east and west of Trench 2. One possible
post mold, a small ash lens, and a concentration of refuse containing burned bone,
clay, and ash were found rather than structural evidence ~igure 17). Although no
house was found, this area yielded a higher concentration of artifacts than did any
other provenience at Vinson during the field school. It is possible that this was an
activity area- such as a plaza -or perhaps the cultural materials were associated
with a nearby structure or a covered arbor.
Feature 29
Feature 29 refers to two cedar posts. The first post is seven feet north (2.1
meters), and the second is 20 feet north (6.1 meters), of Cache Pit 2 (see Figure 4).
The two posts were approximately four inches (10 cm) in diameter and in
poor condition. They were found about one foot (31 cm) below the surface and
extended 1.5 feet (0A6 meters) into the clay. Whether these posts are associated
with an aboriginal occupation or with the later Anglo-American occupation is not
clear, but their close proximity to the farm house complex may indicate that these
posts date to the latter occupation. Approximate grid coordinates for the posts are
N430/W485.

Feature 30 (N570/W530)
A burned beam, a burned clay line crossing the trench, and a dip in the clay
subsoil, were found in the extension of Trench 3 eastward from its intersection
with Trench 4. These disturbances appeared to be part of a house independent of
the refuse around Cache Pit 1, and were designated Feature 30.
The northeast quadrant of Feature 30 was excavated in two levels. First the
plow zone was removed, and then the fill was removed to expose the burned clay
and charcoal layer discovered in Trench 3. A definite line of burned clay was
uncovered running in a northwest by southeast direction, and in line with the
burned clay crossing Trench 3. The burned clay was also at the same depth as the
mouth of Cache Pit 1. To the northeast side of the burned clay line was a definite
change in the clay’s appearance: it was extremely hard-packed and contained a
large quantity of charcoal staining and specks. This was thought to indicate the
interior and exterior of a structure. To the southwest of the "floor" itself were
found two small depressions in the clay, some three feet (0.91 meters) in diameter,
and one possible post mold. The possible post mold was approximately seven
inches (18 cm) in diameter and six to eight inches (15.6-20.5 cm) deep.

96

Texas Archeological Society

The artifacts increased in number to the northeast of the burned clay line.
Some were aboriginal, but most related to the post-Civil War occupation of the
site. Only nine glass beads were recovered from the Feature 30 area. Many
fragments of hand-made brick were found in apparent association with the burned
clay line. The same type of brick fragments are found around the fireplace of the
nearby farmhouse. It is suspected, therefore, that Feature 30 was the base for a
nineteenth century Anglo-American wooden superstructure.
DISCUSSION OF FEATURES
The structures found at Vinson were substantial and took considerable
manpower to build. The structures conform to the descriptions given by Bell
(1984) for typical Wichita Confederacy houses. Whether there is any cultural,
functional, or temporal significance in the difference between circular and oval
house patterns at Vinson is unknown at this time.
These structures are thought to have been utilized during the winter months
because they contained central hearths. If these were only houses used in the
summer there would seem to be no need for an interior hearth. The overlapping
ash lenses in House 1 point to periods of vacancy and then reuse of the structure.
Several of the Vinson structures show evidence of burning, but whether the
burning was intentional or accidential is unknown. Most of the artifactual material
in the houses came from the middens located in the structures after they had been
abandoned. House 1 and House 3 had clay caps placed over the middens. Similar
caps were reported at Gilbert (Jelks 1967). The floors of these structures had little
or no cultural material associated with them, possibly indicating that they were
abandoned before they burned or were cleaned out before they were intentionally
set on fire.
Lined cache pits have been found at the Longest site, a Wichita village on the
Red River in Oklahoma (Bell 1984:369). Cache pits are also found in Nortefio
Focus sites in Texas, having been reported at Stansbury (Stephenson 1970) and
Gilbert (Jelks 1967). These types of cache pits are external features and probably
are associated with nearby structures. At Vinson, Cache Pit 1 is in close proximity
to both House 5 and the unexcavated House 6. Cache Pit 3 is near House 7, while
Cache Pit 2 is near no known structure.
ARTIFACT ANALYSIS
The artifacts analyzed and described below from the Vinson site are a
combination of many peoples’ efforts. Dessamae Lorrain worked many hours on
the preliminary sorting and measuring of the artifacts, and much of the information in this report on the chipped stone and ceramics comes from her notes.
Author credits are provided by each of the different relevant artifact sections.
The senior author of this article carried out the remainder of the analyses with the
advice of others.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

97

The artifacts included here are from three collections: the Texas Archeological
Society Field School, James E. Smith II and Ralph Vinson (House 5), and some
material from Noil Vinson (House 2, House 4, House 6, and House 7).
Chipped Stone Artifacts
There were 221 pieces of lithic artifacts (tools and debris, but excluding
gunflints) recovered during the various excavations at the Vinson site. The tools
were crude and easily made, and the use of a chipped stone technology was not a
major source of tools for the people at Vinson. Most of the artifacts were made
with hard-hammer techniques and showed many hinge fractures. The only quality
piece of worked material that might be attributed to the Vinson people was an
alternately beveled knife. Five of the ten projectile points were Archaic period
types and were probably brought to the village from a site near the springs. Two of
the arrow points may have been made at Vinson, but they are rather poorly
manufactured.
Projectile Points
No. of specimens: 10
The projectile points from Vinson were identified using the Handbook of
Texas Archeology (Suhm and Jelks 1962).
Archaic period projectiles
Yarbrough (two specimens)
Provenience: Surface
Both points are corner-notched with slightly expanding stems (Figure 18e).
The larger piece is beveled on one side. The lithic material for both Yarbroughs
was a typical Central Texas chert.

Length
Width
Thickness
Neck Width
Base Width

Specimen 1
43.2 mm
23.3 mm
8.4 mm
10.5 mm
12.0 mm

Specimen 2
45.3 mm
29.6 mm
8.9 mm
16.2 mm
16.3 mm

Gary (one specimen)
Provenience: House 2
This specimen has a contracting stem and triangular blade on a reddishbrown quartzite (see Figure 18b).

Length
Width
Thickness
Stem Length

43.8 mm
28.6 mm
8.0 mm
15.0 mm

98

Texas Archeological Society

B

D

C

H

F

G

Figure 18. Projectile Points and Preforms: (a-e) Archaic projectile points, (f) preform, (g, i),
unifacial projectile points, and (h) Alba arrowpoint.

Base Width
Stem Length

6.2 mm
15.0 mm

Martindale (one specimen)
Provenience: Feature 30 (1)
This is comer notched with a triangular blade and straight sides (see Figure
18d). This point has the typical "fishtail" notch in the base. It is heavily patinated
and made of Central Texas chert.
Length (est.)
Width
Thickness
Neck Width
Base Width

46.0 mm
26.0 mm
5.8 mm
15.5 mm
18.7 mm

Unidentified (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This specimen may be an Early Stemmed projectile (Turner and Hester
1985:87). It is comer-notched with an expanding base that has been ground on all
three sides (see Figure 18c). The blade is convex and the stem is concave. It is
made from a light tan Central Texas chert.

Length
Width

50.0 mm
26.7 mm

Smith and others m The Vinson Site
Thickness
Neck Width
Basal Width

99

8.0 mm
16.3 mm
17.4 mm

Late Prehistoric period projectiles

Alba (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This is a complete arrowpoint made from a typical gray Central Texas chert.
(see Figure 18h).
Length
Width
Thickness
Stem Width
Stem Length

19.0 mm
12.0 mm
3.5 mm
4.3 mm
6.0 mm

Perdiz (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This piece is the basal portion; it was made on a black chert of unknown
source.

Length (est.)
Width
Thickness
Stem Length

28.0 mm
16.7 mm
3.6 mm
9.6 mm

Fresno (one specimen)
Provenience: Unknown
One Fresno point was apparently recovered from the site, but it was lost
before it could be analyzed.
Unidentified (two specimens)
Provenience: House 5 (2)
Both unidentified arrowpoints are made on flakes that have been worked
only around the edges (see Figure 18g, i)). The quality of workmanship is poor.
They may have been made during the Wichita occupation of Vinson, when flint
knapping methods had begun to be less important. One is made on gray Central
Texas chert, and only vaguely resembles a projectile point in shape. The second
has a form similar to the Scallom type, and is made from brown chert.
Bifaces
No. of specimens: 8
Of the eight bifaces recovered, four were very rough in workmanship
(Figure 19a, b). Three finished pieces appear to be from broken projectile points

100

Texas Archeological Society

A

B

c

H

G

K

N

0

Figure 19. Lithic Tools from the Vinson Site: (a, b, d) Bifaces, (c) Willow-leaf biface, (e, g)
graver/spokeshave, (f, h) spokeshave, (i) scraper, (j) bifacially modified quartz pebble, and
(k-p) edge-utilized flakes.

that may have been brought in to the site. The eighth piece is a broken triangular
preform.
Rectangular Biface (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This is a very roughly-made biface with hinge fractures on both sides. A
similar type of biface was found at the Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks 1961:31).

Length
Width
Thickness

48.2 mm
45.0 mm
15.1 mm

Smith attd others-- The Vinson Site

101

Willow-leaf Biface (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This type of artifact has been described at other Nortefio sites as an alternate
beveled knife. It is alternately beveled on the left side and has a slightly rounded
base (see Figure 19c).
Length
Width
Thickness

6.0 mm
2.0 mm
9.0 mm

Preform (one specimen)
Provenience: Surface (1)
This piece is broken and made of a poor quality, gray, Central Texas chert.
Length
Width
Thickness

N/A
23.7 mm
6.7 mm

Broken or Rejected Bifaces (five specimens)
Provenience: Surface (4), Unknown (1)
Of the four broken specimens, two appear to be roughly worked performs
broken in manufacture. The remaining two were probably from completed projectile points. The rejected biface resulted because the knapper was unable to remove
a knot formed by many hinge fractures. Four of the broken or rejected bifaces are
made on tan chert and the other is a gray chert.
Scrapers
No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: Surface (3)
All three specimens are end scrapers with the classic scraper beak (see Figure
19i). The two larger scrapers are approximately four centimeters in length and
width, while the third measured 3 x 2 cm in length and width. They are made on
large flakes with cortex covering over 50 percent of the ventral surface. All edges
of the piece have use wear on them. Seven other scrapers (two side scrapers from
House 1 and five "thumbnail" scrapers from the surface) were reported in Dessamae
Lorrain’s field notes, but were not available for analysis herein.
Spokeshaves
No. of specimens: 4
Provenience: House 2 (1), House 3 (1), House 5 (2)
All notches on the spokeshaves are roughly the same size with a radius of
curvature of roughly eight mm. These tools are on various sized pieces of chert
debris without bulbs of percussion (see Figure 19f, h). All have additional edges
that show use other than as spokeshaves.

102

Texas Archeological Society

Gravers/Spokeshaves
No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: Surface (1), House 5 (2)
These artifacts have gravers and spokeshaves on the same flake (see Figure
19e, g). Two of these tools have the classic chipped graver point. The other had a
point formed by natural breaks which has wear polish and small secondary flaking
along the beak. It measures 2 x 3 cm in size and was made on a chip. Both of the
chipped beak gravers also have a spokeshave or small concave scraper edge
retouched on the opposing face. They all appear to be from Central Texas chert.
Like the two artifacts mentioned above, the third graver/spokeshave served
multiple purposes. It has a small endscraper edge formed along the thick edge of
the piece and a spokeshave along the opposite, thinner edge.
Spokeshaves and spokeshave/graver tools such as these are common in the
Nortefio Focus of Texas and are listed among the stone tools in the trait list
prepared by Duffield and Jelks (1961: 71).
Edge- Utilized Flakes
No. of specimens: 19
Unifacial Flakes (two specimens)
Provenience: Surface (2)
These artifacts show use attrition along one edge and one surface (see Figure
19k-p). Hinge flaking is present on both tools.
Bifacial Flakes (seventeen specimens)
Provenience: Surface (9), House 1 (3), House 2 (2), House 3 (1), House 5 (2)
These artifacts represent a form of lithic tool technology that likely was
utilized by the Historic Wichita occupants of the Vinson site. There is severe
bifacial edge damage due to excessive use on these specimens, but no retouch is
present. On some pieces hinge flaking has obliterated the flake scars along the
edge creating a rounded used tool margin.
These tools appear to have had considerable force applied to produce this
degree of edge attrition. Such bifacial edge damage has been associated with
sawing activities on hard materials (Tringham et al. 1974; Gallagher and Bearden
1976). It is possible that these tools could have been used with sawing activities on
the large amount of bone present in the site deposits (see Yates 1993, this volume).

Retouched Flake

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Surface (1)
Only one flake appears to have intentional flaking along an edge. Like the
small scrapers, this retouch was along the proximal end of the flake.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

103

Lithic Debris
No. of specimens: 173
Provenience: Specific provenience unknown.
The assemblage was divided into four groups (Table 1). Group one, flakes,
have bulbs of percussion. Group two is labeled chunks. This group of lithic debris
had no bulbs of percussion and the pieces were greater than one cm across. Group
three are chips, pieces of lithic debris with no bulb of percussion and smaller than
one cm across. Group 4 refers to quartzite lithic debris. The groups were also
divided into utilized or not utilized categories (see Table 1), while the flakes were
also separated into hard hammer, soft hammer, or biface thinning flakes, as well as
pressure flakes.

Table 1
Utilized Debitage

Chunks
Chips
Flakes
Quartzite

Utilized

Non-utilized

Total

7
2
3
0

54
34
67
6

61
36
70
6

12

161

173

Table 2
Flake Technology

Hard
Hammer

Soft
Hammer

Biface
Thinning

Pressure

Total

Greater than I cm

36

7

3

0

46

Less than 1 cm

2

15

2

5

24

Flakes

104

Texas Archeological Society
Ground/Pecked Stone
Matzo

No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (2)
Both mano fragments were made of sandstone. The larger specimen was 10
cm in width, 5.5 cm in length of the recovered portion, and 2.5 cm thick. It appears
to have been utilized even after it was broken.
The smaller mano fragment has been utilized on both sides. The fragment
resembles a section of a disk-shaped object (Figure 20d). It has a center thickness
of 3 cm and tapers to 6 mm near the edge of the piece.

A

0

t

2

3

cent|meters

Figure 20. Groundstone Tools.

4

5

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

105

Smoothed Anvil Stones
No. of specimens: 7
Provenience: House 1 (1), House 5 (6)
The seven pieces of siltstone anvils have been carefully prepared by pecking
and smoothing. They represent at least four separate tools and two different
shapes. The largest specimen (Figure 21a) is roughly semi-circular in shape with a
12 cm diameter. It is seven cm high with fiat top and bottom surfaces. The top has
scars from pounding, while a portion of one side has been broken off from a blow
originating on the top edge. The edges along the side opposite the break also show
battering scars. This tool is complete in shape and was definitely used in its
present form.

A

E

Figure 21. Anvil Stones.

106

Texas Archeological Society

Along the broken edge (called the front) is a carefully prepared lip that
protrudes over the side by six to seven mm. This lip configuration is present on
three of the four specimens of this type. It appears the lip was produced by
pecking and grinding the side to form a smooth, curved surface at the interface of
the side and lip. Portions of the bottom edge are rounded but no lip is present.
The lip itself appears to have considerable wear and polish from usage, and the
bottom has also been smoothed.
Five fragments from House 5 appear to be from non-conjoined pieces of
the same tool. Three of the pieces have the same type of shallow (5 mm) lip as
the anvil stone from House 1. The sixth piece is a fragment of siltstone with no
visible outer edges. All specimens have been burned.
Another fragment of siltstone was recovered from the fill in House 1. It
has a slightly deeper (8 mm) lip. This small fragment has also been burned.
The last specimen, also from House 5, does not have the same shape as
those described above, but it appears to have had a related function. The shape
is that of an equilateral triangle with each side measuring 10 cm. The sides, however, are convex while the base is straight. The edges are rounded, and the entire artifact is smoothed in a fashion similar to the lipped fragments described
above. Unlike those fragments, however, there are no pounding scars. Instead,
many marks that may have been produced by a knife are located on the top and
base surfaces. The height of this object is 4.3 cm. This piece was not burned.
While there is no direct evidence to support a hide working function for
these tools, in general the surfaces and edges of the artifacts were smoothed
sufficiently so as not to damage a pliable material while softening or cutting
actions were performed.
Ground Limestone
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: Surface (2)
One of these specimens may have been part of a broken mano, although
limestone is rarely used in this manner. The stone was fragmented, but appeared
to be from a circular object with a diameter of 10 cm. Both faces were ground to
form an oval in profile. The thickness of the piece was 30 mm in the center and
tapered to about seven mm at the edge. The entire fragment had been burned. The
edges show no usage or shaping.
The second specimen is an elongated piece of ground limestone that appears
to have been shaped into a rectangular form (Figure 22f). The object is 7.5 cm long
and 1.3 cm thick at the base. The shaped limestone piece tapers to only 8 mm thick
at the narrow and beveled end. Two faces show striations that appear to be cutting
marks and the entire piece has been smoothed. The limestone is not the same
material as most of the stone pipes but it is similarly as smooth. While it does not
appear to have been an abrading tool, its function is undetermined.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

107

F

H

io

~

2

3

4

s

Figure 22. Groundstone Artifacts. (a) Sandstone Pipe, (b, c) Ground Gaming Pieces, (d, e)
Rubbed Ochre, (f) Ground Limestone, and (g, h) Loaf-shaped Abrading Stones.

108

Texas Archeological Society
Metates

No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: House 4 (1), House 5 (2)
Two metates, one small and the other a bifacially ground slab, were found
in House 5. The third, and largest, was found in House 4.
The small metate is made of sandstone and is rectangular in shape, measuring approximately 9x7 cm. It is a maximum of two cm thick but tapers to four
mm. The grinding/smoothing areas on the slab are in the center, along one of
the diagonal axes, and along the horizontal axis. The metate is sufficiently thin
in the center to suggest it may have been utilized until it broke, and it was then
discarded.
The second metate, from House 5, also appears to have been utilized until
it broke since it is a thin (1-5 cm) grinding slab. The piece measures roughly
9x12 cm. Both faces of the metate have pecking marks as well as extensive grinding striations. There is a slight curvature on both sides of the piece that indicates this is a fragment of a basin-shaped metate (see Figure 20b).
The large metate from House 4 was a 33x26 cm slab of sandstone. The
grinding surface was circular and about 16 cm in diameter.
Possible Gaming Pieces

No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (2)
The first of the two possible gaming stones is a quartzite pebble that shows
pecking marks along the edges that apparently shaped the stone into a circular
form. The diameter of the stone is approximately 2.3 cm and it is 8 mm in thickness. The edges of the stone show wear polish (see Figure 22b, c).
The second stone is a small piece of petrified wood that shows extensive
wear along the edges. The stone is almost square, measuring about 2.3 cm along
its sides.
Miscellaneous Lithic Artifacts

No. of specimens: 7
Provenience: House 5 (4), Surface (3)
Six quartz pebbles were recovered that show some form of modification.
The breaks are very angular, but do not appear to have been the result of accidental breakage.
One modified petrified wood fragment was recovered from House 5. The
specimen has been split to form a rectangular piece 40 mm long, 32 mm wide,
and 13 mm thick. The breaks on all sides follow the grain of the wood and left
a naturally smooth surface on all sides except the ends where the split cuts across
the grain of the wood.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

109

Fossils

No. of specimens: 4
Provenience: House 1 (1), House 5 (3)
A small fossil ammonite, probably from the Cretaceous Period, was apparently utilized as a pendant (Figure 23b). It has a six mm hole in the center that
appears to have been reamed, and also enlarged from wear, possibly by being
worn on a thong around the neck.

4¸

Figure 23. Pendants. (a) Majolica gaming piece, (b) fossil pendant.

In addition to the fossil pendant, three other fossils were recovered. Two of
these were pieces of coral and one was a Ostrea carinata pelecypod. No evidence of modification is present on these specimens.
Hammerstones
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (1), Surface (1)
Two small, circular quartztite pebbles were found with edge battering from
hammerstone use. Neither hammerstone showed extensive use.
Abrading Stones
Quartzite Abrader
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (2)
These abrading stones were river pebbles that had been abraded until the
cortex had been worn through to expose the rough quartzite interior. Over 50
percent of the surface of the larger stone (5 x 3 cm) had been ground away, and
portions of the rough quartzite interior had also been abraded until it was smooth.
The stone is 2.6 cm thick.

110

Texas Archeological Society

The second specimen is much smaller (3.7 x 2.4 cm) but apparently was also
utilized for abrading. The ends of this oval stone are the only portions of the river
pebble that have been utilized.
Sandstone Abrader
No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: Surface (3)
The sandstone abraders are loaf-shaped with one flat side. These types of
abraders are found in other Norteflo sites (Jelks 1967:210).
One of the specimens, recovered from House 5, has a 3.5 cm wide naturally
curved sin-face (see Figure 22g). The naturally curved surface has been extensively utilized for abrading.
Miscellaneous Abrader
No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Surface (1)
One specimen appears to have had a natural groove that was utilized for
abrading. Its material has not been identified although it is not a sandstone.
Ochre

No. of specimens: 10
Provenience: House 1 (3), House 2 (4), House 3 (1), House 5 (2)
Both pieces from House 5 show rubbed and smoothed areas. The one large
piece measure 9 x 4 cm and shows extensive use. The other nine pieces of ochre
are less than two cm in diameter. Of the 10 ochre pieces, eight are red in color and
two are yellow.
Native-Made Pottery
Only 260 sherds of native-made pottery were recovered during the various
excavations at Vinson. These sherds represent a minimum number of 44 vessels.
The majority of sherds were small and rather nondescript. Information on temper,
decoration, and sherd colors are summarized in Table 3 to Table 5.
From the overall assemblage some tendencies are noted. The major tempering inclusion (not including sand at 43 percent that may not have been an
intentional addition to the paste) was bone (40.8 percent). Shell was present in
11.9 percent of the sherds, hematite or ochre was the tempering agent in five
sherds (2 percent), and grog (crushed sherds) was identified as a tempering agent
in six sherds (2.2 percent).
The primary decorative treatment was brushing of the body surface. It
appears that the brushed sherds were from utility vessels that may have had other
decorative techniques on other parts of the vessel. The brushed vessels tended to
be gray or buff in color (see Table 5). The brushed sherds were predominately
tempered with bone (Table 6).

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

111

Table 3
Sherd Temper
Sand

Bone

Shell

Other

Total

Surface

23

17

22

3

65

House1

12

27

2

41

House 2

25

28

2

55

House 3

13

3

-

16

House 4

3

1

-

4

House 5

9

21

3

Feature 25

11

3

1

Feature 26

16

6

1

2

25

Total

112

106

31

11

260

6

39
15

Table 4
Decoration Methods
Provenience

Incised

Engraved

Brushed

Punctated

Plain

Total

Surface

6

6

11

1

41

65

House 1

4

2

1

1

33

41

House 2

2

1

9

43

55

House 3

-

2

1

12

16

House 4

-

1

1

2

4

House 5

4

9

26

39

Feature 25

1

1

2

11

15

Feature 26

1

4

2

2

16

25

18

17

36

5

184

260

Total

1

112

Texas Archeological Society
Table 5
Sherd Color

Decoration

Gray

Brown

Orange/
Red-Brown Total

Black

Buff

5

14

5

36

Brushed

12

Incised

6

6

1

3

2

18

Engraved

2

7

2

3

3

17

Punctated

1

2

1

1

5

Plain

42

75

7

12

48

184

Total

63

90

16

32

59

260

Table 6
Temper and Decorative Associations in the Vinson Ceramics
Punctated

Plain

Brushed

Inched

Engraved

Shdl

26

2

2

1

Bone

84

17

3

1

1

Grog

1

4

1

Hemafi~

-

4

1

73

9

11

15

4

Temper

None*
* Sandy paste

The engraved sherds are from better made vessels that were predominately
brown in color. The exteriors of the engraved vesels were generally wellsmoothed and polished. Most of the engraved sherds had no discernible temper.
The incised and punctated sherds were mainly gray to brown in color (see
Table 5). While the majority of these decorated sherds had no obvious temper
inclusions, bone, shell, grog, and hematite were all used as tempering materials
for these specimens (see Table 6).

Smith and others n The Vinson Site

113

The plain sherds were also predominately a brown or reddish-brown color,
although it is impossible to tell which are from true plain vessels and which are
from the plain part of decorated vessels. Bone and shell were almost exclusively
the only tempers used for the plain sherds.
Bowls with outside rim diameters of about 20 cm were the most common
vessel forms found during the excavations. Small jars also appear to have been
relatively common although they have a greater range in size. Rims from jars
were recovered with diameters between 10-15 cm. Two vessels, both bowls,
were identified with outside diameters of over 20 cm: one measured 21 cm in
diameter and the other 30 cm. Carinated bowls were represented by a few sherds
that were better made than the other vessels. Bottle forms were not definitely
identified, although three sherds had rough, unfinished interiors and may have
come from a bottle.
The predominant rim form in the 14 rim sherds identified was one that was
vertical (or standing) with simple rounded lips. Another five rims were outcurving
with simple rounded lips, and one other had a vertical rim with a flat lip. The
average thickness of the rim sherds was six mm with a range of four to eight mm.
Only six percent of the body sherds were thicker than 10 mm, and only one was
recognized as a base (or near base) sherd in the assemblage.
Womack Engraved
No. of specimens: 6
Provenience: House 4 (1), House 3 (1), General (4)
Two Womack Engraved sherds were recovered during the field school
investigations. Both sherds have a dark gray paste with a finely ground shell
temper. Both sherds have dark brown, smoothed exteriors with the characteristic cross-hatched triangle motif of Womack Engraved (Duffield and Jelks 1961;
Harris et al. 1965). The interiors are also smoothed with brown surfaces. The
sherds (one with a thickness of six mm, the other 11 mm) are from two different
vessels.
Four 6 mm thick sherds in Mr. Vinson’s collection (Figure 24g, h) have
what appears to be Womack Engraved designs. One sherd is from House 4 and
a second is from House 3, but the provenience of the others is unknown. Although they cannot be definitely identified as Womack Engraved, they are similar enough in design to warrant description here. The exterior of the sherds are
dark brown and roughly smoothed, and they have deep engraved lines. The
interiors are also smoothed and grade from light brown to reddish-brown in color.
The paste of the sherds is dark gray and compact with no visible temper.
Remarks: Duffield and Jelks (1961:39) indicate that this ceramic type dates
to Protohistoric and Historic times, and was manufactured until the latter half of
the eighteenth century.

114

Texas Archeological Society

H
F

Figure 24. Artifacts from the Noil Vinson Collection. (a, d-f) Ceramic Elbow Pipes, (b, c)
Stone Pipes, (g, h) Womack Engraved (i) Majolica Pendant, and (j-1) Baked Clay Figurines.

Goliad Plain
No. of specimens: 10
Provenience: Surface (8), House 2 (2)
Duffield and Jelks (1961:72) describe Goliad Plain as an undecorated, orange-colored ceramic with large quantifies of bone temper. There is much variation in the workmanship on these 10 Vinson sherds of Goliad Plain. The exterior
surfaces are orange in color with pieces of bone temper visible on the exterior
(Figure 25k-n). The outer surfaces are smoothed, although sometimes poorly
smoothed, and the paste is very dark gray, sandy, moderately fine, and compact.
The paste is tempered with abundant finely ground bone.
Differences in the interior surface treatment suggest there are two groups of
Goliad Plain sherds. Group One has a gray and poorly smoothed interior, while

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

115

those in Group Two have well smoothed interiors that grade from yellow-brown
to red-brown in color. It is possible that Group One sherds represent a bottle form
and Group Two open bowl forms. One sherd from Group Two is a handle with two
suspension holes. Two other handles of Goliad Plain were recovered but the
interior surfaces were not present.
Patton Engraved
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: Surface (2)
Both Patton Engraved sherds are small and weathered (Figure 25f, g). Type
identification was made with the help of the comparative collection at The
University of Texas, Austin. Both sherds are buff colored with a small section of
the characteristic Patton Engraved tick design visible on the exterior surface. The
paste is light gray, fine, and compact with abundant sand used as the tempering
agent. Both pieces were smoothed on the interior and exterior surfaces. The sherds
are five to six mm in thickness.
Engraved

No. of specimens: 9
Provenience: Surface (9)
These small, miscellaneous engraved sherds range in color from brown to
dark gray. Decorative elements on the specimens include parallel lines, crosshatched engraved lines, and combinations of parallel and vertical lines (see
Figure 25i-j).
Incised
No. of specimens: 18
Provenience: Surface (6), House 1 (4), House 2 (2), House 5 (4), Feature 25 (1),
Feature 26 (1)
Most of these incised sherds have parallel lines as the decoration; none of the
sherds were identifiable to type. One sherd had very thin and deep incised lines cut
perpendicular to a single thin line; these lines appear to have been cut with a sharp
instrument, such as a knife. One well-made polished sherd (from a carinated bowl)
had a cross-hatched incised motif below two parallel lines.
Brushed
No. of specimens: 14
Provenience: Surface (6), House 2 (3), House 3 (1), House 5 (4)
All of the brushed sherds are buff-colored. The description of the ceramics
from the Gilbert Site (Story et al. 1967:137) for Emory Punctated-Incised could fit
many of these sherds except for the lack ofpunctations on the Vinson specimens.
All these brushed sherds could derive from the same vessel.

116

Texas Archeological Society

A

¢
D

F

H

Figure 25. Pottery from the Vinson Site. (a) Plain Vessel, (b) Nocona Plain, (c-e) Womack
Engraved, (f, g) Patton Engraved, (h-j) Miscellaneous Engraved, and (k-n) Goliad Plain.

These sherds can be characterized as follows:
Color: interior - tan
exterior - tan
Wall thickness: 6 mm
Paste color: black
Temper: abundant finely-crushed bone.
Surface Finish: Brushed with temper showing on the outer surface. The
inner surface is smoothed.
Miscellaneous Brushed
No. of specimens: 22
Provenience: Surface (5), House 1 (1), House 2 (6), House 4 (1), House 5 (5),
Feature 25 (2), Feature 26 (2)

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

117

These brushed sherds are from utility jars tempered with hematite or grog,
although the majority of them have no obvious temper. They all appear to have a
sandy-gritty paste.
Punctated
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: Surface (1), House 1 (1), House 3 (1), Feature 26 (2)
These sherds have various forms of punctated designs. It is possible that the
punctations may have been used in conjunction with other types of surface
treatment (such as brushing) since all the punctated sherds come from the top
portions of vessels. The punctations include fingernail-impressed (one specimen
with bone temper and the other with a sandy paste) and stick-impressed (three
sherds with a sandy paste).
Miscellaneous Plain Sherds
No. of specimens: 184
Plain sherds were the predominant type of sherd recovered from the Vinson
site. Of these, ten have the characteristics described for Nocona Plain (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:115); eight of these may be from the same vessel (see Figure

25b).
Nocona Plain
No. of specimens: 10
Provenience: Unknown (8), Surface (2)
These sherds are from heavy shell-tempered utility jars.
Womack Plain

No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: Surface (3)
Three other plain sherds have a gray exterior with a light gray core and finely
ground mussel shell temper. These sherds fit the definition given by Story et al.
(1967:146) for Womack Plain.
Leon Plain
No. of specimens: 7
Provenience: Surface (2), House 1 (2), House 2 (2), House 5 (1)
These sherds compare well with Suhm and Jelks’ (1962:95) description of
Leon Plain in that they are brown to reddish-brown in color, have dark cores,
used pulverized bone for temper, and have wall thicknesses between 3-8 mm.

The rest of the assemblage is generally nondescript and cannot be identified
with any other defined Texas plainwares (see also Tables 3 and 4).

118

Texas Archeological Society
Summary of Pottery Assemblage

The small number of sherds present may not be surprising due to the probable
reliance of the Vinson site occupants on European trade materials such as kettles.
Another possibility that would explain the small pottery assemblage is the short
period of time the site was occupied.
The pottery present conforms to ceramic assemblages from other Nortefio
sites. Womack Engraved is present at Gilbert, Pearson, Womack, and the Longest sites. However, there are some differences: most notably, shell tempered
pottery was present in 44 percent of the sherds at Gilbert and Womack, but only
in about 12 percent of the Vinson sherds. The Longest site was similar to Vinson
in that little shell tempered ceramics were present. Womack Engraved and
Emory Punctated-Incised dominate the identified vessels at both the Gilbert and
Womack sites. At the Longest site, only one sherd could be identified as Womack
Engraved and no Emory Punctated-Incised was found.
No Goliad Plain sherds have been found at any of the Nortefio sites north of
Vinson except at Stansbury; it has also been found at the Stone site. Goliad Plain is
a common aboriginal pottery at Spanish Colonial settlements during the eighteenth
century (Duffield and Jelks 1961:73). The presence of this pottery type in the
southern Nortefio sites can probably be attributed at least in part to their
geographical location in relation to the Spanish Colonial settlements to the south.
European Ceramics
Spanish Majolica Ware
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: House 2 (1), House 3 (2), Feature 26 (2)
All of the sherds were plain except for the two from House 3. The plain
sherds had a creamy earthenware paste, with a white and opaque glaze.
The first decorated majolica sherd has a small, deep blue decoration along
one edge. It also shows remnants of two drilled holes as well as extensive grinding
along the unbroken edges. This piece is possibly a pendant (see Figure 24i). The
second sherd from House 3 has a decoration consisting of two shades of blue and
appears to have been from a plate. It also has extensive grinding along its
unbroken edge that was done to form a disk, gaming piece, or pendant (see Figure
23a). The diameter of the object is estimated at 3.8 cm. It has a thickness of six
mm. The sherd probably predates 1800 (Anne Fox, 1985 personal communication).
Spanish Lead Glazed Ware
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5(2)
Two pieces of orange, lead-glazed pottery were recovered from the site. One
had a green decoration of undeterminable pattern while the other was undecorated. Both had orange pastes and could have been from the same vessel. This type

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

119

of lead glazed ware is found at Spanish Colonial sites in Texas that date to the late
eighteenth century.
Goblet Scraper

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: House 5 (1)
Approximately 20 flakes have been removed from a 19 mm thick, almost
circular, piece of glass to form a scraping tool. The glass appears to be the bottom
portion of a goblet stem. It is 30 mm in diameter and has a smooth concave base
that is approximately 5 mm deep in the center.
The top flaked portion of the specimen forms a classic scraper profile.
Hinge flakes from use of the piece appear in two locations along the margin of
the specimen. There is also one edge with what appears to be a 9 mm in diameter
and 3 mm deep notch. Multiple small hinge flakes are present along this edge of
the tool.
Figurines
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: House 2 (2), House 4(1), House 5 (2)
These crude clay specimens represent figurines rather than pottery vessels.
Two of these (House 2 and House 4) appear to be from the body portions of
figurines, although exact identification of the figurine’s shape has not been
determined. One 3.5 cm body section may represent a human figure (see Figure
241). It is broken on both ends but portions of the legs are visible.
The second body section is more complete but even less identifiable as to
shape. It is about 0.5 cm long and 2 cm in diameter. It is a more solid figure than
the one described above, with the legs having been broken on it. There appears to
be no "head" area, but a protrusion emanates from a central spot near its top. The
body is lens-shaped when viewed in cross section and is also reddish-orange in
color (see Figure 24j).
The remaining three pieces appear to be figurine legs. Two of these may be
pieces from animals although this is not certain. They are both conical in shape
and approximately 15 mm high. The third appears to be the leg and foot of a
human figure lying on its back (Figure 26g). It is 34 mm long and flat on the back,
and it is 11 mm wide and 6 mm thick. The top is reddish-brown in color while the
back is a dark gray. This color difference may be attributed to firing the figure
while it was lying on its back.
Pipes
No. of specimens: 47
Provenience: Surface (17), House 1 (5), House 2 (10), House 3 (2), and House 5 (13)
All but four of the pottery pipe fragments had no visible temper. Three of
these, all from the same pipe, were sand and bone tempered. The fourth was

120

Texas Archeological Society

C

B

.............. W

F
G
Figure 26. Pipes and Figurines. (a-c) Ceramic Elbow Pipes, (d) Mud-dauber Nest, (e, f )
Ceramic Pottery Smoother (?), and (g, h) Baked Clay Figurine Legs.

tempered only with bone. This particular piece (from House 2) had an expanding
bowl and a body thickness of 10.7 mm. It had a brown, well-smoothed, surface
and a fine compact red clay paste.
The major pipe form at Vinson appears to be a straight-sided elbow pipe
with bowl diameters ranging from 2.5 to 4.0 cm. Thirteen of the pipes were
identified as being the straight-sided form.
Besides the expanding bowl pipe described above, two other expanding
bowl elbow pipes were identified. The pipe from House 3 had a bowl diameter of
3.7 cm (see Figure 26c) and the other from House 5 had a 3.2 cm bowl diameter
(see Figure 26b).
Four of the pottery fragments indicate a bowl of more rounded form, much
like modem-day pipes. The bowl wall rounds into the lip on these forms rather

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

121

than expanding or meeting it at right angles. Unfortunately, not enough of any
single pipe of this form was found to determine if it was also an elbow variety.
All of the pipe lips were flat with the exception of one that had a narrow, flat
margin and beveled into the inside of the bowl. It appeared to have been from a
thinner pipe with a wall thickness of 5 mm. The remainder of the pottery pipe
fragments had no dignostic features, although one pipe may have had a line design
of an unidentifiable style.
Stone Pipes

No. of specimens: 13
Provenience: House 2 (3), House 3 (5), House 5 (3), Surface (2)
Nine of the stone pipe specimens are fragments made of a white chalk or
marl. Another is the lip fragment of an unidentified green stone, and the major part
of a yellow limonite elbow pipe is also represented (see Figure 22a). All of the
pipes, except the latter specimen, were quite fragmented, but all appear to be of the
elbow variety (see Figure 24).
The yellow limonite elbow pipe has a rounded bowl that is more roughly
shaped than the smooth marl/chalk pipes. The pipe is split both along the bowl and
along the stem and has some tobacco cake remaining in the bowl.
Two fairly complete stone pipes are in Noil Vinson’s collection. Both are
made of of the same white chalk or marl material as the majority of stone pipes at
Vinson, but these two are not of the elbow variety. The complete pipe (see Figure
24b) has a s~aight-sided bowl with a 17 mm inside diameter. The stem hole is
smoothed and has an 11 mm inside diameter. The lower corner of the pipe has
been brought to a decorative point.
The second complete pipe (see Figure 24c) has a rounded bowl. The portion
of the pipe where the stem is inserted has been broken. It does not appear that this
was of the elbow variety. Measurements for this specimen were not available.
Fired Dauber Nest
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 5 (1), Unknown (1)
Both specimens show grass impressions (see Figure 26d), and thus were
probably attached to the houses when they burned.
Pottery Smoother
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: Unknown (2)
One rim sherd had been utilized as a smoothing tool for finishing the surface
of ceramic vessels (see Figure 26f). The sandy paste sherd is 20 mm in length, 15
mm in width, and 9 mm in thickness. Extensive abrasive use has worn one end of
the sherd to a rounded, smooth shape.

122

Texas Archeological Society

One body sberd had also been utilized as a smoothing tool. It was 38 mm
long and has extensively worn marks on it (see Figure 26e)
Daub and Fire Baked Clay
Daub
No. of specimens: 36
Provenience: House 1 (6), House 3 (7), House 5 (10), Random (13)
Twenty-four pieces of daub appear to have been burned, while the rest were
probably sun-baked. Most of the daub had grass or twig impressions on them.
The daub totals are by no means the sum of daub from each feature. During
the field school pieces of daub may well have been mistaken for the hard-packed
soil common to the site during dry weather and thus discarded. Furthermore, much
of the fill in several features (except House 5) was not completely screened.
Burned Clay
No. of specimens: 60
Provenience: Specific provenience information not available.
Small pieces of burned clay were found in all structures. These pieces of
clay had no wattle impressions, and were small nondescript pieces of clay.
Remarks: Even if all the daub that was present in these structures had been
recovered, there is not enough present to indicate that much clay was applied to
any of the structures. At many Caddo houses, thousands of pieces of daub are
common, sometimes outnumbering the pottery sherds. With evidence of many
structures being burned at the Vinson site, daub from the structure walls would
have been more abundant if originally present.

European Trade Materials

METAL ARTIFACTS, by Jay C. Blaine
The analysis of metal artifacts is based mainly on examples available from
Vinson as of late 1983. As with the firearms sample (Blaine 1993, this volume),
several artifacts known to have been collected by various individuals through
the years from Vinson were not assembled in time for analysis here. Numerous
small scraps of oxidized iron and brass/copper (cupreous) pieces, apparently areally well distributed, were also examined. However, counts were not made of
these fragments or of the obviously late nineteenth century metallic debris from
the site.

Smith and others w The Vinson Site

123

Bridle Bits and Attachments
No. of specimens: 13
Provenience: Surface (4), House 1 (2), House 2 (1), House 5 (4), Random [Lot
116 and 200] (2).
Nos. 1-4 are from surface proveniences. No. 1 ~igure 27a) is a bit section
that has been broken or cut through the cheek plate and also through the port
beyond the curb ring sleeve. The lower cheek plate flange has perforated decorations and the curb ring sleeve has filed linear decoration. No. 1, and most of
the following bit specimens (all of wrought iron), cannot be usefully measured,
primarily because of their obvious distortion and lack of completeness.
No. 2 is a distorted cheek plate section with one relatively large (6 to 7
mm) perforation in the undecorated lower flange (Figure 27b).
No. 3 is one side of a port with curb ring sleeve.
No. 4 is a crescent-shaped chin piece (bridge) that is complete except for
a loop at one side. The body and lower edges are decorated by piercing openwork. Measurements: The estimated distance between loop centers is 100 mm;
maximum width, 30 ram.
No. 5 (House 1) is a small spoon-shaped dangler or jingler that was broken
in the attachment loop. Measurements: Estimated length, 28 mm; maximum
width, 10.5 mm.
No. 6, also from House 1, is a broken link of slack chain that is "figure 8"
in shape (see Tunnell and Ambler 1967:69).
No. 7, from House 2, is a jingler type ornament, possibly a specific Fica.
Measurements: Length, 24.5 ram; maximum width, 9 ram.
Nos. 8-10 (House 5) are "figure 8" links of rein chain; the shortest chain is
complete. Measurements: Length, 30 mm; the other rein chain length are unknown.
Specimen No. 11, also from House 5, is about half of a bit that has been
separated through the curb ring sleeve. The relatively short and narrow "U"
shaped cheek plate has one small perforation in the lowest border.
Specimen No. 12, Lot 200, is another jingler, matching No. 7 in form.
Measurements: Length, 23.5 ram; maximum width, 8.3 ram.
Specimen No. 13, Lot 116, is a fragment of bit from the rein base.
Remarks: All of the above bits and attachments appear typical of the range
of Hispanic ring bits from eighteenth century Indian sites in Texas (Harris and
Tunnell 1967:107-109; Blaine 1989). The bits have been cut, broken, or otherwise disassembled, suggesting that such bits may have functioned more as temporary status symbols or curiosities than as necessities since rawhide bridles with
jaw loops had proven efficient and economical for Native Americans. It is hard
to visualize the breakage of bits if used in norma! service, beyond that of individual rein link failures that would have been easily repaired or replaced. It is
believed such factors, together with a demonstrable affinity for recycling metal
trade goods at some stage, probably bear strongly on the usual condition of bridle
bits on Historic Indian sites.

124

Texas Archeological Society

C

A

C
B

0

1

2

3

centimeters

Figure 27. Bridle Bits.

4

5

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

125

KNIVES AND SWORDS, by Jay C. Blaine
No. of specimens: 9
Provenience: Surface (3), House 5(6)
No. 1, from the surface, is a blade tip of a single edged knive with the cutting
edge curving upwards (Figure 28b).
No. 2 (surface) appears to be a tang for a case knife blade that had been
broken forward of the proximal handle pin hole (Figure 28c).

A

B

C
G
F
D

H

K

j

L

M

N

O
R

Figure 28. Knives, Swords, and Metal Arrowpoints. (a-e) Knives, (f) Pommel, (g, h) Knives,
(i) Sword Hilt, and (j-r) Metal arrowpoints.

126

Texas Archeological Society

Remarks: Both knife fragments fully resemble similar areas on complete
knives common in the French trade (Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine 1965:348).
No. 1 is probably either a Type 1 clasp or Type 2 case knife blade tip (Harris,
Harris and Woodall 1967:Figure 21a-d and Figure 22a, d). No. 2, the partial
tang, probably is from a Type 1 case knife (Harris, Harris, and Woodall 1967:Figure 22a, d, e).
No. 3 (Figure 28a), from the surface of House 5, is a complete blade, with
braded pivot pin in place, from a folding knife. Measurements: Overall length,
150 mm; maximum width, 12 mm; diameter of pivot (swivel) pin, 2.5 mm; length
of pivot pin, 15.5 mm.
Remarks: No. 3 is a classic example of a Type 3 "French" clasp knife
(Harris, Harris, and Woodall 1967:Figure 21h), although its probable origin may
be Flemish. This particular type of folding knife was probably more expensive
than the considerably more numerous Type 2 folding knives, but both are prominent in the French trade.
No. 4, from House 5, is a section of case knife blade that was broken or cut
in the blade and through the distal handle rivet hole (Figure 28d). Measurements:
Length, 77 mm; maximum width, 22 mm.
Remarks: No. 4 conforms to the Type 1 case knife (Harris, Harris, and
Woodall 1967:Figure 22a).
No. 5 (House 5) is complete in the distal blade section (Figure 28e), but
snapped across its proximal end. Measurements: Length, 102 mm; width, 11 mm.
Remarks: No. 5 also conforms to the Type 1 case knife.
No. 6, from House 5, probably is a section of knife or sword blade (Figure
28g). The fragment is broken at both ends and curled slightly along the thinner
edge. Measurements: Length, 60 mm; width, 21 mm.
No. 7, House 5, is a sword pommel (Figure 280. A remnant of blade tang
centers in the distal face, and the proximal tang-end protrudes in the proximal
face. The piece is made from wrought iron, and portions of the original surface
remain that show chased decoration. Measurements: Length, including protrusions, 26.5 mm; maximum diameter, 24 mm.
Remarks: The pommels now known from such sites as Gilbert (Blaine
1992:Figure 4) and Spanish Fort appear to mainly represent hilt elements of
broadswords, such as those utilized by Hispanic horsemen and cavalry. The
quality of this particular pommel, however, is more consistent with a better grade
lighter service rapier or small-sword and dagger.
No. 8, House 5, is likely a section of a small case knife tang (Figure 28h),
complete in the proximal end and broken through the rear handle rivet hole.
Measurements: Length, 25 mm; width, 13 mm.
No. 9 (surface) is made of cast brass. It has been broken across each end
(Figure 28i). The cross section is oval, while both linear edges show even hammering generally along the wider and thicker central portions. Measurements:
Length (chord), 61 mm; maximum width, 8 mm; maximum thickness, 6 mm.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

127

Remarks: This specimen strongly resembles a type of drawer pull handle,
as well as one example of small box handle excavated in Louisiana (H.F. Gregory, personal communication to Jay Blaine). However, Blaine has not observed
the terminal ends of such a pull or box handle, or examples of the accompanying hardware, in the eighteenth century Texas Indian sites that have produced
such specimens. There are undecorated brass small-sword hilt remnants from
the Spanish Fort sites (Blaine reference collection) that utilize simple knuckle
bows precisely like this artifact. These appear identical to the corresponding hilt
elements of French infantry enlisted men small-swords in use by about 1700
(Peterson 1956:Plate 239c).

METAL ARROW POINTS, by R. King Harris and James E. Smith H
No. of specimens: 16
Provenience: House 1 (5), House 3 (2), House 4 (1), House 5 (2), Feature 25 (1),
Feature 26 (1), Trench 7(1), and Surface (3).
All of the metal arrow points from this site were fashioned by the Indians
from scraps of brass (N=9) and iron (N=7). The brass specimens are made of
scrap kettle brass, except for one that appears to be from a fragment of a trade
gun sideplate. Due to the condition of the iron, it is not possible to determine
from what the iron specimens were made (see Figure 28j-r).
As to type, the metal points may be classified as follows: Benton Type A
and Benton Type B, four and five specimens, respectively (Harris and Harris
1967:162); miscellaneous, four specimens; and three fragmentary specimens.
Table 7
Metal Arrow Points
Benton
A

Benton
B

Misc.

Frag.

House 1

1

2

1

1

House 3

1

1

House 5
House 4

1

1

1

1
1

1

1

Surface

1

Total

4

2
1

Feature 26
Trench 7

5
2

1

Feature 25

Total

5

1
1

1

3

4

3

16

128

Texas Archeological Society

The arrow point shown in Figure 30b, made from a gun sideplate fragment,
is a Benton Type A specimen with the distal end sharpened on the edge and
little hack marks on each side of the base. It was then used until the tip broke,
after which the break was smoothed and used again by placing the former distal
end in the shaft. Table 7 shows the provenience of the metal arrow points by
feature and type.
TRADE AXE, by R. King Harris
No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Surface (1)
A fragment of trade axe in the studied collection was recovered in excavations by Noil Vinson. This fragment (Figure 29g) is comparable in form to French
trade axes (Duffield and Jelks 1961:57-58; Blaine 1988:111-117). The Pearson
site specimen was 12.6 cm in length and had a 6.5 cm wide flaring bit and a rather
small round haft-eye. A complete trade axe has also been found at the Vinson site
from an area closer to the springs; it is in the/’;[oil Vinson collection.

FRENCH BLANKET BALE SEAL, by R. King Harris

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: House 2 (1)
While excavating House 2, prior to the TAS Summer Field School, Mr.
Vinson found a small lead disk (Figure 30a-a’). It measured 20 mm in diameter, or
a little larger than a U.S. penny, and it was 1.5 mm in thickness. This specimen
was covered with lead oxide. It was carefully cleaned and found to be a French
blanket bale seal of the rivet type.
This type of seal is a lead disk with holes near the center of the disk. Disks of
this type had a strap of lead attached that was passed through one or two holes, and
when pressed with the seal, the lead strap would flatten out and become a part of
the disk. The specimen from the Vinson Site had two holes in the disk, while the
specimens of French seals from Fort Michilimackinac are of the one hole type
(Maxwell and Binford 1961:89).
When the stamping of the seal and spreading of the rivets were achieved in
one operation, the seal of the country or manufacturer would appear on the outer
side of the disk. Sometimes fabric impressions would also be present on the inner
surface of the disk.
When the seal is broken, the center of the seal is usually destroyed. In the
case of the Vinson specimen, the lead strap was broken--thus leaving the face of
the stamped seal complete and unbroken. On the inner side, it bears faint cloth
impressions. On the outer surface, the seal is impressed with a slightly offcentered pattern of a Fleur-de-lis surrounded by a circle that in turn is surrounded

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

B

129

C

A

E

D

F

G

H

L

M
Figure 29. Artifacts in the Noil Vinson Collection. (a) Bracelet, (b) Loops and Triangles, (c)
Loop and Beads, (d-f) Metal Arrowpoints, (g) Trade Axe fragment, (h-k) Gun Sideplates, (1)
Ring Form, and (m) Gun Barrel.

by a laurel-leaf wreath. Along the outer edge of the seal imprint is an octagonalshaped godroon border that surrounds the wreath.
These lead seals were probably used by the Europeans mainly on bales of
blankets. It is entirely possible, however, that they could have also been used on
bottle necks, bundles of hardware, and strings of glass trade beads, all of which the
French traded to Native Americans in the eighteenth century.
At Fort Michilimackinac, a historic site in Michigan, most of the French seals
appear to date during the period of French occupation--from about 1740 to 1760.

130

Texas Archeological Society

!

I

A"

Figure 30. Blanket Bale Seal and Metal Arrowpoint made from Gun Sideplate.

This French fort was taken over by the British in September 1761 (Maxwell and
Binford 1961:13).
This specimen from the Vinson site may be a governmental seal used on a
bale of blankets obtained through the French trade sometime before the end of the
French trade in Texas--which ceased around 1770-1780.

KEITLES, by Jay C. Blaine
Kettle Repair

No. of specimens: 6
Provenience: Surface (1), House 5 (5)
Specimen No. 1 (surface) is roughly squared in outline with single slits at
three of the comers (Figure 31f). Its appearance is that of "kettle brass" that has
been well hammered. Measurements: Average thickness, 0.3 mm to 0.4 mm.
Remarks: No. 1 is an example of a method of patching that is frequently
identified as done by Native Americans (Harris and Tunnell 1967:110); it is
sometimes combined with leather gaskets (Woodall 1967a: 182). This patch is not
applied.
No. 2, from House 5, is a piece of"kettle brass" that is roughly rectangular in
outline. There is a narrow band of kettle brass between the slits with the band ends
passing through the larger piece and then flattened on the opposing face. Measurements: Average thickness, 0.5 mm.
Remarks: This specimen is probably an example of another method of
patching: a single slit is apparently placed on a small (leak?) hole, and a doubled

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

131

C
D

E
F

A
G

K

M

N

Figure 31. Miscellaneous Metal Artifacts from Vinson. (a) Jew’s Harp, (b) Iron Awl, (c)
Possible Arrow Nock, (d) Wire Stock, (e) Kettle Bail Ear, (f-j) Pieces of Kettle Repair, (k)
Piece with "dragon and cloud engraving", and (l-n) Miscellaneous pieces.

thickness of narrow strap brass is then partially inserted. The "inside" ends are
separated and flattened, while the "outside" head is flattened across the strap’s
bend apex.
Nos. 3-6, also from House 5, apparently are patching "straps" or rivets that
show the same shaping and bending characteristics.
Kettle Bail Ear

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: House 5 (1)
This fragment (Figure 31e) is composed of a heavy cupreous sheet inserted
with a large solid rivet. One rivet end (inner) is spread widely and evenly on the
inner part of the bail ear (Harris and Tunnell 1967:105 and Figure 46); the outer
bail ear has been removed.
Other probable kettle brass fragments are numerous, small, non-diagnostic,
and well distributed over the site. One kettle brass piece shows evidence of
tinning.
Iron Kettle

No. of specimens: 17
Provenience: House 5 (17)

132

Texas Archeological Society

These cast iron pieces represent the rim, part of the body, and the bottom of
an iron kettle; no bail lugs or feet are represented. Two different rim sherds, and
one flat bottom with an obtuse-angled wall juncture, are present in the site
sample. Measurements: One rim sherd is slightly flared with a small remaining
piece of the body. It is 3 mm thick at the rim band, and the rim band is 22 mm in
width. The body thickness is 2.4 ram. The other rim fragment has a more flared
lip with an average thickness of 3 mm. The fragment of flat bottom/body juncture averages 2.5 mm in thickness, and has an interior juncture angle of 102
degrees.
Remarks: There are a minimum of two iron kettles present in House 5. No
cast iron vessels were found at the ca. 1750 Gilbert site despite the exemplary
trade goods sample (Blaine 1992:175-196).

METAL BUTTONS, by R. King Harris, James E. Smith II, and Jay C. Blaine
No. of specimens: 9
Provenience: House 1 (1), House 3 (1), House 5 (3), Feature 25 (1), Surface (3)
During the excavation of the Vinson Site, nine metal buttons were found.
Eight specimens were of European manufacture, while one was probably nativemade. All the buttons were made from brass or bronze.
The native-made specimen appears to have been fashioned from a piece of
kettle brass with two holes punched in the center. A narrow strip of brass was
then placed through the holes that probably served as the means of attachment.
Six of the European buttons can be classified into two types-- Type A and
Type D --in Olsen’s (1963:551-554) typology. Type A is a cast-in-one piece
with a hole drilled in the shank. Five buttons of Type A were found at the Vinson
Site; three had plain faces (Figure 32d) and two were decorated on the face. One
of the decorated buttons had a stylized floral pattern on the face (Figure 32a),
while the other had a pattern of four bars and a series of dots around the rim of
the button (Figure 32c). According to Olsen (1963), the Type A button dates
from 1700 to 1765. The one Type D button is cast with a brass wire set into a
boss on the back. The button was then held in a chuck and spun against a tool,
thus cutting the button to desired thickness; the eye is missing on the Vinson
specimen. The Type D button is dated by Olsen (1963) from 1760 to 1785.
The type A and D buttons were found in a variety of contexts at the site
(Table 8). Two other types of buttons of European manufacture were also recovered in House 5. Button No. 2, of cupreous material, has an off-center brass eye
that was made separately and secured in the button during casting; the presence
of an eye foot cannot be determined. The face is domed, with bevels centering on
a slight circular boss (Figure 32b). The cupped back has been trimmed, showing
slightly irregular turning tool marks centering on the eye base. This type of
button closely resembles South’s (1964:117) type #7 (period of major use from
1726-1776).

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

133

A
B

D

2

3

cm
Figure 32. Buttons from the Vinson Site.

Button No. 3 from House 5 is made of bone; it has been broken through the
cenlral area. Its form is piano-convex with a slightly domed face. The back is fiat
with the broken remnant of a boss in the center. There is a black stain (oxides?)
centering on the boss. The back also shows hand-finishing scratch marks, resembling filing, radiating from the base of the boss. The button is identified as South’s
(1964:119) type #14 (1726-1776).
Remarks: All eight of the datable buttons pre-date 1785, and five of them can
pre-date 1765. The range in button dates implies an occupation in the last half of
the eighteenth century for the site.

134

Texas Archeological Society
Table 8
Metal Buttons
by Provenience and Type

Proveniences
Type

Date

House
1

House
3

House
5

1

1

1

A

1700-1765

D

1760-1785

#7

1726-1776

1

#14

1726-1776

1

Feat.
25

2
1

1

Native-made
Total

Random
Surface

1

1

3

1

3

ORNAMENTAL ARTIFACTS, by Jay C. Blaine
Hawk Bells

No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: Surface (1), House 5 (1)
No. 1, from the surface, is partially crushed but retains a small pellet which
rattles. Its body is formed of thin cupreous (probably brass) material that was
constructed by soldering two flanged hemispheres along their matching and flat
flanges. The top of one half is pierced with two round holes connected by a
straight slit. The other half is broken through its apex where an eye would be
inserted. The flanges on both halves are bordered by two or three closely spaced
fine lines.
Measurments: Estimated diameter at flanges, 16.5 mm; flange width, 1 mm.
No. 2, from House 5, is the undistorted half of a cupreous (probably brass)
hawk bell that retains the eye for attachment. The eye, of round "brass" wire, has
been inserted through a small perforation and the wire ends turned outward to
secure it. A light ring, depressed from the outside, circles the base of the eye. The
edge of the body rim is slightly everted, creating a narrow flange which has traces
of solder. A tiny, unidentified mark, under 1 mm in diameter, is impressed near the
eye.
Measurements: Diameter at rim, 15.5 mm; thickness of wire eye, 1 mm;
"depth" of hemisphere, 6.7 mm.

Smith and others -- The Vinson Site

135

Remarks: No. 1 is a flanged-edge hawkbell type. Judging from the hole, the
eye was a strip form. No. 2 also is flanged (albeit a very narrow flange), but it has
a wire eye. Harper et al. (1967:87-90) estimated that these hawkbell attributes
would date such bells between 1700 and 1850. Woodall (1967a:181-182) found
the flush-edge variety of hawkbell to be prevalent in excavated Nortefio and
possible Wichita sites.
Tinlders
No. of specimens: 8
Provenience: Surface (3), House I (1), House 3 (1), Random [Lot 107, 138, 175] (3)
The three tinklers from surface provenience are all cupreous (kettle brass?),
and are well-formed with either flush edges (1) and overlapped edges (2). All
three are essentially slender, straight-base cone forms (Harper et al. 1967:92 and
Figure 43). Measurments: stock thickness, 0.4 mm; lengths, 21 to 27 mm.
Tinkler No. 4, from House 1, has the same characteristics as Tinklers No.
1-3. Measurements: stock thickness, 0.4 mm; length, 26 mm.
Tinkler No. 5, House 3, is made of iron. This specimen is too badly corroded for measurements, and the tinkler has been broken across the wider end
revealing overlapped edges. It has a slender cone shape with a straight base.
Tinkler No. 6 (Lot 107) is also made from cupreous material, probably kettle
brass, like No. 1-4. Measurements: stock thickness, 0.6 mm; length, 28 mm.
Tinkler No. 7, Lot 138, is made of thin and badly oxidized iron. It has a
slender cone shape with a straight base. Measurement: length, 24 mm.
Tinkler No. 8, Lot 175, is made of "brass" like tinklers No. 1-6. Measurements: stock thickness, 0.5 mm; length, 31 mm.
Remarks: All of the "brass" tinklers above are essentially straight-based
and slender in form (Figure 33h-n). If the Vinson sample above is representative, this trend appears chronologically noteworthy. The tinklers from both the
Womack and Gilbert sites (Harper et al. 1967:Figure 43) are primarily the
pointed-base forms, with many of them widely tapered, and iron examples are
absent or negligible in frequency. These sites predate 1760.
Cylinder Form

No. of specimens: 3
Provenience: House 5 (1), Random (2)
Cylinders (Figure 33o-q) are represented by two overlapped edge tubes,
apparently of kettle "brass." None of the cylinders exhibits the smooth edge
preparation of the tinklers, although they are about the same size as the tinklers
described above.
Pendants
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: Surface (1), House 2 (1), House 3 (1), House 5 (1), Lot 144 (1)

136

Texas Archeological Society

C

B

A

F

E

D

G

H

0

I

J

K

p

L

N

M

Q

Figure 33. Tinklers and other Decorative Ornaments from the Vinson Site. (a-g) Ring Forms,
(h-n) Tinklers, and (o-q) Cylinder Forms.

Pendant No. 1 (surface) is a triangular piece apparently made of very thin
silver (Figure 34c). An elongated hole has worn through the top edge and a smaller
perforation is centered in the lower border, which has four notches. One face is
smooth, while the other face has four parallel, almost equally spaced, rounded
ridges crossing the face laterally. These ridges appear to have been produced in
relief by lightly abrading the areas between them.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

A

B

D

C

0

137

1

2

3

cm
Figure 34. Pendants. (a, c, d) Silver Pendants, (b) Possible Coin Pendant.

Measurments: Length, 21 mm; width, 17 mm; thickness at ridges,
approximately 0.3 mm; and thickness between ridges, approximately 0.1 mm.
Pendant No. 2, from House 2, is apparently of silver, with a sub-lxiangular
shape and a rounded, contoured, and notched base (Figure 34a). The apex is
roughly cut and there is a small lipped depression centered below the cuts. The
back of the pendant is flat with a slight rounding toward the borders. The face is
deeply contoured with longitudinal grooves that slightly diverge from the top
down across the pendant. Measurements: Length, 17 mm; width, 13.5 mm;
maximum thickness, 1.4 mm.

138

Texas Archeological Society

Remarks: The appearance of this pendant suggests that it was made from
a somewhat larger original cast silver artifact. In addition, the small lipped depression appears to be an attempt to create a new suspension hole for the piece.
No. 3 (House 3) is perfectly circular in shape, of cupreous (copper?) material, with a neat and round hole near one edge (Figure 34b); this "suspension"
hole is slightly lipped on both sides. Two very faint traces of a wreath or chevron-like bordering design parallel one face edge. Measurements: Diameter, 14.5
mm; thickness, 0.4 mm.
Remarks: Base stock of pendant No. 3 was probably a small coin, button,
or token.
No. 4, from House 5, may be a "pendant" or utilized in some other ornamental fashion. It is cupreous (brass?), not perfectly circular, and has a small
roughly centered lipped perforation on one face of the specimen. The disc is
recently bent. Measurements: Maximum diameter, 16 mm; average thickness,
0.4 mm.
Remarks: The stock for this piece is consistent with kettle "brass."
No. 5, Lot 144, is a slim triangular form, apparently of very thin silver,
with an elongated perforation at its apex (Figure 34d). The lower border of the
pendant is curved with two ridges parallel to the curved base. These ridges were
produced by tooling pressure from the opposite face and were emphasized by
border grooving. Measurements: Thickness, 0.2 mm; length, 19 mm; width, 11
mm.
Remarks: With the exception of pendant No. 2, all of these silver pendant
forms appear to be of Native American craftmanship. They were made of carefully flattened silver coins as stock. No manufacturer’s sheet stock is suspected,
nor are they of "German Silver."
Pendant No. 3 is probably adapted from a cupreous coin, button, or token
from a non-Indian source, while pendant No. 4 is made from flattened kettle
"brass."
At the Spanish Fort sites the thin silver pendants occur primarily in subareas with some degree of ca. post-1775 occupation, based upon the occurrence
of such temporal markers as gun parts, gunflints, and buttons.
Ring Form
No. of specimens: 8
Provenience: House 5 (7), Lot 18 (1)
Four of the "rings" from House 5 are open-ended, cupreous, relatively heavy
pieces that are irregular in circular outline. Their cross sections are essentially
rectangular. Measurements: Maximum diameter range (outside), 12 mm to 24
mm; width range, 4 mm to 11.5 mm; thickness range, 1.5 mm to 3 mm.
Remarks: These rings were manufactured by Native Americans. All of the
specimens were apparently recycled from parts of other forms of trade articles and
include some of cast brass.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

139

Three additional (House 5) ring forms (see Figure 33d, e) also are openended. These have a more regular circular form, probably due to being made of a
thinner cupreous metal. Two are bands that are essentially rectangular in cross
section, while one is made of a tiny round wire. Measurements: Maximum
diameter range (outside), 9 mm to 13 mm; width range, 0.5 mm to 3.7 mm;
thickness range, 0.5 mm to 1.0 mm.
Remarks: These rings were probably made by Native American craftsmen,
although the tiny 0.5 mm. diameter round wire form is not clearly assignable to
Native American workmanship.
The ring form (of cupreous material) from Lot 18 (surface) is also openended in form and has a circular outline (see Figure 33f). Its cross section is biconvex with flattened edges, while the outer surface is grooved across with both
straight and diagonal lines. Measurements: Maximum diameter (outside), 15 mm;
width, 5 mm; thickness, 2.5 mm to 3 mm.
Remarks: This heavy cupreous section probably is derived from trade bracelet wire stock. The varied diameters of the ring forms above do not necessarily
refer to the size of Indian fingers as such forms, and others, had widely varied
common applications including use on some equine bits.
BRACELET/ARM BAND FORM, by Jay C. Blaine and James E. Smith H
No. of specimens: 4
Provenience: House 4 (1), House 5(2), Surface (1)
Two short sections indicate the large curvature suitable for bracelets or arm
bands. No. 1, from House 5, is cupreous (brass?) with a thin and bi-convex cross
section. Its edges are smooth and regular with one end broken across and the other
rounded towards one edge. The surfaces of the piece are very smooth. Measurements: chord length, 45 mm; width, 9 mm; thickness, 1.4 mm.
No. 2 (surface) is of cupreous material. The top and bottom surfaces have
been flattened by hammering and the sides are smoothly rounded; both ends are
broken. Measurements: chord length, 10 mm; width, 5.5 mm; thickness, 3 mm.
No. 3 is from House 4. It is a complete bracelet made of brass. It is oval in
shape with with a square cross-section (see Figure 29a). Measurements: Thickness, 1.8 mm; major axis, 5.3 cm; minor axis, 4.0 cm; opening at bottom, 2.5 cm.
No. 4 (House 5) is brass with a square cross-section. Measurements: Thickness, 1.8 mm; chord length, 53 mm.
Remarks: The appearance of bracelet/armband form No. 2 is consistent with
partially flattened round-wire stock. The others are short fragments of hammered,
widely curved, and relatively narrow cupreous material. None of these forms had
been completed or showed obvious attempts at the necessary smoothing.
Round Wire Stock
No. of specimens: 6
Provenience: House 5 (1), Feature 28 (1), and Lots 76, 111,174 and 200 (4)

140

Texas Archeological Society

No. 1 (House 5) is cupreous wire stock cut through one end and cut and
broken through the other (see Figure 31d). Measurements: Diameter, 4.8 mm.
No. 2, from Lot 76, is cupreous wire. Measurements: Diameter, 1.4 mm.
No. 3, Lot 111, is cupreous wire stock. It has been cut and broken at both
ends. This specimen is very uniform in thickness and possibly is modem in age.
Measurements: Diameter, 6.5 mm.
No. 4, the Lot 174 specimen, is also cupreous wire stock. It has been cut and
broken at both ends, and there are a pair of grooves angled across the length of
the segment. Measurements: Diameter, 5.8 mm.
The Lot 200 and Feature 28 pieces are both of badly oxidized iron. Measurements: Diameters, 1 and 3 ram, respectively.
Remarks: It is probable that these pieces of round wire stock are byproducts
of segmenting wire stock of various gauges for lengths of bracelets or arm bands
(Blaine 1992:180-181).
EARRINGS, by R. King Harris
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 4 (2)
These earrings are made of small loops of wire with glass beads attached
(see Figure 29c). One loop had three glass beads and the other had two glass
beads. Measurements: Both are 2.0 cm in diameter with 8 mm beads.
METAL TRIANGLES, by R. King Harris
No. of specimens: 2
Provenience: House 4 (2)
Both metal triangles are made from thin iron with holes for hanging (see
Figure 29b). One of these had two rings interlocked with a third ring that held
the meta! triangle. It appears that these artifacts were used for decoration and
may have had beads on the wire loops similar to the earrings described above.
Measurements: approximate equilateral triangles 17 mm on a side.
MISCELLANEOUS METAL ARTIFACTS, by Jay C. Blaine

Jew’s Harp
No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Surface (1)
This specimen is wrought iron (see Figure 31a). One shank is eroded away
and the tongue is missing. The remaining shank is tapered and slightly diamondshaped in cross section. The head is bi-convex in cross section with the shank
turned up where it develops from the head. Measurements: Length, 62 mm;
width, 33 ram.
Remarks: The occurrence of Jew’s Harps is widely reported for eighteenth
century Colonial-era sites. However, they do not appear to be generally associated

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

141

with the Texas colonial trade with Native Americans. Nonetheless, the condition
of this specimen, and its techniques of manufacture, distinguish it from all of the
other post-Indian occupation iron debris, and may well date from the Indian
occupation at the Vinson site.
Awls

No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: House 1 (1)
The awl is pointed at one end and double-tapered in form (see Figure 31b).
The cross section of the awl is round but does have a narrow flat surface
extending along most of one side. This specimen is probably made of wrought
iron. Measurements: Length, 31 mm; maximum diameter, 3.8 mm.
Remarks: This awl is likely of native-manufacture since it does not match
well-known awl types furnished to Native Americans in the colonial trade.
Rather, it may have been altered to the awl form by Native Americans from a
different, but unknown, original form of iron piece.
Spoon
No. of specimens: 1
Provenience: Lot 197 (1)
The simple iron spoon is broken through the thin handle just beyond the
bowl, and one distal bowl edge is eroded away. Measurements: Length, 140 mm;
maximum width, 47 mm.
Remarks: Since the spoon is not complete and is of iron, definitive assignment is not attempted. Spoons have not been typically associated with the
eighteenth century Indian trade in Texas This specimen seems more consistent
with, but not meaningfully limited to, nineteenth century assemblages.
Other Unidentif’mble Pieces
No. of specimens: 5
Provenience: Surface (2), Lot 2 (1), House 5 (2)
The first specimen in this category is a deeply dished circular form with a
large, slightly oval, circular opening near one border. The surface appearance is
one of dark "brass" with areas of reduction showing the even-bottomed thin
delamination suggestive of plating or clading. The technology of the piece
resembles those made through the punch-press or die (machine) process. There
are no obvious attachment bases on the piece, and it is even and smooth in
thickness. There is no evidence of wear on this specimen (see Figure 31n).
Measurements: Diameter of body, 24 mm; maximum diameter of oval hole, 13
mm; thickness, 0.5 mm.
Remarks: The basic stock and technology of this piece is not common for
metal pieces in eighteenth century Native American sites. Rather, the form is very
suggestive of later nineteenth century Indian headstall ornaments, but the form

142

Texas Archeological Society

cannot be confined simply to those ornaments. Spectrographic analysis of this
specimen probably would be needed for any confident assignment of age and
manufacturing origin.
No. 2, from Lot 2, is mutilated. The original edges of the piece are indicated
along the back of the "D" shape present, and by the edges and immediate
shoulder of the rectangular opening in the opposite side. The appearance of the
material is that of"brass." The edge mutilation appears to have been done with a
sharp-bitted tool (chisel?). Its thickness is even and smooth, and there are no
obvious attachment holes or indications of wear (see Figure 31m). Measurements: Length, 41 mm; width, 19 mm; thickness, 0.8 mm.
Remarks: Observations on stock material and technology of the piece are
the same as for No. 1 above. It has no recognizable form and function.
No. 3 (surface) is probably of cast "brass" with traces of silver-colored
plating. Both face surfaces are evenly flattened by hammering, and detectable
original edge areas indicate a varying curvilinear outline of the specimen. Both
faces show deeply rendered chasing characterized by the square and angled
applications of round hollow-punch work, most frequently within depressed
areas (see Figure 31k).
Remarks: The piece’s decoration is vaguely suggestive of an oriental
"dragon and clouds" form, but no definite zoomorphic elements are recognized.
Specimen No. 4, from House 5, is a short section of round cupreous stock,
cut and broken at one end and filed (?) to a tooled edge at the other. Two
diametrically opposed and converging grooves also meet in a "V"-shaped notch
in the shaped tip of the piece, and the tip edges are smooth. Measurements:
Length, 15 ram; diameter, 4.8 mm.
Remarks: This artifact resembles an arrow shaft nock (see Figure 31c), and
may have been useful to force sinew through thick hide. The wire stock material
and diameter of specimen No. 4 matches speciman No. 1, also from House 5.
No. 5 (House 5) is a roughly cruciform-shaped piece of iron broken out (or
cut?) between a central, squared-hole and two adjacent arms (see Figure 311). It
has been badly oxidized. Measurements: 37 mm x 37 mm; thickness average, 2
mm.
Remarks: Specimen No. 5 was apparently made by Native American coldiron working techniques.
GLASS TRADE BEADS AND NATIVE MADE BEADS, by R. King Harris,
Inus Marie Harris, and James E. Smith H
Glass beads were an important item of trade between the European traders
and the Indians on the Southern Plains in the eighteenth century. A large sample
of glass trade beads was collected from houses, features, and random surface
collections at the Vinson Site. In addition to specimens obtained during the 1964
TAS Field School excavations, bead collections of Mr. Vinson, those of R. King
Harris, and those recovered from House 5 were also studied. The analysis of all
beads, except those from House 5, was done by R. King Harris.

Smith and others E The Vinson Site

143

The beads were classified according to a system originally devised by
Duffield and Jelks (1961:40-51), later modified by Harris, Harris, Blaine, and
Blaine (1965:307-315), and systematized by Harris and Harris (1967:129-160).
Under this system beads are classified on the basis of size, color, shape, use, and
structure.
Beads are graded by size as follows (all measurements are outside diameter):
extra small (0 to 2 mm), small (2 to 4 mm), medium (4 to 6 mm), and large (more
than 6 mm).
A color chart (Bustanoby 1947:28-29 and Plate 8) was used to designate the
color of the beads. The various bead shapes are described with the same terms
used in the Womack Site report (Harris, Harris, Blaine, and Blaine 1965:307-315).
Their function or use is indicated by the terms necklace and garter. Larger beads
were used for necklaces, while medium and small beads were used mostly for
making colorful designs on skins, garters, and other clothing.
As to structure, beads were classified as simple (that is, one homogeneous
layer of glass), compound (formed of two or more different colored concentric
layers of glass), and complex (decorated with stripes, dots, or other designs of
glass pressed into the bead).
Techniques of manufacture are: hollow-cane, faceted, and mandrel or wire
wound. The terms tumbled, untumbled, and twisted have the following meanings:
tumbled after breaking the hollow canes to desired length, the broken glass
sections were placed in a heated drum that was rotated to round the bead’s broken
edges; untumbled--the beads were not tumbled, but were used with their edges
sharp; and twisted--the hollow canes were twisted as they were drawn out in
length.
The bead type numbers for Vinson refer to specific bead types on the Harris
Bead Chart. This is the system of bead classification worked out by R. King Harris
(Harris and Harris 1967:129-1960); please refer to that publication for specific
glass bead type descriptions. The following bead type numbers were represented
at Vinson (Figure 35 and Table 9): 5, 44-46, 48-53, 57, 58, 61, 67, 68, 76, 79-85,
90, 95, 96, 100, 103, 107, 111,114, 115, 122, 123, 126, 134, and 137.
From House 5, fifteen other glass beads are grouped into seven unidentified
types. These beads were not found in the Harris and Harris (1967) Bead Chart:
U1

Large, Harvard Crimson, translucent, bead
mandrel-wound of simple construction. Larger
than No. 100 and No. 144 in Harris and Harris
(1967); one specimen.

U2

Medium, Fern Green, translucent, bead of
simple construction. Barrel-shaped but
irregular due to the multiple cut facets.
Appears similar to Harris and Harris (1967)
No. 131 except in size; one specimen.

144

Texas Archeological Society

<

Figure 35. Identified Beads from the Harris and Harris (1967) Bead Chart.

U3

Medium, Dark Bluebird Blue, barrel-shaped,
semi-translucent around the edges, bead of
simple construction. Bead has multiple cut
facets and is similar to Harris and Harris (1967)
No. 147 except for size; four specimens.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site
U4

Large, Colonial Yellow, opaque, olive-shaped,
necklace bead of simple construction. Similar
to Harris and Harris (1967) No. 1 except in color;
six specimens.

U5

Large, Colonial Yellow, round necklace bead
of simple construction. Similar to Harris
and Harris (1967) No. 3 except in color; one
specimen.

U6

Large, Dark Bluebird Blue, opaque
tube-shaped bead of simple construction.
The bead may be Harris and Harris (1967) No.
61, except that it is 20 mm long and does not appear
to be tumbled; one specimen.

U7

Large, Violet, translucent, donut-shaped bead
that is mandrel-wound and of simple
construction. No bead of this color is
mentioned in Harris and Harris (1967); one
specimen.

145

In addition to the glass trade beads, two shell beads were recovered from
House 5. One is white in color and the other white with a purple tint. Both were
tube-shaped beads (6 mm in length) with holes of uniform diameter. These types
of shell beads have been identified as shell wampum (Harris and Harris 1967:155).

Discussion
The ratio of 2785 glass beads to three native made-beads illustrates the
popularity of the European trade beads, and probably also the decline of the native
craft of bead making. Of course, this same pattern is also apparent among other
classes of native-made artifacts, as European trade goods became plentiful after
the mid-1700s.
In the manufacture of glass trade beads, generally the most popular technique
is the hollow-cane method. Types No. 5-85, 96, and Nos. 114 through 137 are all
made by the hollow-cane method. Types No. 53, 95, and 100 through 111 are
made by the mandrel or wire-wound method. Type 134 and some of the unidentified beads are examples of glass beads manufactured by the faceted technique.
All of the glass bead types, except for types No. 100 and No. 114, are
popular in sites dated from the mid-eighteenth century to the latter part of the
eighteenth century (Harris and Harris 1967). Types No. 100 and 114, conversely,
are popular in sites of the early to mid-nineteenth century. These two beads,

146

Texas Areheological Society
Table 9.
Provenience of Glass Trade Beads

Bead
No.
5
44
45
46
48
49
50
51
52
53
57
58
61
67
68
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
90
95
96
100
103
107
111
114
115
122
123

H. 1

11
33
11
2
2
8

H. 2

1
21
98
75
28
11
32
36

H.3

H. 4

8
34
9
4

4
9
7
1
1
5
5

2
12

H.5

28
116
315
150
56
30
80
267
1
1

F.25

3
27
34
4
10
16

F.26

1
22
110
60
10
2
55
106

F.30

2
3

1
3

PIT3

3

1

Surf.

Total

2
34
207
40
21
4
39
61

32
219
835
392
126
48
227
514
1
1
2
1
1
1
5
6
24
1
1
28
65
55
22
70
26
3
2
1
11
2
7
4
2
2
1
1
2

2
1
1
1
5
6
23
1
1
1
1

8
22
4
4
21
5

1
2
1
1

9
46
12
7
14
2
2
6
1
6
1
1

1

1

1

2

15
17
2

1
1

24
5
1

2

1
1

4
12
2
4
17
1

1
2
1
1
1
2

1
1
2

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site
126
134
137
UID
Total

5
1

69

376

14
1
1
15

2

76

34

1222

1
1
2

1

99

434

9

4

147
20
5
4
15

462 2785

however, were surface fmds and could well have been brought to the site after
the primary occupation.
Quimby (1966:81-90) discusses dating sites using a glass trade bead chronology. He compared the types of beads from four sites--including Fort
Michilimackinac in Michigan and the Fatherland site in Mississippi and found
that the glass beads on sites dating after 1760 were very different from those on
sites occupied in the t-n-st half of the eighteenth century. Polychrome beads were
much more common in the early eighteenth century, according to Quimby, and
became rare in the later part of the century. The polychrome bead seems to have
been replaced in popularity by multi-faceted cut glass forms in several sizes and
colors (Quimby 1966:88). This type of bead appears to be similar to unidentified
bead types U2 and U3 from House 5 at Vinson. Quimby also goes on to indicate
that manufactured shell beads or wampum were a regular trade item by Europeans
during the same period.
The provenience on most of the beads did not indicate whether they were
retreived from the plow zone, from the middens in the houses, or from areas that
may have been associated with the floors of the structures. This lack of provenience eliminated the possibility of recognizing more discrete occupational periods as indicated by changes in the frequency of the bead types.
The native-made beads represented several different methods of bead manufacture. They included one made of a crinoid section, a second made from a strip
of brass rolled into a cylinder, and a third made of a very small piece of stiff wire
wrapped to form five loops.
The types and frequency of the beads present suggest that the initial occupation of the site was probably after 1750. While many of the beads that are common
at the Vinson site also occur into the 1800s, they do so in reduced numbers. Many
of the beads present at Vinson, however, occur in greatest numbers during the last
quarter of the eighteenth century. It appears, then, on the basis of the beads that the
major occupation of the site ended before 1800.

Post-Indian Historic Occupation
by Kathleen Gilmore
Historic artifactual materials from the 1964 TAS Field School and House 5
were analyzed for the purpose of identifying the post-aboriginal Historic Anglo-

148

Texas Archeological Society

American occupation of the site. Most of this material was recovered from House
5, due to the collection techniques employed in excavations, as well as its
proximity to the old farmstead structure.
Collection techniques from House 5 were selective in that only recognizable
artifacts in good condition were collected. Wire, scrap iron, round nails, and other
nondescript metal artifacts were not saved. The following analysis was done by
Kathleen Gilmore with the assistance by Cecily Pegues.
Glass
A total of 1537 pieces of glass were analyzed according to color and function
type (Table 10).
The datable glass artifacts fall into the following time periods:
NUMBER

DATES

3
78
1
1
1

1850-1870
1880-1925
1920-1964
1929-1954
1929-Present

Historic Ceramics

A total of 392 ceramic sherds were analysed according to vessel type and
ceramic type (Table 11). The data represents the total sherds/minimum number of
vessels.

Historic Metal Artifacts
Although much undatable metal material from the later post-Indian Historic
occupation was not collected during the excavation of House 5, some possibly
diagnostic items were recovered: 23 cut nails, one possible hand-forged nail, two
connecting fragments of a probable metal bucket, and one undated Confederate
Reunion button.
Discussion

The glass collected at 41LT1 dates from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The earliest date on the glass is 1850 and one piece has a maker’s mark that is
still currently in use. The major historic Anglo-American occupation of the
Vinson site obtained from the glass items appears to be from the last quarter of the
nineteenth century to the first quarter of the twentieth century. The structure is
known to have burned in the 1930s.

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

149

Table 10
Glass Color and Function
Color

Number

Clear
Amethyst
Aqua
Aqua/Clear
Milk
Yellow
Blue
Brown
Bright Green
Olive
Patinated

Total

566
78
224
376
14
1
11
210
29
25
3

1537

Percent
36.82
5.0
14.57
24.46
0.91
0.06
0.71
13.66
1.8
1.62
0.19

Function
Oil -Lamp Chimney
Window Pane
Glass Mugs (drink)
Decorative Items
Fruit Jar -Beads
Fruit Jar -Shoulders
Fruit Jar -Embossed
Other Jars
Other Embossed Pcs
Medicine Bottle
Medicine Bottles
Embossed
Milkglass Jar Liner
Liquor Bottle

Number

Percent

59
376
20
28
10
3
2
7
6
39

3.8
23.8
1.3
1.82
0.6
0.19
0.13
0.4
0.3
2.5

10

0.6

4
1

0.2
0.06

Toiletry Bottle/Jar
Snuff Bottle
Soda Bottle
Wine Bottle
Food Storage Bottle
Unidentified Bottle
Unidentified Bumed
Unidentified General

1
57
1
6
25
34
40
808

Total

1537

0.06
3.7
0.06
0.3
1.6
2.2
2.6
52.0

The largest percentage of identifiable glass material is clear window pane
from the structure; this ranged in color from aqua to clear. Fruit jars recovered
indicate home canning activities, while liquor, wine, soda, and snuff bottles
indicate the consumption of liquor, spirits, and other types of beverages.
Most of the historic ceramics are the remains of domiciliary trash. No
materials were present which could be precisely dated, but most again are from
the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. The presence of the Confederate
Reunion button suggests that one inhabitant of the site may have served in the
Civil War and then established residence on the property after the War. This
would correspond to the time period seen in the glass artifacts. In addition to the

150

Texas Archeological Society
Table 11
Post-Aboriginal Historic Ceramics

Vessel
Type

Stoneware

Ceramic Types
Earthenware Porcelain

Ironstone Yellowware

50/49

3/3

1/1

CUPS

28/19

17/6

4/3

PLATES/
SAUCERS

157/50

4/4

1/1

BOWLS

27/12

UID

52/371

JARS

21/2

CROCKS

8/3

MISC.

6/6

5/4

4/4

Total
Sherds

87

267

28

No. of
Vessels

48

134

17

4/3

6

~Sherds/No. of Vessels

above listed material, two pipe fragments from the Akron Smoking Pipe Co.
(Sudbury 1979:187-189, 276) are dated around the turn of the twentieth century.
The historic Anglo-American settler material definitely dates after the last
possible Indian occupation and no mixing of the artifacts is possible. In this
sample, there is no evidence of any non-Indian materials that date before 1850.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Four objectives guided the 1964 Texas Archeological Society Field School
at the Vinson site. They were: 1) to examine the house patterns; 2) obtain a better
sample of the associated artifacts; 3) explore the areas between the houses; and 4)
determine the site’s cultural and chronological affiliation.
Although the Vinson site produced excellent examples of structures, three
were oval and two were circular. House 1, House 4, and House 5 were oval,
while House 2 and House 3 were circular. No definitive conclusions are offered
as to the meaning of these differences in house shape, but there is no indication
that the houses represent different types of structures used by different cultures
that occupied the site. It also does not seem likely that the same cultural group

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

151

would suddenly change house patterns over the relatively short period of time
that Vinson was occupied; however, the excavation control of the structures was
not always tight enough to clearly prove this point.
Bell (1984:363-378) discusses the archeological characteristics of the
Wichita Confederacy as seen from three major sites in Oklahoma: the BrysonPaddock and Deer Creek sites along the Arkansas River in northern Oklahoma
and the Longest site in the Spanish Fort Complex along the Red River in southern Oklahoma. The Longest Site has been identified as San Bernardo, a fortified
Wichita Village (Bell 1984:364). Archeological investigations place the occupation at the Longest Site after 1750 while the Deer Creek and Bryson-Paddock
sites were primarily occupied during the first half of the eighteenth century.
Bell (1984:367 and Figure 17.2) indicates that three forms of structures
were found at these sites: round structures that ranged in size from six to 10
meters in diameter; oval-shaped structures that varied in size from four by six
meters to 6.5 by 11 meters, and a larger circular structure believed to represent a
community or specialized structure. The round and oval structures were constructed in saucer-shaped depressions with posts generally arranged around the
edges of the depression, although the posthole arrangement varied slightly from
structure to structure. A central fireplace is common to both types of structures.
Both types of structures were also found at Vinson.
One site not mentioned by Bell (1984) that is pertinent is the Upper Tucker
site (Woodall 1967b), another Wichita village (Daniel J. Prikryl, 1993 personal
communication). Upper Tucker excavations uncovered five houses: two of oval
shape and three of circular form. The oval houses were oriented east-northeast to
west-southwest, and measured about 11-12 meters in length and 5-6.7 meters in
width. One oval house had four central posts and a ring of smaller posts inside
the house depression, while the other had a center line of posts suggesting it had
a peaked roof. The afore-mentioned center post structure had a central fire hearth
and a packed clay entrance ramp, but the peaked roof house lacked these features. The circular houses were six to seven meters in diameter with central
support posts; a central hearth and clay entrance ramp was present in one of the
circular houses.
Upper Tucker also had three large bell-shaped cache pits, similar to those
excavated at the Vinson site. The Upper Tucker cache pits ranged between 1.201.65 meters in diameter at the top and 1.35-2.50 meters in diameter at the bottom
of the pits (Woodall 1967b).
In each of the three Wichita villages, numerous small mounds were scattered throughout the village area. These mounds represented trash middens
composed of village refuse. A third feature that is common at these village sites
is cache or storage pits; they vat/in form from cylindrical, to bowl-shaped, to
bell-shaped. Pits found at the Longest site had grass lining and covers. Historical
documents already discussed suggest that these pits were used for winter storage
bins and for granaries to store seeds for next year’s crop. Trash middens are not
founds at Vinson; however, trash pits are present within the depressions of the

152

Texas Archeological Society

abandoned houses. The cache pits that were recorded at the Vinson site are
almost identical in nature to those described by Bell (1984).
The artifact assemblages found in the Wichita sites described by Bell (1984)
varied depending upon the period they were occupied. The later in time that the
site was occupied, the more European trade materials were used as native-made
materials were no longer manufactured. Bell (1984) does list an artifact assemblage that he considers characteristic of pre-European Wichita sites. It includes
aboriginal items made of stone, bone, and pottery. Large numbers of abrading
stones are frequently found, with loaf-shaped and grooved abraders being the
most common. Elbow pipes made of stone or pottery are also typical. Ceramics
found in the sites along the Red River always contain Womack Plain or Womack
Engraved, and crude poorly baked clay figurines are also present. These figufines appear to represent human, animal, and bird forms but specific identifications are difficult to make due to the preservation quality of the specimens that
have been recovered.
Trade items found on Wichita Confederacy sites were primarily of French
origin in sites dating from 1700 to 1760. The northern sites had a much larger
assemblage of aboriginal artifacts by percentage than did the later Longest site. It
appears that the greater availability of trade goods along the Red River caused a
rapid replacement of the aboriginal items of the same nature. Bone whistles,
toothed bone fleshers, and horse trappings were also present at the Longest site.
Bell (1984) states that the Arkansas River villages were abandoned around
1760 due to pressure from the Osage. Their movement was south to the Red River
and the Spanish Fort complex of sites. Some of this southward migration eventually made its way into Central Texas in the last half of the eighteenth century.
Sites in Central and North Central Texas considered to have been occupied
by some constituent tribe of the Wichita confederacy include Gilbert, Pearson,
Stansbury, Womack, Upper Tucker, and Stone. Duffield and Jelks (1961:71-72)
have defined the Nortefio Focus from Texas sites believed to be related to the
southern Wichita-speaking groups. The list of artifacts characteristic of the Nortefio
Focus includes: triangular arrowpoints, snub-nosed scrapers, spokeshave scraper/
gravers, alternately beveled knives, Womack Engraved, Nocona Plain, Goliad
Plain pottery, and elbow pipes made from pottery and stone. All of this material is
found at the five Texas sites listed above, as well as at the Vinson site.
The Pearson site may be the Tawakoni-Yscani village visited by the Spanish missionary, Fray Calahorara, in 1760. However, the recovered artifacts seem
to indicate a date from the late 1700s to perhaps 1835 (Duffield and Jelks
1961:78). No house patterns or features were recorded at Pearson, although a
trenching method similar to the one used at Vinson was employed.
As with Pearson, no house patterns were recorded at the Gilbert site. The
primary features at Gilbert were 21 midden areas with diameters ranging from 20
to 35 feet (6.1-10.7 meters). Five of these were covered by layers of clay that
ranged in thickness from 5 to 18 inches (13-46 cm) (Jelks 1967). It was felt by
the excavators that these middens may have been the location of abandoned

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

153

house sites although no posts were found and the excavations did extend into the
subsurface clay. If these were indeed houses, they must not have been in pits
excavated into the subsoil as the structures at Vinson were. Blaine (1992:187189) suggests the possibility that Gilbert may have been a spring-summer village
and had no need of sturdy structures like those found at Vinson. Two possible
and one definite storage pits have been located at Gilbert; they were not lined.
The site is dated to the third quarter of the eighteenth century (Jelks 1967:244).
The Stansbury Site is located on the Brazos River under what is now Lake
Whitney. It is thought be the archeological remains of the Flechado Village of
Tawakoni Indians visited by MSzi&es in 1778 and 1779 (Stephenson 1970:107108). One structure was discovered at Stansbury that appears to date to the
Flechado Village (Stephenson 1970:67-68). The structure was a rectangular
house, 21 feet (6.4 meters) long and 18 feet (5.5 meters) wide with a central
firepit and a smaller secondary hearth. The central firepit was clearly stratified
with alternate layers of fire refuse and sand, suggesting three separate phases of
occupation (Stephenson 1970:69). Eighteen post molds in an irregular pattern
formed the roof and wall supports. The structure is not subterranean. Five exterior bell-shaped pits were associated with this structure, but none were lined.
Two bone midden areas were excavated. Two burials of extended, supine, adult
males were found with historic trade materials in association. Both burials had
their heads to the east. The site’s Nortefio Focus occupation dates from about the
mid-1770s to 1786.
The Womack Site, located on the Red River in Lamar Country, had occupational features of two types: circular midden areas and burials. The midden areas
were never investigated but were believed to be the remains of houses (Harris et
al. 1965:289). Eight burials were reported to have been found at the site. Four of
the burials discussed by Harris et al. (1965) were all found in a midden accumulation. They had been severely disturbed by plowing, but appeared to be of
extended individuals lying on their back. All but one had native pottery vessels
as grave offerings. One small, baked, possible figurine leg was also recovered.
The site is dated between 1700 and 1730 (Harris et al. 1965).
Although excavations have taken place over a number of years at the
Vinson site, the artifact assemblage is very small. A similar TAS Field School
held at the Gilbert site with about the same number of participants produced a
much greater quantity of artifactual material (Jelks 1967). The artifact assemblage at Vinson includes few aboriginally manufactured materials that can be
directly related to the people who built the structures. Aboriginal artifacts that
were found at the sites and are associated with the eighteenth century occupants
include all the material items expected to be found in a Nortefio Focus site (see
Duffield and Jelks 1961). In addition, loaf-shaped abrading stones and baked
clay figurines were recovered. In sum, this assemblage is typical of Wichitaspeaking groups. However, many of these items-- such as the triangular points
or the Womack Engraved ceramics--are represented by one or a few specimens
or assemblages consisting of a few specimens.

154

Texas Areheological Society

Nevertheless, there are differences between Vinson and the Norte~o sites
discussed above. The pottery types and styles at the Gilbert and Womack sites
are present at Vinson, but the amounts are rather small at Vinson compared to the
others. The same may be said of Fresno arrowpoints.
Mortuary practices are different between the Nortefio sites. At Longest
three burials were extended supine, three were semi-flexed, and another was of
undetermined character. All had their heads to the east and only one had a vessel
included as a grave offering. They were buried around the perimeter of the
village. The two burials at the Stansbury site were both extended supine, again
with heads to the east, but beads were the only grave goods. The burials were
found over 200 meters from the structure. At Womack, by contrast, all of the
burials were found in the midden areas in the main portion of the site. None of
the burials were reported to have had their head to the east but all but one had
multiple vessels as grave offerings.
No burials have been found at the Vinson site although extensive excavations, both controlled and uncontrolled, have taken place over the last 30 years.
M6zi~res (Bolton 1914, Volume I: 289) stated in 1772 that the Tawakoni "do not
bury their dead, but take them to the open field. When they are reproved for such
neglect, they ask if it makes any difference whether the birds and beasts or the
worms eat them." With all the trenching, exploration, and excavation that has
been done at Vinson, it seems unlikely that some burials would not have been
discovered there. Whether the Indians that occupied Vinson did not bury their
dead or whether they buried them away from the site is unknown at this time.
Rohrbaugh (1982:54) argues, based on faunal remains from several known
Wichita camps along the Arkansas River, that they were primarily bison hunters.
In all sites where faunal remains have been analyzed, bison elements were
substantially higher than those of deer. The location of their main villages were
never far away from the bison herds on the plains.
In contrast, at Gilbert a minimum of 127 white-tailed deer were recovered in
the faunal sample. Remains of four bison and a number of other species, particularly turtle, were also reported (Lorrain 1967). No information on the faunal
remains from the Womack, Pearson, and Stansbury sites is available.
At Vinson, nine adult bison and a minimum number of 12 to 17 deer were
recovered from House 5 alone (Yates 1993). Many other species were present.
Unlike the Wichita to the north, then, it appears that the Indians at Vinson were
exploiting all available animal resources.
In summary, based on the structures documented, the presence of cache pits
and midden areas, and the character of the artifact assemblage, it seems probable
that the inhabitants of the Vinson site were affiliated with the Nortefio Focus of
Texas. Identifying the exact group that occupied Vinson, and the time period that
the site was occupied, is more speculative.
The first consideration in this respect is related to the sparse recovery of
aboriginal materials. This alone should indicate a dependency on European trade

Smith and others m The Vinson Site

155

in the area, and when compared to other dated Historic Indian sites places the
occupation at Vinson in the last half of the eighteenth century. A significant fact
about the Vinson assemblage is the lack of French trade materials but the
increased amount of English goods.
’With the French influence in trade declining after 1760, and English guns
becoming common around 1770, additional chronological support is available.
Looking at dateable artifacts in the gun part assemblage, Blaine (1993) dates the
site from about 1760 to 1790. The glass beads found at Vinson could have been
brought there anytime during the last half of the eighteenth century. The dates on
the buttons range from 1700 to 1775, and the blanket bale seal suggests a date of
about 1775. The one silver pendant that does not appear to be aboriginal in
manufacture, but rather a trade item, probably indicates a date after 1760. Moreover, the lack of a larger quantity of trade silver also argues that the occupation
of the site did not extend into the nineteenth century. With all of the dates for
diagnostic trade goods clustering around 1760 to 1775, the strongest evidence,
then, appears to suggests that the Vinson site was inhabited during the period
beginning ca. 1760 and certainly ending before 1800, with the major occupation
lasting from 1760-1780.
When the Vinson site was first selected for excavation by the TAS, it was
believed to be the site of a historically documented Tawakoni village that had
been raided by the Cherokee in 1830. The dates for trade good artifacts
summarzied above for this site would seem to eliminate it as being the one at
which the 1830 attack took place. In addition, no remains of fortifications or the
stones to build such fortifications were discovered at Vinson. Finally, no evidence of a Tonkawa occupation that was reported by Mrzi~res to have been in
the neighborhood of "La Tortuga" was recognized at Vinson.
To address the question of identifying the tribal or ethnic group that occupied the Vinson site, we need to closely compare it again with the other reported
sites whose cultural deposits have been linked to the Wichita tribes, namely
Gilbert, Longest, Stansbury, and possibly Pearson. However, care must be taken
in comparing these sites since Rohrbaugh (1982:52) makes the case that differences between these sites are due to basic cultural differences. Rohrbaugh
(1982:54-55) feels that both Womack and Gilbert are Kichai villages and probably developed out of the Caddoan tradition in eastern Oklahoma. Harris et al.
(1965:287) agree with the assignment of the Womack site to the Kichai. Pearson,
on the other hand, has been suggested to have been the location of a TawakoniYscani village (Duffield and Jelks 1961) while Stansbury is identified as a
Tawakoni site by Stephenson (1970).
The group of Wichita-speaking Indians described by Spanish explorers most
often in this region of Texas were the Tawakoni. In 1803, the United States
purchased Louisiana and appointed Mr. John Sibley as Indian Agent. He left
several documents dealing with the Tawakoni written from material given to him
by French traders (see Sibley 1832). In 1807 Sibley (Hackett 1931-1946, Volume

156

Texas Archeological Society

2:225) stated that "they (Tawakenoes) live on the west side of the Rio de los
Brazos, but they often descend to live for months at a time, leaving their regular
place of residence, to a large prairie, which is on the Tortuga."
The archeological evidence supports the possibility that the Vinson site was
used, abandoned, and reused over a 20-40 year period of time. The overlapping
hearths in House 1 and the use of abandoned structures as refuse pits certainly
suggest this. Yates (1993) argues that the kill pattern of bison and deer in House 5
indicates that the occupation of the site was during the cool and wintery months.
The question may be raised that the bone used in the faunal analysis is
associated with the midden in the houses and not directly with the use of the
houses. While this may be the case, what can be stated is that the people who
procured the bison and deer that were deposited in the middens apparently did so
on a seasonal basis. Both the style of the structures and middens within the
Vinson village site is consistant with the cultural behavior of the Wichitaspeaking peoples in the eighteenth century. Without any reason to believe that
different groups periodically occupied the site at different times, we can make a
reasonable assumption that the bone middens were deposited by the same cultural group living at the site in nearby structures.
Relevant to seasonality issues, Mrzi~res wrote in 1772 (Bolton 1914, Volume I:286) that the Tawakoni "have the same custom of absenting themselves
from their village during the cold season for the purpose of getting a full supply
of dried meat, which is kept for the other seasons of the year." In addition, the
absence at Vinson of agricultural tools such as scapula hoes or digging implements found in other Wichita or Nortefio sites argue that agricultural activities
were not important to the population when they occupied Vinson. The cache pits
found at Vinson and other Nortefio sites were likely to have been used to store
their grain during the winter months while they were hunting bison.
The idea of seasonal patterning between Norteflo sites is only now being
recognized and discussed (Blaine 1992:187-193). If the main Tawakoni village
on the Brazos River was abandoned during the winter months, why would its
inhabitants only go as far as Vinson or perhaps Stansbury? Mrzi~res describes
two conditions in his 1772 expedition through this area that may provide an
explanation. He describes lxaveling north of a Tawakoni village on the Trinity
River for 30 leagues (about 80 miles) through a broad plain to another Tawakoni
village on the Brazos River, encountering an "incredible" number of bison along
the way (Bolton 1914, Volume 1:293). He also describes the area as add and the
Brazos River as having "little water which remains in ~ls [and] is extremely
salty and impotable"(Bolton 1914, Volume 1:293). He goes on to state that the
Tawakonis depend on numerous springs for their water.
Again in 1778, Mrzi~res describes encountering bison (Bolton 1914, Volume II:200-201). This time he encountered them along a route north of what has
been identified as the Stansbury site (Stephenson 1970:107). On this second
expedition, as he turned north he described a "Grand Forest" ~ost Oak Belt) that

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

157

was dense but not wide. He noted that it is adjacent to plains that contain
numerous springs and creeks that attract the bison. It is interesting to note that he
did not encounter bison to the south in the area associated with the Qtfiscat
village. It may be possible, then, that traveling only a short distance during the
winter months, when the bison had its deepest southern migration, would enable
the Tawakonis to find the bison on a more suitable terrain than the area around
their summer village on the Brazos River.
If the artifacts seem to indicate that the Vinson site was inhabited during the
1770s, why did Mrzi~res not visit it on one of his two trips through the area
where the Vinson site is located? Perhaps the answer lies in the fact that he f’trst
came through the area in the early fall, and then in the late spring, and both times
found the village on the Brazos River (On his trip in 1772, he apparently turned
north from the Trinity River and missed the Vinson area altogether). It is also
interesting to note that the Rubi map, which shows an Indian village in the area
of Vinson but none on the Brazos River, was done during the fall and winter of
1767-1768. If the above conclusions are reasonable, then it becomes even more
likely that the Tawakoni village of Quiscat that Vial visited in October 1787,
which had moved 12 leagues west of the Brazos River, may in fact have been the
Vinson site.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Vinson Site was excavated in 1964 by the Texas Archeological Society
and many people have contributed to the completion of this report over the last 30
years. Thanks go to the late R. King Harris, his wife Inus Marie Harris, and Jay
and Jerrylee Blaine, for their work in artifact analysis after the Field School. A
personal thanks also to Jay Blaine for his analysis of the metal artifacts from
House 5 and his patience in this never-ending project.
Without the involvement and cooperation of Ralph and Noil Vinson, I
would never have become involved with this site and this report would not have
reached publication.
Paul Lorrain drafted the figures in this report and his expert ability was a
lifesaver. The Tarrant County Archeological Society participated in weekend
field trips to assist Ralph Vinson and myself in the excavation of House 5.
Without their time and effort much information from the site would never have
been recovered. Thanks to Dale Williams and Charles Clifton who assisted in the
photography. A special thanks goes to my wife, Lorna, and my family, Jamey,
Eric, Greg, and Susan, who worked on the site and supported my effort to write
this report.
Finally, my thanks to Dr. Dee Ann Story for her involvement with the Texas
Archeological Society and this particular project. As the primary professional
archeologist involved during the 1964 TAS Field School, her input, comments,
and criticisms of the manuscript have helped produce a better published report.

Texas Archeological Society

158

REFERENCES CITED
Allen, H. E.
1939

The Parilla Expedition to the Red River in 1759. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 43 (No. 1):53-71.

Bell, R. E.
1984

Protohistoric Wichita. In: Prehistory ofOklahoma, edited by R. E. B ell, pp. 363378. Academic Press, New York.

Blaine, J. C.
1988

Trade Hatchets from the Gilbert Site. In: The Record, Fiftieth Anniversary
Edition, 42 (No. 3): 111-117. Dallas Archeological Society.

1989

Eighteenth Century Texas Indian Horse Gear. In: In The Light of Past Experience: Papers in Honor ofJack T. Hughes, pp. 93-103. Panhandle Archeological
Society, Publication No. 5.

1992

A Summary and Discussion of Additiona! Findings at the Gilbert Site, an
Eighteenth Century Nortefio Occupation in Rains County, Texas.Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Soc&ty 63:175-196.

1993

Firearms and Related Artifacts from the Vinson Site. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 64:163-186.

Bolton, H. E.
1915
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. Publications in History, Vol. IlL
University of California Press, Berkeley.
Bolton, H. E. (editor)
1914
Athanase de Mdzi~res and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780. 2 Vols.
The Arthur H. Clark Company, Cleveland.
1916

Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Barnes and Noble, New
York.

Bustanoby, J. H.
Principles of Color and Color Mixing. McGraw-Hill Book Company, New
1947
York.
Butler, P. M.
1846
Letter to William Medill, dated March 8, 1846. United States Office of Indian
Affairs, Letters Received 1838-1862. B arkerTexas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Duffield, L. F. and E. B. Jelks
The Pearson Site, a Historic Indian Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County,
1961
Texas. Archeology Series No. 4, The University of Texas, Austin.
Gallagher, J. G. and S. E. Bearden
1976
The Hopewell School Site, A Late Archaic Campsite in the Central Brazos River
Valley. Contributions inAnthropology, No. 19. Southern Methodist University,
Dallas.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

159

Hackett, C. W. (editor and translator)
1931- Pichardo’s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas. 4 Vols.
1946
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Harper, E. A.
1953
The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1719 to 1768. The
Chronicles of Oklahoma 31:268-289.
Harper, L., R. Harper, R. K. Harris, I. M. Harris, E. B. Jelks, and J. N. Woodall
1967
Ornaments. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas,
edited by E. B. Jelks. Bulletin of the TexasArcheolog&al Society 37:87-104.
Harris, R. K. and I. M. Harris
1967
Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 129-162. Final Report for Grant GS-964, National Science
Foundation, Washington, D. C.
Harris, R. K. and C. D. Turmell
1967
Miscellaneous European Goods. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in
Northeastern Texas, edited by E. B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 37:105-111.
Harris, R. K. I. M. Harris, and J. N. Woodall
1967
Tools. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas, edited
by E. B. Jelks. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 37:18-32.
Harris, R. K., I. M. Harris, J. C. Blaine, and J. Blaine
1965
A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack Site,
Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:287-365.
Hatcher, M. A. (translator)
1920
Texas in 1820. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 23:47-68.
History of Navarro, Henderson, Anderson, Limestone, Freestone and Leon Counties
1893
The Lone Star State. The Lewis Publishing Company, Chicago.
Jelks, E. B.
Documentary Evidence of Indian Occupation at the Stansbury Site (41-39B 11970
1). Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:277-286.
Jetks, E. B. (editor)
1967
The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 37:1-248.
John, E. A. H.
1992
A Case Study in the Interdependence of Archeology and History: The Spanish
Fort Sites on the Red River. Bulletin ofthe TexasArcheologicalSociety 63:197209.

160

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

Johnson, L., Jr. and E. B. Jelks
1958
The Tawakoni-Yscani Village, 1760: A Study in Archeological Site Identification. Texas Journal ofScience 10:405-422.
Loomis, N. M. and A. P. Nasatir (editors)
1967
Pedro Vial and the Roads to Santa Fe. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Lorrain, D.
1963
The Vinson Site. MS on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1967

Animal Remains. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern
Texas, edited by E. B. Jelks. Bulletin ofthe TexasArcheological Society 37:225 243.

Margry, P.
1879-1888 Decouvertes et £tablissements des Francais dans l’ouest et dans sud de
l’Amerique Septentrionale, 1614-1754.6 Vols. D. Jouauat, Paris.
Marcy, R. B.
1866
Thirty Years ofArmy Life on the Border. Harper Brothers, New York.
Maxwell, M. S. and L. R. Binford
1961
Excavations at Fort Michilimackinac, Mackinac City, Michigan, 1959 Season.
Publications of the Museum, Michigan State University, Vol. 1, No. 1. East
Lansing, Michigan.
Neighbors, R.S.
1847a Report to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, June 22, 1847. Senate Executive
Document No. 1, 30th Congress, First Session. Washington, D.C.
1847b

Report to Commissioner of Indian Affairs, October 12, 1847. Senate Executive
Document No. 1, 30th Congress, First Session. Washington, D.C.

Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr. and W. T. Field
1967
An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the WichitaIndians in the Southern Plains. In:
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R.
E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, pp. 240-401. Final Report for Grant
GS-964, National Science Foundation, Dallas and Norman.
Olsen, S. J.
1963
Dating Early Plain Buttons by Their Form. American Antiquity 28:551-554.
Peterson, H. L.
1956
Arms and Armor in Colonial America. Branhall House, New York.
Prikryl, D. J.
1990
APR Conducts Survey at Tehuacana. The Record 45 (No. 1): 1-7.

Smith and others ~ The Vinson Site

161

Quimby, G. I.
1966
Indian Culture and European Trade Goods. The University of Wisconsin
Press, Madison.
Rohrbaugh, C. L.
1982
An Hypothesis for the Origins of the Kichai. In: Pathways to Plains Prehistory:
Anthropological Perspectives of Plains Natives and Their Pasts, Papers in
Honor ofRobert E. Bell, edited by D. G. Wyckoff and J. L. Hofman, pp. 51-61.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Memoir No. 3 and The Cross Timbers
Heritage Association Contributions No. 1. Oklahoma City.
Sanchez, J. M.
1926

A Trip to Texas in 1828 (Translated by C. E. Castafieda). Southwestern
Historical Quarterly 29:250-288.

Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932
The Geology of Texas, Volume I: Stratigraphy. The University of Texas,
Bulletin No. 3232. Austin.
Sheldon, R. A.
1979
Roadside Geology of Texas. Mountain Press Publishing Company, Missoula,
Montana.
Sibley, J.
1832

His toric al Sketches of Several Indian Tribes in Louisiana, S outh of the Arkans as
River, and between the Mississippi and River Grande. In American State
Papers, ClasslI, IndianAffairs, Vol. 1, pp. 721-725. Gales & Seaton, Washington, D. C.

Smith, R. A. (translator)
1959
Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discovery Made by Him of
Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 62

(Nos. 1-4).
South, S.
1964

Analysis of the Buttons from Brunswick Town and Fort Fisher. The Florida
Anthropologist 17:113-133.

Stephenson, R. L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 41:37-277.
Story, D. A., B. Barber, E. Barber, E. Cobb, H. Cobb, R. Coleman, K. Gilmore, R. K. Harris,
and N. Hoffrichter
Pottery Vessels. In: The Gilbert Site: A Nortefio Focus Site in Northeastern
1967
Texas, edited by E. B. Jelks. B ullet in ofthe Texas A rcheological Society 37:112-187.
Sudbury, B.
Historic Clay Tobacco Pipemakers in the United States of America. BAR
1979
International Series 60" 151-431. London.

162

Texas Archeological Society

Suhm, D. A. and E. B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Joint Publication, Texas
Archeological Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum
Bulletin No. 4. Austin.
Texas Almanac
1861
A.H. Belo Corporation, Dallas.
Tringham, R., G. Cooper, G. Odell, R. Voytek, and A. Whitman
1974
Experiments in the Formation of Edge Damage: A New Approach to Lithic
Analysis. Journal of FieM Archaeology 1" 171-195.
Tunnell, C. D. and J. R. Ambler
1967
Archeological Excavations at Presidio San Agustin De Ahumada. State Building Commission Archeological Program, Report No. 6. Austin.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.
Vial, P.
1787

Diary of Trip made from San Antonio de Bexar to Santa Fe. Bexar Archives,
Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

Watt, F.H.
1969
TheWacoIndianVillageandItsPeople.CentralTexasArcheologist9:195-246.
Wilbarger, J. W.
1889
Indian Depredations in Texas. Hutchings Printing House, Austin.
Winship, G. P.
1896
The Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542.In:TheFourteenthAnnualReportofthe
Bureau ofAmerican Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution, 1892-1893, Part I, pp.
329-613. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.
Woodall, J. N.
1967a Miscellaneous European Trade Goods. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian
Archeology and Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. JelLs, and W. W.
Newcomb, pp. 180-183. Final Report for Grant GS-964, National Science
Foundation. Dallas and Norman.
1967b

The Upper Tucker Site. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb, pp.
3-14. Final Report for Grant GS-964, National Science Foundation. Dallas and
Norman,

Yates, B. C.
1993

Faunas from House 5 at the Vinson Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 54:187-225.

