The Development of the Atlatl and the Bow
OREN F. EVANS
SOMEONE

HAS said that in our study of primitive man we should be

more concerned with what he did than with what he might have done.
Nevertheless, by placing ourselves mentally in his environment and
reproducing, as far as possible, his lines of thought we can gain a fairly
close insight into how he reacted to any particular situation. Thus,
should some archeologist of the distant future recover a complete pick
and shovel from the ruins of one of our cities, it would not be very
difficult for him, by using a little imagination and having some knowledge of our times, to figure out almost exactly how" those implements
were used. In so doing, he will only be repeating what the archeologist
of the present is trying to do with the tools, weapons, and household
utensils of the prehistoric people. Thus, a similar study of the evolution of the atlatl and spear and the bow and arrow should come very
close to the actual way the development of these weapons took place.
After the club and the thrown stone, man’s next discovery in weapons was probably the spear. It took only a little experience to show
him that a long, slender club pitched lengthwise was more accurate
and gave a harder blow than the thrown stone, and with a sharpened
point it was a still more deadly missile.
For a long time the spear was supreme. It gave a deadly certainty of
attack and at the same time allowed a few feet of distance from the
enemy or the quarry. However, the force that can be applied to the
thrown spear by the unaided arm is very limited and man must have
long felt the need of some way of giving it a greater velocity. This came
with the discovery of the atlatl or throwing stick.
The exact way the idea came into being, we will never know. It
may have been the result of seeing a child throw a gob of mud from
the end of a stick or a green fruit from a limber twig. Whatever it was,
it gave some observant savage the idea of hooking the end of a short
stick over the end of his spear. With a little practice, he found he could
throw much harder and about as accurately as by hand. From that

16o

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

time, it began to come into general use and continued until displaced
by the invention of the bow.
The atlatl is still used by the Eskimos and the Australians and there
is evidence that it was formerly in general use throughout much of
North and South America. Yet the belief appears to be quite common
that the propulsion of a spear by the use of the throwing stick is very
difficult and that its mastery requires either a long period of practice
or that the technique is so difficult that it is practically impossible for
civilized man.
However, I once heard the explorer Stefansson say that a civilized
man can do, in nine months, everything a savage can do and do it
better. So with this statement in mind, I made a throwing stick about
16 inches long and cut a 5~-foot spear from a young willow. I sharpened the large end of the spear and made a cup-like depression in the
small end to receive the atlatl head. The atlatl was a pine stick about
an inch square with a shingle nail driven at an angle in the upper
end.

The first attempts at throwing were disappointing. The spear was
inclined to go sidewise and would probably have missed a cow at ten
feet. But a few minutes practice gave the knack of balancing the spear
so as to direct the energy of the drive along its longitudinal axis and
it was soon possible to hit a bale of hay nearly every time at 15 or 20
feet. After practicing a few times, a target a foot in diameter could be
pierced at 20 to 30 feet about four out of five times. From this it is easy
to see how the atlatl-driven spear could become a very efficient weapon
in the hands of a strong, active man.
My method of throwing is to use both hands, guiding the spear with
the left and propelling it with the atlatl in the right. If the movement
of the atlatl is carried too far forward and downward, it throws the butt
of the spear down and it either goes sidewise or turns end for end.
However, it does not take long to overcome this tendency and get the
knack of driving the spear in a straight line.
If the spear is more than about three times as long as the atlatl, it
is difficult to see how it could be controlled except with two hands. The
Eskimos are described as throwing with one hand from a canoe. With
a short, light spear only two or three times as long as the atlatl, I
found it possible to throw quite accurately with one hand by giving
the weapon a slight upward toss just as the throw is made.
Thus it seems that in the hands of primitive man who used the
throwing stick almost constantly, the atlatl and spear were probably
quite accurate and efficient.

ATLATL AND BOW

i~l

Although not all tribes adopted the use of the atlatl, those who did
probably continued its use until it was displaced by the invention of
the bow. It was very efficient under certain conditions, but it has a
number of serious limitations. It is quite evident that the bow is much
superior when shooting at an object in a tree or on the side of a cliff.
Also, arrows are more accurate and, although lighter, they have two
or three times the effective range of a spear. While it was possible to
carry only two or three short spears, 20 or 30 arrows can easily be carried in a quiver. Also, the bow can be used with less effort than the
spear and can be shot with less body exposure.
Whether the bow originated as a primitive harp of one string, as
our musical friends insist, or as a toy resulting from tying a string to
the two ends of a bent twig, will never be known. The discovery of the
bow was simple but its development into an efficient weapon was difficult and took a long time. The first real advance was probably the
discovery that it might be used to throw a light spear with considerable
force and accuracy.
Fortunately, dart points 3 or 4 inches long and weighing 1~ to 2
ounces were already in use. To give accuracy to an unfeathered small
spear or aITOW, it is necessary to use a fairly heavy head and these
small spear points were just about the right weight for the purpose.
Experiments have shown that for the greatest accuracy the center
of gravity in an arrow should be from ~ to ~ the distance of the
length of the arrow from its nook.1 This is because a featherless arrow
is mainly guided by the pressure of the air against the side of the
shaft. So the farther forward the center of gravity, the greater the
guiding force. However, if the center of gravity is very much more
than 3~, the length of the shaft from the nock, the weight of the point
becomes so great that the increased traj ectory interferes with accuracy.
Usually, arrows are from 2 to 3 feet long and five-sixteenths to threeeighths of an inch in diameter. It can be shown by either calculation
or experiment that they can be properly balanced by points from one
to two ounces in weight. It happens that stone points from 3 to 4~
inches long and of the usual proportions are of about this weight and
so work well on a featherless shaft. Thus it seems logical to think that
they were so used on the first arrows. There are even tribes today
who do not feather their shafts but depend on the weight of the head
for accuracy.
1 Evans, O. F., 1957. "Probable Use of Stone Projectile Points," American Antiquity, Vol. 23, No. 1, p. 83.

TEX2.S ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Later, when some ingenious savage hit on the device of attaching
feathers to the side of the shaft, it was found that lighter arrow heads
would give just as true a flight, as good penetration, and a flatter trajectory than the larger ones. This discovery of the use of feathers was
a big step in advance. It probably compares in archery with the discovery of the use of the patched bullet in firearms.
In the light of the above, I suggest that our classification of projectile points could well be changed. I believe it is now usual to consider
points up to 1 ~ inches long as arrow points and all above that as dart
or spear points. Perhaps, considering their probable use, it would be
more logical to consider points up to 2 inches in length as arrow points,
from 2 to 4~ inches as either arrow or dart points, and above 41~
:inches as primarily spear points.
Although the weight of the arrow point is of importance in determining the accuracy of unfeathered shafts, it is of small importance in
the dart because of the greater weight of the dart shaft. With the dart
and spear the accuracy of flight is somewhat more under the control of
the arm muscles than is the flight of the arrow. Also, with the early
darts the distribution of weight in the shaft may have been almost
automatic, as the shaft was nearly always taken from the body of a
shrub or small tree and the thicker part used as the forward end, thus
throwing the center of gravity forward so that the weight of the stone
point contributed only a little to the balance of the shaft.
In my experiments with the atlatl I found that placing vanes near
the butt end of the shaft added to its accuracy. I do not know whether
primitive man did this or not. I have seen pictures of African natives
with masses of cotton or wool attached to their spear handles, but
whether this was for use or decoration, I do not know.
University of Oklahoma
Norman, Oklahoma

