NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS
OF WEST TEXAS CERAMICS:
A STATISTICAL EVALUATION
CAROLYN EKLAND

ABSTRACT
A neutron activation study of west Texas Jornada Mogollon ceramics
was statistically evaluated to see if the neutron activation technique is
useful for distinguishing between ceramics manufactured by different
cultural groups in separate geographical areas. The results of this study
indicate that ceramics from a settled village site at Hueco Tanks show
less variation in their element composition than ceramics collected from
a number of widely dispersed, intermittently occupied sites in the
Guadalupe Mountains area. The analysis further indicates that ceramics
manufactured in widely separated geographical environments are
generally distinct in their total element composition. The results of the
statistical tests suggest that the elements most useful for showing these
distinctions are the major constituents of clays.

INTRODUCTION
Neutron activation analysis is an analytical technique which is
used to identify and measure the abundances of elements found in
various geologic materials. Archeologists have recently found that
knowledge of the element composition of artifacts can be useful for
solving problems of a cultural nature such as locating the place of
origin for artifacts or for establishing the existence of prehistoric
contact between groups in separate geographical areas. Gordus et
al. (1967) and Gordus et a!. (1971) used neutron activation to locate
the source of obsidian artifacts found in Hopewell burial mounds,
and Allen et al. (1975) used the technique to identify the source
material of steatite or soapstone bowls from sites in the eastern
United States. Sabloff (1971) used data from neutron activation of
Fine Orange and other pottery types to infer trade networks or
movements of people between a number of Terminal Classic and
Early Postclassic Maya sites, and Bennyhoff and Heizer (1965) used
neutron activation of ceramics to suggest trade between the sites of
Cuicuilco and Teotihuacan in the Valley of Mexico.
In neutron activation analysis a small sample is extracted from
an artifact and placed in a nuclear reactor where it is bombarded
with free neutrons. During the irradiation process some of the
elements in the sample will absorb neutrons to form radioactive
isotopes. Because these radioactive isotopes are unstable they will

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

decay to the stable form over a period of time, emitting gamma
rays during the disintegration process. The gamma ray emissions
from the decaying isotopes exhibit characteristic energy levels and
rates of decay which allow the investigator to identify the isotopes
and, thereby, the stable elements from which they were produced.
Quantitative measurements can be obtained by counting the gamma
ray emissions from each of the elements detected in the sample and
comparing these with emissions from standards irradiated under
the same conditions (Meyers and Denier 1972: 4-7).
Due to individual differences in the elements’ absorption of
neutrons, and variations in the rate of decay for the resulting
isotopes, different irradiation periods and counting schedules are
employed in the analysis. Different elements and their respective
amounts will be detected in each of the counts.

PROBLEM
Neutron activation studies have revealed that samples of
material from the same geologic source or area are not always
homogeneous in their element composition (Bowman et al. 1973);
however, the element composition of source materials will often
exhibit greater variation between different geographical regions
than will materials extracted from within any one local (Allen et al.
1975). The analysis reported in this paper uses the results of a
neutron activation study of west Texas ceramics to assess the
relative homogeneity of element composition both within and
between sherd populations drawn from two separate geographical
areas. The analysis was further attempted to determine whether
some inferences could be made as to the possible manufacturing
origins for some of the pottery types in the sample. The actual
neutron activation study which provides the basis for the
statistical analysis reported in this paper was not conducted by the
author; however, a description of the sample analyzed and a short
discussion of the results is essential to understanding the statistical
evaluation which follows.
Twenty-six sherds from the west Texas area were selected for
the neutron activation study. The sample included 16 sherds which
were randomly selected from a large sherd population collected by
George Kegley from a Mogollon pithouse village at Hueco Tanks
State Park in E1 Paso County (Figure 1); 10 sherds were selected
from a sample collected from nine intermittently occupied sites in
the Guadalupe Mountains National Park along the HudspethCulberson County border by members of the 1970 Texas

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

121

Archeological Society field school (Figures 1 and 2). One of the
sherds in the Guadalupe Mountains sample had no actual site
provenience and was included as a random specimen. It is
suspected that the sites in the Guadalupe Mountains area were
occupied either by small transient Mogollon groups or by other
cultural groups who were interacting with the Mogollon settlements
further to the west (Harry J. Shafer, personal communication).

Guadalupe Mountains
National Park

NEW MEXICO

41EP2A ~

El Paso co.

.2’ ~
41HZ43
41HZ48
41HZ50
41HZ68
41HZ71
41HZ77
41HZ78
RS 18

/

~,

41CU19

Culbertson Co.

Hudspeth Co.

0

25

Scale of Miles

FIGURE 1. Map of West Texas Area Showing the Locations of Hueco
Tanks State Park and Guadalupe Mountains National Park

The 26 sherds used in the analysis represent several types of
pottery generally associated with the Jornada Mogollon ceramic
assemblage. Of the 16 sherds from the settled village, 12 were El
Paso Brown, two were Chupadero Black on White, and two were
Mimbres Classic Black on White. Of the I0 samples from the
Guadalupe Mountains area, eight were El Paso Brown, one was
Chupadero Black on White, and one was an unclassified specimen

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

122

resembling the E1 Paso Brown ware in paste composition but with
an orange slip. The following are the general type descriptions for
the ceramics used in the analysis:

1

¯ 41HZ43
41HZ48

4111Z68

4 IHZ71
" 41HZ77
¯ 41MZ78

.41MZ41

.41HZ50

J
o

j
Scale Of Miles

o
U

~io~
41CU19 ¯

FIGURE 2. Map of Southwest Corner of Guadalupe Mountains
National Park Showing the Site Locations for Ceramics Used in the

Project.
E1 Paso Brown -- A coiled, undecorated ware with a soft granular
and friable paste. Paste color is generally a medium brown with
surfaces often discolored by firing clouds. Tempering materials vary
depending on the local but frequently include feldspars, gypsum, sand,
or some combination of these (Runyan and Hendrick 1973: 21-22).
Chupadero Black on White -- A coiled, well-fired ware with a fine
textured paste. The paste color is uniform and ranges from light to dark
grey. Vessels are generally slipped white or grey-white and painted with
a black mineral paint. Temper varies with the area of manufacture
often consisting of quartz sand, basalt, or basalt with crushed sherds
(Runyan and Hendrick 1973: 37-38).
Mimbres Classic Black on White -- A coiled ware with a relatively
fine, porous, and friable paste. Paste colors range from light grey to

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

123

grey-black. Interiors of vessels are slipped a heavy white and decorated
with black mineral paint. The characteristic temper is a fine to medium
quartz sand {Runyan and Hendrick 1973: 36}.
Orangeware -- An unclassified specimen with method of manufacture
and paste characteristics closely resembling pottery of the E1 Paso
Brown type. Unlike the E1 Paso Brown, however, the specimen features
an orange slip.

Clay samples were not available from either locality. Admittedly
it would be desirable to have the element composition of the local
clays for comparison.
The ceramics were analyzed through neutron activation by
Rebecca Wright (Ms.) at Texas A&M University. Two samples
from each of the 26 sherds were prepared and used in the analysis.
One sample from each sherd was irradiated for 30 seconds and the
gamma ray emissions counted for five minutes; the second group
was irradiated for 14 hours and the gamma ray emissions counted
for 60 minutes.
This method of analysis identified 16 different elements in the
ceramics as a whole; however, not all of the 16 elements were
detected in each sherd. The short irradiation and count revealed
the presence and amounts of aluminum, calcium, chlorine,
potassium, magnesium, manganese, sodium, and vanadium; with the
exception of chlorine these elements were detected in all of the
pottery samples analyzed. The longer irradiation and count yielded
the presence and amounts of arsenic, gold, bromine, cadmium,
cerium, potassium, lanthanum, sodium, antimony, and samarium;
the presence of these elements was considerably more variable for
only lanthanum, sodium, and samarium were detected in all of the
ceramics. The quantitative analysis also indicated that the majority
of the long-run elements were present in considerably smaller
concentrations than those detected in the short count.
As was mentioned earlier, the following analysis was conducted
to evaluate the potential of neutron activation analysis as a means
for assessing the relative homogeneity of element composition both
within and between two ceramic populations and to determine
whether any inferences could be made as to the manufacturing
origins for some of the ceramic types. The two populations selected
for the study were drawn from widely separated geographical
environments, each occupied by cultural groups differing in their
degree of sedentism. Provided that the assumption that artifacts
manufactured from materials in one particular local will show
similarities in element composition is true, it is hypothesized that
due to differences in selected clay sources, the sherds from the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

124

settled village will show less variation in element composition than
will the samples collected from the more widely dispersed,
intermittently occupied sites. It is further believed that if the two
geologic environments are sufficiently different this will be
reflected in the clay sources, the end result being that each group
of ceramics will exhibit differences in total element composition.
The black on white ceramic types collected from both the settled
village and Guadalupe Mountains area are not believed to be
native to the region and are suspected to be imports (Harry J.
Shafer, personal communication). If this is true, the analysis should
indicate that the element composition of their clays is distinct from
the other ceramics used in the analysis.

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
A recent neutron activation study of ceramics has revealed that
often times clays from different areas of the world do not exhibit
distinct differences in their element composition, especially if single
elements or only a very few elements are considered (Harbottle
1970: 29). For this reason it was decided that a statistical method
which could incorporate the data for as many elements as possible
was necessary for testing the hypotheses proposed in this paper. A
factor analysis was selected as the statistical technique which
would provide the kinds of information most useful for the project.
The first part of the project involved recording on computer
cards the amounts of such element detected in each sherd. A factor
analysis (Nie et al. 1975) was then used to reduce these data to a
smaller set of variables called factors; each of these factors
represents a distinct pattern of variation which is shared by
certain elements in the clays. Only nine of the sixteen elements
were selected for the analysis as they were present in the majority
of the samples. Due to missing data for some of these nine
elements, the factor analysis ignored the one Chupadero Black on
White sherd from the Guadalupe Mountains area, reducing the
data set to 25 cases.
The factor analysis produced three factors which accounted for
80.8% of the variation in the data. The factor matrix, shown in
Table I, indicates that there are three independent patterns of
interrelated elements in the clays of the ceramics; strong loadings,
which are underlined in the matrix, show which individual
elements are characteristic of each factor. The strong positive
loadings for Factor I indicate that there is an element pattern in
the clays which lanthanum, sodium, and samarium are involved in;

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

125

the absolute amounts of the loadings measure how closely each
element is related to this pattern, that is, the higher the loading the
closer the relationship between the element and the pattern.

TABLE 1. ROTATED FACTOR MATRIX

Factor I
Aluminum

Calcium
Potassium
Magnesium
Manganese
Vanadium
Lanthanum
Sodium
Sama rium

Factor H

Factor HI

.01

.87

.42

-.22
-.23
.18
.06
.01
.99
.8_33
.9_44

.00
.24
.39
.6_!7
.7__99
.03
.05
.02

.74
.744
.6_!
.18
-.02
-.17
-.04
-. 12

TABLE 1. ROTATED FACTOR MATRIX

Three factor scores for each of the 25 sherds were also obtained
and can be seen in Table 2. These scores measure the relative
importance of each sherd to the particular factor; a high positive
score indicates that the sherd contains a high proportion of those
elements characteristic of the factor and a high negative value
indicates that the particular sherd is deficient in the elements
characteristic of the factor.
To test the hypothesis that the ceramics from the settled village
would show less variation in element composition than would those
from the sites in the Guadalupe Mountains area, the variance of
the factor scores for each of the sherd samples were calculated
and compared; factor scores, rather than the actual amounts of
each element detected in each sherd, could be used for this as the
meaningful variation in the original data is not lost when factor
scores are computed (Rummel 1967: 451). Two measures of the
variance for the settled village ceramics were calculated for each
set of factor scores, one for all 16 of the sherds and one for only
the brownware; if the black on white ceramics were imports to the
site and thus manufactured from clays of a different element
composition it was suspected that this would be reflected in the
variance. One measure of the variance was calculated for the
sherds from the Guadalupe Mountains region, again for each group
of factor scores; the orangeware specimen was included with the
brownware due to similarities in the paste composition.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

126

TABLE 2. FACTOR SCORES FOR SHERDS

Settled Village
E1 Paso Brown
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Chupadero
Black on White
13
14
Mimbres Classic
Black on White
15
16
Scattered Sites
E1 Paso Brown
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Orangeware
25

Factor I

Factor II

Factor HI

-.14
1.28
3.39
.40
-1.79
.77
-1.01
-.65
-.23
-.41
1.25
-.29

.80
.70
-.39
.57
.51
-.11
.30
-.13
-.47
.29
.49
.43

-.06
.37
.37
.12
-.08
.44
.20
.16
-.02
-.33
-.29
-.08

-.93
-.56

-1.27
2.38

2.90
-.00

-.33
-.69

-.59
.07

1.68
-.30

.15
-.12
.32
.61
-.76
.25
.54
-.15

-.14
.30
2.30
-.86
-1.28
-1.13
-.94
-.97

-.29
.54
.53
-.96
-.70
-.69
-1.19
-1.29

-.90

-.88

-1.02

1.39
1.65
.25

.60

.65
.06
.42

Variance
Settled Village
All Ceramics
Brownware
Guadalupe Mountains

TABLE 2. FACTOR SCORES FOR INDIVIDUAL SHERDS

.16
1.14

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

127

The variance of the factor scores for both groups of sherds from
the settled village and for the brownware from the Guadalupe
Mountains sites can be seen at the bottom of Table 2. For the
factors that loaded heavily for the elements in the short count,
Factors II and Ill, the variance of the factor scores for the settled
village brownware was lower than that of the Guadalupe
Mountains sample; this indicates that the composition of the
elements characteristic of these factors was more homogeneous.
This difference in the variance was expected as it seems likely that
the ceramics from the village would have been manufactured from
one or a few good clay sources located close to the village while
those from the Guadalupe Mountains area would have been
manufactured from a number of different sources.
For the factor that loaded heavily for the elements detected in
the longer irradiation and count the situation was reversed, that is,
the settled village sample showed a considerably higher variance
than did the Guadalupe Mountains group due to some extremely
high and low concentrations of lanthanum, sodium, and samarium
in some of the sherds. This was not expected and may be directly
related to the characteristics of the clay samples used in the actual
neutron activation study. Earlier studies have indicated that
ceramics are not homogeneous and that small samples will differ to
some degree from the body as a whole (Perlman and Asaro 1971:
188). It has been further determined that elements that occur in
very small amounts will not be dispersed in a statistically
satisfactory number of particles if the pottery is not well
homogenized (Perlrnan and Asaro 1971: 184). Both lanthanum and
samarium, which contributed the most heavily to the factor, were
found in considerably smaller amounts than most of the other
elements. If the ceramics were not well homogenized these
elements would not be well dispersed in the clays, the end result
being that either high or low concentrations could be present
depending on where the actual sample was extracted from the
sherd. Taking the size of the two populations into consideration,
sixteen for the settled village as opposed to nine for the scattered
sites, the greater variation exhibited by the settled village ceramics
does not seem unreasonable for there would be an increased
possibility that more extremes would appear in a larger population.
When the variance of the factor scores for all the settled village
ceramics

were

compared

with

the

variance

for

only

the

brownware, there was an increase in the variance for the elements
important in Factors II and Ill; once again this occurred because
certain pieces of the black on white ceramics contained larger

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

amounts of some of the elements especially calcium, potassium,
manganese, and vanadium. However, the variance for elements
characteristic of Factor I decreased because the amounts of these
elements in the black on white pieces were closer to the average,
the extremes being found in the brownware population.
While the results of this rather simple analysis should not be
considered conclusive due to the small size of the sample and the
possibility of measurement errors in the neutron activation study
itself, it would appear that the settled village ceramics showed less
variation in element composition than did those from the Guadalupe
Mountains area. In this instance the elements from the short count
were the most useful for assessing the relative homogeneity for the
two populations of ceramics as they were present in large amounts
and were found in all of the samples. The elements detected in the
longer count appeared to be relatively useless for this kind of
analysis for two reasons: first, not all of the elements were found
in all of the pottery samples analyzed; and second, those that were
detected in all of the samples were present in such small
concentrations that they would be susceptible to extreme variation
from sample to sample if the clays were not well homogenized.
Each of the three sets of factor scores were then plotted against
each other on scattergrams to see if the scattered site sample
would separate out from the settled village ceramics. Both Factor II
and III exhibited some separation when plotted against Factor I;
however, the most distinct separation occurred between Factor II
and III (Figure 3). Both Factor II and III exhibited heavy loadings
for some of the major elements found in clays including aluminum,
calcium, potassium, and magnesium (Shepard 1971:6-10 and
374-377).
The scattergram plot revealed two general clusters, one for the
settled village ceramics and one for the dispersed settlement
sample (Figure 3). One sherd from the scattered site population (18)
clustered with the settled village, and one (19) fell outside both the
dispersed settlement and settled village populations; in both cases
these ceramics contained greater concentrations of the major clay
elements than did the rest of the scattered site sample. Three of
the four black on white pottery pieces also failed to cluster with
the settled village sample; this suggests that although the ceramics
were found at the settled village they were manufactured from a
different clay source than the brownware, lending support to the
hypothesis that they are not indigenous to the site.

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

129

(ACAOSS~ IAC;OR3
"1.m5191

..6632O

-.2aa,~

.t?~22

.~V~3

I.ett63

I.~3e31

I.~4~lS

2.~677b

~.6a~47

¯ 14

Z,376A~

÷ 19

2.errS8

t.Z^est

.~t5~2
.i
-2
.4

.s~o~e

*?

¯ io

+18

° 16

"’~

"’""~
~

",gt~O

*24
2~+ 20
z + ¯ 23
!
!
!

.~

"~

*f

x
!

l

* 22

FIGURE 3. Scattergram of Factor II and Factor III.

Although the separation of the two ceramic populations is not
perfect, the scattergram plot indicates that the Guadalupe
Mountains sample is generally distinct from the settled village
ceramics in element composition and that it is the major
constituents of clay that best reflect this difference.

CONCLUSIONS
Although neutron activation analysis has generally been addressed to problems of ceramic origins, this statistical evaluation
has indicated that the results are also useful for distinguishing
between populations of ceramics drawn from sites occupied by
cultural groups differing in their degree of sedentism. It has
further indicated that the results of neutron activation studies can
be successfully used to differentiate between ceramic populations
manufactured in separate geographical environments. The
statistical tests suggest that when dealing with problems of this
nature it is best to focus on elements found in the greatest
abundances in ceramics, especially the major constituents of clays.

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The minor trace elements detected in considerably smaller
amounts proved to be useless for either accurately assessing
ceramic homogeneity within populations or for distinguishing
between populations from different geographical areas; this is most
likely related to the actual characteristics of the ceramics
themselves for if pottery is not well homogenized the amounts of
these elements could exhibit wide variation depending on where
the sample was extracted from the sherd. However, the detection
of these trace elements would likely be of critical importance to the
investigator dealing with ceramic origins for they would most likely
reflect slight differences in various geologic surroundings.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A number of people were most helpful during the course of the
project, and to them I extend my thanks: Dr. Harry J. Sharer, of Texas
A&M University, who suggested the project and provided the data that
were used in the statistical analysis; Mr. George Kegley who supplied
the ceramics used in the neutron activation study and Ms. Rebecca
Wright, a chemistry major at Texas A&M University, who performed the
actual neutron activation analysis; Mr. Roland Henry, of the Nuclear
Analytical Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin, for his help
in interpreting the results of the neutron activation study; and Mr. Rick
Plattsmier, of the Computation Center at The University of Texas at
Austin, for his patience and valuable assistance in setting up the
statistical programs. Special thanks are extended to Dr. Joel Gunn of
The University of Texas at San Antonio and Dr. Daniel Price of The
University of Texas at Austin, for their suggestions on how to approach
the problem and for their assistance in interpreting the results of the
statistical tests.

REFERENCES

CITED

Allen, R. O., A. H. Luckenbach, and C. G. Holland
1975 The Applications of Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis to a
Study of Prehistoric Steatite Artifacts and Source Materials.
Archaeometry, Vol. 17, part 1, pp. 69-83.
Bennyhoff, J. A. and R. F. Heizer
1965 Neutron Activation Analysis of Some Cuicuilco and Teotihuacan
Pottery: Archaeological Interpretations of Results. American Antiquity, Vol. 30, No. 3, pp. 348-349.

NEUTRON ACTIVATION ANALYSIS OF CERAMICS

131

Bowman, H. R., F. Asaro, and I. Perlman
1973 Composition Variations in Obsidian Sources and the Archaeological
Implications. Archaeometry, Vol. 15, Part 1, pp. 123-127.
Gordus, A. A., W. C. Fink, M. E. Hill, J. C. Purdy, and R. T. Wilcox
1967 Identification of the Geologic Origins of Archaeological Artifacts:
An Automated Method of Na and Mn Neutron Activation Analysis.
Archaeometry, Vol. 10, pp. 87-96.
Gordus, Adon A., James B. Griffin, and Gary A. Wright
1971 Activation Analysis Identification of the Geologic Origins of
Prehistoric Obsidian Artifacts. Science and Archaeology, Fourth
Symposium on Archaeological Chemistry, Atlantic City, 1968. ed.
by Robert H. Brill, pp. 222-234, MIT Press.
Harbottle, G.
1970Neutron Activation Analysis of Potsherds from Knossos and
Mycenae. Archaeometry, Vol. 12, Part 1, pp. 23-34.
Meyers, Thomas and Mark Denier
1972 LONGTERM and SPEKSCAN: Neutron Activation Analysis Computer Programs. The University of Michigan Museum of Anthropology Technical Reports, No. 2, Ann Arbor.
Nie, Norman H., C. Hadlai Hull, Jean G. Jenkins, Karin Steinbrenner, and
Dale H. Bent
1975 Statistical Package for the Social Sciences. McGraw-Hill, New
York.
Perlman, I. and Frank Asaro
1971 Pottery Analysis by Neutron Activation. Science and Archaeology,
Fourth Symposium on Archaeological Chemistry, Atlantic City,
1968. ed. by Robert H. Brill, pp. 182-194, MIT Press.
Rummel, R. J.
1967 Understanding Factor Analysis. The Journal of Conflict Resolution.
Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 444-480.
Runyan, John W. and John A. Hendrick
1973 Pottery Types of the SWFAS Area. Transactions of the Eighth
Regional Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico
and Western Texas, pp. 19-45, Publication of the Lea County
Archaeological Society, Inc., Hobbs, New Mexico.
Sabloff, Jeremy A.
1971 Comments on the Archaeological Background and Implications of
the Neutron Activation Analysis of Fine Paste Pottery. Science and
Archaeology, Fourth Symposium on Archaeological Chemistry,
Atlantic City, 1968, ed. by Robert H. Brill, pp. 180-181, MIT Press.
Shepard, Anna O.
1971 Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Carnigie Institution of Washington,
Publication 609, {Seventh Printing), Washington, D.C.
Wright, Rebecca
Ms. Neutron Activation Analysis on Pottery. Unpublished manuscript in
the files of the Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M
University, College Station, Texas.

