Relationships Between the Caddoan Area
and the Mississippi Valley1
dAMES B. GRIFFIN

Some years ago I published "An Interpretation of the Place of Spiro
in Southeastern Archaeology" (Griffin, 1952), which clearly aligned
the ceremonial efflorescence at the Spiro site with the developed Southern Cult. It was clear to me then that Spiro must be regarded as essentially contemporaneous with many cultural elements moving from
the Mississippi Valley to eastern Oklahoma. In that paper I belabored
certain views of Caddoan development which Krieger favored at the
time. Subsequently, I have found that while some archeologists dealing
with the Mississippi Valley have been able to read, and understand,
this paper (Williams and Goggin, 1956), that the Caddoan area students, by and large, have either not read it, or were so disenchanted
with the point of view that they do not even attempt to refute it.
In my preparation for this current Caddoan session I have been
stimulated by Bel!’s (1953) short paper summarizing certain grave
groups from the Craig Mound and Baerreis’ (1957) paper presenting
his views on the relationship between "The Southern Cult and the
Spiro Ceremonial Complex." In this paper Baerreis proposed an admirable method of attack to a developmental sequence within the
Caddoan area and a comparison of Caddoan culture and its ceremonies
with that of the area to the east. His interpretation, however, that there
is a Spiro Ceremonial Complex in eastern Oklahoma which precedes
and is antecedent to the Southern Cult, representing a time level at
which possible Hopewe11 influences are to be sought, is unsound and
unsatisfactory.
It is somewhat difficult to assess adequately the exact temporal position of the burial groups described by Bell, but they are certainly sonaewhere within the Spiro Focus as the term is used by Baerreis.
This paper was presented at a symposium entitled "Relationships between the
Caddoan Area and Neighboring Areas," which was a part of the program of the
23rd Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, held at the University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, May 1-3, 1958.

28

TEXAS AIICI~[EOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Burial 7 was a large multiple grave containing about 20 individuals.
It had 8 pottery vessels, 114 flint projectile points and a few other artifacts. There were two bottle forms, one engraved and the other incised.
Vessel B7-8 is a low bowl with incurved rim and lug handles which is
shell tempered. One of the jars has a fiat-bottomed squared base. As a
group the vessels are good Spiro forms.
Burial 9 was a multiple burial containing several skeletons. As grave
offerings there were 9 pottery bowls, and Bell included drawings of
three of them. B9-4 is a red filmed, almost certainly shell-tempered
bowl with a small effigy head projecting" upward and slightly inward
from the upper rim. B9-16 is also an ovoid effigy bowl. Vessels B9-1912-5 and 22 are also red-filmed ovoid bowls, and a hasty examination
before the meeting leads me to believe they are also shell tempered.
The following listing, from Bell, of other grave goods is important because they are primarily items of Baerreis’ Spiro Ceremonial Cult.
There were 2 pottery pipes, 3 stone ear spools, 1 stone disc, 6 polished
flint flared celts, 2 large polished stone spuds, 1 copper needle or bodkin, and a few other items.
Burial 51 was a secondary burial containing 11 skeletons. There
were six associated pottery vessels, three of which are Spiro Fine Engraved and have the contracting bottle neck ascribed to Gibson Aspect
forms. One of the vessels, B51-11, is a shell-tempered, strap-handled
BartorL Incised jar. Other artifacts include: 24 stone ear spools; 8
wooden ear spools; 13 stone discs; 1 copper disc; 1 stone bead; a wide
variety of shell beads; pearl beads; basketry; pieces of wood and
galena; and a few other items.
Burial 99 was a secondary burial of at least one individual. The
grave offerings contained 3 of the major stone effigy pipes, 4 other stone
pipes and a pottery pipe, 2 stone ear spools, and 475 flint projectile
points. A very significant additional trait was a shell-tempered hooded
effigy bottle of clear Middle Mississippi inspiration and origin.
Burial 162, a large secondary burial of 4 individuals, had 10 pottery
vessels. Vessel 162-19, not illustrated by Bell, is a shell-tempered tripod
on a stand. This vessel had strap handles, as did a flat-bottomed jar
with two rows of nodes. Among the other artifacts were 2 engraved
shells, 14 projectile points, 2 clay pipes, i stone ear spool, 1 copper
bodkin, and a few other items.
It has now been established that with a significant number of burials
within the Craig Mound there are pottery vessels which are clearly of
Middle Mississippi origin, either by trade or by some other means. It
would be interesting to learn some day what proportion of vessels and

CADDOAH AREA AHD THE ~IISSISSIPPI VALLEY

29

sherds from the Craig Mound are shell tempered. The hooded effigy
bottle is of a type most common in southeast Missouri and western
Kentucky, while the shell-tempered incised rim jar most closely resembles Barton Incised, which is a type that is very common in northeast Arkansas.
A great many of the projectile points from the Craig Mound are the
small triangular side-notched forms, sometimes also with a basal notch.
These are much more common at Craig than at many other Caddoan
sites. They do not, I think, originate in the Cactdoan area but are connected to similar forms from the Ohio Valley and to the southwest.
In Baerreis’ paper the view is expressed that perhaps there is a Spiro
Ceremonial Complex which may have antedated the Southern Cult
but that some of the following list of traits may have lasted up into the
period of the Southern Cult. These Spiro Ceremonial Complex traits
are ear spools of stone and wood, T-shaped pipes of stone and clay,
human and animal effigy pipes, equal-armed pipes, elongate celts,
caches of delicately manufactured projectile points, copper rods. and
chipped stone blades. The article states that
¯ . . these elements crystallized to form a local ceremonial complex which
antedated the Southern Cult. Later, some of the elements combined with
Mexican traits to form the characteristic Southern Cult. Thus, for eastern
Oklahoma the Spiro Ceremonial Complex is the direct antecedent of the
Southern Cult and represents the time level at which possible Hopewell
influences are to be sought (Baerreis, 1.957: 37).
Before commenting on this point of view expressed by Baerreis some
observations from additional sites will be presented. The Norman site
is one usually placed in the earlier part of the Caddoan continuum,
and it is equated approximately in time with the Craig Mound. Indeed, a number of the stone ear spool forms at Craig and Norman are
said to be very similar and may be regarded as essentially contemporary. At the Norman site I noticed in Finkelstein’s report (!940) mention of 2 copper-plated stone ear spools associated with 2 large clay
discs, cane matting, 3 double-stemmed shell-tempered clay pipes, 1
double-stemmed pipe of stone, a human effigy stone pipe, and a shelltempered bottle. One of the copper effigy plates at Norman was associated with a shell-tempered jar. A second copper plate was associated
with copper-plated stone ear spools, a shell-tempered bottle and a
shell-tempered jar. Additional artifact traits from Norman include a
small hooded human shel!-tempered bottle, a ring-base bottle with a
globular body, shell-tempered elbow pipes, and strap handles on jars.
The Brackett site, which had a small number of stone ear spools

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(all of Baerreis’ Type A), has a ceramic complex which also clearly
equates it with Craig and other suggested "early" Caddoan sites. These
include Spiro Engraved, Hickory Fine Engraved, Crockett Curvilinear
Incised, a French Fork bowl, and a strap-handled Spiro Engraved jar
(Bareis, 1955). There is also a human male effigy vessel which Robert
Bell informed me he thinks is shell tempered. There is a large amount
of shell-tempered pottery at this site which is called Woodward Plain
in the Caddo country. There were two clay elbow pipes, and one of
these is shell tempered.
At the Nagle site near Oklahoma City (Shaeffer, 1957), there were
two stone ear spools of Type A, one with a multiple cross and the other
with the six-pointed star design. Some of the projectile points are similar to the Cahokia side-notched forms. The fiat-bottomed Woodward
Plain jar is also present. Shaeffer has suggested a date of A.D. 1300 for
the Nagle complex.
It is assumed by most Mississippi Valley archeologists that shell
tempering, as a characteristic of Mississippian cultures, originated
somewhere between Memphis and St. Louis and spread out from there.
Under this assumption, which has not yet been proved, the shell
tempering known from the Caddoan area would be viewed as having
spread from east to west. Not only have the sites listed above, Craig,
Brackett, and Nagle, a considerable amount of shell-tempered pottery,
but they also have effigy bowls, human and blank face effigy bottles,
ring-stand bottles, and tripod forms which are much more at home in
the eastern Arkansas and southeast Missouri area than they are in the
Caddo country. Some of these were almost certainly carried in from
the developed Mississippian effigy complex. It is also possible that the
Barton Incised jar with Burial 61 at Spiro is a trade vessel. Williams
and Goggin (1956: 64) regard Barton Incised as a Late Mississippi

type; and while the style of decoration is not necessarily always late
(Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951:114-i 19), its association with strap
handles is bound to be relatively late within the Mississippi period,
if comparative and stratigraphic information is significant in archeological interpretation.
The correlations and identifications made above do strengthen the
position taken in earlier papers (Griffin, 1946: 85-92; Griffin, 1952).
The first of these papers was largely written in 1939 and 1940 and in
no way followed or was stimulated by Ford and Willey (1941). The
second was a presentation designed to point out the impossibility of
Krieger’s (Newell and Krieger, 1949) interpretations, which I think
Baerreis unfortunately followed in the paper mentioned above. It is

CADDOAlXI AREA AND THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY

31

curious that Baerreis included the spud or elongate celt as a component
of an early Spiro Ceremonial Complex when I thought I had indicated
its presence not only at some of the major sites listed by Baerreis but
also at other sites in the east, including some rather securely within
the mature Mississippi and Southern Cult period. Furthermore, it
should have been clear that Spiro is on the extreme western margin
of the distribution of this form and that Gahagan is on the southwestern margin of its distribution. Baerreis apparently wrote much of his
paper by 1943 and may not have cared to substantially revise or reorient it before publication in ! 957.
Baerreis also included large chipped stone blades, such as those illustrated by Hamilton (1952: P1.46), but it is my understanding that
a significant proportion of these are made from Duck l~iver flint from
western Tennessee, and this same material and form appears at a number of centers in the Southeast of the Southern Cult. It might also be
added that at ]east some of the polished flint celts at Spiro were made
from a whitish flint from the Cahokia area and that these same polished celts are also found at that site.
The Caddoan style ear spools which Baerreis has grouped into a
number of distinctive types are another matter, and somewhat difficult to deal with, because their distribution is largely within a relatively
restricted area of the general Caddoan territory. There may well be a
sequence of development within the Caddoan area, but Baerreis has
not presented it because of the lack of sound stratigraphic or temporal
placement at the time he wrote his paper. We can, however, do something with the designs of the decorated ear spools. The cross and the
excised multipointed star and cross are conspicuous elements of the
Southern Cult, while the six-pointed star and the six-pointed star and
eye are found on painted pottery vessels of the cult period in the central Mississippi Valley. In fact, a significant number of the designs
on the distinctive Caddoan ear spools are ones held in common during
the period of the growth and spread of the So~lthern Cult. The history
of the various types of Caddoan ear spools should not be equated with
the history of the various designs which appear on them. The designs
I have just mentioned are ones which are apparently on the western
margin of their distribution and have moved to the Spiro Focus ear
spools which are a localized Caddoan development. The historic development of the Caddoan ear spools needs to be carefully worked out,
now that an acceptable classification has been provided, and also careful studies made of the historical development of the designs associated
with the Southern Cult.

32

TEXAS AtlCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A few years ago, while Gregory Perino was excavating Mound 34
at Cahokia and in the surrounding area, for the Thomas Gilcrease
Foundation, Mr. Gilcrease found a cache of eleven stone ear spools
3" in diameter. Some of these have a circle and square design on the
outer face. They had been covered with copper and were found in the
cemetery area between Mounds 19 and 20. W. K. Moorehead (1929:
Plate XXVII, Fig. 6) illustrates what I take to be a Spiro type ear
spool from the same ttamey property area. In the University of Michigan excavations at Mound 34 we recovered materials which, because
of their quality and variety, we regarded as representative of the
Cahokia "climax." This climax was postulated as taking place at the
close of the Old Village Focus, or to use Kidder’s term "phase," of
Middle Mississippi development at Cahokia. It was also postulated that
this climax occurred after the splinter groups had moved north to
Aztalan, the northern Mississippi Valley, and into the central Mississippi Valley. We found, at Mound 34, examples of Caddoan style
engraving on sherds and an engraved "conch" shell fragment.
In Perino’s more extensive excavations in the same mound were a
number of Caddoan-like highly polished engraved sherds with shell
temper, additional examples of engraved conch shells, negativepainted sherds suggestive of southeast Missouri and Nashville negative painting (Phillips, Ford, and Griffin, 1951: 173-177), and the
small stemmed points of jasper which are clearly intrusive from the
Caddoan area. At present we can state that on the basis of a radiocarbon date from beneath Mound 34 (M-33, Crane, 1956) at A.D.
1159--+ 200, and on M-635 (Crane and Griffin, 1959) for a "ceremonial" fire in association with activities at the mound after it was
built at A.D. 1289 --+ 200, that the complex with rather clear association
with the Cahokia Climax and with Spiro, will date A.D. 1150 to 1300,
give or take a few years. We can be reasonably certain that the protoChiwere movement north from Cahokia, with its Old Village economy,
took place around A.D. 1000 or a bit earlier (Griffin, 1960).
The pipe complex as presented by Baerreis deserves some comments,
for the varieties of pipe forms in the Caddoan area should be amenable
to both classification and a temporal alignment. Baerreis recognized
that there were a variety of pipes Go which the term "T-shaped" had
been applied and that a number of distinctive variations should be
segregated and described. For the class of pipes with a long base projection beyond the bowl and in the same line and of about the same
length as the stem, he proposed the term "equal arm." This same term
was given by Deuel (1935: 435, and Fig. 5, No. 9) to the elbow pipe

GADDOAI’~ AI~EA AND THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY

33

form usually made of clay which he called a "determinant" of the
Mississippi Culture. For the "equal arm" pipe of Deuel, Baerreis uses
the term "elbow" pipe. The "T-shape" term he applies only to a form
with a short stem about equal to a basal projection beyond the bowl.
This section of Baerreis’ paper provided a bit heavy going because of
the changes in terminology and the necessity of checking the literature
in order to have an understanding of the grouping he had in mind.
The pipe forms selected by him as representative of the Spiro Ceremonial Complex were the equal arm and T-shape forms as defined
by Bae~eis, the stone pipe with short stem projection, and the human
and animal effigy forms. There can be no question that these forms are
associated with ceremonial activities in the major Spiro sites. Such
common pipe forms as the pottery elbow form and the long distinctive
tubular stem and small bowl set near the end of the tube are eliminated
from consideration on the curious ground that "they are frequently
encountered in ordinary village refuse which may perhaps imply that
they had a more secular than ceremonial function." This decision was
made even though one of the latter forms was with burials at Gahagan,
was found at the Davis site, and with burials at Mineral Springs,
Haley, Norman, and other important Caddoan sites. Why could these
forms not have had different functions at different times?
The effigy pipes at Spiro and at Norman are compared to those at
Gahagan, and Baerreis suggests that the "Caddoan" effigy pipes are a
part of the Spiro Ceremonial Complex. He also recognized that some
effigy pipes were a part of the Southern Cult, "particularly the bird
form," but believes that they were incorporated into it at a later time
than the effigy pipes which are at Spiro and Gahagan. In my discussion
of the Spiro pipe complex (Griffin, 1952: 90-92) it was argued that
the effigy pipes of Spiro and Gahagan were styles which were clearly
Middle Mississippi, in form and in their distribution, and that there
was no reason to attribute temporal priority for them at Spiro or in
the Caddoan area.
The "cloud-blower" pipe at Gahagan (Moore, 1912: 514-519) is,
I think, very clearly a Middle Mississippi form in its sculpturing and
features. From Moore’s photograph I suggest that the small light spots
may be shell tempering in this pottery effigy pipe. After I had written
the previous sentence, I asked F. J. Dockstader in New York to check
this pipe and see if it were not shell tempered. His reply on March 4.
196t, says:
in answer to your request for information concerning our clay effigy
pipe (] 7/479) from the Gahagan Site in Louisiana, I have examined this

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

specimen and in my opinion the tempering is very finely ground shell,
the clay is the usual light brown material with indications of firing, the
particles of shell are quite small and the whole texture of the material
compares quite favorably with most of our Louisiana pottery. There do
not seem to be, numerically, as many shell particles in the composition of
this particular specimen as are found in many of the Louisiana-AlabamaMississippi pieces, but it is not unique in this respect since we also have
many which contain a low percentage of shell in the clay. There are no
large particles of the sort found commonly in large vessels, nor are they
as profuse as, for example, some of those in the material from the Crable
Site. I mention this latter only because I happened to have some of these
on the table at the same time I was examining the C. B. Moore piece and
know you also have a goodly amount of it.
The frog and human effigy pipes at Gahagan are forms which are
well known in Mississippi period sites to the north and east. The best
human effigy pipes similar to the superb group from the Craig Mound
are from the Pittsburgh Landing (Shiloh Battlefield) site in western
Tennessee, and from Moundville (West, 1934: P1. III), which seems
to have a connection with the Southern Cult. A pipe of the same character is illustrated by Thruston (1890:188) from near Kingston, Tennessee, and he also reports a similar pipe from the Oldtown area along
the Harpeth River in central Tennessee.
Williams and Goggin (1956) have discussed the "Big Boy" pipe
from Spiro and pointed out the human face ear plug on both sides of
the head as a representation of the Long Nosed God. This is probably
true, but the sculptured form on the pipe is closer to the small shell
replicas than it is to the specific copper effigy forms with their striking
nose projection. They have employed "The Long Nosed God" as a
horizon marker indicating a short time spread, but we cannot be certain that this is the case. For example, I am sceptical of their assignment of the shell replicas to the same period as the copper forms at
Aztalan. Now it should be noted that "Big Boy" wears a disc-like hair
ornament over his forehead that bears an "ogee" symbol, so intimately
associated with the Southern Cult that Waring and Holder suggested it
was an anus symbol. Attention might also be directed toward the magnificent human effigy pipe from Muskogee County, Oklahoma, which
was formerly in the Whelpley Collection and is now housed in the St.
Louis Art Museum (Fundaburk and Foreman, 1957: P1. 95-96). This
figure is in the act of participating in a chunkee game and holds a fine
discoidal stone of the biconcave type in his right hand. As a result of
these observations on the effigy pipes at Spiro, I reach the conclusion

CADDOAI~ AREA AIND THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY

35

that so far as we can tell at present the pipes are on the same general
time level as many expressions of the Southern Cult and that °~Big
Boy" is probably not on the same time level as the copper Long Nosed
God masks.
There must be a temporal sequence of pipe forms in the Caddoan
area, and one of the early forms of the Mississippi period should be
the long tubular stem forms with the small bowl set at, or near, one
end of the tube; some varieties of Baerreis’ T-shaped form and other
varieties of the projecting stem; and perhaps some of the elbow form.
All of these may be viewed as developments from the platform pipe of
I-Iopewell time, with regional styles appearing in the Caddoan area.
They are local expressions of the general shift to the elbow form which
took place all over the eastern area in post-Hopewe!l time. With due
reserve it is proposed that the effigy complex associated with pipe
smoking in Hopewell times evolved through the large steatite and
other stone forms of the Kentucky-Tennessee area into the effigy complex of the Mississippian cultures.

Summary
My purpose at the Caddoan symposium was to suggest that the developed Caddoan ceremonial complex, in so fat as it could be recognized as a complex, was on the same general time level as much of the
Southern Cult. We do not yet have the skill and the techniques to
recognize and clearly differentiate the growing complexity of the ceremonial life of the Southeastern agricultural communities. The artifact styles certainly evolve through time and we will eventually be
able to see segments of the Mississippian culture development and
thus the growth and decline of its ceremonial expression. It is difficult
now to pin-point those traits which are early and those which are
clearly late. Some efforts have been made in that direction. None of
them, however, leads me to the conclusion that the known Spiro Ceremonial Complex is earlier than the Southern Cult, or as A. J. Waring,
Jr., M.D., prefers to call it, the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex. I
well remember that at the close of my talk at the symposium that Dr.
Alex Krieger remarked to the audience, "Griffin has proved his point."
Re[erences Cited
Baerreis, David A.
1954.

The Huffaker Site, Delaware County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. II, pp. 35-48.
1957. The Southern Cult and the Spiro Ceremonial Complex. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, ¥ol. V, pp. 23-28.

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

36

Bareis, Charles John
1955. The Brackett Site, Ck-4,3, of Cherokee County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. III, pp. 1-52.
Bell, Robert E.
1953. Pottery Vessels from the Spiro Mound, Cr-1, Le Flore County, Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. I, pp. 25-38.
Bell, Robert E., and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 7-100.
Burnett, E. K.
1945. The Spiro Mound Collection in the Museum. Contrilmtions from the
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, Vol. XIV.
Crane, H. R.
1956. University of Michigan l~adiocarbon Dates I. Science, Vol. 124, No. 3224,
pp. 664,-672.
Crane, H. !L, and James B. Griffin
1959. University of Michigan rtadiocarbon Dates IV. American Journal of Science Radiocarbon Supplement, Vol. I, pp. ] 73-198.
DeueL T.
1935. Basic Cultures of the Mississippi Valley. American Anthropologist, Vol.
37, No. 3, Pt. 1, pp. ¢29-¢45.
Finkelstein, J. Joe
1940. The Norman Site Excavations near Wagoner, Oklahoma. The Oklahoma
Prehistorian, Vo!. III, No. 3, pp. 2-15.
Ford, James A., and Gordon 1K Willey
19 1. An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern United States. American
Anthropologist, Vol. 43, No. 3, pp. 325-363.
Fundaburk, E. L., and M. D. Foreman
1947. Sun Circles and Human Hands. Luverne, Alabama.
Griffin, James B.
19¢6. Culture Change and Continuity in Eastern United States Archaeology.
Papers of the Robert S. Peabody Foundation for Archaeology, Vol. III, pp.
37-96.
1952. An Interpretation of the Place of Spiro in Southeastern Archaeology. In:
Hamilton, 1952, pp. 89M06.
1960.

A Hypothesis for the Prehistory of the Winnebago. In: Stanley Diamond
(editor), Culture in History: Essays in Honor of Paul Badin, pp. 809-868.
Columbia University Press.

Hamilton, Henry W.
1952. The Spiro Mound. The Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 14 (whole volume).
Moore, C. B.
1912. Some Aboriginal Sites on tied I/iver. Journal of the Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia, Second Series, Vol. XIV, Part 4.
Moorehead, W. K.
1929. The Cahokia Mounds. University of Illinois Bulletin, Vol. XXVI, No. 4.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.

37

CADDOAN AIiEA AND THE I~<[ISSISSIPPI VALLEY

Phillips, P. James A. Ford, and James B. Griffin.
1951. Archaeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley~ 1940-4,7.
Papers of the Peabody Musemn of American Archaeology and Ethnology~
Vol. XXV.
Shaeffer~ James B.
1957. The Nagle Site, Ok-4. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society,
Vol. V, pp. 93-99.
Thruston, Gates P.
1890. Antiquities of Tennessee, and Adjacent States. Cincinnati.
West, George A.
1934,. Tobacco Pipes and Smoking Customs of the American Indians. Bulletin of
the Public Museum of the City of Milwaukee, Vol. XVII, Pts. 1 and 2.
~¥illiams, Stephen, and John M. Goggin
1956. The Long Nosed God Mask in Eastern United States. The Missom-i
Archaeologist, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 1-72.
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan

Discussion
By Philip Phillips
At the time of the Symposium I felt that Griffin had certainly made
his point. After re-reading his and Baerreis’ paper I still think so, but
I must admit that the questions involved are a little complicated. The
artifact types designated by Baerreis as possibly reflecting an early
"Spiro Ceremonial Complex" show considerable internal development,
presumably involving a fair amount of time. Until the details of such
development are more clearly understood, any conclusions as to
whether there is a Spiro Ceremonial Complex (as distinct from the
Southern Cult), as well as its tempora! relationships to the Cult, will
remain hypothetical, which Baerreis himself admits. The exact nature
of the Southern Cult and the tempora! relationships between the various cult centers in the Southeast are equally nebulous. As Griffin points
out, here also there is considerable development and time depth. Kneberg’s (1959) recent study of engraved shell gorgets of the Dallas
culture is an example of the kind of analysis all so.called Southern
Cult artifacts must be given before we can begin to talk about Cult
relationships with any confidence. It has long been my opinion that
if and when such studies are completed the idea of a closely knit and
rapidly disseminated complex will have undergone drastic modification and that the word "Cult" will disappear from the literature.
If we are not ready for a final showdown on the question of the
specific relationships of Spiro to other Cult centers in the Southeast,
nevertheless a good deal can be said about Spiro in the general context

