BI~NARD DE LA HARPE
AND THE NASSONITE POST
M.P. MIROIR, R. KING HARRIS, JAY C. BLAINE AND JANSON MCVAY
WITH THE COLLABORATION OF DONALD C. BOOK, FLOYD CIGAINERO,
ROGER MCVAY, JOE B. RAFFAELLI, JR. AND PAUL E. SCHOEN

Abstract
Data are presented on an Historic Period site (41 BW 5) in northeast
Texas near Texarkana which suggests that it may be the site of the Nassonite Post established by the French trader, Benard de la Harpe in 1719.

INTRODUCTION
During the past 15 years, a group of nine amateur archeologists has
been collecting artifacts, doing limited testing and researching
documentary sources relevant to an Historic site located near Texarkana, Bowie County, Texas. Information gathered as a result of these
efforts is in the possession of R. King Harris. Artifacts are dispersed
among the authors. Because of the mutual effort on the part of all the
participants in the recovery of the data from the site, all are listed as
authors. The main burden of the writing, however, fell to Miroir,
Harris, Blaine and McVay. Before the project was completed, Miroir
and Janson McVay both died. Since their contributions were many,
they are retained among the senior authors. The section on gun parts,
gun flints, ball and shot was written by Jay C. Blaine.
THE ROSEBROUGH LAKE SITE
The Rosebrough Lake Site (41 BW 5) has had several names applied
to it -- both popularly and in print. Among other names which have
been applied are the Rochelle Place, Pearson Site and Fort St. Louis.
Because the name Rosebrough Lake has appeared in published form a
number of times, it is retained here.
The site is located on a natural levee which rises about 3 feet above
the flood plain of the Red River (Figs. 1,2). Unti! the dam forming Lake
Texoma was built several years ago, the site was subject to periodic
flooding. The last flood known to have affected the site occurred in
1936. The site has undergone some sheet erosion. Generally, it is
associated with a sandy silt matrix.
The site is herein separated into two contiguous areas, A and B, a
division based on differences in the kinds of artifacts recovered and

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

O

K

L

A

H

O

M

A

~.

!,

"

TEXAS

.I"

÷

,EXARKANAI"
I

’,

PORTAGE
OF
,THE
NASSONI
BELLE

oln
~’¢h

p!p
1

i

o

5

M t

L

E

s

ADAPTED FROM "USO $1AMS
TEXARKANA, TEX,;ARK ,; OKLA.;
LA ,1953

,
I
I

FIGURE 1. Map showing La Harpe’ s route up the Sulphur River (Bear
River) and overland to the site of his Nassonite Post (41 BW 5).
the occurrence of visible cultural features. Area A, at the south end of
the site had been exposed to more erosion. Ten occupational features
were recognized here (Fig. 2) and artifacts of both native and European origin recovered. On the other hand, Area B (at the north end of
the site) yielded only native-made artifacts and no discrete cultural
features were noted. Limited stratigraphic testing in the area also
resulted in the exclusive recovery of native-made materials. As much
care as possible was exercised by the investigators to preserve the

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

115

integrity of the site. Burials which were excavated were those which
had been struck by plowing or exposed by erosion in the fields and
hence vulnerable to destruction. Stratigraphic tests (generally 5-foot
square units) were dug only to determine extent of midden in a given
area or feature.
Occupational Features
Two general kinds of occupational features, artifact concentrations
and burials, were recognized at the site (all of them in Area A). Eight
apparently separate and distinct circular to oval concentrations of
various cultural materials including sherds, flint flakes, bone and
burned daub were identified (Fig. 2). Artifacts recovered from the
surface of these features are given the provenience of that feature.
Although stratigraphic tests were made in several of these features,
none was investigated thoroughly enough to allow further description or interpretation.
Figure 2 indicates general locations and spatial relationships
among these features. In addition to the eight concentrations, two
burials of historic age were excavated at the site. Both are described
below:
BURIAL 1
The remains of a 30-year-old female interred in an extended position, back down, with the head to the east was excavated by M.P.
Miroir before World War II. The burial had been tipped by a plow and
although some of the vessels were broken, the basic original arrangement of burial goods could be recorded (Fig. 3). As this burial lay in
dark midden soil, no pit outline could be discerned.
Burial goods included pottery vessels and trade beads. A small,
fine-grit-tempered Natchitoches Engraved (Suhm and Jelks
1962:113-114) bottle was located between the knees (Fig. 3E). Red
pigment had been rubbed into the engraved lines.
A second vessel (Fig. 3C), probably Canton Incised (Suhm and Jelks
1962:21), was placed near the right hand. It is shell tempered.
A Simms Engraved bowl (Suhm and Jelks 1962:141) which has a
fine grit temper was present at the left shoulder (Fig. 3B). Another
Simms Engraved bowl (Fig. 3D), shell tempered, was located at the
left forearm.
Five vessels were located at the feet of the burial. A shell-tempered
Natchitoches Engraved bowl (Fig. 3J) had been placed near the left
foot. Adjacent to it was a grog-tempered vessel which can be classified
as Womack Engraved (Duffield and Jelks 1961:36-39). A fine grit-

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SITE MAP
41 BW 5
/,,

B2

&

F5

&

&

B1

F6

&
F4

&

SCALE
{approx.)

1/2

0
MILE

FIGURE 2. Sketch Map oJ’Site 41 BW 5. "B" indicates the location of a
burial; "F" indicates the location of a feature.

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

117

B
A

,/o

FIGURE 3. Burial 1, Site 41 BW 5. Diagram at the lower left indicates
the relationship of the burial goods to the burial. A, glass trade beads;
B, Simms Engraved vessel; C, Canton Incised vessel; D, Simms Engraved
vessel; E, Natchitoches Engraved bottle; F, unidentified vessel (not illustrated); G, Natchitoches ngraved vessel; H, Simms Engraved vessel; I,
Womack Engraved sherd (not illustrated); J, Natchitoches Engraved vessel.

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tempered Simms Engraved bowl (Fig. 3H) had been placed at the feet.
A fine grit-tempered carinated bowl classified as Natchitoches Engraved (Fig. 3G) and the fragments of another pottery vessel were
located at the right foot.
In the area of the neck and extending down the left side were 1028
glass trade beads (Fig. 3A). They have been classified as follows
(Harris and Harris 1967:156-158): 34 Type 10, 7 Type 9, 2 Type 11, 4
Type 44,973 Type 46, 3 Type 48, 1 Type 63 and 4 Type 80. The basis of
these bead classifications as well as the basic descriptions are given
on each type in a subsequent section "Glass and Shell Trade Beads."
Examples are illustrated in Figure 9. All of the beads from this group
are estimated to fall within the time period of La t-Iarpe (that is the first
decades of the eighteenth century) except for one specimen, Type 63.
BURIAL 2
A second burial was located by Roger McVay and excavated by him
in 1963. It was possible to discern a burial pit 53 inches long by 27
inches wide and 12 inches deep. The skeleton lay extended on its back
with the head to the east-southeast (Fig. 4). The remains appeared to
be those of a female but age could not be determined. Plowing had
destroyed the skull and broken some of the burial goods. Seven grave
offerings were identified and their placement noted (Fig. 4).
Two items were located at the neck area. The first (Fig. 4D) consisted of 18 large conch shell beads around the neck. In the same area
were 48 blue glass trade beads (Type 46) (Fig. 4B).
A shell-tempered vessel, probably Simms Engraved, was located at
the right knee. Most of this vessel had been carried off in the plowing.
A bracelet consisting of 12 conch shell beads (Fib. 4C) was found
around the left wrist.
Four items had been placed along the lower left leg. Two very small
shell-tempered vessels, probably McKinney Plain (Suhm and Jelks
1962:97) have strap handles. One (Fig. 4F) has two handles, the other
(Fig. 4E) four. Located with these vessels was a pear-shaped pendant
of fired clay (Fig. 4A). It had been perforated at the narrow end. An
additional burial association, six mussel shell spoons, was located at
the left foot. These items were too fragile to recover in an intact
condition.

Native-Made Artifacts
Items listed here include stone and ceramic artifacts presumably
made by the Indian inhabitants of the site. Goods of European manufacture which show aboriginal modification are included under
European Trade Goods.

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

119

Pottery
Pottery descriptions conform to previously described types found in Suhm and Jelks
1962 unless otherwise noted. Recurring types will be referenced only once as to source
of original description. Breakdown is by type and temper, vessel provenience is marked
"B" for burial or "F" for feature.

A

\

;

///

FIGURE 4. Burial2, Site 41 BW 5. Diagram at lower left indicates the
relationship of the burial goods to the burial. A, ceramic pendant; B,
glass trade beads; C, conch shell bracelet; D, conch shell necklace;
E,F, McKinney Plain ? vessels; G, Simms Engraved vessel (not illustrated); H, mussel shell spoons (not illustrated).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

120

SHERDS--AREA
Plain rim
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

A

Emory rim
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

66
17
5

41

88
Plain body
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

Emory body
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

591
82
25

Keno Trailed body
shell

3
1
4

Red slipped
clay-grit-grog

Simms Engraved rim
shell
fine grit
red slipped-shell

18
7
3
28

Engraved rim
clay-grit-grog

Natchitoches Engraved rim
shell
fine grit

Engraved body
clay-grit-grog
Punctate body
clay-grit-grog

87
16
7
110

690

Brushed body
shell
clay-grit-grog

31
7
3

7
3
10

11

Natchitoches Engraved body
shell
fine grit

Avery Engraved
shell

68
49
117

TOTAL SHERDS, AREA A

1129

VESSELS--AREA A
Pinched-noded (F. 1)
clay-grit-grog
Canton Incised ? (B. 1)
shell
Emory (olla, F. 5)
fine grit
Keno Trailed (F. 1)
shell
McKinney Plain ? (B. 2)

1

1

1

Simms Engraved
fine grit (B. 1,2;
F. 3,1)
shell

clay-grit-grog

1

3
1
4

Womack Engraved (B. 1) (Duffield and Jelks
1961:36-39)

1
1
1
3

1

2

shell

Natchitoches Engraved (B. 1)
fine grit (red
pigment in lines)
fine grit
shell

TOTAL VESSELS, AREA A

14

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

121

SHERDS -- AREA B
Plain rim
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

Emory body
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone

5
3
2

48
16
5

10
Plain body
shell
clay-grit-grog
bone
shell and bone

69

Keno Trailed
shell
clay-grit-grog

387
207
48

12

34

Natchitoches Engraved
shell
clay-grit-grog

676

Plain body, red slipped
clay-grit-grog

6
4
10

Brushed body
bone

Simms Engraved rims
shell
clay-grit-grog

Plain strap handle
shell
Emory rim
shell
clay-grit-grog

9
3

7
3
10

TOTAL SHERDS, AREA B

802

2
2
4

VESSEL -- AREA B
Simms Plain
fine grit

1

TOTAL VESSELS, AREA B

1

All the decorated pottery examples recovered fall within the Historic time frame.
Examples of similar wares in Historic contexts can be seen at such sites as Gilbert (Jelks
1967) and Womack (Harris et al. 1965). Examples of the ceramics recovered from this
site are shown in Figure 5.

Figurines
Total: 2
A fired clay horse figurine (Fig. 6E) similar to types found in large numbers in the
Spanish Fort sites in Montague County, Texas, and Jefferson County, Oklahoma, on
upper Red River may have come from one of these up-river sites. Bell et al. (1967: Fig.
57Q) illustrate a very similar specimen.
A second figurine fragment (Fig. 6G), boot-like in appearance, was associated with
Feature 6. Small punctates cover the surface of the specimen.

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

I

2.

3 4

5

FIGURE 5. Native-made Ceramics. A, Vessel, Area B; B,E, Natchitoches
Engraved, shell tempered (F.1); C,D, Natchitoches Engraved, fine grit
tempered (F.3); F, noded-pinched, clay grit-grog (F.1); G, Simms
Engraved, fine grit tempered (F.3 ); H, Emory (F.5 ); I, Keno Trailed, shell
temper (F. 1).

BENARD DE LA HARPE

123

Pipes
Total: 11
Although most of the specimens are fragments, they do give some idea of the kinds of
pipes at the site. Of the 11 specimens, two are stone and nine are ceramic.
One specimen {Fig. 6B} is a light tan limestone pipe with the top of the bowl broken
off. Apparently this break was smoothed and the pipe continued in use. The bowl sits
on a rectangular block of stone. The pipe was recovered from Feature 7.
A fragment ofa catlinite pipe stem was found in Feature 3. The stem was hexagonal in
cross section (Fig. 6F}.
Elbow pipes which sit on ring-shaped bases constitute the most common pipe style
found (five out of the eleven}. Each pipe has perforations on each side of the base {Fig.
6C,D). It is possible that these small holes were made so that decorations (such as
feathers) could be attached. Decoration on this type of "ring base elbow pipe" usually
consists of engraved straight lines (some of which are ticked}, occasional punctates and
occasional hatchured engraved triangles. Color ranges from dark brown to almost
black; most examples are well polished on the surface.
An example of this same basic pipe but without the ring base and with the single
perforation through the foot of the pipe was found in Feature 6. The pipe has the same
decoration as the ring-shaped pedestal base examples.

Arrow Points
Total: 71
Specimens include Fresno (66 examples, Fig. 6K-M) (Suhm and Jelks 1962:273},
Harrell (1 example) (Suhm and Jelks 1962:275) and Maud (4 examples, Fig. 6J) (Suhm
and Jelks 1962:28). It is interesting that no stemmed points occur; however, this may be
due to sampling error. These artifacts are made from flint, red and yellow jasper and
novaculite.

Dart Points
Total: 4
A probable Edgewood dart point (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954:418) and three Gary
points (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954:430) were found on the general surface of the site.
They may not relate to the Historic occupation due to the low frequency of occurrence.

Drills
Total: 4
All examples are chipped base types with finely chipped drill stems (Fig. 6N). The
small number of stone drills may indicate the use of iron awls; however, no iron awls
have yet been found here.
Knives
Total: 3
from a light cream-colored flint and shows wear
wear may have resulted from cutting action.
leaf-shaped.

One specimen (Fig. 6H) is made

along

the entire long curved edge. This

Two other

specimens

are

Scrapers
Total: 47 (34 end; 13 side)
End scrapers (Fig. 60,P ,S,T) occurred in association with nearly all features. Thirteen
side scrapers were recovered from the general surface.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

124

B

G

F

Q

0

I

2

5

4

5

cm

FIGURE 6. Native-Made Artifacts. A, Norteno pipe; B, limestone pipe;
C,D, ring base elbow pipes; E, horse figurine; F, catlinite pipe stem; G,
boot-like figurine; H, knife,; I, Edgewood dart point; J, Maud arrow
point; K-M, Fresno arrow point; N, drill; O,P,S,T, scrapers; Q, conch
shell pendant; R, stone pendant; U, celt.

B]~NARD DE LA HARPE

125

Miscellaneous Flint
Total: 30
This sample includes 17 small, rough bifaces, eight secondary flakes and five chips.

Pendants
Total: 2
A stone pendant (recovered from Feature 4) is unmodified except for the drilled hole
(Fig. 6R). A second specimen, a pendant is made from conch shell (Fig. 6Q) and was
probably intended to represent a bear claw. The single perforation is drilled from both
sides. The specimen was associated with Feature 1.

Celts
Total: 1
One well polished celt (from Feature 1) is made of fine spotted diorite, probably
originating from eastern Oklahoma. The poll end is rounded and the cutting edge is
well shaped and sharp (Fig. 6U). A cross section about midpoint is oval.

Beads
Total: 5
Three specimens are thin sections of crinoid stems; two are Olivella shells. It would
appear from the small numbers of native-made beads, that with the availability of glass
and wampum shell beads, this craft was nearly discontinued.

European Trade Goods
Axes or Tomahawks
Total: 5
Three complete and two fragmentary iron axe heads were cleaned of rust to see if any
maker’s marks or names could be found, and, although no such markings are visible,
some use scars are evident.
Two fragmentary axe blades (Fig. 7D), broken off at the eye, are from the general
surface of the site. Both specimens are large and heavy.
A complete specimen from Feature 8 has a slightly damaged cutting edge (Fig. 7B). A
large, heavy specimen from Feature 3 has interesting use marks {Fig. 7E). Both faces of
the blade are covered by numerous fine cut marks possibly produced by using the face
of the blade as an anvil. The eye is tear-drop-shaped.
A specimen found in Feature 1 has a tear-drop-shaped eye (Fig. 7C).
All of the complete specimens have tear-drop eyes and none of the blades appear to
have steeled cutting edges.

Pipe Tomahawk
Total: 1
An iron pipe tomahawk (Fig. 7A) has a pipe blade forged from a single piece of iron
with two straps forged to form the eye and pipe bowl. The eye is almost round.

Bottle Fragments
Total: 14
All specimens are fragmentary and come from light green glass bottles. All exhibit
heavy patination perhaps the result of the soil conditions over the years. Of the sample,
four are "high kick up" bottoms, probably from wine bottles. One sherd has a pontil

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mark. Provenience of the specimens is: Feature 1 (10), Feature 2 (1), Feature 3 (1),
Feature 4 (1) and Feature 7 (1).

Mirror Fragments
Total: 6
All specimens appear to be crown glass. One specimen has a straight edge suggesting
that some of the mirrors were either square or rectangular. One fragment has a chipped
edge about 25 mm long on one edge and may have been used as a scraper. Provenience
of the fragments is: Feature 1 (4), Feature 2 (2).

European Ceramics
Total: 8
The inventory of European ceramics from the site includes: one example of French
faience (Fig. 8A), one delft sherd, a fragment of Puebla blue-on-white majolica (Fig. 8b)
and three pieces of salt glazed stoneware from Feature 1. A second sherd of French
faience (Fig. 8C) and a piece of majolica were found in association with Feature 7.

Ring or Crucifix Set
Total: 1
A clear glass set mounted in a brass frame is similar to examples recovered from the
Spanish Fort sites on upper Red River.

Button
Total: 1
One white metal button with a floral pattern on the front and a border of small
triangular designs around the edge was found in association with Feature 1. The word
"DEPOSE" and a double "T" are on the back (Fig. 8D).

Rivet
Total: 1
A small, handwrought rivet (Feature 1) is made from sheet brass. Numerous rivets of
this type are in collections from the Norteno sites (Harris and Tunnell 1967: Fig. 48).
These items were used to make kettle repairs, horse trappings or other repair jobs.

Horse Trappings
Total: 5
Iron fragments of Spanish bridle bits include: a bridle cannon (Fig. 8I) from Feature 1,
two chain links (Fig. 8J,K) -- Feature 1 and Feature 7, a fragmentary cheek plate with
engraved lines (Fig. 8N) associated with Feature 1, and another fragmentary cheek plate
from Feature 8.

Knives
Total: 10
For several years collections of metal knives have been studied from historic sites,
and, as a result, it is now possible to recognize several types. Some of the types can be
identified as to country of origin by blade shape (Harris et al. 1966:7-8).
A complete French case knife (Fig. 8F) has the name "COOBON" stamped near the
butt. Directly above this name is stamped an oval emblem with a cross on top. The
provenience of the knife is Feature 7. A knife of this same maker was recovered from the
Gilbert Site (Harris, Harris and Woodall 1967:23).

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

127

A

©

D

FIGURE 7. European Trade Axes. A, pipe tomahawk; B-E, trade axes.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

128

I

0

I

2

3

4

5

FIGURE 8. European Trade Good.s’. A,C, faience sherd; B, Puebla blueon-white majolica; D, metal button; E, French clasp knife, Type 1 ; F,
French case knife; G, knife blade fragment; H, case knife; I, bridle
cannon; J,K, chain links from bits; L, strike-a-light; M, possible
strike-a-light-; N, bridle cheek plate; O, carpenter’s knife?; P, briefcase lock; Q, lead pendant; R, brass pendant; S-U, tinklers.

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

129

A new type of case knife (Fig. 8H) from Feature 5 is too oxidized for any names to be
visible, even after cleaning. The shape of the blade resembles French clasp knife Type 1
(Harris et el. 1965:350). This type of knife was mounted in a wooden handle probably
through a ferule similar to one recovered from Feature 4.
Another French clasp knife, Type 1 (Fig. 8E) is too oxidized for cleaning but a single
letter "E" was raised by x-ray. Provenience of the item is Feature 6.
The mid-section of a knife blade (Fig. 8G) is probably from a case knife. The name
"CLAUDE POLIVET" stamped in two rows was raised by cleaning. A mid-section of a
case knife blade found near the stockage (Yscani area) of the Longest Site in Jefferson
County, Oklahoma, also had this name on it (Bell et el. 1967). A similar specimen from
the Gilbert Site bears the same name (Jelks 1967).
Six other fragmentary specimens from the site are too small to warrant further
description.

Scissors
Total: 1
A fragment of a pair of scissors (from Feature 8) is in too poor condition to warrant
cleaning or measurement.

Pendants
Total: 2
A triangular brass pendant (Fig. 8R) has cut marks along portions of the edges,
perhaps a result of cutting the piece from sheet brass. A small punched hole is located in
one corner. The specimen is made from 21 gauge brass. Its provenience is Feature 1.
A lobe-shaped pendant made from 20 gauge sheet lead has two holes punched
through it (Fig. 8Q). The specimen is from Feature 2.

Tinklers
Total: 16
In order to make tinklers, a piece of sheet brass was cut into a blank and then rolled to
finish. A blank from Feature 6 is made from 25 gauge brass. Complete tinklers from the
site are made from the following gauges: 4 of 25 gauge, 9 of 23 gauge, i of 21 gauge and 2
of 19 gauge. Provenience of these items is: Feature I (4), Feature 6 (7), Surface (5). Three
specimens are shown in Figure 8S-U.

Carpenter Tool
Total: 1
A wrought iron tool fragment with what appears to be an engraved design on both
sides of the blade may be a part of a knife (Fig. 80). Part of the blade and all of the handle
are missing. If the specimen were complete, one might be able to judge whether this
artifact was a draw knife, froe or block knife. The edge of the blade opposite the cutting
edge has been flattened. This type of use is seen many times on the back edges of draw
knives and froes as they were used to cut or split boards or shingles. Many early settlers
used draw knives, block or froes for all wood work (Sloane 1964:9, 31, 39). The
engraved design is very much like some present on Spanish horse trappings.

Metal Scraper
Total: 1
An iron scraper recovered from Feature 4 measures 45 mm. long by 25 mm. wide and
varies in thickness from 1 to 2 ram. This type of scraper which was inserted into a

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

wooden handle is of a type also present from the Spanish Fort sites (Bell et al. 1967) and
the Gilbert Site (Jelks 1967). They appear to be made from the flattened thin parts of gun
barrels and lock plates from guns or any other available piece of flat iron.

Bells
Total: 2
A small fragment of a brass sleigh bell is decorated with a floral decoration. The
provenience of the specimen which is too fragmentary to determine size is from Feature
1.
A small fragment of a hawk bell was found on the general surface.

Strike-a-lights
Total: 5
A complete strike-a-light (Fig. 8L) is oval and somewhat like a flattened chain link in
appearance. It measures 68 mm. long by 31 ram. wide and about 3 ram. in thickness.
Fragments of the same type of strike-a-light have been recovered from the Spanish Fort
sites (Bell et al. 1967). A complete specimen of this type was found in Grave 17 in the
Old Birch Island Cemetery on Georgian Bay, Ontario (Greenman 1951: Plate XIX,D).
Items found at Old Birch Island appear to be the result of French trade. The additional
fragments of this same type of strike-a-light were found on the general surface of the
site.
An iron ring (Fig. 8M) recovered from Feature I may have been used as a strike-a-light
as a similar item identified as a round strike-a-light was associated with Grave 18 at Old
Birch Island Cemetery (Greenman 1951: Plate XIX, A).

Briefcase Lock
Total: 1
Part of a brass or bronze briefcase lock (Fig. 8P) from Feature 1 is of a type made in
France near the end of the 18th Century (Allemagne 1967: Plate 61).

Kettle Fragments
Total: 6
One fragment of a rim of an iron kettle was found in Feature 6. It is from a round,
shallow kettle with three legs. In its rusted condition, the thickness of the kettle wall is 4
ram. Three other fragments of this type are among the inventory from the site.
A fragment of the rolled rim of a kettle is made of 22 gauge brass, It is from the general
surface.
The fragment of a brass kettle rim (Found on the general surface) has two handwrought rivets in place. The kettle fragment is 22 gauge.
A small piece of 26 gauge decorated brass was associated with Feature 1. The design
was made by pressing two straight ribs in the sheet brass.

Metal Scrap
Total: 118
These fragments, all from Area A, are considered to be the scrap cut away and residue
of metal discarded in the process of making various artifacts. They can be broken down
as follows:

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

131

Iron: 68 fragments
Brass: 44 fragments of six gauges
gauge

no.

25

15

22

8

19

18

17

1

16

1

15

1

Lead: 5 fragments of 20 gauge
The gauge of the iron scrap was not determined because of the extremely rusty
condition of the items. The brass scrap of all gauges appears to represent kettle brass.
The lead scrap probably is the result of making patches to cushion flints in the vise jaws
of guns. Although the sample is small, the inhabitants of the site appear to be obtaining
sheet lead of one thickness (20 gauge) for this purpose.

Glass and Shell Trade Beads
The use of European trade beads (i.e. glass and shell beads of non-Indian origin) as
time markers has been under study for a number of years. A description of the manufacture of these items and their occurrence in Texas and Oklahoma sites relevant to this
study can be found in Harris and Harris 1967. The relative positions and utility of these
items as time markers is based at present on inter-site comparisons and documentary
correlation (Harris and ~Iarris 1967:156-158). The bead types as expressed here result
from this study.
In the following descriptions, a standard color chart (Bustanoby 1947:28-29, Plate 8)
has been used to indicate the hues of the beads. It should be noted that bead surfaces are
frequently altered by age and weathering and it is sometimes difficult to determine the
original color. However, the color can often be restored by immersing the beads in a
weak solution of muriatic acid for about two hours and then washing in water. It is
surprising how many beads that would have otherwise been classified as "dirty white"
turn out to be red, green, yellow, or blue when cleaned.
General terms are used to describe the bead shapes: barrel-shaped, donut-shaped,
round, and tube-shaped (bugle). Some of the larger (necklace) beads are described as
being olive-shaped. This term was taken from an early 18th century document
(Thwaites 1959:143) and was apparently widely used by the French to describe certain
of the trade beads.
There is documentary evidence that Indians used the larger beads mainly for necklaces and the small and medium-sized ones principally on skins, garters, and the like.
The large beads will here be referred to as necklace beads, the medium and small ones
as garter beads. The beads were sorted into size groups as follows:
0-2 mm. -- extra small
2-4 mm. -- small
4-6 mm. -- medium
over 6 mm.- large

(The measurements are for bead
diameter measured perpendicular
to the hole axis. Length
is disregarded in this

classification.)
At the end of each type description, it will be indicated whether the bead is tumbled
(ends smoothed by placing in hot drum with sand and ashes), untumbled (with ends
left sharp) and/or twisted (while the hot canes were being stretched lengthwise). The

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

abbreviations T, UT, and TW wilt be used to indicate these respective manufacturing
processes.
The glass beads are classified into three categories on the basis of structure: simple,
compound and complex.
Simple beads are those composed of a monolithic, structurally undifferentiated mass
of glass. Both hollow-cane and mandrel-wound forms are common. Mandrel-wound
beads were made by winding a hot thread of glass around a wire or mandrel.
Compound beads are those consisting of two or more layers of glass. These are
normally hollow-cane beads.
Complex beads are those having decorative designs made of tiny glass elements that
are pressed into the bead.
Examples of some of these types are shown in Figure 9. An asterisk (*) next to a
number indicates that it is illustrated.

Glass Bead Types
No. 1.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The
glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 10 specimens.
No. 2.* Large, white, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 8 specimens.
No. 3.*Large, white, opaque, round necklace bead of simple construction. The glass
is porcelain-like in texture. T. 5 specimens.
No. 4.*Large, white, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead, of compound construction.
The inner layer of glass has a porcelain-like texture, while the outer layer is clear glass
but has a slightly frosted appearance, probably due to age. T. 6 specimens.
No. 5.* Medium, white, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead, of compound construction. The inner layer of glass has a porcelain-like texture, while the outer layer is clear
glass but has a slightly frosted appearance, probably due to age. T. 94 specimens.
No. 6* Medium, white, opaque, olive-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The
glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 3 specimens.
No. 8.* Large, light grayish-white, semi-translucent, donut-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass has a frosted-like appearance similar to No. 7. T. 6
specimens.
No. 9.* Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving
it a texture reminiscent of stripped sugarcane. T. 11 specimens.
No. 10.* Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving it a texture
reminiscent of stripped sugarcane. T. 44 specimens.
No. 11.* Medium, Peacock Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving it a texture
reminiscent of stripped sugar cane. T. 40 specimens.
No. 12.*Large, Turquoise Blue, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 1 specimen.
No. 13.* Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass is often cane-like in appearance. T. 1 specimen.
No. 14.* Medium, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. T. 1 specimen.
No. 15.* Medium, Gobelin Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 8 specimens.
No. 20.* Large, white, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with four dark blue stripes which are evenly

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

2

133

14

41

56

15

44

57

20

45

60

21

47

61

48

68

23

76

6

49
24
77
5O

86

26
51

lO

28

29

12

103

53

g~: :>~

30

54
ii

13

31

55

FIGURE 9. Glass Trade Beads. Sample of trade bea ds from Site 41 B W 5.

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

spaced and parallel the long axis. The white glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 1
specimen.
No. 21.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction.
The bead surface is covered with three blue stripes which are evenly spaced and
parallel to the long axis. The white glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 1 specimen.
No. 23.* Large, bluish-white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with three longitudinal sets of three blue stripes
spaced evenly around the bead. The bluish-white glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 6
specimens.
No. 24.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction.
Extending longitudinally across the surface of the bead are three sets of stripes, each of
which is composed of two red stripes, and between these, a blue stripe. The white glass
is porcelain-like in texture. T. 2 specimens.
No. 26.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction.
The bead surface is covered with three sets of three blue stripes which are twisted in an
S-shape around the bead. The white glass is porcelain-like in texture. The inner layer of
glass is bluish-white. TW. T. 3 specimens.
No. 28.* Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction.
The bead surface is covered with six rather evenly distributed red stripes which are
twisted around the bead in an S-shape. The white glass is porcelain-like in texture. TW.
T. 2 specimens.
No. 29.* Large, Emerald Green, translucent, barrel-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with eight white stripes, rather evenly spaced
and parallel to the long axis. T. 4 specimens.
No. 30.* Large, Brittany Blue, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead of
complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with three evenly spaced sets
of stripes, each of which is composed of two white stripes, and between these, a red
stripe. T. 2 specimens.
No. 31.* Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of
complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with five white stripes twisted
S-like around the bead. TW. 1 specimen.
No. 41.* Large, milk-glass, eight-faceted necklace bead of mandrel-wound, pressed
facet, simple construction. The surface sometimes appears frosted, probably due to age.
2 specimens.
No. 44.* Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The
glass has a porcelan-like texture. T. 108 specimens.
No. 45.* Small, white, opaque donut-shaped garter bead of compound construction.
The inner layer has a porcelain-like texture, and the outer layer is clear but has a slightly
frosted appearance, probably due to age. T. 901 specimens.
No. 46. Small, Peacock Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass of this bead has a sugarcane-like texture. T. 1030 specimens.
No. 47.* Small, Gobelin Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass has a porcelain-like texture. T. 36 specimens.
No. 48. Small, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, donut-shaped garterbead of simple
construction. T. 20 specimens.
No. 49.* Small, clear, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. T. 6 specimens.
No. 50.* Small, black, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The
glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 35 specimens.
No. 51.* Small, red, opaque {outer layer), donut-shaped garter bead of compound
construction. The outer layer of opaque glass is brick red, and the inner layer is a

B]~NARD DE LA HARPE

135

translucent light green. This bead is generally referred to as "Cornaline d’Aleppo" T. 38
specimens.
No. 53.* Large, milk-glass, translucent, round necklace bead of mandrel-wound
construction. 2 specimens.
No. 54.* Large, milk-glass, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of mandrelwound simple construction. 1 specimen.
No. 55.* Large, red, opaque (outer layer), tube-shaped (bugle) necklace bead of
compound construction. The outer layer of opaque glass is brick red and the inner layer
is a translucent light green. This bead is generally referred to as "Cornaline d’Aleppo,"
but in this case the bead stock was broken into tube-shaped beads. T. 4 specimens.
No. 56. * Small, Brittany Blue, opaque, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead, of
simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 6 specimens.
No. 57.* Small, red, opaque (outer layer), tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead
of compound construction. The outer layer of opaque glass is brick red and the inner
layer is translucent light green. This bead is the same as No. 55 except the diameter
equals that of a small size bead. T. 35 specimens.
No. 60.* Small, Gobelin Blue, opaque tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 3 specimens.
No. 61.* Small, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of simple construction. T. 13 specimens.
No. 63. Small, Colonial Yellow, translucent, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace
bead of simple construction. T. 2 specimens.
No. 64. Small, white, opaque, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of simple
construction. T. 15 specimens.
No. 65. Small, white, opaque, tube-shaped (short bugle) garter or necklace bead of
compound construction. The inner layer has a porcelain-like texture while the outer
layer has a slightly frosted appearance. UT. 62 specimens.
No. 66. Small, black, opaque, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of simple
construction. The glass of this bead is porcelain-like in texture. UT. 2 specimens.
No. 67. Small, red, opaque (outer layer), tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead
of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with three evenly spaced
sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two white stripes, and between these, a red
stripe. The inner layer is translucent light green. This appears to be a variety of
"Cornaline d’Aleppo" with addition of stripes. T. 34 specimens.
No. 68.* Small, red, opaque (outer layer), tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead
of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with three evenly spaced
sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two white stripes and, between these, a
chocolate brown stripe. The inner layer is translucent light green. This appears to be a
variety of "Cornaline d’Aleppo" with the addition of stripes. T. 18 specimens.
No. 69. Small, dark amber, opaque, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of
complex construction. The surface is covered with nine alternating red and white
stripes which run parallel to the long axis of the bead. T. 1 specimen.
No. 70. Small, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, tube-shaped (bugle) garter or necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with three evenly
spaced sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two white stripes, and between
these, a red stripe. T. 1 specimen.
No. 76.* Large, black, opaque, donut-shaped necklace bead of simple construction.
The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 1 specimen.
No. 77.* Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, donut-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. T. 3 specimens.

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

No. 78. Medium, pearly white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. T. 1 specimen.
No. 79. Small Sky Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. T.
30 specimens.
No. 80. Small, Peacock Blue, translucent donut- to barrel-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. T. 21 specimens.
No. 81 Small, Colonial Yellow to Brass colored, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. The glass often has a cane-like texture. T. 3 specimens.
No. 82. Small, Colonial Yellow to Brass colored, translucent donut-shaped garter
bead of simple construction. T. 2 specimens.
No. 83. Small, Emerald Green, translucent, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. T. 11 specimens.
No. 86.* Large, brick red, opaque, donut-shaped necklace bead of compound construction. The outer layer of glass is brick red, and the inner layer is translucent light
green. This bead is generally referred to as "Cornaline d’Aleppo." T. 3 specimens.
No. 96. Medium, black, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction.
The glass is porcelain-like in texture. T. 4 specimens.
No. 97. Large, Colonial Yellow, semi-translucent, barrel-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. T, 3 specimens.
No. 98. Medium, Colonial Yellow, semi-translucent, donut-shaped, garter bead of
simple construction. T. 3 specimens.
No. 99. Medium, Brick Red, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of compound construction. The inner layer is translucent green. This type is generally referred to as
"Cornaline d’Aleppo." T. 3 specimens.
No. 101. Medium, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace or garter bead of mandrelwound simple construction. 15 specimens.
No. 102. Medium, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace or garter bead of mandrelwound simple construction. The surface has four pressed facets. 3 specimens.
No. 103.* Medium, Harvard Crimson, translucent, olive-shaped garter or necklace
bead of mandrel-wound simple construction. 2 specimens.
No. 104. Medium, Harvard Crimson, translucent, olive-shaped necklace or garter
bead of mandrel-wound simple construction. The surface of the bead has four pressed
facets. 1 specimen.
No. 105. Medium, pink and white, opaque necklace or garter bead of mandrel-wound
construction. The surface of the bead has three pressed facets. It appears that two colors
of hot glass threads (one pink and the other white) were wound on to the mandrel at the
same time, giving the bead a marbled appearance, i specimen.
No. 106. Medium, turquoise, opaque, olive-shaped necklace or garter bead of
mandrel-wound compound construction. The outer layer of glass is turquoise and the
inner layer is white. The surface of this type is nearly always badly pitted, i specimen.
No. 107. Medium, dark Bluebird Blue, semi-translucent, olive-shaped necklace or
garter bead of mandrel-wound simple construction. 2 specimens.
No. 108. Medium, black, olive-shaped, opaque necklace or garter bead of mandrelwound simple construction. 2 specimens.
No. 115. Medium, Bluebird Blue, donut-shaped, translucent necklace or garter bead
of complex construction. On the surface are four rather evenly spaced white stripes
which run parallel with the axis of the bead core. T. 1 specimen.
No. 118. Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of complex construction.
Two red stripes and two blue stripes alternate around the bead, the stripes running
parallel with the bead axis. T. 4 specimens.

Bi~NARD DE LA HARPE

137

No. 128. Extra small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. T. 177 specimens.
No. 137. Medium, white, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead of simple construction.
T. 6 specimens.
No. 138. Medium, Peacock Blue, translucent, barrel-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. T. 2 specimens.
No. 155. Extra small, Peacock Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving it a
texture reminiscent of stripped sugarcane. T. 18 specimens.
No. 169. Medium, dark Bluebird Blue, semi-translucent, "somewhat" olive-shaped
necklace or garter bead of mandrel-wound, pressed facet, simple construction. There
are eight pressed facets. 1 specimen.

DISCUSSION OF GLASS BEAD TYPES
Total:2958
La Harpe’s Nassonite Post was occupied over a relatively long time period; the total
span being from 1719 to 1778. Glass trade beads were found in association with all of
the features at the site and some over the general surface. Based on the kinds of beads
collected from the individual features, some appear to have earlier types than others.
Features 7 and 8 have beads associated with them which date to the period of establishment of the post in 1719. The bead types are: 1-6, 8-15, 20, 21,23, 24,26,28-31,41, 53
and 54. These types occur in large numbers at other Historic Period sites dating from
1700 to 1740 in their spans of known occupancy (e.g., Harris and Harris 1967:156).
Features 1-6 have bead types of a later period associated with them and therefore are
assumed to be younger than the above mentioned feature. New bead types that appear
in the trade after 1740 are: 57, 60, 61, 66-69, 76-83, 86, 87, 96, 97 and 99 (Harris and
Harris 1967:156).
An unusually large number of beads are associated with Feature 1. The numbers and
estimated age of the bead types present suggest that this may be the site of Alex
Grappe’s little fort and trading house built shortly after he settled at the site in 1737.

Shell Bead Types
No. 1. Small, white or purple banded, tube-shaped bead. The drilled hole is very
uniform in size through the bead and probably was made with a metal drill as it does not
appear hour-glass-shaped like typical Indian drilling. The bead is about 12 ram. long.
No. 2. Small, white or purple banded, tube~shaped bead. The hole is of uniform
diameter throughout. Length is about 6 mm.

DISCUSSION OF SHELL TRADE BEADS

Total: 18
Shell wampum (identification by Arthur Woodward, personal communication) at
the site is of two colors. Twelve specimens are made of dark purple shell and six are
made from white shell.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

138

Gun Parts, Gunflints, Ball and Shot*
BA CKGROUND
The process of reliably identifying the components of guns used in
the French trade continues to be in a formative stage. Hamilton
(1960a:1-15; 1960c:126; 1960e:208) pioneered this effort and proposed that certain breech and bore dimensions were indicative of guns
used in the 18th century French or English trade. Hamilton’s proposal
was substantiated and enlarged by other research involving historic
sites by Harris et al. (1965:316-341), Blaine and Harris (1966:33-81),
and Blaine (1967:163-177) wherein these and additional components
of such guns were discussed and proposed. Hamilton (1964) has now
brought together and interpreted the results of such research and
offered provisional types, affording a valuable overview of chronology and trade relationships.
These data can be most useful to the archeologist working with
historic sites but a word of caution about comparative work is necessary. Any comparison with gun parts described here, and in other
reports, should be done with discretion. An accurate interpretation of
some parts, such as a cock, can depend upon the entire historic
assemblage from the site, as well as the particular gun parts assemblage. For example, a "cock" of given appearance could represent
either French, English, or other manufacture, depending upon the
determination of its quality or age.
It is presumed that all parts described herein are from flintlocks.
Wherever the distinction can be made between flintlock and percussion, or other parts, the type invariably is flintlock in this assemblage.
The general terminology and loci of measurements follows that used
by the Harris et al. (1965), Blaine and Harris (1967) and Blaine (1967)
in discussing guns used in the 18th century trade.
Gunlock Parts
All gun parts are from Area A of the site. Provenience, unless otherwise noted, is
random surface.

Flintlock Cock
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
This cock (Fig. 10A) has a wide comb with a groove in the face. The base of the cock is
flat faced with beveled edges. It is goosenecked (s-shaped) with medium general
curvature and not reinforced, The upper cock jaw and jaw screw are missing.

*The following section on gun parts, gunflints, ball and shot was authored by Jay C.
Blaine.

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

139

Measurements: (no major cleaning) Distance from center of tumbler hole to upper
surface of jaw, 39.0 ram.; total length, 75.0 ram.; jaw width (once edge gone),
19.0+ram.; jaw thickness (maximum at jaw screw hole), 4.3 ram.; comb width (maximum) 10.2 ram.
Frizzen
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
The steel of this frizzen (Fig. 10D,D’) is curved with a beveled front face and rounded
top.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) length of steel, 41.0 mm.; width of steel, 23.0
ram.; thickness at pivot arm 8.0 mm.

Tumbler
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 3
This tumbler (Fig. 10B) is an unbridled type with half and full cock notches and
would be used with a vertical action sear. There is no provision for stirrup or swivel.
The axle shaft has a square end and a threaded hole for the tumbler screw.
Measurements: (after major cleaning) tumbler axle shaft, 9.0 mm. diameter; body, 6.5
mm. thickness.
Sear
No. of Specimens: 1
This sear (Fig. 10C) is a vertical action type. The sear arm is at right angle to sear body;
no back rake.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) sear arm length (including ’body’ thickness),
21.8 ram.; sear body thickness, 6.2 mm.

Sear Spring
No. of Specimens:l
This fragmentary specimen is the upper leaf of a sear spring. It is broken through the
screw loop and in the bend of the spring. It would be used with a vertical action sear.
Measurements: (after major cleaning) width, 9.1 ram.; length 22.0 ram.

Mainspring
No. of Specimens: 1
This mainspring (Fig. 10E) is an internal type and is not designed for use with a
tumbler stirrup or swivel. It is broken across the screw loop.
Measurements: (no cleaning) length of upper leaf to break through screw loop, 45.0
ram.; length of lower leaf, 83.2 ram.; maximum width, 13.0 ram.

Frizzen Springs
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 3 (No. 1)
Frizzen spring No. 1 (Fig. 10G) was not notched for a pan strap and has no antifriction roller. It was designed for attaching to the lockplate with a hidden frizzen
spring screw.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

140

Measurements: (after cleaning) length of lower leaf to center of screw hole, 30.6 nrm.;
length of upper leaf, 43.4 ram.; maximum width (lower leaf), 9.3 ram.
Frizzen spring No. 2 (Fig. 10H) is the same in description as that above.
Measurements: (after cleaning) length of lower leaf to center of screw hole, 32.2 mm.;
length of upper leaf, 41.8 mm. Width not determined because the edges are rusted
away.

A

012545
cm

FIG URE 10. Gun Parts. A ,A ’, trigger gu ard No. 4; B,B ’, trigger gu ard No.
3; C, ramrod guide; D-I, side plates (D, No. 1;E, No. 2; F, No. 4 probable front; G, No. 4 -probable rear; H, No. 3; I, No. 5); J-M, butt
plates (J, No. 2; K, No. 3; L, No. 1. - modified into arrow point); N,
possible side plate fragment (modified into arrow point); O, Be~ton,
Type A, metal arrow point.

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

141

Remarks: The cock, tumbler, sear, sear spring and frizzen springs are suitable in size
and form for use on the ca. 1750 fusil as used in the French trade (Blaine and Harris
1966:35-53, Fig. 10). The frizzen is approximately 4 ram. longer in the pan cover-pivot
arm dimension than those of the 1750 French trade gun and would be suitable for an
earlier or larger (possibly military) gunlock. The mainspring also belongs in the latter
category. I cannot establish that any of these parts came from the same gunlock. The
cock and tumbler are the only parts here that would be required to fit together; these do
not.

Gun Barrel Parts

Breech Plugs
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 3 (No. 1)
Breech plug No. 1 (Fig. 10I) is iron and has a lateral hole through the rear body behind
the screw portion. There is a countersunk screw hole in the tang, and tang screw would
pass downward. A groove on the right face of the cylindrical portion indicates use with
a right hand lock. The tang end is pointed and has straight sides.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) plug screw length, 19 mm. (3/4"); plug screw outer
diameter, 18.7 mm.; height of rear body, 32. ram. (1 1/4").
Breech plug No. 2 (Fig. lOJ) is the rear portion of an iron breech plug. The screw
portion (barrel plug) is broken away and most of the tang is also missing.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) height, 30 mm. (about 1 3/16").
Remarks: Breech plug No. 1 is probably from the 18th century military musket. The
estimated bore size, (.65-.68), length of threaded plug and the tang end shape argue
against such presently accepted attributes of French or English 18th century trade guns
(Hamilton 1960e:208; Blaine and Harris 1966:61). The bore size and breech diameter
proposed could agree with that for Hamilton’s "Type A" French trade gun, 1680-1730
(Hamilton 1968:p. 3) but on the basis of personal observation, the "Type A" tang end is
shaped differently. Breech plug No. 2 can only be said to match the outer breech
diameter of late 17th century and 18th century French trade fusils or 18th century
military muskets.

Breech Sections
No. of Specimens: 2
Provenience: Feature 3 (No. 1)
Breech section No. 1 (Fig. 10F) is a portion of an iron gun barrel breech, octagonal,
and with breech plug in place. The breech plug tang has been hammered down against
the body of the breech plug. The touch hole is on the right side and is brass lined (a
repair, drilled off-center). The front of the breech is broken evenly and shows two layers
of metal about the bore at this point (lap forging?).
Measurements: (after cleaning) bore, slightly oval from pounding, estimated at 14.8
mm. to 15 mm.; maximum diameter of breech across flats, 28.5 mm.; total length, 67.0
mm.

Breech section No. 2 (Fig. 10K) is iron, octagonal and in two sections. The breech
plug has been removed and the breech is mushroomed at this end. The breech has been
partially collapsed by lateral pounding and the bore is not measurable. A touch hole is
present.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) breech diameter across flats, (below "mushroom"), 28.5 mm.; breech length (combined), 16.2 mm.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

142

Remarks: Breech section No. 1 is probably from an 18th century French trade gun.
The dimensions are in agreement both in caliber and breech diameter. Breech No. 2 is in
two sections. The bore is not measurable; judging by the outer breech form and
diameter it can only be said to be suitable for a 17th-18th century French trade fusil or
18th century military musket.

Barrel Section
This specimen is a flattened section of gun barrel with a longitudinal split.
Measurements: (no major cleaning) length, 10.5 mm.
Remarks: No bore size or particular affiliation can be estimated for the gun barrel
section. It was a seemingly common Indian practice to collapse discarded gun barrels
by pounding, and by bending their thin sections, separating these from the breeches. By
further pounding the barrel, or its segments, were split into halves. These flat halves
were apparently fashioned into useful articles such as awls, scrapers, and projectile
points. The smooth bore barrels used on guns in the French trade were octagonal and
thick in the breech, or chamber, area; round and thin forward of the breech. The breech
area is tapered and merges smoothly with the round forward barrel area.

Gun Mountings
Side Plates
No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 1: No. 2, No. 4C, No. 6; Feature 3: No. 1
Side plate No. 1 (Fig. 11D) is made of cast brass, flat, with slightly beveled face edges.
It is a center portion, being broken at each end. It is engraved with single line borders
and a scalloped design with floral arrangement. There is a single side, or lock, screw
hole in the uppermost portion. It has oxidized to a black finish. The edges are slightly
undercut for inlaying.
Measurements: thickness, 1.85 mm. to 1.95 mm.; length, 73.0 mm.
Side plate No. 2 (Fig. 11E), of cast brass, is flat with edges beveled toward the interior.
It has been partially cut and then broken across the upper lock plate screw hole, and is
broken at the other end. It is engraved with scrolls and a scalloped design. The portion
of lower border remaining is contoured (fancy outline). This is a mid-section.
Measurements: thickness 1.9 mm. to 2.0 ram.; length 22.0 ram.
Side plate No. 3 (Fig. 11H) is made of flat cast brass. The plate is beveled on the
exterior face along the top and bottom. The edges bevel toward the interior for inlaying.
This is a front section, broken across the widest portion ahead of the location of the
upper lock plate screw. The front end is broken across the front lock plate screw hole. It
is engraved with a simple abstract design containing three ellipses, one large and two
small.
Measurements: thickness, 1.5 mm. to 1.7 mm.; length, 57.0 mm.
Side plate No. 4 (Fig. 11F,G) includes two sections, probably fragments of the same
side plate, and is made from flat cast brass. The edges bevel toward the interior. The
shorter piece is part of the front section; the longer piece is part of the rear section. It is
engraved along the borders with double parallel lines and with a foliate design in the
rear section. This side plate is for a two side screw lockplate.
Measurements: thickness (shorter piece) 1 mm.; length 22.0 ram; thickness (longer
piece) 1 mm.-1.4 mm.; length 44.0 mm.
Side plate No. 5 (Fig. 11I) is made of flat, cast brass. The face edges are beveled. This is
a rear part of the side plate and is broken across both ends. It is poorly engraved; the
design was apparently a bow and quiver motif.

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

143

Measurements: thickness, 0.7 mrn. to 1.0 ram.; length 23.0 rnm.
Specimen No. 6 (Fig. 11N) is a possible side plate fragment and was made into a
point. It is made of cast, flat brass, and was engraved. Basal edges are chisel or knife cut
and lightly roughened. It is broken above the widest portion (across the blade). The
engraving motif is not identified.
Measurements: thickness 0.9 ram. to 1.0 ram.; length 20.0 ram.
Remarks: Side plate No. 1 matches well in size, form and general decorative technique to examples believed typical of the ca. 1750 French trade guns (Harris et al.
1965:327-332; Blaine and Harris 1966:68-71). The engraved design features what I
believe is a conventionalized sea shell from which floral elements extend. This cockelshell or scallop motif appears to be one of importance in French trade gun decoration. I
have seen eleven side plate examples from Texas and Oklahoma sites alone. The
"conventionalized" sea shell detail on these side plates has proven difficult to identify.
Elsewhere the author referred to such as a "design which, solely for descriptive
purposes, may be said to resemble an inverted wicker basket" (Blaine 1967:172, Fig.
55,g), and "what appears to be a basket containing a plant" (Blaine and Harris 1966:69,
Fig. 38h). When used on French trade side plates the sea shell element is roughly
"centered" on the upper screw hole; the Gilbert specimen (ibid.) is an exception to the
rule. In addition, there frequently are two floral (sometimes floral-foliate) elements
extending from the shell border, lending design balance to the front and rear areas of the
side plate. Customarily the engraver has rendered the shells’ narrowly spaced radial
ridges, and/or a simplistic version of the scale-like processes that often cover the ridges
on some shells. Invariably the scalloped or crimped shell edge is emphasized. Sometimes compounding the identification problems are such general gun decoration motifs
as "sun ray" or "sun burst." However, these usually exhibit a spiked or multi-pointed
appearance and are sometimes contained within areas with a smooth circular (not
scalloped) border. Thus far I have not encountered the latter motifs on French trade gun
parts.
I believe this particular side plate decoration, as a frequent motif on guns associated
with the French trade, probably dates from ca. 1750. To date only one atypical side plate
decoration of this nature has been found at the Gilbert site. This French trade oriented
site demonstrably had some occupation at least as late as 1749, according to the date on
a coin (Harper et al. 1966: Fig. 44, g; 94). The earliest dated side plate I am aware of
which suggests this motif is on a Spanish gun dated 1724 (Neal 1955: Fig. 11). This
particular firearm follows French styling in general form and decoration. Some details
of the side plate decoration strongly suggest to me that this gun, or yet unpublished
French guns or gun decoration pattern sheets, could have been a direct inspiration for
sundry details on the patterns of De Marteau dating 1743 and 1749 (Lenk 1965:P1.
130,1-2). In any case, rococo decoration showing the strong use of crimped sea shell
and/or sea shell-scroll details on fine guns generally dates after the publication of De
Marteau’s patterns. Examples occur through and beyond the rest of the 18th century; for
instances of these see Lenk 1965 (P1.93,3); Neal 1965 (P1.20; P1.24; P1.30; P1.56). The
general availability and use of this motif for decoration of common grade guns probably
dates from De Marteau’s 1749 sheet, which also appears to be the most suitable for
copying by the less skilled engravers. The use of such pattern sheets to help identify the
sources and starting times for major use of particular firearm decoration has been
discussed by Harris et al. (1965:318-320), Blaine and Harris (1966:71) and Hamilton
(1968:13). Boudriot illustrates a gunlock from the French model 1754-59 infantry
officers "Fusil" which is engraved in this fashion (Boudriot 1963: P1.6, P1.7).
The decorative motif of crimped shell work, often combined with ’C’ scrolls, is a
rococo style ornamentation. The use of "rococo" style ornamentation on quality French
firearms began in the 1730’s (Hayward 1963:48). In describing some rococo ornaments
executed on fine weapons with this particular type of detail the term "rocaille" has

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

144

A

¢

D

G

\\

lI

N

o

cm

FIGURE 11. Gun Parts. A, flintlock cock; B, unbridled tumbler; C, sear;
D,D’, steel frizzen; E, mainspring (internal); F,K, breech sections; G,H,
frizzen springs; I3, breech plugs.

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

145

been selectively used by Hayward (1963:112,238, P1.67 a,b; PI.75 a; P1.80). The general
category is rococo but, according to the McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Art (1969:529-530),
the French reserve the term "style rocaille" for their own creations. For these, and other
reasons, it would be unsuitable to use the term rocaille when describing the simplified
decoration of the less than fine firearms and of unknown actual origin reported here.
Authoratively described "rocaille style" work shows that usual kev elements are ’C’
and/or ’S’ scrolls fringed with sea shell edges or texturi~ng (Allemagne
1968:122,203,204). Such compositions also may contain the representation of a sea
shell itself. However, the rendition of a sea shell (i.e. the scallop or cockle), without
shell fringed ’C’ or ’S’ scrolls, does not qualify the design as basically rocaille.
Side plate No. 2 also has a sea shell design centering on the upper lock plate screw
hole. No floral or foliate design elements show on this fragment. The decorative
contouring of the lower edge of the plate is slight in degree and uncommon in most
unfretted flat side plates (Hamilton 1968: Fig. 6). This particular feature could reflect an
earlier fashion, that is, that of the fretted and well-contoured side plates as used on
French trade guns ca. 1720 (Harris et al., 1965:327-332, Fig. 13). Nonetheless, I believe
the cockleshell motif dates it in the second half of the 18th century as used on guns
associated with the French trade. Furthermore, it could occur with diminishing frequency to as late as the 1790’s, at which time the Spanish forbade trade between the
Texas Indians and the Louisiana traders.
Side plate No. 3 shows decoration simplified to the degree it could be called abstract.
The ’V’ shaped element at the forward end of the under portion occupies the same
position as a similarly oriented ribbon on Gilbert Site specimens (Blaine and Harris
1966: Fig. 38,g,i). Small, isolated eliptical elements such as the three present here are
often seen on side plate, butt plate tangs, finial necks, and other areas on French trade
gun mounts. The small "v" adjacent to the front lock screw hole occupies a side plate
area commonly decorated with a foliate element which also is essentially v-shaped,
wide at the base and tapering toward the rear. Because of these features I suspect it to be
one of the imitative but greatly stylized decorations that sometimes occur on these
guns.
Side plate No. 4, as noted, is represented by two sections. The plate between these is
missing; however, the double parallel lines along the upper and lower borders of the
recovered sections match precisely in engraving technique (one deep and heavy, the
other light) and both fragments are unbeveled (an uncommon characteristic) on the face
edges. Since the rear portion is intact, we know the conformation of this plate and we
may infer use with a two side screw lock, one in the front and one on the upper center.
This is common in French trade guns (Blaine and Harris 1966:36-51). The use of a
foliate element in the rear of the plate is a common form of decoration.
Side plate No. 5, like the above, was part of a flat and unfretted side plate. Design
elements featuring combinations of bow, quiver, club and arrows are frequent on, but
not restructed to, French trade guns in use by ca. 1750 (Blaine and Harris 1966:65-66,
Figs. 36,38).
Specimen No. 6 is, as noted, possibly the remains of a side plate which has been made
into a projectile point.
There is physical evidence that the gunlocks and the brass side plates used on French
trade guns were not manufactured in close collaboration. It frequently appears that
there was difficulty in adapting the side plate to the gunlock side screws. For example.
often placement for the front screw hole in the side plate was forced partially off the
plate, resulting in a semicircular notch instead of a proper hole (Fig. 11H). That this was
an unplanned or expedient procedure is verified by its evident violation of visual
balance originally present in form and decoration of the side plate. Moreover, in such
cases the side screw head then bears on a partial or badly off-center "washer".

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Admittedly, it was a common 18th century practice to bring together gun components from various sources and assemble them. However, the mismatching cited here,
plus other evidence, strongly suggests many of these brass components were in a sense
mass produced. As such they would form an economical source for gun assemblers
dealing in military and common grade French trade firearms.
Butt Plates
No. of Specimens: 4
Provenience: Feature 1: No. 1, No. 2, No. 3
Butt plate No. 1 (Fig. 11L) is a butt plate heel-tang fragment. It is made of brass, with a
portion of engraved design showing an unstrung bow and "quiver" (base of club?). The
fragment has been formed into an arrow head. The stem edges were formed by chisel
cuts and the blade edges bifacially tapered to sharpness by hammering and grinding.
There are hammer marks present over the entire surface and the tip is broken.
Measurements: thickness, 1.2 ram. to 1.8 mm.; length, 39.0 ram.
Butt plate No. 2 (Fig. J} also is a butt plate heel-tang fragment. It is of cast brass and
broken at both ends across the butt plate tang and heel. It is engraved with a crimped
shell scroll design and has been hammered flat.
Measurements: thickness, maximum, 1.9 ram.; width, maximum, 49.0 ram.
Butt plate No. 3 (Fig. 11K) is a brass butt plate section which has been formed into a
large projectile point or a "knife". It has a bifacially sharpened blade. The stem is
roughly chiseled to edge sharp, with hack marks across the edges, making the edges
rough. The surfaces have been hammered or pounded.
Measurements: length, 84.0 mm.; width, maximum, 21.0 mm.; thickness, maximum,
1.9 mm.
Butt plate No. 4 (Fig. 11M) is another butt plate tang-finial fragment. It is flat, cast
brass, with a portion of engraved design featuring what appears to be an idealized tulip
blossom and portions of scrolls. The base of the fastening tongue is present. The
fragment has been made into a projectile point with the sides of the stem formed by
chisel cuts. Small additional cuts were made at right angles to the edge, probably to aid
in hafting. The blade edges and rounded tip are bifacially sharpened.
Measurements: thickness, 1.2 mm. to 2.4 ram.; length 30.0 ram.
Remarks: Butt plate No. 1 is decorated with an unstrung bow, quiver and what
probably is the base of a club. As noted above, this motif was frequently used in
decoration of the ca. 1750 French trade guns.
Butt plate No. 2 (Fig. 11J) is especially noteworthy in its decoration. This is essentially a crimped shell with scroll which almost certainly was copied directly from the
pattern sheet by de Marteau dated 1749 (Hayward 1962:P1.94). It is also possible, but not
as likely, that De Marteau’s pattern sheet of 1743 (Lenk 1965:1~1.130-1) was the direct
inspiration. Other possibilities are discussed above under the remarks on side plates
concerning the French style Spanish gun of 1724. However, the obvious availability,
wide usage and nature of De Marteau’s patterns for gun decoration argue for their
position as the likeliest source.
It is believed that this butt plate belongs with the post ca. 1750 guns associated with
the French trade. I am presently aware of eight other butt plate specimens with this
scroll-shell motif on their tangs. Five are from the Spanish Fort sites in Texas and
Oklahoma. The projected design (Fig. 11J) is based on one of the Spanish Fort exampies. Hamilton (1968: Fig. 7,D) and Good (1971:P1.8,c) each illustrate additional speci-

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

147

mens. Significantly, only one example has been found to date at theca. 1750 Gilbert site
(personal observation). Doubtless many more can be identified in other collections.
Minor variations in this motif are in its placement and orientation; usually shell
down when placed at the junction with the finial neck. and shell up when based below.
In the latter position the shell usually perches atop an enigmatic partial or full engraved
circle. It seems likely this circle is relict to the position and decoration of a butt plate
screw in use during an earlier fashion (Lenk 1965:P1.124-2). The shell-scroll may be
used by itself, with another, and with varied military-trophy like combinations of
banners, spears, bugle and club. Floral or foliate elements sometimes extend from the
scalloped edge. It seems likely the crimped shell decorated side plate and crimped
shell-scroll butt plate saw contemporaneous use; possibly often on the same gun.
Butt plate No. 3 (Fig. 11K) does not offer any special data beyond demonstrating one
secondary utilization of a butt plate body.
Butt plate No. 4 (Fig. 11 H), as noted, shows what resembles an idealized tulip. The
"tulip", as rendered here, is not an uncommon minor detail in gun decoration of the
18th century, including French trade guns.

Ramrod Guide
No. of Specimens: 1
Provenience: Feature 6
This guide (Fig. 11C,), of sheet brass, is either an intermediate or upper ramrod guide.
It is tubular with longitudinal facets and was split or cut evenly lengthwise and
reformed into a cylinder of smaller diameter. There are two parallel grooves filed
around, and adjacent to, each end. A remnant of one flange remains with the bottom
half of a hole for pin fastener present. Immediately below the partial hole another
complete hole has been made.
Measurements: length, 22.8 mm.
Remarks: This ramrod guide is the same as those believed typical of the ca. 1750
French trade guns (Blaine and Harris 1966:56-58; Fig. 35, h,i).

Trigger Guards
No. of Specimens: 6
Provenience: Feature 1: No. 3; Feature 2: No. 4; Feature 6: No. 3; Feature 7: No. 5.
Trigger guard No. 1 is a probable tang fragment. It is of cast brass, broken at both ends
and piano-convex in cross section. The convex surface has been hammered.
Measurements: width, maximum, 13.5 mm.; thickness, maximum, 2.4 mm.; length
23.0 mm.
Trigger guard No. 2 is the rear tang of a cast brass trigger guard. It is piano-convex in
section and has been bent into a "U" shape, with the convex surface inside. It is broken
across one end, the other end smoothed (as for a bracelet,) and has been heavily
hammered.
Measurements: width, maximum, 11.8 ram.; thickness, 2.2 ram.; length, 10 cm.
Trigger guard No. 3 (Fig. 11, B,B’)is a cast brass front tang, broken across the neck of
the finial and across the lower end of the bow. The fastening tongue on the underside is
broken across the pin hole. One edge is evenly nicked (saw?). The bow remnant shows a
single line engraved along and parallel to the right border. There are wide bevels on the
tang.
Measurements: width, maximum (front), 15.6 ram.; thickness at this point, 2.2 ram.

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Trigger guard No. 4 (Fig. 11A,A’) is a fragmentary specimen of cast brass. It is broken
across the bow and across the front tang near the bow. A front fastening tongue is on the
under surface. The bow is engraved with a scalloped line and with a ticked line along
each side. A central design existed but only one foliate scroll portion can be seen. There
is an uncommon boss or protrusion at the front base of the bow.
Measurements: maximum width of bow present, 19.2 mm.; thickness, same location,
1.6 mm.
Trigger guard No. 5 is a badly oxidized iron trigger guard finial.
Measurements: length, 26.0 ram.; width, 11.0 ram.
Trigger guard No. 5 is a badly oxidized iron finial.
Measurements: length, 51.0 mm.; width, 10.0 mm.
Remarks: Trigger guard No. 1, being piano-convex in section, does not appear to be
typical of those believed commonly employed on French trade guns in the period ca.
1720-1750 (Harris et al. 1965:327; Blaine and Harris 1966:80-81). It is noteworthy in
that two pieces of this particular tang have been found. The other fragment is from the
Womack Site (Harris et al., 1965:326, Fig. 12,L).
Trigger guard No. 2 also is a form (piano-convex in section) not held to be typical of
late 17th or 18th century French trade guns.
Trigger guard No. 3, in the portion here, is typical in form of those used on the ca.
1720-1750 French trade gun.
Trigger guard No. 4 is unusual in two respects. The combination of engraved scalloped line and inner ticked line bordering each beveled side of the bow form a
decoration I have not seen before. The boss, or protrusion, at the front base of the bow is
worth special note. A similar attribute occurs on one trigger guard from the Pearson Site
(Duffield and Jelks 1961:Fig. 13, U,V). I believe these guards were cast in molds
originally designed for light military type trigger guards. Originally this protrusion
was functional and, drilled through laterally, served as the base for a sling swivel. This
particular form is found on 18th century military shoulder arms. Some models of the
latter, described as "German-Dutch" in origin (Neuman 1967:M.40, M.41), have trigger
guards which share some similarities with those of various French 18th century light
military models and guns commonly in the French trade (Blaine and Harris 1966:81).
The importance of the Dutch as actual manufacturers of common or military firearms in
the 17th and 18th centuries is difficult to establish, but their major position as traders in
the export of arms is certain (Hayward 1963:158). I believe a major brass founding
center such as Liege (Hayward 1963:165) may well have produced quantities of the
brass furniture used in assembling the "German-Dutch" and other firearms cited above,
possibly including some of the French trade guns.
Trigger guard No. 5 is a front finial for a trigger guard. Iron trigger guards apparently
saw minor use on French trade guns throughout the period of French trade. They are
often quite similar in general form to the typical cast brass specimens (Blaine and Harris
1966:79, Fig. 40,F).
Trigger guard No. 6 may be either a rear finial from an iron trigger guard, or possibly
the tang of a large terminal rampipe. The former is the more likely identification.

Metal Arrow Points
The site yielded four metal points that are presumed to be "arrow" points, and one
large specimen that cannot be classed in the same category. Three of the specimens are
made from brass gun furniture (Fig. 11L-N) and the large specimen (Fig. 11K) also
comes from that source. The fourth "arrow" point (Fig. 110) is made of iron. All of these

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

149

smaller points can be classified as the "Benton Type A". This type of metal point is
estimated to date between the mid-18th and mid-19th centuries and is found associated
with Norteno Focus sites of the southern plains (Harris et al. 1965:30-31,32).

Gun Flints

Spall Gunflints
Gunflints of this form have been referred to as "wedge-shaped spalts" (Witthoft in
Hamilton 1960b:74), "gunspalls" (Hamilton 1960b:76; 1964:52-57), and "spalt gunflints" (Maxwell and Binford 1961:100; Harris et el. 1965:341-343; Blaine and Harris
1966:81-84; Blaine 1967:177-179; Stone 1970:9). Witthofi (1966:25-28) now designates
such gunflints as "Dutch" and Hamilton (personal communication) agrees with this
choice.
Witthoft (1966:25-26) has found the range of colors and materials common to the
"Dutch" gunflints matches uniquely with those found in the Riss glacial outwash and
believes the Low Countries are the origin of all these particular wedge-shaped gunflints. Minor exceptions are described by Hamilton (1964:53) and Witthoft (1966:
30,37).
Such gunflints were first described as struck individually from rounded cobbles
(Hamilton 1960b:73-79). The Harrises and Blaines (Harris et al. 1965:341-343) described examples struck frmn prepared cores, and the technology is discussed by Blaine
and Harris (1966:82-83) and Witthoft (1966:26-28).
Witthoft has also furnished statistical data on the technology of the wedge-shaped
gunflints (1966:26-27). In the sample from this site, thirty-six have intact striking
platforms. Thirty of these (83%) have one facet (plane) platforms and six (17%) have two
facet platforms.
The concave (relatively flat) face of a "Dutch" gunflint is produced on the core by the
prior removal of other gunflints (ibid.) and dressing flakes (Harris et el. 1965:341-343;
Blaine and Harris 1966:81-83). In the sample from this site twenty-eight specimens
have intact concave faces. Of these, seventeen (61%) show one scar and eleven (39%)
have two or more such scars.
These figures do not closely match those given by Witthoft, but all of the majorityminority relationships are in agreement. Witthoft’s percentages are based on large
samples and this sample, from one site, is probably too small for reliable statistical
comparison. The major significance of all such evidence is pointed out by Witthoft
(1966:26); each core reduced by the "Clactonian" technique produces relatively few
gunflints. Waste is high in proportion to finished product. The production of gunflints
of uniformity and desired various sizes must be accomplished in a relatively random
fashion.
There are seventy "Dutch" gunflints from this site. Sixty (Group A) show no signs of
thermal altering, and ten (Group B) do display significant exposure to heating fire, i.e.
are badly pocked or checked with cracks.
In Group A, 52% are light, medium and dark shades of tan in color. Forty percent are
gray to gray-black. Most of the remaining eight percent range from light gray to whitish
in color. The range of colors in Group A correspond with those of specimens whose
source is identified by Witthoft (1966:25-26) as the Riss glacial outwash of the Low
Countries.
Most of Group B has probably undergone color change through the evident thermal
action. The colors are whitish, gray and light pink.
Five of the "Dutch" gunflints have been reshaped in typical native Indian fashion.
Their primary origin is established on the basis of material, color, and some evidence of
the original technology.

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Eleven specimens are notched in a fashion similar to those flints used with a
fire-steel.
Measurements of the nineteen reasonably intact examples shows width clustering
between 28.6 ram. and 30.2 mm. (64%), and length clustering between 20.6 ram. and
22.2 ram. (64%). Width range is 25.4 mm. to 38.1 mm. Length range is 17.5 mm. to 28.6
nlm.

The width of gunflints, as used herein, refers to measurements taken across the
striking edge, and the length refers to measurement from the striking edge to the back or
heel.
The width measurements show a common but perplexing fact. These wedge-shaped
gunflints usually appear too wide (over 25.4 ram.) for a "proper fit" in the gunlocks of
the 18th century French trade. Frizzens on such gunlocks usually measure less than
25.4 mm. in width. The same observation applies to the 18th century French "blade"
gunflints. Witthoft (1966:37) in comparing the British and French gunflint industries,
suggests a paramount position for the French shops in production of military flints. It
seems likely to me that both wide "Dutch" gunflints, as well as "wide French"
gunflints found in Indian sites were produced originally for military needs, hence
"sized" for large gunlocks. It is important to distinguish between the French gunflints
and the flints they produced for use with fire steel. Witthoft (1966:30) states that most
French blade flints produced before 1760 were designed for the fire steel, double edge,
and usually wider than gunflints. Most of the "Dutch" gunflint groups I have examined
from 18th century Indian sites in Texas contain some smaller specimens suitable for the
French trade gunlocks, but the larger specimens usually predominate.

Blade Gunflints
There are eleven French blade gunflints made of the typical yellowish or "blond"
French flint of waxy lustre in varying shades. Two are relatively intact and seven,
although battered, exhibit the basic prismatic blade technique fundamental to their
manufacture. The remaining two specimens are bifacialty re-worked in good native
Indian style.
French (and English) blade gunflints were made by cross-sectioning prismatic
blades of flint which had been struck from carefully prepared cores. Previously I have
referred to such as the "conventional" form of gunflint (Harris et al. 1965:341-343;
Blaine and Harris 1966:81-84; Blaine 1967:178-179) as made in France and England.
However, the use of national designations for gunflints has become intrenched in the
literature. It remains important to note that such use of terms as "Nordic", "Dutch",
"French", and "English" indicates the probable manufacturing source but not necessarily direct trade from that source. Hamilton (1960b:74-75) and Witthoft (1966:24) give
discussion pertinent to such labeling problems.
One of the two intact French gunflints shows reaction bulbs at the bed (face opposite
to the convex face) and, although retouched, clearly recognizable undercut fractures on
both sloping sides as a result of blade segmenting, or trimming of the gunflint; the other
shows this attribute on one side only. These particular technological attributes are
recognizable on nine other French gunflint specimens I have examined from Texas and
Oklahoma site collections of R. K. Harris and myself alone. Eight are from sites whose
contents at present cannot be dated exclusively within the 18th century, although the
major occupation did take place within that period. The ninth, however, is from the
Gilbert Site (Blaine and Harris 1966:33-86) where I believe there is no reason to suspect
occupation after the 1760’s. Woodward (1960:31) quotes Knowles concerning such
technological features. In substance Knowles states the French knappers did not produce side trimming based on single blow undercut fractures and (between 1838-48)

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

151

sent their gunflints to Brandon for such trimming. Witthoft (1966:36) in discussing
British technology, describes the demi-cone (reaction bulb) "on the scar of the micro
burin blow" as a major attribute in identifying the British gunflint manufacturing
technique. Witthoft (1966:32) in recognizing evidence of this technique on some
"French flints" used in 1812, designates them as hybrid, i.e. "made in France and
finished in England".
Both the British and the French knappers placed their blades over a chisel edged
"stake" or "cutter" when segmenting them into gunflints (Woodward, quoting
Knowles, 1951:30-31; Smith 1960:59). According to Knowles (Woodward 1960:31)
when the blade is struck from above in the segmenting operation the "stake" beneath
produces a reaction bulb (demi-cone, knot, mark of percussion). It would appear that
the blade segmenting operation by either British or French knappers can produce the
reaction bulb. Clearly, reaction bulbs and undercut fractures could result with frequency. The British knappers ultimately sought to produce a single undercut (sloping
side) fracture which would require little or no retouch. Successful attempts are shown
on the finest quality British gunflints and, presumably, the "micro burin" technique
described by Witthoft (1966:30) was employed here. These are comparatively rare
among British gunflints I have examined from Indian sites. More common are examples
showing the basic technique with reaction bulb but with frequent secondary trimming
(sometimes extensive) to straighten the sides and back.
The French knappers product does appear relatively indifferent to any attempt to
produce the "classic" single blow side fracture. The shaping of their typical rounded
back gunflint normally would call for a more extensive degree of secondary trimming
than that required by the British knapper for the square back gunflint. It appears this
would frequently, but not always, remove any reaction bulb and tend to obscure any
primary undercut fracture. However, these two attributes do occur on what I believe are
totally French-made 18th century gunflints and, therefore, should not automatically
cause specimens with such attributes to be assigned among those sent from France to
Brandon in the 19th or 18th centuries. The two French gunflint specimens from this
site, showing the above critical attributes, are not to be classed as fine grade or specially
select in any other sense. They are ordinary French blade gunflints of military musket
size, with the typical rounded back and single striking edge. Both measure 28.6 ram. in
width. One is 24.9 ram. long and the other is 26.1 ram.

Possible Gunflints - Native Indian
There are three possible gunflints in this group. Two are sub-rectangular, roughly
bifaced, and one is a flake or "spall" which has been thinned at the heel and has lateral
edge trimming.
The lithic material is varied but none appears to match European sources. One
specimen has apparently been in a fire, one is quartzite-like, and one (the "spall") is a
black jasper. Both of the latter materials can be found in the adjacent Red River gravels.
Remarks: Eighty-one gunflints are of European origin. There are no British specimens. The absence of British gunflints is probably significant. It is the opinion of
Witthoft (1966:36) that the archeological evidence to date indicates British gunflints do
not appear prior to the 1770’s.
Seventy gunflints are classified as "Dutch". Witthoft (1966:25,29) believes the production of this wedge-shaped gunflint starts about 1650 and that they dominated until
the 1770’s when the blade gunflint came into prominence.
The eleven "blade" gunflints are all French in origin. According to Witthoft
(1966:28) some French blade gunflints were being produced by 1675 but exportation in
significant quantity would not occur before 1740. Witthoft (1960:74; 1966:28-29) and

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hamilton (1960:74-79; 1964:53-55) have indicated the proportion of one European type
gunflint to another in a site may offer a valuable index for estimating occupation dates.
Witthoft (1960:74) noted the proportion of "wedge-shaped spalls" (Dutch) to French
gunf!ints was about equal for sites of the French and Indian war period (1755-63). His
later findings (1966:28-29) indicate the Dutch gunflints remain in the majority through
and beyond that period. Stone’s data from Fort Michilimakinac (1970:20) indicates the
Dutch gunflint remained "in common usage" during the period 1761-81 when that
Michigan post was under British control. The results of Hamilton’s research with dated
sites (personal communication) continued to support the approximately equal ratio for
the 1755-63 period. In 1758, according to data given in Peterson (1956:331), a supply
request from French Canada would indicate gunflints for fowling pieces".., to arm the
Indians" were considered a separate class from "clear and transparent flints" for
muskets. The former probably were the smaller size of "Dutch" gunflints and, in this
instance, ordered in a twenty to one ratio over the, presumably, French blade gunflints.
In view of the above data and opinions concerning ratios it appears that variables
such as military vs. non-military and trade orientation of the sample cannot yet be
adequately evaluated toward use in general applications. In our area the present lack of
sufficient comparative data from discretely stratified historic sites of the 18th century
prevents direct comparison with the above hypothesis. The Gilbert Site (occupied
about 1750) does offer a useful sample in quantity; the ratio of Dutch to French gunflints
is slightly over two to one (32 to 13). At the Vinson Site which should date later in the
18th century, according to the firearms sample (personal observation), the ratio of
Dutch to French gunflints is about three to one (11 to 3).
Based upon such results from these and other 18th century historic Indian sites it is
suspected that our western part of the French trade oriented area will show the "Dutch"
gunflint predominating until after about 1770. Further, I suspect it could subsequently
have continued to appear in the trade after being supplanted in military and civilian
use. This was a nondeteriorating commodity produced in vast quantities; it seems
reasonable to anticipate a terminal distribution in numbers (military surplus?) may
occur in the trade periphery after approximately 1770. For these reasons the seven to
one ratio of Dutch to French gunflints from the sample from the Nassonite Post area
cannot in itself, I believe, be a reliable indication of 17th or major early 18th century
occupation. The number of French gunflints does seem to indicate some substantial
post-1740 activity, and the complete lack of English gunflints (within a major artery of
travel) suggests a cessation of major occupation by the 1770’s.
The European gunflint count is unusually large in proportion to the number of native
Indian gunflints and to the firearms sample. In addition, the majority of the European
gunflints have not been utilized, re-worked, or worn out to the discard stage usually
encountered in our Indian sites. Approximately 10% of both the Dutch and French
gunflints are virtually unused. We may speculate that a source of European gunflints
was immediately available to this site, however, more extensive controlled excavation
is necessary for a reliable evaluation. This is also true for the firearms sample.

Shot
Provenience: All area A, random surface
No. of Specimens: 56
In this report all spherical bullets below 90 grains in weight and .40 inches in
diameter are assigned to the shot category. For comparison, these spherical pellets are
categorized according to named sizes and weights given in an early table by Ezekiel
Baker (1780-1832) as given in J. N. George (1947:211).
Shot of the same weight and size can have several different designations according to

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

153

the manufacturer, time period, and country of origin. In fact, according to Greener
(1910:614), in one period shot tables for the cities of Paris, Lyons, and Marseilles had
widely varying numbers of pellets (hence individual pellet weights) assigned to the
same "size". Compounding the issue was the individual manufacturers own range of
different weight pellets allowable within a given size (Greener 1910:610-611). The
foregoing comments concern "dropped" shot in later times, rather than those we are
probably dealing with in this site, but I suspect an equal lack of uniform standards
among all kinds of shot prevailed from the beginning.
According to George (1947:209), dropped shot rapidly replaced milled shot upon the
market after 1769. Before that time large shot were cast in molds and the smaller sizes
were produced by cutting sheet lead into cubes which then were tumbled ("milled") in
iron drums to round off the corners. The minimum practical size for cast shot is
uncertain but early specimens assigned to "swan" size are illustrated by Hamilton
(1960:Fig. 27).
As Greener explains (1910:610-611}, "dropped" pellets whose shape and uniformity
varied from the ideal were still being placed upon the market at the turn of this century.
I have no reason to doubt this was the case from the time of invention in 1769. One
cannot be certain if many smaller shot from a site have been fired or not. The soft lead
normally distorts when fired, but, as noted above, shape can vary even among unfired
pellets. Identifying any dropped shot that belongs with the early site occupation can be
important for it will indicate post 1769 activity. I am not yet familiar with any reliable
visual criteria for identifying commercially manufactured drop shot. Chemical analysis
may offer promise as it was necessary to mix antimony or arsenic with the lead used in
this process (George 1947:209).
The early practice was to grade shot in size with separation done by passing shot
through a series of different size "screens". Thus separated, they were labeled a given
shot "size" according to the number of pellets per ounce or other weight. Obviously,
this too resulted in varying individual pellet weights in a given size. Close matches
between site specimens and listed "sizes" will expectedty be rare and the range
between listed sizes allowed by screen grading can only be estimated.
One possible indication of Indian preference for certain shot sizes is shown by "shot
sieves" being reported from a late historic Indian site (containing flintlock gun parts) by
Howard (1972:296).
By their physical appearance, all shot listed in the table seem not to be modern. Some
five specimens did appear modern and have been eliminated from the study. One
specimen, No. 50, is still definitely recognizable as one of the early "cubes" and was
tumbled just enough to remove the corners.

SHOT TABLE

All Area A,
SPECIMEN
NO.
33
34

MEASUREMENT

WEIGHT

(INCHES)

(GRAINS)
69.85
65.85+

Random Surface
COMMENT

ADAPTION
E.BAKER TABLE
small buck
small buck+

Fired
Underweight. Fired
Underfilled mold
Conical with 6 longitudinal facets on sides?

35

62.35

36

46.33

swan drops

37

44.21+

swan drops+

Fired
Fired. Weight loss obvious

38

39.74

swan drops

Fired

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

154

SHOT TABLE (Continued)
All Area A,

Random Surface

SPECIMEN

MEASUREMENT

WEIGHT

ADAPTION

NO.

(INCHES)

(GRAINS)
28.64+

E.BAKER TABLE
swan drops+

39

26.76
15.84
14.46
12.09
11.97
11.97
8.62
8.62
8.50
8.13

4O
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

5O
51

,166

52
53
54
55

.160

56
57
58
59
6O
61
62

.156

.155

63
64
65
66
67
68
69
7O
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
8O
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88

.147

.138

.130

6.75
6.38
6.13
5.63
5.50
5.25

goose drops
duck shot
duck shot
BB
BB
BB
B
B
B
B+
B
B
B
No. 1
No. 1
No. 1

COMMENT
Air cavity in shot
Underweight. Cast
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired
Fired. Rodent gnawed.
Weight loss obvious
Cuboid
Fired. Ovoid. Possibly cast
Ovoid. Possibly cast
"Tear" shape. Dropped shot?
Ovoid. Possible sprue
scar. Cast?

5.25

No. 1

5.13

No, 1

5.00

No. 1

Ovoid. Possibly cast
Ovoid. Possibly cast

5.00

No. 1

Fired

5.00

No, 1

5.00

No. 1

4.63

No. 2

4.50

No. 2

Ovoid

4.25

No. 2

4.13

No. 2

Fired
Fired

4.00

No. 2

Fired

3.88

No. 2

3.75

No. 2

3.38

No. 3

3.38

No. 3

3.25

No. 3

3.25

No. 3

3.25

No. 3

3.13

No. 3

3.13

No. 3

3.00

No. 4

3.00

No. 4

2.88

No, 4

2.75

No. 4

2.63

No. 4

2.38

No. 5

2.38

No. 5

2.25

No. 5

2.13

No. 5

2.13

No. 5

1.88

No. 5

1.75

No. 6

1.63

No. 7

Fired
Fired
Fired

Fired
Fired
Fired

Fired
Fired
Fired

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

155

Balls
One intermediate goal in analyzing the spherical bullets from a site is an attempt to
determine the probable bore sizes of the guns they were used with. This in turn may
help identify and date the trade, military, or other sources of such weapons. Ultimately
it can be hoped that such data will be matched with the translations of contemporary
documents dealing with trade or other contact with the site area and help shed light on
its inhabitants and their activities.
There are numerous pitfalls in analysis of these bullets. The following procedure was
followed for this report:
1. All specimens were weighed, despite examples of mutilation and sometimes very
obvious weight loss. By comparison with the median known weights of unfired lead
balls, at least the minimum size of a fired ball can be estimated. This cannot be
precise. Even today molds cast balls which will deviate from true spheres, hence vary
in weight. The quality of lead and alloys varies, also varying the weight. Sprue
cutting also contributes to weight variation.
2. Specimens were measured where it appeared no obvious distortion had occurred
through firing or other agencies. Careful measurement offers the best chance to
identify the original size intended. The best diameter for measurement, I believe, is
along the seam or mold line left on the ball by the mold halves. Care was taken to
avoid the unplanned oversizing in diameter caused by laterally off-center mold
halves (common on balls from 18th century sites). In such cases the weight can still be
correct. Undersizing may be detected by examination of the largest true circle (taken
along the mold seam) and comparing this with the section or diameter taken at right
angle to the mold seam. Unplanned undersizing in this dimension could result from
reduction of the mold faces around the cavity by cleaning, repairs, and by insufficient
cavity depth in one or both mold halves. Many balls suffering from this cause are
noticeably ovoid (Hamilton 1960c:128). I have yet to identify lead balls oversized in
this dimension, but this could occur.
Despite care, most of the measurements and assignments that follow are estimates,
hence subjective. The sizes assigned are based upon an adaption of tables for round ball
weights and diameters (Barnes 1972:300; Dixie Gun Works, Inc. 1972:329). I have found
the best (truly cast with little or no ovoid shape) unfired balls which range from .52 in.
to .60 in. in diameter usually weight approximately 7 to 11 grains under their theoretical weights. An estimate of a fired specimens size, based on weight alone, can only be
considered as the minimum size suggested; each may originally have been any of the
larger sizes.
In this study it is assumed the guns are all smooth bore. Only one ball shows rifling
evidence and it will be considered intrusive to the site. Balls were commonly wrapped
with a "patch" of cloth or thin deer skin. Hamilton (1960c:132) has hypothesized that
approximately .02 inches patch clearance between the ball and the bore could be
suitable for trade or other non-military guns. He also gives data (ibid.:129-132) indicating 30 gauge (approximately .54 inches) balls were loaded with patches in 24 gauge
(approximately .58 inches) bores in the 19th century Northwest (English) trade guns.
The tolerances here would be approximately .04 inches. Belgian 19th century proof
testing called for 6 mm. (approximately .236 in.) clearance or tolerance between ball
and bore (Dixie Gun Works, Inc. 1972:330). Among supplies needed for French Canada
in 1758 (Peterson 1956:331) were bullets "28 or 30 to the pound" (diameters approximately .56 in. or approximately .55 inches). These, I believe, were for the fowling
pieces, included with other arms on the same list, intended for Indian use and inferred
is a common use of balls of approximately .55 in. and approximately .56 in. in diameter
in the same fowling pieces. This also gives a valuable lead toward at least one bore size

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

156

Z
~a

o~

x

©

u

:~

+

I1++++~

5

+++++11

++

+

+++++tl

++

+

++

+

z

©

~

I

I

++++

I

I

I

+

.........

a:

~~

<

CD

++++

o

Z

+

+++++

.........

<

Z

g~

Z

O9

BI~NARD DE LA HARPE

I1+++tl

+

++

II+++1+

+

++

+++

+

++

g

o~
~

g

gg

+

.....

~ggggggg
........

ta’3
tr3

tO

’v~

g~ggg~

157

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

preference (.58?) in French trade guns used at that time. After working with balls and
bores from the 18th century French trade sites, and in view of the above, I now believe
Hamilton’s original guess of .02 inches for patching clearance was excellent but a bit
conservative, and that .02 to .04 inches (approximately 0.5 mm. to 1.0 mm.) clearance
would be nearer the actual situation for this period. British military small arms ammunition called for clearances ranging from .05 in. to .10 in. in the immediate post Revolutionary War period, according to Neumann (1967:52). In the accompanying tables
on balls, the hypothetical bore size ranges are based upon the .02 in. to .04 in. clearance
between these balls and the bores of the probably associated 18th century French trade
gun. As further archeological evidence accumulates we are approaching an identification of reasonably standard bore preferences by trade affiliation and time periods. For
some of the pertinent investigations see Hamilton (1960e:207-209; 1968:3-30), Harris et
al. (1965:334), Blaine and Harris (1966:61-85), Baird (1965:), Good (1972:148-151),
Hanson (1960:176).
The provenience of all ball and shot is area A, random surface.
By my figures* the "28 or 30 to the pound" balls requested for French Canada in 1758
(Peterson 1956:331) would be approximately .56 inches to approximately .55 inches in
diameter. If the patch clearance of .02 to .04 inches I have proposed is correct, a bore of
approximately .58 inches (14.7 mm. to 14.8 mm.) should have been suitable for use with
this range of 250,000 bullets ordered (ibid .). According to the table on bails given inthis
report, approximately 25% (8) of the balls from this site could suit a hypothetical .58
inch bore.
The same requisition also called for bullets "20 or 22 to the pound". These should
range from approximately .63 inches (16.0 mm.) to approximately .61 inches (15.5 ram.)
in diameter. A hypothetical bore of approximately .65 inches (16.5 mm.) could be
indicated but here we are approaching the range of some 18th century military bores
with their larger tolerances.
Our table of balls from the site also indicates 25% {8 balls) appear suitable for a
hypothetical bore of approximately .55 inches (13.9 mm. to 14.0 mm.).
The bore estimates of approximately .58 inches and approximately .55 inches appear
to be the two major patterns to emerge. One additional but lesser pattern would indicate
a hypothetical bore range of .58 to .60 inches (4 balls). Two of the remaining balls (cut
away) do not offer any reasonable basis for an estimate. The final six specimens suggest
a bore of .40 to .42 inches (2 balls); a rifled bore of .43 to .45 inches (1 ball); a bore of .46 to
.48 inches (1 ball); and a bore of .50 to .52 inches (1 ball).

BENARD DE LA HARPE AND THE ESTABLISHMENT
OF THE NASSONITE POST
Benard de la Harpe arrived from France in 1718 with the express
goals of exploring the Kadohadacho territory and establishing a trading post among these Indians. The post represented another French
attempt at reinforcement of their relations with the Indians and dominance over this territory in their continuing rivalry with the Spanish.
During his journey La Harpe kept a journal ("Account of the Journey
of Benard de la Harpe Discovery Made by Him of Several Nations
*Based upon the old French 490 gram livre (pound).

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

159

Situated in the West," Ralph A. Smith, translator and annotator,
Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. LXII, Nos. 1-4) and it has
been the main basis for correlation of the archeological manifestations
with the documentary sources. For examples, see discussions of the
Angola Farm Site (Swanton 1911:311-313) and the Fish Hatchery Site
(Gregory 1962).
Because the present paper is concerned with that period of La
Harpe’s journey after he reached the mouth of the Red River, a brief
resume of events leading up to that time is presented.
The La Harpe Expedition left New Orleans on December 18. 1718,
and reached the mouth of the Red River on January 10, 1719. At this
point, La Harpe left his boats and journeyed by pirogue to the village
of the Tunicas where he arrived on-the 12th of January. After this side
trip, La Harpe continued his trip, entering the mouth of the Red River
January 15, 1719. By February 21 he had reached Natchitoches. On
March 6, 1719, La Harpe and six companions left Natchitoches, entering the Bear River (Sulphur River) April 1. It is at this point that the
present narrative begins.
No attempt has been made to reconcile La Harpe’s estimates of the
leagues travelled; rather discussion is in terms of the land forms
mentioned by La Harpe in his journal and their relationship to presently observable topography.
On April 1, 1719, La Harpe and his companions reached the juncture of the Bear and Red rivers where they spent the night. La Harpe
had resolved to go through the Bear River with one of his pirogues and
a party of Indians to the portage of the Nassonites and then overland to
his destination to establish a trading post. The rest of his men were to
travel the Red River and meet him at the site of the post. La Harpe
estimated that his segment of the trip would be 5 leagues by water and
10 leagues by land. On the other hand, his men would have to travel
52 leagues on the Red River (Smith 1958:249-250).
After he had entered the Bear River on April 2, La Harpe found
many log jams and bushes which made travel difficult. This same
stretch of the river from the mouth of the Sulphur River to the Texarkana dam is still plagued by logs and brush. As recently as World War
II cypress logs were removed by lumber companies for commercial
use.

Three leagues to the northwest, the La Harpe party camped on a
little island (Smith 1958:250). This island may have been old Belle
Island, a land feature noted for many years by local residents and now
partially inundated by the Texarkana Reservoir.
On April 1, La Harpe said "We found high lands on the left [south
side] as we sailed along Bear River..." (Smith 1958:249). These high

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lands would place him between the mouth of Bear River and present
Texarkana Dam.
On April 3, La Harpe mentions "... very great high grounds which
we sailed along, leaving them to our left..." [south side of Bear River]
(Smith 1958:250). These very great high grounds would place him
between present Texarkana Dam and Knight’s Bluff.
La Harpe arrived at the portage at 2 o’clock in the afternoon on April
3, 1719 (Smith 1958:250). Before the dam which joined Lake Texarkana, there was an old county road crossing of the Sulphur River (Fig.
1). The crossing was built there because of the break in the hills on the
south side of the river. On April 4, 1719, La Harpe beached his
pirogues and started overland to the village of the Nassonites. One of
the Indians in his party was sent ahead to inform the Nassonite chief
of his coming.
La Harpe mentioned a "fine stream" and may have camped by it on
that night. It is possible that this is Barkman Creek, a spring-fed creek
in the vicinity of present-day Leary, Texas.
On April 5 La Harpe continued his trip and mid-morning the war
chief of the Nassonites and six tribal notables arrived to meet him.
They continued their trip and at three in the afternoon arrived at the
dwelling of the chief. La Harpe was entertained with a great feast of
bread, boiled corn, bear meat, buffalo meat and fish (Smith
1958:250-251).
La Harpe spent several days talking to the Nassonites and looking
for a location to establish a post. He resolved to locate it on the left
(south) side of the Red River at a distance of a "musket shot" (Smith
1958:253).
On April 21 the boats which La Harpe had sent around by the Red
River arrived at the Nassonite village. The next day the Caddo nations
celebrated the Calumet for the party and La Harpe gave the Indians
2,000 livres of merchandise which consisted of European trade goods.
At this time La Harpe proposed to the Nassonite chief to cede to him
the deserted village of the chief. The chief consented to this and was
given 30 pistoles in merchandise (Smith 1958:255).
La Harpe described the site of his post thusly:
"The terrain of the Nassonites is a little elevated, the soil is sandy; but at
half a quarter of a league from the river, the country is fine, the earth black,
and the prairies most beautiful and most fertile. Near the place that I have
chosen for my establishment, there is an expanse (lake) two leagues long
covered with ducks, swans, and bustards. Although the land there may be
sandy, it does not fail to be very fertile for cultivation ..." (Smith
1958:254).

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

161

The Rosebrough Lake Site closely fits the description of the area
given by La Harpe for the location of his Nassonite Post. The site is
located on an old natural levee of Red River and thus a little elevated.
The black land to the south is present and the lake (cut offbend of Red
River) is present. Today the lake is somewhat like a fishhook in shape.
In 1806 when the site was visited by the Freeman-Custis Expedition,
the lake had somewhat the shape of a reversed "S" (Freeman and
Custis 1806:Nicholas King map). Today the remnant scar of the old
lake as seen by Freeman and Custis is visible on the Minor Davis Farm.
Another feature located north of the site is a "double hook" in the
Red River which has been indicated on maps of the area since 1720. It
is first shown on two maps attributed to La Harpe -- one dated 1720
and the other 1722 (Lowery Catalog of Maps, Library of Congress, Nos.
301 and 302). The map of the Freeman-Custis Expedition of 1806
discussed above shows this double hook in the river just north of the
site. A map of Texas printed in Morphis’s History of Texas in 1874
also shows this feature as does a map of Texas printed in 1879 in
Hanford’s Texas State Register. Too, modern maps of appropriate
scale indicate this characteristic of the channe!. As of March 10, 1973,
this hook was still present. Although the river banks are fairly stable,
the stream has been eroding the north bank. The south bank does not
appear to have been subjected to much erosion. Although some have
said that the Rosebrough Lake Site has been reworked by the river

since the site was abandoned, we feel that this is impossible as the
burials and other features of the site are still intact and undisturbed
(except by plowing).
Next we will go the Freeman-Custis Expedition of 1806 for additional evidence that thePoste aux Nassonites (Post of the Nassonites)
and the Rosebrough Lake Site are one and the same. On July 27, 1806,
towards evening, the party was on the north side of the Red River
opposite a lake on the south around which Caddoes had planted corn
fields when they occupied their principal village. This lake was about
2 miles in length and parallel to the river. Astronomical readings
taken that evening determined their latitude to be 33° 34" 42’ north
(Freeman and Custis 1806:37). The latitude of the Rosebrough Lake
Site (41 BW 5) in a field road about the center of the site is 33° 34" 15’
-- a difference of 27’. Freeman’s reading was taken on the north bank
of the river and this difference is about 540 yards.
The day following this reading, one of the Indian guides accompanying the expedition, Frangois Grappe, guided the expedition to
the south side of the river opposite the point where the French had
established a military outpost. Grappe had been born there in 1748

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Freeman and Custis 1806:37). The establishment of this post, erected
many years before Louisiana was ceded to Spain, was to guard a
factory that was there for the Indian trade (American State Papers
1832, Vol. IV:729).

CHRONOLOGY OF THE NASSONITE POST
When La Harpe purchased the site for the post, the Indians offered
him 30 men to bring cypress wood for the construction of the house
that he wished to build. By the end of July 1719 a building 110 feet
long by 20 feet wide had been erected (Smith 1958:255-256). After La
Harpe left in 1719 little is known about the occupation of the post
until 1726.
In a letter dated March 26, 1726, to the Compagnie des Indies from
De Pauger, a complaint is made about having only six soldiers (Margry 1876-1886, Vol. VI:226-227).
The history of the post after 1735 depends largely on depositions
made before John Sibley in 1805 in Natchitoches by former residents
of the French post.
In 1737 Alex Grappe settled at the post and built and fortified a
small post and trading house (American State Papers 1832:692-694).
The post was maintained until 1763 when Louisiana was ceded to
Spain and the garrison withdrawn. The trading house remained in
operation until 1765 when Grappe moved with all his family to
Compti. By 1778 the French settlement had been totally abandoned
(American State Papers 1832:693-694).
In 1770 the post was visited by Athanase de Mezieres. Alex Grappe
came from Compti as an interpreter. At this time there was still a small
population present (Bolton 1914, Vol. II.:71-74).
By 1778 mention of the post drops out of the frontier correspondence (American State Papers 1832:693). Therefore, it is assumed that
the dates of occupation at the post can be placed from 1719 to 1778. At
no time during this occupation does it appear that the population was
large -- generally a few soldiers, settlers and traders. The number of
soldiers was set at 15 (a sergeant’s command) by the French government, but it is doubtful that this number was ever present at the site. A
few French families lived there at various times during the period of
occupation. Depositions to this effect were given to Dr. John Sibley in
1805 by Mary Pulogia Grappe Fontinueau, Julien Bessen, Mary Senes
Brevell, John Baptiste Grappe and Francois Grappe (American State
Papers 1832, Vol. II:692-694).

B!~NARD DE LA HARPE

163

CONCLUSIONS
The journals left by Benard de la Harpe in 1719 and the FreemanCustis Expedition of 1806 have made possible the tentative identification of the Rosebrough Lake Site (41 BW 5) in Bowie County, Texas, as
the site where La Harpe established the Nassonite Post (Ft. St. Louis
de Kadohadacho) in 1719.
All of the European goods found in Area A of the site seem to
substantiate this hypothesis as all fit the period of occupation -1719-1778. It is presumed that if Area A of the Rosebrough Lake Site is
investigated in the future such structural features as French, Indian
and trading houses and military buildings could be found and identified specifically.
Acknowledgments
This project would not have been possible during the years except for the fine spirit of
cooperation and the kindness of Mr. and Mrs. George Pearson and Mr. and Mrs. Minor
Davis.
We also wish to thank all of our wives for the coffee and snacks furnished during the
many meetings of the authors. We are most thankful to Jerrylee Blaine and Inus Marie
Harris for their kindness in helping with the documentary research and the typing of
the final manuscript.
Dr. Charles R. McGimsey of the University of Arkansas was very helpful in furnishing
photographs and notes on Burial 1 from the Rosebrough Lake Site and giving us
permission to use them in this paper.
William A. Westbury of Southern Methodist University very kindly identified the
French and Spanish ceramics.

REFERENCES CITED
Allemagne, Henry Rend d’ and Vera K. Ostoia
1967 Decorative Antique Ironwork: A Pictorial Treasury. Dover Publications. New York.
American State Papers
1832 Class I: Foreign Relations, Vol. II and Class II: Indian Affairs, Vol. I.
Gales and Seaton. Washington D.C.
Baird, Donald
1965 S ome Eighteenth Century Gun Barrels From Osage Village Sites. Great
Plains Journal, Vol. 4, No. 2:49-62.
Barnes, Frank C.
1972 Cartridges of the World. Third Edition. Digest Books, Inc. Northfield,
Illinois
Bell, Robert E., E. B. Jelks and W. W. Newcomb (Assemblers)
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Final
Report for Grant GS-964, National Science Foundation.

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Blaine, Jay C.
1967 Guns. In: A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and
Ethnohistory, Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks and W. W. Newcomb,
assemblers. Final Report for Grant GS-964, National Science
Foundation:163-179.
Blaine, Jay C. and R. K. Harris
1967 Guns. In: The Gilbert Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 37 (for 1966):33-86.
Bolton, Herbert Eugene
1914 Athanase de Mezieres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier, 1768-1780,
Vols. 1 and 2. The Arthur H. Clark Company. Cleveland.
Boudriot, Jean
1963 Armes a feu Francaises, modeles reglementaries, 1717-1836. Second
Series. Lucien Petitot. Paris.
Bustanoby, J. H.
1947 Principles of Color and Color Mixing. McGraw-Hill Book Company.
New York.
Dixie Gun Works, Inc.
1972 Catalog No. 122. Union City, Tennessee.
Duffield, Lathel F. and Edward B. Jelks
1961 The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir,
Rains County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, Archaeology
Series, No. 4. The University of Texas. Austin.
Freeman, Thomas and Peter Custis
1806 An Account of the Red River in Louisiana. Report to the War Office.
George, J. N.
1947 English Guns and Rifles. The Stackpole Company. Harrisburg, Pa.
Good, Mary Elizabeth
1972 Guebert Site: An 18th Century Historic Kaskaskia Indian Village in
Randolph County, Illinois. Central States Archeological Societies
Memoir, No. 2.
Greener, W. W.
1910 The Gun and Its Development. Ninth Edition. Bonanza Books. New
York.
Greenman, Emerson F.
1951 Old Birch Island Cemetery and the Early Historic Trade Route, Georgian Bay, Ontario. Occasional Contributions from the Museum of
Anthropology of the University of Michigan, No. 11. University of
Michigan Press. Ann Arbor.
Gregory, H. L.
1962 Louisiana Studies, Vol. 1, No. 2. Northwestern State College.
Hamilton, T. M.
1960a The Determination of Date and Origin of Archaeological Gun Parts. In:
Indian Trade Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist,
Vol. 22:5-15.
1960b Additional Comments on Gunflints. In: Indian Trade Guns, T. M.
Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:73-79.
1960c Some Gun Parts from 18th Century Osage Sites. In: Indian Trade Guns,
T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:120-149.

Bt~NARD DE LA HARPE

165

1960d The Gunsmith’s Cache Discovered at Malta Bend, Missouri. In: Indian
Trade Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol.
22:150-171.
1960e Concluding Comments and Observations. In: Indian Trade Guns, T.
M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:207-209.
1960f Some Gun Parts from 17th Century Seneca Sites. In: Indian Trade
Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:99-119.
1964 Recent Developments in the Use of Gunflints for Dating and Identification. In: Diving Into tile Past: Theories, Techniques, and Applications of Underwater Archaeology, Proceedings of a Conference on
Underwater Archaeology, June Drenning Holmquist and Ardis Hillman Wheeler, editors. The Minnesota Historical Society and the
Council of Underwater Archaeology.
Hamilton, T. M.
1968 Early Indian Trade Guns: 1625-1773. Contributions of the Museum of
the Great Plains. No. 3, Lawton, Okla.
Hanson, Charles E., Jr.
1960 Locks From Indian Trade Guns of the 19th Century. In: Indian Trade
Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol.
22:172-177.
Harper, Loyd, Ruby Harper, R. K. Harris, Inus M. Harris, Edward B. Jelks and J.
Ned Woodall
1967 Ornaments. In: The Gilbert Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 37 (for 1966):87-104.
Harris, R. K. and Inus Marie Harris
1967 Trade Beads, Projectile Points and Knives. In:A Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, Robert E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks
and W. W. Newcomb, assemblers. Final Report for Grant GS-964,
National Science Foundation:129-162.
Harris, R. K., Inus Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine and Jerrylee Blaine
1965 A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack
Site, Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 36:287-363.
1966 French Clasp Knives: Types D and E. The Record, Vol. 22, No. 1:7-8.
Dallas Archeological Society.
ms. The Spanish Fort Site in Texas and Oklahoma. Unpublished manuscript.
Harris, R. K., Inus M. Harris and J. Ned Woodall
1967 Tools. In: The Gilbert Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 37 (for 1966):18-32.
Harris, R. K. and Curtis D. Tunnell
1967 Miscellaneous European Goods. In: The Gilbert Site. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 37 (for 1966):105-111.
Hayward, J. F.
1962 The Art of the Gunmaker, Vol. 2. St. Martin’s Press. New York.
Howard, James H.
1972 Notes on the Ethnogeography of the Yankton Dakota. Plains
Anthropologist, Vol. 17, No. 58, Part 1:281-307.

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jelks, Edward B., editor
1967 The Gilbert Site, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 37
(for 1966).
Lavin, James D.
1965 A History of Spanish Firearms. Arco Publishing Company. New York.
Lenk, Torsten
1965 The Flintlock: Its Origin and Development. G. A. Urquart, translator.
Bramhall House. New York.
Margry, Pierre, editor
18791888 Decouvertes et etablissements des Francais dans l’ ouest et dans le sud
de l’Amerique Septentrionale, 1614-1754,Vol. 6. Paris.
Maxwell, Moreau S. and Lewis H. Binford
1961 Excavations at Fort Michilimackinac, Mackinac City, Michigan, 1959
Season. Publications of the Museum, Michigan State University, Vol.
1, No. 1.
Myers, Bernard S., editor
1969 McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Art, Vol. 4. McGraw-Hill Book Company.
New York.
Neal, W. Keith
1955 Spanish Guns and Pistols. G. Bell and Sons. London
Neumann, George C.
1967 The History of Weapons of the A merican Revolution. Harper and Row.
New York.
Peterson, Harold L.
1956 Arms and Armor in Colonial America. Stackpole Company. Harrisburg, Pa.
1965 American Indian Tomahawks. Contributions from the Museum of the
American Indian, Heye Foundation, Vol. 19.
Sloane, Eric
1964 A Museum of Early American Tools. Funk and Wagnalls. New York.
Smith, Carlyle S.
1960 Two 18th Century Reports on the Manufacture of Gunflints in France.
In: Indian Trade Guns, T. M. Hamilton, editor. Missouri
Archaeologist, Vol. 22:40-49.
Smith, Ralph A.
1958 Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discovery Made by Him
of Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vol. 62, No. 2:246-259.
Stone, Lyle M.
1970 Gunflints from Eighteenth Century Fort Michilimackinac, Michigan:
A Formal Analysis and Description. Paper Presented at the Eleventh
Annual Conference on Historic Site Archaeology, Columbia, South
Carolina.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of th e Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1911 Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of
the Gulf of Mexico. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin No. 43.

BIJNARD DE LA HARPE

167

Thwaites, Reuben Gold, editor
1959 The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents: Travels and Explorations
of the Jesuit Missionaries in New France, 1610-1791, Vol. 66. The
Burrows Brothers Company. Cleveland.
Witthoft, John
1966 A History of Gunflints. Pennsylvania Archaeologist, Bulletin of the
Society for Pennsylvania Archaeology, Vol. 36, Nos. 1 and 2:12-49.
Woodward, Arthur
1960 Some Notes on Gunflints. In: Indian Trade Guns, T. M. Hamilton,
editor. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22:29-39.

