EXCAVATIONS AT THE BLUM
ROCKSHELTER
EDWARD B.

JELKS

INTRODUCTION
The Blum rockshelter is situated on the west bank of the
Nolands River near the town of Blum in Hill County, Texas.
It was discovered by Mr. George Benson, Hill County rancher and amateur archeologist, in the summer of 1951. Recognizing the potentialities of the site, Benson informed the
writer of his discovery.
In January, 1952, Edward H. Moorman and I spent two
days in company with Benson digging a test pit in the
shelter. Results of the test indicated that the site held
promise of producing significant data on the Central Texas
Aspect, and since it will be within the embrace of Lake
Whitney’s flood control pool, plans were immediately made
for its excavation. These plans were brought to fruition
in September, 1952, when a crew consisting of Benson, E. O.
Miller, Thomas L. Williamson, Steve Boyd, James H. Duke,
Glen E. Rodda, and the writer excavated an area of 250
square feet to a mean depth of approximately six feet.
I am grateful to all the above for their enthusiasm and
industry on the dig. Special acknowledgment is due Mr.
Benson for his discovery and initial appraisa! of the site, and
for his wholehearted cooperation during all phases of the
River Basin Surveys’ investigations at Whitney. I am also
indebted to Glen L. Evans of the Texas Memorial Museum
for his geological analysis of the site, one of the key ingredients used in formulating the conclusions in this paper.
Excavation of the Blum Rockshelter was part of the nationwide archeological salvage program of the River Basin
Surveys, a program designed to recover, before it is inundated or otherwise destroyed, archeol0gical material endangered by the construction of dams and reservoirs. Formerly administered by the Smithsonian Institution, the
River Basin Surveys office in Austin is now operated by
the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, and

190

Texas Archeological Society

conducts salvage operations in Texas and adjoining states.
Grateful acknowledgment is due the following institutions
and agencies, all of which contributed complete cooperation
to the Whitney archeological project: the U. S. Army Corps
of Engineers, the University of Texas, Texas Memorial Museum, and Baylor University.
Physiographic Setting
Across the extreme northwestern corner of Hill County,
Texas, flows the Nolands River. From its headwaters in
northern Johnson County to its point of entrance into Hill
County it flows in a southeasterly direction, roughly parallel
to the Brazos a few miles to the west; but immediately after
entering Hill County it changes its direction of flow and
curves toward the west in a broad arc to converge with
the Brazos at a point some eight miles southwest of Blum.
Its channel has cut deeply into the Cretaceous limestone
bedrock, thereby exposing vertical limestone cliffs at the
edges of the valley. The cliffs have been long exposed to
the elements, and rockshelters have been formed in them
at favorable spots by the erosional effects of stream action,
weathering and temperature fluctuations. One of these is
the Blum Rockshelter.
Present day mammalian fauna of the area includes the
white-tailed deer, fox squirrel, cottontail, jack rabbit, gray
fox, red fox, opossum, raccoon, bobcat, timber wolf, coyote,
and armadillo. Of these the red fox was introduced in
recent years and the armadillo has migrated into the area
within the last fifty years. Mammals present historically,
but not found in the area now, include javelina, bison, and
beaver.
The uplands are rolling prairie which once sustained large
herds of bison, but along the margins of the stream valleys
erosion has produced a series of rocky hills and valleys. The
prairies support a fairly heavy cover of native grasses, scattered mesquites, and motts of elm and oak. The stream
valleys are heavily forested with pecan, hackberry, elm,
juniper, and other trees, dense tangles of underbrush oc-

PLATE 18
View of Nolands River terrace with Blum Rockshelter in center background°
end of low-water dam in center, where river has cut around it.

Note

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

curring in many spots.

193

The hilly zones adjoining the val-

leys are covered with juniper and small oaks.
The resources appear adequate to support a hunting, gathering population of considerable size: small game was abundant a century ago; the streams still teem with fish, turtles,
and mussels; edible nuts, fruits, seeds, and berries are plentiful. Terraces along the streams would have been suitable for
primitive agriculture without irrigation.
Geological Background
The Blum Rockshelter faces almost due east toward Nolands River. A low terrace (T-l), 18 to 20 feet thick and
60 to 100 feet wide, stretches across the interval between
shelter and river (Plate 18). On the east side of the stream
T-1 is absent, but T-2 is well developed. The surface of
T-2 is about 25 feet above the bed of the stream, some seven
feet higher than T-l, and T-2 is undoubtedly of considerably
greater age than T-1 (Figure 13, A).
On a line with the northern end of the shelter, a low dam
was constructed across the Nolands by the PWA in 1936.
Shortly afterward the river burst around the west end of
the dam (Plate 18) cutting a new channel through the
terrace (T-l) to which the dam had been anchored. This
dissection of T-1 left a clean, vertical face revealing clearly
its composition, which is as follows (Figure 13, B) :
Stratum
4.

Thickness
in ~eet

Top stratum of T-1. Weak soil, sterile
of cultural material ........................................

1.2

3. Middle stratum of T-1. Brown silt, weakly
stratified. Sterile of cultural material ......

2.8

2. Bottom stratum of T-1. Gray silt, humus
stained in the top three feet, containing
lenses of small gravels and sand. Flint
chips, charcoal, hearthstones, and bone
scraps occur throughout this stratum ........ 15.0

194

Texas Archeological Society

Disconformity
1. Weakly consolidated gravel lenses resting
on limestone bedrock, evidently remnants of an older terrace than T-1 (T-2?)

2.5

Four stages in the development of the present geological
situation have been reconstructed, all based on a study
made by Glen L. Evans.
Stage 1. The Blum shelter lies in a limestone bluff on the
convex side of a long meander of the Nolands River. The
erosional processes which formed the shelter can be seen at
work today several hundred feet upstream at a point where
the river impinges on the vertical face of the same limestone
bluff. A cavity is developing there in the bluff where the
erosional action of the stream is slowly removing a layer
of relatively soft stone sandwiched between more resistant
strata.
Formation of Blum shelter took place during Stage 1 when
the Nolands flowed against the cliff at the point where the
shelter is situated, and removed a soft stratum of limestone,
leaving an inhabitable indentation in its stead. The original
cavity has continued to enlarge through the years due to
spalling of weathered fragments of stone from the ceiling
and back wall. Erosion has also imparted a slight inclination to the floor, so that it slants downward from the rear
wall toward the mouth.
Stage 2. After having hollowed out the shelter the stream
gradually migrated laterally to the east, depositing gravels-and presumably silts--where its former channel had been.
Remnants of this deposit (T-2?), resting on bedrock and
discomformably underlying T-l, are yet visible where the
river has dissected and exposed a vertical face in T-1 in
front of the shelter.
Another remnant of what is apparently the same older terrace lies about fifty feet south of
the shelter along the face of the same limestone cliff. (There
are indications, incidentally, that another shelter, still filled
with the terrace remnant and masked by a sizeable talus
accumulation, may exist at that spot.)

Excavations aS the Blum Rockshelter

195

Stage 3. At some unknown time after the formation of the
terrace in Stage 2, the N01ands moved in toward the shelter
again, erasing the old terrace except for remnants such as
those described above. Although there may be small remnants of the old terrace remaining within the shelter proper,
none were recognized as such in the excavated area, and it
is probable that the shelter was swept completely, or very
nearly, clean during Stage 3.
Stage 4. Again the river retreated from the cliff, leaving
another deposit (T-l) in its wake, mostly silt rather than
gravel (Figure 13, B). That the formation of T-1 took place
in relatively recent times is indicated by an unbroken
sequence of cultural material, all a result of the Central
Texas Aspect occupation in the shelter, extending to the
bottom of T-1. All the cultural material excavated was
apparently deposited on the site during Stage 4.
Excavation
Prior to excavating, an area fifty feet long and twenty
feet wide, running east and west on its long axis from the
rear wall of the shelter out into the open terrace, was
blocked off in a grid system of five-foot squares with a
stake at each corner of each square (Figure 14). The eastwest lines of the grid were labeled J, K, L, M, and N, in
sequence from south to north; the north-south lines were
numbered in sequence from 6 through 15 from west to east.
The coordinate designation for each square was taken from
the intersecting lines at its southeast corner.
Specimens were sacked by six-inch levels and, after the
strata inside the shelter had been recognized, were labelled
by strata. All excavated fill was run through a screen.
of I/4 inch mesh.

Squares excavated were J-6, J-7, K-6, K-7, L-6, L-7, L-8,
and L-9. It was soon discovered that the rear wall, instead
of being perpendicular, sloped back to form a recess, so that
the deposits lying in the back part of the recess felt into.
Squares J-5, K-5, and L-5. This material was also exca-~
vated.

Texas Archeological Society

196

All squares inside the shelter were carried down to bedrock except L-7, L-8, and L-9. L-8 and L-9, lying at the
mouth of the shelter, were excavated to respective depths
of 96 and 114 inches, well below all evidence of occupation.
Tests with a post-hole digger in the floors of those two
squares went some 20 inches deeper in both cases without
producing any sign of habitation. For the purpose of correlating the geological sequence inside the shelter with that
revealed in the face of the terrace, Square L-15, about half
way between the shelter and the edge of the terrace, was
excavated to a depth of 84 inches.
Four distinct strata were recognized in the shelter deposits. They are:
Stratum

Thickness
in feet

4. Reddish brown, oxidized soil, in the upper
part of the stratum. Small gravels and
numerous small limestone spalls in the
lower 7 to 8 inches. Sterile

0 -2.3

3. Silt, grading from dark gray to brown,
heavily interspersed with limestone
spalts. A few bone splinters and flint
chips and a large fire hearth were in
the lower six inches

.1.2 -2.8

2. Midden material intermixed with silt and
tiny to very large limestone spalls. Several ash lenses were present. Most of
the artifacts were found in this stratum ....... 0.5 -5.3
1. Dark gray silt containing small gravels,
artifacts, and cultural debris. Not discernible in Squares L-5, L-6, L-7, L-8,
and L-9 .................................................................... 0 -1.5
The three higher strata (4, 3, and 2) in the shelter evidently correspond to the three higher strata in the vertical
terrace exposure at the river’s edge (Figure 13, B). Stratum
1 in the shelter, however, contains Central Texas Aspect

197

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

A
t,J

__~.__’:X_.___:_..4~
OmZON~

$ AL iHr

EA~;"r

~,.

B
FIGURE 13
Cross

section

of Blum

Rockshelter and adjacent terraces

of

Nolands

River.

Composition of terraces T-1 and T-2 with position of rockshelter indicated.
scale exaggerated 5 times).

A,

(Vertical

B, Stratigraphy of excavations, related to strata exposed

in edge of terrace at river (vertical scale exaggerated 2 times).

198

Texas Archeological Society

artifacts and is probably equivalent to the lower portion of
Stratum 2, rather than Stratum 1, in the terrace outside.
Inside the shelter, artifacts were found from the lowest
part of Stratum 3 throughout Strata 2 and 1 down to bed’
rock. Features encountered include numerous ash lenses,
piles of fire-cracked limestone chunks, masses of charcoal,
and concentrations of snail and mussel shells.
Square L-15, in the terrace between the shelter and the
river, was carried down to a depth of 84 inches. The three
upper strata seen in the section at the terrace’s edge were
easily identified in L-15, Strata 4 and 3 being sterile, Stratum
2 containing artifacts and cultural debris.
No line of demarcation between Strata 1 and 2 was discernible in Squares L-5, L-6, L-7, L-8, and L-9 but it is
thought that the difficulty in separating the two strata is
due to soil characteristics. Consequently, when the artifacts are assigned to their respective strata in the following, those found in the bottommost levels of the L squares
are designated as occurring in Stratum 1-2. All other specimens were found definitely in the strata to which they are
assigned.
Artifacts
Since most of the recognized artifact types found at Blum
have been described elsewhere, no descriptions of them will
be given here. The others will be briefly described. Projectile-point types having binomial designations will be
referred to only by the identifying word in the name, as
follows:
Present Name
Perdiz
Cliffton
Alba
Scallorn
Fresno
Yarbrough

Binomial Designation
Perdiz Pointed Stem
Cliffton Contracting Stem
Alba Barbed
Scallorn Stemmed
Fresno Triangular Blade
Yarbrough Stemmed

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

199

Arrow Points
A total of 148 chipped stone arrow points was found, 36
of them too fragmentary for typological identification and
six that do not have the requisite characteristics to be
assigned to any recognized type. Of the remaining 106
specimens, 50 are of the Perdiz type (Kelley, 1947, Plate 13,
a; Miller and Jelks, 1952, p. 177 and Plate 24, 2); 28 are
Scallorn (Kelley, 1947, Plate 13, f; Miller and Jelks, 1952,
pp. 176-7 and Plate 24, 1) ; 19 are CliJfton (Kelley, 1947, Plate
13, b; Krieger, 1946, p. 115 and Fig. 7, p-s; Miller and Jelks,
1952, p. 177 and Plate 24, 3); six are Alba (Newell and
Krieger, 1949, pp. 161-2 and Fig. 56, A-H; Miller and Jelks,
1952, p. 178 and Plate 25, 2); and three are Fresno (Kelley,
1947, Plate 13, g; Miller and Jelks, 1952, Plate 25, 3). Examples of these types appear on Plate 19.
Of the two most numerous arrow point types, Perdiz and
ScaIlorn, it was readily apparent--both in the field and in
the laboratory--that Perdiz occurred principally in the upper levels of occupation while Scallorn was found, for the
most part, at greater depths. Thirty-three Perdiz points
were recovered from Stratum 2 where only one specimen
of Scallorn was found; six of the Scallorn points occurred in
Stratum 1, which yielded no Perdiz.
Fourteen of the 19 CIiffton points were in Stratum 2 in
association with Perdiz; none were found in Stratum 1. One
specimen each of types Alba and Fresno was recovered
within Stratum 2, the other points of those two types occurring in the Stratum 1-2 zone (bottom levels of the "L"
squares).
The average depth below the surface for Perdiz was 52.6
inches, for Cliffton 52.1 inches, and for Scallorn 67.1 inches.
Dart Points
Sixteen dart points were found at Blum, all made of chipped stone. Three are probably of the type Yarbrough (Newell and Krieger, p. 168 and Fig. 57), four are of unknown
type, and nine are too fragmentary to be classified. One

200

Texas Archeological Society

Yarbrough and two indeterminate fragments occurred in
Stratum 2; all the other dart points were in Stratum 1-2.
DriZls
The nine flint drills and drill fragments were classified
on a basis of size.

There are three small drills with light,

delicate blades chipped on both faces.

One was rechipped

from a dart point with the dart point stem retained as a base
(Plate 19, N); the other two have unworked bases (Plate
19, L, M). Four drills were classified as medium-sized, all
having worked bases. Two fragments were not classifiable.
While the "medium" drills are larger than those commonly
occurring in Central Texas Aspect components, they are not
so large as those typical of the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Blades
A total of 28 flint blades and blade fragments was found.
Eight are thin triangular specimens which were probably
used as knives. One of them was found in the lower part
of Stratum 3, three in Stratum 2, and four in Stratum 1-2.
Another knife-like blade, asymmetrical in shape, was recovered from Stratum 1-2. Three crude blades which might
equally well have been classified as blanks or cores were
found, one in Stratum 2 and two in Stratum 1-2. The sixteen fragments, too small for identification, were distributed

in this manner: eight in Stratum 2, five in Stratum 1-2, and
three in Stratum I.
Scrapers
Of the 66 flint scrapers, 56 are flake scrapers, six end
scrapers, and four heavy side scrapers. The flake scrapers
are smal!, irregularly shaped spalls which have been retouched unifacially along one or more edges. Twenty-three
occurred in Stratum 2, 25 in Stratum 1-2, and eight in
Stratum 1.
The heavy side scrapers are larger chunks of flint with
one smooth unworked face. The opposite face is worked

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

201

along one or both lateral edges. Strata 2 and 1-2 yielded
respectively one and three examples.
Two small and four medium-sized end scrapers were
found. Of the medium ones, two were in Stratum 3, one in
Stratum 2, and one in Stratum 1. One small end scraper
came from Stratum 2, the other from Stratum 1-2.
Gravers
The six gravers are irregular-shaped flint chips retouched
along one edge in the manner of the flake scrapers, but with
a sharp, short, beak-like projection which would be suitable
for scratching grooves in materials such as wood, bone, and
soft stone. They were equally distributed between Strata
2, 1-2, and 1, two specimens occurring in each of those strata.
Grinding Implements
Five fragments of grinding slabs and ten mano fragments

¯

d

K LN~

/
Ground plan of Blum site, showing position of rockshelter in relation to eroded
edge of terrace to east:
Stakes in excavation area shown by dots.
Squares outlined
are those excavated to date.

2O2

Texas Archeological SocieSy

were found as follows: in Stratum 2, three slab and five
mano fragments; in Stratum 1-2, two slab and five mano
fragments. As nearly as could be determined from the
pieces, the grinding slabs had been subjected to rotary,
rather than back-and-forth, motions during the grinding
process.
Hammerstones
Three hammerstones were found in Stratum 2, four in
Stratum 1-2. All are waterworn pebbles which show evidence of battering around the edges.
Pigments
Small pieces of hematite, probably used for body paint,
were found in all occupation levels.
Bone Awls
Fourteen sharply pointed bone awls with highly polished
blades were recovered from Strata 1, 2, and 1-2. All are
evidently of deer .bone, two of them retaining a portion of
the articular surface of a joint at the base. One, fashioned
from a bone splinter, has a rough unworked base. The other
eleven are too fragmentary for complete description.
Deer Ulna Flakers
Eleven flaking implements made from deer ulna were
found. Five were in Stratum 1,2, six in Stratum 2. The
blunt design of the tip and the scratches toward the distal
end of the blade indicate that this type of implement was
probably used for flint chipping by the pressure method.
Bone Bead
One undecorated, cylindrical bone bead was cut from a
long bone of a small mammal. It came from Stratum 2, and
is 1 cm. long with a diameter of 7 ram.
Artifacts of Antler
There are thirteen pieces of worked antler, all probably
representing implements used for chipping flint by either

B

A

I

0

p

Q

R

H

6

F

M

L

K

J

,

E

D

C

T

S

X
PLATE 19
Representative artifacts from
points.

I-K, Cliffton points.

O-S, Scallorn points.

Blum Roekshelter.

A-E,

Perdiz points.

L, M, Drills with unworked bases.

T, Fresno point.

U, Engraved sherd from

F-H, Alba

N, Stemmed drill.
vessel No.

1.

V,

Rim sherd from vessel No. 3.
W, Rim sherd from vessel No. 2.
X, Rim sherd from
vessel No. 4.
Y, Sherd with faintly engraved pendant triangles from vessel No. 5.
Size 1~, except X, 1/~.

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

pressure or indirect percussion.

205

The distal tips are blunt

and have been smoothed and polished.

Three specimens are

between 11 and 12 cm. long and may be almost complete;
the rest are small fragments.
the others from Stratum 2.

Four are from Stratum 1-2,

Ceramics
Eighty-eight potsherds, representing at least five and
perhaps six or seven vessels, were found. All are from the
upper portion of Stratum 2 in association with Perdiz and
Clif]ton arrow points. No pottery was encountered below
the Perdiz-Cliffton zone.
Only a single sherd (Plate 19, U) of Vessel 1, a bottle,
was found. It is a thin, hard, dark gray, polished ware with
clay temper. An engraved design of panels composed of
concentric curved lines is somewhat reminiscent of the Titus
Focus type RipIey Engraved. The lines contain traces of red
pigment.
Vessel 2, represented by 15 sherds, was a simple undecorated bowl, dark gray in color (Plate 19, W). It is clay-grit
tempered, with a sandy texture, and the paste is relatively
hard. A heavy coating of burned grease suggests use as a
cooking vessel.
The four sherds of Vessel 3 are light tan in color, tempered
with clay lumps and small particles of bone (Plate 19, V).
Like Vessel 2, it was evidently a small, simple bowl, The
exterior is smoothed, and an incised design consisting of inclined parallel lines and light, thin punctates appears below
the rim.
Most complete of the vessels is Vessel 4, of which 55 sherds
were found. The paste is black and has a decided tendency
to crumble. The tempering agent is bone. This was a large
vessel with a slightly outcurving rim and a bulging body
which is decorated with parallel, horizontal bands of deep
fingernail impressions, the uppermost band 9 to 10 cm. below the rim (Plate 19, X). The shape of the base cannot
be determined.

206

Texas Archeological Society

There is only one sherd of Vessel 5, a bottle with a crudely
executed design of pendant triangles engraved around the
shoulder (Plate 19, Y).

It is dark gray in color, with a

slightly smoothed exterior, and the principal tempering
agent is small clay lumps.

There are also a few tiny white

particles which appear to be bone.
None of the five vessels has been definitely identified as
to type, but most or all of them seem to be Caddoan ware.
It is safe to assume that all are trade items from the east.
Summary and Conclusions
The entire occupation at the Blum Rockshelter can be
attributed to the Central Texas Aspect. A complete absence of European trade material indicates that the shelter
was abandoned prior to the time that intensive trade between white men and central Texas Indians began. The
fact that a terrace of the Nolands River, 18 feet in thickness, has been deposited over the earliest signs of habitation
suggests that the occupation extended over a period of several centuries. That conclusion is strengthened by the
quantity of spall material, fallen from the shelter’s roof,
encountered throughout the excavated deposits. The dozens
of carbon samples which were collected should provide accurate dates for the occupation when they are subjected to
analysis by the radiocarbon method of age determination.
Absolute dating of the material will also contribute to geological knowledge concerning the rate of terrace accretion
along small streams in the area.
The presence of Caddoan style pottery in the higher levels
is indicative of trade relations between the Central Texas
Aspect and peoples to the east. While no pottery was found
in the deeper levels, the presence there of arrow point type
Alba and dart point type Yarbrough suggests contacts with
peoples in the same direction.
Arrow points with expanding stems, notably types ScaIlorn and Alba, in general lay deeper than those with contracting stems (Perdiz and Cliffton). It will be of interest,

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter

207

and perhaps of considerable chronological significance, to
discover whether or not similar typologica! stratigraphy
obtains at other Central Texas Aspect sites.
References Cited
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of
the Toyah, Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeologica! and Paleontological Society, V.
18, pp. 115-128. Abilene.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chrono!ogy in Northern
Texas. University of Texas Publications No. 4640. Austin.
Miller, E. O. and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, V. 23, pp.
168-217. Lubbock.
Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Society for American Archeology, Memoir No. 5.
National Park Service
River Basin Surveys
601 East !9th St.
Austin, Texas

~
~z~

