AN INFANT BURIAL IN THE TEXAS PANHANDLE
BILLY R. HARRISON AND BOB T. GRIFFIN

Abstract
An infant burial with some unusual artifacts was found on West
Amarillo Creek in Potter County in 1968. The associated materials included prairie dog palates and hackberry seed beads. A Scallorn-like
arrow point indicates a late lithic or early ceramic age for the burial.

INTRODUCTION
In August of 1968 Mr. Terry Gerhardt of Amarillo, then a student at
West Texas State University in Canyon, found an infant burial eroding out of a creek bank on the farm of Mr. A. E. Wesley near Amarillo.
Associated with the burial were numerous bone beads and several
other kinds of artifacts. Gerhardt encased what was left of the burial in
a plaster-of-Paris jacket and brought it to the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum in Canyon to be cleaned and studied.
The junior author of this report, then a Curatorial Assistant at the
Museum, cleaned the burial, described the skeletal remains, and
prepared the accompanying illustrations. The senior author, who is
Curator of Anthropology at the Museum, visited the site with
Gerhardt on June 19, 1971, described the cultural remains, and prepared the rest of this report.

THE SITE

The spot where the burial was found has been designated Site A769
in the records of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum. It is in the
central part of Potter County, northeast of the community of Cliffside
and northwest of the city of Amarillo.
The burial was eroding out of a steep cutbank in a terrace on the
west side of West Amarillo Creek. It was about 4 feet below the top of
the cutbank which is about 12 to 15 feet above the creek bed. The
upper part of the terrace is a light brown silt. The grave fill immediately around the bones was darker. The grave could not be traced
upward to the surface from which it was dug.
The skeleton Was flexed and lying on its right side with head to the
east. No occupational materials were found near the burial.
West Amarillo Creek flows generally northeastward out of the
Staked Plains into the south Canadian River. It is one of many such
creeks which have produced the moderately rugged terrain along the
southern edge of the Canadian breaks, which form the northern border of the Staked Plains. In the vicinity of the burial, the creek is an

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

62

intermittent stream that is cutting a deep narrow channel in large
meanders along a wide shallow valley. Broad terraces of Quaternary
alluvium occupy the valley floor. Underlying the valley floor and
extending up the valley slopes are colorful siltstones and sandstones
of the Dockum Group of upper Triassic age. Crowning the slopes are
light-colored sediments of the Ogallala Formation of Pliocene age.
In many places cottonwoods are clustered along the channel, mesquites are spread across the terraces, and junipers are scattered up the
slopes. Several different Indian sites in the area have produced artifacts ranging in age from Folsom points to glass beads. The natural
condition of the area has been considerably altered in modern times
by such things as farm buildings and plowed fields.

/

\

/ J/~

/

\1

\\

\

......-.fill>

~<~
\

\

c J/

i
\
x
\

\

\
0

j

/

12 inches

I

FIGURE 1. Infant burial as viewed from inverted position in plaster
jacket. Broken line shows contact of dark brown grave fill with
lighter-colored terrace deposit. A, left and right ilium. B, proximal
end of femur. C, right hand. D, ribs. E, obsidian pendant. F, prairie dog
palate. G, bone beads.

INFANT BURIAL

63

The Staked Plains has been classified by Fenneman (1946) as part of
the High Plains section of the Great Plains province of the Interior
Plains major division, and characterized as "broad intervalley remnants of smooth fluviatile plains." The U.S. Department of Commerce
(1970) has described Staked Plains climate as "semiarid", "cool
temperate", and "a dry steppe type of climate with mild winters".
Blair (1950:110) has assigned the Staked Plains to the Short-grass
Plains biotic district of the Kansan biotic province.
THE SKELETON
Skeletal parts recovered include the following axial elements: skull
(frontal, premaxillary, right malar, both mastoid regions, right
pterygoid area, occipital condylar area, and mandible); teeth (see
dental analysis below); fragments of 20 vertebrae and 41 rib fragments. Appendicular elements recovered include right and left
humerus, radius, ulna, ilium, pubis, femur, tibia, and fibula; 17 hand
elements; 13 foot elements; and 29 hand or foot elements.
SKULL Only the supra-nasal portion of the medio-facial suture is
yet unobliterated, which places the skull at less than six years old but
well after the second year. The mandible has united at the symphysis
and the mastoid process has begun to appear. The formation of the
frontal sinuses is not yet evident. All of these traits usually occur
during the second year. Other traits cannot be reported due to weathering or missing parts.
DENTITION Only the premaxilla and mandible are present. The
maxilla was eroded away with lower portions of the skull. The teeth
recovered are as follows: 1) complete mandibular deciduous dentition; 2) all mandibular permanent tooth buds except second and third
molars; 3) left and right maxillary deciduous first molars, left maxillary deciduous central incisors, right maxillary deciduous cuspids,
and left maxillary deciduous first molar; 4} left and right maxillary
permanent incisor and cuspid tooth buds and left maxillary permanent first molar tooth bud.
The age of the child as indicated by the dentition would fall between two and three years.
The mandibular permanent first molars are dryopithecus, or
Dahlberg’s Y5 type (the metaconid adjoins the hypoconid). This trait
has been reported in 68.7% of Texas Indians (Dahlberg 1951:156}. The
maxillary permanent incisors are shovel-shaped, as in nearly 100% of
these people.
The only attrition and abrasion is on the mandibular deciduous
incisors with possible wear facets on the cuspids and lingual cusps of
the mandibular deciduous first molars. There is no indication of

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

caries or other anomalies. Except for the abrasion, the dentition appears to be more perfect than that of the typical North American child.
POST-CRANIAL SKELETON The neural arches of the cervical vertebrae are not fused, placing the child at less than three years old. The
proximal ends of both radius and fibula have not formed, which
indicates an age of less than four years. The epiphyses of the
phalanges, metacarpals, and metatarsals have not developed, also
indicating an age of less than four years.
GENERAL No cranial deformation can be recognized, nor is any
pathology noted. The child’s sex cannot be determined. The cause of
death is not indicated.

THE ARTIFACTS
The skeleton was accompanied by an unusual number and variety
of artifacts of stone, bone, shell, and plant material. These include a
flint arrow point, an obsidian pendant, 275 tubular bone beads, 11
prairie dog palates, two mussel shell beads, and 38 hackberry seed
beads.
The arrow point (Fig. 2A) was found by Gerhardt when he first
started digging into the burial. It is a small corner-notched specimen,
made from a flake of red Alibates agate with good bifacial chipping.
Edges of the blade are straight, as is the base of the stem. Maximum
length is 25 mm., maximum width 15 mm., maximum thickness 2.7
mm., neck width 7.6 mm., and stem length 4.4 mm. It resembles arrow
points of the Scallorn type, which are common in Oklahoma and
down the middle of Texas, with an estimated age of A.D. 500 to A.D.
1200 (Suhm and Jelks 1962:285, pl. 143). In the Texas Panhandle
Scallorn-like arrow points have been reported with the Lake Creek
Focus (a complex of the Plains Woodland stage) dating around A.D.
1000 (Hughes 1961), and with the Canyon City Focus (a complex of
the late Plains Archaic stage) dating around A.D. 500 (Hughes n.d.).
The obsidian pendant (Figs. 1E and 2B) is bifacially chipped into a
broad oval outline with a small tang at one end. Both faces show some
grinding. It is 25 mm. long, 18 mm. wide, and 4 mm. thick.
The 275 tubular bone beads (Figs. 1G and 3A-E) may have formed a
long necklace that was doubled around the infant’s neck. Thirty-five
smaller beads were found partly inside larger beads (Fig. 3A) and
were not removed for measuring. The remaining 240 beads are readily
classifiable into three different sizes (Fig. 3B, D, and E): 76 large
(averaging 24 mm. long by 8 mm. in diameter); 122 medium (averaging 16 mm. long by 4 mm. in diameter); and 42 small (averaging 10
mm. long by 2.5 mm. in diameter). Three of the large and two of the
medium beads measured were encircled with a groove (Fig. 3C).

INFANT BURIAL

65

B
0
1

I

20ram
J

C

FIGURE 2. A, Scallorn-like arrow point B, obsidian pendant, C, prairie
dog palate.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

66

’it

A

C

B

0

0

I0

g

E

20mm

10ram

FIGURE 3. A, large bone bead with smaller bead inside. B, large bone
bead. C, medium-size grooved bone bead. D, medium-size bone bead.
E, small bone bead. All side and end views, F and G, shell beads, H,
hackberry seed bead.

INFANT BURIAL

67

The 11 prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicans) palates (Figs. 1F and 2C)
have been grooved, snapped, and worn at both ends. Perhaps they had
some religious significance, since they do not look very ornamental.
The two large flat mussel shell beads (Figs. 2F and G) are perforated
near the center and have ground edges but unmodified faces. The
holes are 3 ram. in diameter and drilled from both faces. The specimen
with sub-trapezoidal outline is 22 ram. long, 15 mm. wide, and 1.7
ram. thick. The circular specimen is 17 mm. in diameter, and 1.5 ram.
thick.
The 38 hackberry (Celtius occidentalis) seed beads (Fig. 3H) were
found during laboratory work on the burial remnant in the plaster
jacket. Twenty-three are complete and 15 are fragmentary. They were
made from the hard, hollow, spherical seeds of the hackberry tree by
grinding away opposite portions of the sphere. Average diameter is
about 4.5 ram. Such beads could easily be overlooked in the field and
may have been more common than the archeological literature would
indicate.
CONCLUSIONS
Since Indian graves in the Texas Panhandle seldom exceed a depth
of 21/2 to 3 feet, the position of the skeleton at a depth of 4 feet below
the present surface of the stream terrace suggests that the grave site
has received a foot or more of alluvium since the burial was made,
although the grave could not be traced up to the level from which it
was dug. This depositional stage at the grave site was succeeded by
the present erosional stage which is actively cutting the terrace, and
revealed the burial. This amount of deposition and erosion supports
an inference of some antiquity for the burial.
If this burial was typical of the people who made it, then it can be
inferred that their custom was to bury a dead infant on a stream terrace
in a shallow oval pit barely large enough to accommodate the body in
a flexed position, on its right side with head to the east, and accompanied by a quanity of ornaments and other objects, including, in this
instance, numerous tubular bone beads of three different sizes, some
hackberry seed beads, some prairie dog palates, a couple of mussel
shell beads, an obsidian pendant,and a Scallorn-like arrow point.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Mr. Gerhardt for allowing us to analyze and publish his
discovery; Mr. Wesley for permission to enter his property; and Dr. Jack T. Hughes,
Professor of Anthropology at West Texas State University, for advice in preparing this
report.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
REFERENCES CITED

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1:
93-117.
Dahlberg, A. A.
1951 The Dentition of the American Indian. In: The Physical Anthropology
of the American Indian, William S. Laughlin, editor: 138-176. Viking
Fund, Inc., No. 5. New York.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1946 Physical Divisions of the United States. Map, United States Geological Survey. Washington, D.C.
Hughes, Jack T.
1961 Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32: 65-84.
n.d. The Canyon City Club Cave in the Panhandle of Texas. Texas Historical Commission Archeological Report (in press).
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks, Editors
1962 Handbook of’Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological Society Special Publication No. 1, Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 4.
United States Department of Commerce
1970 Climatological Summary for Canyon, Texas. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
Canyon

