307

Missing the Point: A Reply to DockaH,
Dickens and Shafer
Kim A. Cox

ABSTRACT
Dockall, Dickens, and Shafer offer criticism of Herman Smith’s and my 1991
article on the study of impact damage to Perdiz points. They raise issues on
methodology and ethics. I disagree that the methodology was flawed or that there
was a breach of ethics in the use of real Perdiz points in destructive experiments.

INTRODUC~ON
In their evaluation of Herman Smith’s and my 1991 paper, Dockall, Dickens,
and Shafer (see article, elswhere in this volume) pursue two major areas of
methodology and ethics. Their comments in both of these areas demonstrate a lack
of understanding of the experiments and conclusions, as well as philosophical
differences on ethical issues.
METHODOLOGY

The two principal conclusions of our paper were that (a) the mere appearance
of lithic tools resembling Perdiz points does not necessarily mean that their final use
was as tips for arrows, and (b) the study of snap versus impact damage has use in
the understanding of site function as well as other general applications (which were
enumerated in the article). Dockall, Dickens, and Shafer raise the criticism that our
evaluation of the reasons for the appearance of snaps and edgewear was not
complete and that, therefore, the results were somehow invalid.
First, in regard to snaps, the focus of our analysis was on the presence of impact
damage, not on the presence of snaps. In fact, we actually acknowledged that "there
are other easy explanations for snaps on projectile points" (Cox and Smith
1991:293). B ut the presence of snaps was not the relevant issue; the important point
being made was that "[a]ll projectile point types must evidence impact fractures"
(Cox and Smith 1991:293).
As an example of the application of this analysis, we concluded that the Fresno
"point" that is quite widespread in this area may not be a projectile point type
because it does not have anywhere near as many impact fractures as are seen on local
Perdiz and Starr arrowpoints. In fact, in the three years since this article was written,
these Fresno points have become a persistent source of consternation. We would
like them to be projectile points, but the" lack of any impact damage on them is

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61 (1990)

308

Texas Archeological Society

extremely bothersome. In any event, the problem poses questions that would not
have been raised without this type of damage analysis.
Second, in regard to edgewear, there is no question but that most if not all of
the Perdiz points from the sites studied were originally intended to be used as
arrowpoints. However, the analysis of edge attrition tends to indicate that the last
use of some of the points before they were lost or discarded was not as projectile
points. The fact that there was significant edge attrition on the whole points, but
much less aUrition on the ones with major impact damage, is enough to suggest such
an idea.
If, as argued by Dockall, Dickens, and Sharer, any number of other factors
could have been responsible for the edge attrition (such as dulling in the manufacturing process), why is there a disparity between the whole points and the ones with
impact fractures? And why are there so many dull, poorly shaped arrowpoints?
I suggest that anyone who believes that these are arrowpoints try to survive by
using them as such. It is inconceivable to think that skilled bow hunters would even
entertain such a notion.
Our experiment was not intended to be a detailed use-wear study, nor was an
exhaustive experimental program required for our conclusions; it was simply a
matter of perception and common sense. We were simply trying to convey in the
article the fact that one cannot necessarily infer site function or intensity of use from
the mere presence or number of projectile points.
ETHICS
Over the past five years, I have measured and recorded edge attrition and
damage patterns on several thousand Perdiz points from public and private collections. In the course of doing this, I have had donated to me several Perdiz points for
which there was no provenience; it was not known even whether they were found
locally. We used some of these points in our experiments because they fit within the
range of shapes and edge wear of the Perdiz points from 41SP135. Dockall,
Dickens, and Shafer raise an ethical issue concerning the use of genuine points in
destructive experiments.
We considered using replicated points instead of actual ones, but we saw the
failure of the people who used them to salvage these points as the real question. I
did not know at the time that shape and edge wear significantly affect the
performance of a point, and I believed that the credibility of the experiment
depended on the use of points that had been discarded, and not on ones that had been
recently manufactured. After all, we were trying to answer the question of what was
wrong with the discarded points.
The points that were actually used could not have contributed to the three
categories of potential information listed by DockaU, Dickens, and Shafer. However, the use of genuine points provided critical information to the experiments,
which were the moral equivalent of using impact tests to study the hardness of
pottery. To some extent, the authors must be allowed their discretion in the choice

Cox ~ Missing the Point: A Reply

309

of artifacts to be used in destructive experiments without summoning the ethical
police. Even on the offensiveness scale, our breach was minor. To raise it as an issue,
I believe, is to overemphasize artifacts as things rather than as potential sources of
knowledge, an issue recently broached by Stephen Black (1992) in an address to the
Texas Archeological Society.
Essentially, archeology is a process for the acquisition of information leading
to the elucidation of the human condition through time. There is much merit in
preserving what remains of our heritage, but this is simply one facet of the whole
scenario. It seems to me that the Texas archeological hierarchy has misplaced its
emphasis in this matter with its anachronistic fixation on things over ideas, a fixation
used to justify the mandatory expenditure of huge amounts of both public and
private money for negligible results.
It is outrageous that archeologists with new ideas and new approaches have to
operate on a shoestnng while monstrous sums of money are spent for embarrassingly little new information, a fact recently acknowledged by Michael B. Collins,
when he said we should "think long and hard before we dig another burned rock
midden" (Collins 1991:1). What a novel idea!
This is all by way of politely saying that, although ethics will always be a
legitimate concern, academicians themselves leave too much room for improvement to be pronouncing judgment on others.
REFERENCES CITED
Black, S. L.
Nailing the Coffin Shut on the Traditional Approach to Prehistoric Archaeology
1992
in Texas: An Epitaph and Inquiry into the Afterlife. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Texas Archeological Society, Corpus Christi.

Collins, M. B°
1991
Thoughts on the Future Investigation of Burned Rock Middens. In: The Burned
Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological Symposium, edited by T. R. Hester.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin,
Studies in Archeology 13.
Cox, K. A., and H. A. Smith
1991
Perdiz Point Damage Analysis. Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog&alSociety 60
(for 1989):283-301.
Dockall, J. E., W. A. Dickens, and H. J. Shafer
1993
Getting to the Point: Some Comments on Cox and Smith’s Perdiz Point Damage
Analysis (in this volume).

