THE SAM KAUFMAN SITE, RED RIVER
COUNTY, TEXAS
R. K. HARRIS
The site described in this paper is located on the farm of
Mr. Sam Kaufman in the north central part of Red River
County, Texas, about two miles northwest of the small community of Blakeney.

The village area is located on a low

terrace about one mile long and about 1/4 mile wide.

Near

the middle, the terrace is cut through by a small slough
which flows into Red River just north of the site. It is called
Salt Well Slough.
Many small rises are to be found over the village area on
both sides of the slough. Several of these rises seem to have
the remains of house sites located on them. Mound building
seems to have about ceased at the time the site was occupied,
but on the west side of the slough what appear to be ~wo
small mounds are to be found. The east mound, the smaller
of the two, is probably only a natural rise with about two
feet of accumulated midden material. This small mound has
the remains of a house site located in it. Cultivation has
torn into the remains of the burned house, as many large
pieces of burned clay daub are found over the surface.
Around this house site, some small evidences of white contact
have been found, namely, four or five glass trade beads and
three or four copper cones made from rolled-up sheet copper.
They were probably ornaments or tinklers attached to clothing. However, one was rolled with a very sharp point on
one end, and was probably an awl or a projectile point.
The larger or west mound is probably the only real mound
of the two. Today, after years of cultivation, it is still about
five feet high above the surrounding field. The soil on top
of it is very black and shows evidence of much fire. Plows
have no doubt destroyed several large burials in this mound
as over the top may be found large conch shell beads and
many sherds of Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and
other types of pottery found in the Texarkana and McCurtain Foci.

44

Texas Archeological Society

Two cemetery areas are located near the site. One is just
to the northeast of the village area and is in the bank of Red
River. The other, also located in the bank of the river is
about ~ mile downstream from the village area. Both cemetery areas are now being destroyed by Red River, and many
burials are being lost to the river. In fact, the whole Kaufman Site is in danger of being destroyed as Red River is
shifting south at a rapid pace. During 1952, Mr. Kaufman
lost over 200 acres to the River. The two mounds are only
about 300 yards from the river at present. If the river continues to shift south, at the rate of the last two years, the
whole site will be gone in about three or four years. Before
this happens, some institution should excavate some of the
house sites and burials.
The writer and some of his fellow students of archeology
have tried to gather as much information about the site as
possible before it is lost forever. At this point the writer
wishes to thank Mr. C. R. Allen, Mrs. Mamie Allen, Mr. Jack
Hughes, and Mr. Lester Wilson for their help in making
this report possible.
Surface Artifacts
Over the surface of the village, after a heavy rain, may
be found many artifacts of the Indians who occupied the
Kaufman Site.
Several house sites have been destroyed by the plow.
Around these house sites may be found many artifacts. The
following paragraphs will describe artifacts found over the
surface.
Lithic Artifacts
Lithic artifacts at the Kaufman Site can be divided into
projectile points, scrapers, knives, drills, and chipped axes.
Projectile Points: Projectile points can be divided into
spear points, dart points, and small arrow points, The spear
points shown on Plate 3, Nos. 13, 14, 16, and 18 are of the
types found. The dart points are mostly of the type Gary
Stemmed. Plate 3, No. 12, bottom row, shows dart points

PLATE 3
Kaufman site artifacts of shell, bone, turquoise, gl,ass, and flint.

Size ~.

The Sam Kau]man Site

47

from this site. The small arrow points are mostly triangular,
but several of the Alba Barbed and side-notched triangle are
also found. Plate 3, No. 12, middle row, shows small arrow
point types.
Scrapers:

Scrapers are mostly small end or duckbill

scrapers, but the side scraper is also present.

Plate 3, No.

12, upper two left, shows types of scrapers found.
Knives: These are leaf-shaped.

Some are double-pointed

and some rounded on one end. Plate 3, No. 15 shows a knife
from a burial.
Drills: Plate 3, Nos. 12, upper right, and No. 17 shows the
types of drills found. Only one drill of the type shown on
Plate 3, No. 17 has been found. This is the first of this type
seen by the writer from the Red River area.
Double-bit Axes: Plate 4, No. 13 shows a double-bit axe
chipped from ferruginous sandstone.
Lithic artifacts are made mostly from quartzite or cherts,
but some evidence of trade is seen in artifacts made from
novaculite from Arkansas.
Polished Stone Artifacts
Many celts are found at this site. They are made mostly
from a black stone with white specks, but a few are made
of a green stone. Plate 4, Nos. 12, 14, 15, and 16 are celts from
this site.
Plate 4, No. 11 shows an arrow-shaft abrader from the
Kaufman Site. It has two grooves in one face. Both of the
grooves are smooth and rounded.
Plate 4, No. 4 shows a beautiful quail effigy pipe. It is
made from red siltstone and has the features of a quail engraved on it. It was found in a disturbed house site.
Plate 4, No. 6 shows a stone ear plug or spool. It is made
from a soft white stone and is of the same type as shown by
Bell and Baerreis (1951, Plate 10, No. 13).

Texas ArcheologicaL Society

48

White Trade Artifacts
A few white and blue glass trade beads and three or four
artifacts made of sheet copper have been found around house
sites and in graves.

On the whole, white trade artifacts are

very scarce.
Shell Artifacts
Plate 3, No. 2 shows an insect effigy pendant of mussel
shell. It has the features engraved with small lines or dots
and probably represents a grasshopper or locust. Plate 3,
No. 7 shows a piece of conch shell probably once used as
inlay in some sort of wooden object. Plate 3, Nos. 4, 5, and
8 show conch-shell beads from the surface and from burials.
A local farmer has a gorget made of conch shell, plain, about
three inches in diameter, with two drilled holes near one
edge.
Bone Artifacts
A few crude bone beads and one bone awl have been
found. Plate 3, No. 6 shows one of the crude beads. The
bone awl was in Burial 5 (see below). Most of the bone
artifacts seem to have decayed due to soil conditions and
time.
Pottery Artifacts Not Associated With Graves
Plate 4, No. 8 shows a shell-tempered pipe found in a disturbed house site.

Fragments of long, thin-stemmed pipes

have been found around house sites.
Plate 4, No. 7 shows an engraved and perforated sherd in
broken condition. Fragments of several artifacts of this type
have been found:
Plate 7, Nos, 4, 5, and 6 show three shell-tempered vessels
of the type Nash Neck Banded. These were on the floor of
a disturbed house, on a bed of ashes, with a small mano
nearby. Plate 7, No. 3, and Plate 8, No. 7, show small shelltempered vessels found on other disturbed house floors.

PLATE 4
Kaufman site artifacts of shell, stone, and clay.

Size ~g.

The Sam KauSman Site

51

Houses and House Floors
Very little is known about house types at this site, but
from small amounts of excavation done by the writer in disturbed houses, it seems that round houses of wattle-daub
construction are probably the major house types. However,
one disturbed area seems to have a square or rectangular
house present. This problem needs the attention of an institution which would have a crew large enough to handle it.
Burials
Many burials have been found at the Kaufman Site. Some
are in the village area about the two small mounds, others in
the two cemetery areas being destroyed by the river, and
still others all over the remaining village area. All of the
burials probably belong to a single culture as will be seen
in the burial descriptions to follow.
Burial I
This burial was located in the village area. It had been
somewhat disturbed by the plow but was mostly in position
as buried. The skeleton was in a bad state of preservation
but appeared to be an adult. It was impossible to determine
the sex. Burial was extended with head to northeast. Burial
offerings were three shell-tempered vessels and one conch
shell dipper or ornament. This was made by removing the
central core of the conch shell and smoothing the outer
edges. A hole was drilled at each end (Plate 4, No. 10).
There was no decoration on it.
The small spool-necked bottle (Plate 5, No. 2) was near
the head. The body of this bottle is engraved all over with
interlocking hook-shaped elements with small engraved
circles between. The design is repeated four times around
the bottle, which is brown in color. A bottle of somewhat
the same shape and design has been assigned to the McCurrain Focus in Oklahoma by Bell and Baerreis (1951, Plate
10, No. 20). However, they state it may be a trade piece.
The second vessel from Burial 1 (Plate 8, No. 1) has a design engraved through a red slip and belongs to the type

52

Texas Archeological Society

Avery Engraved which Krieger (1946, Fig. 18) assigned to
the Texarkana Focus. This type is also common in the McCurtain Focus which was defined in southeastern Oklahoma
shortly after Krieger described the Texarkana Focus (compare the present vessel with that shown by Bell and Baerreis, 1951, Plate 10, No. 14). The third vessel (not shown)
from Burial ! is of the type Simms Engraved which was
assigned to Texarkana Focus by Krieger (1946, Fig. 18), and,
like Avery Engraved, is now considered common also in the
McCurtain Focus (Bell and Baerreis, 1951, Plate 10, No. 19).
In the Kaufman site the type Simms Engraved usually has
red pigment rubbed into the lines.
Burial 2
Burial 2 was located in the cemetery area just to the northeast of the village area. It was buried at a depth of 14 feet
below the present surface and was exposed by the present
river cutting. The skeleton was extended with head to the
east, and was in a bad state of preservation. Determination
of sex was impossible, but the teeth were those of an adult.
Offerings consisted of two shell-tempered vessels, a doublepointed knife (Plate 3, No. 15), and two small arrow points
of the type Alba Barbed. There was no water bottle in this
grave, but it is possible that there was one and it had already
become a victim of the river.

The first vessel found (Plate 7, No. 7) is of the type Nash
Neck Banded, assigned to Texarkana Focus by Krieger (1946,
Fig. 18). Like Avery Engraved and Simms Engraved (see
above) this type is now also considered to be common in
both Texarkana Focus and IVIcCurtain Focus (Bell and Baerrels, 1951, Plate I0; No. 17). The second vessel from Burial
2 (Plate 8, No. 5) has three rows of impressed fingernail
lines (nail punctations placed end to end) around the vessel just under the rim, and a chevron design repeated four
times around the body. These designs were applied while
the vessel paste was still soft. This vessel has the crimping
of neck coils and is probably a variation of Nash Neck Banded, which sometimes includes such body designs in addition
to crimped rim coils.

PLATE 5
Kaufman site pottery vessels.

Nos. 3, 4 are %~ size, others ~.

The Sam Kaulman Site

55

Burial 3
This was located in the village area and was extended
with head north. The skeleton was in a bad state of preservation but was that of an adult. Sex could not be determined. The burial offerings were three shell-tempered vessels and 20 small triangular arrow points. Of the 20 small
points, two are side-notched triangles, and 18 are indentedbase triangles without notches. Two of the 20 are novaculite, a material obtained from southwest Arkansas. Of
the three pottery vessels in this burial, one is Simms Engraved with red pigment in the design, one is Avery Engraved (Plate 6, No. 2) with design engraved through a red
slip, and one is a bottle (Plate 5, No. 3). This bottle is very
much like one pictured from Oklahoma by Bell and Baerreis
(1951, Plate 10, No. 18). The water bottle and the red Avery
Engraved vessel had both been broken around the rim, and
showed evidence of having been chipped evenly around the
break, then re-used.
Burial 4
Burial 4 was located in the middle of a county road which
passes through the village area. The skeleton, which was
in a bad state of preservation, was extended with head to
the northeast. Determination of sex was impossible, but
the burial was that of a child about 12 years old. Burial
offerings included three shell- tempered vessels, a shelltempered pottery pipe and eight long conch-shell beads. The
shell beads (four of which are shown on Plate 3, No. 4) were
around the neck. The pipe (shown on Plate 4, No. 9) is interesting as it is the stem of a pipe, which after the bowl was
broken off, the break was smoothed down around the hole
and the stem end smoked by placing a cane stem in the hole
on the side. Two vessels (not shown) are Simms Engraved,
with red pigment in one vessel design. The bottle (Plate 5,
No. 5) is plain with a red slip covering it.

Burial 5 was located in the County road and was extended
with head to north. The sex could not be determined and

56

Texas Archeological Society

skeleton was in bad state of preservation, but appeared to
be a young adulh Burial offerings included two shell-tempered vessels and one bone awl. The bone awl (Plate 3,
No. 1) is made from ulna of deer. Plate 8, No. 4, shows a
vessel of Simms Engraved from this burial. Plate 5, No. 6,
shows a bottle.
Burial 6
This burial was located in the cemetery area being washed
by the river just northeast of the village area. It was in the
bank of the river about 12 feet below the present surface.
The skeleton was that of a middle-aged male and in a good
state of preservation. It was extended with head to the east.
Burial offerings included four clay-tempered vessels, one
shell-tempered vessel, one conch-shell pendant with nineteen conch-shell beads, 16 small triangular arrow points, and
three mussel-shell spoons.
Of the 16 small arrow points, five show evidence of being
ground or smoothed on the edges near the point. One of the
five is ground smooth on edges near the point and also
smoothed on each side of the point about half way toward
the base. The 16 points are shown on Plate 3, No. II. The
conch-shell beads and pendant are shown on Plate 3, Nos. 3
and 5. The pendant is made from the center core of conch
and is probably some sort of insect effigy.

The water bottle shown on Plate 5, No. 4 has three sets
of three strips of applied clay marked with fingernail as a
design. The vessel shown on Plate 6, No. 1 has a design of
punctates and straight lines, which is similar to Canton
Incised at Sanders Site (Krieger, 1946, Plate 28, Figs. F & G).
However, this vessel does not have the polish or shape of the
vessel from Sanders. The vessel shown on Plate 6, No. 3,
has 4 lugs on the rim and four incised lines under and around
the rim and is well polished. The writer has seen vessels
similar to it from the Sanders and Titus Foci Sites. The
vessel shown on Plate 6, No. 6 has a thickened lip and four
lines of punctates around the vessel just below the lip. The
surface of the vessel is well polished. The above four yes-

4

3

PLATE 6
Kaufman site pottery vessels.

No. 4 is % size, others 1,4.

The Sam Kau]man Site

59

sels are probably trade pieces to the Kaufman Site. All
four are clay-tempered. The last vessel from this grave is
shown on Plate 6, No. 5, is shell-tempered Avery Engraved
with design engraved through the red slip. Burial 6 in some
ways seems to be a stranger to the Kaufman Site with its
four clay-tempered vessels, some of which could be Sanders
or Titus vessels, and yet, they were in the same grave with
a shell-tempered vessel of Avery Engraved and 16 small triangular arrow points.

Burial 7 was located in the County road in the village
area. It was the burial of a small child in bad state of preservation. Sex was impossible to determine, but burial was
extended with head to east. Burial offerings included three
small shell-tempered vessels and a shell-tempered pipe. The
pipe is shown on Plate 4, No. 5. It shows no evidence of being
used in smoking. Plate 6, No. 4 shows a small vessel of
Avery Engraved with design engraved through the red slip.
Plate 7, No. 2 shows a small vessel of Simms Engraved with
red pigment r ubb ed into the design. Plate 5, No. 7,
shows a small spool-necked water bottle with interlocking
design repeated four times around the body.
Burial 8
This burial was located just east of County road in village
area. The burial was extended, but somewhat disturbed by
the plow. The skeleton was in a bad state of preservation
and determination of sex was impossible. Burial offerings
included two shell-tempered vessels, two small turquoise
pendants, and five turquoise beads. Plate 3, No, 9 shows
the turquoise artifacts. These turquoise artifacts are of the
same type as found by Rex Housewright in a burial on the
Goss Farm in Fannin County (Housewright, 1946) and must
be the result of trade from New Mexico with Pueblo tribes.
The Goss Site is located across Bois d’Arc Creek from Sanders Mound. As early as 1542, Caddo tribes were engaged
in the trade of bow wood of Osage Orange to the Puebloans
in exchange for turquoise and cotton blankets (Krieger,

6O

Texas Archeological Society

1946, p, 207), A small turquoise bead was found in the
Hatchel Mound near Texarkana by the University of TexasW, P. A: in a midden stratum assigned to Texarkana Focus
(Krieger, 1946, p. 207).
Of the two vessels from burial 8, one is Simms Engraved
(not shown) and the other Avery Engraved with design cut
through the red slip (Plate 8, No. 6).
Burial 9
This burial was located in the village area and was extended with head to north. The burial was that of an adult,
but skeleton was in a bad state of preservation and sex could
not be determined. The offerings consisted of three shelltempered vessels and 28 blue glass trade beads. The two
vessels (Plate 8, Nos. 2 and 8) are of the same type and are
plain except for a row of crimping around the top just below
the rim. This crimping of the neck coils is done in the same
manner as on the Nash Neck Banded vessels. The water
bottle shown on Plate 5, No. 1 is from this burial. The
blue glass trade beads are of the same type as found on the
Womack Site some 30 miles up Red River.
Burial 10
This burial was located in the cemetery area northeast
of the village area and was partially cremated with remains
of skull to the east. It was not possible to determine the
sex, but it was an adult. Offerings consisted of three pottery vessels, all shell-tempered. Plate 7, No. 1 shows a very
fine vessel of the type Nash Neck Banded. The design
was filled with red pigment and body highly polished. The
other two were a red-slipped vessel of Simms Engraved and
a plain vase-shaped vessel.
Burial 11
This burial was located in the County road in the village
area and was extended with head to the northeast. The
skeleton was in a very bad state of preservation, but seemed
to be that of an adult female about middle age. A small
shell-tempered spool-necked water bottle was to left side of

2

PLATE 7
Kaufman site 9ottery vessels.

All .’~.

The Sam Kau]man Site

63

head, but was so badly crushed by road grader that it could
not be repaired. Two shell-tempered vessels were to right
of head. One of these is Simms Engraved with red pigment
in design. The other is shown on Plate 8, No. 3 and is plain
except for a crimped design below the rim. This crimped
design was done in the same manner as the two vessels in
Burial 9. Near the right hand of burial 11 was a large mussel shell with a small flint scraper and three colors of paint
inside. The colors were red, white, and yellow. Plate 4,
Nos. 1, 2, and 3 show the yellow and white paint, and scraper.
The mussel shell and red paint were too soft to move. This
mussel shell was probably a paint kit and scraper used to
work the colors.
Pit Burial o5 Skulls
Just east of Salt Well Slough, and about the middle of the
village area, a pit was found. This pit contained about 20
skulls, but no other bones of the bodies. There were male,
female, and small children’s skulls in the pit. As the Osages
were the bitter enemies of the Caddo in historic times, these
may represent the remains of a group of Osages captured by
the Caddo. If they were Caddo themselves, it is probable
they would have been given the typical burial with offerings.
Many burials at the Kaufman site have been destroyed by
road graders, plow, and the river, but many more remain
to be excavated and recorded.
Summary of Burials
The burial of people who occupied the Kaufman site was
typically in an extended position with the head usually to
north or northeast, with a single skeleton in each grave. An
exception is the partially cremated burial described above.
Probably due to soil conditions, the bones are usually in a
very bad state of preservation.
Offerings included pottery vessels of types commonly
found in burials of the Texarkana and McCurtain Foci elsewhere, shell beads, shell dippers (one burial), shell gorgets
and pendants, glass beads (one burial), turquoise artifacts
(one burial), pottery pipes, and (very rarely) bone imple-

64

ments.

Texas Archeological Society

In most cases the pottery vessels were placed about

the head and shoulders.
Historical Notes
In 1797, while Andrew Ellicott was at Natchez, a body of
Choctaw Indians crossed the Mississippi to make war on
the Caddo. They were very successful and returned with
a number of poles filled with scalps (Foreman, 1930, p. 32).
In the early 19th century, the Caddos’ greatest enemies were
the Osage, William Dunbar reporting in 1804 that they were
unable to defend themselves against this tribe (Foreman,
1930, p. 25).
A few Caddo were still living in the area of northern
Red River County in 1815. Foreman (1930, p. 160) states
that in 1815 a number of white traders made a settlement
at Nanatscho, or Pecan Point, on the south bank of Red
River south of the present Kullituke in McCurtain County,
Oklahoma. The Caddo chief immediately complained of
this intrusion to the Caddo agent, Jamieson, at Natchitoches,
because this was the only crossing place for buffalo hunting
for miles along the Red River. In April, 1816, Jamieson
removed a dozen white families from this settlement to the
north side of Red River, arrested several unlicensed traders,
and confiscated their merchandise. The Caddo, however,
had become greatly reduced in numbers by this time.
We have seen that some Caucasian trade material has been
found on the surface of the Kaufman site and in Burial 9.
However, the amount of this trade material is so small
when compared with that from the Womack site, some 30
miles up Red River from the Kaufman place, that one wonders whether Kaufman is not mainly protohistoric rather
than historic. Krieger (1946, p. 210) states that the Texarkana Focus sites in the northeast corner of Texas and adjacent Arkansas and Louisiana have not revealed the slightest hint of historic contact. Bell (personal communication)
has said that the McCurtain Focus sites in southeastern
Oklahoma are without historic contact. In Burial 9 at the
Kaufman site, we nevertheless have found blue grass trade

PLATE 8
Kaufman site pottery vessels.

All 9§.

The Sam Kau]man Site

67

beads together with pottery vessels which closely resemble
those of other graves described above from this site. The
complex as a whole provides a close connection with both
the Texarkana and the McCurtain Foci through such pottery types as Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and Nash
Neck Banded. The water bottle from Burial 9 may border
on the type of bottle associated with the Glendora Focus,
which is generally regarded as representing the historic
period in the heart of the Caddoan area (Krieger, 1946).
On the whole, however, there is no positive Glendora Focus
ware at the Kaufman site so far as known, and Glendora
Focus bottles are often difficult to distinguish from those
of late prehistoric loci (Krieger, personal communication)’.
The Kaufman site would therefore seem to belong very
near the beginnings of white contact in this area, perhaps
early in the 18th century, when the first French traders were
extending their activities up Red River from Louisiana. It
has been the writer’s observation that evidence of white
trade increases as one comes up Red River. Thus, Kaufman
might be slightly later in time than the sites of Texarkana
and McCurtain Foci farther east, as from the notes above
it is suggested that the Osage and Choctaw drove the Caddo
west and south, or out of eastern Oklahoma and up Red
River.
At the Womack site to the west in Lamar County, there
is not only much more white trade material, but Glendora
Focus pottery types become the major ones.
Although the pottery types Avery Engraved, Simms Engraved, and Nash Neck Banded occur commonly in both
Texarkana and McCurtain Foci, there are a number of
differences between these loci in other pottery types, housefloor patterns, projectile points, and other traits. Because
of its proximity across Red River from the known McCurtain
Focus sites in Oklahoma, the absence of some of the key
pottery types of the Texarkana Focus, and the high frequency of red slips and shell temper, Krieger (personal
communication) suggests that the Kaufman site probably
should be considered a component of the McCurtain Focus

68

Texas ArcheoIogical Society

rather than Texarkana. If so, it extends this focus into the
time of early white contact although the date cannot be
accurately determined as yet.
Conclusions
1. The Kaufman site burials, so far as they have been
studied, contain pottery types of both the Texarkana and
McCurtain Foci, with preference for the latter, and perhaps
some tendency toward Glendora Focus through the shape
and decoration of certain bottles.
2. Trade relations with southwestern Arkansas are seen
in the presence of projectile points made of novaculite.
3. Trade relations with the Puebloan Indians of New
Mexico are seen in the turquoise artifacts in Burial 8.
4. A small amount (perhaps the beginning) of trade with
white men, probably French, is seen in the presence of blue
glass beads in Burial 9, and cone-shaped tinklers or projectile points of rolled sheet copper on the surface.
5. The McCurtain Focus, previously believed to be prehistoric, is seen to extend slightly into historic times, and
the Caddo Indians living at Kaufman may have been forced
westward up Red River by their enemies.
Bibliography
Bell, Robert E. and Baerreis, David A.
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bulletin of
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. Lubbock.
Foreman, Grant
1930. Indians and Pioneers, The Story of the American
Southwest before 1830. Yale University Press.
Housewright, Rex
1946. A Turquoise Bead Necklace. The Record, Vol. 5,
No. 2. Dallas Archeologicat Society.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of Texas Publication No. 4640,
Austin.
9024 San Fernando Way
Dallas 18, Texas

