TOWARD A GENERALIZED MODEL
OF HUNTING AND GATHERING SOCIETIES
PARKER NUNLEY

ABSTRACT
Although much is ethnographically known about various hunting and
gathering societies, all these groups had been affected to some degree by
food producing groups at the time they were reported. Archeology remains
the only viable source of data to test theories of the culture and society of
hunting and gathering peoples before contact with food producing
societies. The present paper represents an attempt to formulate
generalizations, stated in the form of expectations, about hunting and
gathering groups. The generalizations are inductively derived from
ethnographic data and are limited to some of those areas amenable to
verification by archeological investigation,
The utility of studies such as the present one lies, in part, in the
possibility that they will contribute further to the limited data on
variations in hunting and gathering cultures through time and
through a wide variety of environments. Although our
generalizations are by necessity limited ones, we agree with DeVore
when he writes that he is unwilling " . . . to abandon the search for
generalizations that seem to apply to most hunter-gatherers most of
the time" (DeVore 1968:339). The lack of complete data should not
discourage the formulation of careful generalizations, but should encourage caution in the use of such generalizations. The
generalizations presented here depend heavily on the work of Birdsell (1958) and Steward (1936, 1938). Unlike Birdsell’s and Steward’s
work however, the present work purposely excludes none of those
societies which depend on a hunting and gathering subsistence
base. Birdsell excluded societies such as the acorn gatherers of
California, tribes in the Northwest coastal area and the Coastal
Eskimo on the basis that they had access to "richer sources of
energy" that would "influence density, population structure, and
social and political organization in such a way that the
generalizations derived from the more stringent economies no
longer apply" (Birdsell 1958:189). Steward, on the other hand, was
primarily interested in primitive bands and excluded from consideration those hunting and gathering groups with more complex
social organization.
It now seems that exclusion of such groups artificially limits the
extent of variation possible among groups with a hunting and
gathering subsistence base (Freeman 1968). Dependence on the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

14

"classic cases" such as Netsilik Eskimos, the Arunta, and the !Kung
Bushmen may be misleading as Lee and DeVore point out:
... within a given region the ’classic cases’ may, in fact, be
precisely the opposite: namely, the most isolated peoples who
managed to avoid contact until the arrival of the ethnographers.
In order to understand hunters better it may be more profitable
to consider the few hunters in rich environments, since it is
likely that these peoples will be more representative of the
ecological conditions under which man evolved than are the
dramatic and unusual cases that illustrate extreme environmental pressure (Lee and DeVore 1968:5).
Since it is beyond the scope of this paper to derive a detailed
ethnology of societies with a hunting and gathering subsistence
base, the following discussion is limited to generalizations directly
useful to archeological verification. Topics covered include:
Territoriality, Settlement Pattern, Subsistence, and Social
Organization.

TERRITO RIALITY
It is by now apparent that all known hunting and gathering
groups have some sort of territorial concept. These concepts range
from a simple sense of a vague "life space" in which no territorial
rights are asserted, as among the Eastern Hadza (Woodburn 1968)
and the Western Shoshoni (Steward 1938) to specific land and water
use rights as among the Indians of the Northwest coast (Suttles
1968) and the Ainu (Watanabe 1968).
Stanner (1965) described territoriality among certain groups in
Australia. Although he was specifically referring to territory among
Australian Aborigines, he introduced three terms into the anthropo!ogical literature that have much wider usage that he gave
them:
The pattern of aboriginal territoriality should be looked at
from an ecological point of view. The evidence allows us to say
that each territorial group was associated with both an estate and
a range. The distinction is crucial. The estate was the traditionally
recognized locus

("country", "home", "ground", "dreaming

place") of some kind of patrilineal descent-group forming the
core or nucleus of the territorial group. It seems to have been a
’more or less continuous stretch. The range was the tract or orbit
over which the group, including its nucleus and adherents, or-

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

15

dinarily hunted and foraged to maintain life. The range normally
included the estate . . . Estate and range together may be said to
have constituted a domain, which was an ecological lifespace . . . In good habitats range and estate might be virtually coextensive . . . At another extreme.., an estate for practical purposes of life might amount to only places on a track (Stanner
1965:2).

If we discount the reference to a "patrilineal descent group" as
the foundation of the territorial group, Stanner’s terms are applicable.to all hunting and gathering groups.
In all cases there exists some form of "boundary" dividing a
group’s domain from surrounding territories. Sometimes, as in the
case of the Eastern Hadza and Western Shoshoni, the boundaries
are similar to a "cline" in genetics in that interacting groups blend
into one another rather smoothly. As Woodburn describes the concept among the Eastern Hadza: " . . . all four regions resemble each
other in having no clear-cut boundary. To draw boundaries would
be quite artificial; the regions grade into each other" (Woodburn
1966:104). Steward (1936) reports a similar lack of clear-cut boundaries among the Western Shoshoni.
Other groups have very specific boundaries to their territory,
however. Among the Bushmen, for example,
... each group of them has a very specific territory which that
group alone may use, and they respect their boundaries rigidly.
Each group also knows its own territory very well; although it
may be several hundred square miles in area (Thomas 1958: 10).

Woodburn makes another important point about territoriality
among the Hadza: "Each of these areas contains sufficient sources
of food and water to maintain its inhabitants throughout the year
and many people, especially the elderly, restrict their nomadic
movements for years at a stretch largely to a single one of these four
areas" (Woodburn 1968:104).
If we consider this in more general aspects, Woodburn’s
statement is applicable to all extractive groups. That is, all domains
must supply the minimum needs of food and water in order that the
population may survive. Therefore, the more scarce these
necessities are in a given area, the larger must be the domain of a
given human population. Contrariwise, the more abundant these
resources, the smaller the domain necessary for a given population.
In a study designed to test this apparent relationship, Birdsell

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(1953) assumed that mean annual rainfall is a reasonable correlate
with the amount of food and water available to extractive cultures in
Australia. Further assuming a tribal constant of five hundred individuals, he analyzed the relationship between rainfall and tribal
area. After reducing his initial sample of 409 tribes to a basic series
of 123 tribes on the "... grounds that either ecological factors
distorted the basic relationship between size of tribal area and
population density, or cultural variables produced undue deviations
in the size of the tribal population as compared to the assumed constant of 500 persons per tribe... " (Birdsell 1953:181), he was able
to conclude that "... there exists a very high degree of association
between the size of the tribal area in the basic series and the mean
annual rainfall occurring within its territory" (Birdsell 1953:183). If
Birdsell’s assumption that rainfall is a reliable indicator of
ecological viability is valid, his conclusions support the
generalization that the size of the domain of a group is inversely
related to the amount of available food and water. Birdsell
elsewhere points out that:
¯.. the qualitative descriptions in the literature strongly suggest
that other populations at comparable levels of culture show densities also primarily determined by environmental
variables . . . For each local group of populations the fuller array
of environmental factors must be analyzed ... the ability of each
human group to utilize these sources of energy will vary with
their extractive efficiency as determined by their technology
(Birdsell 1953:192).

SETTLEMENT PATTERN
We are here concerned with the distribution of hunting and
gathering groups Within their domain. Murdock’s classification of
settlement patterns is used to facilitate reference to his Ethnographic
Atlas (Murdock 1967) and Coult and Habenstein’s Cross-Tabulations
(1965).
Generally speaking, it has been widely held that the nomadic
band is the typical settlement pattern associated with hunting and
gathering groups. There is now good reason to question this belief.
Part of the new skepticism arises from the realization that our
ethnographic evidence is likely to be strongly biased in terms of
marginal hunters and gatherers. This bias must be taken into account when generalizing about hunting and gathering groups.
Another area of skepticism centers about the question of whether

17

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

one should separate hunting and gathering groups from fishing
groups, and/or groups with storage facilities as Birdsell (1958) has
done. This division of extractive groups seems to be particularly
questionable in view of the high degree of association between huriting and gathering and fishing in groups with an extractive subsistence base. In the present paper all groups without food production are considered to be hunting and gathering groups.
With this broader definition of hunting and gathering groups,
there is a fairly wide range of settlement patterns that occur. Coult
and Habenstein (1965:318) show, for example, that out of 101
societies with an extractive subsistence base, thirty-three have fully
migratory bands; forty-four are semi-nomadic/semi-sedentary; one
is composed of a cluster of hamlets; and twenty-three are compact
villages. They show no hunting and gathering groups with either
compound settlements or neighborhoods of homesteads.
In terms of specific groups, settlement pattern among hunters and
gatherers ranges from the permanent year-round residence of the
Ainu (Watanabe 1968) and the semi-sedentary long houses of the
Nootka (Drucker 1951) through the semi-nomadic bands of the
!Kung and Gikwe (Thomas 1959), the Walbiri (Meggitt 1962) and the
Eastern Hadza (Woodburn 1968).
Although the range of settlement patterns for known extractive
societies is broad, the actual association between hunting and
gathering and sedentary settlement patterns is a strong positive"
association between a hunting and gathering subsistence base and
semi-nomadic settlement patterns. These associations are presented
by Coult and Habenstein (1965:318) and are summarized in Table 1.
TABLE 1
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SETTLEMENT PATTERN
AND MODE OF SUBSISTENCE

Mode of Subsistence
Settlement Pattern

Bands
Semi-Nomadic

Extractive

Pastoralism

+ +

+ +

+

+

Plant Domestication

PermanentSemi-Permanent

--

+

++

Note: Strength of association: strong positive, + +; positive, +; not significant, O;
negative, -; strong negative, -. (After Coult and Habenstein 1965:318

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

If distinction is made between modes of subsistence within a
general extractive subsistence economy, an interesting pattern
emerges. As there is greater reliance on what may be termed a
"water economy" -- fishing, shellfishing, and taking large water
animals -- there is a tendency toward sedentary settlement patterns. Conversely, as the importance of a "water economy"
decreases, there is a marked tendency toward nomadic settlement
pattern. This tendency is suggested by comparison of Tables 2 and
3.
TABLE 2
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SETTLEMENT PATTERN AND FISHING

Mode of Subsistence: Fishing
Settlement Pattern

Bands
Semi-Nomadic
PermanentSemi-Permanent

Dominant

Co-dominant

o

0

+

0

Unimportant or Absent

Note: Strength of association: strong positive, + +; positive, +; not significant, 0;
negative, -; strong negative, --. (After Coult and Habenstein 1965:207)

TABLE 3
ASSOCIATION BETWEEN SETTLEMENT PATTERN AND
HUNTING AND GATHERING

Mode of Subsistence: Hunting and Gathering
Settlement Pattern

Dominant

Co-dominant

Unimportant or Absent
--

Bands

+ +

0

Semi-Nomadic

+ +

+ +

Semi-Permanent

--

-+ +

Note: Strength of association: strong positive, + +; positive, +’, not significant, 0;
negative, -; strong negative, --. (After Coult and Habenstein 1965:254)

If we consider hunting and fishing as independent variables in
extractive societies, the positive association between fishing
societies and increasingly sedentary settlement patterns is quite
clear. Table 4 illustrates the direction and strength of this

19

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

association. Data for this table were derived from Murdock (1967)
and include all those exclusively extractive cultures from America
north of Mexico.
TABLE 4
FREQUENCY OF VARIOUS SETTLEMENT PATTERNS WITH
REGARD TO SUBSISTENCE BASE
Settlement Pattern

Subsistence Mode

Hunting Dominant
n - 66

Semi-

Transhumanic

Permanent

Bands

Nomadic

Semi-Sedentary

Village

f

13

48

4

1

%

20

73

6

2

Hunting and
Fishing Codominant
n - 16
Fishing Dominant
n = 68

f

0

9

5

2

%

0

56

31

13

f

2

30

20

16

%

3

44

30

24

In Table 4 dominant means that the subsistence mode in question
was scored higher than its alternative. Thus, if hunting were rated 4
and fishing 3 for a’given society, that society would be tallied among
those with a dominantly hunting subsistence base. It should be
noted that the two societies with a dominant fishing base and band
settlement pattern, the Satudene and the Karankawa, are both
classed as only 10 percent more dependent on fishing than hunting
and are therefore not as far from the predicted pattern as their extreme position would seem to indicate.
Similarly, the single hunting-based society occupying a permanent village, the Nomlaki, is a borderline case. This group is
shown to be dominantly a food collecting society (56 to 35 percent)
and fishing (6 to 15 percent). Still, this group must be included to
satisfy the criteria of classification outlined above.
Chi-square was used to test the hypothesis that there is no
significant difference between the observed and the chance expected frequency settlement of pattern among societies with
dominant hunting subsistence as compared with societies with
dominant fishing subsistence. The result was a x2 value of 39.00
with 3 d.f. The null hypothesis that there is no significant difference
between the observed distribution and that expected by chance was
therefore rejected at better than the .001 level of confidence.
Although this distribution did not likely occur by chance, other

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

factors such as biased sampling, faulty data, improper weighting of
the classificatory criteria, etc., may account for some of the observed
variation. The point is, although the relationship between increasing
dependence on fishing and increasingly sedentary settlement patterns has not been proved, it remains a viable generalization.

SUBSISTENCE
There is a long-held myth about hunting and gathering societies
that is only recently being corrected (cf. Binford 1968). It says, in effect, that hunting and gathering societies are conservative because
the individuals in such societites have no leisure time to develop
"higher" culture. This lack of leisure is thought to be especially
restrictive in "marginal" areas since
¯ . . this type of habitat limits and narrows the cultural patterns
that are possible, once one method of survival has been worked
out, the possibility that another and strikingly different mode of
existence will be developed is remote. The people in such a
culture are constantly busy supplying minimum needs; they cannot hazard the experiment of trying to find a new way of life.
And in difficult habitats, such as the semideserts of south Texas,
external influences which might stimulate culture change are apt
to be minimal (Newcomb 1961:32).
In this passage the author makes two assertions which no longer
seem to be justified. As regards the first, concerning cultural conservatism in marginal areas, it has been shown that one of the most
striking cultural innovations yet, the domestication of plants and
animals, transpired repeatedly and independently in just such areas
as Newcomb’s Western Gulf culture area (cf. Ucko and Dimbleby
1969). Furthermore, among the earliest and most spectacular of the
"hydraulic" civilizations were some located on exotic streams
similar to the Rio Grande. Rather than seeking an environmental
reason for the apparent cultural conservatism in southwestern
Texas, one should perhaps look for explanation within the cultural
compulsives of the societies themselves or within the dynamics of
population pressures as suggested by Binford (1968).
As regards the assertion that the rigors of life in a hunting and
gathering society are such that the constituents "cannot hazard the
experiment of trying a new way of life," quite the opposite is now
widely documented from a number of widely different huntergatherer groups (Lee and DeVore 1968; Meggit 1962; Thomas 1959).

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

21

The consensus now seems to be that hunting and gathering groups
tend, as a rule, to be among the most leisured human societies the
world has known.
By and large, the productivity of labor in hunting-gathering
societies must be very low because of such limited technology.
For this reason one might suppose that hunting and gathering activities must be nearly unremitting. It has frequently been
assumed, in fact, that the hunting and gathering bands are
restricted to a tow level of cultural development simply because
the people lack the leisure to refine or "build" their culture.
But self-evident though this judgment may seem, it is nevertheless false. For reasons having to do with the very simplicity of
the technology and the lack of control over the environment,
many hunting-gathering peoples

are quite literally the most

leisured peoples in the world (Service 1962:12-13).

An alternative to Newcomb’s hypothesis suggested by current
data on hunting and gathering societies could be similar to Caldwell’s (1958) "maximum forest efficiency." That is, rather than the
development of "another and strikingly different mode of
existence" being a remote possibility, just the opposite is true. One
is then faced with the problem of explaining cultural conservatism
in some other terms. It could be that change was impeded in such
areas simply because the changes available were not as functionally
adaptive as those cultural elements they would displace.
The point here is that societies with an extractive subsistence
base ordinarily maintain a "surplus" of food within their domain.
Surplus as used here refers to the fact that hunters and gatherers
typically maintain themselves considerably below the maximum
short term carrying capacity of their domain. Such maximum
carrying capacity is, of course, a function of extractive technology
and available resources. The general nature of this relationship was
pointed out by Steward:
The type of sociopolitical groups in the Basin-Plateau area was
conditioned to a definable extent by human ecology. Rainfall,
soils, topography, and climate determined the nature, quantity,
and distribution of plant and animal species which were
required for food. The hunting and gathering devices and transportation facilities known in the area allowed only a certain
quantity of these to be procured and consequently limited the
general population density. The subsistence habits required in
each region largely determined the size, nature, and permanency

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

22

of population aggregates. These, in turn, predetermined many,
though not all, features of social structures and political control
(Steward 1938:256-257).

Murdock (1967:46) describes the subsistence base of a given
society in terms of five major types of subsistence activity: gathering
of wild plants and small land fauna; hunting, including trapping
and fowling; fishing, including shellfishing and the pursuit of large
aquatic animals; animal husbandry; and agriculture. Of these five,
only the first three are of interest here.
An inspection of the description of 105 extractive societies from
America north of Mexico (Murdock 1967:102-111) reveals the
relative frequencies of occurrence of gathering, hunting, and fishing
among them. After deleting twelve Plains Indian societies which
were all dominated by a horse and buffalo economy and therefore
felt to be special cases, the subsistence base of the remaining 138
societies is shown in Table 5.
TABLE 5
ASSOCIATION OF SUBSISTENCE TYPES
Dominant Subsistence Types
Important

Subsistence Types

Gathering

Hunting

Fishing

Total

Gathering

--

9

Hunting

28

--

19
35

3

13

--

28
63
16

....

8

8

Fishing
Hunting

and

Gathering
Hunting

and
12

Fishing
Gathering

Fishing
Totals

....

12

and
--

4

--

4

43

26

62

131

Notes: 4 societies have Hunting and Fishing co-dominant; 2’ societies have Gathering
and Fishing co-dominant; 1 society has Hunting and Gathering co-dominant;

123 societies have all.three types; 8 societies have Hunting and Gathering only;
7 societies have Hunting and Fishing only; 0 societies have Fishing and
Gathering only.
In terms of Murdock’s typology, several things clearly stand out.
One of the most interesting of these is the fact that the term "hunting and gathering" is misleading when applied to general extractive
societies. Hunting and gathering societies, that is, societies that
depend either exclusively or mostly on hunting and gathering ac-

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

23

tivities comprise only 33 percent of the total sample (46 of 138),
while societies that depend chiefly on hunting and fishing comprise
44 percent (61 of 138) of the sample. Even if the Plains Indians were
not excluded, the percentage of hunters and fishers would still be
greater than the percentage of hunters and gatherers. A more accurate term to describe non-food producing societies would simply
be the word "extractive". This assertion is supported by the observation that almost all of the societies in the sample (123 of 138)
availed themselves of all three subsistence modes. Of the remaining
fifteen, eight societies depended on hunting and fishing only, while
none depended on gathering and fishing only. Of these extreme
cases, most occur in a severe environment such as the Arctic in
which one of the three modes of subsistence is ordinarily
unavailable. In general it may be said that if the ecology of a domain
permits, all three modes -- gathering, hunting and fishing -- will be
used by an extractive society¯
Fishing appears as the dominant subsistence activity in about
sixty-two societies of the sample, gathering is dominant in fortythree societies, and hunting in only twenty-six. If we consider the
total number of societies in which an activity is of considerable importance (dominant, co-dominant, and important), hunting emerges
as the most frequent activity, fishing second most frequent, with
gathering third. These figures suggest that, although gathering is
present in most extractive societies, it is the least preferred of the
three modes of subsistence. This idea is borne out by field observations:
Very little of the vegetable food is eaten with much enthusiasm¯
But the advantage of vegetable food over meat (or honey), and
the basic reason why it constitutes the bulk of the diet of the
Hadza, is that it can be obtained quickly and, above all, predictably (Woodburn 1968:52-53).
¯ . . gathering of vegetable foods is fully as important a factor in
diet as is hunting. Although hunting is a more prestigious activity, gathering strategies play a large part in determining the
band’s daily and seasonal movement. Even in the direction of
their all-male spear hunt, the Ik take the distribution of vegetable
foods into consideration and women are called on for advice
(Turnbull 1968:135).

In short, it would seem that gathering serves as the economic
backbone for extractive societies and is increasingly relied upon
where other means fail. Conversely, gathering is avoided when

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

possible. The position gathering activities hold in extractive
societies is no doubt one of the variables that operates to keep such
a society near the long-term maximum carrying capacity of its
domain while operating well below the maximum short term
capacity. Gathering seems to be considered a way to supply supplementary foods even though, in fact, it may be the principle
economic base of an extractive society.
On the other hand, hunting and fishing tend to be seen as the
most important food producing activities even though they, in fact,
account for only a fraction of the food required by a society. Furthermore, fishing will tend to displace hunting in importance when
the environment allows equal access to both subsistence modes.

SOCIAL ORGANIZATION
Heeding Harris’s (1968) warning to archeologists, this section is
not concerned with those aspects of social organization that are
commonly lumped under the rubric of kinship. Rather, the interest
here is focused on the units into which hunting and gathering
groups are segmented, the kind and intensity of interaction that
takes place between and in those units, and the manner in which
they are integrated with one another.
Three different orders or social units are found in hunting and
gathering societies. Two of these, the nuclear family and the local
community, are so clearly found in extractive societies that Murdock has been led to comment:
Looking back on the 27 hunting societies covered in my conference paper, I come to the conclusion (leaving aside the
Australian ones for the moment) that there is a surprisingly
narrow range of variation in hunting and gathering cultures with
regard to social organization. The two universal human social
groupings -- nuclear family and local community -- stand out
clearly in all the hunter-gatherer societies (Murdock 1968:335).

In addition to these two universal social units, it now appears that
a third basic unit is common to extractive societies. This unit, which
has been noted in studies of hunting and gathering groups
throughout the world (Birdsell 1958:195; 1968:232), is today properly
termed the dialectal tribe instead of the previously used dialectic
tribe.
Since the nuclear family is conceded to be the basic social unit
among hunters and gatherers, just as it is among all other known

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

25

societies, it will not be further discussed here. Instead, attention is
focused upon the local group and the dialectal tribe.
The local community is a social unit defined by Murdock
(1949:79) as composed of individuals who interact with one another
on a day-to-day basis. The community among hunters and gatherers
is typically in the form of a band or, in Cooper’s (1946) term, a
"local group". It is territorially based and usually, but not always,
composed primarily of affinally and consanguineously related persons.
In terms of interaction patterns, the local community is the chief
social unit of cooperative interaction among the families in a
society. It is this unit which is the most flexible, which expands in
size when ecological conditions demand or permit, and shrinks
again with further change in the ecology of the area.
This was the worst season of the year for the people. Before
this, during the winter, the large extended band.., was
separated into little family groups that were scattered through the
veld, living at little waterholes that did not keep their water all
year long. During the dry season the water in these waterholes
vanished, causing the small family bands to gather at the last
sure waterhole of the area (Thomas 1959:148).
The local community is held together primarily by a combination
of kinship, cooperation, compatibility and friendship. There is
typically no political force or informal rule that maintains such a
community. Even so, forms of integration range from the political
hierarchy of the chiefdoms of the Northwest coastal groups
(Drucker 1965) to the simple primary associations of the Shoshoni
(Steward 1938). The degree of political authority exercised within
the local community seems to be minimal while kinship remains
the major integrative force.
As described by Birdsell (1958:195), the dialectal tribe is the unit
that most nearly fits the minimal definition of society. It is selfsufficient in all aspects and forms a territorially identified and
defined cultural pattern of interaction as well as a Mendelian
population. In short, the dialectal tribe can be defined as a collection
of interacting groups of nuclear families and/or communities,
sharing a linguistic dialect and forming a territory-specific cultural
and genetic unit. The characteristics of specific dialectal tribes have
been described by Cooper (1946), Woodburn (1968), Meggitt (1962)
and Thomas (1959).
Cooper, for example, notes that the Yahgan divided themselves

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

into five regional dialect groups and that "Marriages with mates
from far distant localities, especially outside one’s own of the five
dialectic (sic) groups, were disliked and infrequent" (Cooper
1946:92). At the same time, however, marriage with blodd relatives
was taboo. Thus, an individual ordinarily sought a mate outside his
local group, since most individuals in such a community were likely
to be blood relatives, yet married within the dialectal tribe.
The dialectal tribe is not a tribe in the sense used by Service
(1962). Rather, the concept of tribe as used here refers to a more informal concept of relationships than Service had in mind. The
dialectal tribe is a collection of bands, of communities, that are integrated by sharing a common language dialect, a common domain,
and a common Weltanschauung or collective consciousness. Such a
dialectal tribe may incorporate well delineated forms of social differentiation, as among the Indians of the Northwest Coast, it may
approach an egalitarian society as among the Eastern Hadza, the
Bushmen, or the Yahgan, or it may be a combination of these with a
higher number of achieved status positions as among the Plains Indians.
The significant characteristic concerning the dialectal tribe is that
it appears in some form in all these kinds of societies with a hunting
and gathering subsistence base. Societies with other types of subsistence may or may not have such a social unit. Among hunting
and gathering groups, the dialectal tribe is thus the maximum social
unit in terms of interaction patterns.
The size of the dialectal tribe seems to vary about a central tendency of approximately five hundred individuals (Birdsell 1953;
1958; 1968). This figure represents an empirically observed value
derived from data on native Australians, Shoshoni, and Andamanese (Birdselt 1968) as well as the Eastern Hadza (Woodburn
1968), !Kung Bushmen (Thomas 1959), and Yahgan (Cooper 1946).
The dialectal tribe may comprise the entire society as among the
Eastern Hadza (Woodburn 1968), or it may be only a subdivision of
a larger political unit. As the number of local groups within a dialectal tribe increases, there is a marked increase in cultural
homogeneity between the units (Birdsell 1958).
Interaction between dialectal groups is described as relatively infrequent, although normally tranquil:
Social relations within and between the dialectic and local
groups appear to have been normally irenic, but violence and
bloodshed were not infrequent... The Yahgan resented and

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

27

avenged exploitive trespass upon their tribal territory... So,
too, did members of any one of the five dialectic groups, of any
one of the numerous local groups, by nonmembers (Cooper
1946:95).
Much of the interaction as does take place between dialectal
tribes can be seen as a matter of cooperative sharing in emergencies:
Members of one dialectic or local group could, however,
exploit the territory of other groups to secure food in grave shortage, to feast on a stranded whale, and to gather firestones and
suitable canoe bark which were found only in certain parts of the
Yahgan territory (Cooper 1946:95).

The following quotation from Meggitt summarizes these three
social units very well:
From the point of view of the individual, the group at its
greatest was the community that comprised all his country and
included most of his closer relatives. At its least, the group was
his family of procreation or orientation. Between these extremes,
the unit might perhaps be termed a horde, but it was one whose
personnel were recruited on a number of different bases that
varied from one occasion to the next. These might reflect consanguineal links, affinal ties, bonds of ritual friendship or
obligation, the pull of temperamental compatibility -- or combinations of all of them (Meggitt 1962:51).

SUMMARY
It is recognized that this brief overview of ethnographic data cannot provide the basis for a definitive theory of the behavior of hunting-gathering groups. Instead, the purpose here is to provide a
theoretical, abstract model in terms of which archeological and
ethnographic data may be ordered and explained. The model is to
be considered a flexible one, subject to change as the data and
problems warrant. It is in this sense merely another conceptual tool
and can only be judged by its usefulness.
Such a model, by its very nature, is stark and, perhaps, vague in
its generality. It lacks the explicit detail that comes with the extraction of particular relationships from their context and in this
sense is typological in nature. It is a mistake, too often made, to apply such a general model to particular situations without due

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

allowance for the intricate contextual nuances that must be taken
into account in the particular.
Another caution in using such a model is that it not be allowed to
become the reality it was originally designed to represent. It must be
remembered that a model is merely a rather simple abstraction
which, in its better forms, more or less accurately represents a
theoretical, complex reality. Thus, the following model, presented in
the form of a series of statements, is to be considered to be a partial,
problem-oriented list of expectations concerning extractive
societies.
1. Extractive societies occupy a definite territory which is known
to group members and which is defended in varying degrees against
transgression by out-groups. The territory of such a group is often
bounded by geographically distinct features such as broad plains,
different watersheds, soil changes, etc.
2. This territory may be considered in terms of:
(a) An estate-- the "home ground" of a group or an individual;
(b) A range-- the tract over which a group ordinarily conducts
its activity;
A
domain -- the area containing both the estate and the
(c)
range; the ecological life-space of a group.
3. The domain must supply the minimum needs of food and
water to maintain the group on both a long-term and short-term
basis. Therefore, if population size and extractive technology are
held constant, there is an inverse relationship between availability
of food and water and size of domain. Correspondingly, areas with
little available food and water have relatively low population densities, while areas with an abundance of food and water tend to be
relatively densely populated.
4. Extractive societies tend to establish an equilibrium between
population density and available resources. The point of this
equilibrium normally lies near the maximum long-range carrying
capacity of a given domain, but is well below the typical short-term
carrying capacity. This results in considerable amount of leisure
time for hunting and gathering populations.
5. Extractive societies maintain themselves at an equilibrium with
their environment in part by exploiting the resources of their
domain in a preferential manner. Although hunting, fishing, and
gathering activities are all employed when possible, hunting and
fishing are preferred over gathering. Gathering activities normally
provide the bulk of foodstuffs in hunting and gathering societies
even though such activities are not preferred.

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

29

6. The settlement pattern of extractive societies range from small,
fully nomadic bands to relatively large, sedentary villages. There is
a direct relationship between sedentary settlement patterns and
water economy, so that as an extractive society relies to a greater extent on a water economy, it grows increasingly sedentary. On the
other hand, extractive societies with little or no reliance on fishing
are typically highly nomadic.
7. The nuclear family, the local community, and the dialectal tribe
are social units that are typically found in extractive societies.
8. The nuclear family is the basic unit of social organization in extractive societies, just as it is in societies with other forms of subsistence. It is similarly the primary source of enculturation, identification and reference. Patterns of interaction are intense and
prolonged. The nuclear family is the only one of these three forms
of social organization that is wholly exogamous.
9. The local community is the major social unit in terms of interaction patterns among families in a society. It ranges in form
from ill-defined, temporary local bands to well defined long-lived,
relatively permanent groups. It is territorially based, and its cultural
patterns can be expected to differ significantly from similar
territorially based groups.
The local community is composed of one or more families and is
usually, though not always, exogamous. Interaction within the community is an intense, daily affair. Hence, the local community is
second only to the family as an instrument of enculturation and
provides the first opportunity to the individual for peer group and
other extra-familial sanctions. The culture of the local group is
typically quite distinctive, particularly in the more sedentary
societies in which flux of movement in and out of the local community is at a minimum.
10. The dialectal tribe is a totally self-sustaining social unit. It is
territorially based and is composed of a number of local communities. Interaction is largely within the tribe. This, plus the fact
that the tribe is endogamous, leads to the development and maintenance of a distinctive cultural pattern.
11. The dialectal tribe is ordinarily a relatively long-lived
sociocultural unit. Its duration should far exceed the time span of
any of its constituent members or communities.
12. There is a marked increase in cultural homogeneity within a
tribe as the number of local groups within the tribe increases. In
relatively favorable regimes, therefore, one could expect dialectal
tribes to be more culturally homogeneous than in relatively un-

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

favorable regimes.
13. Interaction of groups centrally located in the tribal domain is
more likely to be confined to intertribal contacts than interaction of
groups located near tribal boundaries. Therefore, centralized groups
are more likely to be culturally conservative in relation to outlying
groups. By the same token, and following the old culture area concept, centralized groups are more likely than outlying groups to interact with all other groups in the tribe.
14. Dialectal tribes vary greatly in size of population, but there is a
marked central tendency toward approximately five hundred as the
most frequently occurring size.

REFE~NCES CITED

Binford, L. R.
1968 Post-Pleistocene Adaptations. In: New Perspectives in Archeology. S.
R. Binford and L. R. Binford (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company.
Chicago.
Birdsell, J. B.
1953 Some Environmental and Cultural Factors Influencing the Structuring of Australian Aboriginal Populations. American Naturalist 87:
pp. 171-207.
1958 On Population Structure in Generalized Hunting and Collecting
Populations. Evolution 12: pp. 189-205.
1968 Some Predictions for the Pleistocene Based on Equilibrium Systems
Among Recent Hunter-Gatherers. In: Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and
I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Caldwell, J.
1958 Trend and Tradition in the Prehistory of the Eastern United States.
Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association, No. 88.
Cooper, J. M.
1946 The Yahgan. Handbook of South American Indians. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 143.
Coult, A. D., and R. W. Habenstein
1965 Cross Tabulations of Murdoch’s World Ethnographic Sample. University of Missouri Press. Columbia.
Devore, I.
1968 Discussions, Part VII. In: Man the Hunter. Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Drucker, P.
1951 The Northern and Central Nootkan Tribes. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin No. 144.
1965 Cultures of the North Pacific Coast. San Francisco.
Freeman, L. G.
1968 A Theoretical Framework for Interpreting Archeological Materials.
In: Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing
Company. Chicago.

HUNTING/GATHERING SOCIETIES

31

Harris, M.
1968 Comments. In: New Perspectives in Archeology. Aldine Publishing
Company. Chicago.
Lee, R. B. and I. Devore (eds.)
1968 Man the Hunter. Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Meggitt, M. J.
1962 Desert People: A Study of the Walbiri Aborigines of Central Australia.
Sydney. Angus & Robertson.
Murdock, G. P.
1949 Social Structure. The MacMillan Company. New York.
1967 Ethnographic Atlas. Pittsburgh.
1968 Are the Hunter-Gatherers a Cultural Type? In: Man the Hunter, R. B.
Lee and I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of
Texas Press. Austin.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R.
1933 The Andaman Islanders (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge.
Service, E. R.
1962 Primitive Social Organization. Random House. New York.
1966 The Hunters. Prentice-Hall. Englewood Cliffs.
Stanner, W. E. H.
1965 Aboriginal Territorial Organization: Estate, Range, Domain, and
Regime. Oceania 36: pp. 1-26.
Steward, J. H.
1936 The Economic and Social Basis of Primitive Bands. In: Essays in Anthropology Presented to A. L. Kroeber. Berkeley.
1938 Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Sociopolitical Groups. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 120.
Suttles, W.
1968 Coping with Abundance: Subsistence on the Northwest Coast. In:
Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing
Company. Chicago.
Thomas, E. M.
1959 The Harmless People. Alfred A. Knopf. New York.
Turnbull, C. M.
1968 The Importance of Flux in Two Hunting Societies. In: Man the
Hunter, R. B. Lee and I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company.
Chicago.
Ucko, P. J. and G. W. Dimbleby (eds.)
1969 The Domestication and Exploitation of Plants and Animals. Aldine
Publishing Company. Chicago.
Watanabe, H.
1968 Subsistence and Ecology of Northern Food Gatherers with Special
Reference to the Ainu. In: Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and I. Devore
(eds.). Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.
Woodburn, J.
1968 An Introduction to Hadza Ecology. In: Man the Hunter, R. B. Lee and
I. Devore (eds.). Aldine Publishing Company. Chicago.

Richland College
Dallas, Texas

