THE GARZA OCCUPATION AT
THE LUBBOCK LAKE SITE
EILEEN JOHNSON, VANCE

T.

HOLLIDAY, MICHAEL

J.

KACZOR

AND ROBERT STUCKENRATH

ABSTRACT
Recent excavations at the Lubbock Lake site (41 LU 1) by the Lubbock
Lake Project, The Museum of Texas Tech University, resulted in the
recovery of Garza points in association with hearths. Radiocarbon
determinations received on the charcoal dated the occupations to the
mid-1600’s. These were the first reported radiocarbon dates for this
distinctive point type. Four excavation areas yielded evidence of
repeated Garza occupation in the form of camping areas and a
processing station. In one of the excavation areas, previous work
conducted by Green (1962) was correlated with that of the excavations
of the Lubbock Lake Project. The dates and the association of Apachelike pottery [micaceous blackware) strongly suggested that Garza points
were contemporaneous with the Apache occupation of the area and that
perhaps the point type represented a local Apache style.

INTRODUCTION
The Lubbock Lake site (41 LU 1) is a stratified archeological
locality on the Llano Estacado. Situated in an old meander bend of
Yellowhouse Draw, the site is located on the northern outskirts of
the city of Lubbock, Lubbock County, Texas. Although the site has
long been recognized as a Paleo-Indian locality (Sellards 1952;
Black 1974), the deposits record a fairly continuous aboriginal
occupation from Clovis to Historic times. A faunal and geological
stratigraphy exists concomitantly with this cultural sequence,
providing a three dimensional framework for the interpretation of
cultural change in the area.
The Lubbock Lake Project is an on-going, interdisciplinary
research program of The Museum of Texas Tech University.
Although primarily concerned with the delineation of the PaleoIndian occupations and changes at the site, most of the cultural
time periods and geological substrata have been tested by the
project. The site has a minimum extent of 110 acres, and owing to
its size and the stratified nature of the deposits, many excavation
areas were opened. A variety of cultural activity areas existed
synchronically and diachronically, attesting to the differential
utilization of the site environs by various cultural groups. Within
the later deposits at the site, the most extensively explored cultural

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

occupation was that of the Garza period. This cultural designation
is based on a distinctive point type, that of a small, triangularshaped point with a single, centrally placed, basal notch (Runkles
1964: 107). Several sites yielding Garza points and an associated
tool assemblage had been excavated in the area (Holden 1938;
Wheat 1955; Word 1963; Runkles 1964; Parsons 1967; Lorrain
1968), and surface collections indicated a distribution from the
Llano Estacado into southeastern New Mexico (Runkles 1964: 124).
No radiocarbon dates were associated with the material from these
sites, but the suggested time period of Garza occupation in the area
was late prehistoric (Runkles 1964: 123). Radiocarbon determinations received on charcoal from hearths associated with Garza
points at the Lubbock Lake site suggest a protohistoric/historic
occupation by this cultural group.

OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES
Garza period occupational features were found at four excavation areas at the site, Area 5, 8, 14, and 15 (Fig. 1). These features
represent two different kinds of cultural activity, camping areas
and processing stations. Camping areas, where people lived for a
short period of time, were located in Area 8, 14, and 15. These
areas are characterized by the occurrence of hearths, widespread
scatter of lithic tools, unfinished items, and debris, and the absence
of bone expediency (butchering) tools. One processing station was
partially exposed in Area 5. Secondary butchering and marrow
extraction took place in these stations, the kill and primary
butchering occurring elsewhere. Processing stations are characterized by the presence of butchered remains of several kinds of game
animals, a random bone disposal pattern, marked absence of
various major skeletal elements, and the occurrence of bone
expediency tools. These two kinds of cultural activity areas are
also differentiated by their topographic locations. The camping
areas were located in the dry, upland sections away from the main
watercourse. Processing stations were located in the lowland areas
along the marsh/stream complex. The geologic deposits reflect this
topographic difference. The Garza camping areas occurred in
substratum 5A1, an aeolian/fluvial sand and colluvium deposit;
while the processing stations occurred in 5C1, the lowland clay
facies (Stafford 1977).

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

85

/
\
’\\\

/

r~
©

0

©
r~
©

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Activity Areas
Area 14-FA14-1 and Area 15-FA15-1 .
Of the three camping areas located, the two in Area 14 and 15
were found through stratigraphic testing that revealed the
presence of hearths. In each of these excavation areas, only the
hearth and immediately adjacent occupation surface were
excavated, an expeditious technique designed to recover material
for radiocarbon dating.
An unlined, basin-shaped hearth, feature FA14-1, was exposed in
Area 14. Excavations revealed a Ethic scatter beginning 10 cm
above the hearth and extending down into it. A unifacially flaked
Garza point made of Edwards Plateau chert was recovered in situ
10 cm above the hearth. The broken tip exhibits several hinge
fractures from impact. A biface corner section of Edwards Plateau
chert was recovered and may have been broken in manufacturing
since only a few parallel flakes were removed from each side.
There is no noticeable wear along the edge of this specimen. Two
utilized flakes of Edwards Plateau chert were recovered. One
exhibits damage flake scars along both sides, but particularly along
the medial edge. The other specimen was broken but retains an
edge showing damage flake scars. Seventy-five unmodified flakes
were recovered, the most common material being Edwards Plateau
chert (59). Other materials used included Tecovas (9) and Alibates
(3) cherts, silicified caliche (3), and obsidian (1). Charcoal,
submitted to the Radiocarbon Laboratory of the Smithsonian
Institution, yielded a date of A.D. 1635 (315+ 50; SI-2701). The
hearth in Area 15 (FA15-1) is more appropriately described as an
ash-filled, kettle-shaped pit (Fig. 2). Hearth material, including
burned caliche, burned and unburned bone, and charcoal, had
been dumped into the pit. One Garza point of Edwards Plateau
chert came from the lowest level in the pit. The tip was broken,
showing a burin-like break that had occurred on impact. Charcoal
from this lowest level yielded a date of A.D. 1665 (285 _+ 60; SI2703).
Area 8-FA8-2, FA8-4
Evidence of repeated, intensive occupation by Garza period
peoples came from Area 8, where at least two, and perhaps as
many as four, levels of habitation were found. Green (1962) had
opened a long trench in this area, dividing it into four excavation
units, Block A, B, C, and X. A minimal amount of testing was

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

87

!
.2,

;i

¢3
"UJ
©
OD

¢J
b.l

t9

i i i i )i i i i i i

U3

iiiiiiiiiiiii
iiii~iii~iiiii

i i !i !i!i!!!!

<D

¢J
(D

64
c~

tO

cD

D

~

2

E

o

u.

o

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

conducted in this area by the Lubbock Lake Project to correlate
stratigraphy and obtain additional data on the various occupation
levels. Green’s (1962) stratigraphic sequence in this area was
compressed and redefined by Stafford (1977). Within his stratum 6,
now designated substratum 5A by the Lubbock Lake Project, Green
(1962: 119) exposed two living surfaces, calling the higher one the
first occupation level and the other the second occupation level.
These levels corresponded to features FA8-2 and FA8-4,
respectively, uncovered by the Lubbock Lake Project (Fig. 3). Two
other occupation levels were encountered by the project within the
5A deposits, one above and one below the Garza levels. No
diagnostic artifacts were recovered, and their cultural affiliations
are unknown at present. These features may represent Garza
occupations as well since the total deposition of 5A occurred over
a short period of time (Stafford 1977).
FA8-2
Green (1962) recovered a variety of tools and exposed several
micro-activity areas in both occupation levels. The predominant
lithic material source was Edwards Plateau chert; a few other
types of material were minimally represented. Three projectile
points were recovered from the first occupation level: a broken
Garza point made of Tecovas chert (Fig. 4g); a basal tang of a
"Lott" point, a locally known, informally named point; and the
blade of an indeterminate type (Fig. 4f). "Lott" points were
associated with Garza points in the upper two occupation levels at
Blue Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938) and at the Pete Creek
site (Parsons 1967). Other tools from the first occupation level
include an ovate, bifacially flaked, preform of Edwards Plateau
chert (Fig. 4c), and six scrapers, all of Edwards Plateau chert and
all made on flakes. Three of the scrapers were small, delicate tools
perhaps used as finishing implements. Minute damage flake scars
can be seen along the working edges. One has retouch along both
sides; the second example was broken, but has steep retouch along
the two unbroken edges. The third scraper is alternately retouched
along the sides. Retouch along the lateral edge is on the dorsal
side, while the medial edge retouch occurs on the ventral side (Fig.
4j,k,1). Another scraper exhibits alternate retouch at the distal
corners, on the dorsal side at the medial edge, and on the ventral
side of the lateral edge (Fig. 4h). A snub-nosed scraper has steep
retouch on three sides with heavy damage flake scarring along the
edges, particularly the distal end (Fig. 4b). The last scraper was a

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

89

E

o

.£
Z
o

/ .....

o
O~

o

/

©

o
o

©

5

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

broken section, showing some damage flake scarring superimposed
on the retouch of the working edge (Fig. 4i).

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

91

Fifteen utilized flakes were recovered, the majority of which
were of Edwards Plateau chert. Four of them have either
indentations that were used or notches created through damage
flake scarring. Of the others, three show damage flake scaring
along the lateral edge (one on the ventral side); two exhibit use
along the medial edge (one on the ventral side); and two are utilized
on the distal end and one at the latero-distal corner. The apex of a
triangular-shaped flake has been utilized. The remaining utilized
items are broken pieces exhibiting damage flake scars along single
edges.
At least one chipping station was exposed, represented by a
small cluster of flakes located along the Block A/B line. The
majority of unmodified flakes, including retouch and resharpening
debitage from the chipping station, were of Edwards Plateau chert.
Other materials (Alibates chert, chalcedony, Morrison quartzite,
and a white chert of unknown source) were represented by only a
few flakes each. A hearth, with several large chunks of burned
caliche, was located in Block A (Fig. 3), but a radiocarbon
determination was not reported.
In addition to the lithic material, parts of two tubular bone beads
were recovered (Fig. 4a). Similar beads were found at other
excavated Garza sites (Holden 1938; Wheat 1955; Runkles 1964).
Pottery sherds from the level consisted of a thick-walled, brushed,
grit-tempered blackware (Fig. 4e). This is an unnamed pottery type
that has occurred at other sites (surface collections) in the area
and may be of local origin.
Although no Garza points were recovered from the project’s
testing operations in Area 8, feature FA8-2 was correlated with
Green’s (1962) first occupation level (Fig. 3). Six additional utilized
flakes, a small core, a biface, pottery, and the edge of another
chipping station were exposed in a 1 x 2 meter test unit adjacent to
Block C. The flaking on the ventral side of the tip of the biface was
incomplete, having been broken during manufacturing (Fig. 4m).
The material used was Edwards Plateau chert. A unidirectional
core was made on a very small nodule of Edwards Plateau chert
(Fig. 4d). Two of the utilized flakes (Edwards Plateau chert) were
notched along the lateral side, one taking advantage of an
indentation and the other creating a shallow notch from damage
flake scarring. The other four flakes exhibit a variety of utilization
indications. One flake (Edwards Plateau chert) was utilized along
the distal end and on the ventral side of the medio-distal corner;
while a second flake (Edwards Plateau chert) exhibits wear along
the distal end. Two obsidian flakes were utilized, one along the

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

distal and lateral edges, the other along the medial edge on the
ventral side.
Two hundred fifty-five flakes of retouch/resharpening debitage
were recovered from the partially exposed chipping station.
Ranging in size from less than 2 mm to 19 ram, most of the flakes
were located in situ; the rest were recovered from matrix
concentrates. Edwards Plateau chert was the preponderant lithic
source (71%), followed distantly by a white chert of unknown
source (22%). Other materials (chalcedony, obsidian, and silicified
caliche) made up the remainder {7%). The use of five different
lithic materials indicates the manufacture or use of a variety of
implements (at least five).
Pottery sherds recovered were an unbrushed, thick-walled, grittempered blackware. Similar sherds were recovered in surface
collections from the area, from the uppermost Garza occupation at
Blue Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), and the Garza
occupation at the Floydada Country Club site (Word 1963). These
sherds probably represent either a contemporaneous type or
unbrushed portions of brushed ware. Neither Wheat (1955) nor
Runkles (1964) recovered pottery in association with Garza
material.
Food debris scattered across the occupation surface consisted
principally of remains from modern bison (Bison bison), although
pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra americana) and wolf (Canis lupus)
also were represented. Parts of two bison mandibles were
recovered during the project’s testing efforts. One is the left
mandible of a mature animal, aged between 5.5 and 9.5 years
(Frison and Reher 1970). The ascending ramus and angle had been
removed by pounding action during butchering and the P2-M,
removed. The tooth cavity was exposed to the M3 by incomplete
spiral fracturing, removing the symphyseal surface and border
area. The breakage was completed by several blows along the
border, giving access to the marrow-rich area. The mandible could
not be measured for sexing because of this damage. The other
mandible is a right one of probably a 3.5 year old. Only the M3
remained, and it was erupted with the first two cusps in wear and
the third cusp unworn (Frison and Reher 1970). The ascending
ramus, angle, and border had been removed through pounding
action to just posterior to the Ma, probably during butchering. The
anterior section had been removed to the M3, and the mandible
could not be measured for sexing.

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

93

FA8-4
Several projectile points, all of Edwards Plateau chert, were
recovered by Green (1962) in the second (lower) Garza occupation
level. Of the five, two are midsections and one is the corner tang of
a Harrell point. Two Garza points were located in the second
occupation level. One point is a unifacially flaked basal section
with the notch bifacially flaked. The other point is incomplete and
apparently broke during manufacturing, the two sections being
recovered near each other. This Garza point has merely an
incipient basal notch, with only a few flakes removed bifacially
(Fig. 5a,b). Garza and Harrell points were found in association at
the Garza type locality (Runkles 1964), at the upper two occupation
levels at Blue Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), and at the Pete
Creek site (Parsons 1967).
The basal section of a thin, bifacially flaked knife, of Edwards
Plateau chert, also was recovered. It was apparently broken during
manufacture. The base is concave and the edges and base
demonstrate some degree of grinding (Fig. 5d).
All of the scrapers and utilized flakes were of Edwards Plateau
chert. Two side scrapers were made on flakes. One of these retains
the outer cortex of the nodule on the proximal and distal ends. This
tool has steep angle retouch along the lateral side with heavy
damage flake scarring (Fig. 5f). It was apparently broken during
use, and two sections were recovered. The other scraper is a small,
delicate tool. Steep angle retouch has created a shallow notch on
the lateral side, and tiny damage flakes were removed in the notch
area (Fig. 5g). An end scraper has steep retouch that created a
shallow scallop edge. Heavy damage flake scarring is exhibited
within the "notches" of the scallop (Fig. 5h). The fourth scraper is
a keeled, long, and narrow tool, steeply retouched on all sides (Fig.
5e). Damage flakes had been removed around the distal end and
adjacent sides, but particularly along the medial edge.
Five utilized flakes were recovered. Three have damage flake
scarring along the distal end, one along the medial edge, and one
along the lateral edge on the ventral side.
A bone awl was fashioned from a split shaft segment of a long
bone, ground and polished to a tip (Fig. 5i). The tip had been broken
during use. Awls from split sections of bone were recovered at
other excavated Garza localities (Holden 1938; Wheat 1955;
Runkles 1964; Parsons 1967).
The most unusual occurrence in this occupation level was the
exposing of a cluster of 16 bison skulls (Green 1962), extending

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

©

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

95

from Block A into Block X (Fig. 3). Although Green (1962: 119)
suggested that they may have had ritual significance, the feature
was not totally isolated; other mundane activities had occurred
around the cluster. A butchered wolf skeleton and lithic debris
were scattered to the east of the cluster. Two small chipping
stations (debris of Edwards Plateau chert) also were located in the
area, one south and the other southwest of the cluster. However,
no lithic material was recovered from the adjacent Block B to the
west of the skulls. Cultural material was located further to the
west in Block C (Fig. 3), where another hearth was located. No
radiocarbon date was reported. Burned remains of pronghorn
antelope, badger (Taxidea taxus), and western diamond-back
rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox) were recovered from the hearth.
Green’s (1962) second Garza occupation level was correlated
with FA8-4 from the project’s test unit. Most of the material from
this feature consisted of modern bison remains, concordant with
the butchered remains Green (1962) recovered in Block C (Fig. 3).
Three resharpening/retouch flakes, each of a different material
(Edwards Plateau chert, and a white chert and pink quartzite of
unknown sources), constituted the lithic material recovered. A more
detailed analysis of the material recovered by Green (1962) and
correlation with work done by the Lubbock Lake Project is
forthcoming (Kaczor ms.).
Area 5-FA5-6

The one processing station excavated by the project was located
in Area 5 and designated feature FA5-6 (Fig. 6). The station
represented an area of secondary processing, a distinctive aspect
of the animal procurement system. The "schlepp effect" concept
(Perkins and Daly 1968), whereby long bones and other major
skeletal elements were not as numerous as they should be given the
minimum number of individuals (MNI) represented, was operative
in these stations. Perkins and Daly (1968: 105) felt that this
phenomenon resulted from killing and initially butchering animals
away from the locale and bringing back only selected parts. At the
Lubbock Lake processing stations, these selected units were then
further butchered and the bones processed for marrow. Although
modern bison was the principal game animal, remains of pronghorn
antelope, wolf, and coyote (Canis latrans) also were recovered.
Faunal remains were scattered over the surface in a random
pattern; however, there was a greater concentration of faunal
material and bone expediency tools in the eastern section of the
exposed station. This area may then be close to a boundary of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

96

original station. Deposits east of the exposed station were removed
by dredging in the 1930’s and subsequent erosion. More of the
station existed south of the exposed area, demonstrated through
testing and profiling operations.

~2
©

r./]

/rI

tr3

<

32

©

5

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

97

Lithic tools and flakes were found throughout the processing
station. Parts of four projectile points were recovered. One Garza
point of Tecovas chert has the tip broken by impact creating
several hinge fractures (Fig. 7a). A Harrell point of chalcedony is
represented by a corner tang. A small basal section with a notch
(Edwards Plateau chert) is from either a Garza or Harrell point.
The fourth point consists of a broken midsection of Edwards
Plateau chert. The broken tip of a chalcedony biface was recovered
(Fig. 7b). Both edges of this possible knife show slight crushing
damage and rounding of points, although wear is heaviest along the
lateral edge. A broken unifacially flaked implement, of Edwards
Plateau chert, may have also been part of a flake knife. Damage
flake scarring is biracial, and the sinuous edge is worn and
rounded. Two scrapers of Edwards Plateau chert were found. One
is a large, snub-nosed scraper made on a thick flake (Fig. 7d). Steep
angle retouch occurs on the three sides with damage flake scarring
concentrated on the distal end. Both edges adjacent to the proximal
end, but particularly the lateral side, show edge crushing, perhaps
for hafting purposes. The other scraper was made on a blade that
had a triangular cross-section (Fig. 7c). The broken midsection of a
side scraper was collaterally flaked; damage flake scarring is
exhibited along both edges but is more pronounced along the
latero-distal one. The material may have been heat-treated as it
shows a very crystalline structure, is highly fractured internally,
and pitted. Flakes of similarly colored and structured Edwards
Plateau chert were recovered in Area 8 from Green’s (1962) upper
Garza occupation level and FA8-2. A very large chopper made on a
cobble of Potter’s chert was found lying next to a bison skull. It is
unifacially flaked with heavy damage flake scarring along the
central distal edge. Ten utilized flakes were found; most of these
are of Edwards Plateau chert. Two broken flakes demonstrate
damage flake scarring along the working edges. Three others
exhibit damage flake scars along the distal, lateral, or medial
edges. One has damage flake scarring along the lateral edge on the
ventral side; while another has been alternately utilized with
damage flake scars along the lateral edge on the dorsal side and
along the medial edge of the ventral side. Damage flakes have been
removed along the latero-distal edge of a small blade; while
another blade of Potter’s chert exhibits some damage flake removal
along both sides. An indentation along the medial edge of a flake of
Alibates chert was utilized; the "notch" also shows damage flake
scarring.

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

¢J
bl

tr~

<

¢J

E©

¢J

<

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

99

Two pieces of a broken metate were recovered. One may have
been used as a pounding stone for breaking bones open since the
broken edge has several large flakes removed and exhibits some
crushing damage. One sherd of "Apache" pottery, a thin-walled,
mica-tempered blackware, was recovered (Fig. 7@ Similar pottery
was recovered from the first Garza occupation level at Blue
Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), in the Garza occupation at
the Floydada Country Club site (Word 1963), and the Garza
occupation level at Red Bluff Shelter (Lorrain 1968). One hundred
forty-five resharpening flakes and other micro-debitage have been
recovered to date. Although 10 different kinds of lithic material are
represented, Edwards Plateau chert accounts for 73% of the
collection. A white chert of unknown source makes up 8%, while
chalcedony accounts for 6% and Tecovas chert for 4%. The
remaining 9% consists of the other six lithic sources. A variety of
colors of Edwards Plateau chert have been encountered, ranging
from blue-black to light tan. The variety of lithic sources indicates
that a minimum of 10 tools had been used in the station, although
tools from only three of the lithic categories were recovered. When
the distribution of the resharpening flakes was plotted they
clustered in several groups (Fig. 8), possibly indicating work areas.
However, not all matrix concentrates have been sorted, and
additional resharpening flakes from these concentrates could
change the distribution pattern.
s
+,

÷,

Lubbock Lake Site
41 LU 1
Feature 6,

Area 5

Distribution of Resharpening Flakes

÷,

~9~ r

FIGURE 8: Distribution of resharpening flakes from Feature 6, Area
5 -- Carza period processing station.

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Eighteen bone expediency tools were recovered among the
scatter of faunal debris. Of these, five were manufactured and 13
were utilized items. Bone expediency tools are implements that
were made "on-the-spot," generally from elements of the carcasses
being processed. After use, they were left with the rest of the
faunal debris. Manufactured tools were shaped before use; utilized
items consisted of pieces unmodified before use. Controlled
breakage (spiral fracturing) represents a major aspect of the
technology, but advantage was also taken of fortuitous breaks. The
expediency tools from the Lubbock Lake site, including those of this
processing station, were discussed in detail elsewhere (Johnson
1976). All bone tools from the station are of bison, and no one bone
was used preferentially. For the purposes of this report, only the
manufactured items will be discussed. Two of these are the broken
shafts of expediency tools, both demonstrating the removal of a
series of thinning flakes along the shaft edge for shaping. A third
tool was made from a humerus shaft segment. A number of
thinning flakes were removed along the lateral shaft edge. The
spirally fractured working edge exhibits damage flake scarring,
rounded edges, and heavy wear polish along the ventral side,
possibly from use as a scraper. Two choppers were made from the
proximal ends of metacarpals. One exhibits damage flake scarring
on all three sides of the working edge and wear polish from use.
The second is cracked and broken from heavy use. Numerous hinge
fractures and heavy wear polish on the discontinuous working edge
attest to the battering it received. These and the other expediency
tools were restricted to the eastern portion of the exposed station
where the faunal debris was more concentrated.
In addition to the possible work areas outlined by the lithic
flaking debris, another micro-activity area was exposed in a test
unit along the west wall of Area 5. A small pile composed
principally of long bones was capped by a bison skull. Numerous
resharpening flakes, most of Edwards Plateau chert, were found in
the unit. The large chopper was found in association with this bone
pile. Although several of the bones show butchering damage, few
had been processed for marrow. This bone stacking and lack of
marrow processing was in direct contrast to the activities seen in
the rest of the processing station.
Judging from a combination of skeletal elements, sexing, and
aging, a minimum of six bison were represented in the deposits.
Given the extent of the unexcavated deposits and the abundance of
material, many more than this number were actually processed.
The recovered remains represent four mature animals, a sub-adult,

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

101

and a fetus. Mandibles that could be aged and sexed (three left
ones) were all from females within the 5.5 to 9.5 years age
category (Frison and Reher 1970). The fourth adult was a male,
based on measurements on the skull recovered from the small bone
pile. The sub-adult was five years of age or younger, based on
unfused epiphyses and the known closing schedule of these (Koch
1935). Remains of a three-quarter term fetus consist of part of a
front leg, a vertebra, and a hyoid found grouped in one of the test
units along the eastern edge of Area 5.
No statement on seasonal use of the station can be reasonably
formulated at this time. The possibility of "out-of-season" births
among bison was always present (McHugh 1958; Wilson 1974}, and
one three-quarter term fetus does not necessarily indicate a spring
use. The mandibles could not be aged accurately enough to
determine the time of kill. Additional corroborative data will be
necessary before a seasonal determination can be made.
Intensive marrow processing is evident from the extensive bone
breakage, to the point of extraction even from phalanges. Marrow
processing has obliterated much of the bone damage done during
the initial butchering, although occasionally initial damage such as
defleshing cut lines on shaft sections or near ends of long bones
could be noted. Almost all long bones were represented by
proximal and distal ends, and were not as numerous as the M.N.I.
would indicate. Shafts were either broken through spiral fracturing
or the ends were chopped off. Neither technique was restricted to
particular elements; the same type of element was treated both
ways. However, there does appear to be a preference in the way
the two ends of a long bone were treated. Tibiae, for example,
generally had the proximal ends (areas of spongy bone) chopped
off, while controlled breakage was used on the distal ends (denser
bone). The tooth cavity of mandibles was generally exposed through
controlled breakage. Skull sections were recovered, indicating that
skulls had been completely disarticulated in the process of
removing the brains. Hide preparation may also have taken place
in the stations, given the number of lithic and bone scraping
implements found and the access to tanning material such as
brains.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Although the inventory list of recovered species is small, it
represents a predominantly grasslands fauna. The site environs
were restricted by the narrowness of the draw, which was less

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

than 500 meters at its widest point in the site area. Because of this,
although different ecological zones may be represented in the
assemblage, most animals could easily traverse these zones within
their daily activity patterns. Man, in particular, would have utilized
the various habitats in the draw and probably crossed them daily.
Differential habitat utilization by man can be seen in both economic
and spatial dimensions. Different cultural activities had their
particular geographic settings even though remains of the same
kinds of larger game animals were found in each. On the other
hand, some resources, particularly those of the marsh area, were
little utilized or perhaps ignored; while grasslands animals, both
large and small, were conspicuously consumed.
Most of the animals recovered were mammals, the rest were
reptiles. Fish, amphibians, and birds were conspicuously absent.
This situation may have been due to a combination of factors both
ancient and modern: the cultural activities being explored,
unfavorable habitats, and incompletely processed matrix concentrates. Mammals represented include cottontail (Sylvilgaus sp.),
black-tailed jack rabbit (Lepus californicus), black-tailed prairie dog
(Cynomys ludovicianus), coyote (Canis latrans), gray wolf (Cauls
lupus), badger (Taxidea taxus), pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra
americana), and modern bison (Bison bison). Reptiles recovered are
the pond turtle (Chrysemys scripta), ornate box turtle (Terrapene
ornata), Texas horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum), and the
western diamond-back rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox). All of these
animals ranged into the region historically, although some were
extirpated from the area by encroaching civilization. Open
grasslands were indicated by bison, pronghorn antelope,
rabbit, box turtle, and rattlesnake. Short-grass prairie
inhabited by prairie dogs and their predators, such as badgers
coyotes. Cottontails and other animals, including coyotes

jack
was
and
and

wolves, favored the ecotonal areas of brushy grasslands. The pond
turtle was the only member of the riparian community.
Geological evidence documents a dry, upland area surrounding a
marsh/stream
complex.
Based
on
the
faunal
communities
represented, the reconstruction could be expanded. A mixed-grass
prairie existed in the draw, grading into a wet meadow area of the
marsh which merged into the spring-fed, small stream coursing
through the draw. Trees were scarce to non-existant as no
woodland dependent forms were recovered; but a few deciduous
trees may have been scattered along the waterway. Hackberry
(Celtis reticulata) seeds were recovered in the later 5C~ deposits
overlying the processing station. These trees are known historically

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

103

to have grown in various draws in the region [Holden 1962), and
exist today in Yetlowhouse Canyon several miles downstream from
the site. Although the present situation of the draw differs,
transformations brought about were due to European cultural
activities, not by climatic changes. The reconstruction represents
an historically modern view of the draw.
DISCUSSION
Garza occupations at the Lubbock Lake site occur sequentially
within a given stratigraphic context. Facies changes occur in the
deposits, and their correlations are important to both the
stratigraphic and cultural chronologies at the site. Since work had
been conducted at the site previous to the Lubbock Lake Project
excavations, correlation of the various efforts and defined
stratigraphic sequences were necessary. Excavations in Area 8
were particularly dependent on these correlations since the
project’s testing recovered no diagnostic artifacts but uncovered
more occupation levels than had been previously recognized. The
correlation of the strata and features uncovered by the two
excavations, those of Green (1962) and the Lubbock Lake Project,
was based on geologic work by Stafford (1977) and recent
reprofiling and analysis efforts by Kaczor {ms.). Although
designations of substrata differ, both unit description and thickness
of deposits match (Fig. 3). When plotted vertically, materials
recovered by Green (1962) show a linear distribution along the top
(first occupation level) and middle (second occupation level) of
substratum 5A,. A similar plot of features encountered in
substratum 5A in test units by the Lubbock Lake Project show the
same distribution for FA8-2 and FAS-4, respectively. In addition,
two other features were exposed, FAS-7 in the 5A2 soil zone above
FAS-2/first occupation level and FA8-5 in the 5A~ colluvium
immediately below FAS-4/second occupation level (Fig. 3). These
features may represent additional Garza period encampments, but
no diagnostic artifacts were recovered. Another feature (FA8-1)
was encountered in the 5B~ deposits above 5A. Since it contained
metal, Green (1962) reported that material in this substratum dated
from the time of the Singer store occupation (1880’s). Additional
processing stations were uncovered by the project’s excavations in
substratum 5C2. This substratum is a facies of 5B, and the stations
contained the butchered remains of modern bison and modern
horse (Equus caballus) in association with Washita and Fresno
points.

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stratigraphy
The deposition of substrata 5A and 5B over the well-developed
4C soil horizon in Area 8 reflects changes in available moisture
and rainfall pattern in the area. Substratum 5A, is a predominantly
fluvial deposit with multiple lenses of caliche pebbles in the lower
part. These pebble beds are colluvial sediments representing
discontinuous sheets of slopewash. The upper part of 5A, is an
aeolian and fluvial deposit of very fine to medium silty sands,
ranging in color (moist) from brown (7.5YR5/4) to yellowish brown
(10YR5/3). A 35 cm thick soil (5A2) developed at the top of the 5A
deposits, consisting of fine to medium silty sands and brownish
black (10YR4/2 to 10YR5/3) in color. This soil development reflects
a change (of short duration) to more stable conditions and growth
of vegetation cover. Substratum 5B is a cyclic repeat of 5A, with
aeolian sands and stringers of slopewash sediments in the lower
(5B~) deposits and an aggrading soil development in the upper (5B2)
one. Substrata 5A and 5B are upland facies deposits of sands and
soils along the draw slope. The interface with substratum 5C, the
lowland marsh deposit in the center of the draw (Stafford 1977).
The lowland facies represents the repeated cutting and subsequent
infilling of the channel along the interior of the draw. In Area 5,
substratum 5C consists of two units. The lower half (5C~) is a
brownish-gray (10YR5/1), fine to medium sandy clay. This unit is
archeologically equivalent to that of substratum 5A in the upland
sequence. The upper unit (5C2) is a dark gray (5Y4/1), very fine to
fine silty, sandy clay which is archeologically equivalent to
substratum 5B.
Radiocarbon Dates and Cultura! Associations
Two radiocarbon determinations now date the Garza period
occupation at the Lubbock Lake site to the Historic period. Garza
points were originally believed to date prior to A.D. 1500 (Runkles
1964: 123). This assessment was made by Green (1962) based on his
work at the Lubbock Lake site and was applied by inference to the
Garza type site (Runkles 1964). The two dates of A.D. 1635
(350_+ 50; SI-2701) and A.D. 1665 (285 +_ 60; SI-2703) secured by the
Lubbock Lake Project suggest that Garza points continued at least
into the mid-1600’s. The first Europeans entered the region in A.D.
1541 (Holden 1962). At that time, the Lipan Apache were believed
to be the principal occupants of the area; their arrival on the Llano
Estacado is estimated to be about A.D. 1525 (Gunnerson 1956;
Collins 1971). The association of Garza points and Apache peoples
is further suggested by the recovery of both Garza points and a
micaceous blackware in the processing station, FA5-6. Campbell

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

105

(1976) believed this type of pottery to be distinctive of the Plains
Apache. Furthermore, Gunnerson (1969) recovered several
micaceous wares in New Mexico believed to be licarilla Apache,
although they date somewhat later in time (about A.D. 1700).
Finally, although Apaches on the Llano Estacado may have had
horses as early as the mid-1600’s through trade in New Mexico
(Oliver 1962), no horse remains were recovered from Garza period
activity areas at the site. Given these circumstances, the Garza
occupation probably represents a protohistoric period (i.e., a period
when Europeans had passed through the area but trade goods and
horses had not yet been acquired) with a time span of at least 150
years.
Garza points appear to be contemporaneous with the Apache
occupation of the area. There are a number of possible working
hypotheses. The pottery association suggests that the points may be
an Apache type. Whether this point type was indigenous, or
brought into the area by the Apaches, or developed by them after
their arrival, is uncertain. The known distribution of this type
favors the Garza point type being an indigenous form. The type
appeared to be largely confined to the Southern High Plains with
an extension into the E1 Paso area (Runkles 1964}. A further
extension down the Pecos River to the Sheffield area was made by
Lorrain (1968). In addition, Heartfield (1975) reported a Garza point
from Southwestern Coahuila. In any case, it appeared that this
point type may have been utilized for a fairly short time period in
the Southern High Plains, from the early 16th century to the mid to
late 17th century (Holliday 1977).
Concerning the radiocarbon determinations themselves, the dates
fall into a period of known fluctuation in the radiocarbon
chronology (Ralph 1971). Such fluctuations were studied and
assessed by several different radiocarbon laboratories. Various
fluctuation graphs and charts were presented, for example Ralph
(1971) and Suess {1970). Fluctuations appeared to be real, but there
is some disagreement as to the magnitude of fluctuation within
these periods. The radiocarbon dates reported here are
uncorrected. According to what is known about the fluctuations,
the dates are probably young. Using the MASCA correction table
(Ralph 1971: 28}, the dates could be as much as 50 years too young.
This correction factor would amend the dates, placing them into
the late 1500’s or early 1600’s. However, such a change is not
considered significant because this period is still within the known
time span of Apaches on the Llano Estacado. Such a correction

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

would, in fact, strengthen the hypothesis of a relationship between
Garza points and Apache culture.
Tool Assemblages
Several similarities exist among the tool assemblages recovered
from the Lubbock Lake site and other excavated Garza localities,
particularly among the collections from camping areas. Garza
points were found in association with other point types. At the
Lubbock Lake site they were in association with Harrell and "Lott"
points. Runkles (1964) recovered Garza, Harrell, and Fresno points
from the type locality. Wheat (1955), Word (1963), and Lorrain
(1968) reported Garza and Fresno points in association; while
Holden (1938) and Parsons (1967) recovered Garza points in
association with a variety of other types, including Harrell, Fresno,
and
"Lott."
While
size,
and
perhaps
function,
varied,
morphologically similar, steeply retouched, end scrapers (snubnosed) were also recovered from all the sites discussed. Wheat
(1955) recovered the tip of a bifacially flaked knife from Johnson
Creek, similar to the one recovered in the processing station at the
Lubbock Lake site. Edwards Plateau chert was the predominantly
used lithic source during the Garza period at the Lubbock Lake
site. Two-thirds of the lithic items recovered from the Johnson
Creek site (Wheat 1955) were of Edwards Plateau chert. While a
variety of materials were represented in the Blue Mountain Rock
Shelter (Holden 1938), Edwards Plateau chert was dominant.
However, at the Pete Creek site (Parsons 1967), both Edwards
Plateau and Tecovas cherts were used extensively. Tubular bone
beads were recovered from the Lubbock Lake site, Blue Mountain
Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), Johnson Creek site (Wheat 1955), and
the Garza type locality (Runkles 1964). Micaceous pottery was
found at the Lubbock Lake site, Blue Mountain Rock Shelter
(Holden 1938), Floydada Country Club site (Word 1963), and Red
Bluff Shelter (Lorrain 1968). Curiously, no pottery was recovered
from the Garza or Johnson Creek localities (Runkles 1964; Wheat
1955), from the lower two Garza occupation levels at Blue
Mountain Rock Shelter (Holden 1938), or from Green’s (1962) lower
Garza occupation level at the Lubbock Lake site.
The one major difference of note concerns the variety of cultural
activities represented by the camping areas of the several sites and
the processing station at the Lubbock Lake site. The main
distinction between the two assemblages is the presence of bone
expediency tools in the processing station. The variance of
settlement and procurement activities at the site is concordant with

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

107

a differential utilization of the site environs and resources.
Spatially, the activity areas were located in different topographic
settings, the processing station in the lowlands of the marsh/stream
complex and the camps along the dry, upland areas. Some of the
animal communities in the draw were ignored, while major
dependence was placed on one or two forms (i.e., bison and
antelope) from another. Small game items such as rabbits found in
the camping areas were used as subsidiary sources.
The Carza occupation at the Lubbock Lake site represents a
repeated occurrence both temporally and spatially. Different
cultural activities took place during the occupation in distinctive
locales. The radiocarbon determinations received on charcoal from
a hearth and ash-filled pit date the occupation to the Historic
period. However, because of the absence of European trade goods
and modern horse remains, the term Protohistoric for the period is
suggested. Circumstantial evidence is presented for a series of
working hypotheses regarding the cultural relationships between
Carza points and Apache peoples. Continued research, both at the
Lubbock Lake site and elsewhere, will be needed to test these
hypotheses, to identify historic aboriginal groups in the area and
their associated point types, and to trace the migrations of these
groups into and out of the region.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank M. Elizabeth King (The Museum, Texas Tech
University) for her editorial comments and suggestions; James H. Word
(Floydada, Texas) for his critical reading of the manuscript and
suggestions; and Jerome L. Thompson (The Museum, Texas Tech
University) for the photographic work. Grateful acknowledgements were
due the Pioneer Natural Gas Company (Lubbock and Amarillo) for their
cooperation and funds to test Area 14. This paper was part of the ongoing research of the Lubbock Lake Project, funded by the National
Science Foundation (Grants No. SOC75-14857, BNS 7612006), National
Geographic Society, Texas Historical Commission, and the City and
County of Lubbock

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED
Black, Craig C. (ed.)
1974 The History and Prehistory of the Lubbock Lake Site. The Museum
Journal, The West Texas Museum Association Vol. 15, pp. 1-160,
Lubbock.
Campbell, Robert G.
1976The Panhandle Aspect of the Chaquaqua Plateau. Graduate
Studies Texas Tech University, No. 11, pp. 1-118.
Collins, Michael B.
1971 A Review of Llano Estacado Archaeology and Ethnohistory. Plains
Anthropologist, Vol. 16, No. 52, pp. 85-104.
Frison, George C. and Charles A. Reher
1970 Age Determination of Buffalo by Teeth Eruption and Wear. Plains
Anthropologist, Vol. 15, No. 50, part 2, pp. 46-50.
Green, F. E.
1962 The Lubbock Reservoir Site. The Museum Journal, The West Texas
Museum Association, Vol. 6, pp. 83-123, Lubbock.
Gunnerson, D. A.
1956 The Southern Athabascans: Their Arrival in the Southwest. E1
Palacio, Vol. 63, pp. 346-365.
Gunnerson, J. W.
1969Apache Archaeology in Northeastern New Mexico. American
Antiquity, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 23-39.
Heartfield, Lorraine
1975 Archeological Investigations of Four Sites in Southwestern
Coahuila, Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
46, pp. 127-177.
Holden, W. C.
1938 Blue Mountain Rock Shelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 208-221.
1962a The Land. In: L. L. Graves (ed.), A History of Lubbock, The West
Texas Museum Association, pp. 1-16, Lubbock.
1962b Indians, Spaniards, and Anglos. In: L. L. Graves (ed.), A History of
Lubbock, The West Texas Museum Association, pp. 17-44,
Lubbock.
Holliday, Vance T.
1977Cultural Chronology of the Lubbock Lake Site. Unpublished
master’s thesis, Texas Tech University.
Johnson, Eileen
1976 Investigations into the Zooarchaeology of the Lubbock Lake Site.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Texas Tech University.
Kaczor, Michael J.
ms. A Correlative Study of the West Texas Museum Excavations at the
Lubbock Lake Site, 1959-1961. Unpublished master’s thesis, Texas
Tech University.
Koch, Walter
1935 The Age Order of Epiphyseal Union in the Skeleton of the European
Bison (Bos Bonasus L.). Anatomical Record, Vol. 61, pp. 371-376.

GARZA OCCUPATION AT LUBBOCK LAKE SITE

109

Lorrain, Dessamae
1968 Excavations at Red Bluff Shelter (Sotol Site) Crockett County,
Texas (X41CX8). Transactions of the Fourth Regional
Archaeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, pp. 18-39.
McHugh, Tom
1958 Social Behavior of the American Buffalo (Bison bison bison).
Zoologica, Vol. 43, pp. 1-40.
Oliver, Symmes C.
1962 Ecology and Cultural Continuity of Contributing Factors in the
Social Organization of the Plains Indians. University of California
Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 48, No.
1, pp. 1-90.
Parsons, Mark L.
1967 Archeological Investigations in Crosby and Dickens Counties, Texas
During the Winter, 1966-1967. State Building Commission
Archeological Program, Report No. 7, pp. 1-108.
Perkins, Dexter and Patricia Daly
1968 A Hunter’s Village in Neolithic Turkey. Scientific American, Vol.
219, No. 5, pp. 96-106.
Ralph, E. K.
1971 Carbon 14 Dating. In: H. N. Michael and E. K. Ralph (eds.), Dating
Techniques for the Archaeologist. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Runkles, Frank A.
1964 The Garza Site, a Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35, pp. 101-126.
Sellards, E. H.
1952 Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Stafford, Thomas W. Jr.
1977 Late Quaternary Alluvial Stratigraphy of Yellowhouse Draw,
Lubbock, Texas. In: Eileen Johnson and Thomas W. Stafford Jr.,
Cultural Adaptation to Ecological Change on the Llano Estacado.
Preliminary Report of the 1976 Field Season of the Lubbock Lake
Project. Report to the National Science Foundation. Edited by M.
Elizabeth King.
Suess, H. E.
1970 Bristlecone Pine Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time Scale 5200
B.C. to the Present. In: I. U. Olsson (ed.), Radiocarbon Variations
and Absolute Chronology. Wiley, New York.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1955 Two Archaeological Sites Near Lubbock, Texas. Panhandle-Plains
Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 71-77.
Wilson, Michael
1974 The Casper Local Fauna and Its Fossil Bison. In: George C. Frison
(ed.), The Casper Site: A Hell Gap Bison Kill on the High Plains, pp.
125-172. Academic Press, Inc., New York.
Word, James H.
1963 Floydada Country Club Site. Bulletin of the South Plains
Archaeological Society, Vol. 1, pp. 37-63.

