267

Sin Nombre and E1 Fortin:
Pecos River Style Pictographs
in Northern Mexico
Solveig A. Turpin
ABSTRACT
The Archaic-age Pecos River style polychrome pictographs are a defining
characteristic of the Lower Pecos River region of Texas. The recognition of four
examples of this distinctive art style in two localities on the southern periphery of
the Serrardas del Burro extends the range of this cultural area at least 145 km (90
miles) south of the Rio Grande into northern Mexico.

INTRODUCTION

The boundaries of the Lower Pecos cultural area, surrounding the confluences
of the Pecos and Devils rivers with the Rio Grande, are usually defined by the
distribution of the most ancient of the regionally defined pictographs--those of the
Pecos River style---and by the commonality of the cultural materials found in dry
rockshelter deposits (H. Taylor 1948; Kirkland and Newcomb 1967; Shafer 1977;
Brown et al. 1982). The recent recognition of four Pecos River style pictograph
panels south of the Serranfas del Burro in northern Coahuila necessitates redefinition of the extent of this cultural area and affords a broader view of the movement
of people and ideas in prehistory (Figure 1).
THE LOWER PECOS CULTURAL AREA

The concept of cultural areas can be criticized as a simplistic attempt to cram
complex multidimensional data into a unidimensional form. It is clear, however,
that boundaries exist (Barth 1969), and one traditional means of defining them is
through the analysis of style (Conkey 1983). The transience of cultural boundaries
mandates that cultural areas be fixed in time as well as space. Presumably, in the case
of the Lower Pecos River region, the characterstics that define the cultural area
reflect the behavior of a related group of people (Shafer 1977) during a specific
period in history. Here, the discussion is limited to the Archaic period, probably
between 3000 and 4000 years ago, when relatively homogeneous groups of hunters
and gatherers, well adapted to the arid environment of southwestern Texas and
northern Mexico, evidenced their increasing social complexity by painting elaborate mural art (Turpin 1990). Thus, during this time period, the Lower Pecos cultural
area can be equated to (I) a regional Archaic study unit (Brown et al. 1982), (2) the
territory of a related group (Shafer 1977), (3) a unified belief system ~urpin 1990),
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 60 (1989)

Texas Archeological Society

268

Modern City

o

Archeological Site

A

\
!i

Previous boundary
0zona o

of Lower Pecos

Cultural Area
0

I0

\
50

km

TEXAS
/

I
I
I
\

s

D

Ciudad

El Fort[n ~

Del Rio

\

Negras~

COAHUILA

~oNueva

Rosita

Sabinas

Figure 1. Map of the Lower Pecos Region of Texas and Mexico showing sites in the
northern part of Coahuila, Mexico.

(4) a sociocultural unit, and 5) an ethnic unit, defined as having a community of
physical and mental u’aits produced by common heredity and cultural tradition.
The Lower Pecos region is the smallest of the designated cultural areas of Texas
(Brown et al. 1982) and is generally considered to extend along the Rio Grande from
below the mouth of the Devils River, now beneath Lake Amistad near the modem
cities of Del Rio and Ciudad Acufia, to west of the historic hamlet of Langtry (Figure

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

269

1). On a north-south axis, the outer perimeter crosses the Pecos River about 100 km
(60 miles) north of the Rio Grande. Differences in estimates of the southern limits
have long been attributed to the dearth of archeological data from northern
Coahuila, but the Rio Grande certainly presented no physiographic barrier to the
exchange of people, material goods, or ideas.
Now arid rangeland, the region topographically comprises broad rolling upland
plains dissected by tributaries of three major rivers, the Rio Grande and the Pecos
and Devils rivers. Rockshelters hollowed from the limestone walls of the entrenched
canyons were home to Archaic inhabitants from the end of the Pleistocene until
about A. D. 1000. Preserved in these dry rock shelters are accumulations of
domestic debris deposited over several millenia and the remarkable pictograph
sequence for which the region is famous.
The most ancient of the rock art styles, the polychrome Pecos River style, is
considered the manifestation of a shamanic religious tradition (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967). The central figures are elaborately dressed faceless anthropomorphs
equipped with, or surrounded by, setrepertoires of accessories. Newcomb suggested
that the main characters were shamans or members of medicine societies dressed in
their ritual garb and, elaborating upon an idea first presented by Campbell (1958),
that the pictographs were visions, conceived by artists in trance states and made
permanent on the walls of the shelters (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967). The frequent
illustration of the atlatl and the absence of the bow and arrow place the Pecos River
style within the long Archaic period, from 9000 to 1000 years ago in this region.
Turpin (1990) recently presented arguments for a Middle Archaic age for the Pecos
River style, suggesting that it flourished during the San Felipe period in the local
chronology, between 3000 and 4000 years ago (Turpin 1988:Figure 4).
Previous Pictograph Research in Northern Coahuila
In 1948, Herbert Taylor (1948) located five pictograph sites during his
reconnaissance of the south bank of the Rio Grande between Langtry and the mouth
of the Peeos. He described two sites as remnant paintings, but one, E1 Sefs, was still
clearly Pecos River style. The two Pecos River style sites that overlook the river, El
Elephante and San Martin, have been almost totally destroyed, and the deep cultural
deposits at a third, Coahuilan Shumla shelter, have been severely vandalized by relic
hunters.
Ten years later, Taylor (1958:88; Taylor and Rul 1960:159) reported that the
typical Pecos River style of rock painting was virtually absent in the area surveyed
for the Mexican part of the Amistad Reservoir. The description of their only
pictograph site matches that of a Red Monochrome panel, INAH 203, now
inundated by the reservoir (Turpin 1986). However, an INAH number, 180, was
assigned to Coahuilan Shumla shelter where H. Taylor described the few surviving
paintings as cowheads. In fact, in INAH 180, locally known as Cueva Chumbla,
there are three identical Pecos River style shaman figures, one solid red, one
outlined in red, and one infilled with white. Only the upper half or torso is shown,
a not uncommon convention (see Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:Plates 7, 16, 33);

270

Texas Archeological Society

their upraised arms give these human figures passing resemblance to stylized
longhorns.
In 1989, a sixth Pecos River style pictograph, Abrigo Diego, was located in
Coahuila by Turpin and Zintgraff about 1.5 miles above the confluence of an
unnamed tributary with the Rio Grande. Once a gallery of paintings more than 60
meters long, Abrigo Diego now has only a few decipherable segments, but the
surviving figures are as intricate and elaborate as the well-known classic Pecos
River style panels at Panther Cave and Rattlesnake Canyon. Taken in composite,
Abrigo Diego, E1 Elephante, and San Martin demonstrate an intensity of ritual
activity equal or superior to that evidenced on the north bank.
All the known examples of the Pecos River style recorded in northern Coahuila
are within a few miles of the Rio Grande, where similarities between the north and
south banks are expected. The two pictograph localities described below expand the
range of the Pecos River style more than 145 km (90 miles) into northern Mexico
and raise broad questions about the nature and direction of the interaction that
produced them.
The Sin Nombre Pictographs
The Sin Nombre pictograph locality is south of the Serranfas del Burro in the
Sierra del Carmen on a north-flowing tributary of the Arroyo de la Babia above its
confluence with the Valle E11nfante ~igure 1). As the crow flies, the site is 145 km
(90 miles) south-southwest of the mouth of the Pecos River, but the intervening
Serranfas del Burro may have doubled the distance for pedestrian travelers.
The similarities between the Sin Nombre pictographs and those of the Pecos
River style were first noted in 1974 in an undergraduate term paper in an anthropology course at The University of Texas at Austin. Fifteen years later, rock art
photographer Jim Zintgraff and archeologist Tom Guderjan visited the sites and
documented the paintings.
Most of the pictographs are in a large northeast-facing rockshelter. The site has
two ledges, or shelves; pictographs were painted from both. Most of the paintings
are spread across the 50-meter-long top shelf; only a few figures are found along the
lower ledge. Water seeping through the porous limestone has obliterated or
damaged several pictographs, and collapse of the ledges has left others isolated high
above the present floor. Higher in elevation in the same canyon, a small shelter now
contains only the remnants of pictographs painted in the same style and with the
same pigments. These paintings have deteriorated too much to make reconstruction
of the original figures and groupings possible.
From their quantity and variety, the pictographs at Sin Nombre suggest several
episodes of painting. One panel of geometric designs, composed of dots and lines,
resembles art styles found farther south near Monterrey more than any Lower Pecos
styles. Most of the anthropomorphs, animals, and sinuous geometric motifs,
however, reflect themes and stylistic conventions common to the Archaic art
concentrated along the Rio Grande and the Pecos and Devils rivers.

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

271

The most prominent figure in the largest panel is modeled after a specific type
of shaman most commonly found around the mouth of the Pecos River and
illustrates the ability of the shaman to transmogrify (to adopt the form of an animal
familiar), combining feline and human characteristics (Turpin 1990). The Sin
Nombre version has the characteristic ear headdress, frontal posture with upstretched
arms, and blank face, but lacks the hand-held objects such as atlatls, darts, and
fending sticks, wielded by the shamanic prototype in Panther Cave (Figures 2, 3; see
also Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:Plate 25).
In another typical Pecos River style motif that appears at Sin Nombre,
described by New comb (1976:184; see Kirkland and Newcomb 1967: Plates 13, 29,
33),
an antlered headdress is associated with an odd variation of the shaman
figure. Wide, squared-off "wings" extend outward from either side of the
body at shoulder level in this variation, and hands and arms project upward
from them. They have a curious resemblence to the old Ford tri-motored
airplane and long since have had this appellation attached to them.

Conceptually, these winged figures (Figure 4) illustrate one of the tenets of
shamanic religions, that shamans can fly. This belief is mirrored in another panel at
Sin Nombre and in other sites in the Lower Pecos where horizontal anthropomorphs
apparently soar through clouds of dashed lines or dots. Another convention
consistent with Pecos River iconography is the recurrence of frontally posed
anthropomorphs with undulating streamers (Figure 5) flowing down from their
upstretched arms (Newcomb 1976:185). In addition, parallel wavy lines or streamers, another attribute common to the Pecos River style, appear repeatedly at Sin
Nombre. Although most of the Sin Nombre figures are empty handed, unlike the
classic Pecos River shamans with their elaborate paraphernalia, one anthropomorph
holds a three-pronged rod, a motif found on the Devils River and at Rattlesnake
Canyon on the Rio Grande, where it has been mistaken for a sword (see Kirkland
and Newcomb 1967:Plate 2).
E! Fortln Pictographs
In 1966, two pictograph sites in the Cation E1Forffn, a tributary of the Valle El
Infante above its juncture with Arroyo de la Babia, were visited by Lorraine
Heartfield and Ronald Ralph (Figure 1). Heartfield and Ralph were part of Jeremiah
Epstein’s Northeastern Mexico Archeological Project funded by the National
Science Foundation, and their objective was to evaluate the excavation potential of
El Fortfn, a large rockshelter on the Rancho Las Margaritas. Coincidentally, they
toured two nearby pictograph sites, where they took black-and-white Polaroid
photographs (Figures 6 and 7).
Cation El Forffn penetrates the southern rim of the Serranfas del Burro about
30 km (20 miles) northeast of Sin Nombre and 110 km (70) miles south-southwest
of the mouth of the Pecos (Figure 1). However, a small mountain range, the Sierra

272

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Photograph, feline shaman of Sin Nombre. The figure is about 1.25 meters tall.
(Courtesy of Jimmy Zintgraff.)

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

273

Figure 3. Photograph, feline shaman of Panther Cave. The figure is about 1.5 meters tall.
(Courtesy of Jimmy Zintgraff.)

274

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Drawing of winged figure at Sin Nombre. (Drawn by David G. Robinson.)

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

Figure 5. Photograph, shaman with streamers at Sin Nombre. (Courtesy of Jimmy
Zintgraff.)

275

276

Texas Archeological Society

©

,,...,-%

o

I

5

lO

I I
cm

Figure 6. Pecos River style figure at C-18, E1 Fortfia. This example of Pecos River style art,
is reconstructed from faded and deteriorated photographs taken in 1966, augmented by a few
color and black-and-whiteprints found later at theTexas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL) under the name San Jose de las Piedras and dated 1962. The scale is approximate,
and the relationships between the figures are largely unknown. (Drawn by David G.
Robinson.)

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

:277

(
~t

f

!
0
I

10
I

20
I

cm

Figure 7. Pecos River style figure at C-139, E1 Fortfia, reconstructed from a faded and
deteriorated photograph taken in 1966. The scale is approximate, and its relationship to the
figure in Figure 6 is unknown. (Drawn by David G. Robinson.)

278

Texas Archeological Society

0

10

20

I

I
cm

I

Figure 8. Outlined feline shaman from C-139, E1 Fortfi-a, reconstructed from a faded and
deteriorated photograph taken in 1966. The scale is approximte. (Drawn by David G.
Robinson.)

TurpinmPecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

279

del Cedral, intervenes between Sin Nombre and E1 Fortin, and the Serranfas del
Burro rise directly to the north.
C- 138 is a rockshelter 20 meters long and 6 meters deep, situated more than 100
meters above the valley floor on the west side of a canyon north of the headquarters
of the Rancho Las Margaritas. The pictographs were described as primarily red,
with some black, and very badly deteriorated. Color prints without negatives on file
at TARL show both red and black figures, but it is impossible to determine their
exact provenience, since at least three sites are apparently included under the name
San Jose de las Piedras. Definite Pecos River style designs in C- 138 include shaman
figures (Figure 6), insects, and winged figures with branching appendages that fit
within the variant "trimotor" design cited above (Figure 4).
C-139 is a smaller shelter, 6 meters wide and 2.5 meters deep, with shallow
cultural deposits, also high above the valley floor in a canyon west of the Cation E1
Fortfn. The red and yellow pictographs include two fringed shaman figures (Figure
7), one associated with a series of circles and streamers (Figure 8). The latter is a
variation of the were-feline motif also recognized at Sin Nombre, this time drawn
in outline. In addition, one small birdlike shaman is detectable in the Polaroid prints.
Apparently, none of the C-139 pictographs were included in the photographic
collection at TARL.
The rock art in C-138 and C-139 is very similar to that of Sin Nombre and, in
composite, the two localities demonstrate that this southernmost expression of the
Pecos River style is not an isolated occurence. In fact, these small enclaves suggest
that many more sites await recording in the rugged terrain between the Arroyo de
la Babia and the Rio Grande.
IMPLICATIONS
The pictographs of Sin Nombre and E1Fortfn demonstrate that, during at least
one period ofprehistory, the Lower Pecos cultural area extended at least 145 km (90
miles) south of the Rio Grande, encircling or encompassing the Serranfas del Burro.
All four sites are near Arroyo de la Babia, one of the historically documented travel
routes between Musquiz (then Santa Rosa) and the Rio Grande (Weddle 1976:413).
Although different constraints applied to prehorse populations, the mountain ranges
of northern Coahuila always would have affected broad movements of people,
channeling travel and exchange routes into valleys, passes, or the near-desert
rangeland that fringes the mountains.
At first glance, these few pictographs appear to be outliers, remote from the
heartland of the style (Figure 1), but this impression is more a function of the
intensity and orientation of archeological research in northern Coahuila than of
cultural reality. Studies either concentrated along the banks of the Rio Grande (H.
Taylor 1948; Taylor and Ru11961) or, like Epstein’s Northeastern Mexico Project,
sampled areas farther south and east, leaving a zone of ambiguity in between. The
commonality between Lower Pecos and Coahuilan archeological remains has long
been noted (H. Taylor 1948; W. Taylor 1966). Specifically, shared fiber (Andrews

280

Texas Archeological Society

and Adovasio 1980) and lithic industries (Johnson 1964), burial practices (Turpin
and Bement 1988), and art (H. Taylor 1948; Kelley 1974) bespeak a unity of culture
that spanned the Rio Grande at various times in prehistory. However, the nature and
direction of these relationships remain speculative until archeological survey is
undertaken around and including the Serranfas del Burro.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Manuel Diego, owner of the Rancho Santa Rosa, granted permission to visit
Abrigo Diego, and Jorge Ramon, Bob Perry, and Garner Fuller helped us get there.
Robert Goldsbury first drew the Pecos River style pictographs in the Sierra del
Carmen to my attention. Jim Zintgraff photographed the Diego and Sin Nombre
sites and provided copies for reproduction and for this analysis. Tom Guderjan
commented on a draft of this paper, lending knowledge based on his personal
experiences at Sin Nombre. Lorraine Heartfield and Ron Ralph shared their
experiences at El Forffn and helped track down the photographs and notes. Dr.
Jeremiah F. Epstein freely granted permission to use the information gathered
during the Northeastern Mexico Archeological Project. Herbert Taylor discussed
his maiden expedition into Coahuila in 1948 with the author. Dan Julien constructed
the site location map, and all of the line drawings are the work of David G. Robinson,
who used both old and recent photographs in their preparation.
REFERENCES CITED
Andrews, R. L., and J. M. Adovasio
1980 Perishable Industries fr°m Hinds Cave’ Val Verde C°unty" Texas" The University
of Pittsburg Department ofAnthropology Ethnology,Monograph 5.
Barth, Frederick
1969
Ethnic Groups and Boundaries. Little-Brown, Boston.
Brown, T. M., K. L. Killen, Helen Simons, and Virginia Wulfkuhle
ResourceProtectionPlanningProcessforTexas.TexasHistoricalCommission,
1982
Austin.
Campbell, Thomas N.
1958
Origin of the Mescal Bean Cult. American Anthropologist 60:156-160.
Conkey, M. W.
1983 Boundedness in Art and Society. In: Symbolic andStructuralArchaeology, edited
by Ian Hodder. Cambridge University Press, London.
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1964
The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val Verde
County, Texas. The University ofTexas at Austin, Department ofAnthropology
Archeology Series 6,

Turpin--Pecos River Style Pictographs in Northern Mexico

281

Kelley, J. C.
1974
Pictorial and Ceramic Art in the MexicanCulmral Littoral of the Chichimec Sea.
In: Art and Environment in Native America, edited by M. E. King and I. R.
Taylor, Jr. Texas Tech University, The Museum Special Publications 7.
Kirkland, Forrest and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967
The Rock Art of Texas Indians. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1976
Pecos River Pictographs: The Development of an Art Form. In: Cultural
Change and Continuity: Essays in Honor of James Bennett Griffin. Edited by C.
E. Cleland. Academic Press, New York.
Sharer, H. J.
1977
Art and Territoriality in the Lower Pecos Archaic. Plains Anthropologist
22(75):13-21.
Taylor, H. C., Jr.
1948
An Archeological Reconnaisance in Northern Coahuila. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontolog&al Soc&ty 19:74-87.
1958

Archeological Survey of the Mexican Part of Diablo Reservoir. In: Graham, J.
A., and W. B. Davis. Appraisal of the Archeologieal Resources of Diablo
Reservoir, Val Verde County, Texas. Report of the National Park Service by the
Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program, Field Office, Austin, Texas.

Taylor, W. W., and F. G. Rul
1961
An Archeological Reconnaissance Behind the Diablo Dam. Coahuila, Mexico.
Bulletin of the Texas A rcheological Society 31:153-165.
Turpin, S. A.
1990
Speculations on the Age and Origin of the Pecos River Style Pictographs,
Southwest Texas. American Indian Rock Art 16:99-122. Las Ojos, California.
1986

Pictographs in the Red Monochrome Style in the Lower Pecos River Region.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeolog ieal Society 55:123-144.

Turpin, S. A., and L. C. Bement
1988
The Site and its Setting. Chapter 1 in: Seminole Sink: Excavation of a Vertical
Shaft Tomb, Val Verde County, Texas. Compiled by S. A. Turpin. Plains
Anthropologist Memoir 22.33-122, Pt 2:1-4.
Weddle, R. S.
1976
The Vanguard. In: La Hacienda. An Official Bicentennial Publication of the
Whitehead Memorial Museum and the Val Verde County Historical Commission, Del Rio, Texas.

