SHELL CELTS FROM COASTAL YUCATAN, MEXICO
JACK

D.

EATON

ABSTRACT
Celts made from the shell of the marine mollusk, Strombus costatus,
have been found along the coasts of Yucatan. A study of the wear patterns
on the collected tools, combined with the replication and use-testing of
tools made from modern beach shells, suggests that shell celts could
effectively replace their stone counterparts for most tasks in a coastal zone
where tool-quality stone is lacking. The shell celts were recovered from
middens that date from the Middle Preclassic until well into Colonial
times. During this time span of over 2,000 years, the basic form and
probable use of the shell celts remain essentially unchanged. At least one
Middle Preclassic village site on the northeast coast of the peninsula had
been a workshop which produced shell celts in quantity.

INTRODUCTION
During 1968 I made an archaeological reconnaissance of the west
and north coasts of the Yucatan peninsula as part of the research
program being carried out by the Middle American Research Institute
of Tulane University (Andrews 1970). The purpose of the reconnaissance, which covered some 800 kilometers from Isla del Carmen,
Campeche, to Isla Blanca, Quintana Roo (Fig. 1), was to search out and
sample ancient campsites in order to learn something of man’s occupation of the littoral during all time periods (Eaton ms.).
Ancient cultural materials were collected from more than 60 sites,
most of which are located within the coastal cienega, where traces of
the ancient beach were found. Twenty-six sitescan be fixed temporally through ceramic chronology and consist mostly of kitchen middens dating from the Middle Pre-classic into early Colonial times (ca.
600 B.C. to around A.D. 1600).
This brief report is concerned with a specific type of shell tool
found in many of the middens examined, particularly along the north
coast. The tools have a celt form and are fashioned from the thick outer
lip of the ribbed conch (Strombus costatus Gmelin). This is a conch
found commonly along the west and north coasts of the peninsula, but
rarely found along the east coast, where it is largely replaced by the
queen conch (Strombus gigas) and others (Andrews 1969:9).
The ribbed conch is a tasty gastropod relished by coastal people,
and is today an important shellfish in the commercial markets. The
shells of this mollusk are abundantly represented in nearly all coastal
middens studied, attesting to its importance as a marine source of
food in ancient times. However, this mollusk not only formed part of a

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

dietary pattern, but the shells provided the aboriginal peoples with a
dense and durable raw material that could be easily worked and was
utilized for the making of tools and body ornaments.

FIGURE 1. Map of Yucatan showing locations of sites where shell
celts are found.

More than 300 samples of celt-like shell tools were recovered from
coastal middens dating from the Middle Preclassic into the Colonial
period. During this time span of well over 2,000 years, the basic form
of the tool, and its probable use, had remained essentially unchanged.
Most of the celts were from Preclassic middens. This was partly due to
sampling technique, since the earliest middens had long been exposed to erosional processes and larger amounts of a cultural debris
was exposed on the surface. Also notable is that the majority of the
middens found along the coast belong to the Late Preclassic period.
Apparently this had been the most substantial p eriod of occupation of
the littoral in pre-Columbian times (Ball and Eaton 1972). At least one
Middle Preclassic midden (Alegria 1), on the northeast coast of the
peninsula, had been a workshop which produced the shell celts in
quantity. A surface collection alone from this small eroded site included 204 samples of finished and partly made shell tools.

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

199

DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS
Although the shell celts found in the middens along the coast vary
somewhat in form, the typical tool has a long rectangular outline (see
Fig. 2). The bit end has a ground, bifaced cutting edge, which is
slightly rounded. The bevel angle of the bit is usually around 35°, and
is remarkably consistant for most samples (from all periods) and
apparently results from one basic grinding technique. The poll end of
the tool is generally rounded. The sides are smooth and usually taper
toward the poll end. There is no direct evidence for halting. The
typical celt measures 8-10 cm. long, 3-4 cm. wide, and 0.5-1 cm. thick.
The actual size of the celts vary with respect to the original size and
thickness of the mature shells from which the tools were made.
Table 1 shows the geographic and temporal distributions of the
shell celts found along the coast. Included are relative and total
quantities, and bit conditions of the celts. These data relate only to the
typical celts. Bifaced shell tools of other forms, and badly shattered or
eroded fragments of celts, were not included. The collection sites are
numbered sequentially and keyed to the map (Fig. 1) for easy reference.

FIGURE 2. Typical shell celts from the coast of Yucatan.

J

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Out of a total of 274 complete (or nearly completed) celts collected,
86 (31.5%) have complete bits which are sharp, or perhaps only
slightly dulled from use, 105 (38%) have blunt and battered bits, 71
(26%) have basically sharp, but partly shattered bits, and 12 (4.5%)
have completely shattered bits. It must be considered, however, that a
tool with a worn, battered or shattered bit could easily be reground.
Several celts in the collections had been reworked until they were
quite short. The bits listed as partly, or completely, shattered might
also tend to be misleading. While some of the shattering was certainly
the result of use, much of it seems to stem from cracking and splitting
by weathering and decomposition.

FIGURE 3. Specialized forms of shell tools from the coast of Yucatan.

MANUFACTURE AND USE
The uses of a shell celt would be many and varied in a coastal zone
where tool-quality stone is notably lacking, as it is along the Yucatan
coasts. A variety of stone tools were found at some sites, but these are
obvious imports from the interior or other areas. For many functions,
at many of the sites, the shell celt had effectively replaced stone tools
that were seemingly not available or were difficult to acquire.

201

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

pa~olleqs

v-¢

~m

,-.¢j
~

o~

¢D

-~.~

~o
d

2 2.~.~-~.~

~D

"~’~

o’~

"~’~.~’~

r~

202

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The shell tools described in this report are, I believe, morphologically and functionally "celts". By definition, a celt is an axe without
perforations or grooving, for hafting. Basically the shell celt appears
to have been a hand-held tool (i.e. hand axe), although it would adapt
easily to halting thereby augmenting its efficiency. The broad, sharp
bifaced blade would provide a suitable tool for light duty hewing,
cleaving, chopping, etc. This has been demonstrated by tests described below. Testing has also demonstrated that the tool could be
used effectively as an adze, knife, scraper, etc., without loosing its
basic status as a celt. The celt is probably one of the oldest and most
versatile tools developed by man.
To gain an appreciation of the hardness and workability of the shell,
and to test its use, I produced several celts from modern Strombus
costatus shells collected from the beach. Fig. 4 illustrates how a celt
was produced from the mollusk shell. Possible methods of hafting are
also shown, but these are offered only as suggestions. The reason for
making tools from modern shells was not only to test the workability
of the procedure I believe the ancients used, but also I felt that
subjecting ancient tools to certain tests might be misleading because
of possible character change in the shell through time and exposure.
Study of broken shells in the middens, and the partly worked and
finished tools from the midden collections, has provided information
on the process by which the celts were made. A fair amount of
experimenting was done and some mistakes were made, but in the
main the procedure described below seemed to be the most practical
and produced the best celts.
First of all, the lip of a mature shell has to be removed (Fig. 4,a). This
is done by simply breaking it off. I found that by striking the back of
the shell quite hard several times where the break is desired, with a
fist-size stone, would remove the lip. Hammerstones of various sizes
and shapes were fairly common implements found at the sites and
undoubtably these were often used in the making of the celts. The
shell does not break easily, and not all shell lips will break off exactly
where you want them to, but with practice the ease and efficiency of
the lip removal improves.
The detached lip then has to be worked into form. It seemed to me
that there must have been an intermediate work stage to remove the
excess shell and to trim the jagged edges before the finished grinding.
I found through experimentation that the shell tool could be quickly
roughed into form by pecking away at it around the edges with a
hammerstone, as a flint knapper does his percussion flaking (Fig. 4,b).
I got the best results when the tool was placed on a large stone for
support while striking it. The shell is actually crushed more than

203

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

flaked, but the method is effective and rapid. After improving my
technique I was able to break away the shell with fairly good control.
Although a method of cutting shell was known and used by the
ancients (this is evidenced in other worked shell artifacts collected),
there was no evidence that the method was used in making the celts.

J

FIGURE 4. Celts made from the Strombus costatus marine mollusk shell.
a, removal of shell lip and subsequent forming of tool; b, roughing out
the tool with a hammerstone; c,d, grinding the tool; e, celt used as a
hand-held tool; f, suggested methods of hafting.

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The next step was to grind the edges smooth and to form the bit.
Incomplete tools found in the middens show that the form was first
ground smooth all around the periphery (Fig. 4,c), then the final work
was to bifacially grind the bit (Fig. 4,d). The bits, incidentally, are
always bifaced, and never have a unifacial bevel. The grinding was
evidently done on a medium to fine grained stone, possibly a limestone or basalt metate. Metates, or fragments of them, were also found
at some sites. I ground one celt on a large fragment of a smooth-worn
basalt metate for the experience, but it was, admittedly, a very slow
process that took me all afternoon. In order to accelerate the production of more celts for experimental purposes, I used a metal file. ¢~l
As already mentioned, the bit bevel angle is usually around 35°.
This is a bevel angle that results when the tool is placed upon the
griffding stone as shown in Fig. 4,d, with the poll end elevated just
enough to keep the hand free of the stone. Constant pressure has to be
applied while grinding, which is done in a fore-and-back sliding
motion. Maintaining the angle of inclination is important to give the
best bevel. The stone has to be cleaned frequently while grinding
since the powdered shell is a good lubricant and the abrading process
can soon be diffused. There seems to have been an attempt by the
ancients to maintain symmetry of the biface, although this was not
always attained and perhaps it was partly due to the curvature of some
shells. The actual bevel angle of the bit is not just the result of
technique, it is also an angle of practicality which was probably
learned in most ancient times. My experiments have shown that to
reduce the bevel angle to give a longer, thinner bit would invite
premature shattering; to increase the bevel angle notably would provide a bit too blunt for effective cutting. The practical superiority of a
bifaced bit over a bit with simple uniface bevel on a general purpose
tool was apparently something else learned very early by the ancients.
The tools were subjected to several tests. As a chopping tool I found
that it would cut, chip and split wood, bone, and other substances. I
deliberately destroyed a couple of tools when testing to see how much
punishment they could take. With hard and persistent chopping on
wood the bits were blunted and then shattered as a result. Wood, even
relatively hard Spanish cedar, can, however, be cut or fashioned by
persistent light chipping and the shell stands up to this quite well.
Chopping (or chipping) can be done by holding the tool in the hand as
shown in Fig. 4,e, but by attaching the tool to a handle (in-line with
the handle is best), more work can be done with less effort. As a coastal
tool it would be useful for the making of dugout canoes (cf. Painter
1968). For this use it would function as an adze, although a true adze
generally has a blade with a unifacial bevel.

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

205

The broad, sharp blade of the celt could also be used as a knife for
many cutting functions. Experiments demonstrate that it will easily
cut thin material (strips of meat, cloth, etc.) by drawing across it,
while bearing down forcefully. With heavier substances this does not
work as well because of the bit thickness, and it was found that the
blade cut some things easier with a rocking motion. Perhaps this is
one of the reasons for providing a slightly rounded bit (Fig. 2).
The shell celt was found to be a fairly good scraper, as most bladed
tools would be. The tool was tested by scraping bones, wood, removing bark, and scaling a fish. The tool worked best for most s craping if it
was held perpendicular to the surface, or at a slight incline when
actually used like a chisel.
The basic form and subjected tests of the shell tools demonstrates
that structurally and functionally they are best described as celts.
They would, as the tests have shown, however, be an extremely
versatile instrument in any limited tool assemblage.
The celts that I made and tested demonstrated that the Strombus
costatus shell has an effective hardness about equal to moderately
compact stone. A properly ground bit is remarkably durable, even
when subjected to prolonged cutting, scraping, or chipping wood.
The shell has enough elasticity to absorb some shock and does not
shatter easily. During the testing of the tools it was found that the bit
should be resharpened occasionally, or the efficiency of the tool will
drop off notably.

COMPARATIVE MATERIAL
Celt-like shell tools have been reported from other areas of Mexico.
For example, a shell celt from the site of Arrecife on Conzumel Island
was recently subjected to radiocarbon dating at the University of
Miami, Florida (Ball 1973). The results indicate an apparent age of
1620+60 B.P. (330 A.D.; UM 123). Pina Chart (1968) has illustrated
several shell celts from Isla Jaina, the large Classic period island
cemetery.
Shell celts are found at many sites in the Gulf of Mexico-Cirum
Caribbean area (see Hester ms. for distributional data.). They are
absent from the Texas coast, but are common in sites along the Gulf
and Atlantic coasts of Florida.
Although the major form of celts in the Yucatan coastal collections
all seem to be made from the lip of the Strombus costatus shell, at least
one identifiable exception has been noted. A celt found at E1 Cuyo 1
site is made from the body-whorl of a Turbinella angulata shell. This
tool (not illustrated) has a comparatively narrow form and is relatively
thin.

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Also in the coastal collections are shell tools fashioned from the
Strombus costatus lip which have forms differing from the celts
described in this report. Some are illustrated in Fig. 3. The forms
suggest uses differing from, and perhaps more task-specific, than that
of the celt tool. As noted in the illustration, these often occur with a
long taper ending in a relatively small, narrow bifaced bit. The ones
illustrated are from Isla Jaina, Isla Piedras, and Isla Guaymil, all
Classic to Postclassic period sites. Similar tools were also found at
Alegria 1, a Middle Preclassic site. A long, thin cylindrical tool with a
small bifaced bit, and made from the columella of a Busycon sp. shell,
was also found at Alegria 1 site. The long tapering tools might be
useful, for example, for cutting the attaching muscle and extracting
the mollusk from conch shells.
DISCUSSION
It is not surprising to find shell tools distributed along coastal zones
where large marine gastropods are plentiful. Shell is a reasonably
hard and durable material quite suitable for a broad range of tool
typ es, and with prop er technique it is remarkably easy to work (Hester
ms.). The celt is a very practical tool form, certainly designed out of
need, and has a long tradition. Stone celts have a world-wide distribution and are known to have been made for thousands of years (Bordes
1968). Included in the artifact collections from the Yucatan coasts are
a number of stone celts. Basically there are two types represented:
large percussion-flaked bifaces of flint; and smaller, ground and
polished celts of hard gray, green or black stone. Both celt types have
been noted throughout the Maya lowlands (Coe 1965:594-602) and
apparently had differing and specific uses.
Perhaps the shell celts served to bridge the needs in isolated coastal
communities where stone celts were hard to obtain. The presence of
stone celts at some of the coastal settlements indicate trade contacts,
although probably indirectly, with other areas. The shell celts, which
are rarely, if ever, found in the interior of Yucatan, were evidently a
common, locally-produced implement probably found in every seaside household.
The coastal reconnaissance of Yucatan produced a surprising quantity of shell celts, particularly when considering the basic aims of the
survey, which were to sample the coast by means of surface collec:
tions and by digging small stratified test pits. No extensive excavations were undertaken at any of the sites. The collections, therefore,
actually represent only a relatively small sampling of the coastal
littoral. A more intensive sampling would almost certainly demon-

SHELL CELTS FROM YUCATAN

207

strate that the shell celts have a much broader distribution than
presently recorded.
Cultural materials collected during the survey have shown that
man lived on the Yucatan coast at least as far back as the Middle
Preclassic period (ca. 600 B.C.). Ball and Eaton (1972), in their report
dealing with chronological placement of midden sites along the
coasts of Yucatan, have listed the earliest occupation as occurring
during the Late Preclassic period. A more recent re-evaluation of the
ceramics by Ball, from some middens on the northeast coast (along the
Rio Lagartos), has shown that these were in fact Middle Preclassic
deposits. The pottery found there equates with Smith’s (1955) Mamon
phase. The Middle Preclassic sites are listed in Table 1. Shell celts
were found in quantity at these sites. As already mentioned, a surface
collection at Alegria i site produced a large quantity of finished and
unfinished shell celts and I suggest that it was a workshop.
Although the Middle Preclassic occupation appears to be centered
along the northeast portion of the Yucatan coast, the greatest overall
occupation of the coastal zone seems to have been during the Late
Preclassic period. These sites were probably occupied by subsistence
fishermen. During the subsequent Classic and Postclassic periods, the
overall population on the coast was evidently reduced and tended to
cluster in certain areas, notably where salt was produced. This trend
continued into the Colonial period. In modern times, the largest
coastal settlements are based upon a fishing economy, and salt production is second in importance.
The coastal collections indicate that the shell celts continued to be
made into the Colonial period. They probably survived in many of the
remote coastal households long after Spanish contact, but the introduction of metal tools eventually decreased their importance until
they ceased to be made.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I wish to thank the late Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews IV, Director of the Middle American
Research Institute, for allowing me to do the coastal survey as part of a broad research
program in Yucatan. The help and encouragement received by Dr. Andrews, particularly during preliminary evaluation of the collected materials, is very much appreciated.
I thank Dr. Joseph W. Ball, Rio Bec region ceramic analysist, for reviewing the coastal
pottery and providing valuable information on the chronological setting.
The generous financial support of the American Philosophical Society is gratefully
acknowledged.

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED

Andrews, E. Wyllys
1969 The Archaeological Use and Distribution of Mollusca in the Maya
Lowlands. Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University,
Publication No. 34.
1970 Pre-agricultural or Early Ceramic Remains on the Yucatan Coasts.
Year Book of the American Philosophical Society, 1970, pp. 540-541.
Ball, J. W. and J. D. Eaton
1972 Marine Resources and the Prehistoric Lowland Maya: A Comment.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 74, No. 3, pp. 773-776.
Ball, Hal C. (Editor)
1973 Radiocarbon Dating of Select Sites in the Maya Lowlands. Newsletter,
Institute of Maya Studies of the Miami Museum of Science. Vol. 2, No.
7.
Bordes, Francois
1968 The Old Stone Age. World University Library, New York.
Coe, William R.
1965 Artifacts of the Maya Lowlands, Handbook of Middle American
Indians, Vol. 3, pp. 594-602. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Eaton, Jack D.
ms. Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Coasts of Yucatan, Mexico.
Manuscript in preparation. To appear in Middle American Research
Institute, Tulane University.
Hester, Thomas R.
ms. A Technological Study of Prehistoric Shell Implements in the
Circum-Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico Region. Manuscript submitted
for publication.
Holmes, W. H.
1883 Art in Shell of the American Indians. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau
of American Ethnology, Annual Report (1880-81), No. 2, pp. 179-306.
Painter, Floyd
1968 Long Creek Midden, Part 5. A Busycon Shell Gouge. The Chesopiean.
Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 57-61.
Pina Chan, Roman
1968 Isla Jaina, La Casa en la Agua. Instituto National de Antropologia e
Historia. Mexico, D. F.
Smith, R. E.
1955 Ceramic Sequence at Uaxactun, Guatemala. Middle American Research Institute, Tulane University. Publication No. 20.
Merida, Yucatan, Mexico

