Recommendations for the Conservation of Shell
Materials
Paul S. Storch
ABSTRACT

Recovery of mollusk shell from excavations can be difficult for the
archeologist because of poor preservation. A search of the archeological literature on field conservation reveals a lack of concern and
knowledge of techniques applicable to the treatment of shell in the field.
After summarizing the structure of shell, factors affecting preservation,
and the categories of information inherent in shell deposits, this paper
reports the results of a laboratory experiment performed on archeologically recoveredRangia cuneata (Gray) specimens in order to determine
which consolidants are best at preventing further deterioration and loss
of information on both wet and dry shell. Recommendations on which
consolidants to use and how to apply them in the field are based on the
experimental data.
INTRODUCTION
Mollusk shell, when found in large concentrations such as are found in littoral
shell middens may be in excellent condition (Aten 1981:179, Meighan 1970:415,
Sparks 1970:395-396). On the other hand, individual specimens that have been
deposited in organically rich acidic soils in terrestrial sites may be weak and friable.
Inquiries by several Texas archeologists as to the best methods for recovering shell
specimens from excavations made the author aware of a lack of recognition of this
problem in archeological field manuals. The field techniques that can be found
consist of dousing the finds with a proprietary formulation such as Elmer’s
Glue-All, which rarely, if ever, gives satisfactory results.
The goal of this paper is not to promulgate a panacea for all problems
concerning shell specimens and artifacts, but rather to provide usable data and to
make practical recommendations that can be used until something better is developed. The proper conservation of any material requires an understanding of the
physical and chemical nature of that material and procedures acceptable for testing
the field consolidants. The advice given here is not intended to replace the
assistance of a trained archeological conservator and should not be taken as such.
THE PROPERTIES OF SHELL

Shells are the calcareous outer protective covering of invertebrate animals
belonging to the phylum Mollusca. This phylum is divided into six classes; the two
most important in archeology are Gastropods (snails) and Bivalvia (Pelecypoda, or
clams, oysters, and mussels).
The shell itself consists of a matrix of calcium carbonate covered with a
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 58 (1987)

268

Texas Archeological Society

noncalcareous membrane called the periostracum, which is analogous to the
periosteum on the outer surfaces of bones (Morris 1973:xviii). As the periostmcum
dries and flakes from the shell, it breaks the delicate growing distal edge of the valve
(Aten 1981:186-187). The shells of bivalves are excreted by tissue layers called the
mantle, which cover the visceral mass (Weisz 1963:274). The shells of most
bivalves are laid down in visible layers that are useful in seasonality studies, since
the thickness and spacing of the layers correlate with the seasonal growth of the
animal.
PRESERVATION
The primary parameters in the preservation of shell remains in the ground are
the pH level of the soil matrix, the amount of shell in the deposit, and aeration.
Secondary factors affecting preservation are human and animal disturbances and
erosion, which allow increased weathering and leaching to occur. For example,
burning or calcination of shell leads to poor preservation. The habitat of the mollusc
may also be important to preservation after death. The shells of some terrestrial
gastropods that live on calcium-depleted soils may be thin and easily broken, and
pelecypods that live in brackish or marine environments rich in calcium ions will
be preserved very well. Although there are technical distinctions among different
types of shell midden deposits, the term is used here to refer to deposits consisting
almost entirely of shell remains (Meighan 1970:415). Water percolating downward
through such a concentration of shell may become charged with carbonic acid,
causing a leaching and redeposition effect on the shells, serving to encrust or even
cement some of them together with a caliche coating (Sparks 1970:395). The pH
levels of shell middens that are deposited in initially acidic soils such as sandy loams
can be raised to alkaline ranges that encourage the preservation of bone and other
organic materials such as wood, cordage, and seeds, especially if the site is
waterlogged or wet as well.
THE ARCHEOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE OF SHELL REMAINS
Shell has been used as a material for ornaments in the New World at least since
the Archaic stage, perhaps reaching an artistic apex during the Mississippian period
in midwestern and southeastern North America, so the need for preserving shell
artifacts is obvious. Shell refuse, on the other hand, can provide invaluable
information about the economy of the site occupants, population, climate and
habitat, radiocarbon age, and, from the season of death of the mollusks, the
seasonality of the site’s occupation (Aten 1981:179, Shakelton 1970:407).
In order to determine seasonality from bivalve remains, a sample of at least 50
to 100 fairly complete specimens is needed. Aten (1981) describes in detail the
morphological approach to the determination of seasonality in the Gulf Coast
brackish water speciesRangia cuneata (Gray). This approach requires that the outer
edges of the bivalve be as well preserved as possible to allow measurement of the
most recent growth tings. The exterior surface of the valve should also be stable,
since powdering and flaking will obscure the earlier growth rings, making accurate
measurement difficult.

Storch m Conservation of Shell

269

FIELD TREATMENTS
The few archeological manuals that deal with field conservation pay little or no
attention to the problems attendant on the excavation of shell. Dowman (1970), in
her book that is still the only work devoted entirely to archeological field conservation, does not mention shell at all. Joukowsky (1980:258) discusses the treatment
of shell together with bone and ivory. For dry shell requiting in situ stabilization,
she advocates the use of a polyvinyl acetate (PVAc) resin in acetone.
Lamb and Newsom (in Fairbanks 1983:30), in a misguided and dangerous
attempt to standardize archeological field conservation, state that "shell artifacts
generally do not present a problem with preservation." They go on to say that in
archeological deposits, shell can become very fragile and advocate the use of
ethulose and PEG (polyethylene glycol, Carbowax). Conceding that these materials may not provide adequate consolidation, they describe the use of cellulose (sic)
in either ethanol or acetone. They advocated Duco cement, an unstable and
unsuitable material, which should not be used on any artifactual material whatsoever, for use on shell in a "2% solution in alcohol." Duco is composed of
nitrocellulose and is soluble only in ether-alcohol mixtures and acetone.
Cease (1985, personal communication) also states that shell usually is found in
good condition, but that if it is extremely friable, it can be consolidated by brushing
on a 2 percent solution of acrylic resin (Acryloid B-72) in acetone or toluene. If the
specimen is damp, Cease states that a PVAc emulsion can be used. However, PVAc
emulsions are irreversible once they dry completely, unstable, acidic (pH less than
7), can attract moisture, and should not be used on artifacts.
Hester, Heizer, and Graham (1975:214), using outdated references, describe
the use of celluloid (nitrocellulose) on dry shells and gelatin/formaldehyde for damp
shells. The latter treatment is unstable and harmful to the specimens, since
formaldehyde will form formates with the calcium in the shell over time (Tennant
and Baird 1985:77).
TREATMENT EXPERIMENTS
As can be seen from the sources described above, there is no consensus as to
the best treatment for shell, either wet or dry. An experiment was undertaken using
several consolidant formulations in order to determine which type gives satisfactory
results and to develop techniques that can be applied to treatment in the field.
A sample of 50 valves ofRangia cuneata (Gray) recovered from archeological sites in the Gulf coastal brackish water environment along the San Jacinto River
in Harris County were obtained from Prewitt and Associates, Inc., of Austin. After
excavation, the shells had been air-dried slowly on screens. The condition of the
surfaces could be described best as moderately deteriorated, a rating of 2 to 3 (Table
1). Some of the outer edge rings were already broken, and the exterior surfaces
powdered under light pressure, but none were brittle or exfoliating.
aded to "corrode" the shells artificially using hydrochloric acid, m order to reproduce a natural weak and unstable condition, but the acid
treatment only served to dissolve the shells without causing friability and exfolia-

Texas Archeological Society

270

Table 1.

Qualitative Ratings of Shell Deterioration Conditions

Surface

Rating

Pitting

Striations

Layers
& Edges

Excellent (1)

Not powdery

None

All visible

Good (2)

Exterior

Some

Most are visible

slightly

Stability

Most outer

Both wet
& dry
Both wet

edges extant

& dry

---

powdery
Fair (3)

Mostly ob ....

Unstable

surfaces

literated

when dry;

powdery

on exterior

Exterior

Yes

flakes or

crumbles to
touch
Poor (4)

Flaking,

Heavy on

Minimal,

crumbling,

exterior

soft, ,un-

soft

surface

stable

dry

or wet

tion. The results of the control sample group and the group that was soaked in a 1.75
percent g/1 sodium chloride salt solution are reported here (Table 2). The salinity of

Table 2. Weights of the Shell Specimens Before Treatment
Test Group

Control Group (A)

(B)1

Dry, No

Before

After Drying 6 hrs

No.

Preparation

Soaking

in Lab Oven at 40~C

1

15.64

21.27

21.22

Specimen

2

10.30

11.54

11.50

3

14.16

13.36

13.25

4

13.44

19.90

19.84

5

6.53

14.61

6

13,51

6.60

7

15.95

7.90

8

22.21

7.64

9

16.20

10.62

10

14.25

4.45

After Soaking;
Treated Wet

14.58
6.63

8.61
8.30
11.18
5.00

t Specimens 1-6 were soaked for 4 weeks in the 1.75% saline solution.

seawater is about 3.5 percent, so a concentration of 1.75 percent would approximate
the salinity of brackish water. The pH of the salt solution was measured at 5.0.
Weight (Tables 2, 4) was the parameter used to measure the efficacy of the treatment
and to indicate the reversibility of the consolidant. It was assumed in this
experiment that the influence of density, porosity, and age of the shell would be negligible. There are, of course, other considerations in the choice ofa consolidant than
weight gain and reversibility; they are chemical compatibility with the artifact
material, stability over time, surface appearance, and toxicity to the operator. All
of the consolidants that were chosen for this experiment have satisfactory characteristics and have been used in other applications by conservators (Table 2).
The specimens were divided into two groups. Group B specimens 1-6 were
treated with solvented resins; the last four were treated with water-based and

Storch ~ Conservation of Shell

271

emulsion consolidants. The resins, which included PVAc-AYAA, PVAc-AYAF,
and polyvinyl butyral ~VB) B-98, were applied in 5 and t0 percent gB solutions
in acetone and ethanol. The wet consolidants were Rhoplex acrylic emulsion
AC-33, polyethylene glycol ~EG) 400, a mixture of PEG 400 and methylcellulose
(25 percent 1/1) and CM Bond (a PVAc emulsion) used at 25 percent strength.
The solvented resins are clear, dry by evaporation of the solvent, and are stable.
PVB may yellow over time if exposed to UV radiation. The AC-33 is an acrylic
emulsion that is stable, neutral in pH, and more easily reversed than the PVAc
emulsions. PEG 400 is a low-molecular-weight glycol ether commonly used in the
preservation of wet and waterlogged wood and leather. It acts as a bulking agent
by forming hydrogen bonds between hydrogen and hydroxyl groups and by
replacing water in the material. The mixture of PEG and methylcellulose was
proposed by Brown in 1974 as a 4:1 PEG/ethulose solution in water. This mixture
never dries completely and is hygroscopic. CM Bond is a PVAc emulsion
formulation with a high molecular weight of about 30,000. It has the drawbacks
discussed above that are inherent to most emulsion products.
Consolidant solutions were brushed onto the specimens and allowed to air dry.
The specimens were then weighed and placed in a Hotpack environmental chamber
for 14 days at 80 percent R.H. and 90°F (33°C), which simulates storage conditions
in an environmentally uncontrolled building.
RESULTS
After treatments of the shell surfaces (Table 3), the specimens were soaked for
12 hours in a solvent specific for the consolidant solution that was applied. They

Table 3.
Specimen
No.
i
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Visible Effects of Treatment on Shell Surfaces
Observation1

Slight sheen; stopped surface abrasion
Sheen slightly heavier than 5%; stopped surface abrasion
Slight sheen; stopped surface loss
Slight sheen; stopped surface abrasion
No sheen noted on Group A specimens; stopped surface loss
No sheen; stopped surface loss
Marked sheen; shallow penetration; no abrasion noted
Stayed wet in areas; no abrasion resistance
Group A stayed wet; Croup B dried; no abrasion resistance
Slight sheen; abrasion resistance

Consolidant
Used
PVA-AYAA 5%
PVA-AYAA 10%
PVA-AYAF 5%
PVA-AYAF 10%
PVB 5%
PVG 10%
Rhoplex AC-33
PEG 400
PEG/MC
CM Bond

1 Observations are for both groups unless otherwise noted.

were removed from the solutions, light--dried with a paper towel, and weighed. A
weight lower than the initial weight indicated removal of the consolidant (Table 4).
It can be seen (Table 4) that the most successful reversibility occurred with the
PVAc resins. PVB was not easily removed by soaking in ethanol and tended to
absorb solvent instead, slightly increasing the weight. The water soluble consolidants also were removed after soaking. This was most likely due to the fact that poor

272

Texas Archeological Society
Table 4. Results of Reversibility Tests:
Comparison of Treated Weights With Weights After Consolidation
Treatment (B)

Control (A)
Specimen

Soaking

No.

Agent

Treated
Weight

1
2
3
4

Acetone
Acetone
Acetone
Acetone

15.72
10.41
14.24
13.58

15.69
10.35
14.21
13.51

21.40
11.74
13.38
20.05

21.34
11.65
13.34
19.95

5
6

Ethanol
Ethanol

6.60
13.58

6.64
13.76

14.69
6.77

14.73
6.84

7

Acetone

16.28

16.03

8.10

8.00

8

Ethanol

22.93

22.58

8.07

8.00

9

Ethanol & water,
50%, 1/1
Acetone

16.53
14.44

16.31
14.33

10.96
4.58

10.97
4.54

10

WeightAfter
Removal

Treated
Weight

Weight After
Removal

penetration had occurred, especially with the PEG and PEG/methylcellulose
mixture.
Treatment Recommendations and Techniques
Based on the results of the experiment, the following materials and techniques
are recommended for shell materials requiring treatment in the field. For dry
conditions, one of the grades of PVAc in either acetone or ethanol should be used.
If the ambient temperature is over 80°F, use ethanol, since it will evaporate more
slowly, eliminating the risk of shallow penetration of the consolidant. The
lowest-molecular-weight grade ofPVAc, AYAA, should be used if the shell is very
porous and fragile in order to afford the best penetration. The AYAF grade may be
used if the condition is moderate, but fragile. It is best to apply a light spray of pure
solvent onto the object being treated before the consolidant is applied. This helps
to drive off residual moisture and to introduce the solvent into the material, aiding
the penetration of the consolidant. In a midden site, the individual pelecypod valves
may be tightly packed together. It is best to excavate a pedestal, consolidate the
shells with the surrounding matrix, and remove the sample in a block, either with
or without jacketing. This is the standard method for removing fragile bone and
other objects and has been described in detail elsewhere ~xon 1976, Storch 1983).
When wet or damp shell is encountered, an aqueous-based consolidant is
required because it would be impossible to allow the material to dry enough to use
a solvented system. Use of a solvented resin on material that is too damp will result
in the formation of a white skin on the surface and lack of penetration. The
recommended wet consolidant is Rhoplex AC-33 acrylic emulsion. It can be used
as supplied, which is 45 percent solids, or diluted with distilled or deionized water.
It is the most stable of the emulsion formulations and is of neutral pH. The sheen
can be toned down by swabbing with acetone once the material is stable and dry.

Storch m Conservation of Shell

273

Koob (1984) describes the use of this consolidant on archeological bone in the field.
The same excavation method can be used with the emulsion as the one described for
the solvented PVAc system.
Once the specimens have been returned to the laboratory, they should be
carefully removed from the jackets and placed in an environmentally stable area
(without major fluctuations in temperature and relative humidity). Cleaning of
consolidated specimens can be done by dissolving the adhered matrix with the
appropriate solvent, and, once it is cleaned, reconsolidating the actual surface of the
object. Objects requiring more than simple mending and cleaning treatment should
be treated by a qualified archeological conservator.
CONCLUSIONS

It is difficult to describe every possible object, condition, or problem that might
be encountered in the field, but it is hoped that this article can help to solve some
of the problems posed by fragile shell materials. Several consolidants have been
tested in controlled experiments and, based on the results, the stable, conservation
quality consolidants polyvinyl acetates and acrylics have been recommended for
most stabilization procedures. Although it was not tested in this experiment, the
author agrees with Cease’s recommendation of using a dilute solution of Acryloid
B-72 as a consolidant on dry shell. A recommended dilution is 1:2 B-72/acetone;
acetone is less toxic to the operator than toluene. The resin is known to be stable,
has been well tested on several artifactual materials, and is compatible with shell.
Its main advantage over the PVAc resins is that B-72 has a higher Tg than the
PVAc’s, meaning that it will not cold-flow once it has set up.
Proprietary compounds such as Duco Cement and Elmer’s GlueAll must be
avoided. These materials were not formulated to meet the standards of conservation
practice, are not stable, and actually may be harmful to the specimen. It also must
be remembered that the consolidation with a carbon-containing solvent or resin
should be avoided on any samples that might be subjected to radiocarbon dating.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks Prewitt and Associates, Inc., consulting archeologists,
for supplying the Rangia cuneata (Gray) specimens used in the experiment.
REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1981

Determining seasonality of Rangia cuneata from Gulf Coast shell middens. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:179-200.

Dowman, E. A.
1970

Conservation in field archaeology. Methuen, London.

Hester, T. R., Heizer, R. F., and Graham, J. A.
1975 Field methods in archaeology (sixth edition). Mayfield. California.

274

Texas Archeological Society

Joukowsky, Martha
1980 A complete manual of field archaeology. Prentice-Hall, New Jersey.
Koob, S. P.
1984 The consohdation of archaeological bone. In: Adhesives and consohdants,
Preprints. HC, London.

HC

Lamb, T. R., and Newsom, Lee
1983 Preservation and conservation of organic materials. In: The conservation of
archaeological materials, edited by Charles H. Fairbanks. Special Publication 1,
Florida Journal of Anthropology, University of Florida.
Meighan, C.W,
1970 Molluscs as food remains in archaeological sites. In: Science in archaeology
(second edition), edited by Don Brothwell and Eric Higgs, pp. 415--422. Praeger,
London.
Morris, P. A.
1975 A field guide to shells of the Atlantic and Gulf coasts and file West Indies (third
edition). The Peterson Field Guide Series, 3. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Rixon, A. E.
1976 Fossil animal remains:
London.

their preparation and conservation.

Athlone Press,

Shackelton, N. J.
1970 Marine mollusca in archaeology. In: Science in archaeology (second edition),
edited by Don Brothwell and Eric Higgs. Praeger, London.
Sparks, B. W.
1970 Non-marine mollusca and archaeology. In: Science and archaeology (second
edition), edited by Don Brothwell and Eric Higgs, pp. 395-406. Praeger, London.
Storch, P. S.
1983 Fietdandlaboratorymethodsforhandlingosseousmaterials. ConservationNotes
No. 6, November. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.
Tennant, N. H., and Baird, Thomas
1985 The deterioration of mollusca collections: identification of shell efflorescence.
IIC Studies in Conservation 30:73-85.
Weisz, Paul B.
1963 The science of biology (second edition). Mcgraw-Hill, New York.

