Archeology of the Sheldon Site, Hidalgo County, Texas
Joel L. Shiner

ABSTRACT
Two summers of excavation at the Sheldon site are described. Prehistoric activities
are portrayed as oriented around fire hearths. The site, dated at A.D. 1086 --+ 56 by the
radiocarbon method, is related to similar late occupations in northeastern Mexico.

INTRODUCTION
The Sheldon site in Hidalgo County, Texas, was the scene of two summer
archeological field schools conducted by the Department of Social Sciences, Pan
American University, Edinburg, Texas. The primary purpose of the field schools
was to introduce to students of sociology and anthropology the most recent techniques of data gathering in a field situation, as well as problems of data classification and statistical treatment. During the first season (1976), general hypotheses were developed and tested to gain basic information about an area that had
never before been investigated through scientific excavation. During the second
season (1977) we tested more specific hypotheses that had been generated from a
study of the first year of work.
Sacrificing an archeological site in the name of education alone is not acceptable. Archeologists are obligated to see that the description and interpretation of recovered data are carried to fruition even when beyond the scope of a
field school. The author performed those statistical analyses that were too complex for the class and prepared the manuscript for publication. All recovered artifacts are permanently housed at the International Museum in McAllen, Texas.
A review of the literature on the Lower Rio Grande shows that most knowledge of prehistory in the area is based on limited surveys on both sides of the
river. Attempts to describe the regional prehistory in terms of excavation data
from adjoinging or nearby regions are not necessarily successful. In the present
report almost nothing is added to our general knowledge of the Lower Rio
Grande because the Sheldon site, as will be demonstrated, is not representative
of the general area. Instead, the site appears to be related more directly to sites of
northeastern Tamaulipas and Nuevo Leon, primarily due to a striking similarity
of tool assemblages and raw materials used.

LANDFORMS AND SETTLEMENTS IN THE LOWER RIO GRANDE
A common and distinctive landform along the flood plain of the Lower Rio
Grande consists of low, rolling, gravel hills covered with stunted brush. Major
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54 (1985 for 1983)

310

Texas Archeological Society

and minor creeks are frequent, and some of these drain large areas away from tim
river.
Near the location of the present town of La Jolla, the hills end and both
banks of the river grade imperceptibly from flood plain to flat, featureless plain.
East of this escarpment (Bordas Escarpment) there is almost no local drainage in
evidence in spite of ample rainfall.
Upstream from La Jolla there are numerous Indian campsites, mostly above
the flood plain and away from the river. The hills, having extensive gravel exposures, are essentially sterile of cultural material, except for occasional large
cortex flakes, some of Indian origin and some from the testing of pebbles by
modern agate collectors. Prehistoric sites are located along the edges of the
gravel exposures or where there is substantial silt deposited on top of the gravel.
Large creeks passing between the hills have both trapped Rio Grande silt and
deposited silt of their own. Sites associated with these landforms usually feature
an unusually varied growth of trees. Nunley and Hester (1975) have referred to
these sites as gallery locales, and to the more upland hill sites as bower locales.
Both landforms offer rich microenvironments for the hunter-gatherer, especially
with respect to seeds, roots, and small game.
The Sheldon site is in a bower location on a silt-covered hilltop (Figure 1).
Trees, especially mesquite, offer both shade and abundant food in the form of
bean pods. In addition, the wood is superior for some forms of cooking because
of hard, long-lasting coals. Ebony, a hardwood of large size, is more common in
the flood plain, and prickly pear (Opuntia sp.) is more at home in the lower hills.
Both plants produce seasonal opportunities for food (ebony beans and prickly
pear seed pods called tunas). A more compelling reason for the site location may
be the presence of a small spring flowing from between two layers of caliche conglomerate some 50 meters downhill from the area of concentrated occupation.
SOME EARLY WORK ON LOWER RIO GRANDE ARCHEOLOGY
Sayles (1935) noted the abundance of sites along the Rio Grande, and the
surveyors of the proposed Falc6n Reservoir collected many artifacts and information about area landforms in the 1950s. Unfortunately, very little of the archeological data from work in the reservoir area was formally published, and some
of the conclusions regarding terrace systems and artifact ages remain untested
hypotheses.
A major archeological synthesis for South Texas was published by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954), but the Lower Rio Grande suffered from lack of excavation data. Their temporal phases Falc6n and Mier still need clarification
through excavations and problem-oriented surveys.
Nunley (1971) studied an area along the Texas side of the Rio Grande from
north of Laredo to the Falcdn dam vicinity, both in the field and through collections in Balcones Research Center. He essentially rejected the Falc6n and Mier
phases as well as some of the dart point typology. A later study (Nunley and
Hester 1975) more specifically defined settlement patterns characteristic of the
area upstream from Hidalgo County.
Hidalgo County apparently can be divided by a geographical and a cultural
boundary that separates the coastal Indians from those in the interior (Hester and
Ruecking 1969; Nunley and Hester 1975). The county is also sharply divided

Shiner--Sheldon Site

311

into the eastern low coastal plain and the western rolling hills. Today, much of the
eastern portion of the county is blanketed by citrus groves and contiguous small
cities. Archeological materials within the coastal plain are rarely encountered except as a result of deep disturbance by construction.

SURVEY FOR A FIELD SCHOOL SITE
During the spring of 1976, I began a search for a prehistoric site to use as a
field laboratory for excavations to be sponsored by Pan American University. It
was imperative that such a site be close enough to the campus for commuting,
intact enough to justify excavation, and complex enough to permit testing of
hypotheses.
After examining the published records and talking to several friendly artifact collectors, it became apparent that I would have to find a site the hard
way--by driving around and walking across country. Two days of intensive
search convinced me that the low hills of western Hidalgo County were the only
hope. Dr. Robert Trotter of Pan American had been going into the brushy hills
with local curanderos in search of medicinal plants, and he steered me to a promising area near La Jolla. During the search, I passed over several surface scatters
of Late Prehistoric sites. A presence of Starr arrow points (Campbell 1958) and
an absence of marine shell and pottery suggested that these small sites might be
affiliated with interior, rather than with coastal, groups.

THE SHELDON SITE
Several preliminary trips were made to the Sheldon site before the students
were introduced to the physical problems of excavation and of sampling for various kinds of data. Approximately half of the site area was intact, and the tops of
the larger rocks in a number of fire hearths were visible. About one-fourth of the
site had been displaced by sheet erosion, and another fourth was destroyed by
gullies up to 1.5 meters deep.
Examination of the eroded areas produced more than a dozen dart points of
the general Archaic to very late Archaic range. These rather small points with
triangular to teardrop silhouettes might be variously called Abasolo, Catan, Tortugas, or Matamoros, but in my opinion form a continuum from square to round
bases with only a mild beveling of edges (Figure 2). As noted by Hester (1976),
these point forms are difficult to place in time or with any specific culture type.
Two dart points from the deep gully are obviously much older and must represent
an association with the spring. One is a Scottsbluff point, which would seem to
be far south of its usual distribution, and the other is a large stemmed point of
unknown affiliation.

Pre-Excavation Questions
The presence of hearths, a projected lack of meaningful stratigraphy, and
overall site conditon limited the number of questions that could be addressed by a
field school excavation. It was decided to seek reasons for the site location, the
principal activities carried out there, the distribution of economic activities in
regard to space, and possibly hints as to the division of labor. Answers to these
questions would have to be sought in terms of stone technology and functional

312

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. General view of the Sheldon site area.

Figure 2. Examples of dart points from the Sheldon site,

Shiner--Sheldon Site

313

typology. Practice sessions provided experience in the recognition of firefractured rock, cortex flakes, biface thinning flakes, chips, and cores. Laboratory sessions with simulated tasks and microscopic examination of artifacts gave
adequate skill in gross categorization of scraping, slicing, boring, and chopping
wear patterns.
The preliminary plan was to divide the intact portion of the site into 1-meter
squares and to use a stratified sampling technique. It soon became apparent that
the site consisted of fire hearths of 1.5 to 2 meters in diameter, each ringed with a
limited number of tools and flaking debris. Spaces between the hearths were significantly free of artifacts. For this reason we turned to the excavation of each
hearth as a distinct feature and concentrated on mapping artifacts and hearth
stones.

Excavation
Once it was recognized that the Sheldon site consisted of fire hearths with
associated activity areas, an excavation technique consisting primarily of evenly
spaced test squares was used. Removal of earth was done with trowel and whisk
broom. All loose material was sifted through tA in. hardware cloth. Hearth
stones, areas of burned soil, and tools were left in place until they could be
mapped. Within midden areas, usually distinguished by large numbers of snail
shells (Rabdotus sp.) and a few flakes, vertical controls consisted of arbitrary
20 cm levels.
The fire hearths consisted of clusters of tightly packed river cobbles, mostly
of quartzite (Figure 3). Activity around each hearth had left hard-packed earth,
which could be easily detected by trowelling. Plan maps of each hearth revealed
patterns of debitage (flakes) clustered 1 to 2 meters beyond the outermost hearth

Figure 3. An excavated hearth at the Sheldon site.

314

TexaS Archeological Society

stones. Thus features with their associated debitage ranged from 4.5 to perhaps
7 meters in diameter. Smaller artifacts, such as chips, ranged more widely but
still formed part of each cluster.
Total recovery for the site might be presented as a multiple of all hearth
clusters. Table 1 is a technological breakdown representing the order of tool production. All artifacts listed are from excavations. The figures suggest that whole
cobbles of chert were brought to the site and reduced. Cortex flakes and chips are
frequent, while finished tools are relatively infrequent.
The morphologically distinctive tools are listed under the universal system
of Bordes (1961). The primary concern is overall shape and process of manufacture (Table 2). In order of frequency, finished and unfinished dart points are the
dominant form of tool and are followed by retouched flakes. In this methodology
only a small reliance is placed on correlating name with function. Some points
could have been used as knives or saws,and some scrapers could have been used
as push planes. In view of the quantity of chippage present in the assemblage,
four hammerstones seem inadequate (Table 2). Three choppers (Table 2) do not
seem to be sufficient to produce the amount of firewood that was consumed.
Activity, in terms of tool production and tool use, is best determined by
experimentation with the local stone and microscopic analysis. Functional tools
(Table 3) include those of named morphological types plus flakes and core fragments that clearly show wear patterns of direction, angle, and movement. The
utility of this typology is evident in that, excluding dart points, which are presumed to be used in the field, the number of activity-related artifacts is more than
doubled. None of the bifaces exhibited evidence of wear, and they were therefore
not used for cutting.
Individual Hearths
Three features appear to represent the terminal occupation at the site. Each
hearth contained large numbers of fire-fractured cobbles and abundant charcoal
in well-preserved cubical fragments. Unfortunately, one of the features suffered
major disturbance from exploration drilling conducted during the 1930s or
1940s. The hearths were all buried, and from the condition of the charcoal, I
woiald suggest that each had been deliberately banked with earth. It is probable
that all three were contemporary, and charcoal from one yielded a date of
A.D. 1086 --+ 56 (SMU 583).
At least six other, apparently older, hearths were present. Each contained
rocks that were burned and shattered into small granular fragments. No charcoal
was recovered, but small quantities of white ash were present. The peripheries of
the hearth activity areas did not produce frequent or patterned tool clusters.
These hearths appear to have been exposed to the elements at some time in the
past and were possibly exposed to the comings and goings of later occupants.
Hearth feature No. 1, when mapped, showed 4 preforms, 2 choppers, and 1
scraper on the west side of the hearth (6 large tools and 1 small tool). On the east
side of the hearth were 1 dart point, 1 hammer, 7 small scraping tools, and 3
slicing tools. I do not want to push the interpretation of these data too far, but
there is a high probability that these reflect differing activity patterns divided by
the hearth.
Hearth feature No. 3, some 15 meters to the south, yielded 1 preform and 8
small scraping or slicing tools on the west side of the hearth, while the east side

Shiner--Sheldon Site
Table 1. Technology
Spec i mens

Number

Cores
Cortex
Flakes
Chips
Bifacial thinning flakes
Tools
Total

Percent

40
700
363
5,421
474
74

0.6
9.9
5.1
76.7
6.7
l.O

7,072

I00.0

Table 2. Morphologically Distinctive Tools
Tools
End scrapers
Side scrapers
Raclettes
Denticulates
Notches
Points
Preforms
Burins
Gravers
Gouges
Retouched flakes
Hammers
Choppers
Total

Number

Percent

5
4
3
2
4
15
14
I
5
3
II
4
3

6.8
5.4
4.1
2.6
5.4
20.3
18.9
1.3
6.8
4.1
14.9
5.4
4.0

74

I00.0

Table 3. Functional Tools
Function
Scraping
Slicing-sawing
Graving
Boring
Chopping
Hammering
Planing
Rasping
Total

Number

Percent

46
20
I0
I
3
7
4
3

49
21
II
I
3
7
4
3

94

99

315

316

Texas Archeological Society

produced 6 preforms and 1 small functional scraper. Although there are only 35
artifacts from both of these hearth features, the distributions are highly suggestive. Unfortunately, a statistical test is ruled out by the small sample size.
There is the distinct possibility that the artifact distribution reflects a division of labor, with biface production and heavy chopping related to male activity.
The small scraping, slicing, and graving tools would seem to be more appropriate for women’s work with hides, clothing, and possibly the butchering of animals. This speculation is supported by dozens of ethnographies (e.g., Murdock
1946; Service 1971). A universal rule in hunting and gathering societies is that
males make and use weapons, while women prepare hides, make and repair
clothing, and butcher game.
Sexual division of labor has been suggested by Varner (1968), Whallon
(1962), and others, based on data recovered from hearths in northeastern Mexico.
The Sheldon site is the first example that I can find where functional typology was
combined with mapping around small hearths. The technique has been used previously in different kinds of sites (Shiner 1970; Shiner and Shiner 1977).
Whereas the hearths provided clues to the structure of activities at the site,
artifacts of stone proved to be remarkably unrevealing. Excavated dart points, 15
in number, matched those ubiquitous triangular through teardrop shapes found in
the eroded gully. All were carelessly made and comparatively thick, with little
evidence of craftsmanship or style. Three points were made of a black marine
chert that is common to northeastern Tamaulipas and Nuevo Leon (Department
of Geology, Pan American University, personal communication, 1977). The
same lack of interpretive significance was evident for the other stone tools,
although the range of morphological types was rather wide for such a small
sample. We had not expected to find Clear Fork gouges in a site this late in time,
but neither did we anticipate an absence of arrow points.
Animal bones are not well preserved due to calcium carbonates in the soil.
The few samples of cottontail rabbit and wood rat may represent debris from
food or material from rodent burrows. As such, they are of little significance.
Several fragments of turtle carapace were recovered.
CONCLUSIONS
The Sheldon site appears to be a temporary camp visited periodically, or
perhaps seasonally, as part of a patterned movement out of Tamaulipas and
Nuevo Leon. An intensive survey by the author along the Conchos River east of
Montemorelos, along the Arroyo Mohinas, north to China and west of the Rio
Salado has revealed almost identical hearths and tool assemblages. These sites
also represent repeated visits by small groups, but indicate special exploitation
of local resources. Among these resources are particular cactii and shellfish from
the arroyos. More importantly, the same projectile point shapes were present at
every site and included significant numbers of points made of a black marine
chert that outcrops in the vicinity of Linares, Nuevo Leon.
I will speculate as to why the Sheldon site was part of a seasonal round. The
hill has a spring of clear water and is close to resources of the flood plain, but is
apparently free of insect pests at night. Mesquite beans, tunas, ebony beans, and
small game are available. If interior Mexico were also a part of the patterned
movement, the Arroyo Mohinas and most of the Rio Conchos offer completely

Shiner--Sheldon Site

317

different but complimentary resources. I cannot push the data beyond these assumptions, but I have covered the western part of Hidalgo County and the aforementioned areas of Mexico intensively (Shiner 1976a, 1976b).
The nonutility of the Catan, Abasolo, and Matamoros morphological construct is again demonstrated. If the interpretive value of these so-called projectile
point types is to be discerned, then an intensive restudy is needed. Perhaps flaking technology may be the key.
As to the suggested evidence for the division of labor, I offer it only as
a hypothesis generated by scant data. The interpretation of activities around
hearths, however, is strengthened by this excavation. It now appears that the
basic pattern or structure of Late Archaic band activity in southern Texas and
northeastern Mexico is based upon self-sufficient nuclear families or small
groups, and that hearths, burned-rock middens, earth ovens, or other fireplaces
were a focal point of group activities (Shiner and Shiner 1977). Except at quarries, I find no evidence for site areas reserved for highly specific activities. It is
probable that other cultural patterns existed in nearby mountainous regions and
the coastal plain, but no comparative descriptive reports have yet been published.

REFERENCES CITED
Bordes, F. H.
1961 Typologie du pal6olithique et moyen. Publication de l’Universitg de Bordeaux,
M~mories de l’Institute Prdhistorique 1.
Campbell, T. N.
1958 Archeology of the central and southern sections of the Texas coast. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-175.
Hester, Thomas R.
1976 The Archaic of southern Texas. In The Texas Archaic: a symposium, edited by
T. R. Hester, pp. 83-90. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio, Special Report 2.
Hester, Thomas R., and Frederick Ruecking, Jr.
1969 Prehistoric cemetery sites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:
147-166.
Murdock, George P.
1946 Our primitive contemporaries. Macmillan, New York.
Nunley, J. P.
1971
Sociocultural units of the southwestern Texas Archaic: an analytic approach. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Nunley, J. P., and Thomas R. Hester
1975 An assessment of archaeological resources in portions of Starr County, Texas.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archeological Survey Report 7
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An archaeological survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17. Gila Pueblo, Globe,
Arizona.

Service, Elman R.
1971 Profiles in ethnology. Harper and Row, New York.

318

Texas Archeological Society

Shiner, Joel L.
1970 Activity analysis of a prehistoric site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
41:25-36.
1976a Ethnic persistence in prehistoric northeastern Mexico. Current Anthropology
17(3) :502.
!976b An archaeological survey of northeastern Mexico. Louisiana Archaeology 3:
253-256.
Shiner, Joel L., and Maxine V: Shiner
1977 Structure and organization of a burned rock midden: the Indian Creek site, Real

County, Texas. Plains Anthropologist 22(78), Part 1:263-282.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and E. B. Jelks
1954 An introductory handbook of Texas archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol 25.
Varner, Dudley M.
1968 The nature of non-buried archeological data problems in northeastern Mexico.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 38:51-65.
Whallon, Robert
1962 Hearth surface survey. Typescript, Northeastern Mexico Archaeological Project file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

