Legal Safeguards for Preserving the Past
PEAltL L.

McNEIL

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The writer wishes to express her deep appreciation to Dr. George
R. Fischer, Archeologist, National Park Service, and his staff for their
invaluable assistance in the preparation of this paper.

INTRODUCTION
Since man does have a brain, he has a tendency to pause and reflect.
One aspect of this reflection is that of speculation about his origin.
Archaeologists may use speculation to build theory, but they must
be able to unearth some evidence of and about the past. Much of our
historic, and still more of our prehistoric, past has been lost due to
careless destruction preparatory to new construction or due to treasure
hunting. For this reason, some legislation is necessary to proteet against
inept and willful demolishment of tangible evidence of previously
existing human communities. This type of legislation falls in the category called antiquity laws.
The purpose of this paper is a delineation of the historical background of this concern; a presentation of federal and state legislation
in the field; and some discussion of the probable effectiveness of the
antiquities codes in the various states.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
A.

CAUSE FOR CONCERN

As primitive man moved up through time his shelter evolved through
time from "lean-to’s" to mud huts to earth lodges to grass dwellings
to stone houses. It is conceivable that he left some remains at each
occupational level or living site that can be interpreted by those with
proper training and the inclination to do so. The "reading" of these
prehistoric and historic "records" has become the main business of
modern archaeology. As a matter of fact, because of their broad
socio-cultural interpretation of the data-some might be called "ethnoarchaeologists."
Now that we have subdued the wilderness and conquered our geographical h’ontiers in these United States, we are becoming increasingly concerned about our historic and prehistoric past. The notations
of Lewis and Clark in their expedition of the great West beyond the
Mississippi are considered valuable ethnographic records. The diarylike history-guidebook on "Michilimachinac" by John R. Bailey, a phy-

9,68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

sieian, is a valuable ethnographic document and contains some data
that help to explain the "gaps" and the seeming inconsistencies between
the archaeological findings and the historical record in Michigan history books.
Thomas Jefferson, the third U.S. President, was the first to excavate
an ancient Indian Village in this country. According to Dr. J. O.
Brew (in Wendorf, 1962), "Not only did he do the digging but he
also published an account of it, thereby setting an example not always
followed by successors. Jefferson’s Notes on Virginia dated 1782 and
published in Paris in 1784, carries a report of his excavation of a site
in Virginia which inaugurated American Archaeology."
Brew goes on to point out that the 19th century discoveries of
ancient Pompeii, the excavations at Troy and in Egypt, plus the diseoveries of topographic and railroad surveys in western United States
"brought archaeology to the threshold of professional status." The
first professorship was established in 1866 at the Peabody Museum,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and the chair was known as the George
Peabody Professor of American Archaeology and Ethnology. "Museums
transformed themselves," continues Professor Brew, "from collectors
’cabinets’ of natural, unnatural, and so-called scientific curios to presentations of prehistolJc cultures and stories of man’s steps in his development toward his dominant position in the modern world. The whole
field of the history of mankind took on meaning, content, and purpose."
Within the last twenty years a new dimension has come into archaeology with phenomenal consequences. This new dimension is known
as salvage archaeology. Regarding its amazing development Fred
Wendorf (1962:6), one of its pioneer architects, observes:
In the last few years, salvage archaeology has become a major concern to
archaeologists througbout this country, and, indeed, throughout the world.
In many areas industry has come to consider salvage archaeology as a norreal, standard part of its construction projects; it has recognized a legal and
moral obligation to protect our cultural and scientific resources from needless
destruction.

In discussing the genesis of this concern in one of the scientific
journals, Dr. Brew points out the fact that population growth all over
the world has always threatened the preservation of historical and
archaeological items. In other words, we may say that for thousands
of years different civilizations have wrecked the structures of previous
generations to "make way for tomorrow"-to quote a 20th century
radio program. Modern Athens, Ilome, Cairo, Damascus and New York
have all gone through this process. Dr. Brew’s delineation asserts
that "to meet the threat resulting from unprecedented rural and urban

ANTIQUITY LAWS

269

developments of the 20th century, the idea of salvage archaeology
developed .... Since not all old buildings, information or artifacts
can be saved, the idea of salvage archaeology is to survey and record.
. . . This does not impede progress and occasionally an alternative
route for a road or a dam can be found in order to save a threatened
nmnument" ( 1960:294).
The first major prog~’am in salvage archaeology in the United States
took place in Kentucky and Tennessee and adjacent territory in connection with the work of the Tennessee Valley Authority during the
th’st term of the presidency of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. It was
carried on under the direction of Major William S. Webb, then chairman of the Department of Anthropology at the University of Kentucky. Numerous sites were surveyed and excavated before any water
came into the reservoirs.
The most extensive salvage yet undertaken by the United States
govermnent followed World War II. The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
and the Corps of Engineers had been authorized to create 108 dams
in the Missouri River Basin with countless other projects to follow. A
group of archaeologists was quick to realize that because "ahnost a!l
of the prehistoric and early historic occupation of the Missouri was on
the banks of the main stream and its tributaries, a large part of our
heritage was scheduled to go under water (Brew, 1962:14). They
organized the Committee for The Recovery of Archaeological Remains
in order to prevent much of our American heritage from literally
"going down the drain." Archaeologists active in the 1945 effort
included Dr. J. O. Brew, Dr. Frederick Johnson, and Dr. Frank H. H.
Roberts of the Bm’eau of American Ethnology in the Smithsonian Institute. The Committee was co-sponsored by the American Council of
Learned Societies, the Society for American Archaeology, and the
American Anthropological Association. The efforts of this dedicated
group of scholars, though inexperienced politically, won support in
Washington. With the assistance of the archaeologists at the Smithsonian and undergirded by the Antiquities Act of 1906, the Historic
Sites Act of 1935, and the guidance of the National Park Servicebrought into being the INTER-AGENCY A~CHAEOLOCY SALVAGE I’I~OCRAM
OF THE UNITED STATES COVERNMENT (Brew, 1947:209-25).

B. TYPES OF SALVAGE ARCHAEOLOGY
The three main types of salvage archaeology are: (I) 1~iver Basin
Salvage, (2) Pipeline Salvage, and (3) Highway Salvage.
Beginning with the Missouri River Basin projects the report of the
number of archaeological, paleontological and historical surveys has
been an impressive record of cooperation between government

9,70

TEXAS AIqCHEOLOCICAL

SOCIETY

agencies and the public with scholars and universities in the direction
of primarily epistemologieal goals.
A publication of the Committee for the Recovery of Archaeological
Remains reported on the accomplishments from 1946-1957 in a pamphlet entitled The Inter-Agency Archaeological Salwtge Program After
Twelve Years.
It is interesting to note in summary that:
(a) 9,000 sites were located and recorded, including prehistoric
villages, burial grounds, trails, quarries, fur-trading posts, military forts, pioneer cabins and early frontier settlements.
(b) Surveys were made in 310 reservoirs in 49. states;
(e) Sixty-nine (69) excavations were conducted in 69 reservoir areas
in 31 states; and
(d) Over 4,000,000 specimens were gathered for compiling and
classification.
As demand for off and natural gas increased and tank car transport
proved inadequate to meet the supply needs, a new threat came to our
prehistoric past as engineers perfected methods of moving gas and oil
through pipelines. Thus Pipeline Salvage Archaeology was born.
Arehaeo!ogists are now standard personnel on pipeline projects.
Then in 1956, President Eisenhower inaugurated a 56 billion dollar
road building program. The Society for American Archaeology was
immediately alert to this new danger to American antiquities and set
up within the organization a Highway Salvage Committee under the
leadership of Dr. Fred Wendorf, then director of anthropologiea!
research at the Museum of New Mexico (now as of 1964-Head of
the Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University). By
1962, Highway Salvage Archaeology was organized in eleven states.
In eight years, 9.50 new highway routes in the state of New Mexico
alone had been surveyed by archaeologists and seventy-two sites
excavated.
On an international scale, UNESCO of the United Nations Organization established a world committee in 1960 with King Custaf VI of
Sweden, himself an archaeologist, as chairman. In 1961, President Kennedy delivered a strong message to Congress calling for U.S. support
(to be undergirded by funds) and appointed Professor John Wilson
of the University of Chicago as executive of the U.S. Committee to
cooperate with the World Committee under the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
Whereas archaeological salvage, properly planned and executed,
neither denies nor impedes progress, it cannot take place without certain prescribed rights of passage. Hence the body of legislation which

ANTIQUITY

271

LAWS

is known as "antiquities acts"-to be discussed in the remaining sections of this paper.
FEDERAL ANTIQUITIES LEGISLATION
The first antiquities code was not conceived by archaeologists, nor
did its framers have archaeology in mind. Its authors were so farsighted
that the Federal Antiquities Act of 1906 is yet a model in the field.
Not only that, but it proved to be a significant development in the
growth of the national park system; it made possible the quick preservation of great works of nature and portions of the nation’s landscape
that might have been exploited or destroyed as the U.S. frontier
moved westward.
FEDERAL ANTIQUITIES ACT
Public Law-209
34th Congress S. L. 225
June 8, 1906
An Act For the preservation of American antiquities.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States
of America in Congress assembled. That any person who shall appropriate, excavate, injure, or destroy any historic or prehistoric ruin or monmnent, or any object
of antiquity, situated on lands owned or controlled by the Government of the
United States, without the pemaission of the Secretary of the Department of the
Government having jurisdiction over the ]ands on which said antiquities are situated, shall upon conviction, be fined in a sum of not more than five hundred
dollars o1" be imprisoned for a period of not more than ninety days, or shall suffer
both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
SEC. 2. That the President of the United States is hereby authorized, in his
discretion, to declare by public proclamation historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures, and other objects of historic or scientific interest that are
situated upon the lands owned or controlled by the Government of the United
States to be national monuments, and may reserve as a part thereof parcels of
land, the limits o£ which in al! cases shall be confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected:
Provided, That when such objects are situated upon a tract covered by a bona
fide unperfected claim or held in private ’ownership the tract, or so much thereof
as may be necessary for the proper care and management of the object, may be
relinquished to the Government, and the Secretary of the Interior is hereby
authorized to accept the relinquishment of such tracts in behalf of the Government of the United States.
SEC. 3. That permits for the examination of ruins, the excavation of archaeological sites, and the gathering of objects of antiquity upon the ]ands under their
respective jurisdictions may be granted by the Secretaries of the Interior, Agriculture, and War to institutions which they may deem properly qualified to conduct such examination, excavation, or gathering, subject to such rules and regulations as they may prescribe: Provided, That the examinations, excavations and
gatherings are undertaken for the benefit of reputable museums, universities,
colleges, or other recognized scientific or educational institutions, with a view to
increasing the knowledge of such objects, and that the gatherings shall be made
for pem~anent preservation in public museums.

272

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SEC. 4. That the Secretaries of the Departments aforesaid shall make and
publish from time to time uniform rules and regulations for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of this Aet.
Approved, June 8, 1906 (34 Stat. L.225)
97785*--24
UNIFORM RULES AND REGULATIONS
Prescribed by the Secretaries of the Interior, Agriculture, and War to carry out
the Provisions of the "Act for the Preservation of American Antiquities,"
Approved June 8, 1906 (34 STAT. L., 225)
1. Jurisdiction over ruins, archeological sites, historic and prehistoric monuments and structures, objects of antiquity, historic landmarks, and other objects of
historic or scientific interest, shall be exercised under the act by the respective
Departments as follows:
By the Secretary of Agriculture over lands within the exterior limits of forest
reserves, by the Secretary of War over lands within the exterior limits of military
reservations, by the Secretary of the Interior over all other lands owned or controlled by the Government of the United States, provided the Secretaries of War and
Agriculture may by agreement cooperate with the Secretary of the Interior in
the supervision of such monuments and objects covered by the act of June 8, 1906,
as may be located on lands near or adjacent to forest reserves and military reservations, respectively.
2. No permit for the remova! of any ancient monument or structure which can
be permanently preserved under the control of the United States in situ, and
remain an object of interest, shall be granted.
3. Permits for the examination of ruins, the excavation of archeological sites,
and the gathering of objects of antiquity will be granted by the respective Secretaries having jurisdiction, to reputable nmseums, universities, colleges, or other
recognized scientific or educational institutions, or to their duly authorized agents.
4. No exclusive permits shall be granted for a larger area than the applicant
can reasonably be expected to explore fully and systematically within the time
limit named in the permit.
5. Each application for a permit should be filed with the Secretary having
jurisdiction, and nmst be accompanied by a definite outline of the proposed work,
indicating the name of the institution making the request, the date proposed for
beginning the field work, the length of time proposed to be devoted to it, and
the person who will have immediate charge of the work. The application must
also contain an exact statement of the character of the work, whether examination,
excavation, or gathering, and the public museum in which the collections made
under the permit are to be permanently preserved. The application must be
accompanied by a sketch plan or description of the particul~ site or area to be
examined, excavated, or searched, so definite that it can be located on the map
with reasonable accuracy.
6. No permit will be granted for a period of more than three years, but if the
work has been diligently prosecuted under the permit, the time may be extended
for proper cause upon application.
7. Failure to begin work under a permit within six months after it is granted,
or failure to diligently prosecute such work after it has been begun, shall make
the permit void without any orcler or proceeding by the Secretary having jurisdiction.
8. Applications for permits shall be referred to the Smithsonian Institution for
recommendation.
9. Every permit shall be in writing and copies shall be transmitted to the
Smithsonian Institution and the field officer in charge of the land involved. The
permittee will be furnished with ’a copy of these rules and regulations.

ANTIQUITY LAWS

273

10. At the close of each season’s field work the pennittee shall report in duplicate to the Smithsonian Institution, in such form as its secretary may prescribe,
and shall prepare in duplicate a catalogue of the collections and of the photographs made during the season, indicating therein such material, if any, as may
be available for exchange.
11. Institutions and persons receiving permits for excavation shall, after the
completion of the work, restore the lands upon which they have worked to their
customary condition, to the satisfaction of the field officer in charge.
12. All pelanits shal! be terminable at the discretion of the Secretary having
jurisdiction.
13. The field officer in charge of land owned or controlled by the Government
of the United States shall, from time to time, inquire and report as to the existence, on or near such lands, of ruins and archeological sites, historic or prehistoric
ruins or monuments, objects of antiquity, historic landmarks, historic and prehistoric structures, and other objects of historic or seientifie interest.
14. The field officer in charge may at all times examine the permit of any
person or institution claiming privileges granted in accordance with the act and
these rules and regulations, and may fully examine all work done under such
pemlit.
15. All persons duly authorized by the Secretaries of Agriculture, War, and
Interior may apprehend or cause to be arrested, as provided in the act of February 6, 1905 (33 Stat. L., 700), any person or persons who appropriate, excavate,
injure, or destroy any historic or prehistoric ruin or monument, or any object of
antiquity on lands under the supervision of the Secretaries of Agriculture, War, and
Interior, respectively.

Supplementary legislation has been enacted by the 74th and 86th
Congresses. In 1935 Congress passed Public Law 74-299, known as the
Historic Sites Act which provides for the preservation of sites, buildings, objects and antiquities of national significanee for the "inspiration
and benefit of the people of the United States."
In 1960 Congress enacted Public Law 86-593 "to provide for the
preservation of historical and arehaeologieal data (including relies
and speeimens) which might otherwise be lost as the result of the
construction of a dam."
STATE ANTIQUITIES LEGISLATION
The fourth section of this paper is a digest of existing antiquities
acts and/or preservation programs among the several states. An attempt has been made to indieate the probable effectiveness of the
regulations in each state by grouping the states into categories ranging
from strong antiquities codes to "no provisions."
The categories and the states so classified follow:
A.

ANTIQUITIES ACTS--strong codes including regulations requiring
the service of a State Archaeologist. There are seventeen (17)
states so classified. They are:
Delaware
New Mexico
Florida
New York
Iowa
North Carolina

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

274
Kansas
Kentucky
Maryland
Minnesota
Nevada

B.

Oklahoma
Oregon
Texas
Utah
West Virginia
Wisconsin

SPECIFIC LEGISLATION--Official

enabling laws but without the

position of State Archaeologist. There are seven (7) states that
fall in this category. They are:
Missouri
Alaska
North Dakota
Arkansas
South Dakota
Michigan
Wyoming
C.

D.

REGULATIONs--designed to prohibit treasure seekers,
et al. from destroying valuable historical and/or archaeological
items. There are seven (7) states expressing this degree of
concern. They are:
Hawaii
Alabama
Montana
Arizona
Nebraska
California
Washington
OFFICIAL

ARCHAEOLOGICAL PROGRAlt{S

with Government Support-no offi-

cial legislation but with resolutions expressing concern and
designating certain funds to support the program through State
Museums, and!or Universities. The thirteen (13) states so
committed are:
Massachusetts
Connecticut
New Jersey
Colorado
Ohio
Idaho
Pennsylvania
Illinois
South Carolina
Indiana
Tennessee
Maine
Virginia
E,

F.

STATE ORGANIZED CONCERN--without any official program but
with the organized efforts of State Universities, Museums, State
Historical Commission and related agencies. The two (9)
states so classified are:
Georgia
Louisiana
VOLUNTEERS

ONLY--states where no official concern is mani-

fested and preservation efforts carried on by State Archaeo-

ANTIQUITY

LAWS

275

logical and/or State Historical Societies. There are two (9.)
such states, namely:
New Hampshire
Vermont
C.

NO e1~OVlSlONS--where there is no known attempt at preservation of archaeological remains of historical significance. One
such state:
t~hode Island
Note: No report available on the state of Mississippi.

The succeeding pages will present the synopsis of the regulations
and program highlights for Texas and each of the boundary states.
Texas-Chapter 153; Title 4, Articles 147a and 147b; Chapter 159.;
Chapter 227; Chapter 150; Chapter 193; Chapter 194; and Chapter
195. (See Appendix A for 1969 Proposal)
Chapter 153 and Article 147a are general antiquities laws which
protect areheologieal remains on State-owned and -controlled lands
and on (all?) lands west of the Pecos River in the State. Also declared
to be a misdemeanor is the forging or alteration of article of antiquity
for profit. Within this section (Article !47b), are the law requirements
for nonresidents in obtaining permits to explore or excavate areheological remains on State or private lands. The State legislature has
authorized counties to set up advisory historical commissions, to be
appointed by the county judge; and has allowed cities and eounties to
acquire museums, buildings, sites, and landmarks of archeological
interest (Chapters 159, and 9,27, respectively), and to set up historic
markers or monuments in such areas as of significance to the county
(Chapter 150). Provisions have been enacted which protect the
integrity of the properties declared significant. (Chapters 193 and
194). The Texas State Historical Survey Committee was established to
coordinate the State program designating sites of historical, archeo!ogieal, or paleontological significanee (Chapter 195). The position
of state archeologist, attached to the State Buildings Commission (409
Sam Houston State ONce Building, P.O. Box 19.172, Austin, Texas
78711), was created in 1965, but operating funds are available for
primarily administrative and educational functions. Archeological
research is correlation of survey systems. The University of Texas,
Austin, Texas, has the most extensive site survey reeords; other records
are at Southern Methodist University, Texas Memorial Museum, Panhandle Plains Historical Museum, Centennial Museum, Witte Museum,
and other institutions. Plans have been initiated to combine all the
site survey records.

276

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Arkansas-Act 89. of 1959; Act 59 of 1967
The 1967 act serves as antiquities legislation in regard to making
fieldwork an exclusive right of the designated State institution, and
at the sime time encourages private landowners to abide by the precepts of the legislation, in relation to its protective and investigative
measures. The act of 1959 establishes the State program for archeological research, designating the director of the Coordinating Office of
the University of Arkansas Museum (Fayetteville, Arkansas 79.701) as
the keeper of the statewide survey records.
Louisiana- (no known legislation)
No legislation has been passed on antiquities, though strong efforts
have been made. No position of state archeologist exists; although the
State Museum and Commission of Parks and Recreation cooperate in
antiquities efforts. The State University (Baton t~ouge, Louisiana
70803) serves, fairly successfully, as the clearinghouse for State survey
reeords. Some of the work entailed in the program is with the aid of
amateurs. The site records are filed with the standard trinomial numbering system.
New Mexico--1931 Laws, Chapter 42, page 81; 1953 Laws, Chapter 7,
Article 13.
The Statute of 1953 is the principle State antiquities law. It is this
law which creates the office and position of state archeologist (to be
held without salary), and establishes a State Science Commission for
the purpose of expediting the provisions of the act. Also, the act declares that permits are necessary for all archeologieal investigations on
State lands, and that these are to be granted by the Commissioner of
Public Lands upon reconnnendation from the Science Commission;
collections made under the provisions of the act are to be deposited
in the Museum of New Mexico (Santa Fe, New Mexico 8750i ), unless
otherwise designated by the eonnnission. The Director of Research at
the Museum serves in the capacity of state archeologist. Some State
funds are available for projects, though the Museum, along with "the
University of New Mexico (Albuquerque, New Mexico 97106) and
Eastern New Mexico University, is mainly dependent upon grants and
contracts. The two universities correlate their differing catalog systems
with that of the Museum. The Museum’s records are primarily site
surveys only for work done by that institution.
Oklahoma-Chapter 50, Section 3309; Chapter 139, H.B. No. 1262.
State law requires all persons desirous of investigating archeological
remains on any lands in the State of Oklahoma to hold a permit, for
which a fee of 50 dollars is charged. Fifty percent of all collections
made under such a permit are to be deposited with the Museum of

277

ANTIQUITY LAWS

Science and History of the University of Oklahoma (Norman, Oklahoma 73069). Oklahoma law declares that it is a misdemeanor to
vandalize prehistoric or historic remains on property owned or administered by the Oklahoma Historical Society. The Chairman of the
Department of Anthropology at the University is authorized to issue
lieenses, and he functions as the state archeologist, though no such
official office exists. The University is the clearinghouse for site survey
records, which are numbered in the standard fashion. The Oklahoma
Anthropological Society and the Museum of the Great Plains both
submit their site reports to the University’s catalog. No funds are
directly available for research or salvage other than those used by
the University’s field training school and moneys obtained via contract
or grant.
CONCLUSIONS
Included in this paper is a copy of the proposed (spring, 1969)
Antiquities Code for the State of Texas (Appendix A). This is a
rather comprehensive piece of legislation and, necessarily so, considering the nature and richness of culture history in Texas territory
and environs even prior to 1492, and in light of the distinctive contribution to human knowledge that might accrue from excavations in
coastal regions and submerged lands.
One observation seems pertinent. Antiquities legislation must be
strong enough to deter ruthless treasure seekers but flexible enough to
keep amateurs not only curious about man’s past but actively participating in its preservation.
The United States government and the many fields of knowledge
and academic disciplines are now pooling their resources into an interdisciplinary program of action to preserve the past that will aid us
in the study of man through time.
This program of historical archaeology gives us some assurance that
in the United States this portion of the record of mankind will not
forever disappear from the face of the earth.
REFERENCES CITED
Brew, J.
1947
1960
1969.

O.
Symposimn on River Valley Archaeology. American Antiquity, Vol. 12.
Science Newsletter, Volume 77.
Introduction in A Guide for Salvage Archaeology by Fred Wendoff,
Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa Fe.

Wendorf, Fred
1969. A Guide for Salvage Archaeology,
Santa Fe.

Museum of New Mexico Press,

9.78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOCICAL SOCIETY

Resource:

Antiquities Codes Files, Office of Archeology and Historic Preservation,
National Park Service, United States Department of the Interior, Washington, D.C.

APPENDIX A
1969 PROPOSAL FOR
ANTIQUITIES CODE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS
An Act establishing and adopting an Antiquities Code for tile State of Texas;
setting forth tile public policy of tile State with respect to archeological and
historical sites and items; providing for a system of permits and contracts
for the salvage of treasure troves and the excavation or study of archeological
and historical sites and objects; making it unlawful to damage or destroy
archeolo~ieat and historical items and sites on public lands; providing a
penalty for violations of the Act; providing for cooperative efforts on the part
of state officers, agencies and law enforcement officers to carry out the provisions of this Act; providing for injunctive relief; providing a saving clause;
repealing prior status; and declaring an emergency.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:
SECTION I-Short Title
This Act shall be known, and may be cited, as "’Code of Antiquities."
SECTION 2-Public Policy
It is hereby declared to be the public policy and in the public interest of the
State of Texas to locate, protect and preserve all sites, objects, buildings, shipwrecks and locations of historical, archeological, educational or scientific interest,
including, but expressly not limited to, prehistoric and historical Indian or aboriginal campsites, dwellings and habitation sites, archeological sites of every character,
treasure troves, sunken or abandoned ships or any part or contents thereof, maps,
records, documents, books, artifacts and implements of culture in any way related
to tile inhabitants, prehistory, history, natural history, government or culture of the
lands now comprising the State of Texas, its tidelands and submerged lands.
SECTION 3-Property Rights of tile State, Permits
All sites, objects, buildings, shipwrecks, treasure troves, artifacts, implements and
locations of historical, archeological, scientific or educational interest located on or
within any lands, tidelands, or submerged lands of the State of Texas, or upon
any lands in any way claimed or controlled by the State of Texas, or by any
county, city or political subdivision of the State, are the sole property of the State
of Texas and may not be taken, altered, damaged, destroyed, salvaged or excavated without a permit from an antiquities committee composed of the Director
of the State Historical Survey Committee, the Director of tile State Parks and
Wildlife Departnlent, the Commissioner of the General Land Office, one professional archeologist and one professional historian who shall serve without additional compensation other than travel and per diem expenses which may be
available from existing appropriations. All permits shall be granted for a specified
location, activity and time period. All activities carried out under such a permit
shall be under tile general supervision of the State Archeologist, and any permit
may be revoked by the Antiquities Committee at any time for the violation of this
Act or of any rule or regulation set forth in the permit.
SECTION 4-Salvage of Treasure Troves
In addition to its other powers, and without limiting same, the Antiquities
Committee shall be authorized to enter into contracts with other state agencies or
institutions and with qualified private institutions, companies or individuals for

279

ANTIQUITY LAWS

the discovery and salvage of treasure troves and shipwrecks on or under the tidelands or submerged lands of the State of Texas or its political subdivisions or
agencies thereof. The contract may provide for fair compensation to the salvager
in terms of a percentage of the reasonable cash value of the objects removed, or at
the discretion of the Committee, of a fair share of the objects recovered. Superior
title to all such objects is retained by the State of Texas until and unless they
are released to the salvager by the Committee. All such salvage operations must
be carried out under the general supervision of the State Archeologist, in such
a manner that the maxinmm amount of historic, scientific, archeological and education information is recovered and preserved in addition to any treasure trove. The
Antiquities Committee shall determine the repository of all items recovered from
any such salvage operation, in order that the maxinmm scientific benefit ,shall
accrue to historians, archeologists, anthropologists and the citizens of Texas. No
person, fima or institution shall be entitled to a salvage eontract as a matter of
right, but all such contracts are to be entered into at the discretion of the Committee upon a showing of good cause for salvage operations.
SECTION 5--Salvage or Removal of Treasure Trove Without Permit
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the salvage operations described
in Section 4 of this Act, or to remove or recover all or any part of any treasure
trove fi’om any lands, tidelands, or submerged lands of the State of Texas, its
political subdivisions, or of any agency thereof, without having in possession a
valid permit from the Antiquities Conunittee to conduct that specific activity.
SECTION 6-Damage to Historical Archeological or
Vertebrate Paleontological Sites
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally excavate in or upon, collect
artifacts from, or to disturb, deface, disfigure, damage, alter, destroy, or remove
any historic or prehistoric ruin, shipwreck, artifact, burial, burial ground, mound,
prehistoric or historical Indian campsite, or any foma of archeologica! or vertebrate
paleontological site, or any site containing fossilized footprints, or inscriptions,
paintings, pictographs or petroglyphs made by any human agency, or any other
archeological or paleontological feature, or any historical marker, medallion or monument, or other historical feature, situated in, under or on any lands, public property, tidelands or submerged lands owned or in any manner controlled by the State
of Texas, its political subdivisions, or by any agent, official or agency thereof,
without having in his possession a valid permit from the Antiquities Committee
to conduct such activity.
SECTION 7--Defacing Indian Paintings, Carvings and Hieroglyphics
It shal! be unlawful for any person to intentionally deface, damage or destroy any
Indian paintings, carvings, petroglyphs, hieroglyphics, or other marks of carvings
on rock or elsewhere which pertain to the prehistorie or historical Indian Inhabitants of the State of Texas.
SECTION 8-Forging Archeological Objects
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally reproduce, replicate, retouch,
rework, or forge any archeological or other object whieh derives value from its
antiquity, with intent to represent the same to be original or genuine and with
intent to deceive or offer any such object for sale or exchange.
SECTION 9-Recovery of Objects Unlawfully Acquired
Any objects, artifacts, treasure trove, implements, or information recovered, taken
or held in violation of any Section of this Act, as well as any proceeds thereof,
may be recovered by the State of Texas or the rightful owner thereof from any
person, firm, institution or corporation holding or having possession of same.

TEXAS

280

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

SECTION 10-Injunctive Rellef
In addition to, and without limiting the other powers of the State Attorney
General, and without altering or waiving any criminal penalty provisions of this
Act, the Attorney General shall have the right to bring an action in the name
of the State of Texas in any District Court for restraining orders and injunctive
relief to enjoin and restrain violations or threatened violations of this Act, and
venue of such action shall lie either in Travis County, Texas, or in the county
in which or nearest the place where the activity sought to be restrained is alleged
to be taking place.
SECTION 11--Cooperation Between State Agencies
The chief administrative officers of each state agency are authorized and
directed to cooperate and assist the Antiquities Committee and Attorney General
in carrying out the intent of this act. All law enforcement agencies and officers,
state and local, are authorized and directed to assist in enforcing this Act and in
carrying out the intent hereof.
SECTION 12
It shall be unlawful for any person, not being the owner thereof, and without
written consent of the owner, proprietor, leasee or person in charge thereof, to
enter or attempt to enter upon the lands of another and intentionally injure, disfigure, remove, excavate, damage, take, dig into, or destroy any historical structure, monument, marker, medallion or artifact, or any prehistoric or historic
archeological site, Indian campsite, artifact, burial, ruin or other archeological
remains located on or under any private lands within the State of Texas.
SECTION 13
Any person violating any of the provisions or Sections of this Act shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine of not less than Fifty Dollars
(850.00) and not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or by confinement
in jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and confinement.
Eacla day of continued violation of any Section of this Act shall constitute a
distinct and separate offense for which the offender may be punished.
SECTION 14
The Sections of this Act and each part of such Sections are hereby declared
to be severable and independent of each other, and the holding of a Section, or
part thereof, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, to be
invalid or ineffective or unconstitutional shall not affect any other Section, or
part thereof, or the application of any Section, or part thereof, to other persons
and circumstances.
SECTION 15
All laws in conflict herewith and laws codified as Article 147a, Article 147b,
Article 147b-1, and Article 147b-2, Vernon’s Annotated Penal Code, are hereby
repealed.
SECTION 16
The fact that irreparable damage and harm is rapidly being done to the archeological and historical heritage of the State of Texas and its citizens, and that
historical and archeological sites, and treasures on public lands, are without
adequate legal protection and supervision and are being destroyed and damaged
without lawful authority, creates an emergency and imperative public necessity
that the Constitutional Rule requiring bills to be read on three several days in
each house be suspended, and this Rule is hereby suspended, and this Act shall
take effect and be in force from and after the date of its passage, and it is so
enacted.

