Notes on Excavated Ring Midden Sites, 1963-1968
JOHN W.

GREER

ABSTHACT
Recent excavations and radiocarbon dates of ring middens in Texas,
New Mexico, and Colorado indicate that this type of site is relatively
late, dating generally after A.D. 800.

A survey of ring midden sites has been carried out during the past
few years, primarily in western Texas and southern New Mexico
(Greer 1965). Since the smwey began in 1963, a number of sites have
been tested, and radiocarbon dates are now available for many of
them.
Ring middens are circular, doughnut-shaped middens of fire-cracked
limestone rocks and gray ash. These may be elassified as either midden circles or mescal pits. Following are descriptions of the ring midden types in this report.
Midden eireles are the remains of the surface hearths from which
the broken stones have been thrown back in a circle producing a
mound of rocks and ash with a central depressed area of ash. Form I
midden circles are symmetrically circular middens with a widely depressed center. Variety A is 40 to 55 feet in diameter and 4.0 to 5.5
feet high. The sides of the pit are usually quite steep and the rim is
eomposed of medium-sized pieces of burned rock with little or no
ash. Variety B is about 30 to 35 feet in diameter and 0.5 to 2.5 feet
high. The eentTal depression is shallower-saucer-shaped-and the rim
contains a mixture of ash and small, heat-fractured rocks.
Mescal pits are the remains of earth ovens, the mound of burned
rocks and ash being the result of raking back the coals and broken
slabs after plant baking. Although surface features may be similar to
midden circles, the mescal pits contain a slab-lined cooking pit in the
center of the midden dug down below the natural gTound level, the
original surface. Form I has the same surface eharacteristies as Form
I midden eireles, even to the variety distinctions. FolTn II is a semicircular midden accumulation.
Excavated ring midden sites include eight in Texas--tln’ee middens
in Val Verde County, two in Sutton County, two in Crockett County,
one in E1 Paso County-as well as five in Eddy County, New Mexico,
and one in Las Animas County, Colorado. The sites in Val Verde,
Crockett, and Sutton counties are mainly in regions of low hills and
fairly wide, shallow canyons and no doubt represent, at least in part,
sotol-gathering activities. The E1 Paso County site, which is on a flat,

40

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

sandy desert section of the mountain-basin region east of E1 Paso,
may also be the result of plant baking. The southern New Mexico sites
are in the Guadalupe Mountains of Carlsbad Caverns National Park
just north of Culberson County, Texas (Greer 1966a). One site (with
three tested middens) is at the base of the mountains, and two others
are on top of the 600 to 1300 foot escarpment overlooking the desert
flats to the east and south. These middens also were probably used to
roast sotol (Dasylirion) and mescal (large Agaves, including A. perryi)
which are still present in the area. The site in southeastern Colorado,
just east of Trinidad, is on the open plains and is next to a large canyon. The purpose of this midden is unkonwn-no Dasylirion or Agave
or edible species of Yucca are present in the area.
Eighteen dates were obtained from the samples dated by the Radiocarbon Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin (Table 1;
Pearson et al. 1966; Valastro et al. 1967; Valastro et al. in press). The
earliest date of 610 B.C. does not fit in well with the other dates and
may be questionable as a date of midden circles. It is from Felton
Cave (site TX-20, Sutton County) and ff correct should date the beginning of the side-notching tradition in the eastern part of west
Texas. The two excavated ring middens appear to be Form IB midden circles lying directly on bedrock. Perdiz points were scattered
about the general surface of the site and both middens. It has been
suggested-though impossible to discern at the time of excavationthat the middens accumulated during times of late corner-notching
and early side-notching traditions, and the centers were later dug out
to be used as earth ovens by people who used stemmed arrow points.
The date of 610 B.C. then may be attributable to the Archaic occupation rather than to a Neo-Indian group which made use of the midden circles.
A later date of A.D. 1240 for the early part of the Ensor-Frio tradition at the large Form IB mescal pit at the Hodge Site (site TX-21,
Val Verde County) suggests a definite overlap with the Neo-Indian
occupation in this part of Texas and the ceramic periods in areas only
slightly to the west. The occurrence at this late date of small sidenotched dal± points, primarily the Er~or type, in nearly all Neo-Indian
sites in the general area of Val Verde-Terrell counties might suggest
that dart points and arrow points were in use contemporaneously. It
is possible they were both used on arrows by the same groups of people. Similar suggestions have been made by Johnson (1964:37) and
Dibble (1967:34) for Val Verde County.
The Cammack Sotol Pit, site TX-14 in Val Verde County, is a NeoIndian Form II mescal pit yielding a large number of arrow points

raNG ~IIDDEN SITES

41

and a few side-notched dart points, but no pottery. The site, representative of the Livermore Focus or possibly the middle part of the
Bravo Valley Aspect, has a date of circa A.D. 1335 on taro samples.
The dates of the Form IB midden circle at the Dunlap Site, TX-63,
Crockett County (Calhoun 1966), seem to fall within those attributed
to the Livermore Focus or the middle part of the Bravo Valley Aspect
(Kelley et al. 1940). They range primarily from A.D. 1280 to 1410-the
earlier date of A.D. 1010 is inconsistent with the others. The site is
characterized by stemmed arrow points, E1 Paso Brotun pottery, and
a continuation of small, side-notched dart points.
Mr. Arnold Sommer of Midland, Texas, has recently excavated a
ring midden, site TX-75, on top of a high mesa at an elevation of
about 3000 feet. It is on the western edge of the Edwards Plateau
overlooking the Pecos River valley in western Crockett County. Although an earth oven technique is suggested by the small subsurface
slab-lined pit, there is some question as to what was cooked. The midden may represent a late Form IB mescal pit. Sotol is present in small
amounts on the middle slopes of the mesa sides, but it is entirely absent on the high flats where ring middens m’e most common. A single
side-notched Ensof point from the excavated area suggests a fairly late
date, but radiocarbon measurements are not yet available.
The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon in western Texas and southern New Mexico is divided here arbitrarily into early, middle, and
late parts since phase distinctions cannot be recognized for the excavated middens. The early part is represented by Form IB midden
circles at the Pow Wow Site, TX-2, E1 Paso County, and Middens No.
3 at site NM-82, Eddy County, and by a Form II mescal pit at Midden No. 2, site NM-1, Eddy County. These sites yielded dates of A.D.
900, 1130, and 1170 respectively. Pottery is primarily El Paso B,ro~un
and Alma Plain. The middle Jornada Branch at Midden No. 2, site
NM-2, Eddy County, dates A.D. 1330. E1 Paso Brotun, Chupadero
BIack-on-~¥hite, and Lincoln Polychrome(?) are present. The late
Jornada Branch at Midden No. 5 at site NM-89,, a Form IB midden
circle, was dated at A.D. 1465 and contained E1 Paso Brown and
El Paso Polychrome.
Arrow points from most Neo-Indian sites are stemmed and tend
toward laterally protruding barbs and often irregulm’ly serrated blade
edges, the Perdiz-Livermore type. A few sites such as the Form IA
midden circle at Midden No. 1, site NM-82, have contained plain and
notched triangular arrow points.
The Louden Site (CO-l), a Form IB mescal pit in southern Colorado, was dated at A.D. 1435, but it is uncertain what cultural affilia-

TEXAS AI~CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

?

~

9

g4

9999

9

9

9

r~

o

o

>o~ >>

>>>>>
> >- >>>>>
>>
............

.> ..............

°°~g~ ~ I+o I+l+l+l+l+
~oooo

¢o~

I+

0-%

I+!+

(..00o

I+1+1+

Oo c.O ~-.., Oo ~,

~*~

¯

>

~

OO

~.

-

R=’~ ~

~-

~

"~- ’

=~

on

0

~ I+o

e~

I+

~

(")

Oo

~ ~.

~’ o ~. o ~. o

~ o~ ~ ~
0
I v o~

~

~

~ ~ ~+

-2 .... "’~e.~= ~.~

o~

v
~

~..~ ~-.~ ~..~ (.000

~

0

--~
~
v

?

0

".4

©

IRING

MIDDEN

43

SITES

tion is represented. Previously I suggested that the site might be attributable to an early Plains Apache occupation (Creer 1966b).
The dates show all these sites to be relatively late, with the exception of the questionable date of the Sutton County midden which is at
least 1450 years earlier than the other excavated sites. Surface collections at numerous middens indicate that side-notched dart points, occasionally with a few very fine and thin arrow points, are most common. The earliest sites-those containing only dart points-tend to be
in the eastern pal~s of west Texas, e.g. the Val Verde County region.
As one goes west across the state and north into southern New Mexico, ring midden sites are more commonly Neo-Indian and often contain ceramics. As shown by the date of A.D. 1240 from Val Verde
County, the late "preceramic" sites may actually be quite late.
Field work continues to suggest that the Form IB middens with
their small rocks, considerable ash, and gently rolling surfaces generally predate the more angular Form IA middens. Form IA middens are
characterized by steep, ash-h’ee rims of larger rocks, often a lighter,
orange color. The best example of tiffs sequence is site NM-82 where
the single Form IA midden overlies earlier type IB middens and contains later arrow point styles. Ramos Polychrome and obsidian, materials found in the latest sites, consistently have been found in Form
IA middens in the Guadalupe Mountains.
Many of the middens currently being investigated in western
Crockett County by Arnold Sommer and Aaron Itiggs of Midland are
classifiable as Form IA. They often contain more ash and small rocks
and have shallower central depressions with less steep rims than
many of the Form IA middens in the Cuadalupe region, the "type
area." It might be that the Crockett County middens represent a transitional form with a very limited temporal position. Additional work of
the present excellent quality by Sommer and tliggs will probably
clarify the situation considerably. It is my impression that mescal pit
middens with stone-lined pits are generally later than midden circles,
but there is presently insufficient data to support a formal hypothesis.

IIEFERENCES CITED
Calhoun, Cecil A.
1966 Midden No. 1. Texas Archeology, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 12-i3.
Dibble, David S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Multilith report submitted to
the U. S. Nationa! Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project.
Greet, John W.
1965 A Typology of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits. Southwestern Lore,
Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 41-55.

44

TEXAS AtlCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1966a

Report on Preliminary Areheologieal Exploration at Carlsbad Caverns
National Park, New Mexico. Mimeographed report submitted to the
U. S. National Park Service by the Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas.
1966b The Louden Site (CO-l), Las Animas County, Colorado. Southwestern
Lore, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 57-65.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1964 The Devil’s Mouth Site, a Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Archeology Series, No. 6, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940 The Association of Archeological Materials with Geologic Deposits in
the Big Bend Region of Texas. West Texas Historical and Scientific
Society Publications, No. 10.
Pearson, F. J., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and M. A. Tamers
1966 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates IV. Radiocarbon, Vol. 8, pp.
453-466.
Valastro, S., Jr., E. Mott Davis, and Craig T. Rightmire
In Press University of Texas at Austin Radiocarbon Dates VI. Radiocarbon, Vol.
10, No. 2.
Valastro, S. Jr., F. J. Pearson, Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1967 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates V. Radiocarbon, Vol. 9, pp.
439-453.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

