311

Some Thoughts on Texas Historical Archeology
John W. Clark, Jr.

ABSTRACT
There has been a general lack of interest in historical archeology by many
prehistoric archeologists in this important period in our history. The author points
out several specific areas of concern and offers some suggestions for techniques
and approaches that are important in the study of historic sites and records.
Historical archeology has the potential to help us make significant improvements
in our understanding of Texas history and anthropology.

INTRODUCTION
The study of historical archeology has been pursued in Texas on a regular basis
since the late 1950s, focusing first on historic Indian camp sites, then moving on to
the excavation of mainly Anglo-American sites associated with important historical
figures. During most of the early years of historical archeology in Texas I was a
student and participated in a few excavations, including some volunteer work
during the first investigation at Independence Hall at Washington-on-the-Brazos,
serving as a crew member of the excavation of the Anson Jones kitchen site, and also
visiting several sites. However, at that time I was more interested in prehistoric sites
and had opportunities to work on many excellent sites in Texas and other states. It
was not until the early 1970s when I was placed in charge of the excavation and
publication of three structure foundations at Fort Lancaster that I began to appreciate the possibilities of historical archeology. Since that time, I have continued to see
more possibilities as I worked on a variety of historic sites.
HISTORICAL ARCHEOLOGY IN TEXAS
During the 1960s the subdiscipline of historical archeology in the United States
began to develop with the founding of the Society for Historical Archaeology. The
first volume of HistoricalArchaeology contained articles dealing with questions of
the place of historical archeology in relation to history and anthropology. The early
issues were concerned with this question and with the typology and dating of certain
artifact types. During the 1970s and 1980s the focus shifted to more theoretical and
anthropological approaches. During thatperiod, the emphasis on particular artifacts
as the subject of study in and of themselves was greatly reduced, and more emphasis
was placed on interpretation through sets of analytical models that could be
quantified and tested. Several of these models have proven their worth in sites all
over the country, and they serve as excellent bases for comparing sites.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 61 (1990)

312

Texas Archeological Society

However, much of the historical archeology in Texas remains like that of
the 1960s, with little emphasis on the anthropological and historical questions
that can be discussed profitably in the analysis of historic sites. This is meant
not as a criticism of any specific individuals, but rather to suggest that there are
more creative analytical techniques and more powerful models in use in other
parts of the country than are commonly in use here. A part of the problem is that
much of the work has been done by archeologists who were much more interested in prehistoric than historic sites and who did historical archeology unwillingly as part of salvage or Cultural Resource Management (CRM) work. Some
who have had a continuing interest in aspects of Texas historical archeology
seem to have been kept so busy with CRM projects that they have had little time
or inclination to use updated analytical methods. I call attention here to some of
the research questions and models I consider important and suggest some of the
ways by which they can be implemented. This requires that I state my predilections with regard to the analysis and interpretation of these sites and discuss
some of the opportunities and limitations offered by various kinds of sites. It
also requires a discussion of the characteristics that make a site significant. These
are weighty subjects that have been discussed and continue to be discussed by
archeologists throughout the nation.
Historical archeological sites usually are sites that date from the entrance of
Europeans or descendants of Europeans into an area to the present. They are
usually characterized by two things; artifacts of Euro-American manufacture and
some kind of documentation relating to the site or its inhabitants. In some cases,
modem descendants of the inhabitants of the site make it possible for archeologists to relate the site to the modem world. Also, the artifacts, or at least a large
percentage of them, are much more likely to be identifiable as to function and
date than those at prehistoric sites. This frees historical archeologists to concentrate more time and effort on the interpretation of the data, from excavated,
archival, or oral sources.
Questions to be Answered
What, then, are some of the questions that can be addressed in the analysis
of the material gathered by extensive research on these sites? One of the important questions deals with the establishment of functional distribution patterns
that make it possible to create quantified descriptions of component artifact
assemblages. This technique, developed by Stanley South (1977) in the early
1970s in South Carolina, has proven successful in his research and that of others working on colonial period sites, and has been used with some success in
other areas and for other time periods. The categories of artifact function must
be expanded considerably to accommodate the enormous number of artifact
categories found in late nineteenth and early twentieth century sites. The technique is not perfect, and its limitations have been discussed in the literature, but
it is useful for the definition of patterns, and it provides quantifiable bases for

Clark ~ Texas Historical Archeology

313

comparing sites. This technique could be very useful in Texas once it has been
used on several sites. It is important now to develop an archive of sites that have
had this kind of analysis so larger patterns can be derived.
A second question is horizontal patterning. The spatial distribution of artifacts can indicate culturally significant patterns of refuse disposal and activity
areas as has been shown in the mid-to-late 1970s and in the 1980s on several
sites here in Texas. This technique can be effective when there has been sufficient sampling of the site area. One method used to show artifact frequency is
to combine all artifact categories and plot raw numbers on a map of the excavation units of the site, and an alternative method often used is to indicate intensity by different degrees of shading, and still another version of this technique
is to use a series of site maps to show the distribution of artifact function categories as defined by South. These approaches are valuable, but the latter may
enable archeologists to define special activity areas that might not be readily
discernible in the former.
In some respects, these questions can be related to still another question-ethnicity. To understand the cultural dynamics represented in the artifacts and
the structural features of a site it is important to determine ethnic affiliation of
the occupants of the site. This can sometimes be done by interviewing descendants of inhabitants or their neighbors or by archival research, or it can sometimes be determined by the presence of certain ethnically specific artifacts such
as, for example, sherds of Loza Corriente ceramics or perhaps glass or ceramic
sherds embossed with non-English lettering. If it is possible to determine the
ethnicity of the inhabitants of a site, the previously mentioned pattern definition
techniques may make it possible to assign or describe ethnically related patterns
quantifiably; that is, ethnically identifiable refuse disposal patterns and function/frequency patterns may be discernible when these techniques are used.

Economic Patterns
Still utilizing artifacts excavated from a site, it may be quite possible to
outline aspects of the market system of the inhabitants. Several exchange systems are available to occupants of most sites. The most remote of these markets
is the international import market reflected in inventories of foreign makers’
marks or product marks that might be found on ceramics or liquor bottles.
Another market system available to the inhabitants might be the national market, some examples of which might be artifacts--bottles, ceramics, and bricks-with marks from manufacturers in other areas of the country. Items made in other
parts of the state indicate participation in a regional market. The local market is
often represented by local pharmacy bottles and tokens. Most artifacts will not
provide information on manufacturers, and there may be containers manufactured in one place holding products manufactured at another. Items found on
site often provide data on the diet of the inhabitants. When archeologists think
of diet, they usually think of animal bones, which are certainly found on most

314

Texas Archeological Society

of these sites and can provide not only the traditional information about genus
and species and minimum number of animals, but also information on the cuts
of meat being eaten and the butchering techniques that were prevalent in the
area at a particular time period, subjects to which considerable attention has been
given in the literature. Other items of diet are often represented in the remains
found at a site. Tin cans often indicate the use of canned vegetables, meats, and
spices, and the use of coffee and tea is also often indicated by the embossed lids
of tins they were packed in. Lids of baking powder tins and condensed milk
cans are often found, and canning jars or lids may well indicate the home production of vegetables and/or fruit. Traditional recovery techniques such as flotation for charred food remains can provide additional information, and the use
of certain kinds of foods and condiments can be indicated by certain styles of
bottles and jars or by embossing on the sides or panels of bottles. Together, these
data can add much detail to the picture of the diet at the site.
Another aspect of the site that can be determined is relative wealth. The
inhabitants of sites containing much decorated porcelain and whiteware probably enjoyed a higher economic status than those sites containing mostly plain
ceramics. In the literature of historical archeology are several articles on the
economic scaling of ceramics. At present, economic status is usually determined
by the presence of decorated and nondecorated ceramics, several types of which
have established price values. Other kinds of artifacts might be used, but constructing scales for them would require considerable research effort, and ceramics provide a convenient and well-tested approach. The basis for scaling by
ceramic types is the fact that decorated ceramics were more costly than plain
ceramics and that certain decorative techniques were used on the most costly
ceramics.
On some historic sites, the economic pursuits of the occupants may be patently obvious, particularly industrial or manufacturing sites, and other sites, such
as town residences, may provide no artifactual information regarding the economic endeavors of their inhabitants. In any event, all excavators should be alert
for artifacts that might provide clues, such as tools, raw materials, pieces of
equipment used in farming or ranching, ephemeral items such as business cards
or tokens, or by many other artifacts that reflect occupational endeavors. However, it is often difficult to determine whether an artifact reflects the occupation
of the occupant of the site or is an item acquired by the occupant in the pursuit
of other activities. It is particularly useful to consult trade catalogs of the period
under study in order to learn the names and functions of many artifact parts
related to economic pursuits. Unfortunately it is often difficult to locate appropriate catalogs, but the search can be rewarding.
Family and Social Relationships
Often at residential sites the major outlines of the composition of family
groups can be determined from certain artifacts. The presence of men can be

Clark n Texas Historical Archeology

315

indicated by a variety of artifacts usually associated with grooming or clothing,
including collar studs, suspender buckles, straight razors, and many others.
Artifacts that indicate the presence of women might include decorative dress
buttons, corset stays, web belt buckles, face cream jars, canning jars, and sewing equipment. Boys might be represented by marbles, cast-iron toys, or other
male-oriented toys, and girls might be represented by doll parts or miniature
ceramics. These kinds of data should be considered together with archival and/
or informant information.
Oral History
Up to this point, I have considered only some of the possible uses of features and artifacts in the analysis of historic sites. But there are other sources of
information for historical archaeologists who wish to maximize the data base
for the analysis of a particular site or group of sites. Most archeologists in this
country get their degrees in anthropology, and the usual reason for studying
archeology is that we are studying the anthropology of past cultures, but at least
we should be trying in historical archeology to provide a descriptive ethnography, if not a more in-depth analysis and description of culture history and cultural change. Archeology provides a unique opportunity to consider and study
cultural patterning and change. While we are excavating historical simms, we
sometimes have visitors who offer personal reminiscences about the site, and
sometimes people who are familiar with the site are sought out and interviewed.
But the vast majority of informant interviews now in the literature seem to concentrate almost exclusively on acquiring information about the locations and
descriptions of structures formerly standing on the site.
If we are, in fact, attempting to do anthropological research on these sites
of the past, why do we limit our questions to a small segment of material culture? If one has a series of informants, why not ask questions about a wider
variety of data? Oral history need not be confined to historians or to expressly
historical topics: we can ask the same questions about social relationships that
social anthropologists ask. Nor do we need to be limited to purely historical
topics. By questioning informants, we can get information on the feelings and
perceptions of former site occupants or their descendants about cultural change.
It should be kept in mind, however, that the memory of any individual may be
faulty, so we should always have supplementary data---excavated archeological
remains, documents, or supporting testimony from other informants.
Sometimes, informants who visit excavations may indicate that they have
information, but in other cases it may be necessary to recruit informants, by
asking people who have lived near the site for a long time if they knew the site
occupants or their descendants or if they have information on the site and the
community, or by contacting the media--particularly television stations--who
can publicize your request for informants. Interviewing techniques should be as
comfortable as possible for the informants. Successful and productive relation-

316

Texas Archeological Society

ships can be fostered at their homes, on the site, or in neutral, but comfortable,
settings, but only rarely in the archeologist’s office. Bulky tape recorders are
intimidating, so it might be better to use an inconspicuous recorder or a notepad.
Try to prepare a series of questions beforehand, but be prepared to skip around
in the list as questions are answered in the course of the conversation with the
informant, for, although the questions may be ordered for the convenience of
the archeologist they almost certainly will not be discussed in that order, no
matter how logical it may be. Be prepared to skip from question to question.
The name, address, and age of the informant, date and place of the interview, and the project title must be recorded, for it is important to provide readers of the report with this information and with a reasonably detailed summary
of this primary descriptive data.
Archival Research
Archival research is a common feature of historical archeologicai reporting
that is often demanded in CRM work. Often, a chain of ownership satisfies the
State Historic Preservation Office requirement for archival research. Study of
deed records in county courthouses can sometimes provide genealogical data
when properties are inherited, sold to other family members, or subject to suits
to clear titles, and they can provide some indications of changes in property
values over time and the approximate dates of capital improvements. It may even
be possible to determine certain aspects about the predevelopment vegetation
patterns of original land grants from original survey notes usually found in the
archives of the General Land Office.
Other archival sources are tax records that may provide useful data about
property improvements and land values: tax sales, foreclosures and other recorded legal actions can provide valuable data on the economic status of the
occupants of sites. School censuses, county road books, minutes of meetings of
commissioner’s courts and other courthouse records can provide clues to activities: most counties have libraries of local history collections--documents, clippings, books and/or photographs---of varying quality and scope, which should
be supplemented with information from local county historical commissions,
county clerk’s offices (find the oldest clerk working there), and local businesses
(for early records, company histories, etc.). Among other, nonlocal, sources in
Texas are the Archives Division of the State Library, the Barker Texas History
Center at The University of Texas at Austin, the Confederate History Research
Center at Hillsboro, the Rosenberg Library in Galveston, church records, and
several archival holdings in Mexico and some from Spain, which have been
microfilmed and are housed in Austin or San Antonio. One should not overlook
church records.
Since only cursory examination of records may be possible during the visit
to the archive, it is extremely important to make maximum use of archives’ copying facilities in order to collect as many documents as possible for detailed

Clark ~ Texas Historical Archeology

317

examination later, elimination of transcription errors (a significant advantage),
and the potential to use the documents as illustrations in a final report.
When archival research materials are in another language (in Texas this is
usually Spanish), archeologists are cautioned that many documents containing
translation errors have led to the misinterpretation of the information. It is best
to have both a transcription and a translation, for the transcription might provide information that may not be in the translation, and it will certainly provide
a feel for the nature of the documentation.
Genealogy
Genealogy is one aspect often overlooked in investigations, but it can provide valuable information on family structure (kinship), or patterns of association in family groups, and, among families, information about migration,
demographic data, and other kinds of information, and it can also provide a feel
for the people. Some generalized information can be gleaned from informant
interviews, census data, school censuses, court records, land records, cemetery
records, military records, and many others, and the Texas State Library and
Archives have many valuable publications and documents in their specialized
collections. Fairly intensive genealogical research may well reveal quite important documentation on the activities of the site inhabitants showing their antecedents and revealing the history of their descendants, thereby making the
connection between the past and the present in a quite human manner. Several
readily available publications explain how to do this kind of research, and standard forms are available for summarizing the data collected and indicating relationships. Family group charts are particularly valuable; examples of these are
found in several publications and are available commercially.
One kind of information that can be developed in doing genealogical and
other archival research on a site is the pattern of interpersonal and economic
relationships (the networking) of the site occupants. These relationships can
include friendships, marriage patterns, business relationships and other economic
activities. Plotting these on general area maps may reveal the functioning of
geographic factors. This approach is relatively new in historical archeology and
has the potential to provide much valuable information. These patterns of networking may reveal primary and secondary communication routes, social groups,
lodge or club associations, and other potentially valuable information. Since this
area of historical archeological investigation is new to the field, the opportunities for creative approaches in this area are wide open.
Work with archival and, especially, genealogical sources often involves
references to deaths and funerals in county histories, genealogical source books, and
newspaper obituaries. Obituaries can provide the names of survivors, personal
history of individuals, and places of burial, and this information leads investigators
to cemeteries where they can glean more information, for tombstone inscriptions
sometimes provide information about family members and relationships that is not

318

Texas Archeological Society

provided in other documentation. The physical relationship of graves also can
provide further information about family groups. Graves sometimes provide
information on religious affiliation if the individuals are buried in cemeteries
associated with particular religions. Taken as a whole, cemeteries can provide much
demographic data, including age at death, periods of epidemic, gender-related
mortality, infant mortality, and other topics. The study of stylistic changes in
headstones and burial practices is also productive, since some tombstones indicate
lodge affiliations not indicated in other sources. Considering the plethora of data
available in cemeteries, it is worthwhile to search out and examine the cemeteries
in the vicinity of the site.
Several archival depositories maintain collections of photographs that provide information about the structures, layout, landscape, dress of the occupants,
activities of the site inhabitants, and images of the occupants themselves (I have
used historic photographs to provide details of construction when the archeological record was unclear). Photographs can be particularly valuable when there
is no structure surviving on the site. An equally important use of historic photographs is to provide investigators and readers with a feel for the living site
and occupants. Through the use of these materials, the archeological report
becomes more human.
Historical Context
At the present time, much is being made of a concept called historic context. As it seems to be interpreted by the office of the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), this term does not describe what the SHPO is looking for
in either reports or plans of investigation, but rather, discussions of a series of
historical/economic topics--hog production, folk art, town form, exploration and
settlement, military, economic development, and others--in relation to a particular site. These topics are meant to provide guidance in developing research
designs or plans of investigation of regional or temporal units, but it seems to
me that this scheme neither considers historical context nor provides adequate
guidance in the development of designs for the investigation of sites. However,
to me, the term historic context means the relationship that the site has to the
broad cultural and historical developments in the local area, the region, and the
nation. In Texas, these include international developments in France, Spain, and
New Spain that led to the exploration and colonization of Texas by the Spanish,
developments in the United States and Mexico that led to the Texas Revolution,
border friction during the Mexican Revolution, and other similar topics. It must
be remembered that the borders of Texas were fixed only recently and even now
hardly cut off the flow of people from one area to another. Members of the same
Mexican families live on different sides of the border, and a constant flow of
people existed in the prehistoric period as it does now. The historic context in
this sense would be best discussed in the historical background and conclusion
Of a report.

Clark ~ Texas Itistorical Archeology 319
The topical approach does not consider truly archeological questions or the
cultural anthropology of a site as already discussed. It does not consider cultural
process or the interactions of the ,carious eompouents of culture. Essentially, it does
not consider ongoing theoretical development of historical archeology but favors
piecemeal historic topics. We are still anthropologists and should keep that in mind
when excavating and analyzing sites.
The historic period is readily amenable to this approach, and the approaches
discussed above are possible with the techlaology and theoretical development
we now have available in the literature. We should allow for the future development of theory and techniques in the field and not limit ourselves to a series
of topics that can easily become fossilized and can stifle creative development
of theory and analytical technique.
Archeological Significance

The question of significance has bothered archeologists for many years.
While working on an early twentieth century rural tenant house, I was asked by
local county historical commission members as well as archeologists why I considered such a mundane site important and why were we wasting money digging
a site that was not architecturally elegant or related to a historically important
person or event. These people were looking at only some of the criteria for the
evaluation of site significance in terms of eligibility for inclusion in the National
Register of Historic Places. They did not consider the criterion that covers the
historical or archeological information a site has produced or may produce. I
have worked on sites associated with important historical persons and events.
These sites also yield information relatable to historical archeological theory.
Except for association with important persons or places, site significance depends solely on its potential to yield information on cultural process and change.
Sites of many ages, sizes, locations, and socioeconomic positions can provide
much information. Even the meanest hovel in the woods can be significant if it
can yield information relating to historical archeological theory, and on the other
hand, an elegant architectural confection may have no archeological significance
if its context has been destroyed. For example, the Anson Jones house in the
Washington-on-the-Brazos State Park is not archeologically significant because
it was moved to the park from another location. The critical factor is the potential of the site to answer questions relating to archeological theory and not to the
illustrating of historical factors such as structure size and the age of a particular
artifact. These are historical particularistic questions that often can be answered
through documentation or methodological techniques. Answers to this kind of
question are pertinent only to the specific site under investigation, whereas focusing on questions of process relates to broad cultural patterns and forms the
basis for the development and analysis of cultural hypotheses.
Significance, then, does not depend on age or, necessarily, the association of
the site with a historical personage or event or with craftsmanship. For historical

320

Texas Archeological Society

archeologists, it really depends on the potential of the site features, artifacts, and
documentation to yield information that can be analyzed with regard to specific
theoretical goals and to the development of hypotheses of culture theory. By
using a variety of methodological approaches to site analysis, some of which
have been discussed above, the hypothetical approaches are quite varied, offering historical archeologists an open field for creative hypothesis formulation and
testing. This aspect of historical archeology is something that can, in fact, be
done, and the formulation of data recovery plans, research designs, or mitigation
plans can consist of approaches that have a reasonable certainty of producing
valuable results. One need not formulate hypotheses for testing that go far
beyond the capabilities of the data.
Archeological Excavation
I have discussed, in cursory fashion, a variety of areas for the development
of theory and techniques to analyze excavated data and data gathered from mainly
historical or archival investigations. Still another aspect of historical archeology
that should be considered is techniques, or approaches to excavation. Because
sites in Texas were generally occupied by people who used only two systems of
measurement, these systems should be used when dealing with these sites, and
since the Spanish and Mexicans used leagues and varas in most cases during
their occupancy of Texas, excavators of Spanish or Mexican sites might consider using varas for measuring site features and for excavation units. If there is
a standing structure on the site, it is appropriate to orient the site grid to the
structure, perhaps using a corner or other significant part of the site as the point
from which measurements and units are taken.
Virtually all post-Mexican-era sites were laid out in the English system of
measurements, and, even now, most buildings, roads, and other works are in
this system, so it makes very little sense to impose the metric system on these
sites. The metric system is appropriate for sites in which there is a strong suspicion that the occupants had no formal system of measurement or that were
built using the metric system.
Most historic sites were not deposited or laid out in random patterns. In
most sites there are demonstrable concentrations, or at least patterned distributions, of features and patterns of artifact disposal that can be used by archeologists to maximize recovery of data. Metal detectors, magnetometers, aerial
photos, probes, mechanical removal of deposits, and other techniques can help
identify the areas of artifact disposal before excavation. This recognition of
disposal patterns may, in some cases, help archeologists to determine excavation plans. But archeologists must be flexible and let the circumstances at the
site guide the excavation program. Data recovery plans are all too often retained
long after they are found to be inappropriate.
The very definition of site boundaries and designation can become a problem
under some conditions. In a rural area where one may be working on a farmstead,

Clark m Texas Historical Archeology

321

is the site boundary the perimeter of the entire farm or is it the concentration of farm
structures? In a small town, perhaps the whole community should be given a single
site number, or perhaps each residence and commercial unit in the community
should have its own site number. This is even more of a problem in cities, where
there are dense concentrations of potential archeological features. Is the whole town
one site, or is each unit a site?
For towns and cities, there is a better system that avoids having a plethora
of site numbers. Because land transactions require precise reference systems,
most towns and cities were surveyed when they were laid out and have streets
and alleys, blocks, and lots that have been measured and given legal designations that are readily traceable in county deed records. They are convenient
mapping and cultural units, and they have real meaning to the culture and history of the community.
Reporting Results
Finally, there is the question of reporting the results of the project work.
What should one report and in how much detail? This depends on the objectives
of the archeologist and on the nature of the site, for in certain situations the
geographic setting--soils, climate, flora, and fauna--is important, whereas in
another the hardrock geology may be important, and in some cases, the environment may have had little effect on the location or occupation of the site. It may
not be efficient to provide the reader with extraneous data that do not pertain to
the occupation of the site or to the understanding of its history and archeology,
but the broad patterns of regional and national history should always be discussed in order to place the site in relation to that history. This is the historical
context of the site; i.e., how it relates to the history and archeological developments of the area should be a fairly extensive part of the report. As an extension
of this historical context, a more detailed site history should be provided, including the events that occurred at the site: the oral history, genealogy, and other
social/cultural information. The excavation techniques and features should be
described in some detail, and one section should deal with the artifacts, and since
they provide important cultural information necessary for the development of
the archeological questions to be answered, they should be described. When
artifacts are not in primary context, certain kinds of well-known artifact classes
should be listed, but other artifacts may require more description and analysis,
such as the listing of maker’s marks, patterns, and other special characteristics.
Following the artifact descriptions--which may vary from merely listing some
classes to extensive description and analysis of others--there should be a discussion
of the significance of the artifacts to the research questions usually defined in the
introduction of the report. This may include information regarding market systems,
ethnicity, class, consumer preference, or any of a number of other purely archeological questions. Finally, the conclusions should draw the historical, oral history,
environmental, archival, and genealogical data together with the artifact data to

322

Texas Archeological Society

data to provide a broad view--an anthropological view---of the occupation of the
site. For small sites with relatively few artifacts, these items usually should not result
in a very large report, but, for large sites or multisite projects, it is inevitable that the
resulting report should also be large and time-consuming to write. However, if the
research questions are developed and if the information in the report can be used by
other researchers, the end product will be worth the effort.

SUMMARY
Historical archeology is an open field of opportunity for the development
of techniques for enhancing the development of archeological culture theory and
new analytical techniques. Many valid research questions, already defined, can
take researchers many years to examine, and many more questions will develop
as we refine our understanding of cultural-historical process. Unfortunately, it
is not possible to get formal training in historical archeology in Texas, so Texas
historical archeologists must train themselves by reading the literature produced
in other states and in the national journals. They must also read history, both
interpretive and descriptive. First-person accounts can be quite valuable, but
archeologists must also become familiar with the literature on collections and
with architectural history and construction techniques. They should pursue the
broadest possible reading program, and, although it may not be necessary to be
knowledgeable about all aspects of the artifacts, it is important to know where
to find the information.
REFERENCE CITED
South, Stanley
1977
Method and Theory in Historical Archeology. Academic Press, New York.

