SMALL ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE INVESTIGATIONS
FOR INTERPRETATION OF SITE ACTIVITIES*
TOM D. DILLEHAY

Abstract
Small archeological site investigations are discussed as one approach to
aid in the interpretation of various activities housed at large, intensively
occupied complex sites. Analysis of less complex, small, short-term sites
is suggested to be more sensitive for isolating activity components. Once
these activities have been identified with the associated spatial patterning
of tool assemblages and structures at various small sites, then they may be
useful in extrapolating the range of activities at larger, more complex
sites.

INTRODUCTION
In recent years the field of archeology has adopted a stronger scientific framework for investigating material remains and contextual
relationships of past cultures. Along with increasing emphasis upon
scientific methods as a means of formulating and testing hypothetical
laws and explanations about past human behavior and cultural processes, the archeologist is confronted with an increasing complexity
of data necessary for interpretive frameworks applying systemic and
ecological approaches. This emphasis also requires the archeologist
to design more explicitly the definition of his problem, types of data
needed to solve it, and techniques necessary to collect the data. Since
not all available data can be dealt with, the problem-oriented investigator must make sampling decisions.
In general terms, this paper concerns the potential utilization of one
type of sampling procedure, "small site methodology", and its relation to certain objectives and requirements of archeological research.
It is a review of the major tasks of this methodology with additional
comments about basic aspects of its general procedure, and a reexamination of some techniques that may be applied to methodological
orientations in archeology. This essay is not an attempt to reevaluate
treatment of the archeological record in terms of explicit models,
theories, and laws of cultural systems operations, but rather, it is only
an attempt to suggest the treatment of data in terms of small site
investigations, and some ways in which we may attempt to answer the
questions raised so far.
*This is a revised version of a paper read at the 1973 Convention of The Texas
Archeological Society, Lubbock, Texas.

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK AND PROCEDURES
In recent archeological research, there has been growing interest in
spatial and chronological relationships of pattern variables (such as
location and site type, tool assemblages, general characteristics of the
cultural deposit) in determining site functions, or particular activity
components housed within a site, within a settlement system. To
date, several approaches have been applied in attempting to discern
the various activities within a settlement system, but with relatively
little success. In some instances, no significant associations have been
found between site type, function, and archeological context on
which to base a working method of extrapolating isolated activities.
One approach which may be applied in attempting to isolate these
activity components in the field is the concept of small site methodology as described and utilized recently with reference to Peruvian
settlement pattern studies by M. Edward Moseley and Carol J. Mackey
(1972). Here the methodological emphasis is on less complex small,
short-term sites rather than large, tong-term sites, as small sites are
much more sensitive for isolating activity components. Moseley and
Mackey (1972:75) signify that larger sites complicate the identification of "specific modes of behavior or activity components" because
thick cultural deposits indicative of lengthy occupations at sizable
sites represent a number of different activities which has resulted in
problems relating to connecting distinct patterns of archeological
remains with specific types of past activities. In referring to A. L.
Kroeber’s methodological assumptions regarding settlement pattern
studies (cf. Kroeber 1963), Moseley and Mackey also add that
¯.. small populations have rather circumscribed and focused patterns of
activity. The focus of activity derives from the fact that small settlements
are not generally full microcosmic reflections of the greater society;
rather, they tend to be specialized adaptations geared to particular circumstances. Granting this, it should be and frequently is easier to work
out correlations between specific configurations of archeological remains
and the behavior that produced them at small settlements than it is at
complex sites. It is here that the remains particular to separate enterprises
and distinct patterns of conduct can be sought in relatively pure form
(1972:76).

It is Kroeber’s contention that societies are indicative of a complex
system, the most characteristic feature of which is its capacity to adapt
to "particular circumstances" by detailing its structure. Often it is the
small archeological site that reflects this adaptation to specifically
changing variables.
For our purposes, Moseley and Mackey’s concept will be modified

SMALL SITE INVESTIGATION

171

somewhat so that the following terms will be used interchangeably. A
reference to limited activity site is analogous to their "small, shortterm site", and the usage of range of activities site is equivalent to
their "large, long-term site."
Numerous investigators (all of whom generally agree about the
subject matter) have utilized general archeological site categories
composed of respective member sites. These common member sites
are considered to yield contextual characteristics and spatial patterning of archeological remains thought to be reflective of distinct site
categories which house either "limited activity" or a "range of activities." For example, limited activity sites are considered to be
represented by such site categories as kill and butchering locations,
quarry/workshop locations, burial locations (not associated with an
occupational area), short-term hunting and/or gathering camps (or
single component sites), fishing !ocations, and even pictograph locations. Those site categories considered to have a range of activities are
commonly referred to as long-term intensively occupied sites, base
camps, and ceremonial sites with associated occupational areas.
Traditionally, archeological investigations have focused primarily
upon such aspects as the larger, thicker, and more spectacular sites in
hopes of finding a rich cultural deposit with the potential to solve
problems relating to a number of activities, broad chronological
framework, general patterns of artifact associations, patterns of subsistence economics. In the past few years, another type of archeological research has been carried out in settlement pattern studies. These
studies have been related directly or indirectly to the establishment of
settlement pattern models. (Apparently, the significance of these
models is that they indicate an attempt to explain the underlying
factors for different settlement pattern arrangements by describing
changes in site distributions and associated tool assemblages.) Here
the attempt is to examine the spatial configuration of communities
within a given set of environmental zones in hope of ascertaining
inferences relevant to various topics such as procurement activities,
socio-political systems, trade, warfare, anti population size. Yet unless the full range of site types within a particular settlement system
study is sufficiently sampled, the understanding of site function may
be obscured. With reference to such an orientation, K. C. Chang states
that
in order to determine the historical relationship, at a certain time level and
for a certain time depth, between two or more communities, the archeologists generally must compare their respective remains -- or, more
accurately, the respective types of their remains, inasmuch as the vast

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
number of actual variations usually preclude comparison on a piece-bypiece basis. The purpose of comparing types of different communities is
in most cases to determine whether (1) type A of community X derived
from type A, of Community Y, or vice versa; (2) the two types derived from
a common origin; or (3) the two came about independently (Chang
1968:5).

For our purposes, Chang’s types of communities are analogous to
our usage of "site categories." However, when examining settlement
patterns, the tasks of archeological methods seem to be related directly or indirectly to the study of similarities of various kinds of
objects or events. Three such interrelated tasks for the objectives in
"small site methodology" are: (1) description of physical and cultural
similarities common to all members of a site category, (2) formulation
and testing of generalizations about repetitive relationships among
variable features as related to members, and (3) interpretation of
single objects or events by use of generalizations. Therefore, the
discovery of definable variables, formulation, and testing of generalizations concerning the relations among selected variables (or attributes) as related to site categories of objects or events constitutes our
central task.
The classification of activity components in terms of pattern variables (that is housed within each member site of a site category) is the
first step toward construction of a working "small site methodology."
For a better understanding of the interrelations between all sites in a
settlement pattern, these classifications will have to be well-defined
and related to the functional problems of activity components within
different site types.
In clarifying our usage of the concept of small site methodology or
even studies of "types of communities," inferences of other investigators concerned with problems relating to the complexity of material remains in the archeological record should be offered. Kent V.
Ftannery presents the view that we examine the complexity of systems such as settlement systems by attempting to isolate and examine
each of the constituent subsystems as a separate variable and then
recombining (1967:120). Lewis R. Binford points out that "... culture
is multivariate, and its operation is to be understood in terms of many
casually relevant variables which may function independently or in
varying combinations. It is our task to isolate these causative factors
and to seek regular, statable, and predictable relationships between
them (Binford 1965:205)." By combining these viewpoints, we arrive
at the basic concept that a complexity is organized in such a way that
we can attempt to understand it by examining, in the physical and
cultural environment, a combination of (a) the numbers and charac-

SMALL SITE INVESTIGATION

173

teristics of individual component units, and then (b) the relations
between the component parts within a larger, more complex unit.
From these points one may conclude that there should be a continu:
ous analytical interplay between large site and small site investigations -- if one is to understand more thoroughly the cultural processes. However, it seems that unless one has command of both approaches, the chances of progressing toward an understanding of the
cultural processes contained in large, long-term sites will be few.
Thus, such an interplay cannot be achieved unless one has first
developed a strong foundation of basic information, which in our case
would be not only the examination of those site categories indicative
of large sites housing a range of activities, but also the definition and
explanation of all the site categories representing small, limited activity sites. Suffice it to say, this approach is viewed not as much a parts
to whole relationship as it is a simplex to complex relationship.
If one reviewed the emphasis of most archeological investigations,
he would realize that past work has misrepresented the full spectrum
of the abovementioned site categories, in that the main concern has
been "range of activities" sites. Selecting larger sites simply on the
basis of their potential for producing more useful information can
often produce a distorted view of the archeological record, particularly when one is examining settlement patterns. Larger, more spectacular sites do not necessarily house greater potential for producing
data that would lead to a better understanding of a full range of past
human behavioral activities, but they do offer a wider range of problems. The larger site is also viewed as having a greater potential for
yielding a more complex set of human behavior patterns. Another
problem is that long-term occupation sites tend to be more difficult to
work with when investigating a full range of activities because the.
internal structure of the site is often more complex due to superimposed levels of sequential activities (Shiner 1970:26).
Today in archeology, as in the past, there continues to be a basic
prevailing concern with tool assemblages or clusters of tool types.
Since this is our basic analytic unit for understanding prehistoric
human behavior, then we shall use it as our primary variable in small
site investigations.
Let us assume that a tool assemblage at a limited activity site, such
as a quarry or kill site, offers a simpler insight into the patterning of a
specific cluster of tool types as opposed to a number of tool types as
seen in a more complex framework, such as the larger, thicker site. If
so, then it should be easier to work out correlations between tool
assemblages and the behavior that produced them at small sites than
it would be at more complex sites. Presumably once a given set of tool

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

assemblages is isolated at member sites, the more complex settlement
types could then be established on the basis of aggregations of specific
activity components.
It should be stressed that it would be necessary to ascertain all
activities within member sites of categories, because different activities may have been carried out at a given site simultaneously. This
procedure contrasts with the traditional one in which sites were
placed hastily into a few site categories, then relevant behavorial
characteristics thought to be associated with each broad type were
assigned. By applying the concept of small site methodology we can
more accurately define activity components (and their associated
spatial patterning of tool assemblages and structures) within the
member sites, then build up a working system of site categories as
aggregations of these activities. Such a framework would also allow
for inference of generalized behavioral characteristics not founded on
previously arranged categories. Once these activity components and
associated tool assemblages have been defined for the spectrum of
limited activity site categories, we could then attempt to clarify the
larger, more complex site by extrapolating from previously defined
activity categories. Such an approach would allow us to focus more
accurately on relations between activity components in the larger
sites.
However, it should be pointed out that the author does not advocate
the neglect of larger sites and a total shift to the smaller sites within all
site categories, but a greater emphasis toward the examination of two
types of sites: (1) sites that represent short-term occupations by a
small group of people and are therefore shallow in depositional
thickness and small in horizontal extent, and (2) sites that are indicative of less complex economic, social and contextual relations. Examples of the first type might include small sites that are representative
of "limited activity" components or possibly even large, long-term
locations having a series of well separated, thin cultural lenses (such
as the middle and lower deposits of Arenosa Shelter in Val Verde
County; Dibble 1967). The second type could be represented by sites
such as coastal shell middens and burned rock middens, which,
though representative of long-term occupations, are relatively simple
and therefore within the margins of our usage of small site methodology.

EXAMPLE OF THE METHOD
This section cannot deal with the application of specific measures
of small site investigations to a particular archeological context be-

SMALL SITE INVESTIGATION

175

cause the method has not been widely applied in light of the above
discussion. Yet to illustrate the use of one type of small site investigation, let us examine an archeological situation that reveals the potential of this method.
This example from the lower Trinity River delta on the Gulf Coastal
Plains of Texas, specifically concerns data dealing with dense shell
middens often found along rivers and bayous in the region. To date
several archeological investigators have concentrated their efforts
upon a detailed analysis of the larger, thicker middens in hope of
ascertaining functional activities, subsistence strategies, and explaining settlement pattern configurations.
Excavation of thicker shell middens has presented many problems,
the foremost of which is a lack of visible occupational stratification. In
addition, these sites often yield vast quantities of different artifactual

FIGURE 1. Site 41 CH 170 midden exposed. Note the thinness of the
relatively concentrates shell pile in the center portion of the grid; and
the adjacent small shell scatter in the excavation extension in the left
background. The main shell accumulation is about 3 square meters.

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and faunal remains which cannot be distinguished with the associated activity.
From the investigation of a small, unstratified, thin lens shell midden (Fig. 1), 41 CH 170, we may begin to isolate specific activities and
associated refuse which would be masked in a thicker, more complex
site. The following data on Site 41 CH 170 was provided by Lawrence
E. Aten (personal communication). Aten’s excavations at the site
produced two shell accumulations, one of which contained a small
hearth area. All recovered artifacts and bones were confined to the
spatial limits of the shell concentration. Artifacts and bone consisted
of ten Goose Creek Plain sherds, one broad barbed, straight-stem
projectile point, 680 Rangia cuneata shells, one unidentified small
fish, one unidentified turtle, one alligator gar, and one white-tailed
deer. Based on detailed analysis of usuable meat from each animal
and the small spatial limits and compactness of the total cultural
evidence, Aten estimates that no more than one or two meal preparations for a maximum of four to six adults is represented.
Obviously the examination of the small, thin concentration of residue at 41 CH 170 resulted in the production of more readable data
for specific activity patterning and variability, the settlement pattern,
general site function, and population systems analysis. Thus, it is also
quite possible that examination of more confined human activity may
help us to determine the continuous accumulations of refuse in large
complex shell middens.
Consideration of the members of each small site type in terms of the
micro-environmental zones from which they come, and the type of
human activity which they reflect could develop into a working
typology of aggregations of small site technological and economic
adaptations. This could then be articulated with members of large site
types in the total environment through a set of relationships.
CONCLUSION
In considering small site investigations for solving problems of
large complex sites, it must be realized that the present study is by no
means an attempt to present the one method for discerning various
types of past activities housed at archeological sites, yet this discussion should at least stimulate some thought aimed at improving
manipulation and interpretation of certain archeological data.
In conclusion, it is only necessary to remark that there are two
primary restrictions to this methodology. Moseley and Mackey
(1972:78-79) point out that (1) both small and large sites can house
similar "archeological forms or configurations" which may be rep-

SMALL SITE INVESTIGATION

177

resentative of different behaviors in each context, and (2) explanations and interrelationships of certain archeological phenomena can
only be solved in large, complex sites. With regard to the first limitation, it should be said that the distinction between context and associated activity is an analytical problem in all methodological approaches; yet whatever the limitations, by applying small site
methodology it should be possible to make generalizations explaining the spatial and chronological distributions, changes and continuities of certain activity components. The importance of such an
approach lies in the idea that workable activity components from
small sites have the potential to make large complex sites much more
manageable analytically when interpreting processual trends and
understanding cultural changes.
Acknowledgments
Special acknowledgment is extended to Glen Fredlund, the junior author of the
earlier version of this paper, and to Lawrence E. Aten, archeologist for the National Park
Service, for providing me with unpublished data. The author would also like to express
thanks to David S. Dibble of the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin, and to Alton K. Briggs and William M. Sorrow of the Texas Historical Commission, Austin, Texas, for their helpful comments and criticisms.

REFERENCES CITED
Binford, Lewis R.
1965 Archaeological Systemati~s and the Study of Cultural Process.
American Antiquity. Vol. 31:203-10.
Chang, K. C.
1968 Toward A Science of Prehistoric Society. In: Settlement Archaeology,
K. C. Chang, editor. National Press Books, Palo Alto, California.
Dibble, David S.
1967 Excavations at Arenosa Shelter, 1965-66. Report submitted to the
National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Flannery, Kent V.
1967 Culture History v. Culture Process: A Debate in American Archaeology. Scientific American. Vol. 217, No. 2:119-22.
Kroeber, Alfred L.
1963 The Methods of Peruvian Archaeology. Nawpa Pacha. Vol. 1:61-71.
Moseley, M. Edward and Carol J. Mackey
1972 Peruvian Settlement Pattern Studies and Small Site Methodology.
American Antiquity. Vol. 37, No. 1:67-81.
Shiner, Joel L.
1970 Activity Analysis of a Prehistoric Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. Vol. 41:25-36.
The University of Texas at Austin

