An Evaluation of Radiocarbon Dates From
the Galena Site, Southeastern Texas
E. RAYMOND RING~ JR.

Introduction
The Galena shell midden.is located on a knoll near the mouth of
Hunting Bayou in the incorporated City of Galena Park some ten
miles east of the central downtown Houston business district in Harris
County, Texas. This interesting Galveston Bay Focus site came to
public attention in the summer of 1957, unfortunately as the result of
a Houston newspaper story. The excavation of the site, conducted
principally in 1958, but in part during 1959, involved an out-of-theordinary salvage effort aimed at preserving its archeological record
from the unintentional damage being done by persons whose curiosity
had been aroused by the newspaper item.
While the preliminary archeological report of this site was prepared
and presented in early 1959, two radiocarbon assays provided shortly
thereafter by the Geochemical Laboratory, Exploration Department.
Humble Oil and Refining Company (Houston, Texas), caused the investigator to withdraw and take a long, hard look at the puzzling
aspects of the matter. The report which follows presents a tentative
evaluation of the Galena shell midden radiocarbon dates, giving particular attention to the pottery associations. At a later date a complete
report will be made of the Galena shell midden site. This will describe
the cultural materials recovered and present a full archeological evaluation.

The Problem
The surprising antiquity shown by the radiocarbon assays of the
Galena shell midden samples, and particularly the date obtained from
sample O-912 (3350 +- 115 years B. P.), has created the necessity for
conducting an exhaustive study of the time and space relationships
and/or anomolies which have been found to exist in archeological cul-

318

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tures extending broadly across the entire southern half of the United
States. A two-year search of the literature provides a certain amount of
intellectual peace-of-mind, however large or small the helping may be.
To review the Galena shell midden problem, a brief description of
the total midden deposit is here presented. The superficial six-inch
layer of the midden deposit consisted of a very dark, organic, sandy
loam and throughout most of the vertical column were dispersed Goose
Creek potsherds, flint dart points, and other cultural materials which,
by archeological evaluation, fall into some phase of the Galveston Bay
Focus. Of special note, this layer produced the one and only arrowpoint (Perdiz type) found in the entire site excavation. Beneath this
loam layer was found a foot-thick zone of compact shell, the interstices
of which were filled with very dark, organic, sandy loam. It is this
compact shell layer, also containing cultural materials attributable to
some phase of the Galveston Bay Focus, that was subjected to the two
radiocarbon assays. The foot-thi@ shell layer rested rather conformably o~ a reddish-brown, weathered, natural platform of the Beaumont Clay formation, the Quaternary mantle which blankets this area
of the Texas Coastal plain outside of the margins of certain drainage
features. In the early stage of excavation, this weathered Beaumont
Clay platform surface appeared to be sterile of human artifacts; however, continued excavation produced six flint dart points and a flint
knife, abundant natural calcareous concretions used as roasting stones,
and some occasional traces of badly decomposed Rangia shell and
animal bone fragments extending to the maximum depth of about
six inches below the surface of the platform. It became apparent that
this pre-ceramic layer represents a light occupation by men who
wandered along Hunting Bayou prior to its backflooding stage, probably during the Archaic Stage of human time.
A sample of Rangia shell was collected from the top of the compact
shell layer, and another was collected from the base. The upper sample
(O-911) produced a radiocarbon date of 1900 +- 105 years B. P., while
the lower sample (O-912) produced a radiocarbon date of 3350 -- 115
years B. P. Both samples were in direct contact with Goose Creek
sand-tempered potsherds, a ware indigenous to this particular stretch
of the Texas Gulf Coastal Plain, as well as dart points characteristic
of the Galveston Bay Focus.

The Case ]or Early Pottery
Heretofore, and perhaps even now, there has been a decided reluctance among most archeological investigators to accept wholeheartedly

GALENA SITE RADIOCARBON DATES

319

the suggestion that pottery, and particularly sand-tempered pottery,
might have been used at such an early time in North America. If one
were seeking from the literature mental reassurances to support the
very early Galena midden site pottery radiocarbon dates, he could find
certain solace in the results of radiocarbon determinations in two
Southeast cultural sites, both of which date fiber-tempered pottery
zones, as follows:
(1) Chattahoochee River Site (J-5), Florida. Charcoal sample (M-394) in
fiber-tempered pottery zone, collected and submitted by Ripley Bullen
in 1958. Dating produced 3150 + 250 years B. P. (Crane and Griffin,
1958: 1101).
(2) Sapelo Island Site, McIntosh County, Georgia. Shell sample (M-39)
in fiber-tempered pottery zone, collected and submitted by Antonio
J. Waring in 1956. Average date of two samples produced 3700 -- 250
years B. P. (Crane, 1956: 665).
Although

the

Florida and Georgia dates argue the case for very

early pottery in the American Gulf Coastal Plain, we must recognize
that these two sites produced fiber-tempered pottery as contrasted to
the Galena midden in Texas which produced sand-tempered pottery.
Here we must search the literature again to determine whether tempora! relationships have ever been found to exist between these two
classes of pottery. And here again we receive a modest amount of intellectual security in the results of the investigations of William S.
Webb and David L. DeJarnette (1948 a-d) at the great mussel shell
middens along the Tennessee River in Northern Alabama. These sites
are: the Flint River Site, the Perry Site, the Whitesburg Bridge Site,
and the Little Bear Site. In these fabulously thick midden deposits one
apparently reads the complete text of southeastern Woodland vessels,
ranging from pre-ceramic to historic pottery types, written in the stratigraphic wall of time. Here one can also find a strong suggestion of
contemporaneity between fiber-tempered and sand-tempered ceramics. In these massive mussel shell middens the earliest scriptures read
of an admixture of preceramic sandstone and steatite vessels in such
positioning as to be indistinguishable as to which preceded the other.
These are followed temporally by occupation layers which contain
both fiber-tempered and sand-tempered potsherds so thoroughly
mixed that, again, one cannot be certain which antedates the other, if
at all. Subsequently the clay- and sherd-tempered wares appear and
these are followed by the shelLtempered wares, the latter of which
apparently originated prehistorically but extended into early historic
time.

32O

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Thus, if one wishes to argue in favor of the credibility of the very
early Galena site Goose Creek sand-tempered pottery dates of 1900
-- 105 B.P. and 3350 -+ 115 B.P., he can take certain comfort in the
pottery data obtained in Florida, Georgia, and northern Alabama.

The Neighboring Pottery Complexes
To the east and northeast of the Houston area we observe the fairly
well defined ceramic sequence of the lower Mississippi River Valley
cultures. While the Plaquemine, the Coles Creek, the Troyville, and
the Marksville ceramics do not pose any great problem, since there has
always been the suggestion that these cultures post-date the early
dart-point zone ceramic phase of the Galveston Bay Focus, we still
have the problem of the Tchefuncte pottery (Ford and Quimby, 1945).
And further up the Mississippi River Valley we have an even more
startling problem in the pre-ceramic Poverty Point culture (Ford and
Webb, 1956) which falls in the late Archaic stage yet produces a radiocarbon date later in time (the arithmetic average date of the type site
samples is 2773 +- 140 B.P.) than the three radiocarbon assays of pottery cultures in Florida (3150 - 250 B.P.), Georgia (3700 +- 25(/
B.P.), and Texas (3350 -+ ll5 B.P.). As for the Tchefuncte, Wheat
(1953) encountered a hint of contemporeneity between Tchefuncte
and some phase of the Galveston Bay Focus in his investigation of
certain sites at Addicks, Texas, about 15 miles west of Houston and
about 25 miles west of the Galena shell midden. In an Addicks site
Wheat excavated five sherds of Tchefuncte stamped pottery representing a single vesse!, and subsequently the present writer excavated from
two other Addicks sites six sherds of Tammany Pinched wares of the
Tchefuncte tradition, representing two vessels. These data permit a
suggestiort of temporal correlation between some phase of each of these
two widely separated cultures; however, the prevailing belief has been
that, despite an indicated overlap of the two cultures, the body of
Tchefuncte time would pre-date substantially even the earlier regions
of Galveston Bay Focus time. In this regard, the arithmetic average
date of all intelligible Tchefuncte radiocarbon assays yields the approximate date of 1690 +- 140 B.P. The two radiocarbon tests which
seem to best date the early Tchefuncte are 0-28 (1900 - 110 B.P.)
and 0-30 (2200 +- ll0 B.P.) run on Rangia shell and deer antler, respectively (Brannon et al., 1957: 148). These two dates are almost
identical to the Galena Shell midden sample O-911 (1900 -4--- t 05 B.P.)
but much later than sample 0-912 from the same site which produced
3350 --- 115 B.P.

GALENA SITE llADIOCAIIBOIXT DATES

As for the Poverty Point Site farther up the Mississippi River from
the Tchefuncte culture in Louisiana, this interesting late Archaic site
is regarded as pre-ceramic; however, it should be noted that a small
collection of fiber-tempered pottery was recovered from the Poverty
Point layer during excavations (Ford and Webb, 1956)~ and a few rare
sherds are still being plowed up at the site today. While there is no
particular evidence that the Poverty Point people manufactured fibertempered pottery~ it would seem that they were acquainted with some
far distant folk who did, and perhaps they obtained this fiber-tempered
pottery from the people in the Southeast who provided them with
steatite bowls.
To the north of the Houston area are the Caddoan pottery complexes
which present no problem of themselves, since all known Caddoan
phases seem to post-date the early phase of the Galveston Bay Focus;
however, certain problems are posed in the areas of geographic overlap, namely at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas
(Newell and Krieger~ 1949) and the three McGee Bend Reservoir
Sites, San Augustine County, Texas (Tunnell, 1961; C. H. Webb,
1960; and Edward B. Jelks, personal communications). Both inland
areas show an interesting ceramic sequence, that is~ of Caddoan pottery
types underlain by an aberrant sand-tempered pottery quite similar in
most respects to the Goose Creek ceramics of the coastal area. While no
radiocarbon assay has been made of this cultural layer at the McGee
Bend sites~ the artifact suite compels Tunnell (1961) to suggest that
this sand-tempered pottery horizon should be placed in the late
Archaic stage. The Davis site produced a radiocarbon date of 1553 -+175 B. P. from charred corn cob samples (C-153) from a culture
identified as Phase 1 of the Alto Focus, Gibson Aspect (Neo-American
Stage). It is interesting to observe that virtually all of the sandtempered sherds found at the Davis site were recovered from the early
Phase 1 level dated by the radiocarbon test. This remark is in no way
intended to imply that sherds of the early Caddoan Alto Focus were
absent from this layer because, in fact, they were overwhelmingly
present. The Davis site dating is slightly later than the younger of the
two Galena midden dates (1900 - 105 B. P.); however, it is entirely
conceivable that pottery moved from the Texas coast to northeastern
Texas.
To the northwest of the Houston area the pottery comolex of the

Central Texas A~]oect (Neo-American Stage), consisting of Leon and
other unidentified types, presents no particular problem in connection
with the Galena shell midden dates, but only because the Central

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

Texas types are very poorly understood and undated by radiocarbon.
As a special note, sand-tempering is fairly common among some of
these ill-defined Central Texas pottery types, despite remarks to the
contrary by Suhm and associates (1954).
To the southwest of the Houston area there occurs along the Texas
coast a peculiar sand-tempered or mixed-tempered pottery taking the
name of Rockport, which is also the name of the focus within
which this pottery is found. While the physical properties of the Rockport ceramics have been well described in the literature, there are no
radiocarbon dates available for the Rockport Focus. Investigators place
the Rockport Focus in the Neo-American Stage in which it probably
belongs at least at inception; however, it has been shown that in at
least one site, the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County (Campbell,
1958), that Rockport pottery survived into historic time. Here it was
found in position with European artifacts dating within the first quarter of the nineteenth century and indicating an identification with
Karankawa Indians. The Rockport Focus and the earlier pre-ceramic
Aransas Focus of the Archaic Stage which underlies it are found in
an area geographically contiguous to the Galveston Bay Focus. It
might be argued that, although no temporal correlation has yet been
established between any cultural phases of the two areas, the terminal
Rockport Focus time extending into the Historic Stage may cast reflections on the antiquity of the Galena midden radiocarbon dates. This
does not, however, seem to be a valid assumption for more reasons
than stated above. Even before the Galena midden radiocarbon dating,
the culturally undivided Galveston Bay Focus had shown evidences
of having embraced a long span of time commencing as early as some
phase of Tchefuncte and surviving as late as A.D. 1600 or 1700. Today
one notes the growing suspicion that the Goose Creek pottery of the
Galveston Bay Focus extends into the European contact period in isolated sea-coast sites in the Galveston Bay region. It is perhaps only a
matter of time until some undeniable associations of Goose Creek potsherds with European materials will be established.

Conclusions
If one reaches out to find evidence to support the antiquity of the
Galeno shell midden radiocarbon pottery dates, then he can find considerable reassurance in the radiocarbon dates from both the Florida
and Georgia pottery sites, in the pottery sequences and associations
demonstrated in the massive mussel shell middens of the Tennessee

GALENA SITE RADIOCARBON DATES

323

River Valley in northern Alabama, and in the general ceramic relationships that are observed widely across the southern half of the
United States. If one could accept these data and the suggested conclusions derived therefrom as being reasonable probabilities, then he
might persuade himself to consider that North American pottery may
have first been used in cultures along the Gulf Costal Plain and later
moved northward up the many great valleys which drain across it.
The present data do not necessarily compel one to speculate that
North American pottery originated in the American Gulf Coastal
Plain cultures. Perhaps it did, but otherwise pottery manufacture
may have had its beginning even further south than the American
Gulf Coastal Plain, perhaps in the Huastecan culture on the Gulf
Coastal plain of Mexico, or even further beyond in the Valley of Mexico.
Returning finally to the Galena shell midden radiocarbon dates
and the problems that the antiquity of these dates reflect on previous
archeological time concepts insofar as the Galveston Bay Focus and
Goose Creek sand-tempered pottery are concerned, one is left with the
disagreeable chore of choosing sides between the earlier concepts
which have broadly placed Galveston Bay Focus sites in a time range
extending from about A.D. 500 to about 1700, as constrasted with the
Galena radiocarbon range of 1391 B.C. to A.D. 59. If one chooses to reject the present Galena radiocarbon dates, then he will argue that
we must accept the highly intelligent speculations of past archeological investigators who did not have available radiocarbon assays to
assist or confuse them in their dating conclusions. From the standpoint
of simple arithmetic, the dating conclusions of earlier investigators
considerably outnumber the present radiocarbon dates, and there
is always the question as to whether we have the right to dispute the
intensive archeological considerations of competent scientists with a
mere radiocarbon date or two. Thus the problem boils down to a
thick, viscous residue which can be seen clearly with the eye and
judged by the mind. It is neither necessary nor preferable to choose
sides. It is patently desirable to join forces (1) to promote further
archeological investigations in this area of puzzling cultural complexes
which we presently seem satisfied to tag by the name of "Galveston
Bay Focus" and expect a wide range of cultural manifestations to
equate confortably into it, and (2) to press for a multitude of radiocarbon assays to study and evaluate in conjunction with archeologica!
findings. Until such time as a mass of statistical radiocarbon data can
be compiled and evaluated within the presently defined Galveston

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bay Focus, it would seem unwise to reject the time concepts of earlier
investigators who based their decisions on numerous archeologica!
considerations outside of radiocarbon assay. By the same token, it
would seem extremely undesirable at this time to reject the newly
discovered Galena shell midden radiocarbon pottery dates simply because they violate grossly al! the previous archeological time concepts
in the area of investigation.

Re]erences Cited
Brannon, H. R., Jr., A. C. Daughtry, D. Perry, L. H. Simons, W. W. Whitaker,
and Milton Williams
1957. Humble Oil Company Radiocarbon Dates. Science, Vol. 125, No. 3239,
pp. 147-150.
Bullen, Ripley P.
1958. Six Sites Near the Chattahoochee River in the Jim Woodruff Reservoir
Area. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 169, pp. 315-357.
Campbell, T. N.
1958. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423-442.
Crane, H. R.
1956. University of Michigan Radiocarbon Dates I. Science, Vol. 124, No. 3224,
pp. 664-672.
Crane, H. R., and James B. Griffin
t958. University of Michigan Radiocarbon Dates II. Science, Vol. 127, No. 3306,
pp. 1098-1105.
Ford, James A., and George I. Quimby, Jr.
t94,5. The Tchefuncte Culture, An Early Occupation in the Lower Mississippi
Valley. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 2.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Pt. 1.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Tunnell. Curtis D.
1961. Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites in the McGee Bend
Reservoir, San Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959), pp. 123-158.
Webb, Clarence H.
1960. A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958), pp. 35-62.

GALENA SITE RADIOCARBON DATES
Webb, Win. S., and David L. DeJarnette
1948a. The Flint River Site. Alabama Museum of Natural History, Museum
Paper 23.
1948b. The Whitesburg Site. Alabama Museum of Natural History, Museum
Paper 24.
1948c. The Perry Site, Lauderdale County, Alabama. Alabama Museum of
Natural History, Museum Paper 25.
1948d. Little Bear Creek Site, Colbert County, Alabama. Alabama Museum of
Natural History, Museum Paper 26.
~heat, Joe Ben
1953. The Addicks Dam Site. I. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam
Basin, Southeast Texas. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154,
pp. 143-Z52.

Houston, Texas

