A MODEL FOR CULTURAL SUCCESSION
FOR THE COASTAL BEND AREA OF TEXAS*
JAMES E. CORBIN

ABSTRACT
A model for cultural succession in the coastal bend area of the Texas
coast is presented. Emphasis is placed on temporal and spatial changes of
artifacts in the time period from 2,000-3,000 B.C. to A.D. 1200. Seriation
and matrix analysis were used in chronological ordering of the artifactual
materials. Definitions of the Aransas and Rockport foci are re-examined
and a discussion of ethnohistoric peoples on this portion of the coast is
provided.

The purpose of this paper is to outline briefly a model for cultural
succession in the area of the Texas coast between and including Baffin
Bay and the Brazos River (Fig. 1). Although it is concerned with
cultural succession, it will not in reality be, for the most part, dealing
with culture per se at all. Rather, this discussion will consider the
distribution in space and changes through time of particular artifacts.
Although these are tangibles (artifacts) which may or may not reflect
real culture change, the establishment of the order of their changes
through time can be valuable tools to the archeologist.
For the present we cannot consider the entire temporal span of the
area with which we are concerned because we lack sufficient data.
Artifacts that might date into the so-called Paleo-American stage are
few and scattered. There are no radiocarbon dates to show that there is
any real time depth for coastal adaptations in this area, yet surely the
coast was exploited very early. At present, this author does not think
the sites have been found which would reflect this early adaptation,
and because of certain geologic and environmental changes (especially the rise in sea level) these may never be found.
In discussing the culture complexes in this area which would fall
into what Suhm, et. al., (1954) have called the Archaic, our concern is
with materials that date from ca. 2,000-3,000 B.C. to ca. A.D. 1200. The
early dates given are only guesses, for there is only one good radiocarbon date and that is for the end of the Archaic. One is tempted to date
coastal cultures in this area with correspondences to the interior and
south, but at this point there are indications that this area was out of
phase with most of the rest of Texas, and it would be wrong to make
across-the-board equations unless there are other data to back them
up.
*Paper presented at the Conference on the Archeology of the Gulf Coast, Beaumont,
Texas, 1971.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

o"

TEXAS

Gulf

Coast

20

FIGURE 1. The Coastal Bend Area of Texas

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

31

To date, the only archeological complex that has been defined for
the Archaic is the Aransas Focus. T. N. Campbell (1947a) described
this complex on the basis of his analysis of the materials recovered
from the Johnson site (Fig. 2) on the northern portion of Live Oak
Peninsula. In a later analysis (Campbell 1947b:75) he included materials from the Kent-Crane site in the Aransas Focus. Although originally this complex was limited to that area between Corpus Christi
Bay and Guadalupe Bay, it has come to be applied to nearly all
Archaic materials between Baffin Bay and the Colorado River. This
expansion, plus the inclusion of all of the Kent-Crane site in the
complex essentially destroyed the Aransas Focus, although it has
taken a long time to realize it. At the Houston Archeological Society
Coastal Conference in 1967 this author presented some data on the
spatial distribution of certain artifacts and hinted at some temporal
distribution of these same artifacts which would 1) force an eventual
reduction of the definition of Aransas Focus, or at least a discontinuation of the term "focus", or 2) if the expanded definition was retained,
imply reference to an Aransan culture or perhaps an Aransas Aspect.
As stated earlier, this would be based primarily on changes in certain
artifacts through space and time, but may not reflect any significant
change in subsistence pattern or economic adaptation.
With this in mind, consider the projectile point types recovered at
the Johnson and Kent-Crane sites (Fig. 3), both on the north end of
Live Oak Peninsula, first noticing the differences between Johnson
and Kent-Crane as a whole. The picture is not really clear, but is
probably a reflection of the excavation techniques, particularly at the
Kent-Crane site. Two natural zones were recognized during excavation, with the thicker, lower zone being excavated in two arbitrary
vertical units. Each zone at Kent-Crane could have been divided
easily into at least three arbitrary units, possibly making the changes
through time a little clearer. This would have been particularly helpful for Level 2, for it is felt that the upper portion would be much more
like the Johnson site and the lower portion more like Zone lb. The
excavators also noted that there was a distinct stratigraphic break
between lb and 2 at the site. The absence of incised bone work in Zone
2 at Kent-Crane and in the Johnson site along with the appearance of
Catan in Zone 2 at Kent-Crane and its predominance at Johnson is
probably significant. It is possible that there could be a gap in the
archeological record between Zone 2 at Kent-Crane, and the Johnson
site.
Collections from some sites with shorter temporal duration tend to
clarify things at this point. The materials from SP-40 (Fig. 4,a), on the
south end of Live Oak Peninsula, are very reminiscent of Zone 2 of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

32

\
~o÷\°°

TEXAS
Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 2. Location of the Kent-Crane and Johnson Sites

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

33

KENT-CRANE
"1
Z
o

oZ

rn

o

N

O

2
.u
Z

Z
m
w

:

P_

I

P~

:¢X>
m

INCISED

BONE

WORK

FIGURE 3. Kent-Crane and Johnson Site Sequence

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Kent-Crane. The projectile point types are duplicated at two other
small sites in the immediate vicinity of SP-40. Approximately threefourths of a mile away is another site, SP-43 (Fig. 4,b), but with a dart
point assemblage that is quite different and analogous to the Johnson
site. The Archaic zone at SP-43, excavated by Dr. D. A. Story (1968),
has a radiocarbon date (average of four dates) of ca. A.D. 1200, which
probably indicates the termination of the Archaic for this area. The
SP-43 collection is duplicated by materials from SP-53, the Edwards
Field site (Fig. 5), several miles to the north. There are more of the
small, side-notched points reminiscent of Fairland types, but a few of
these occur at SP-43 and at the Johnson site. There are other temporal
differences that can be noted: conch columella gouges and conch
adzes are common in Zones la and lb at Kent-Crane, while only a very
few occur in Zone 2 and at the Johnson site. There was one adze
recovered at SP-43 (i.e. late) and no gouges were recovered there or at
SP-53. Five gouges were collected at the earlier SP-40.
The above data seem sufficient to convince one that we are dealing
with considerable temporal change as far as the occurrence of some
cultural materials within what has been called the Aransas Focus is
concerned. Some simple distributional data (Fig. 6) will help to
finalize arguments on the Aransas Focus. Fig. 6 shows the distribution of dart point types north and south of Corpus Christi Bay and the
Nueces River. These data are based on the total sample available for
study in an area from the north side of Copano Bay to approximately
one-half the distance between Corpus Christi Bay and Baffin Bay. The
figure shows that unstemmed (Abasolo to Pandora) forms predominate south of Corpus Christi Bay, and stemmed (Darl-Bulverde) forms
predominate north of the Bay. The columns in the right half of Fig. 6
exhibit this same distribution, but in this case the initial collection
was divided and the percentage of each type was derived for each half
so as to show the relative importance of each type north and south of
Corpus Christi Bay. This author believes this north-south dichotomy
to represent some sort of real cultural line which will eventually be
defined. The actual line is probably a little south of the Corpus Christi
Bay and the Nueces River. lit is interesting to note the occurrence of
some of these projectile point types a little farther south, in the
vicinity of Baffin Bay. Hester (1969) records Matamoros as representing 37%, Tortugas 10%, Ensor 2%, Abasolo 2%, with all other types
(the majority of these being stemless), less than 2%.] Nunley and
Hester (1966:251) have demonstrated an almost identical east-west
line across Dimmit County, separating essentially the same projectile
point types. Again, this line runs generally several miles south of the
Nueces River. It would appear that what we are seeing here, as above,

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

35

:/i~¸~

B

0

1
inches

FIGURE 4. Projectile Point Types; A: 41SP40

B: 41SP43

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

36

J
f

iI

\
\

I

0
inches

FIGURE 5. Projectile Point Types, 41SP53

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

37

is a fluctuating cultural boundary (centered around the Nueces River)
which represents the movements of two groups (one based on subsistence in a mesic climate, and the other existing in a more xeric
environment) influenced by fluctuating ecological boundaries. This
is of course highly speculative, but is an intriguing possibility.
Thus it may be seen that what was originally defined as theAransas
Focus is much more complex than believed at its inception, both
temporally and spatially. Without taxing the data too much, it is
suggested that one of the two following statements is probably more
representative of the prehistoric cultural situation for the Archaic on
this portion of the Texas coast than earlier concepts:
I. Retain the concept of anAransas Focus, but limit its application
to the most recent archeological manifestation of an Archaic cultural
adaptation to a coastal environment. To be more specific, the term
should denote only the type site (Johnson) and those other sites
containing the predominant projectile point assemblage of Ensor,
Catan, Darl-Fairland, Matamoros. Spatially the focus would be limited in its southward extent to just south of Corpus Christi Bay and,
until more data can be presented, should not be extended north of
Guadalupe Bay (Fig. 7). The Aransas Focus was preceded by another
cultural complex which is represented by Zones la and lb of KentCrane and other sites (like the Kinney Bayou sites [SP-40, etc.]) which
contain the projectile point assemblage of Bulverde, Palmillas, and
Matamoros, along with a high percentage of shell tools (gouges and
adzes) and incised decorated bone work. Its southern limit is the same
as for the Aransas Focus. For the present, it is impossible to comment
on the northern range of this complex, but it probably is not north of
the Brazos-Colorado River vicinity. A third complex or focus may be
proposed for the coastal area south of Corpus Christi Bay to and
including the Baffin Bay area. The only date we can apply to anyof
these is that of ca. A.D. 1200 for the termination of the Aransas Focus.
II. Reject the concept of anAransas Focus, but use the termAransas
to designate the Archaic culturaladaptation to the coastal environment of this portion of Texas, i.e. an Aransas complex. New designations for the spatial and temporal differences could be adapted or
dispensed with for lack of sufficient data.
Stratigraphically overlying the Archaic cultural materials at four of
the excavated sites in the area are materials which Suhm, et. al., place
in a generalized late prehistoric category called the Neo-American. In
the central coastal area this period is signaled by the appearance of
arrowpoints and ceramics which are attributed to an archeological
complex known as theRockportFocus. Although originally proposed
by Sayles as occurring along the entire Texas coast, the area was

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38

DART
CENTRAL

POINT STYLES
TEXAS GULF COAST

Distribution

Distribution

,~ Frequency
o

o

AREA

Sth

I’a

Types
Pandora

rth

Refugio

Tortugas

2 8

19

16

9

Tortugas

14

4

20

Refuglo

8

37

Palmillas

3

Catan

.
~

"

3

%,

70

°7°

Catan

Matamoros

rth

Matamoros

)0

0

utt

Types

)0
7°

I

AREA

17

~

0
".7.
d
i u

Abasolo

6

3
o

t

Darl

Palmillas

Ensor

0

~

Bulverde

U

9

50

Darl

4

81

Ensor

3

16

90

Bulverde

0

lO

100

Falrland

0

9

/

JEC

FIGURE 6. Dart Point Distributions and Frequencies

reduced by Suhm, et. al. to include just that area in which the distinctive Rockport ceramics occur (Fig. 8), i.e., from approximately Baffin
Bay to the Colorado River vicinity. For whatever the Rockport Focus
may be, it is felt this spatial definition is still valid. The real question
is concerned with the definition of the Rockport Focus. Suhm, et. al.,
listed a number of arrowpoint types as diagnostic of this culture,
specifically Perdiz, Scallorn, Cliffton, and Fresno. As knowledge of
the area has increased, this author has become convinced that the
interpretation of the data concerning projectile points is erroneous.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

39

D

.o

TEXAS
Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 7. Proposed Aransas Complex-Culture Area

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TEXAS
Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 8. Rockport Focus Area

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

~
50-

41

I ~

-~

~

~.

Z~4
~,

~

n-

I

oFIGURE 9. Arrowpoint types, frequencies and distributions

Recent work in the area, which included a survey of the south end of
Live Oak Peninsula (Corbin 1963) and another of the northern end of
Padre Island (Campbell 1964), greatly increased our knowledge of the
area and it was felt that there were perhaps enough data for some fairly
sophisticated analyses. These analyses and their results were presented in professional meetings in 1967 and 1968. Since then, work
has continued, the results of which, along with new information from

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the area, have convinced this author that the data are valid and should
be included here. It was, in fact, these studies that prompted much of
this re-evaluation of the archeology of the area.
The study was confined originally to the area between Baffin Bay
and Saint Charles Bay, for which there was the most and best information, and was restricted to materials from surface collections and
excavated sites whose intra-site control relegated them to this status.
First, it was important to determine what projectile point types existed in the area and something about their frequency and distribution. Re-analysis of earlier data along with new information revealed
the types (Fig. 9) which would categorize adequately what actually
occurred in the area. The relationships between these types proved to
be very interesting. Simple tabulations and percentages showed a
picture (Fig. 9) somewhat opposed to original concepts. The shaded
bars show percentage relationships between types: Perdiz (40%) and
Fresno (28%) proved to be the predominant types, with Scallorn and
Cliffton and all others occurring as 5% or less of the sample. The
extended bars (light) show at what percent of the sites the various
types occur; thus it may be readily seen that only Perdiz and Fresno
enjoy a wide distribution throughout the area. The next step was to
carry out a seriation analysis paying particular attention to the relationship between Perdiz and Fresno (Fig. 10). Arranging of horizontal
site bars was done without knowing site identities and by trying to get
the smoothest curves for Perdiz and Fresno. The problem then was to
orient the resulting graph. Fortunately there were some clues with
which the orientation illustrated could be made, with some confidence as to its correctness. First, sites 3 (41SPll) and 1 (41NU1)
contained historic materials which seemed to be associated with
aboriginal materials. Incised sherds occurred at these sites along with
the only occurrence of the bulbar-stem arrowpoint type. Recently two
more sites with this same assemblage have been found. At one,
41NUll, on Oso Creek (Fig. 11), the association was on the surface as
with the other two sites, but at 41CL2 on Guadalupe Bay, the same
association was recovered in a controlled excavation by C. A.
Calhoun. Secondly, the clustering of the popularity of the Scallorn
type at the opposite end of the chart (Fig. 10) from 1 and 3 at a time
when Perdiz is not a major type would seem to corroborate data from
other areas; Scallorn precedes Perdiz.
To check to see whether any other ordering could be obtained, the
data were incorporated in two other systems used for seriation. The
ordering obtained with matrix analysis is identical with the original
study with the exception of the reversal of sites 6 and 7. The data were
then plotted on a tripolar graph (after Meighan 1960), the result being
identical to that of the matrix analysis (Fig. 12).

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

43

--N~O77VOS~

w
l_J

FIGURE 10. Seriation Graph

>_J
n~
w

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

44

\

\

\
TEXAS
Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 11. Sites with the bulbar-stemmed arrowpoints and incised
ceramics associated with historic (Spanish) artifacts.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

45

Before constructing this portion of our model around the sequence
above, a short digression concerning some aspects of Rockport
ceramics which will apply to the problem must be made. One of the
distinctive features of these ceramics is the use of asphalt for waterproofing (?), patching, and decoration. It has long been hypothesized
that this feature was intrusive from the Huastecan area where
asphalt-decorated ceramics occurred. No one has bothered to discuss
the fact that there is no correspondence whatever between the simple
lines, dots, squiggles, and lip painting of Rockport ceramics, and the
complex designs that occur in the Huastecan wares. If the Archaic
culture peoples preceding the Rockport culture were introduced to
ceramics and adopted the idea, why would they not coat pottery with
the abundant asphalt as they did their basketry? It is beginning to look
as though this is a more plausible explanation than one of diffusion
from the Huasteca.
As for the origin of Rockport ceramics, the earlier hypotheses
(Campbell 1962:335) for diffusion from the upper coast are still wellfounded. Story’s excavation (Story 1968) at the Anaqua site may have
provided an immediate source. The cultural zone, representing
primarily a single component, contained sherds from plain, sandy
paste vessels in association with Scallorn and Granbury arrowpoints.
The ceramics seem to have affinities with the east, and perhaps with a
site mentioned by George Martin on Saint Charles Bay (Martin, n.d.)
which contained no "pointed-stem" (Perdiz) arrowpoints, but
expanding-stem forms (Scallorn) in association with plain, undecorated pottery. It is believed by this author that these sites (Fig. 13) and
the culture they represent are significant to the understanding of the
archeology of the area under consideration.
Incised designs occur not infrequently on sherds of Rockport ware,
particularly in the Guadalupe-Matagorda Bay area. A brief study on
the possible origins of the designs proved very interesting. It has
always been thought the designs were related to those that appear on
the Goose Creek wares of the Galveston Bay area. With the development of Aten’s Galveston Bay ceramic sequence this relationship can
be made more specific (Fig. 14). All of the incised designs on Rockport
wares which show similarities with Galveston Bay ceramics occur in
Aten’s Old River Phase, dated from ca. A.D. 1400 to A.D. 1700. In Fig.
14, the designs on the left (Group I) of the Rockport section are almost
one-to-one correspondences, while the center forms (Group V) are
very closely related. Only the designs to the right (Groups II, III, IV in
Fig. 14) do not seem to have their origin to the east. Comparison with
some unpublished sherds from McNeish’s sites in northern
Tamaulipas indicates a possible direction in which to look for these
design elements.

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c
OTHER

FIGURE 12. Tripolar Seriation graph

The next portion of the model can now be constructed around the
seriation graph (Fig. 9). Ca. A.D. 1250 (C14 date for the Archaic zone at
site No. 3 on the graph) new cultural influences were felt in the area.
This resulted in the introduction of ceramics and the bow and arrow
and probably other material and non-material cultural aspects. This
might be a result of:
A. Acceptance of these forms by the indigenous culture after continual contact with cultures having these items.
B. An influx of new peoples to the area who made a similar
economic adjustment to the coastal environment, or
C. A combination of the above, which was probably the case, but
with greater emphasis on A.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

47

The late occurrence of these artifacts represents some time lag for
this area as ceramics occurred to the east as early as A.D. 100; the bow
and arrow appeared as early as A.D. 900 there, and ca. A.D. 500 (?) to
the west in central Texas. The concept of the bow and arrow may have
come from several directions; thus it appears that two of the predominant arrowpoint forms (Fresno, Padre) in the early portion of this
period are but a continuation of the diminution that Jelks (Suhm, et.
al. 1954) saw in Tortugas-Matamoros, Abasolo-Catan types in South
Texas. The triangular form (Fresno) becomes the predominant type
along with Scallorn, which (viz., at Anaqua and at Martin’s site on
Saint Charles Bay) may relate to the introduction of ceramics. Fresno
is replaced by Perdiz, which eventually almost completely dominates. In the meantime a distinctive ceramic ware with asphalt coatings and designs has evolved. Sometime after A.D. 1400 (probably
1500-1600) incised designs began to be employed as a minor ceramic
decorative technique. The introduction of a new projectile point form
(bulbar-stem) and contact with Europeans (or at least with European
goods) appear to have occurred at about this same time or shortly
thereafter.
Since very little of the above matches what has been defined as the
Rockport Focus, it is suggested that for the present the term "focus" be
discontinued and the phrase Rockport culture be used to designate
that late prehistoric cultural adaptation to a coastal environment in
the area between Baffin Bay and the Brazos River. This culture is
typified artifactually in archeological components by the occurrence
of Rockport ware ceramics and most commonly arrowpoint types
Perdiz andFresno. The Rockport culture dates between ca. A.D. 1250
and 1600-1700. Whether this culture may be continued any further
into the historic period is the final problem.
It would seem that the task of historical reconstruction would be
somewhat simplified when that time in the past for which there are
written records of the area with which we are concerned is considered. As is well known, the situation is only more complicated, for
we are faced with the task of matching historical facts with the
archeological record.
It has been mentioned that there are sites in this vicinity which
contain aboriginal materials mixed with the remains of European
manufactured goods. Thus, at this point in time (ca. 170"0) we are
dealing with the cultural remains of a people who were beginning to
obtain goods from the French and the Spanish (either in person or
from shipwrecks) and these contacts should be recorded to some
extent in the historical record. The model outlined above cited the
distribution of Rockport ware ceramics as the delimiting factor for the

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TEXAS

Gulf

Coast

JEC

FIGURE 13. Anaqua site and G. C. Martin’s Saint Charles Bay Site

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

49

area occupied by an archeological culture or aspect designated as
Rockport. Since there are written accounts by various explorers in this
area, it would seem an easy matter to connect the people recorded for
this area in the 1700’s and later as being the historic counterparts of
Rockport culture. Indeed the various Karankawan tribes have been
linked, albeit somewhat tentatively, with the prehistoric Rockport
materials. Suhm, et. al. (1954) state that it "seems probable" tha~ this
is the case, while Campbell (1958) says that at least part of the Rockport materials represent the Karankawas. Later he states the linkage
between the two as a fact, although some of the materials may be due
to Coahuiltecan groups. The only problem with the above is that at
least one of the major Karankawan groups, the Coaques (or Cocos), is
placed north of the Brazos, specifically along the southern shore of
Galveston Bay (Newcomb 1961). Presumably, Newcomb places this
group here because he assumes the Cocos of later chroniclers can be
equated with the Coaques of Cabeza de Vaca. As noted above, Rockport ceramics stop just short of the Brazos River. In this light we
would have to say that Rockport culture may represent a part of the
historic Karankawa groups. This may or may not be the case, but let us
examine the problem further.
Cabeza de Vaca, not having a Texas map, did not know where on the
Texas coast he landed and neither exactly do we. Using descriptions
of rivers crossed, most historians, with the exception of Bancroft,
identify de Vaca’s Isla del Malhado as Galveston Island. If this is the
case, and if the Caoque (or Capoque) he was with can be identified
with the Caux of Belle Isle, the Quaoquis of Father Douay, and the
Cocos, Cocoas, and Cokes of later Texian and Spanish chroniclers,
then sometime between 1540 and 1740 they moved from the vicinity
of Galveston Bay south to the region between Matagorda Bay and the
Brazos.
If the location of de Vaca’s Caoque (ca. 1540) and the assumption
that Caoque equals Cocos (or Cocoas, Cokes).is accepted, then this
movement and other pertinent correspondences may be documented
as follows:
1) The San Xavier missions on the San Gabriel River were established in 1746 and continued until 1755. One of the missions contained several groups of Karankawas. The Spanish chroniclers note
that in 1749 the Cocos left the mission to return to their homeland
between the Brazos and Colorado Rivers (Gilmore 1969:19). Test
excavations at the particular site that housed the Karankawan groups
recovered sandy paste sherds decorated with asphaltum
(Ibid.:ill-114). These and a few other sherds (with lip notching) fall
into the Rockport ware category.

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY ’

"6r~

0
f~

0

g
rl

r3

S

(3

--t

_

B

rn
0

r3
rn

o
rn

FIGURE 14. Incised motifs for Rockport and Galveston Bay ceramics

2) Mission Nuestra Senora del Rosario de los Cujanes was established on Colletes Creek in present Goliad County in 1754. This
mission was to house the five Karankawan bands (which include the
Cocos). The Cocos were in residence until 1797 when they left for
another mission (Bolton 1906). Analysis of the ceramics excavated
from the site (Green n.d.) revealed two distinct wares were present.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

51

One of these wares fits the description in all respects of Rockport
ware. Decorative techniques are limited primarily to asphalt painting
although one incised sherd (similar to Fig. 14,2) was recovered.
3) Lafora’s map of 1767 (Editor’s note in Berlandier 1969:114)
shows the Cocos west of the Brazos.
4) Berlandier (1969:114) states that in 1830 the Cocos’ territory was
between the Rio Nogales (?) and the Colorado del Texas.
5) Lino Sanchez y Topia’s watercolor of the Cocos for Berlandier
shows a blue circle tattooed beneath the eyes of the Indians (Berlandier 1969:Fig. 16, sketch made in 1830).
6) Mrs. Oliver, Gatschet’s informant on the Karankawa (Gatschet,
1891) lived on a ranch at Tres Palacios on the east side of Matagorda
Bay from 1838 to 1848. It is from this group of Karankawa that she
learned to speak Karankawan and this corpus was the basis for
Gatschet’s linguistic analysis of the Karankawan language. Mrs.
Oliver states that "a small circle of blue tattooed over either cheekbone" was a distinctive mark of these people (Gatschet 1891:19). Mrs.
Oliver’s Karankawa decorated their pottery with asphaltum (Ibid.:59).
Thus it would indeed appear that the Cocos were located in the
vicinity of the west shore of Galveston Bay about 1540. Between 1540
and about 1760 they moved to between the Colorado and the Brazos.
The reason for this movement is not readily apparent. By ca. 1840 the
remnants of the Cocos appear to be centered around Matagorda Bay as
a result of several moves to various missions established for them by
the Spanish.
If it may be inferred that the Cocos at the time of Cabeza de Vaca or
shortly before were associated with the archeological culture, Galveston Bay Focus or a portion thereof, then the archeological record in
the present area of study would seem to substantiate the westward
movement of the Cocos as outlined below:
1) The majority of incised designs that occur on some ceramics in
Rockport culture sites (Fig. 14, 1 and 5) are identical to or very
reminiscent of designs that occur in Aten’s Old River Ceramic Phase
(ca. 1400-1700) in the Galveston Bay area (Aten 1970).
2) The incised ceramics* always occur in sites containing at least
some historic (Spanish) artifacts along with the bulbar-stemmed arrowpoint. Similar arrowpoint forms also occur in the Galveston vicinity.
*The fact that almost no ceramics (one sherd) with incised designs occur at Spanish
mission sites which were known to house Cocos would seem to indicate that they had
quit making these ceramics by ca. 1760 and were manufacturing a ware with asphalt
designs indistinguishable from the Rockport-Karankawan wares of this period.

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Other than the model presented above, we see only three other
alternatives at the present:
1) Cabeza de Vaca landed on Galveston Island; the Coaques are not
related to the Caux, Quoaquis, Cocos, etc., thus creating no problems,
or
2) Cabeza de Vaca landed on Matagorda Peninsula or in the vicinity (i.e. south and west of Galveston Island) and the Coaques are the
same peoples that are mentioned by later chroniclers in the vicinity of
Matagorda Bay and between there and the Brazos River.
3) The ethnographic and historical records are hopelessly scrambled and we may never be able to connect the archeological past with
the ethnographic present.
It may, of course, be that none of these alternatives is part of the final
solution. Thus it may be too late to make the necessary correspondences, and the statements on these matters must remain ones of
probabilities. This author favors the first statement, all the while
realizing that history is very seldom as we think it was or would like
for it to have been.
The preceding pages have been an attempt to reconstruct a model of
cultural succession for the central portion of the Texas coast. Although the reconstruction is essentially a reworking of earlier concepts based on more recent information, it is felt that it presents a
more logical model for this area than the original. In final analysis, it
should not be considered a complete statement, but rather a
framework on which to build and a model to be tested.

CULTURAL SUCCESSION

53

REFERENCES CITED

Aten, L. E.
1970 Coastal Southeast Texas Archeology. Unpublished manuscript, University of Texas at Austin.
Berlandier, Jean-Louis
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830. Edited by John C. Ewers. Smithsonian
Institution Press.
Bolton, Herbert F.
1906 The Founding of the Mission Rosario. Quarterly of the Texas Historical Association, Vol. 10, No. 2.
Campbell, T. N.
1947 The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18,
pp. 4O-75.
1952 The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. Bulletin,
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
1960 Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 145-175.
1962 Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of Texas.
Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32, pp. 331-36.
1964 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Padre Island, Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service.
Corbin, James E.
1963 Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of Corpus Christi
Bay, Texas. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp. 5-30.
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891 The Karankawa Indians, the Coastal Peoples of Texas. Papers of the
Peabody Museum of American Archeology and Ethnology, Vol. 1, No.
2.
Gilmore, Kathleen K.
1969 The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site Identification.
State Building Commission, Report No. 16.
Green, Lorraine H.
n.d. Unpublished manuscript. University of Texas at Austin.
Hester, Thomas Roy
1969 Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy Counties, Texas.
State Building Commission, Report No. 15.
Martin, George C.
n.d. Preliminary Archeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast
Made by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929.
Privately printed.
Meighan, C. E.
1960 New Methodforthe Seriation of Archeological Collections.American
Antiquity, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 203-214.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Nunley, Parker, and Thomas Roy Hester.
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas.
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 233-53.

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Robinson, W. S.
1951 A Method for Chronologically Ordering Archeological Deposits.
American Antiquity, Vol. 16, No. 4, pp. 293-301.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf Coast Sites.
State Building Commission, Report No. 13.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin, Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Pullman, Washington

