WOODALL: REPLY TO VAUGHAN

235

REPLY TO VAUGHAN
J.

NED WOODALL

The critique of my recent paper (Woodall 1973) has reached me at an
unfortunate time, since I am currently living abroad and do not have access to
my library, research notes, the citations of Vaughan, or even a copy of the
paper under discussion. Consequently, my comments will be general, rather
than specific replies to the criticisms offered.
First, Vaughan contends that since the artifact scaling was based on an
"eyeballing" procedure, it is not clear whether the best scale values were
obtained. In fact, after obtaining the coefficient of similarity for each pair of
sites, using the Robinson-Brainerd technique, the ranking of sites was done
by computer; the output matrices with the fewest negatively signed differences were chosen (several "tied" for this, as I recall) and from these was used
the one with the smallest total of negative signing. The only "eyeballing"
done was in calculating the coefficients of similarity, and I do not see how
nominal level data (e.g., the percentages of brushing, incising, engraving) can
be treated differently.
I fully agree with Vaughan’s statement that "a one-dimensional scale (may
not) accurately represent the set of intersite similarities." What I was trying to
detect, however, was the boundaries of matrilocal tribes, and this is why I
selected ceramic attributes that presumably functioned in the socioideological cultural subsystem. Such attributes would identify more nearly the endogamous units (tribes) than would artifacts, or attributes of artifacts, that
functioned primarily in the technological subsystem. Indeed, it would be
expected that intersite similarities calculated on the basis of frequencies of
stone tools, bone awls, or kinds and quantity of animal bone would be sharply
divergent from similarities shown by comparison of decorative modes on
ceramics. In analyzing archeological material it is recognized that since
culture is a multivariate phenomenon, then the sources of variation, like their
artifactual forms and loci, are multiple. I attempted to segregate a set of data
from the total corpus that would be more responsive to one source of variation, i.e. female residence patterns. I strongly disagree, therefore, with
Vaughan’s later statement that "methods... which make maximum use of all
information in the data are preferable..." I contend, rather, that certain data
not only can be, but must be ignored in some cases.
In discussing my analysis of design motifs in attempting to test the clustering suggested through analysis of decoration techniques, Vaughan suggests
use of a second set of sherds rather than different attributes of the same set. I
agree that this would have been preferable, but the small sample size from
several of the sites made it impossible; destruction of some of the sites by Lake
Palestine prevented further collection.
Finally, I respect Vaughan’s criticism of the statistical techniques I used,
and encourage a re-analysis of the data using the suggested methods, and any

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

others available. The abstraction of socio-cultural models from material remains, and the testing of those models by various means, is the most promising approach to pleoethnography.

REFERENCE CITED

Woodall, J. Ned
1973 Prehistoric Social Boundaries: An Archeological Model and Test.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (for 1972), Vol. 43, pp.
101-120.
Wake Forest in Venice

