La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas
Kathleen Gibnore

ABSTRACT
The location of La Salle’s colony in Texas, established in 1685, has
been in doubt. Comparisons with a model of topographic, physiographic,
and geographic data, and physical cultural remains make it evident that the
Keeran site on Garcitas Creek in Victoria County (41VT4) is the site of the
colony. Part of the proof lies in the presence there of a ceramic ware made in
Saintonge, France in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

INTRODUCTION

The location of La Salle’s colony in Texas, Fort St. Louis, long has been the
subject of discussion. To commemorate the three hundredth anniversary (1985)
of the establishment of the colony, this report seeks to resolve doubts about its
location. Since the finding by the historian H. E. Bolton of a 1691 survey map
that compared favorably with modern maps of the Matagorda Bay area, the location has been generally accepted to be somewhere in that area (Figure 1).
Bolton (1924), on July 3, 1914, boarded a train in Austin, Texas, traveled to
Placedo, Texas, contacted the local people, and found a site that had on the
surface "small fragments of antique blue and white porcelain." A wall 21/2 feet
thick enclosing an area 90 feet square was traced and, although Bolton knew and
admitted that these remains probably belonged to the Spanish presidio established at La Salle’s colony, he was convinced that this was the site of La Salle’s
colony too. This site, now known as the Keeran site, is in Victoria County on
Garcitas Creek, a stream flowing into Lavaca Bay, which in turn flows into the
larger Matagorda Bay (Figure 1).
Because Bolton could not prove that this was the site of La Salle’s colony,
other historians were not convinced of the validity of his claim. Some thought the
colony probably was on Galveston Bay; some, on the Lavaca River about 8 km
(5 miles) east of Garcitas Creek. Finally in 1950 excavations were carried out by
the Texas Memorial Museum at the site on Garcitas Creek (Figure 2) and nonIndian artifacts were found. It is the analysis (Gilmore 1973) of the material from
these excavations plus recent additional information from France, Canada, and
elsewhere (Gusset 1984; Barton 1981) that makes it possible to put to rest doubts
about the location of La Salle’s Fort St. Louis.
In the study of the data two objectives were kept in mind: to accept or reject the hypothesis that this was the site of La Salle’s Fort St. Louis, and to deter-

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986for 1984)

62

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Map of the Matagorda Bay area of Texas showing location of the Keeran site
(41VT4). Base map from AMS 1:250,000: Beevilte, Bay City.

mine through study of the artifacts what materials were at the site and why they
were there.
For the first and primary objective, the same method was used as had been
employed in looking for the precise locations of other historical sites: the use of a
conceptual model of what the site should look like in the field. To do this, four
kinds of information (geographic, physiographic, topographic, and data about
physical cultural remains) were gathered. For example, if La Salle’s colony had
indeed been on this site, what would be expected both in physical surroundings
and in the ground. This information would come from research in historical
documents and archeological material from sites of the same time period and
cultural tradition; from a systematic analysis of each kind of information the
conceptual model would be formed. Following is a historical sketch from which
the conceptual model for this site was constructed.

HISTORY OF LA SALLE’S EXPEDITION
La Salle sailed from La Rochelle, France on July 24, 1684, with four ships
and about two hundred people: soldiers, tradesmen, derelicts, and women, all

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

63

Garc/’tas Creek

IS

0

N

\

(
’,,

,..~7
~ 89V <~II

~
5

.’

4

\
\

\

27

\
%

%

I

"-,.015
EXPLANAq’ION

I

~
\

Margin of cleared area ~

[’--7 Excavation unit

!
!

16

!

?

¯ _., Earth mound

17

Contour interval 2 feet
0
I

50
I

I00 FEET
I

/

~pl8
¯

,,

~30~

-J

~.19

-*

bod 1985

Figure 2. Topographic map showing the 1950 excavations by the Texas Memorial Museum at the Keeran site. Contour interval 2 ft. Map by Texas Memorial Museum.
sparked with enthusiasm by the romance and wealth of the exotic New World.
This colony was to be established at the mouth of the Mississippi River, which,
together with all the land drained by the river, had been claimed by La Salle for
France when he explored the river down to its mouth in 1682. One of his supply
ships, the St. Francis, was captured by privateers in the West Indies. After a stay
in Hispaniola, the expedition, now three ships (a supply ship, a small frigate, and

;

64

Texas Archeological Society

an escort man-of-war), finally landed on February 20, 1685 at the mouth of a
river that La Salle hoped was the Mississippi.
Upon entering the channel the supply ship ran aground and was wrecked.
Some cannon had been removed to lighten the load and other material was salvaged, but this ship had contained most of the supplies for the colony: the forge,
mill, colonists’ possessions, cannon balls, and most of the medicines. The
people, all of whom were saved, gathered with the salvaged material on the shore
not far from the entrance to the bay (Joutel 1962:49). With both supply ships
lost, a large supply of goods would not be expected at the settlement.
La Salle then set out to explore the area to find the mouth of the Mississippi
River and a place for a settlement. He found a spot on a small hill, 2 leagues
(about 8 km, or 5 miles, using 2.6 miles as equivalent to 1 league) up the smalleSt
river that flowed into the bay from the northwest. La Salle’s personal ship, the
small frigate Belle, because of a sand bar, could not anchor near the settlement.
A depot was set up opposite the bar so material could be carried in the Belle from
the original camp to the depot camp, from which it was then transported to the
settlement in canoes. (A memorial statue of La Salle now stands at Indian Point
near the site of the depot camp at the entrance to Lavaca Bay.) Canoes were
scarce; some were appropriated from the Indians to their great displeasure.
It has been confirmed that the settlement was on a rise, 2 leagues (ca. 8 km,
or 5 miles) up the smallest river draining into the bay from the northwest.
One house at the settlement was built of timbers obtained--at great sacririce--about a league (about 4 km, or 2.6 miles) upcountry. A house next to the
first was built of salvaged ship timbers.
While La Salle was exploring the region in search of the Mississippi, the
Belle, which was at anchor awaiting his return, was blown across the bay and
grounded. According to La Salle’s brother Jean Cavelier (Delanglez 1938), "all
boxes, clothing, papers, utensils, linen, plates, and dishes" belonging to La Salle
and the people of his company were on board. Most of La Salle’s belongings were
salvaged, together with some swivel guns and rigging.
Two more buildings were built: a chapel made of stakes driven into the
ground and "a sort of separate building" of logs plastered with clay mixed with
earth and thatched with reeds. A palisade around the settlement was started. Gardens were planted with chicory, melons, pumpkins, cotto.n, celery, and asparagus, but rabbits and rats ate the tender shoots, and an alligator devoured
what remained (Joutel 1962: 70).
Near the settlement was a marsh where fish and birds were found, among
them turkeys, partridges, a bird they called the great gullet (pelican), and one
with pale red feathers they called spatula because of the shape of its beak (undoubtedly a roseate spoonbill). Rattlesnakes were common, and there were large
alligators in the rivers. Both live oak and deciduous trees grew there and also a
plant whose leaves they described as like rackets andfull ofprickles (prickly pear
cactus). Other plants, harsh and sharp pointed, with leaves like gutters, were
probably Spanish daggers.

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

65

So it is clear that the site of La Salle’s settlement should be found in an area
where pelicans, roseate spoonbills, turkeys, partridges, rattlesnakes, and large
alligators existed, and there were growing in the vicinity live oak trees, prickly
pear cactus, and a plant similar to if not the Spanish dagger.
La Salle became convinced at last that he was not at the mouth of the Mississippi and, since the wreck of the Belle made communicating by sea impossible, the only alternative he had was to return to France for help, overland
by way of the Illinois country and Canada. On January 12, 1687, almost two
years after landing, only 37 of the 200 or more people who had landed were left;
17 people set out on the journey, leaving in the settlement 20 people, 70 or 75
swine, 18 or 20 hens, some casks of meal, powder, ball, and eight pieces of cannon without any bullets (Joutel 1962:84).
On March 20, 1687 La Salle and others were killed by members of their
own party, leaving 15 survivors from the 17 who set out on January 12. Six of
the 17 eventually returned to France and 9 were captured by the Spaniards
(Wedel 1973).
From the time of the capture of the supply ship St. Francis in the West Indies, the Spaniards had known of plans for the French colony, and many expeditions had been sent by land and by sea to search for it. A land expedition headed
by Alonso de Le6n came upon the French settlement on April 22, 1689 (Le6n
1909) and found it sacked. It was littered with broken chests, bottle cases, and
furniture, about 200 torn and scattered books (in French), and gun stocks without locks or barrels. They found and buried three bodies; no living creatures were
found. They counted six houses (Figure 3): nearest the arroyo (Garcitas Creek) at
the north edge of the settlement was a house of four rooms built of ship’s timbers;
near this, a one-room house; toward the south, two more houses; and toward the
west, two more. A small hut faced the arroyo. Eight iron cannon and three old
swivel guns were there. They buried the cannon and one swivel gun and carried
off two swivels, together with the other iron they found (Bolton 1959 : 398-399).
They drew a plan of the site (Figure 3), and one of the soldiers composed a poem
of lament (Le6n 1909: 336).
When de Le6n learned that there were two Frenchmen living with the Indians some distance away, he sent for them, and they told about the destruction of
Fort St. Louis. The two surviving Frenchmen had stayed with the Indians in East
Texas after La Salle’s murder and immediately after they heard that the Indians
had raided the Garcita’s Creek fort about three months previously, they had gone
there and found it devastated. They buried 14 bodies and exploded about 100
barrels of powder.
De Le6n himself was sent back the next year (1690) to burn the fort. While
he and his men were exploring the area looking for further French activity, in the
bay at the mouth of the river they saw two objects they suspected were buoys.
This discovery caused consternation in Spanish colonial government circles, and
a sea expedition with engineer C~irdenas aboard was sent to find and destroy the
buoys, map the bay, and search for evidence of the French in the area (see

66

Texas Archeological Society

E257

Figure 3. Sketch plan of the French settlement in 1689 (Le6n 1909:330).

Gilmore 1973, Appendix III). The buoys proved to be logs grounded by high
water, and no evidence of French activity was found.
The map made by this expedition (Figure 4) compares favorably with modern maps of the Matagorda Bay area; the route the expedition took around the
bay can be traced with ease. According to the map, the river on which the Pueblo
de los Franceses was located has an island at its mouth, and it enters the bay
(Lavaca Bay) from slightly west of north. Another small river enters the bay to
the south, and another larger river enters southeast of the Rio de los Franceses.
The next spurt of Spanish activity was in response to French activity on the
Red River, when the Aguayo Expedition was sent by Spanish authorities in 1722
to establish missions and presidios throughout the area. One presidio, Nuestra
Sefiora de Loreto La Bahfa, was built on the site of the French settlement. While
ditches were being dug for these fortifications, "pieces of gun locks and fragments of other things used by the French were found," according to the diarist for
the expedition. Lines for four bulwarks were drawn, each curtain to be 45 varas
(38 meters, or 125 ft.) long. The place where the powder had been exploded in
1689 was enclosed within the lines of the fort (Pefia 1935:63-64). A mission,
Espfritu Santo, was established across the same river, three-quarters of a league
(3 km, or 2 miles) distant. But Presidio Loreto did not prosper as expected, and
four years later, in 1726, both the presidio and the mission were moved farther
inland.

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

67

!

/

/

Figure 4. Map showing the route of the C~irdenas-Llanos Expedition of 1691. From the
J. P. Bryan Collection (24a, 1691), The University of Texas at Austin.

68

Texas Archeological Society

The similarity of the C~irdenas map to modern maps of Matagorda Bay, and
the fact that the route of this expedition can be traced accurately on a modern
map, demonstrate that the French colony of St. Louis was located in the Matagorda Bay area. Therefore, the model to be considered for the location of La
Salle’s settlement will be in the Matagorda Bay area.
THE MODEL

Fort St. Louis was described as on a small hill 2 leagues (8 km, or 5 miles)
up the smallest stream emptying into the bay that stretches northwestward. At the
mouth of this river was said to be a small island. From the modern map (Figure 1) we can see that Agula Creek on the south may be smaller than Garcitas
Creek but it has no island at its mouth, and the Lavaca River on the southeast has
islands at its mouth, but it is the largest river flowing into this bay, and the C~irdenas map shows the French settlement on a river that comes into the bay at a
more northerly point. Birds of many kinds, including pelicans and roseate spoonbills, inhabit the area; rattlesnakes abound and are held in great respect. The
writer has seen no alligators there, but there are marshes southwest and northeast
of the Keeran site. Live oaks, yucca, and prickly pears grow in the area. Therefore the topographic, geographic, and physiographic parts of the model coincide
clearly with field data from the Keeran site.
Physical cultural remains, the fourth part of the model to be reconciled with
the field data, are known not only from historical documents, but also from archeological information from sites of the same time period and same cultural
traditions.
In this part of the model, structural remains and ceramic artifacts have been
emphasized. Stylistically and technologically, ceramics are sensitive indicators
of cultural traditions, and it seemed a good probability that French ceramics of
the period could be isolated from those of the Spanish more effectively than
could other artifacts. For the Spanish settlement there should be indications of
the four bulwarks outlined by Aguayo, in addition to certain artifacts left by the
Spaniards.
Majolica ware is Spanish-Mexican tin-enameled earthenware. Tin-enameled
earthenware has a soft, absorbent, white to light red or buff paste, and is coated
with a vitreous tin-bearing opaque glaze. The technique of manufacture was
brought from Spain to Mexico soon after the conquest in the middle of the sixteenth century. Tin-enameled earthenware made in France is usually referred to
as faience, and that made in Holland and England as delft. Majolica and faience
can be differentiated usually by design style and technique of glaze application.
Majolica potsherds serve as "index fossils" for Spanish Colonial sites, and a
chronological sequence of design styles has been devised.
Majolica types for the occupation at the Keeran site should include some of
those found at Spanish Colonial sites of the same period (e.g., the second location of Presidio Loreto, the Alamo, and certain sites in Florida), and among these

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

69

types would be Puebla Polychrome, San Agustin Polychrome, Puebla blue on
white, and possibly Abo Polychromes. Sherds of San Luis Polychrome were
found at the second location of this presidio (Loreto) and might be found here
as well.
Of the 10,200 tin-enameled sherds examined, only 20 were polychrome.
Some are Puebla Polychrome, and most of the blue on white majolica seem to be
San Agustin plates, cups, and bowls. Although the type variety expected was not
found, the types that were found do coincide with the model, confirming the
Spanish occupation of this site during the first half of the eighteenth century.
For the French settlement we should find the outlines of six burned houses,
five of which should contain fragments of burned daub or clay and possibly
burned timbers or charcoal. These house outlines should fit the pattern on de
Le6n’s map and his description, and associated artifacts should be of French origin, provided the construction and occupation of the Spanish presidio did not
destroy them.
The fortress of Louisbourg in Nova Scotia was started about 1715 (Lunn
1973), Fort Michilimackinac in Michigan was occupied by the French at about
the same time, and the French occupation at Santa Rosa Pensacola in Florida was
in 1719 (Smith 1965). Since faience from France was found at these three sites, it
would be expected at Fort St. Louis. At Louisbourg (Marwitt 1966; Barton 1981)
and Michilimackinac (Miller and Stone 1970), many coarsewares or kitchenwares were found, and considering the nature of the pioneer settlement, more
coarsewares than finewares probably would be found at Fort St. Louis.
As expected, in the Keeran site collection was one group of French sherds
(Figure 5) of a type that, to the best of the writer’s knowledge, does not occur at
any other site in Texas. The interiors are covered with a white slip over which a
green glaze was applied; this glaze varies from dull greenish yellow to deep grass
green. The lips on these sherds have been rolled onto the exterior, making them
much thicker than the bodies of the sherds. The paste is buff to pink, with
red specks. At the time of the original analysis (Gilmore 1973), this ware was
thought probably to have been made in France. Research carried out in both
Canada and France since that time has shown definitely that the ware originated
in Saintonge, France (Gusset 1984), not far from La Rochelle, which was the
center of colonial trade and the port where La Salle embarked on his last adventure. Unmistakable clues to this origin are the paste, the glaze technique, and the
rim treatment. A shallow bowl found at Louisbourg of similar ware, but decorated with brown dots and lines, has been dated from the late seventeenth century
(Webster 1969:Figure 1), and a shallow undecorated bowl of this type is in the
Tunica collection from Louisiana (Brain 1979:59). The Tunica Indians were
early and long-time trading friends of the French. Examples have also been reported from Port Dauphin, Dauphin Island, Mobile Bay--primarily occupied
from 1702 to 1717 (Brain 1979:59)--and Fort Michilimackinac (Miller and
Stone 1970).
Great quantities of this inexpensive utility ware were exported to the New
World in the seventeenth century and most of the eighteenth. Intense rivalry be-

70

Texas Archeological Society

/

/ /
/
!
/ J

0
I

I
I

2
1

3
!

4
I

5 cm
I

C

Figure 5. Photographs of green glaze ware from Fort St. Louis.

Gilmore--La Salle’s Fort

71

tween Spain and France would have precluded the bringing of this French ware to
the site by the Spaniards. Furthermore, by 1722, when the Spanish presidio was
established on this spot, both tin-enameled ware and utility wares were being
produced in quantity in Mexico.
Other utility wares abound in the collection. Some undoubtedly are French,
and some may have been made at the site. A scaffito sherd depicts an animal with
an arrow sticking in or out (as the viewer prefers to see it), done in a technique
similar to that of Louisbourg coarseware from the early eighteenth century
(Webster 1969:Figure 5). A few tin-enameled sherds in the Keeran site collection may be French.
Further application of the model to the field data reveals that the 86 sherds
of the green glaze ware were recovered only in excavation units 1, 5, 7, 12, 13,
and 14 (Figure 2). Possible faience occurred only in units 4, 7, 12, and 13. Clay
daubing in the collection in the greatest numbers came from units 1,5, 7, and 19,
and was also found at units 3, 4, 6, 12, and 26. The percentages are biased by
what the excavator decided to bring in.
This clustering indicates that the French houses depicted by de Le6n (Figure 3) were in these areas; the four-room house nearest the arroyo was in unit 14;
the two houses toward the south were in units 5 and 7; the two houses toward the
west, in units 13 and 12; and a small hut facing the arroyo was in unit 1.
All parts of the model are in agreement with the field data, and there are
artifacts of French origin and of the time of La Salle’s colony at the Keeran site
on Garcitas Creek. These facts make it certain that the Keeran site was the scene
of the tragic events that started 300 years ago on February 20, 1685, at the settlement at Fort St. Louis.
REFERENCES CITED
Barton, Kenneth James
1981

Coarse earthenwares from the fortress of Louisbourg. History and Archaeology
55, Parks Canada.

Bolton, Herbert E.
1924
The location of La Salle’s colony on the Gulf of Mexico. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 27(3) : 171-189. Reprinted from The Mississippi Valley Historical
Review, Vol. 2, No. 2, 1915.
1959

Spanish exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. 1916. Reprint. Barnes and
Noble, New York.

Brain, Jeffrey
1979

Tunica treasure. Papers of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology
Harvard University. Vol. 71.

Delangtez, Jean (Translator)
1938

The journal of Jean Cavelier: the account of a survivor of La Salle’s Texas expedition, 1684-1688. Institute of Jesuit History, Chicago.

Texas Archeological Society

72

Gilmore, Kathleen
1973

The Keeran site: The probable site of La Salle’s Fort St. Louis in Texas. Texas
Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist Reports, Number 24.

Gusset, Gerard
1984

Personal communication.

Joutel, Henri
1962

A journal of La Salle’s last voyage. 1714. Reprint. Corinth Books, New York.

Le6n, Alonso de
1909

Historia de Nuevo Le6n, edited by Genaro Garcfa. Documentos In~ditos o Muy
Raros, Vol. 25. Librerfa de la Vda. de Ch. Bouret, Mexico [City].

Lunn, John
1973

Colonial Louisbourg and its developing ceramics collection. In Ceramics in America edited by Ian M. G. Quimby. University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville.

Marwitt, Renee H.
1966

A preliminary survey of seven coarse earthenwares from the fortress of Louisbourg. The Conference on Historic Site Archeology Papers, 1965-1966, Vol. 1.

Miller, J. Jefferson II and Lyle M. Stone
1970

Eighteenth-century ceramics from Fort Michilimackinac: a study in historical
archaeology. Smithsonian Studies in History and Technology, No. 4. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington.

Smith, Hale G.
1965

Archeological excavations at Santa Rose Pensacola. Notes in Anthropology,
Vol. 10. Florida State University.

Pefia, Juan Antonio de la
1935

Pefia’s diary of the Aguayo expedition, translated by Peter P. Forrestal. Preliminary Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society, Vol. 2, No. 7. Reprinted from Records and Studies of the United States Catholic Historical
Society, Vol. 24, 1935.

Webster, D. B.
1969

Early slip-decorated pottery in Canada. Charles J. Musson, Toronto.

Weddle, Robert S.
1973

Wilderness manhunt. University of Texas Press, Austin.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
A past president of the Texas Archeological Society, Kathleen Gilmore graduated
from the University of Oklahoma in geology and earned her Ph.D. in anthropology from
Southern Methodist University in 1973. She is also a member of the Dallas Archeological
Society. Her interests are Caddo archeology and historical archeology. Since 1975 she has
been with the Institute of Applied Sciences at North Texas State University in Denton.

