A Petroglyph (41TG54) from Tom Green County
West-Central Texas
J. A. Jaquier

ABSTRACT
This paper describes a previously unpublished aboriginal petroglyph
found in Tom Green County. The specimen has been excavated and placed on
public display in San Angelo, Texas by the U.S. Corps of Engineers. The
petroglyph is described, and its composition and probable temporal placement are discussed.

INTRODUCTION
The Concho Valley of west-central Texas has long been noted as the location
of Paint Rock (41CC1), the major pictograph site on the Concho River, about
48 km (30 miles) east of San Angelo. The discovery of this isolated petroglyph
(41TG54) along the southwestern margin of the O. C. Fisher Reservoir (north of
San Angelo in Tom Green County) represents, to the best of the writer’s knowledge, the only documented example of rock carving (as opposed to rock painting) along the Concho River.
The petroglyph (Figure 1), herein called the Red Arroyo hunting scene, was
discovered in August 1974 on U.S. Corps of Engineers land by two motorcyclists
who subsequently reported the find (Thomas 1979). The small sandstone boulder
on which the petroglyph is carved was at the side of a draw below a sandstone
bluff. The reservoir manager, D. A. Caffey, immediately expressed concern over
protection of the petroglyph to the Fort Worth District of the Corps and constructed a small wooden shelter to cover the boulder. By the time the site was
recorded by Darrell Creel in December 1975, the shelter had been torn down by
vandals, and weathering of the petroglyph was occurring at a rapid rate. In November 1977, under a contract between the Corps of Engineers and the Cultural
Resources Institute of Texas Tech University, William J. Mayer-Oakes conducted
an archeological survey of the site area. Based on his recommendations (MayerOakes 1977), Corps personnel prepared a statement of work and awarded a contract in May 1979 to Benham-Blair and Affiliates, Inc. of Oklahoma City to excavate and, if possible, remove the sandstone boulder. In June 1979, the work
was completed and the Red Arroyo hunting scene petroglyph was placed in a
naturalistic setting in a display case in the project office of the O. C. Fisher Reservoir, where it can be viewed today.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55 (1986 for 1984)

146

Texas Archeological Society

I0 CENTIMETERS
I

Figure 1. Tracing of the Red Arroyo hunting scene petroglyph, Tom Green County, Texas.
From a 1974 U.S. Corps of Engineers photograph.

DESCRIPTION
The Red Arroyo hunting scene is composed of three distinct stylistic representations: a human stick figure equipped with bow and arrow, a discoidal depression probably representing the sun, and a depression in the form of a large
quadruped (the target of the hunter). Each of these depictions was carved into the
surface of a small (75 by 50 by 40 cm) sandstone boulder that has a gray cortex
and tan interior.
The following description of the petroglyph is from direct observation of
the rock art, extrapolation of measurements from a 1974 Corps of Engineers
color photograph, and discussions with D. A. Caffey, who observed the petroglyph when it was first discovered. Detailed measurements to the nearest millimeter or degree were made of the petroglyph itself with stainless steel calipers
and goniometer.

Jaquier--Aboriginal Petroglyph

147

The human stick figure is at the left of the grouping, with the hunter facing
and aiming his weapon to the right (as viewed). The hunter has a short protrusion, which probably represents a feather, extending upward at a slight backward
angle from the back of his head. The bow, undrawn, is held vertically, and the
arrow angles slightly upward at a less-than-optimum shooting angle toward the
quadruped. The grooves (lines) of the stick figure are still quite deep (as much as
8 mm) and have near-vertical sides, despite obvious deterioration.
The quadruped, at the right of the grouping and facing to the right away
from the hunter, appears to have a tail, a dorsal hump, and horns. Its legs are
much thicker than would be expected, even allowing for weathering, and the
forelegs thicken considerably toward the hooves.
The circle representing the sun is centered above the two lower figures; the
composition of the three elements suggests that the sun was placed in this position intentionally to be the apex of a triangle. The depressions forming both the
sun and the quadruped figure are relatively deep, with gradually sloping edges.
There are no traces of pigment in or around any of the figures. Gray cortex is
visible in the grooves as well as on the lower parts of the rock surface, but on
many high spots the cortex has been abraded naturally, so the tan color of the
rock’s interior shows through. Chips of cortex are still flaking off from the surface of the rock, threatening further damage to the figures. Texture of the rock in
and around the grooves is rough and pitted. From the early photographs it was in
that condition at the time of discovery.
Basic macromorphological dimensions are:
Human Stick Figure
Height: 272 mm
Line width: 6 mm (average)
Line depth: 8 mm (maximum)
Quadruped
Height: 105 mm
Length: 240 mm
Depth: 20 mm (maximum)
Sun

Diameter: 65 mm (average)
Depth: 18 mm (maximum)

DISCUSSION
The two basic methods of creating petroglyphs are grinding and incising. In
ground petroglyphs the rock is abraded with another, usually harder, rock. Grinding, whether linear or areal, creates smooth-surfaced depressions with gradually
sloping sides and is usually performed on sandstone or other soft stone (unless
tools, rather than designs, are the desired end products). Incising, on the other
hand, is accomplished by hammering or pecking at the rock on which the design
is being carved. Pecking is done either directly (by a hand-held hammerstone

148

Texas Archeological Society

beaten directly against the rock) or indirectly (by a hand-held hammerstone hit
against a second stone that does the actual chipping of the rock, similar to the
action of a hammer and chisel). Incising virtually dictates a more linear or outline style (Schaafsma 1980 : 31) with rougher and near-vertical sides of the resulting grooves or depressions, particularly when the indirect technique is used. The
Red Arroyo hunting scene’s human stick figure has narrow (6 mm), deep (8 mm)
grooves with near-vertical sides, so indirect incising is the technique that probably was used by the aboriginal artist. Although the areal depressions forming
the sun and quadruped have sloping sides, they are rough surfaced, and the tail,
horns, and legs of the animal are more linear than areal, so indirect incising
probably was used in the creation of these figures too.
The age of the oldest rock drawing in the Southwest is still undetermined,
although Schaafsma (1980:3) states that some are at least 2,000 years old and
believes another thousand years should be added for preceramic hunting and
gathering cultures. In west-central Texas, the hunting and gathering lifeway persisted much later (Prewitt 1981:84), perhaps as late at A.D. 1750. Schaafsma
(1980:3) finds no correlation between the degree of artistic sophistication of
groups and their levels of cultural development.
Techniques such as patination, superimposition, and vertical placement
cannot be used for dating this petroglyph, but content and comparison are dating
techniques that merit discussion. The human stick figure is obviously using a
bow and arrow. Hester (1980: 86) believes common use of the bow and arrow
occurred around A.D. 1000 or shortly after in South Texas, but Prewitt (1981 : 83)
suggests about A.D. 700 as the time when the bow and arrow replaced the atlatl
and became prevalent in Central Texas. Although eventually it was replaced by
the gun, the bow and arrow continued in use among Indians in the Concho Valley
into the late nineteenth century (Clemens 1980:64). Realistically, then, the depiction of the bow and arrow restricts the petroglyph to the period from about
A.D. 700 to 1870.
The rock paintings on the bluffs at Paint Rock (41CC1) are believed to be
primarily of Lipan Apache origin (Clemens 1980: 28, 34), with many scenes obviously depicting historical events. Many of these drawings show wasp-waisted
human outline figures--some on horseback--and this style is attributed to historical aborigines (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967). Equestrian Indians, primarily
Apaches and Comanches, arrived in the Concho Valley in the seventeenth century (Clemens 1980:28). Since the human stick figure in the Red Arroyo hunting scene is hunting on foot and not on horseback, the date for the petroglyph’s
creation might be further restricted to the 900-year period between A.D. 700
and 1600.
Considering the depiction of the large quadruped, we must ask what species
it was intended to represent. Caffey (n.d.) is convinced that when he first viewed
the petroglyph, the animal was clearly a buffalo. Deer, antelope, and bison were
present in west-central Texas during historic times and have been documented
archeologically as part of the Indian subsistence pattern for thousands of years.
The relatively short horns of the animal in this petroglyph appear to be extremely

Jaquier--Aboriginal Petroglyph

149

low on its head; the dorsal hump and massive forequarters argue against deer and
antelope and in favor of bison. Too, bison are common themes in at least six
petroglyph panels at Paint Rock (41CC1), clearly recognizable from their horns,
dorsal humps, and large forequarters (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967). If the
quadruped is accepted as a bison (and that certainly appears, also considering
faunal evidence from archeological sites, to be the most reasonable conclusion),
a brief examination of bison density in the region is warranted.
Dillehay (1974) proposed a period from about A.D. 500 to 1300 when bison
were almost absent on the southern plains of New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas,
and in Louisiana. Lynott (1979: 98), discussing north-central Texas, postulated a
high-density bison population during the period from about A.D. 1200 to 1600,
and an even greater density in bison population on the High Plains to the west.
Using these two hypotheses as models for the exploitive strategy of the Concho
Valley, bison herds were abundant and became a dominant part of the hunting
economy in the area during that period. Although it remains to be proven archeologically, should the period from A.D. 1200 to 1600 be found to be a reliable
high-density period for bison in the Concho Valley, such a conclusion could further narrow the most likely time span for creation of the Red Arroyo hunting
scene to that 400-year period.
Hurt (1977) finds no stylistic parallel between the Red Arroyo petroglyph
and the pictographs at the Paint Rock site, but it must be pointed out that the
Paint Rock pictographs are an admixture of styles and cultures (Kirkland and
Newcomb 1967)covering perhaps 1,000 years (Clemens 1980:34), therefore
consideration of the rock art at Paint Rock as a single entity for comparative purposes is invalid. Newcomb (Kirkland and Newcomb 1967:143) sets the Paint
Rock pictographs apart as a rock-art form because of their geographic isolation
and because the artwork, albeit crude in many respects, does not seem related to
that at any other site or to any defined regional style. Human stick figures,
as opposed to outline forms, occur clearly at least 16 times in the Paint Rock
panels. Kirkland and Newcomb (1967) have illustrated similar human figures
equipped with bows and arrows (page 147, plate 98, panel 1), bison (page 147,
plate 98, panel 2), and even a human stick figure with feather using a bow and
arrow to shoot a bison (page 153, plate 105, panel 5). So, motifs similar to those
in the Red Arroyo hunting scene are found at Paint Rock, but at Paint Rock the
motifs are in the artwork of a culture earlier than that of the historic equestrian
Indians whose work is characterized by wasp-waisted figures, outline forms, and
depictions of horses, guns, and Spanish missions.
In sum, the Red Arroyo hunting scene is a valid example of prehistoric Indian rock art. Analysis of the content--particularly the bow and arrow and
bison--and a comparison with the mixed artistic styles of the Paint Rock pictographs further confirms the prehistoric nature of this petroglyph. A more finite
span of A.D. 1200 to 1600, which fits within Prewitt’s (1981:75) Neo-Archaic
stage or Hester’s (1980: 156) Late Prehistoric stage, is tentatively proposed.
Unfortunately, five years of exposure to the elements (from time of recording to removal to the display) after runoff cleaned the surface of the rock of its

150

Texas Archeological Society

protective cover of soil, and were responsible for serious deterioration of the Red
Arroyo hunting scene petroglyph. Today, despite being indoors in a display, the
petroglyph’s human stick figure is barely recognizable, and the animal figure on
its right cannot be clearly discerned at all. Flaking and chipping of the sandstone
cortex continue. Caffey (n.d.) advises that Thorn’s (1979:6) recommendation for
a protective coating to retard further deterioration has not been followed. A coating of simple polyvinyl acetate or other protectant is urgently needed to preserve
what is left of the only known example of prehistoric petroglyph art from Tom
Green County.

REFERENCES CITED
Caffey, D. A.
n.d.
Personal communication.
Clemens, Gus
1980

The Comanche country. Mulberry Avenue Books, San Antonio.

Dillehay, Tom D.
1974
Late Quaternary bison population changes on the southern Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65): 180-196.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980
Digging into South Texas prehistory. Corona, San Antonio.
Hurt, Richard
1977
An unusual petroglyph in Tom Green County, Texas. Appendix A in Preliminary archeological reconnaissance of two sites at O. C. Fisher Lake, Texas, by
W. J. Mayer-Oakes, Cultural Resources Institute, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, pp. 1-18.
Kirkland, Forrest, and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.
1967

The rock art of Texas Indians. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Lynott, Mark J.
1979

Prehistoric bison populations of northcentral Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 50: 89-101.

Mayer-Oakes, William J.
1977

Preliminary archeological reconnaissance of two sites at O. C. Fisher Lake,
Texas. Cultural Resources Institute, Department of Anthropology, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock, Texas: l - 18.

Schaafsma, Polly
1980
Indian rock art of the Southwest. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Thoms, Alston
1979

Archeological Excavation of a petroglyphic boulder at O. C. Fisher Lake, Tom
Green County, Texas. Benham-Blair & Affiliates, Inc., Oklahoma City.

Jaquier--Aboriginal Petroglyph

151

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
J. A. (Jaq) Jaquier has participated in many archeological surveys and excavations
from Abilene to the Gulf Coast, including the Alamo, Timmeron Rock-shelter, and
St. Mary’s Hall. He has been a volunteer professional archeologist for the Fort Concho
"Digging History" program, which has trained more than 240 gifted and talented sixthgrade students in archeological excavation techniques and cultural resource conservation.
He directed the 1976 summer field school (excavations at Walker Ranch, 41BX228) Of
The University of Texas at San Antonio and is backup archeologist on permit for the Fort
Concho National Historic Landmark and Museum in San Angelo. He is a charter member
of the Regional Archeological Stewardship Network, a member of the Board of Directors
of the Barrow Museum in Eola, and since 1974 has been a research associate with the
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

