An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave
Material: Part II
NIARDITH K. SCHUETZ

Introduction
This paper is the second part of a three-part summary description of
artifacts from Pecos River Focus sites, based on studies of artifacts in
the collections of the Witte Memorial Museum, San Antonio, Texas.
The preceding part (Schuetz, !956) described sandals and chipped
stone artifacts. The present paper describes artifacts of wood, bone,
antler, stone (pecked, ground, and painted), shell, clay, and skin. Part
III, to appear in the following issue of this bulletin, wil! describe fibre
and cordage specimens, basketry and matting, and will also present
a general summary of the Pecos River Focus as now known.
Between 1928 and 1936 the Witte Museum sent several expeditions into the Trans-Pecos area of Texas. In 1929 Lieutenant-commander Claude S. Young explored caves in Santa Helena Canyon,
Brewster County. In 1930 a prelimary survey of Brewster and Val
Verde counties was made by Ellen S. Quillin, Director of the Museum,
Col. M. L. Crimmins, William Capurro, and Leona Worley. "Uncle
Tom" Miller of San Vicente served as guide. In 1931 a second survey
was made by Sam YVoolford and George C. Martin, and preliminary
reports were published by Martin (n. d. a) and by Gardner and Martin (n. d.). In 1931 Emma Gutzeit and Mary Virginia Carson, with
"Uncle Tom" Miller again serving as guide, also went over the area
recording pictograph and petroglyph sites. Their portfolio has never
been published.
In 1933 investigation of nine caves was undertaken by George
C. Martin and his field crew near Shumla, about one-half mile north
of the Rio Grande in southwestern Val Verde County. This work was
partially reported by Martin (n. d. b).
In 1936 the Witte Museum sent another expedition to Val Verde

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

County. A field party, under the direction of J. Walker Davenport,
extensively tested Eagle Cave, a large rock shelter just outside the
town of Langtry. Sites in Jacal Canyon were also briefly investigated.
A report on Eagle Cave was later published by Davenport (1938).
These early investigators, all amateur archeologists, can be credited
with conscientious and careful work. Since their time the field of
archeology has come a long way. New techniques of excavation have
been developed, new standards of reporting have been achieved, and
new scientific dating techniques have been introduced. A re-analysis
of the Witte Museum materials from the Pecos River Focus now seems
advisable.
The author has spent much of the past three years reworking the
collections brought back from the Trans-Pecos area by the Witte
Museum expeditions of the 1930’s. The first fruit of this work was the
publication in 1956 of a complete study of the sandals and lithic artifacts (Schuetz, 1956). In the course of research for that report, charcoal from Eagle Cave was found and a radiocarbon date of 4550 +- 130
years was obtained (Schuetz, 1957). The remainder of the material
--artifacts of wood, bone, antler, shell, clay, skin, fiber and cordage,
basketry and matting, and certain stone artifacts--has now been
completely studied, and the results are presented in this and a following report.
A few explanatory statements are in order. Martin, in his reports,
described only selected artifacts and in many cases these were not
fully described. In the present report, which aims at more complete
description, no attempt is made to avoid description of artifacts already described by Martin. Martin was convinced that "a single culture from hardpan to surface" was represented in the Shumla caves,
and for this reason he did not record data having stratigraphic significance. The majority of artifacts from his Shumla caves were not
labeled, so that today it is not possible to tell from which cave each
specimen came. In the present paper the proveniences of artifacts are
given only when this was recorded.
The specimens from Eagle Cave were l~beled according to the recognized zones of occupation in which they were found. The organic
debris in the successive occupation levels had been burned, so that
Eagle Cave is known almost exclusively in terms of stone artifacts.
The perishable artifacts, in which we are primarily interested in this
study, are too few to be of much value. The few Eagle Cave specimens
listed in Table 1, for instance, are all from Zones A and B of the cave.
The discussions of lithic material in this report stem from my own

VAL

VERDE

COUNTY

GAVE

!~!IATEIIIAL

!69

earlier published analysis (Schuetz, 1956), which is based upon a
classificatory scheme set up long after Davenport’s work on Eagle
Cave. The almost exclusive references to my own work are not to be
construed as slighting Davenport’s valuable Eagle Cave report.
To the following people, who volunteered their time and services to
the Trans-Pecos expeditions, the Witte Museum is grateful: J. Walker
Davenport, John S. Eross, Harding Black, Sam Woolford, George C.
Martin, Albert Maverick III, John Davis, Everett Lehmann, George
Nalle, Jr., John A. Ray, Gustave Bentrup, Burton Waters, Edward
l~itchey, Joe Benz, Jack Specht, Emma Gutzeit, Mary Virginia Carson, and Peter Hohnstedt.

drti[acts o! Wood
(See Table 1)
1. Rabbit Sticks or Fending Clubs
The collection includes 16 rabbit sticks, 15 from the Shumla caves
and one from Jacal Canyon. Martin (n. d. b) reported 20 specimens
from the Shumla caves, but the present writer recognizes only 15 in
the museum collection.
One complete specimen came from Shumla Cave No. 8. It has a
length of 32.5 cm., a width of 3.75 cm., and a thickness of 1.25 cm.
It has deteriorated so much that it is now difficult to determine the
groove pattern. Three grooved zones are still discernible in the middle
portion; two more such zones may have been present on the ends,
but no trace of them is observable. In each of the middle zones three
grooves can be seen, but originally these zones may have consisted
of five grooves each. Grooves appear on only one face. One end displays cuts perpendicular to the grooves.
Another nearly complete specimen, with only the ends missing,
was recovered from Shumla Cave No. 1. Its present length is 35 cm.;
it is 1.9 cm. wide and !.1 cm. thick. This stick was split and appears
to have been reinforced with fiber bindings. On both surfaces four long
grooves run nearly the entire length of the specimen.
A third specimen (Fig. 1, B) from an unspecified Shumla cave is
25 cm. long, 2.5 cm. wide, and 1.6 cm. thick. Three sets of parallel
grooves cover about three-fourths of the surface on each face of the
specimen. The pattern consists of three long, four short, and three long
sets of grooves. Martin (n. d. b: Plate XXX, top) presents a drawing
of this specimen.

170

TEXAS AIRCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 1
Provenience of Artifacts Made of Wood

Shumla
Caves
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
i0.
11,
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

Rabbit Sticks
Atlatls
Grooved Dart Foreshafts
Grooved Arrow Foreshafts
Barbed Wooden Foreshafts
Tenoned Foreshafts
Sharpened Projectile Foreshafts
Bunted Dart Foreshaft?
Toy Arrow?
Reed Shaft-Wood Foreshaft Combination
Reed Shafts
Hardwood Arrows?
Bow-like Implements (Snare Triggers?)
Fire Hearths (Wood)
Fire Drills
Scoops
Fire Tongs
Digging Sticks
Wedges
Stakes
Awls
Burred Wood
Rasping Sticks
Flageolets?
Split Twigs Bent Double
Cane Cigarettes
Cane Tubes
Wooden Container
Paint Brushes
Needles?
Shuttle
Dart Nock
Cradles
Halted Flint Artifacts
Cane Fragments
Cut Wood
Wood ~rrapped with Cordage
Gummed Stick

15
3
8
3
2
10
72
. .
1
6
11
4
5
37
16
5
1
9
6
4
4
4
2
2
2
3
9
1
2
2
1
1
3
3
8
33
13
1

Eagle
Cave
..
..
. .
1
. ,
. .
2
1
. .
. .
..
..
. ,
5
1
1
. .
. .
1
4,
1
. .
. .
..
1
. .
. .
. .
I
..
..
. .
..
. .
3
21
. .
. .

]acal
Canyon
1

1
1
6

2

1

A fourth Shumla specimen (Fig. 1, A), cave unspecified, has a
length of 18.75 cm., a width of 2.5 cm., and a thickness of 1.9 cm.
On each surface are two short sets of three parallel grooves, and one
end is scored by multiple cuts perpendicular to the grooves. Martin

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

171

(n. d. b: Plate XXX, center) also presents a drawing of this specimen.
A unique form of rabbit stick (Fig. 1, C) is a short specimen with a
length of 20 cm, a width of 3.1 cm., and a thickness of 1.2 cm. This
club is Y-shaped, but with one arm of the Y shorter than the other.
The three extremities have a single set of four short grooves. Martin
(n. d. b: Plate XLII, 6) illustrates this specimen but shows the opposite face.
Other rabbit sticks are fragmentary but indicate that widths range
from 1.2 to 3.8 cm. and thickness from 1.1 to 1.9 cm. Two specimens
are decorated with patterns other than the usual sets of grooves. One
end fragment has two wide grooves with an incised zigzag between
the grooves. Another end fragment has a series of 10 incised chevrons.
Patterns of three and four grooves occur with about the same frequency and are often combined on the same specimen. One fragment
lacks grooves of any kind.
2. Atlatls
Three atlatl fragments occur in the Shumla caves collection, but the
specific cave provenience of each is unknown. Two of these are distal
or hook-end fragments, the third a proximal fragment.
One distal fragment, with a length of 23.75 cm., has a width of
1.2 cm. and a thickness of approximately 1.6 cm. (Fig. 1, D). In crosssection it is keel-shaped, and the groove for placement of a dart is 9.5
ram. wide and only 1.2 ram. deep. The specimen is equipped with a
carved hook that will engage either a conical or a widely grooved hock
of the dart. The under side has a series of 19 deep notches. Gardner
and Martin (n. d.: 16) show lateral and top views of this atlatl fragment.
A second distal fragment is of interest because it has been reworked
(Fig. 1, E). It has a length of 19 cm., a width of 2 cm. at the hook
end and 2.7 cm. at the opposite end, and a maximum thickness of 9
ram. It is nearly fiat, having a very shallow groove (2 ram.) and is
equipped with a carved hook. This specimen seems to have been reworked from a much longer original atlatl. The proximal end is cut
off squarely and is without a grasp of any sort. The groove for the
dart rather neatly parallels the lateral edges; but there are traces of a
higher and older groove, indicating clearly that the specimen has
been reworked and thus accounting for its present thinness and short
length. Martin (n. d. b: Plate IX, l) has two sketches of this atlatl,
one being a lateral view.

Fig. 1. Wooden artifacts from the Shumla caves. A-C, rabbit sticks or fending clubs;
D-F, fragments of atlatls. Lengths of specimens (in alphabetical order): 18.75, 25, 20,
23.75, 19, and 15.3 cm.

VAL VERDE COUNTY- CAVE 1VIATERIAL

173

The third fragment (Fig 1, F) is a proximal fragment with two
finger notches on each side. The end is tapered and round in crosssection. The length of this specimen is 15.5 cm., the maximum width
is 3 cm., and the maximum thickness is ! cm. Martin (n. d. b: Plate
IX, 2) also illustrates this fragment with two sketches, one being a
lateral view showing details of the finger notches.
3. Grooved Dart Foreshafts

Eight dart foreshafts (Fig. £, A), all from the Shumla caves, are so
designated because of their size and weight. They are made of hardwood and have wide, deep grooves at the distal end for reception of dart
points. The proximal ends are tapered to fit cane shafts. Lengths range
from 10.6 to !5.6 cm. and diameters from .95 to 1.£5 cm. The distal
grooves have widths of 4 to 5 ram. and depths of 1 to 1.5 cm. One specimen (Fig. 2, B) has a wide triangular point still gummed into place.
This chipped stone projectile point is probably of Tortugas type
(Suhm et al., 1954: 482), but positive identification is impossible because the base cannot be examined. A sketch of this specimen is illustrated by Martin (n. d. b: Plate IX, 3). Another specimen (Fig.
£, K) has a length of £8.1 cm., 18.7 cm. of its length having been
tapered to fit into a reed shaft that has a maximum diameter of 8 ram.
This appears to be the same as a specimen illustrated by Martin (n.
d. b: Plate VII, 5).
4. Barbed Wooden Foreshafts

Two foreshafts from the Shumla caves were made from twigs that
have natural barbs. One of these has a length of 16.3 cm. and a diameter of 6 ram.; the other (Fig. £, C) has a length of 9 cm. and a
diameter of 6 ram. Martin (n. d. b: Plate VII, 6) has a sketch showing
one of these specimens.
5. Grooved Arrow Foreshafts

This includes five specimens, three from the Shumla caves and one
each from Eagle Cave and Jacal Canyon, that have distal grooves so
small that only arrow points could have been used. The proximal ends
are broken on all five specimens. All have diameters of approximately
ram.

6. Tenoned Foreshafts
Eleven tenoned foreshafts (Fig. £, D, E, G), 10 from the Shumla
caves and one from Jacal Canyon, fall into two distinct size groups

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE MAT]~RIAL

175

that suggest use with both darts and arrows. All are made of wood;
but some were distally grooved to receive stone points and others were
merely tapered and sharpened at the distal end.
Three large specimens are probably unfinished. The tenons are
carved, but the distal ends remain unaltered from the original cutting and splintering of the twig. These are of interest mainly because
they suggest probable stages of manufacture. A fourth specimen has
a sharpened point. A fifth differs from all the others; it is piano-convex
in cross-section, the distal end is bluntly tapered, and the proximal end
is shouldered, giving an outline somewhat like that of a stemmed
projectile point. A sixth specimen is complete and has a distal groove
(cf. Martin, n. d. b: Plate X, 1, 7, and 2 respectively). The diameters
of these large specimens range from 8 to 16 ram. Lengths of the
two complete specimens are 5 and 7.5 cm. respectively.
Four small specimens were recovered, and all have a length of about
6.3 cm., a diameter of about 6 ram. Two are distally grooved; one is
cut off squarely at the distal end, possibly for use as a bunt; and the
fourth is broken at the distal end (see Martin, n. d. b: Plate X, 3, 4, 5).
These tenoned artifacts are puzzling. No artifact has been found
with a mortise to receive the tenon, and the tenoned proximal end does
not appear to be adapted for use in a cane shaft. Specimen size points
to their use with dart and arrow points, but this calls for a compound
foreshaft with a toggle-head arrangement without precedent in the
Southwest. And there are no holes for a toggle-head attachment. It
has been argued that these artifacts are remnants of longer foreshafts
that have been shortened for some reason, the tenon being accidentally
fashioned during the process of making a new groove. This argument
does not satisfy the writer. If shortening was desired, this could be
done most simply by cutting to the desired length, using the customary
encircling groove and breaking technique, and then grooving the end.
The finished appearance of the tenoned artifacts also argues against
their identification as discards.

7. Sharpened Pro]ectile Foreshafts
In the museum collection are 80 sharpened projectile foreshafts, 72
Fig. 2. Projectile foreshafts and shaft fragments. A-B, G, grooved dart foreshafts; C,
barbed wooden foreshaft; D-E, tenoned foreshafts; F, H-J, sharpened foreshafts; G, arrow
foreshaft; K, dart foreshaft; L, bunted dart foreshaft (?); M, reed shaft fragment with
hardwood foreshaft; N-O, cane shaft fragments. All specimens from Shumla caves except
K, which is from Eagle Cave. All to same scale, length of K, 28.1 cm.

176

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from the Shumla caves, two from Eagle Cave, and six from Jacal
Canyon. Thirteen of these are pointed at both ends (Fig. 2, F. H),
their lengths ranging from 16 to 35.6 cm., and the maximum diameter
being 6 ram. Twelve additional foreshafts are pointed at one end and
cut off squarely at the other. The maximum diameter in this group is
6 ram., but length ranges from 5.6 to 20 cm. One of these specimens
has a droplet of gum on the distal end.
The remaining 55 foreshafts are pointed at one end and broken or
charred at the other (Fig. 2, I-J). Two have traces of gum on the
pointed ends for distances of about 2.5 cm. from the tip. A third has
a trace of gum on the pointed end for a distance of about 5 cm. from
the tip, suggesting the use of gum in securing the end in a cane shaft.
About 90~/o of these foreshafts have diameters ranging from 4 to 7
ram. The remainder have diameters of 8 or 9 ram.
Martin (n. d. b: 27) mentions finding foreshafts bearing red paint,
but no such specimens can now be found in the museum collection.
8. Bunted Dart Foreshaft?
The one possible example of a bunted dart foreshaft (Fig. 2, L) is
from Eagle Cave. This specimen (length 21 cm.) is made of wood
that appears to have been held in fire; the distal end has a diameter
of 1.6 cm., the broken proximal end a diameter of .7 cm. Martin (n.
d. b: Plate VII, 2) shows a sketch of this specimen.
9. Toy Arrow?
A twig (length 13.75 cm.) from the Shumla caves is sharpened
to a point on one end, while the opposite end, partially broken, bears
some indication of having been grooved as though for a bowstring.
The damaged end has a fiber binding around a bit of feather quill.
Martin (n. d. b: Plate XXXVII, 1) describes this as a needle.
10. Reed Shaft-Hardwood Foreshaft Combinations

In this category are six specimens from the Shumla caves. One
specimen has the entire foreshaft intact, but it has a narrow distal
groove, ruling out the possibility of its use with a dart point.
Four specimens, including the one just mentioned, have reed shafts
that are tapered to make a smoother receptacle for the foreshafts.
Three (Fig. 2, M) are bound with sinew at the point of union to secure
the foreshafts, and one is bound with fiber. The proximal ends of

VAL VEIlDE COUNTY CAVE ~WIATERIAL

177

these specimens are missing. Shaft diameters range from 6 to 9 ram.
Martin (n. d. b: Plate VII, 1) illustrates one of these.
Another specimen consists of a 7.5 cm. length of cane neatly cut
off at both ends, and into one end is inserted the pointed end of a hardwood foreshaft having a length of 6.25 cm. The cane is not tapered at
the juncture, giving the specimen an awkward appearance. It is doubtful if the two pieces belong together.
An unusual specimen is a hardwood shaft narrowed 7.5 cm. from
the point and perfectly fitted with a cane sleeve having a length of
1.9 cm. at the narrowed portion. The proximal end is broken.

11. Reed Shafts
The 11 specimens in this category, all from the Shumla caves,
are known only from their proximal ends (Fig. 2, N-O). Five of these
show a range in diameter from .8 to 1 cm. The hOCk ends are narrowed and all were originally bound. On one specimen the binding
is of fiber; on another it is of sinew. Bindings are missing from the
others. Nocks are all grooved instead of conical. Above the fiber hock
binding of one specimen is an area 1.9 cm. long that bears incised
decoration. This consists of three longitudinal panels~ each panel made
up of two rows of V’s. One row of V’s in each panel runs in an opposite
direction from the other. At the apex of each V is a short horizontal
line.
Three shafts of sufficient length for careful inspection have parts of
feathers attached. One example indicates that three feathers (probably
split) were used. Traces of gum remain, suggesting that feathers may
have been further secured with this material.
12. Hardwood Arrows?
Four artifacts from the Shumla Caves are represented by proximal
ends that have grooves too shallow for the insertion of points. Three
of the grooves are V-shaped, the fourth U-shaped. All look like the
simply grooved nocks of some historic Plains Indian arrows.
13. Bow-like Implements (Snare Triggers.9)
Five artifacts, all from the Shumla Caves, have the appearance of
miniature bows. Two of these are bent twigs with two slits on opposite
ends through which fiber cord is caught and wrapped around the
twig. The positions of the slits are high on the curves of these twigs.
On the complete example (Fig. 3, B) the straight distance from one

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL

SOCIETY

VAL VERDE COUI~TY CAVE iVIATERIAL

179

slit to the other is 26.25 cm. The second specimen apparently was
broken just short of the second split. The cord used on both consists of
two-ply S-twisted yarns twisted Z fashion into a strand.
A third specimen (Fig. 3, A) utilizes Y-shaped projections on the
twig rather than splits on the ends to hold the cord. Cord construction is the same as those described above. Martin (n. d. b: Plate VII,
4) shows a sketch of this specimen).
A fourth specimen (Fig. 3, D) consists of two bent twigs bound
together with heavy, loosely-twisted fiber cord. In addition~ a finer
cord of the same type as described above is wrapped around the twig
at one end of the binding, leaving a long piece hanging loose. The end
of this cord is broken and it is impossible to determine its function.
The distance between the two ends of this soecimen is 20.5 cm.
An informant who builds animal traps and snares tells me that these
are probably spring devices used with noose snares. When the snare
is tripped~ the bow springs back, tightening the noose around the leg
or head of an animal. Because of their small size and light weight they
were probably used for birds only.
A fifth specimen (Fig. 3, C) resembles a miniature bow and is
strung with fine fiber cord of the same construction as described above.
This cord is wrapped around the ends and drawn taut. The bow has
a length of 31 cm.
14~ 15. Fire Hearths and Fire Drills
In the museum collection are 43 wooden fire hearths, 37 from the
Shumla Caves, five from Eagle Gave, and one from Jacal Canyon.
These hearths (Fig. 3, L) are made from split stalks and have drilled
depressions. The collection also includes 17 fire drills, 16 from the
Shumla Caves and one from Eagle Gave. These drills (Fig. 3, E) are
straight pieces of hardwood with rather uniform diameters (range 7
to 9 ram.) ; the ends are rounded and charred from use in the hearth
depressions. Martin (n. d. b: Plate XLIII, 3-4) illustrates 11 hearths
and six drills.
16. Wooden Scoops
The term scoop is applied to split, elongated pieces of wood whose
Fig. 3. Miscellaneous wooden artifacts. A-B, D, bow-like implements (snare triggers?);
C, miniature bow; E, fire drill; F, H-I, wedges; G, J, stakes; K, scoop; L, fire hearth. Lengths
of A-D: 25, 26, 31, and 20.5 cm. respectively; E-J, to same scale, length of F, 2.3 cm.;
K-L, to same scale, length of K, 31.5 cm.

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ends are beveled or otherwise altered by use (Fig. 3, K). The charred
surfaces of these objects indicate extensive usage in fires. Some have
parallel sides, but others taper slightly toward one end. Sixteen of these
scoops are from the Shumla Caves and one is from Eagle Cave. In
length they range from 15 to 31.3 cm., in width from 3.8 to 8.8 cm.

17. Fire Tongs
The collection includes a single specimen (Shumla Caves) that is
made of a split section of sotol flowering stalk (length 25 cm.). The
stalk section is bent to bring the two ends near each other and this
bend is loosely held by split lechuguilla leaves. The flat sides of the
two ends face each other, and both ends are charred.
18. Digging Sticks
Out of a total of nine digging sticks (all from the Shumla Caves),
only two are complete, and these have lengths of 50 and 52.5 cm. respectively. The ends of all nine specimens are beveled and have pianoconvex cross-sections. In diameter these sticks range from 1.25 to 2.5

19. Wedges
These are fiat pieces of split hardwood whose distal ends are cut
into V shapes or are beveled. The proximal ends show evidence of
pounding (Fig. 3, F, H, I). The length ranges from 2.3 to 3.8 cm.,
the width from 1.25 to 2.5 cm. Of the nine specimens, six are from
the Shumla Caves, one from Eagle Cave, and two from Jacal Canyon.
20. Stakes
These are short lengths of twigs whose diameters average 3.! cm.
One end is pointed, the other frayed from pounding (Fig. 3, G, J).
The collection includes eight specimens, four from the Shumla Caves
and four from Eagle Cave, whose lengths range from 9 to 17 cm.
21. Awls
Five objects, four from the Shumla Caves and one from Eagle Cave,
are considered to be awls. One complete specimen labeled "Old
Shumla" is made of hardwood; one end is sharpened to a point, the
other carefully rounded. It has a length of 24.1 cm. and a diameter
of .95 cm. This specimen is longer than an awl needs to be. Its length

VAT, VEt/Dtg COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

181

suggests a dart foreshaft, but its proximal end is not properly formed
for placement in a cane shaft.
22. Burred Wood

From the Shumla Caves there are four objects with single ends split
into thin strips that curl like paper ribbon. The opposite ends are
ragged from being broken or t~xdsted. In diameter these sticks range
from 6 to 16 mm.
23. Rasping Sticks
Two fragmentary rasping sticks were recovered from the Shumla
Caves. One is a round twig (diameter 6 mm.) with wide notches cut
into it. The other is a flattened piece of wood (width 9 mm.) with
notches (width 3 mm.) cut into it at intervals of about 2 mm. Martin
(n. d. b: Plate IX, 6) has a sketch of one of the above specimens.
24. Flageolets?
Two pieces of cane from the Shumla Caves bear parts of the margins
of burned holes. As similar specimens with burned holes occur in
other sites of this area, these are tentatively identified as flageolets.
25. Split Twigs Bent Double
Three of these were recovered from the Val Verde sites, two from
the Shumla Caves and one from Eagle Cave. The single example (Fig.
4, E) from Eagle Cave (Zone A, top) is bent so that the ends are even.
The other two specimens both from Shumla Cave No. 5) have one
end shorter than the other. All three examples seems to have been
buried in the cave deposit with only the bend of the loop exposed;
the bend is clean, but the remainder is coated with cave deposit. In
length these specimens range from 5 to 18.7 cm. It is possible that
these objects may have served as skin stretchers (see Artifacts of
Skin and Hide, Item 6).
26. Cane Cigarettes

Three sections of cane, all from the Shumla Caves, contain cedar foliage (Fig. 4, A-C) and appear to be cane cigarettes that have been
smoked down to short sections. The largest cane section has a diameter
of 1.9 cm. In two of these specimens the septum has been removed, but

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

183

in the third a small hole has been drilled through the septum. Martin
(n. d. b: Plate XV, I) has a sketch of one of these specimens.
27. Cane Tubes
Nine sections of cane, all from the Shumla Caves, have been carefully cut, possibly to serve as containers and cigarettes. In seven of
the nine specimens the ioints have been removed. In length these
tubes range from 5 to 18 cm., in diameter from 1 to 1.9 cm. Martin
(n. d. b: Plate XV, 2-3) presents sketches of two such tubes.
28. Wooden Container

A small piece of wood from the Shumla Caves has been cut to a
length of 5.9 cm. and hollowed out at one end to a depth of approximately 2.6 cm. This obiect tapers slightly toward the open end. Its
maximum diameter is i .26 cm.
29. Paint Brushes

Of the four paint brushes, two are from the Shumla Caves and one
each from Eagle Cave and Jacal Canyon. Two specimens are made of
bundles of sotol leaves folded lengthwise and wrapped near the distal
end with the same material. Their ends are shredded for use, and one
example bears red pigment. The remaining two specimens consist of
short woody stalks with one end shredded diagonally. Martin (n. d.
b: Plate XXVI, 2-4) has sketches of three of these shredded stalks.
30. Needles

Two artifacts from the Shumla Caves may be needles that were used
in making basketry or netting. They have lengths of 15 and 11.3 cm.
respectively. One has a fiber binding around the proximal end (Fig.
4~ G) ; the other (Fig. 4, H) once had a similar binding, and it also has
a groove running about one-third its length from the proximal end.
Martin (n. d. b: Plate XXXVII, I-2) has sketches of two such needles.
His No. 2 is the same as Fig. 4, G.
Fig. 4. Objects of cane and wood. A-C, cane cigarettes (A and B parts of same specimen);
D, wooden dart hock; E, split twl9 bent double; F, wooden shuttle; G-H, wooden needles.
A-E, to same scale, diameter of B, 1-9 cm.; length of F, 15 cm.; G-H, to same scale, length
of H, 15 cm.

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

31. Shuttle

A shuttle (Fig. 5, F) from the Shumla Caves is made of two twigs
(lengths approximately 15 cm.) loosely bound together in two places.
Fine fiber cord is wrapped around the bindings and between the two
twigs. A sketch of this shuttle is illustrated by Martin (n. d. b: Plate

Xli).
32. Dart Nock
A wooden hock (Fig. 5, D) for insertion in a cane dart shaft was
found in one of the Shumla Caves. This hock has a length of 2.5 cm.,
and one end has a conical pit for use with the atlatl. Wooden hock
plugs for reinforcing the proximal ends of cane shafts may have been
used more frequently than has been realized. Examination of the
ends of four cane arrows shafts from the Shumla Caves revealed that
three of them were so plugged before a groove was carved. The fourth
appears to have utilized the joint of the cane instead.
33. Cradles
Three cradles were obtained from the Shumla Caves. One of these,
a toy cradle, has been damaged since it was excavated and cannot be
as fully described as the other two.
(1) Cradle No. 1. This specimen (Fig. 5, A) which has a length
of 57.5 cm., has a framework made from the fork of a tree branch.
The average diameter of this framework wood is 9 ram. Lashed crosswise beneath the triangular frame are two sections of split sotol flowering stalk, the flat sides of the split stalk resting against the frame. The
shorter of these two crosspieces is lashed on at a distance of 23.8 cm.
from the top of the cradle (apex of the triangle) ; the other is lashed
on 7.5 cm. from the opposite end or bottom of the cradle. Lying
on, and lashed to, these crosspieces are a number of closely spaced
twigs. Fifteen of these twigs, whose diameters are rather uniform in
size (3 to 4 ram.), are still held in place by the shorter of the two
crosspieces. The lashing cord used is a two-ply Z-twisted fiber strand
with a diameter of 3 ram. It appears that this cord was first used to
lash the crosspiece in place on one side and that the remaining length
was then used to lash the longitudinal twigs across to the opposite
side. The cord passes across each twig diagonally and around the crosspiece more or less at right angles to its longitudinal axis.
On both sides of the shorter crosspiece, at distances of 6.3 and 10 cm.

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

185

Fig. 5. Three cradles from the Shumla cave.~. Length of A, 57.5 cm.; B, 25 cm.; C, 55 cm.

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

respectively, cords are twined about each twig and tied to the frame on
each side. The same length of cord was used for both twined supports,
being wrapped around one side of the frame to pass from one support
to the other. The cord used for this is two-ply S-twisted fibers in a
Z-twisted strand.
About 10 cm. below the top or shorter crosspiece the twigs are also
held in place by twined cord, and at this point about four additional
twigs were added, on the left side, to compensate for the greater width
of the frame. The cord used here is the same as that described in the
preceding paragraph. Four inches farther downward the twigs are
again held in place by twined cord, but the cord is lighter in weight
(diameter 1 ram.) and doubled.
This cradle seems to have been ceremonially broken across the middle section, and the twigs have fallen out of the lower part, leaving
only six still attached at one side. Presumably the missing twigs were
secured to the lower crosspiece in the same manner as on the upper
crosspiece.
Attached to the frame approximately 18.8 cm. from the bottom of
the cradle is a bundle of cords made by doubling a set of six cords, presumably for holding the infant in the cradle. The looped end of the
bundle is secured to the frame by a leather thong, and the opposite
end has a leather thong drawn through it, possibly for tying after the
infant was laced into the cradle. The cordage in this bundle is two-ply
S-twisted yarn twisted Z fashion into a strand. One end of the bundle
has the cords roughly braided for a distance of 30 cm., and it is likely
that the entire length was originally braided. The total length of the
cord bundle is 77.5 cm.
Attached to the upper end of the cradle near the shorter crosspiece
is what appears to be a burden strap made of a fiber coil on a fiber
cord foundation. This wil! be described in the section on cordage.
Only one apparent lacing loop appears on this cradle, and this is a
fiber cord fastening located opposite the leather thong attachment of
the cord bundle. Martin (n. d. b: Plate XXXVI) has a drawing of
this cradle.
Associated with this cradle is a small leather pouch (see Fig. 5, A.

lower center) made from a rectangular piece of leather doubled over
and sewed with a leather thong. The pouch was sewed diagonally
across the top, down the side opposite the fold, and across the bottom,
completely enclosing whatever it originally contained. The specimen
is 7.5 cm. long and 1.9 cm. wide; the bottom bears leather fringe 10
cm. in length. Possibly this pouch originally contained the child’s
umbilical cord.

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE I~VIATERIAL

187

Cradle No. 2. This cradle (Fig. 5, C) is also triangular in outline and
has a length of 55 cm. The V-shaped frame is made of two branches
(average diameter 8 mm.) bound together by heavy cord (diameter
4 ram.). This cord was first wrapped horizontally around the two
sticks and then wrapped vertically between the sticks. The cord used
is two-ply Z-twisted. A strip of split leaf is coiled vertically around the
cord lashing.
Three split sotol stalks are lashed across the frame at intervals of
18.8, 33.8, and 50 cm. from the top of the cradle (apex of the triangle). Some of the lashings are split leaves; others are fiber cord with
diameters ranging from ! to 4 mm. Fiber cord loops are attached to
both sides of the frame; three of these are intact on one side of the
frame and two on the other. Originally there may have been four or
five loops on each side. A fiber cord passes through some of these loops
and is apparently the cord that was used to lace the infant into the
cradle. Cordage used for the tie loops and lacing cord consists of twoply, S-twisted yarns forming a Z-twisted strand 4 mm. in diameter.
Unlike Cradle No. 1, this cradle has no twigs inside the triangular
frame. A comparison of Fig. 6, C, with Martin’s (n. d. b: Plate XLIV,
7) earlier illustration shows that this cradle is now less complete than
it formerly was.
Cradle No. 3. This small cradle (Fig. 5, B), which appears to be a
toy form, was found in "Old Shumla." It has a length of 25 cm., and
the frame is made of three twigs lashed together with fiber cordage to
form a triangle. The lashing at the apex of the triangle consists of a
cord tied to the end of one stick, looped over the second stick, and then
apparently running down one side of the frame to serve as lashing for
the stick forming the base of the triangle. The twig forming the base
is set into encircling grooves cut into the side twigs. Remnants of
several cords attached at the apex indicate that the space inside the
triangle was loosely filled by cords extending from top to bottom of
the cradle. These longitudinal cords seem to have served the same purposes as the closely spaced longitudinal twigs of Cradle No. 1. Cordage
used in Cradle No. 3 consists of two-ply, S-twisted yarns forming a
Z-twisted strand.
34. Haired Flint Artifacts
As lithic artifacts from these Pecos River Focus sites were described
in the first part of this report (Schuetz, 1956), only hafting techniques
will be described here. Three flint artifacts from the Shumla Caves
were halted to wooden handles.
The first hafted specimen (Fig. 6, A), which is from Shumla Cave

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 6. Hafted flint arHfacts from the Shumla caves. Lenqth of A, 8 cm.; B, 14 cm.; C,
7.2 cm

VAL VEttDE COUNTY CAVE 5/IATEttIAL

189

No. 5, is a convex-based flint knife with beveled lateral edges. It is
piano-convex in cross-section. This knife has a length of approximately
8 cm. and a width of 6.6 cm. Its base is set in a short section of wood
(diameter 3.3 cm.), the seat being a narrow, carved-out slot. Remnants
of an unidentified material at the bottom of the slot suggest that the
slot was partially filled in to help secure the knife. On each side of the
knife are two small sticks that are lashed to each other, and these
sticks are also lashed to the slotted handle. Stains and bits of dark
material on the blade and on the wooden parts indicate that the knife
was also heavily cemented in place. The lashing elements consist of
fiber cord and strips of lechuguilla leaves. Martin (n. d. b: Plate
XXXIII) has published a sketch of this hafted knife.
The second specimen (Fig. 6, B) is a triangular, convex-based knife
set laterally in a piece of wood, presumably for use as a scraper or
knife. Although the handle is poorly preserved, it is clear that the stick
was split rather than slotted. The wooden handle has a diameter of
4 cm., and its present length is 14 cm. The blade was cemented in place
with gum. Remains of fiber cord lashings indicate that the split stick
was held together by encircling cords at both ends of the flint knife.
The knife is made from a large piano-convex flint flake and shows
flake scars only on the convex face. It has a length of 9 cm. and an
estimated width of 6.3 cm. The remains of fiber cord were heavily
treated with preservative, so that the technique of manufacture cannot
be fully determined. The strands appear to be two-ply, Z-twisted.
Martin (n. d. a: 9) illustrates this specimen.
The third hafted specimen (Fig. 6, C), which is from Shumla Cave
No. 3, consists of a small flake knife set laterally between a piece of
split sotol flowering stalk that is lashed together with fiber cord. The
handle has a length of 7.2 cm. The fiber cord consists of two-ply,
S-twisted yarns forming a Z-twisted strand. A sketch of this specimen is given by Martin (n. d. b: Plate XXXIII).
In addition to these hafted specimens, there is other evidence of
halting at these sites. One Tortugas (?) point is halted to a dart foreshaft (Fig. 2, B), and two Kinney points and one Abasolo point still
retain traces of gum on their proximal ends. Hafted flint tools have
also been reported from the western Trans-Pecos (Sayles, 1941) and
from Coahuila, Mexico (Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda et al., 1956: Lfim.
XI-XVI, 41-42).
35. Cane Fragments
Eleven cane fragments are included in the museum collection, eight
from the Shumla Caves and three from Eagle Cave. Some of these

TEXAS AI~CI-IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

190

specimens may be parts of artifacts, but the surviving fragments are
too small for identification.
3d. Cut Wood
This includes pieces of wood, small twigs, and cane that show traces
of having been cut. This series totals 54 specimens, 33 from Shumla
caves and 21 from Eagle Cave.
37. Wood Wrapped with Cordage
Thirteen such specimens were recovered from the Shumla caves.
They consist of twigs and cane wrapped with fiber cordage or split
leaves. In some specimens the cordage bears knots.

38. Gummed Stick
One artifact from the Shumla caves appears to be a stick that was
used for applying cementing material to artifacts. It is a broken stick
with a blob of dried gum at one end. Mason (1893: Plate XXXIX)
illustrates a similar specimen.

Arti]acts o] Bone and Antler
(See Table 2)

1. Bone Awls
A total of 54 bone awls was collected from the Val Verde sites, 53
of which are from the Shumla Caves and one from Jacal Canyon.
These may be subdivided as indicated below.
TABLE 2
Provenience of Bone and Antler Artifacts

i.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
ii.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Bone Awls
Bone Flakers
Antler Flakers
Bone Wrench
Antler Hammers or Rubbers
Bone Pins (?)
Antler Scrapers
Scapula Scoop
Scapula Rattles
Bone Rasp
Bone Netting Needles
Antler Atlatl Hook
Bone Needles
Bone Beads
Rodent Tooth Pendants

Shumla
Caves
53
18
5
1
3
2
1
1
5
1
2
I
3
?
3

]acal

Canyon
1
2
1

1

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

191

a. Split Long-bone Awls with Proximal Ends Smoothly Ground. In
outline (see Fig. 7, I-M) the proximal ends vary from straight to convex. The distal ends are sharply pointed and are sometimes constricted
as the result of resharpening (K-L). These awls are ground and polished all over, but four specimens (I-K) bear incised decoration on one
face of their proximal ends. This consists principally of hatched and
cross-hatched lines. In length these awls range from 11.8 to 16.7 cm.
The specific Shumla provenience is recorded for 12 of these awls: four
specimens from Shumla Cave No. 1 and two specimens each from
Caves No. 3, 5, 6, and "Old Shumla." Martin (n. d. b: Plate VIII) has
sketches of four of these awls, including three with incised decoration
(cf. Fig. 8, I-J).
b. Split Long-bone Awls with Proximal Ends Unaltered. These have
been ground and polished and the distal ends are sharply pointed. In
length they range from 7.9 to 17.7 cm. Four of these are from Shumla
Cave No. 1; two from Shumla Cave No. 3; four from Shumla Cave
No. 5; one each from Shumla Caves 6 and 7; two from "Old Shumla;"
and one from Jacal Canyon. The remaining 10 are from unspecified
Shumla caves.
c. Unsplit Long-bone Awl. This single specimen (Shumla Cave No.
7) bears the articular joint on one end and a point on the other. It has
a length of 13.5 cm. and is highly polished.
d. Fish Bone Awls. These are unaltered fish bones with naturally
pointed distal ends. Articular knobs form the proximal ends. Lengths
range from 6.5 to 12.5 cm. All four specimens are from the Shumla
caves (one is recorded as from Shumla Cave No. 3).
2. Bone Flakers
Twenty-seven tools seem to have been used in chipping flint and
other siliceous stones. Of these, 23 are from the Shumla caves, one is
from Eagle Cave, and four are from Jacal Canyon. The various forms
are described below.

a. Ulna Flakers. Sixteen flaking tools (Fig. 7, G-H) are made from
deer ulnae. In most specimens the proximal articular ends show some
wear; the distal ends are wedge-shaped and range in width from 6 to
16 mm. Lengths of these flakers range from 8 to 14 cm. One is recorded
from Shumla Cave No. 3, another from Shumla Cave No. 5, and two
from Jacal Canyon. The remainder are from unidentified Shumla
caves.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE iVIATEIIIAL

193

b. Split Long-bone Flaker with Altered Proximal End. One flaker
from Shumla Cave No. 5 is made of split bone, with the proximal
end cut and smoothed, the distal end rounded, nicked, and battered
from use. The lateral edges are ground to a fiat surface on the concave
face of this tool. Its length is 6.8 cm.
c. Split Long-bone Flaker with Unaltered Proximal End. This specimen, which is from Shumla Cave No. 8, has a length of 13.6 cm. The
proximal end is formed by part of the articular end of the bone, and
the distal end is round and somewhat smoothed from use. The lateral
edges have been ground smooth.
d. Split Long-bone Flakers with Cut but Unsmoothed Proximal
Ends. The six specimens in this category range in length from 7.6 to
!5.8 cm. One specimen is from Shumla Cave No. 5 and another is from
Jacal Canyon; the remainder are from unidentified Shumla caves.
e. Split Rib Flaker. A single specimen from Zone B of Eagle Cave
(Schuetz, 1956) is curved and appears to have been made from a split
section of animal rib. The cancellous tissue is visible on one face. The
proximal end is diagonally cut and has been beveled on both faces,
suggesting use as a scraper. The distal end shows gouge marks, apparently from use as a flaking tool. Near the proximal end are transverse cut marks, possibly made when the bone was diagonally cut. The
length of this specimen is 8 cm.
f. Miscellaneous Flakers. One flaker

(specific provenience un-

known) consists of a short bone with unaltered articular head, the
opposed end of which has been beveled (through use) in such a way
that a triangular plane has developed on one face. A second specimen
(specific provenience also unknown) is a flaker made from a reworked
awl. The broken proximal end of a split-bone awl was reworked and
bears evidence of use as a flaking tool. This flaker has a length of 6.6

3. Antler Flakers
Six antler tines, ranging in length from 7.6 to 15.8 cm., have cut but
unsmoothed proximal ends. The distal ends show traces of use in workFig. 7. Bone and antler artifacts. A, antler atlatl hook; B, bone wrench fragment; C,
bone awl; D, bone needle; E-F, bone pins; G-H, ulna flakers; I-M, split long-bone awls with
proximal ends smoothly ground. Length of A, 5.4 cm.; B, 13.6 crn.; C-D, to same scale,
length of D, 5.7 cm.; E-F, to same scale, length of E, 4.5 cm.; G-H, to same scale, length
of G, 8 cm.; I-M, to same scale, length of 1, approximately 15 cm.

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ing flint. One of these is from Shumla Cave No. 5 and another is from
Jacal Canyon. The remaining four are from unspecified Shumla caves.
4. Bone Wrench

A long-bone fragment (Fig. 7, B) from one of the Shumla caves
indicates that a hole was drilled entirely through the bone by boring
from two opposed sides of the shaft. This hole has a diameter of approximately 7 ram. The bone was broken across the perforation. One
end of the fragment, which has a length of 13.6 cm., bears the articular
surface.
5. Antler Hammers or Rubbers

Short thick sections of antler were apparently used as hammers or
rubbing toms (Fig. 8, B-D), for their ends are considerably worn.
Three specimens were obtained: one from Shumla Cave No. 5 (dimensions 3.7 × 6.7 cm.), one from Shumla Cave No. 6 (3 x 12.8 cm.), and
one from an unspecified Shumla cave (3.8 × 5 cm.). One of these is
illustrated by Martin (n. d. b: Plate XLIII, 7).
6. Bone Pins (?)

Two delicately worked bone artifacts may have served as pins or
eyeless needles (Fig. 7, E-F). They are slivers of bone that are round
in cross section and pointed at both ends. Both have diameters of 4
ram. and lengths of 4 and 4.5 cm. respectively.
7. Antler Scrapers

Two antler objects appear to have been used for scraping purposes
and possibly for other purposes as well. One specimen (Fig. 8, A) is
complete, the other fragmentary. The complete specimen is a split
antler section (length 15.7 cm.) that shows evidences of use on both
ends. One end appears to have been used on flat surfaces, but the other
seems to have been pressed against convex surfaces. The lateral edges
are smooth. The complete specimen is from "Old Shumla," the fragmentary specimen from Jacal Canyon.
8. Scapula Scoop
A deer scapula from one of the Shumla caves was apparently used
as a scoop or spade, the thin end of the bone being worn and scratched.
9. Scapula Rattles
Five deer scapulae from the Shumla caves indicate use in groups as

VAL V]EIIDI~ COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

195

rattles. Three such scapulae are tied together with fiber cord (Fig. 8,
H). The joint of a fourth scapula is encircled by a cord and may originally have been attached to the other three. The cord used is a twoply, Z-twisted strand made of S-twisted yarns. Martin (n. d. b: Plate
XLIII, 5) shows four scapulae joined by cordage, presumably the same
four described here. A fifth scapula has a coil of untwisted fiber encircling the joint.
10. Bone Rasp
A curved section of bone, having a length of approximately 14. cm.,
is notched on the concave edge and probably was used as a musical
rasp. This specimen is from one of the Shumla caves.
11. Bone Netting Needles
Two bone needles from the Shumla caves are believed to have been
used for making nets or possibly basketry. Both are made from the
dista! ends of deer metapodia, the articular heads of which are worked
down to a blunt, rounded form. The opposite ends in both specimens
are ground to tapered points. In one of these (Fig. 8, J) a hole has been
drilled through the bottom of the natural cleft in the condyle to connect with the natural groove on the anterior face of the bone. A piece
of cord passes through this hole and out into the groove and is wound
around the needle for its entire !ength (17.5 cm.). The proximal end
of this needle is heavily coated with gum.
The second specimen (Fig. 8, I) is similar in form and size, but it
lacks the connecting perforation through the distal cleft of the metapodium. Martin (n. d. b: Plate XI) shows sketches of two netting
needles.
i2. Antler Atlatl Hook

A single specimen (Fig. 7, A) was recovered from an undisturbed
layer of ash and fiber in Shumla Cave No. 5. It has a length of 5.4 cm.
and a width of 1.3 cm. At one end is a carved hook, and in the middle
part is a hole that apparently facilitated attachment to the atlatl shaft
(also see Martin, n. d. b: Plate IX, 5). This hook is unlike antler hooks
reported from the southeastern United States and is a unique find in
Texas.
13. Bone Needles
From the Shumla caves there are three slender bone tools (Fig. 7,
D and Fig. 8, F-G) that may have been used as needles in basket
making. These have lengths of 5.7, 8.8, and 10.1 cm. respectively.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

VAL VEI~DE COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

197

14. Bone Beads
Tubular bone beads were made from the small long bones of birds
and mammals. All seem to have been made by encircling the bone
shaft with grooves and breaking at these weakened places. The ends
of all these beads are ground smooth. A single string of 118 tubular
bone beads came from one unspecified Pecos River site (Fig. 8~ E).
Bone beads were collected from Eagle Cave and the various Shumla
caves, but the provenience records are not sufficiently clear to enter
figures in Table 2.
15. Rodent Tooth Pendants

One large rodent tooth, apparently used as a pendant, was recovered
from Shumla Cave No. 3. Two additional specimens were associated
with an infant burial in Shumla Cave No. 1. The proximal ends of
these two teeth were cemented to a piece of fine, hard, two-ply fiber
COrd.

drtifacts of Stone
An analysis of most of the stone artifacts from the Val Verde County
sites has already been published (Schuetz, !956). This previous publication covered projectile points, knives~ scrapers, and heavy chipped
stone tools~ all of which are chiefly associated with hunting activity.
A few additional stone artifacts are described below.
1. Grooved Pebbles

Three small pebbles with encircling grooves (Fig. 9, A-C) were
found in the Shumla caves. Two (B, diameter 2.5 cm.~ C, diameter
2.7 cm.) are of limestone and the third (A, diameter 2.2 cm.) is made
of a soft, red ocherous material. These objects may be net sinkers or
bolas stones (see Martin~ n. d. b: Plate XIII, 6).
2. Perforated Stones

A number of small pebbles with natural perforations (Fig. 9, E)
were found in the Pecos River sites. These may have served as net
weights. Martin (n. d. b: Plate XIII, 7) has a sketch of one of these
pebbles.
Fig. 8. Bone and antler artifacts. A, antler scraper; B-D, antler hammers or rubbers;
E, string of 1 18 tubular bone beads; F-G, bone needles; H, deer scapula rattle; I-J, bone
netting needles. A, 15.7 cm. in length; B, 12.8 cm.; F, 10.1 cm.; J, 17.5 cm.

Fig. 9. Artifacts of stone and shell. A-C, grooved pebbles; D, F, cigar-shaped clay
objects; E, perforated stone; G, shell pendant; H-K, stone pendants; L-M, tubular stone pipe
fragments. A-C, to same scale, B, 2.5 cm. in length; D, 8.7 cm.; E, 5.4 cm.; G-K, to same
scale, I, 6.3 cm.; L-M, to same scale, M, 10 cm.

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

199

3. Tubular Stone Pipes

Parts of five tubular stone pipes were recovered from the Val Verde
County sites. Three of these are made of limestone, the others of red
sandstone. The most complete specimen (Fig. 9, M), which is made
of sandstone, is from the top level of Eagle Cave. Its distal end is missing, the surviving fragment having a length of i 0 cm. and a maximum
diameter of 5 cm. The remainder of the fragments are from pipes that
have been split longitudinally (Fig. 9, L). Martin (n. d. b: Plate
XXXV) illustrates one of these tubular pipes.
4. Stone Pendants

A brown slate pendant from one of the Shumla caves is rectangular
in outline and has five perforations, three at one end and two on the
opposite end (Fig. 9, I). Its dimensions are 5.6 by 6.3 cm. In form and
material it is similar to stone pendants reported from Archaic sites of
central Texas (Jackson, 1941; Schuetz, 1957b).
Another Shumla cave pendant (Fig’. 9, J), made of limestone, is also
of rectangular outline but bears only one perforation for suspension.
This perforation is located near the middle part of one end. The specimen has a length of 3.8 cm., a width of 1.9 cm.
In Jacal Canyon a gray slate pendant was found associated with a
burial. This specimen (Fig. 9, K) has an elongated triangular outline
(length 10.6 cm., maximum width 3.i cm.). It bears a single perforation near the base of the triangle; the apical tip is missing.
Another specimen from Jacal Canyon (Fig. 9, H) is a very thin, oval
pendant of limestone with a single perforation for suspension. Its
maximum diameter is 2.9 cm., its minimum diameter 2.2 cm.
A third pendant from Jacal Canyon, made of very soft red stone and
incomplete, appears to have been round originally. The sides are now
irregular because six holes were drilled around the periphery and fragments have broken off across the drilled holes. A seventh hole, for suspension, was formed by drilling from both faces of the pendant. The
present dimensions of this fragmentary specimen are 1.9 by 3.2 cm.
It is rather thick at the center (i.i cm.).
5. Stone Beads

Three well-polished sections of crinoid stems appear to have been
used as beads. These specimens are from Shumla Cave No. 7, Eagle
Cave, and Jacal Canyon respectively. In length these sections range
from i to I .+ cm., in diameter from 2 to 6 ram.

~00

TEXAS

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

6. Milling Stones
Milling slabs are made of sandstone or limestone and bear shallow,
basin-like grinding facets. Hand stones are of the single-hand variety,
and some have wedge-shaped cross sections. Examples of milling stones
are shown in Fig. 10. Provenience records are incomplete, so that frequency figures cannot be given. Bedrock mortars occur on stone outcroppings adjacent to many Pecos River sites.

Fig. 10. Milling stones.

7. Decorated Stones
Numerous decorated stones occur in all Pecos River Focus sites. Flat
stream-worn pebbles are painted with black pigment, although some
stones are decorated with red and yellow pigments (Fig. 11, C-G).
Martin (n. d. b: Plates XXV, XXVI, XXVII, and XXVIII) illustrates
a number of such decorated stones. Eighty-two painted stones were
recovered from Eagle Cave, eight from Jacal Canyon, and 30 from the
Shumla caves. The Shumla specimens illustrated by Martin are now
missing from the collection.

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

201

Also found, but not so numerously, are roughly shaped limestone
flakes to which leaves of deciduous plants are bound with strips of split
sotol leaves (Fig. 11, A-B). Five such stones were recovered from the
Shumla caves (see Martin, n. d. b: Plate XXXII). Occasionally a
painted stone displays the same wrapping (Davenport and Chelf,
1933: Plate IX, 10). Since manganese was found in the Shumla caves,
Martin (n. d. b: 77) has suggested that it was an important source of
black pigment. Pieces of red and yellow ocher were also found in these
sites. These colors occur more commonly in pictographs of the area
than on the painted stones.
8. Worked Stones

Two pieces of calcite, one from Eagle Cave and the other from Jacal
Canyon, have been altered by human handiwork. The specimen from
Eagle Cave has a length of 1.2 cm.; its breadth and thickness are the
same, 1.9 cm. It is grooved and may have served either as a pendant
or as a net weight. The specimen from Jacal Canyon, with dimensions
of 2.2 by 2.2 by .7 cm., is worked but does not bear a groove.
9. Pictographs and Petroglyphs
In conjunction with excavations by the Witte Museum, two artists
were sent to the lower Pecos River area in 1931 to record in water
colors the various carvings and paintings on stone. The portfolio of
paintings has never been studied and published, but an examination of
these records shows that the petroglyphs and pictographs are from
sites visited and reported by Kirkland (1957, 1938, 1939) and by
Jackson (1938). A detailed study of the Witte Museum records is currently under way.

Artifacts oi Shell
Shell was not commonly used in making artifacts. Freshwater mussels were an important source of food, as indicated by the frequency
of shells in the Pecos River sites; but mussel shells rarely show any
evidences of use. However, these shells are fragile and usually occur
in fragmentary form, which may be one reason why so little evidence
of use can be seen.

1. Mussel Shell Scrapers
Three mussel shells in the Witte Museum collections from these

TEXAS AIICHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

203

sites show wear on their edges. These may have been used as scrapers
or small scoops.
2. Shell Pendants

A complete shell pendant was found at Eagle Cave. This specimen
(Fig. 9, G) has an oval outline and is perforated at one end for suspension. It has a length of 3.1 cm. and a width of 2.5 cm. The shell is
rather thick and is clearly foreign to the Pecos area.
Fragments of two mussel shell pendants were also obtained from
Eagle Cave. One of these fragments has edges notched at intervals of
3 ram. The surface of the second fragment bears scratches, but these
do not form any recognizable design.
Another mussel shell pendant fragment was collected at ]acal Canyon. It also bears random scratches.
3. Shell Beads

Large land snails were evidently eaten, judging from the frequency
of shells in the Val Verde sites. In "Old Shumla" cave five of these
were found on a fiber cord. A necklace of small O]ivella shells and two
rodent teeth pendants were associated with an infant burial in Shumla
Cave No. 1.

Artiiacts oi Clay
Two objects of unfired clay were found in Eagle Cave (Davenport,
1938: 10; Schuetz, 1956). Both are fiat and resemble cigars, both ends
being pointed. The larger specimen (Fig. 9, D), which is from Zone
A, has a length of 8.7 cm. (both ends are damaged, however) and a
maximum thickness of 2.5 cm. On one face, and near one end, are five
incised lines having lengths of approximately 2.5 cm. Both faces show
red stains. The second specimen (Fig. 9, F), which is from Zone B,
has a length of 5.4 cm., a width of 1.6 cm., a maximum thickness of
1.1 cm., and is undecorated.

Fig. 1 1. Decorated stones. A-B, limestone flakes bearing plant leaves held by wrappings;
C-G, painted pebbles. A-B, to same scale, A, 7 cm. in length; C-F, to same scale, F, 7 cm. in
length.

TEXAS A O EOLOGm L SOO TY
Arti/acts o/Skin
1. Skin Sandals
Five sandals from the Shumla caves were made by folding deer skin
into rectangles, the folds being held together by the tie strings
(Schuetz, 1956; Martin, n. d. b: Plate XLIV, +, 8, 9).
2. Skin Robes
Processed skins with fur left on may have served as robes or
blankets. One specimen was associated with an infant burial described
by Martin (n. d. b: 21).
3. Skin Apron

An apron from one of the Shumla caves is made of long strips of
hide (width 1.3 cm.) attached to a leather tie string by overhand
knots. The maximum length of this apron is 32.5 cm.
4. Tie Strings
Leather tie strings are occasionally used with head bands, sandals,
and cradles (see Schuetz, 1966, and appropriate section of this report).
5. Skin Pouches

Small pieces of leather were often used to wrap items for protection
and storage. A leather pouch (already described) is attached to a
cradle from one of the Shumla caves. A second packet was made by
wrapping strips of rawhide (width 1.9 cm.) around an object now
lost. Martin (1935) has described three additional rawhide pouches.
6. Skin Fragments with Stretching Holes

Marginal fragments of hide frequently show small stretching holes,
indicative of the method of mounting hides for processing.

Re/erences Cited
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis, Manuel Maldonado-Koerdell, y Pablo Martinez
del Rio
1956. Cueva de la Candelaria. Volumen I. Memorias del Instituto de Antropologia e Historia, V. Mexico, D. F.

205

’VAL VERDE COUNTY CAVE MATERIAL

Davenport, J. Walker
1938. Archaeological Exploration of Eagle Cave, Langtry, Texas. Big Bend e, as~
ket Maker Papers, No. 4. ~¥itte Memorial Museum. San Antonio.
Davenport, J. Walker, and Carl Chelf
1939. Painted Pebbles from the Lower Pecos and Big Bend Regions of Texas.
Witte Memorial Museum, Bulletin V. San Antonio.
Gardner, Major Fletcher, and George C. Martin
n. d. A New Type of Atlatl from a Cave Shelter on the Rio Grande near
Shumla, Val Verde County, Texas. Big Bend Basket Maker Papers, No. 2.
Witte Memorial Museum. San Antonio.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. Picture-writing of Texas Indians. The University of Texas Publication
3809. Austin.
Pendants and Their Uses. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, pp. 9-45. Abitene.
Kirkland, Forrest
1937. A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 89-119. Abilene.
1938. A Description of Texas Pictographs. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 11-39. Abilene.
1939. Indian Pictures in the Dry Shelters of Vat Verde County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 11, pp. 4776. Abilene.
Martin, George C.
n. d. a. The Big Bend Basket Maker. Big Bend Basket Maker Papers, No. 1. ~,’Vitte
Memorial Museum. San Antonio.
n. d.b. Archaeological Exploration of the Shumla Caves. Big Bend Basket Maker
Papers, No. 3. Witte Memorial Museum. San Antonio.
1935. Report on Four Shumla Cave Packets. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vot. 7, pp. 115-117. Abilene.
1941.

Mason, Otis T.
1893. North American Bows, Arrows, and Quivers. Annual Report of the Board
of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution, pp. 631-679. Washington, D.C.
Sayles, E. B.
1941.

Some Texas Cave Dweller Artifacts. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, pp. 163-168. Abilene.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1956. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 129-160. Austin.
1957a. A Carbon-14 Date from Trans-Pecos Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. Vol. 28, pp. 288-289. Austin.
i957b. A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 28, pp. 135-168. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25. Austin.

Witte Museum
San Antonio, Texas

