Foreword
The Rise of Man
Through the various forms of life, from the
lowest microscopic single-celled organisms of both
the animal and vegetable kingdoms, up to their
apices in the huge multiple-celled aggregations of
life, such as the whale and the elephant on the one
hand, and the higher multiple-celled forms of
vegetation represented by the great oaks and elms
on the other, runs the golden thread of life; a great
mystery, as much a mystery today as when the first
brutal prototype of man began to have glimmerings
of wonder as to whence he came.
We know that certain attributes run through all
of life’s cellular structures, that these life cells are
all built up of protoplasm, a complex jelly like
substance, which always contains carbon,
hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulphur. This
protoplasm is built up by plants alone and received
as such by all animal life. It is reasonable to
conclude therefore that plants were created first
and that all of the vast tree of life has been built on
this foundation.
Mendel’s Law
Experimentation has shown that the Mendelian
law of heredity operates in the same manner in both
plant and animal life.
Paleontology unfolds for us the leaves of the
book of life going back into the almost
imponderable hundreds of millions of years.
We see in the hot ooze of the primordial seas a
droplet of jelly charged and pulsating with life. Can
it be that all that we know as life came from this?
At any rate the rocks show successive stages of
progression from some invisible beginning up to
the culmination of all life in man.
The mind must be dull indeed which can see no
wonder and romance in the records of the earth’s
progression. Who cannot visualize, for instance,
the age of reptiles when strange vegetation covered

the earth, and yet stranger beasts shook the earth
with mighty tread, browsed from treetops; or when
the echoes roared from hill to hill while savage
reptiles, many times larger than elephants, charged
in bloody combat, bellowing thunderously and
slithering over and breaking down trees in their
monstrous rage, while overhead hissed and flapped
great satanic winged reptile dragons licking red
tongues out of long fang filled jaws; the whole a
picture more near to a real inferno than the morbid
dream of any medieval monk.
Man’s Slow Rise
Did man spring fully panoplied and equipped
into the arena of life? Again paleontology and
archeology show that his rise to civilization was
slow and painful, and probably lasted a million
years or more.
What physical attribute is there in man which
distinguishes him from the lower animals? The
answer is, the brain of man. And undoubtedly, the
attribute of the brain of man which has made him
what he is today is curiosity. When we examine
the lower animals for evidences of this trait we
find it most fully developed only among the order
of primates. With all the rest of animal creation
there seems to be little interest or curiosity
concerning anything other than the most primitive
fears and appetites. All of the order of primates,
however, manifest almost human curiosity. Also
mental tests have shown the higher forms of these
to be next to man in intelligence.
Among men it has been shown that the most
intelligent are those who maintain throughout life
the curiosity of a little child.
In Unpromising Regions
Both historic records, and research into the
prehistoric ruins of vanished civilizations, show
that owing to some unseen force, civilizations

sprang up in the most unpromising regions, grew
rapidly for a few thousands of years, and then when
racial culture had reached its flowering, the hand
that held high the torch that became the light of
the world was stilled; the jungles’ noxious growths
covered its temples, the rattlesnake wriggled over
its pavements, and the jaguar stalked through its
stately mansions.
Other hands, if not indeed other races, had
snatched the dying embers, and enkindled anew,
the light of the world flamed yet again.
This has gone on for as yet an unknown number
of thousands of years.
What is this unseen force which is behind
today’s as of all the vanished civilizations of the
past? It is the writer’s opinion that this divine flame
or ferment is present in less than a thousandth part
of the population of any race or people.
A nation’s rulers have seldom been of this
original thinker class, occasionally in the past this

has been so, and genius flowering at the head of
government for a few generations has produced
wonderful civilizations.
One Class Led
In the Egyptian, Mayan, Incan and Aztec
empires civilization flowered in the priestly class
and died with them. The priests of Spain not only
destroyed the cultured priests of the Mayan
civilization, but also all of their literature and
chronicle’s, the cultural flowering of thousands of
years. They left only the hewers of wood, and the
drawers of water, and today the descendants of
these wander stupidly among the glorious ruins
produced by their past rulers, unable either to
understand or to reproduce them. Some one has
said that any civilization could be easily destroyed
by destroying the small per cent of the population
responsible for it. Today no one knows in which
continent civilization is oldest.
C. N. R.

