Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

7

TWO SITES ON THE CALLO DEL OSO,
NUECES COUNTY, TEXAS
BY GEORGE CASTOR MARTIN
The Callo del Oso bay and its tributary creek
extends in a southerly and then a westerly direction
into the mainland from the southern shores of
Corpus Christi Bay, Nueces County. This body of
water has approximately twenty miles of shore line
when the encircling edges of its many small islands
and the shores of its coves are taken into
consideration. The entire shoreline and all of the
islands were extensively used by the Indians for
camping purposes, but investigation of this section
of the coast has not been finished. In this article
only two campsites are described, the first situated
on the northwest bank of the False Oso, the second
the first campsite north of the western approach to
the Mud Bridge.
There is a peninsula formed by the junction of
the False Oso and Corpus Christi Bay. A campsite
covered all the shoreline here. The north-facing
portion of the camp extends along Nueces Bay for
about one-half mile, its western end sparsely dotted
with tepee sites, the remains of which show as the
high clay banks erode. Much broken pottery lies
scattered on the ground, much broken flint, and
arrow-heads are found after every rain. Toward
the eastern end of the peninsula the debris becomes
more plentiful until the tip of the point is reached,
and here the surface is covered with shells,
potsherds and chips. (Plate 1, Fig. 3). In two piles
of conch shells here, two implements of bone were
found. They were made from the long bones of an
animal, probably a deer. One was complete, but
was broken in half. It measured four inches in length,
about one third of one inch in width, and had been
rubbed to a flat symmetrical point. In all, eight
specimens of this type have been taken from
different camps on the Oso, all of them in connection
with piles of conch shells. Other implements of
like material but pencil-shaped were also found
on Oso sites, one at a site near Viola, another on
one of the islands in the Laguna Madre. All but
two were found in connection with piles of conch

shells, the exceptions being one taken from the
topsoil where a tepee had stood, the other from a
pile of oyster shells where it was found in contact
with a bone tube which was beautifully made and
polished. On the Oso sites, wherever conch shells
are found in heaps, they usually have holes broken
through one side of the shells. It would appear that
the conch were roasted in the shell, the hole broken
into the side so that the shrunken meat could be
reached and removed with the aid of one of these
bone implements. This theory is practically proved
by one specimen with deeply worn indentations
running around it where its sides had been scratched
deeply by the edges of the rough hole in the shell,
and by several broken ones, the breaks always
occurring where the edge of the shell formed the
fulcrum for the bone pick. One of the bone picks
mentioned above measured eight inches in length.
It was in six pieces when found, but was mended
perfectly and is now in the Witte Memorial
Museum, San Antonio. Where shells are found in
piles here it is due to the fact that the topsoil is
oozy muck blown up on the clay banks from the
bottom of the Oso in very dry years. The Indians
heaped their refuse on this, into which it sank until
it reached the clay, and more wind-drift collecting
on this covered the piles deeply and preserved them.
In very dry years this process of building up the
topsoil continues, but the climate of the coastal
country is undergoing a very rapid change and the
rainfall is much greater than in times past, and banks
that have taken centuries to grow into what they
were until recently are rapidly eroding. Thus a pile
of shells held in place by the enveloping topsoil of
past years is slowly uncovered by the soil being
gradually washed from it, and is left on the surface
in practically the exact form in which it was
originally piled.
From the point of the peninsula, running
southwesterly along the northwestern bank of the
false Oso, for a distance of over one-half mile, was

8

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Plate 1.
TEXAS COASTAL SITES.

site during the Civil War, states that in
those days it was covered with brush,
was not eroded, and no Indian remains
were noticed. Years later, after Mr.
Dunn became interested in
archaeology, the brush was grubbed
away and the bank began to erode.
Skeletons began to be exposed, and at
one time according to Mr. Dunn,
several carloads of bones could have
been picked up from the surface. Mr.
Dunn obtained many skulls at this time,
all of which have since been stolen
from him by boys. While the writer
was excavating a portion of this site
August 26, 1929, a former owner of
the property, Mr. Martin Pearse,
passed the spot and stopped to talk.
He stated that he bought the property
about the year 1900 and that at that time
over five thousand skeletons were
exposed on the surface (this was
shortly after the 1900 storm), all the
bones in fine hard condition. In recent
years Mr. Dunn has removed more
skeletons from the site, and Mr.
Alexander Cox, of Corpus Christi, has
removed five complete skulls in the
past year, besides finding many which
were crushed and broken. During July,
1929, he removed one skull, complete
but distorted by earth pressure, and
found three others in fragments, the
upper sides of these not more than six
inches below the present surface.

The writer began his excavation at
the edge of the hole made by Mr. Cox.
He dug a trench a foot wide and two
1. Bone pit on the Callo del Oso.
feet deep, seven feet long, and began
2. Mud Bridge site; Geo. C. Martin standing at relic
slicing down its edge with a trowel
bearing stratum.
and a stiff brush. Bones were found
3. Large camp site on Callo del Oso.
from six to fourteen inches below the
surface. (Plate 1, Fig. I). They were in
every
imaginable
position, some upright in the
the principal part of the camp. It is now a slope
varying from fifty to one hundred and fifty feet in ground, others lying crossing each other in all
width, grassed over in places, and badly eroded directions. Some of them were broken and in
elsewhere. Mr. John B. Dunn, who worked on this fragments before burial and only portions of them

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
were present. The first skull located was that of an
infant. Only the top of the skull was present, and
while in size it was no larger than that of an average
newborn Caucasian, the fontanelle was completely
covered, the sutures of the anterior fontanelle and
coronal having united. These bones crumbled and
went into pieces when gently brushed to remove
the sand. Two inches from this one, another infant’s
skull was found, and this was in about the same
condition as the first, but was kept together until it
could be photographed in connection with a third
and larger skull several inches to its right. The last
mentioned was found only after the careful but
unsuccessful cleaning of still another infant’s skull,
which, as it broke away disclosed that it had been
crushed against the top of the larger skull, and was
seated on it much in the form of a cap or hat. The
larger skull was then carefully exposed. It was small
in size, but the teeth showed it to have belonged to
an adult. It was face downward, and below it was
the remains of a hand and wrist with all the bones
present and articulated, but no arm bones were
connected with it. To the west of this skull a lower
and upper jaw of another skull lay on its left side,
perfectly articulated, and this was photographed
together with the infant’s skull and the large skull
lying near it. When attempt was made to remove
the group from the soil, all fell apart, though well
covered with dry shellac, and it was found that the
two adult skulls had been crushed into each other.
The space occupied by these five skulls was less
than two square feet. No body bones were
connected with the skulls, but beside the articulated
hand already mentioned as being below the face of
one of them there was a thick layer of broken long
bones, ribs, and vertebrae forming a layer on which
they rested.
Six inches east of the group last described, a
single complete lower jaw was found, and near it
loose teeth from an upper jaw. A foot further east
was the top of another skull, lying with the crown
downward, and in the brain cavity were portions
of the jaw, teeth, part of a rib, the upper joint of a
thigh bone, and some sections of broken long bones.
Of the infant burials only skulls were found except
in one instance, and in this case skull, vertebrae,
ribs, and the bones of one upper arm were found in

9

place. One complete arm was missing, as was one
forearm, and no bones of either the pelvis or legs
were present. Notable among the articulated bones
were the hand and wrist previously mentioned, a
single adult leg, flexed, with knee joint and knee
cap present, and with ankle bones complete, but
without the bones of the feet, and ten vertebrae
joined as in life but not connected with any other
bones. One lower leg bone had in it three incisions
evidently made while the bone was still green.
These were shallow and rather wide, and appeared
as though made with a stone knife used in the manner
of a saw. Another bone showed that it had been
struck a glancing blow, evidently with a flint hatchet.
In two days spent in excavating this site by the writer
and Mr. Wendell H. Potter, twenty-one skulls were
uncovered, none of them in such condition that they
could be preserved. The size of the ditch was seven
feet in length, its breadth four feet. The layer of
bones lies about eight inches below the present
surface, and extends eight or ten inches further down
into the soil. The original surface was about twelve
inches higher at this spot, and it was from this layer
of earth above the bones that the skeletons described
by Mr. Pearse and Mr. Dunn came. During the
digging described above, the only manufactured
item of interest found was a single flat disc of clam
shell, drilled, and this was lying against one of the
skulls. Conch shells were found with the bones. In
earth thrown up by another excavator, a portion of
a shell pendant was found, its sole ornamentation
an edging of small nicks. It was drilled for the
purpose of suspension. Excavation done by Mr.
Dunn yielded a cylindrical pipe of chalky substance,
this ornamented in the same manner as the pendant,
and a sword hilt of silver, of Mexican manufacture,
embossed by Aztec designs. The portion of the
pendant is in the Witte Memorial Museum, San
Antonio, the pipe and sword hilt in the collection
of Mr. Dunn, in Corpus Christi. The surface of the
entire campsite, wherever eroded, is covered with
the shells of edible mollusks. Potsherds are present
but scarce. Artifacts are rare where the bones are
found, but it must be remembered that the site has
been eroding for thirty years and has been much
hunted over. In uneroded portions of the top of the
hill, the surface shows flint and shells as much as

10

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

three hundred yards back from the edge of the Oso.
The banks of the Callo del Oso were probably the
most thickly inhabited section of the Texas coast,
and finds will be made here for many years to come.
There are two theories concerning the bones
found in the excavation made by the writer. Mr.
Cox believes that the camp was attacked in force,
the raiders beaten off, the dead of both sides buried
in a large pit or ditch. The theory is not unreasonable
in view of the fact that two distinct types of skulls
were removed from the ground here by him, but it
does not explain the reason for so many bones being
so badly broken, disarticulated and scattered. It does
not explain most of the skulls being largely separated
from the bones of the bodies to which they belonged,
nor the fact that most of them rest above a layer of
leg, arm and body bones. Careful examination of
the remains uncovered by the writer has convinced
him that the particular portion of the camp excavated
by him was originally a pit into which were thrown
the remains of cannibal feasts, and further digging
will be done to see if more information can be
obtained and perfect specimens of skulls secured.
Apparently about ninety per cent of the bones so
far recovered were those of women and children.
The foregoing portion of this article was written
in the Summer of 1929. Up to that time the writer
had removed soil covering twenty-eight square feet
for a depth of about twenty-four inches and had
uncovered twenty-one skulls or portions of as many
different ones, and had removed portions of
skeletons to account for about forty burials. During
September, October and November, three additional
visits were made to the site and the number of skulls
located was brought up to fifty-three, the total
excavated area being about fifty square feet. During
these visits several skulls were removed in almost
perfect condition, and many complete skeletons of
adults, children and infants were uncovered. With
the bones was a single grinding or rubbing-stone
worn smooth on one side and two triangular
arrowheads of large size. Dr. J. Alden Mason, of
the Museum of the University of Pennsylvania, was
present at the time of one visit to the site, and he
uncovered one fairly complete adult skeleton, the
body lying on its side, head in a vertical position,

the lower jaw having fallen loose from the skull
and dropped onto the bones of the chest and
shoulder. On this occasion a digging tool made from
a triangular piece of conch shell was found with
one skeleton. Dr. Mason assisted in the work of
uncovering several other incomplete skulls and
skeletons.
The best finds resulting from a visit to the site
were made by Mr. John B. Dunn of Corpus Christi.
His excavation was begun where the writer left off.
Slight chipping away of the earth at the side of the
trench revealed the presence of a skeleton, and the
earth above it was carefully removed. The bones
proved to be those of a young person. The body
had been interred lying flat on its stomach, face
downward, legs and feet straight and in line with
the body, both arms extended above the head in the
attitude of a person diving, the palms of the hands
downward and these resting on another adult skull.
Two small “bird-points” were found in the soil
close to the bones. (Plate 2, Fig. 2). Around each
wrist were a number of small square pieces of
mother of pearl, each drilled with two holes, and
around the neck and down on the chest were
numerous small pendants of the same material, each
of these bored with one hole. In all, sixty-four of
these ornaments were in such condition that they
could be removed and preserved. (Plate 2, Fig. 2).
Many were mere chalky impressions in the soil.
With the shell pieces forming the bracelet were two
bone objects, almost flat oblongs one and oneeighth by three-quarters of an inch, these were not
drilled and both were ornamented with like designs
in incised lines. From the soil near the body was
taken a single black bone bead (judging by its color
it is probably ivory) wonderfully carved. It is five
eighths of an inch in length, seven-sixteenths of an
inch in width, and flattened oval in outline. An
incised line forms a ring around the unflattened
portion of the bead, and it is drilled from the upper
to the lower surface instead of being drilled
lengthways. One flattened surface is marked off by
incised lines in such manner that it gives the
appearance of a carved beetle, and the other side
is marked with incised lines which might have been
intended to represent legs. Its general appearance
suggests a scarab. Also near the bones Mr. Dunn

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

11

found a single mother of pearl pendant,
quite thick, and in perfect condition. Its
length is about two inches, rounded at
the top, straight edged at the bottom, two
holes drilled through it at the rounded
end, the straight edged bottom having
three notches cut into it and four drilled
holes, the notches being cut so that they
indent the edge between the holes.
“Mud Bridge” Site
The “Mud Bridge” campsite on the
Callo del Oso, was discovered by the
writer June 15, 1929. It has peculiar
features well worthy of description.
(Plate 1, Fig. 2). It is situated on a much
eroded bluff a short distance north and
west of the “Mud Bridge” at a spot
where the bluff forms a point extending
toward the water. In dry seasons the Oso
at this point dries up to a large extent
and strong Gulf breezes blow the dust
from its bottom up onto its high banks.
The camp was located on the clay
subsurface of the bluff and since
occupation accumulated blown dust has
formed a topsoil varying from three to
eight feet or more in thickness over the
entire site. The evidence is plain where
erosion has occurred recently, the
ground below the level of the bottom of
the topsoil being covered with lumps
of burned clay mingled with flint chips,
Plate 2.
some broken shells, and fragments of
ARTIFACTS FROM TEXAS COAST
bones, the three to eight feet of topsoil
covering the clay not showing the 1. Effigy bowl and incised stones.
slightest evidence that Indians ever 2. Ornaments and small projectile points from a burial on
camped on it. Each eroded slope shows
the Callo del Oso.
its thick layer of topsoil totally free of
remains and refuse, and below it is a
slope of clay subsurface covered with such debris. projections at the sides which permitted the
The exposed portion of the site covers several acres. forefinger a broad space to rest on and so allow
Potsherds and bird-points are absent. The artifacts the user to exert more pressure on the implement
found consisted entirely of triangular arrowheads than would have been possible had the implements
with rounded and straight bases, and a number of been made with a double edge or narrow back.
knives, one curved, the others triangular, all with (Plate 3). These knives (eight in all if the writer

12

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
the place where its edge would
have been flattened by
hammering. At this spot a number
of arrowheads had evidently
been made, and it is possible that
the “knives” and hammer-stone
were used in the manufacture of
these, the former used to chip
with. The projections on the
sides of the artifacts which may
have served the purpose of knives
are not an uncommon feature on
the Texas coast. The writer has
three others, one from Banquete
Creek, one from the shore of
Copano Bay, one from another
site on the Oso, all three finely
worked specimens and showing
this feature. The hammerstone is
much larger and heavier than any
other stone used for this purpose
as yet found between Matagorda
and Baffin Bays, and is of unusual
shape. Its material is not native
and it is doubtful if it could have
been found by the Indians
anywhere within a fifty mile
radius of the campsite where it
was picked up.

A word or two should be
inserted here as to the windblown
topsoil of the Oso’s banks. On
September 1, 1929, the writer
accompanied by Mr. Henry Fulton
and Mr. Alexander Cox, visited
Plate 3.
the most southwesterly site on the
ARTIFACTS FROM THE TEXAS COAST
Oso. The tide had been low for a
week or more, and there had been
1 and 2. Points made form Conch shell.
but little rain. The wind was
3. Flake scraper, slightly retouched.
blowing strongly from the
9. Point with leverage plane from Callo del Oso.
southeast, and as the party stood
All artifacts except Fig. 9 from Mud Bridge site.
on the campsite last mentioned
Scale: Fig. 16, 2 3/5 inches in length.
and looked off westward toward
the next small peninsula, clouds
remembers correctly) were found close together, of dust and sand filled the air obstructing the view
surrounded by chips and flakes of flint, and with to such an extent that the hill less than one-half a
them was a large stone shaped not unlike an axe, mile away was entirely blotted out at times and

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
was continually swept with thick clouds so that no
clear view of it was obtainable. How long it would
take to deposit the accumulation covering the “Mud
Bridge” site under such conditions is highly
problematical.

Early in 1929 Mr. Geo. C. Martin sent to Abilene
a large amount of human skeletal material from
Texas coast sites.
These bones represented bones of individuals
of several quite different anatomical types. Some
had skulls of modern shape and thickness with
straight long bones, the bone substance of these
unaltered except by age. Another type possessed
rather flat, narrow, extremely thick and rather
heavily mineralized skulls.

13

Two heavily mineralized portions of the shafts
of the long bones have numerous transverse cuts in
them. Several femora sent me have quite marked
antero-postero curves somewhat similar to
Neanderthal types. The normal human tibia or shin
bone has on the inner side of the crest or shin “a
smooth, slightly convex surface” which is known
as “the internal or subcutaneous surface of the shaft
which is covered only by skin and superficial fascia
except in its upper fourth.” (Cunningham Anat.) Two
of the tibiae or shin bones sent here by Mr. Martin
had instead of slightly convex surfaces, a well
marked guttered or depressed condition of the bones
down the internal or subcutaneous portions. Mr.
Martin stated in correspondence that some of these
heavily mineralized human bones were recovered
from the bottoms of bay waters after Gulf storms.
CYRUS N. RAY, President.

Some of the frontal and parietal portions of these
skulls are far thicker than any human skull bones
ever previously seen by me. One frontal bone
Mr. Martin’s article was read by me before the
measured seven-sixteenths of an inch thick and State meeting of the Society held in Abilene in
several others very slightly under that thickness.
October, 1929.
These thick skull bones and portions of several
In July, 1929, a companion, Carl Chelf, and I
long bones are so heavily mineralized that they clink were conducted to the sites described by Messrs.
like porcelain dishes when knocked together.
George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter.
Several of the frontal bones have large pieces
of sandstone concretion firmly fixed to the insides
of the skulls. Some have evidence of marine life
incrusted on the outside. When examined with a
geologist’s lense the mineralized structure is quite
apparent.

The site on the Oso has been known locally for
a long time. The Mud Bridge site was discovered
by Mr. Martin after he had made previous visits to
the same vicinity that revealed nothing until this
site was uncovered by favorable winds following
dry weather during the winter of 1928-29.
E. B. SAYLES, Secretary.

