Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

7

SOME TYPES OF ARCHEOLOGICAL
SITES IN TRANS-PECOS TEXAS
BY HENRY T. FLETCHER
Archeological sites are found at more or less
close intervals throughout the Trans-Pecos region
of Texas. These sites are of various types depending
upon the uses made of them by their aboriginal
builders who utilized the limited facilities at hand
in their efforts to live. Their chief needs were water,
protection, game and plants that provided food. The
type and distribution of sites reflect conditions as
they obtained at the time of their occupation.

Some miles to the northwest, a thick bed of red
conglomerate, in weathering, yields nodules of flint,
chert and novaculite. A nearby lava flow carries
numerous geodes of agate and chalcedony. At a
number of points in this area workshops are found,
the ground being covered with numerous flakes and
chips, together with nodules from which they were
chipped. Celts, fragments of knives and points, and
rude hammer stones are still not uncommon, though
these sites have been visited repeatedly.

The West Texas Historical and Scientific Society
has mapped some two hundred sites, mostly within
Hearths
a hundred mile radius of Alpine, where its museum
is located. Many other sites, known to members of
Several small hearths are found at a Site five
the Society and reported by reliable persons, have miles due west of the 02 Ranch Headquarters, forty
not as yet been mapped.
miles south of Alpine. This site is situated in a flat
now cut by numerous shallow gullies. The hearths
are circular or oval in shape and are all more or
Workshops
less disturbed by erosion. Several metates and
While most camp sites have workshops in
manos were found near them. A large camp site
connection with them, sites often occur where rock
may have once been located here but the burned
was worked and no burned rock, ashes, or other
rock mounds and ashy earth, if ever present, have
evidences of a camp are found. At these sites the
been covered by alluvium or washed away.
ground is usually covered with flakes, chips,
fragments of completed points and hammer stones.
A large camp site lies around Diff Spring. The
Occasionally, the materials are wholly from nearby writer knows of no large hearth unless some of the
ledges, though usually they are mostly foreign to burned rock mounds at some of the camp sites are
the locality.
hearths.
Flint Sources

Mounds

The Edward’s Limestone includes several strata
characteristically rich in flint nodules reaching the
size of a base ball. The nodules range in color from
black, through blue and gray, to pink. An outcropping
of Edward’s Limestone, in the form of a high bluff,
along the south side of Buck and Chalk Draws,
about sixty miles southeast of Alpine, contains
several dry shelter camps of various sizes. At
several points, independent of camp sites, scattered
chips and fragments of flint, many with flaked edges,
indicate the site of work shops. It is quite probable
that the flints were quarried from the nearby bluff.

Mounds of several types are found. Most of them
are composed of rather well sorted rocks, usually
two or three inches in diameter. Charcoal and soil,
having the appearance of having been burned, are
generally present.
One type of mounds is found along trails
ascending talus slopes from valleys to hills.
Sometimes, only one mound is present but several
usually occur at intervals from the bottom to near
the top of the trail. On one trail ascending the
Mitchell Mesa, ten miles northwest of the 02 Ranch,
there are seven such mounds. They are roughly

8

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

circular in outline, some ten feet in diameter, and
three or four feet high. The topsoil under the mound,
lowest on the trail, yielded charcoal. No artifacts
were found at or near any of them. Their uses are
problematical. They may have been trail markers;
pointers to water; caches; or burials, though the
latter is hardly likely as the soil under the mound
examined apparently had not been disturbed.

was made as a ceremonial. The larger part of this
collection is in the Museum of the West Texas
Historical & Scientific Society.

Between Leoncito Spring and Hovey, about
twenty-five miles northeast of Alpine, is a snake or
serpentine mound of earth. It is three yards wide,
two to three feet high, and about one thousand yards
long. It winds through the brush, having some plants
growing on it. A corral is situated near the head
and any peculiar shape it might have had has been
obliterated by the activities of working cattle over
a long period of time. The tail describes a circle
which nearly closes. A few flints were found at
several points. Several large camp sites occur near
Leoncito Spring, a few miles away.

usually shallow and are indicated by low mounds
of rather large stones placed with some care. The
mounds are round or oval, the bodies often being
buried in a flexed position.

Burials

Burial sites are of several types: in dry shelters
and caves; on talus slopes and on open high points.
The cave and shelter burials are rather common in
Another type of mound is found in valleys, the Davis Mountains and Big Bend. Mr. E. F. Coffin,
usually just above the high water mark. They are of the Museum of the American Indian, Heye
circular in outline and level on top. They are of Foundation, found burials in Bee Cave Canyon and
burned rocks mixed with ashy earth, and sometimes nearby caves, about seventy miles southeast of
charcoal. A common size is ten to fifteen feet in Alpine. In one case a skeleton was wrapped in a
diameter and two to three feet high. One at Live woven skin basket. In another, the body had been
Oak Well, on the 02 Ranch, is well preserved and flexed and tied with fiber cords. The Museum of
has large bushes growing on it. A few artifacts, the West Texas Historical & Scientific Society has
including several metates and manos, were found, a burial of an infant taken from a cave near Langtry.
all typical of the camp sites of the region. At another It was placed in a woven sack which was folded
mound, near Whirlwind Spring, also on the 02 over and sewed.
Ranch, several well made scrapers were found.
The talus slope and open country burials are

On a flat-top point east of Terlingua Creek, about
eighty miles south of Alpine, is a site with a group
of eight mounds. They are placed irregularly, the
point now being covered with a growth of ocotillo
and other shrubs. They have not been explored but
are thought to be Indian graves.
Sotol Pits

Peculiar, circular, burned rock mounds are found
throughout that part of Trans-Pecos Texas where
Monument sites are found on a number of the sotol, Dasylerion sp., is an indigenous plant.
prominent points in the Davis Mountains. The rocks The writer noted one of these mounds at the entrance
in the monuments are laid without mortar but with to the Carlsbad Caverns in New Mexico. Mr. E. W.
some order. Some of them are evidently markers Wilson describes the sotol mounds of the Edward’s
pointing to water as exploration disclosed nothing Plateau in Bul. 2, Texas Archeological &
under them. One, on Mount Livermore, the highest Paleontological Society.
peak in the Davis Mountains and second highest
In Trans-Pecos Texas the occurrence of sotol is
point in Texas, was used as a cache. Mrs. Susan M.
Janes, with a party, found 1250 small arrow points, determined by physiographic conditions rather than
beautifully made and most of them perfect, mixed the type of the soil. It grows almost invariably on
with the soil under a cairn of rocks several feet debris covered mountain slopes or rolling or hilly
high. Mrs. Janes and others think that this cache areas representing the cutting of plateaus. Hence,
Monuments

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
we find it growing in locales of volcanic rocks as
well as those of limestone. This gives us types of
sotol pits, the main difference being in the kind of
rock of which they are built. In this region they are
circular and average ten or twelve feet in diameter.
As found today, they are as a rule lower in the center
and composed of rocks of rather uniform size. They
are generally located some distance from camp
sites, often one half mile or more, and near the foot
of the hills where the sotol grows. Two miles east
of Diff Spring a single sotol pit is on the top of a
long point, there being a light stand of sotol at
present growing on the slopes nearby. This mound
is hidden by a thicket of sumac, that grows in the
ashy soil of the pit. The few artifacts found near
sotol mounds include metates and manos.
E. W. Wilson, in the work above cited, has
described the method of cooking sotol. He quotes
F. M. Buckelew, an early traveler, as saying that
meal was made from the cooked sotol. This would
account for the presence of grinding implements.
Another method of eating is indicated by the
numerous chewed quids of sotol leaves found in
the dry shelters of this region.
Rock Walls
Rock walls were used for shelter in this region.
At a number of points in the Davis Mountains walls
of rough masonry are found. At one place in Green
Valley a room about seven feet in diameter is found
having walls two feet high except for a rude opening
on one side.
In some places rocks are used to chink or stop
openings between large boulders to afford
protection against north winds. Remnants of walls
are found in many shelters and semi-shelters,
indicating the outlines of small rooms, usually
circular in shape. In the exploration of the Bee Cave
Canyon Shelter, by Mr. Coffin, small circular rooms,
with walls of crude masonry laid without mortar,
were found practically the whole length of 768 feet.

9

remains of a system of irrigation ditches are found.
They are in the form of connected low ridges, two
or three yards wide, covering several hundred acres
of land that slopes southward to Alamo Cesario
Creek. The site is too high above the creek to have
received its water supply from that source unless it
was diverted some distance above and brought
down in a ditch skirting the hills on the north side
of the draw. It is more probable that the water came
from a spring, in the canyon north of the field, now
dry or plugged, as some have suggested. There is
no suggestion of ditch on the tops of the ridges today,
but the two series of parallel ridges, at right angles
to each other, preclude the idea that they might
indicate natural drainage channels.
When Fort Davis was established in 1854, C.
G. Raht, in The Romance of the Davis Mountains,
says the soldiers reported seeing the Indians
irrigating crops by ditches which took water from
Limpio Creek nearby. I do not know whether any
sign of these ditches are to be seen today.
Mortar Holes
While mortar holes are found at most camp sites,
especially those occurring in shelters or on hilly
terrain, sites are often found where they are the only
sign of previous occupation now to be seen. At a
number of sites mortar holes are found singly or in
groups: sometimes on rocks at the foot of talus
slopes, and sometimes on ledges near gullies or
creeks. The kitchen midden mounds that were once
probably located nearby have disappeared. Usually
no artifacts are found though occasionally a mano
or flint fragments are noted.
Trails

Early maps of the region show several Indian
trails that were said to have been well marked when
first noted by the early travellers west of the Pecos.
Parts of these trails are still preserved where they
ascend bluffs or traverse rocky terrain. One of these
sites is in Middle Canyon passing out of Green
Valley to the westward. Near the head of the canyon
Irrigation Ditches
is a rocky water hole and the site of a camp that has
At the old Indian Farm, about seventy miles south
yielded a number of relics. This trail contains
of Alpine and just north of Agua Fria Mountain, the
several of the rock mounds mentioned above. Near

10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

San Esteben, twelve miles south of Marfa,
the trace of a well traveled trail is seen.
Here, the travel of countless years has cut
deep into the lava in some ten parallel
paths, some of them more than a foot deep.
This trail was said to have been used by
the Commanches in their forays into
Mexico.
Battlefield
Five miles east of the 02 Ranch, running
east and west, a hill rises some two
hundred feet above the Alpine road. The
highest point of this hill is called
Cottonwood Mesa from Cottonwood
Spring in a canyon behind it to the
northward. Cottonwood Canyon emerges
east of the mesa and contains within its
mouth a large camp site. In smaller
canyons to the west are sites of smaller
camps.
On an area of several hundred acres,
lying about a mile southwest of
Cottonwood Mesa, many arrow points
have been picked up, usually one at a time.
No other class of artifact or signs of a camp
site have been noted. From the fact that so
many weapon points have been found in
so small an area, it is believed that a battle
was fought here between enemy groups.
The inhabitants of the Cottonwood Canyon
camps were, probably the defenders.

Plate 1
TRANS-PECOS SITES

Dry Shelters
1. Mortar holes; eroded stone. 02 Ranch.
Most dry shelters are accompanied by
either characteristics of camp sites, as
pictographs, mortar holes, and burned rock
and ash heaps on the slopes outside.
However, many small shelters occur at distances
Camps
from other sites. They may have been used as
Camp sites are, roughly, of four types: sand flat,
temporary winter quarters for hunting parties. Some
are often so small that not more than two persons valley, hill and dry shelter; the differences
could find shelter in them and usually have depending mainly upon topography. We will
blackened walls and often beds of ashes mixed with describe each type briefly.
wind blown sand. There are numbers of these sites
in the Green Valley section.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

11

Sand Flat Camps
Sand flat camp sites are not uncommon in the
salt basin region east of El Paso. They were
commonly on the shores of the shallow lakes that
were often dry. The gradual drying up of the lakes
has left many sites some distance from the present
shore lines. The shifting of the sands by wind action
has partially or wholly covered other sites.

Hill Camp Sites
Hill camp sites are of three sub-types: those
utilizing a south facing bluff for protection; those
having tepee sites marked by circles of boulders;
and those built on talus slopes. In each the kitchen
mounds are on the south slope of the hill or at the
foot of the bluff.

Valley Camp Sites
Valley camp sites are usually found
just above the danger of high water and
near a rocky point. Sometimes, however,
they occur in the middle of wide draws
where they must have been subject to
overflows. Possibly, they were occupied
only in seasons of the year when rains
would not be expected. These sites are
marked with large mounds of burned
rock, mixed with soil that has been
blackened with ashes. Artifacts usually
occurring include: metates, manos,
knives, weapon points, hammer stones,
scrapers and numerous chips and
rejects. In the Green Valley region an
anvil rock of red lava is usually found,
especially where ledges of rock are not
near. Small hearths occur at many camp
sites.
Mounds
The 02 Ranch is situated on a branch
of Terlingua Creek, which for several
miles is a small running stream of fine
water. At close intervals are mounds of
burned rock, some oblong in outline and
as much as one hundred feet long. These
mounds have been flattened out as the
draw was subject to overflows until the
creek was washed out to near its present
dimensions. The mounds commonly bear
a more vigorous growth of lote bush,
mesquite or creosote bush than the
surrounding soil. Two arrow shaft
polishers were found near one of these
mounds.

Plate 2
TRANS-PECOS SITES
1. Tepee site, outlined with boulders, 02 Ranch.
2. Small dry shelter near Santiago Peak. In Edward’s
Limestone.
3. Circular flat top, burned rock mound. Live Oak Well.

12

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

On a bench at the east side of the mouth of
Cottonwood Canyon is a site with six tepees
outlined by red gritty boulders from the ledge
forming the hill. There are many mortar holes along
the edge of the low bluff making the bench and a
great mound of burned rock under the bluff on the
south. At one point the bluff forms a semi-shelter
several feet deep. Boulders form the outlines of
several rooms, probably having been used to weigh
down tepee walls. Many artifacts common to camp
sites were found.
On the opposite bench is a similar site except
that only two or three tepee sites are present. Here,
several thin metates were found. The rock from
which they were fashioned occurs in thin beds under
the gritty conglomerate which forms the bench. Two
types of metates are often found at camp sites. One,
a thin plaque type of light material, the other often
a foot thick and of lava or sandstone. The latter
was probably used in situ while the thinner type
may have been carried from place to place. In Green
Valley the metates were hollowed on only one face.
At a camp site three miles south of Alpine, in an
oak grove near a small spring, metates were found
that were hollowed on both faces.
The mouth of Cottonwood Canyon between the
camp sites is dry today, the nearest natural water
being at Cottonwood Spring a mile above. Early
maps showed a large water hole at this point which
was called Ojo de San Aparicio.
Mortar Holes
Three miles north of the 02 Ranch, at the point
of a low flat topped hill near the mouth of Diff
Canyon, is a mortar hole camp site with hundreds
of mortar holes made in the great slabs of volcanic
tuffs that have rolled down from the low bluff at
the top of the mesa. A small shelter in this bluff has
several pictographs, one a perfect, life size, left
hand done in cinnabar red. Several mounds of
burned rock occur at the foot of the slope and a
workshop at the north edge of the camp. Many of
the typical camp site artifacts have been picked up
here.

Metal Artifacts
The writer found a steel knife blade, four inches
long, badly oxidized and with the point broken. It
had lugs on each side for fastening to the handle.
With a reading glass it was possible to decipher
the words PIERRE RAVOLIER. This blade appears
to have been hand forged, the name, no doubt, being
that of the maker. It probably reached the Big Bend
through the connection of Commanche Indians with
French traders on the Arkansas or Missouri rivers.
A camp site two miles to the west yielded a flat
wrought iron spike, seven inches long, that had been
worked to make a rude chisel. At another site nearby
a slender steel knife blade was found. It was about
eight inches long and was branded with a small
anchor.
Dry Shelter
The dry shelter sites vary in size from those
providing shelter for not more than two persons to
the Bee Cave Canyon shelter, measured by Mr.
Coffin, which is 768 feet long and 108 feet in
maximum depth. Vol. 6, No. 4, Indian Notes
describes the exploration of that shelter. The dry
shelters of this region have also been described by
V. J. Smith, in Vol. 29, No. 2, The American
Anthropologist.
Many shelters occur near Alpine, some of them
yielding burials besides the wooden and fiber
articles and stone artifacts usually found. Many of
them contain pictographs and a few sherds have
been picked up.
In the limestone areas of Trans-Pecos many caves
occur. Most of them show some signs of occupancy,
though only the area near the mouths were occupied.
The cave sites often contain burials. Some forty
feet back in a cave, six miles southwest of Santiago
Peak, two burials were found. The bodies were in
baskets laid on poles over a natural vertical shaft
that descended from the floor of the cave. The
bottom of the shaft yielded nothing of interest.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Pueblos
Very near the Texas-New Mexico line, some
thirty miles northeast of El Paso, are the ruins of
several large pueblos. The foundation walls of
masonry, laid in a brittle gray mortar, are partly or
wholly covered by drifting sand.
Water and shelter seem to have been determining
factors in the location and type of sites. The larger
camp sites are found near permanent water and their
occurrence would indicate that a constant supply
of water has existed over a long period. Other large
camp sites, where no water is now found, indicate
that springs have become dry or streams have
changed their courses since they were inhabited.

13

in the lower part of the Big Bend. A ball of red
paint, four inches in diameter, was found in a shelter
in Sunny Glen, west of Alpine, by Ross Smith, son
of V. J. Smith. It is now in the Museum of the West
Texas Historical & Scientific Society.
Plants

Certain plants make more vigorous growths in
the ashy soil of the burned rock mounds of this
region. Camp sites, sotol pits, hearths and other
sites may often be located by watching for groups
of plants larger in size and richer in color than the
plants around them. Shelters and talus slope sites
may often be located in the same manner, as shrubs,
usually found growing in draws or flat terrain, are
often found to have adapted themselves to the
Paint
hillside slopes, because of the changed condition
No quarries, of materials for weapons or pipes, of the soil. It is probable that potash from the ashes,
or paint mines have been found. A single paint ball mixed in the soil, causes the increased growth of
was found in the Bee Cave shelter. It was red and the flora on the sites.
probably derived from cinnabar ore which occurs

