14

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

A VASE AND SOME CARVED STONES AND PEBBLES
FROM NUECES COUNTY, TEXAS
BY GEORGE CASTOR MARTIN
In September, 1929, a Mexican trespassing on
one of the posted ranches along Petronila Creek
(also called Petronita and Santa Petronita) saw in
the bank, where a landslide had exposed it, the side
of a pot. With buried treasure in mind, the vessel
was roughly removed from the soil, and was badly
broken in the process. According to the story of the
discoverer, this pot was inverted over another one,
and both were filled with soil which had seeped in
through the cracks between them. The second pot
was removed in pieces, and the sole content was
found to be a small vase of dark brown color,
glazed, and formed somewhat like a bird, wings
and tail projecting from it, the neck and opening
being in the position of the bird’s head and neck.
(Plate 2, Fig. 1). In removing the vase, it also was
broken, but not badly, the fracture being at the
juncture of the bowl and the neck so that it was
easily mended. Nervous about having made the
discovery illegally on another man’s property, the
Mexican hurried with his find to the private museum
of Mr. John B. Dunn, of Corpus Christi, where he
disposed of it for a small sum, but being in fear of
prosecution for his trespass he refused to divulge
the exact site of his find. He stated that it was on
the bank of Petronila Greek, however, and promised
to go back for fragments of the larger pots. Mr. Dunn
informed the writer of his acquisition, and a hurried
trip was made to Corpus Christi to examine it. The
vase was found to be of material and workmanship
entirely unlike any of which potsherds have been
found between San Antonio and Baffin Bays on the
Texas coast, and was probably manufactured in
Louisiana or Arkansas.l Its body is practically
spherical, flattened at the base, protuberances
extending from each side and from the back to
simulate wings and tail, the neck of the vessel taking
the place of the bird’s neck and head. Extreme height
from base to top of neck is five and three-sixteenths
inches, width across top of wings is five and seveneighths inches, and the diameter of the bowl, outside
measurement, is about four and three-quarter inches.
During the examination it was found that the vase
was slightly more than half full of a mixture of sand,
clay and leafmould, hard packed almost to the
consistency of sandstone. This was broken up and
loosened with a heavy knife, and was removed
through the hole in the vase where the neck had
been broken off. One of the lumps refused to
crumble under pressure, and after continued

washing and gentle scrubbing it was found to be a
pebble of sandstone, on which, carved in relief, is
the figure of an alligator or lizard, the end of the
tail extending around the edge of the stone to its
reverse side. The sandstone composing the pebble
and the earth in the vase had been in contact for so
long a period of time that the two had almost united
and it was impossible to completely clean the stone
without risk of injuring it.
The curious feature of the find lies in the fact
that after the vase was mended and an attempt to
replace the carved stone back in the vessel was
made, it was found that to do so was impossible,
as the entrance measures only twenty-two
millimeters in its widest diameter, the carved pebble
twenty-four millimeters. The fracture through which
the pebble had been removed was new and fresh.
The condition of the soil in which the pebble was
embedded proves absolutely that it was not placed
in the vase after the neck was broken therefrom, so
only one conclusion can be reached, and that, that
the alligator carving was enclosed in the vessel
when it was made. On certain campsites on the
Rincon Ranch, Aransas County, the writer found
lumps of white sandstone which had been used for
abrading purposes, and these were heavily
impregnated with oil or grease, evidently used by
the Indians much as the modern white man uses oil
on his oil-stone in edging steel implements. The
carved alligator stone also has a heavy oil content,
either obtained while in the process of manufacture,
or by coming in contact with oil or grease which
had once been in the vase in which it was found.
Carved pebbles and stones are rare along the Texas
coast, but are not entirely unknown. The artifacts
shown by the two upper figures of Plate 2, Fig. 1,
were found within the present limits of Corpus
Christi, in what was Salt Lake, a marshy body of
water now filled in and built upon. This carving is
of flint, much discolored by age, originally dark
brown, now a creamy white. Colonel M. L.
Crimmins, internationally known authority on
pictographs and petroglyphs, pronounced it a
representation of a manatee. Dr. Warren K.
Moorehead pronounced it a “record-stone,” also
stating that it was an animal effigy, the most
southerly find of such that had come to his notice.
1. Mr. Martin writes that Dr. J. Alden Mason, of Univ. of Penna.
Mus., stated the pot was likely from Mid. Miss. Valley.

