10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
ON BAYOU MACON IN ARKANSAS
BY HARRY J. LEMLEY
Progress has been made in recent years toward
the establishment of an archaeological chronology
for the lower Mississippi Valley area. Henry B.
Collins, Jr., Jas. A. Ford and Moreau B. Chambers,
the pioneers in this task, have approached the
problem in Mississippi and Louisiana by way of “the
historic method of attack,” using potsherds found
on known historic sites as a basis, and working
backwards from the standpoint of time.
In 1925, Collins collected sherds from four
historic Choctaw sites in Eastern Mississippi (1);
in 1927-28-29, Ford and Chambers did a large
amount of exploring in the Tunica area in Western
Mississippi and collected sherds from the historic
Haynes Bluff site on the Yazoo River; in 1930,
Chambers explored and collected pottery from the
historic Natchez site on the Fatherland plantation
near Natchez, Mississippi; and in 1933 and
succeeding years, Ford collected sherds from the
historic Caddo site on the Wilkinson Place in
Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana, and elsewhere in
the Caddo area in that state. Upon the pottery
collected by these gentlemen and certain vessels
exhumed by Clarence B. Moore from sites in the
area yielding trade objects, the determination of the
historic Choctaw, Natchez, Tunica and Caddo
pottery complexes is based.
In 1929, Collins, associated with Ford and
Chambers, explored the prehistoric site on the
Pepper Place near Deasonville, Mississippi, and
found sherds of a coarse ground-potsherd tempered
ware, a large per cent of which were either cord
marked or painted (2), but found no sherds of the
historic Choctaw, Tunica and Natchez complexes;
Ford and Chambers, thereafter explored ten other
prehistoric sites in Mississippi yielding a similar type
of sherds; and from this evidence the prehistoric
Deasonville complex was determined.
Along with the predominant cord marked and
painted ware discovered at Deasonville, some
sherds bearing a different type of decoration

AND

S. D. DICKINSON

characterized by overhanging lines parallel to the
rim, and resembling somewhat the pottery of the
West and Northwest Florida coast, were found.
These were of a style similar to sherds found by
Ford and Chambers on prehistoric sites in Western
Mississippi and Eastern Louisiana. This complex,
the Coles Creek, Ford states was first recognized
at a site on Coles Creek near Fayette, Mississippi
(3). On the Coles Creek sites at least a few of the
Deasonville sherds were found, and vice versa,
thereby indicating that the two complexes were
contemporaneous, at least in some areas.
Upon certain of the type sites of the prehistoric
Deasonville and Coles Creek complexes a few
sherds decorated either with “smooth bands
outlined by incised grooves” with a roughened
background, or by “deeply incised concentric and
parallel lines closely spaced,” were found. These
were of the type of ware unearthed by Fowke (4)
in 1926, and later by Setzler, at the prehistoric site
near Marksville, Louisiana, Setzler having
recognized in the meantime that the pottery
exhumed by Fowke was of the Hopewell culture
found in Southern Ohio and adjacent areas (5). To
this complex of the Southern aspect of the
Hopewellian phase the name of “Marksville” has
been given. A few village sites, predominantly
Marksville, have been explored by Ford in
Louisiana.
In 1933, in excavating a deep midden on the
Peck Place near Sicily Island, Louisiana, yielding
sherds of the Deasonville, Coles Creek and
Marksville complexes, Ford (6) secured evidence
indicating that pottery of the Marksville complex
was in use, at least by the people who made refuse
deposits in a part of the midden, at an earlier period
than that of the Deasonville and Coles Creek.
From the data obtained as a result of the
explorations above mentioned, Ford in his “Outline
of Louisiana and Mississippi Pottery Horizons” (7)
has suggested a chronology of three pottery

Archeological Investigations On Bayou Macon
sequences for Louisiana and Mississippi; the latest,
Choctaw, Natchez, Tunica and Caddo complexes;
the intermediate, Deasonville and Coles Creek; the
oldest, Marksville. Accompanying his paper is a map
showing the distribution of these
pottery complexes within those parts
of the states of Louisiana and
Mississippi so far explored.

11

of a late prehistoric culture and resembling the
pottery of the Tunica complex, was found with
burials. In a few instances this ware was with vessels
related to pottery of other types found elsewhere

Incident to the problem of
establishing a chronology is the
determination of the area covered by
each complex and the intrusion of
other complexes therein.
The Caddo complex, as is well
known, extends into Arkansas and
Texas. Moore (8) and Harrington (9)
found Caddo ware almost exclusively
in the Red and Ouachita River Valleys
in South central and southwest
Arkansas, and Jackson (10) and Pearce
(11) in a part of the Red River area of
Northeast Texas. Pottery of the Coles
Creek complex, but in some details
suggestive of Marksville, was found
by Lemley (12) in 1935 with burials at
the prehistoric Crenshaw site on Red
River, Miller County, Southwest
Arkansas. In certain mounds on this
site vertical stratigraphic evidence was
obtained of occupancy by the
Caddoes, and also by a pre-Caddo
group who buried vessels of the Coles
Creek complex with their dead. The
relationships of this ware were
discussed by Dickinson in Vol. 8 of this
bulletin (13). No pottery of the
Deasonville complex was discovered
on the Crenshaw Place.
In 1934, the writers of this paper
undertook a joint expedition into the
Bayou Macon area in Southeast
Arkansas, headed by S. D. Dickinson.
Two months were devoted to the
project. In mounds on various
prehistoric sites in that section, shell
tempered ware, believed to have been

No. 1.
No. 2.
No. 3.
No. 4.
No. 5.
No. 6.
No. 7.
No. 8.
No. 9.

PLATE 1.
Vessel V-1743, Mound Grimes Place.
Clay Rattle, V-1183, Burial 13 Cemetery Jones
Place, Hog Lake Site.
Vessel V-1182, Burial 13 Cemetery Jones Place,
Hog Lake Site.
Vessel V-1181, Burial 13 Cemetery Jones Place,
Hog Lake Site.
Vessel V-1221, Mound Wolff Place, Rohwer Site.
Vessel V-1174, Burial 2 Mound B Medley Place,
Hog Lake Site.
Vessel V-1223, Mound Brown Place, Rohwer Site.
Vessel V-1222, Mound Brown Place, Rohwer Site.
Vessel V-1136, Gibson Mound.

12

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

within the state of Arkansas. In middens and on the
surface of certain of these sites, sherds of the
Deasonville and a few of the Marksville complexes
were found. Several entire vessels and other pottery
objects of, or related to, the earlier complexes were
exhumed.

permanent Indian settlements between the
Quawpaw village at the mouth of the Arkansas
River, Arkansas, and the Taensa towns on Lake St.
Joseph, Louisiana, but encountered the Korea tribe
of the Tunica group, whose settlements were on
the Yazoo River in Mississippi, hunting and making
salt in the upper Bayou Macon region (14), and,
In the hope that our work on the Bayou Macon
according to Swanton’s ethnological map of the
may assist to a limited degree in the determination
Indian tribes of the lower Mississippi valley (15),
of the areas covered by the pottery complexes of
the area under consideration in this report belongs
Louisiana and Mississippi and at the same time
to Tunica territory. Moore (16) explored most of
contribute to the archaeology of Arkansas, this
that part of the bayou lying within the state of
paper is presented.
Louisiana, and Ford collected sherds on the Neal
Our interest in this particular section had been Place (referred to by Moore as the Jackson Place)
aroused by Mr. George P. Kelley, of Halley, in West Carroll Parish, Louisiana, but no detailed
Arkansas, who had previously shown us a number report, to our knowledge, has heretofore been made
of pottery vessels unearthed by him in that locality. on that part of the stream situated within the state
Our thanks are due to him and also to Mrs. Alma of Arkansas. Moore’s work in Southeastern
Brown, of Rohwer, Arkansas, for many courtesies Arkansas was done on Bayou Bartholemew (17)
shown the expedition. We are indebted to Mr. James and the Saline (18) and Mississippi Rivers (19).
A. Ford, of Louisiana State University, for
assistance in the classification of the pottery found
Hog Lake Site
by us, and for the loan of type collections of sherds
Mr. Kelley had found burials on Hog Lake, an
of the Marksville, Coles Creek and Deasonville
old channel of Bayou Macon, near Halley, Arkansas,
complexes used for comparison purposes, and
and, as a consequence, our investigation began
especially for permission to study a copy of his
there. This site, showing evidences of aboriginal
comprehensive manuscript now being published by
occupancy for three quarters of a mile along the
the Louisiana Department of Conservation as its
east side of the lake and including three mounds, is
“Anthropological Study No. 2,” entitled “Analysis
located in Chicot County, Arkansas, just south of
of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana
the Desha County line, mostly in Sec. 4, Twp. 14
and Mississippi.” We are also indebted to Mr. Frank
S., R. 2 W., but extending a short distance north
M. Setzler, Acting Head Curator of the Department
into Sec. 33, Twp. 13 S., R. 2 W. The properties
of Anthropology, Smithsonian Institution, for
upon which the site is located belonged at the time
assistance through correspondence in classifying the
to ex-Governor Harvey Parnell, Webster Medley,
sherds of the Marksville complex and related objects
colored, and Laura Jones, colored, the Medley place
found by us; and to Dr. P. F. Titterington, of St.
being in the NW¼ of NE¼ of Sec. 4, the Jones
Louis, Missouri, for X-Rays and photographs of
place in the NW¼ of SE¼ of the same section, and
our material made by him.
the Parnell plantation covering the remainder of the
The Bayou Macon is a sluggish stream located site, and surrounding the two smaller tracts.
between Bayou Bartholemew and the Mississippi
River. It heads in Desha County, Arkansas, about
Evidences of Older Culture On Site
six miles east of Winchester and flows south through
Over the surface of the greater part of the Hog
Southeastern Arkansas and Northeastern Louisiana,
Lake Site fragments of pots and bowls (but none
emptying into the Tensas River.
of bottles) of a rather thick, heavy, grit tempered
The French explorers who came into this area
ware were in evidence. Most of these sherds were
during the latter part of the 18th century found no
of undecorated brown and dark gray pottery, having

Archeological Investigations On Bayou Macon

13

either a plain or a notched rim; a few
were plain except for a rather indistinct
undecorated band encircling the rim and
outlined below by a faint line; many of
them bore the cord marked decoration
of the Deasonville complex; a very few,
the typical decorations of the Marksville
complex; one of the sherds had deeply
incised overhanging lines parallel to the
rim (Coles Creek); and several of the
undecorated rim sherds bore projections
or lugs. A few of the sherds were covered
both inside and out with a light red slip.
These potsherds of the older complexes
from the Hog Lake site were similar in
most details to those found by us on
other sites hereinafter mentioned, and
their types are discussed more fully in
our classification of the sherds from the
Alma Brown place, infra.
The most abundant surface remains
on the entire site were on the Parnell
plantation south of the Medley line, but
extensive digging here uncovered but
one burial, a poorly preserved one found
just beneath the surface. The plow had
apparently destroyed the remaining
burials at this point. This skeleton, an
adult, measured 5’ and was extended on
its back with head to the northwest and
arms crossed on its breast. No furniture
was found with the burial. A number of
Deasonville sherds were found in the
digging around the skeleton, but none
of the later complex. About 50’
northwest of the burial was a refuse pit.
A number of cord marked Deasonville
sherds were in this pit and at the bottom
of it were the remains of a large square
bottomed pot, V-1177, of heavy, plain
dark gray-brown, grit tempered ware,
which has since been restored (catalog,
rather than field numbers of artifacts, are
given). This vessel probably belongs to
the Deasonville complex, since sherds of
that complex only were found in the trash
pit.

PLATE 2.
No. 1. Vessel V-1138, Burial 4, Cemetery, Westlake
Place.
No. 2. Vessel V-1180, Burial 3, Cemetery, Jones Place,
Hog Lake Site.
No. 3. Vessel V-1176, Burial 11 Mound B, Medley
Place, Hog Lake Site.
No. 4. Vessel V-1184, Burial 14, Cemetery, Jones Place,
Hog Lake Site.
No. 5. Vessel V-1178, Burial 1, Cemetery, Jones Place,
Hog Lake Site.
No. 6. Vessel V-1176, Burial 8 Mound B, Medley Place,
Hog Lake Site.
No. 7. Vessel V-1172 near Burial 9 Mound B, Medley
Place, Hog Lake Site.
No. 8. Vessel V-1135, Burial 1 Mound B, Medley Place,
Hog Lake Site.

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A house site, the hard packed, irregularly shaped
floor of which measured 11’ x 7 ½’ was discovered
about 200 yards south of the burial referred to. At
the time of the destruction of the dwelling the walls
had collapsed and had fallen on the floor. The
plastering was 4” in thickness. Immediately south
of the house were the remains of rotted poles. There
was no evidence of a fireplace within the dwelling,
neither could any opening be seen. Cord marked
and plain heavy sherds were found around the sides
and beneath the floor, but none of the later complex.
Similar sherds were also found in a small mound
on the Parnell plantation north of the Medley line,
but no burials.
EVIDENCES OF LATER CULTURE ON SITE
In two mounds on the Medley Place and in
cemeteries on the Jones and Parnell Places, burials,
which we believe to be Tunican, were found.

finding with stone slab cist burials in the Abilene,
Texas, region, six skulls from which the lower jaws
had been removed, the remaining bones, including
all of the upper jaws, being present. Five of these
burials were found in his “Roberts Covered Mound,
3” (20) and the remaining one in his “Alexander
Covered Mound, 1” (21).
The sherds gathered throughout the digging in
this mound were shell tempered and of Tunica ware.
We secured a vessel, V-1093, from Medley, which
he stated was plowed up on the mound in the spring
of 1933. It is a small pot of heavy polished black
ware, the rim of which is decorated with a band of
closely spaced horizontal lines formed by brushing
with fibers.
Mound “B”

Mound “B”, situated about 300’ northwest of
Mound “A” and directly on the bank of Hog Lake,
was approximately 50’ x 30’ and 10’ high, and was
Mounds, Medley Place
composed of a mixture of sand and clay. It had
Mound “A”
evidently been used for domiciliary purposes since
Mound “A”, roughly circular, approximately 45’ pieces of plaster from an aboriginal house and the
in diameter and 4’ high, was badly damaged. Its remains of beams were found in the course of our
base was a low natural elevation. It had been dug digging. This mound was of service during the flood
into by Mr. Kelley. He reported that he found a of 1927, and permission to excavate was given only
number of burials, all bunched with the exception on condition that the sides be not disturbed; hence,
of one, which was flexed, that but few pottery the summit plateau only was explored. This area
vessels and no stone artifacts were with the burials, was packed and had the appearance of not having
and that the pottery was in all instances near the been dug into except in one place near the southern
skull. He noted the absence of lower jaws in the end, where Mr. Kelley had made a small excavation
bunched burials. The pottery discovered by him is and found an “L”-shaped pipe. Directly beneath the
of the general type found by us with burials on the surface was a layer of black soil, and all of the burials
Medley Place. Mr. Kelley courteously presented us found by us were in this layer, at depths of from 2”
with one of the finest specimens, V-370, a tall to 8”.
graceful vase of porous yellow clay with a short
Burial No. 1 was an adult, extended on its back
flaring neck, the body of which is decorated with
with head to the west. At the left of the skull was a
incised interlocking scrolls and the neck with three
medium sized urn, V-1135, of porous yellow-brown
deeply incised encircling lines. This mound was
ware, decorated with crude incised interlocking
completely explored by us but yielded nothing other
scrolls broken by horizontal, parallel lines.
than a skull without a lower mandible, and
numerous other bones. The fact that no lower jaw
Burial No. 2 was an adult, extended, with head
bone was found with this skull appears significant to the north. Its skull was about 7” southwest of
in view of Mr. Kelley’s observation. We know of that of No. 1. Against the left side of the skull a
no other discoveries in this area of the absence of plain water bottle, V-1174, of yellow ware having
lower mandibles from burials, but Ray reports a short, wide neck, was found.

Archeological Investigations On Bayou Macon
Burial No. 3, directly under the torso of No. 2
with a thin layer of soil between, was an adult
extended with head toward the northeast. At the
top of the skull was a medium sized bottle, V-1134,
of yellow ware, decorated with a well executed
design based on the interlocking scroll, and having
a short, wide neck.

15

the body bears a design composed of red and white
interlocking scrolls arranged in a somewhat
swastika-like manner. This vessel resembles in color
and design, but not in shape, certain tall, wide
necked bottles found on the St. Francis and
Mississippi Rivers in Northeastern Arkansas, and,
in that its decoration is based on the scroll, is not
unlike the short, small necked, red and white painted
Burial No. 4, a skull with no other bones and
bottles of the Arkansas River area. With this bottle
pointing south, was approximately 1 ½’ west of
was part of a small bowl of dark brown ware, the
the right tibia of No. 2; no furniture.
rim of which is decorated with a band of incised,
Deposit of Bones. Just under the surface about nested triangles enclosing parallel diagonal lines.
1 ½’ south of No. 2 was a deposit of bones,
Two feet northwest of burial No. 9 an urn of
principally tibiae and femora; presumably, bunched
thin yellow ware, V-1172, was discovered. The
burials. Nearby was a portion of a small undecorated
design is composed of concentric semicircles, or
bowl.
festoons, on the body of the vessel, and a nested
Burial No. 5, a flexed skeleton, headed south triangular pattern, with punctate units, about the
and facing west, was discovered 12 ½’ south- rim.
southwest of No. 2. These were the only skeletal
Burials Nos. 10 and 11. Ten inches south of the
remains found in the mound which were fairly well
bottle in No. 8 was a skull pointed south. About 7”
preserved. No furniture.
east of this skull was another similarly placed. No
Burial No. 6, a skull headed south and facing other bones were with these skulls. At the east side
west with no other bones, was found 6” west of of the latter skull was a medium sized, undecorated
the cranium of No. 5. No offerings.
cooking pot, V-1176, of porous, thin, black ware,
having a conical base. Spots of soot were on the
Burial No. 7, an adult extended with head to
sides.
the south, had been placed directly above Nos. 5
and 6. At the left side of the skull was a small
In the general digging in the summit plateau of
globular pot, V-1173, of thin yellow ware, plain Mound “B”, a number of sherds of the Deasonville
except for a band of incised diagonal lines around complex were found. The manner in which these
the rim.
were scattered indicated that, in the course of the
building of the mound, some dirt had been gathered
Burial No. 8, the upper part of a skull consisting
from the trash pits of the people of the older culture.
of parts of the frontal, parietal and occipital bones,
was 2 ½’ east of No. 5 and headed south. On its
Cemetery, Jones Place
west side was a medium sized globular pot, V-1175,
On the Jones place in the southern part of the
of thin, dark brown ware, decorated with incised
continuous interlocking scrolls. Three parallel Hog Lake site, an orderly cemetery of the later
incised lines encircled the base of the rim. In our culture was found. The burials were directly under
collection is a vessel from the Saline River, Ashley the surface, the bones in poor condition and, in
County, Arkansas, having an identical decorative several instances, damaged by the plow. All of the
burials except No. 2 were headed south of west,
pattern.
were parallel, fairly uniformly spaced, and averaged
Burial No. 9, about 15” southwest of No. 8 was
about two feet apart. Except where otherwise
a skull without other bones, on its side, facing west.
noted, the skeletons were extended on their backs.
Directly against its face was a beautiful water bottle,
Burial No. 1 included an adult, 5’ 4”, and an
V-1170, of yellow paste, tempered with a high
percentage of shell. The neck was painted red and adolescent measuring 3’ 2” with the skull of the

16

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

adolescent partially on the right shoulder of
the adult. At the north side of the feet of the
adult, were numerous bones, including
femora, tibiae, lower mandibles, ribs and
vertebrae. At the left of the adult’s skull was
a rather large, shell tempered urn, V-1178,
of dark gray-brown ware, below the rim of
which is a wide encircling band of incised
nested triangles containing parallel diagonal
lines. The carapace of a terrapin was found
in this vessel. At the left of the adult’s skull
was a rather large semi-globular bowl of
yellow ware, plain except for shallow, widely
spaced notches on the rim. Just south of the
skull of the adolescent was the lower part
of a water bottle of plain, porous, dark gray
ware, the remainder of which had been
destroyed by the plow.
Burial No. 2, the lower extremities of
which were found 2’ northwest of the skull
of the adult in No. 1, was an adult headed
northwest. The skull had been partially
destroyed by the plow. No artifacts.
Burial No. 3 measured 5’ 7”. At the top
of the skull were a small, crudely made elbow
pipe of plain yellow clay and a medium sized
urn, V-1180, of dark, gray-brown ware,
decorated with an incised rectilinear design
composed of parallel horizontal lines, cut
into groups by parallel vertical lines.
Burial No. 4 included an adult extended,
measuring 5’ 2”, and a bunched burial,
consisting of leg and arm bones which were
placed to the left of the lower extremities of
the former. At the top of the skull of the
extended skeleton was a bottle of plain
yellow ware.
Burial No. 5 measured 5’ 11”. No
artifacts.
Burial No. 6 was 5’ 9” in length. Beneath
the skull on the right side was a crudely made
bone pin, 5 1/8” long, and a small oval piece
of shell; presumably ornaments for the hair.

PLATE 3.
No. 1. Vessel V-1139, Burial 1 Cemetery, Westlake
Place.
No. 2. Vessel V-1177, Refuse Heap, Parnell Place,
Hog Lake Site.
No. 3. Vessel V-370, Mound A, Medley Place, Hog
Lake Site.
No. 4. Vessel V-1170, Burial 9 Mound B, Medley
Place, Hog Lake Site.
No. 5. Vessel V-1173, Burial 7 Mound B, Medley
Place, Hog Lake Site.
No. 6. Vessel V-1134, Burial 3 Mound B, Medley
Place, Hog Lake Site.
No. 7. Vessel V-1093, Mound A, Medley Place,
Hog Lake Site.

Archeological Investigations On Bayou Macon
Burial No. 7 was in a grave 5’ long. A skull,
face downward, and headed south of west was at
one end. The remainder of the grave contained a
number of arm and leg bones. No offerings.
Burial No. 8 was bunched and contained two
skulls and a number of other bones. No furniture.
Burial No. 9 contained an adult in a poor state
of preservation. At the right of the skull was a badly
crushed vessel, the paste of which was so poor that
its nature could not be determined. Just below the
chin, in fragments, was an elbow pipe of gray-brown
ware.
Burial No. 10 contained two adult skeletons,
side by side. The skull of skeleton “a” had been
removed and placed at the feet of “b”. A crushed
water bottle of poor ware was at the top of the
skull of “b”.

17

sole decoration consists of closely spaced notches
around the edge of the juncture referred to. A small
undecorated water bottle of yellow ware, V-1181,
with a tall, straight neck and flaring rim, had been
placed at the left of the skull of the adult.
Burial No. 14 contained three skeletons
damaged and disarranged by the plow. With these
was a large bottle, V-1184, of polished, hard, dark
gray-brown ware, the form of which resembles
certain bottles found in the Caddo area in Southwest
Arkansas. The body is decorated with a three
pointed engraved figure arranged symmetrically
about the neck and containing cross hatching;
crudely engraved lines connect the points of this
figure. The neck has three encircling lines at the
rim and a like number at the base.
Cemetery, Parnell Place

Burial No. 11, an adult, had been partially
On the Parnell plantation, directly west of the
destroyed by the plow. No artifacts.
Jones line, a cemetery, also considerably damaged
by the plow, was discovered.
Burial No. 12 was an adult. At the top of the
skull was a small water bottle of a poor grade of
Burial No. 1, an adult extended, with head to
yellow ware with a wide, short neck, undecorated the northwest, measured 5’ 5”, and was found just
except for a raised encircling ridge at the base of below plow depth. At the right elbow was an
the neck, reminiscent of certain vessels found on offering of the following objects: a large stemmed
the Mississippi and St. Francis Rivers in arrow head of red jasper, a red jasper drill, a lump
of oxide of iron, a large claw, and some teeth of a
Northeastern Arkansas.
small animal.
Burial No. 13, the richest in the cemetery,
Burial No. 2, a badly decayed skull, was found
contained the skeleton of an adult, extended. At
the right of the skull was another cranium, that of 2 ½’ southwest of No. 1 and headed northwest; no
an adolescent. Of the latter, no other bones were artifacts.
found. On the abdomen of the adult, the bones of a
Burials Nos. 3 and 4 had been struck by the
very young baby could be traced; also upon the
plow and the leg bones alone remained. These
abdomen was a small bowl placed over a rattle of
remains were parallel to those of No. 1.
pottery, containing pellets. The bowl, V-1182, is
Burial No. 5, just below plow depth, contained
saucer-shaped, of reddish-brown ware, and has on
its exterior a narrow, incised, encircling line just two adults placed side by side, parallel to and about
below the rim. The interior bears an incised design 2’ south of the leg bones of No. 4. Skeleton “a”,
composed of a band encircling the rim within which measuring 5’, was extended on back, headed
four groups of concentric semi-circles, or festoons, northwest, with face turned toward “b”. The latter,
are arranged. The rattle, V-1183, is of brown ware measuring 4’ 9”, was extended on its right side,
and has two perforations for suspension. It was headed southeast, with knees slightly flexed and
formed by joining two shallow, semi-globular bowls touching the right arm of “a”. In this inverted
at the rims, and sealing the juncture with clay. Its position, the skull of “a” faced the feet of “b”, and
vice versa. No artifacts.

18

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Bellaire Mound

Burial No. 6 contained an adult extended,
parallel to and about 9’ southwest of No. 5, and
was headed northwest. It had been struck by the
plow. A flint chipping outfit was at the left of the
skull. This kit consisted of 3 pieces of sandstone, 2
bone tools used in flaking, 2 antler tips, 2 poorly
wrought arrow-heads, 24 pieces of jasper, 2
hammer stones, a piece of slate, and a conglomerate.
A refuse pit containing sherds of the later complex
was discovered between burials Nos. 5 and 6.

At Bellaire, on the Parnell Plantation, about
three-quarters of a mile west of the Hog Lake site,
is a mound approximately 80’ in diameter and 12’
high. This mound had been previously dug into and
was badly damaged. A day was spent in digging
into parts of the tumulus for the purpose of
ascertaining whether it had been used by the people
of the older or later culture. A few sherds of Tunica
ware only were found. This site was formerly a part
of a plantation owned by Mrs. James A. Anderson.
About the year 1886, and during the Anderson
tenure, a large rectangular stone effigy pipe was
Surface Finds
found on the place. The specimen remained in Mrs.
In addition to sherds of the earlier and later
Anderson’s family until 1931, when her daughter,
complexes, the following objects were found on
Mrs. Sue Levinson, kindly permitted us to add it to
the surface of the Hog Lake site:
our collection. This pipe, P-117, of polished cream
Medley Place: A large, unfinished plummet of colored felsite, represents some feline beast which
hematite, having neither groove nor perforation, 3 is sometimes found modeled on pottery vessels of
3/8” long; half of a rather flat, deeply hollowed out the Mississippi and St. Francis areas of Northeast
boatstone of brown quartzitic sandstone; and a small Arkansas. The stylistic treatment of the creature
celt of green stone, 2 ½” in length.
would indicate an association with a mythological
concept. For example, the tail, which is in relief,
Jones Place: An “L”-shaped pipe of yellow ware,
encircles both the wide aperture where the pipe stem
decorated with two lines of punctations about the
was inserted and the bowl, terminating near a lightly
rim of the bowl.
engraved circle just back of the ears. Two stone
Parnell Place: A crude boatstone of gray effigy pipes resembling this specimen, one of them
sandstone, 3” in length, and having a flat base; a most strikingly, were found near Mound “M” at
small celt of polished green stone 2 ½” in length; a Moundville, Alabama, about 1860, and are
small rectangular pendant made from a shell illustrated by Moore (23). One of these is in the
tempered potsherd; 2 crudely made objects of clay Peabody Museum at Cambridge. The other was
resembling those found by Moore at Poverty Point acquired by General Thruston, and is described and
on Bayou Macon in Louisiana (22). In digging test illustrated by him (24). He states that it represents
holes on the Parnell Place: a medium sized pipe of a panther. Moore, himself found a similar pipe near
dark brown clay, somewhat “L”-shaped with a well Mound “R” at Moundville, and gives two views
defined base, was found.
(25). The last mentioned pipe is also figured by
Moorehead (26) and by West (27). McGuire (28)
A few large and medium sized stemmed arrowdescribes and illustrates a somewhat similar
heads of jasper and novaculite, some with and others
specimen from Hot Springs, Arkansas. One of the
without barbs, were found at various places on the
group of five stone effigy pipes from Selsertown
site. Similar arrow-heads were on the surface of
Plateau, Mississippi, in the Milwaukee Public
the other sites on Bayou Macon which were
Museum (catalog No. 16209), depicts a crouching
investigated by us. No glass beads or other objects
animal showing its teeth in a threatening manner. It
that might indicate European contact were
is figured and described by Brown (29) and
discovered on this or any of the other sites referred
illustrated by West (30) Ford, in his forthcoming
to.
monograph, before referred to, illustrates a large
effigy pipe, of clay however, from the Pocohontas

Archeological Investigations On Bayou Macon
Mound, in the Big Black River valley of Mississippi,
which was explored by him and Chambers and
yielded early Tunica ware. Although, this pipe
depicts a man kneeling, it is of the same general
Muskhogean type as those under discussion. In this
connection, it is also of interest to note that in the
Smith mound, in the same valley, Ford and
Chambers found with early Tunica ware a red and
white quadrilateral square bottomed vessel, having
terraced sides, similar in shape to one found by
Moore, (31) at Moundville.
Westlake Place
We also investigated a site situated at the mouth
of Lost Chain, a stream emptying into Bayou Macon
in Desha County, Arkansas, upon which site there
are two mounds. The eastern part of the site,
including one of the mounds, is on the farm of Lizzie
Wilson, who refused permission to excavate. This
mound was about 40’ in diameter and 3’ high and
had been washed by the 1927 flood. Sherds of the
later complex were found on its surface. The rest
of the site, with the remaining mound, is on the
Westlake place situated in the E½ of NE¼, Sec.
29, Twp. 13 S., R. 2 West. This mound, measuring
approximately 35’ in diameter and 2’ in height, was
completely explored by us. The following described
burials were found; all of the burials, with the
exception of the bunched burial later referred to,
were extended on their backs at depths averaging
about 2 ½’; the bones in all instances were in poor
condition:
Burial No. 1, measuring 5’, was in the center of
the mound, headed west. At the right of the skull
was a cooking pot, V-1139, of heavy plain dark
gray-brown ware, with a circular opening, square
bottom and rudimentary feet.
Burial No. 2, 4’ east of No. 1 and headed west,
was 4’ in length no artifacts.
Burial No. 3, about 11” north of No. 1, included
two adults headed north, side by side, respectively
6’ and 5’ in length, and a bunched burial. The
bunched burial was placed to the right of the leg
bones of the shorter skeleton. No offerings.

19

Burial No. 4, about 3’ northeast of No. 3 and
headed east, was 5’ in length. At the left of the skull
was a small, crude, semi-globular bowl, V-1138, of
thick, grit tempered, light brown ware, having two
holes placed oppositely at the rim.
Considerable digging in the field failed to
disclose other burials. Many sherds of the
Deasonville and a few of the Marksville complex
were found on the surface of the Westlake place. A
polished, red jasper knife with a curved blade, 3”
in length, was found on the surface of the Wilson
place.
Gibson Mound
An investigation was made of a small mound in
the woods on the Henry Gibson place, situated near
Bayou Macon in the W½ of NE¼ of Sec. 21, Twp.
13 S., R. 2 West, Desha County, Arkansas. This
mound, approximately 58’ in diameter and 5’ high,
had been partially explored by Mr. Kelley. He
reported having found in the center several bunched
burials, with pottery. The vessels discovered by
him are of the Tunica complex. Undisturbed parts
of the mound were dug into by us. Certain artifacts,
but no burials, were found.
In the northeastern part of the mound, 6” under
the surface, was a pot, V-1136, having certain Coles
Creek characteristics. This vessel is of heavy, brown,
grit tempered ware and has a circular opening and
a square bottom. It is decorated with a wide
encircling -band enclosed in incised horizontal lines.
Within this band is a design composed of diagonal
lines forming irregular triangular figures, with
interspaces filled with punctations formed by a blunt
pointed tool inserted at an angle. In the southeastern
part of the mound, at a depth of about 2’, were
three vessels: a large, shallow undecorated bowl of
thin, yellow ware; part of a smaller bowl of plain,
dark gray pottery; and a semi-globular bowl of
porous yellow paste, upon one side of the rim of
which is a triangular projection similar in shape to
the conventionalized tails appearing on effigy bowls
found farther north in the Mississippi valley. The
opposite side of the rim is missing but doubtless it
contained the head of the effigy. On the north side

20

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

PLATE 4.
No. 1. Sherds of the Deasonville Complex, from the Rohwer Site. No. 2. Sherds of the
Marksville Complex, from the Hog Lake, “Westlake and Rohwer Sites.
of the mound and also at a depth of about 2’ was a
small shallow, broken bowl of dark gray ware, over
which 13 slightly worked, rather large, pebbles of
yellow jasper had been placed. A few flakes in each
instance had been struck from the pebbles.

Rohwer Site

There is a group of six mounds on Boggy Bayou
near Rohwer in Desha County, Arkansas. Boggy
Bayou was formerly a tributary of Bayou Macon
but its course has been changed by a channel dug
This mound had the appearance of being a
in recent years. Four of the mounds are on the
natural formation. The soil was homogeneous and
plantation of Mrs. Alma Brown, situated in the S½
contained no sherds, charcoal or debris.
of Sec. 11, Twp. 11 S., R. 2 W. The remainder are
Mr. Kelley also did some digging in a mound on on adjoining lands belonging to Mr. R. H. Wolff.
the W. E. Grimes farm, about three-quarters of a These mounds are composed of sand and have been
mile south of the Westlake place, and found burials plowed over for many years.
with Tunica ware. He presented us with one of the
The northernmost mound on the Wolff place
vessels, V-1743, a small, round, slightly concave
measured 130’ north and south by 100’ east and
platter of porous gray-brown ware, comparatively
west, and the southernmost 116’ north and south
heavy and thick walled. Its interior bears an incised
by 101’ east and west. These mounds were partially
“all over” pattern composed of two concentric
explored by us. In both instances, modern burials
circles enclosing herringbone patterns irregularly
were found, and the work was abandoned. In the
spaced and separated by wider incised lines. The
northernmost mound on the northeastern side, and
exterior is decorated by two encircling lines below
at a depth of 4’, a large water bottle, V-1221, was
the rim.
discovered just beyond the limits of a modern grave.

Archeological Investigations On Bayou Macon
This vessel, of yellow ware, is decorated with three
sets of widely spaced incised concentric circles, and,
in design, but not in the composition and texture of
the ware, resembles certain Caddo bottles found
on the upper Ouachita River in Arkansas. Sherds
of the later complex were found in and around the
Wolff mounds.

21

technique” (32). This object and a large fragment
of a somewhat similar one, U-160, found by us in a
shallow refuse pit on the Brown place containing
sherds of the Deasonville complex, remain
unclassified. An illustration of both is given.
Specimen U-160 is similar in size and material to
U-159, but is more rounded. It is 7/8” thickness,
and is flat on one side and slightly convex on the
other. It also is well baked and contains on both
sides deeply incised, but carelessly executed,
decorations resembling each other in design. But
for the fact that no stamped ware was found on
Bayou Macon, we might classify these as pottery
stamps. It has been suggested that they may have
been used as gaming discs. Clay discs resembling
these were found by de Booy in the Salado caves
of Eastern Santo Domingo (33). The similarity
between our specimen U-159 and those illustrated
in his Figure 27 (op. cit. p. 95) is striking. The
designs, which are incised in both instances, appear
to be practically the same. In certain of his discs,
including those just referred to, both sides bear the
same decoration, as is the case with ours. In others,
however, there is an incised design on one side and
a small animal effigy in low relief (op. cit., pi. IX),
on the other, within the body of which is a hollow
space forming a receptacle for pebbles. De Booy
classifies all of these discs as stamps, and suggests
that those containing pebbles served both as stamps
and as rattles.

The four mounds on the Brown place, all of
which are roughly circular, are approximately 119’,
90’, 85’ and 25’ in diameter. The time that we could
devote to our investigation had about expired, and
no attempt was made to explore these mounds.
Some digging however, was done in the two smaller
ones, which were but a few feet apart and may, at
one time, have been one mound. The smallest
yielded 2 vessels and no burials. On its northeastern
side at a depth of 1 ½’ was a badly crushed, friable
square bottomed pot, having a circular opening and
decorated below the rim with a wide encircling band
of nested triangles containing parallel lines. About
2’ east of this vessel was a medium sized pot, V1223, of heavy ware, modeled in the shape of an
inverted truncated cone and decorated with closely
spaced parallel vertical ridges made by pinching the
wet clay between the finger tips. Remains of a light
red slip are upon both the interior and exterior of
this vessel. A number of test holes were made in
the other mound last referred to, and on its eastern
side at a depth of about 2’ an urn, with no evidence
of a burial, was discovered. This vessel, V-1222, is
of thin, polished brown ware, and is decorated
Prior to the making of our limited investigation
throughout with diagonal intersecting bands of the mounds referred to, considerable digging was
forming diamond shaped figures, with a background done in that part of the village site lying between
of punctations.
the Brown mounds and Boggy Bayou. Here a small
cemetery, much damaged by the plow, was
About 1 ½’ west of the vessel was an interesting
discovered. All of the skeletons except three had
and unusual clay object, U-159. This specimen of
been practically destroyed. Two of the remaining
well baked, buff colored clay, is square in shape, 2
ones were adults extended on backs, headed west
7/8” wide and 1 1/8” thick at the center, with slightly
of north with no offerings. The remaining skeleton,
rounded comers. It is convex on each side, and on
an adult headed northwest and flexed on the right
both faces is a rectilinear design of deeply incised
side, was somewhat damaged. At the left of the
chevrons. As Mr. Setzler states with regard to this
skull was a plain, shallow, circular bowl of dark
specimen, the decoration is comparable to the
gray, grit tempered ware, 5 ¾” in diameter. With
decoration on pottery vessels from the Marksville
the bowl were 5 slender bone needles, circular in
site in central Louisiana, and consists of a type
cross section and ranging from 5 ½” to 5 7/8” in
which he has termed “closely spaced incised line
length, and the sharpened tip of an antler.

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Sherds of the earlier culture, all from pots and
bowls but none from bottles, were found in this
cemetery and in shallow refuse heaps nearby and
on the surface of the area mentioned. The unusual
clay object, U-160, above described, was
discovered in one of these middens. These sherds,
which are of the same general types as those of the
older culture found on the Hog Lake and other sites
investigated by us, are not only capable of being
classified into complexes, but also to some extent
into sub-types. For such a classification we have
selected 406, being all of those saved from the
Brown place except undecorated body sherds,
which were plentifully distributed over the area.
Sherds of the Deasonville Complex

The cord marked rim sherds fall into four classes:
(a) plain, of which there are 9, (b) notched, 7, (c)
banded, 7, and (d) banded and notched, 9. In “a”
the cord marking extends upward to an undecorated
rim lip; in “b” the rim is identical with “a” except
that the lip is notched (the notches in some cases
appearing on the outer edge only, in others
extending across the lip); in “c” a raised band
varying from 5/8” to 1 1/2” in width encircles the
rim (this band having been formed in most instances
by purposely failing to smooth out completely the
last coil of clay); and in “d” the rim is identical with
“c” except that the lip is notched. The rims range
from 5 mm. to 1 cm. in thickness; the body sherds
from 6 mm. to 1 cm. Parts of the bottoms of 7 cord
marked vessels were found. All of these bottoms
are square and the cord marks extend almost
completely to the base; thickness of bottoms, 11 to
13 mm.

Cord Marked Sherds: Of the sherds mentioned,
250 are cord marked; 211 of these are body sherds.
The cord marks vary in width from slightly less than
1 mm. to 2 mm., and were applied in some instances
Plain Rim Sherds: Sixty-three of the rim sherds
in vertical or diagonal parallel lines and in others
are
undecorated; thickness from 5 mm. to 12 mm.
crosswise, forming large and small rectangular
figures. The colors are mostly brown, some gray. Six have red slips; otherwise the colors are browns
In all cases, practically the entire vessel with the and grays.
exception of the bottom was decorated.

PLATE 5.
No. 1. Pipe No. P. 117 from Bellaire, side view. No. 2. Pipe No. P. 117, front view.

Archeological Investigations On Bayou Macon

23

Banded, But Otherwise Undecorated Rim
Sherds: There are 19 of these. A plain band, formed
by failure to completely smooth out the last layer
of clay, encircles the rim; thickness from 7 to 9 mm.;
colors, grays and browns. Five have red slips.

undecorated rim sherds” and the Coles Creek, in
that a plain band outlined by a line below encircles
their rims. This line, however, is not incised, and
we believe that the sherds in question belong to the
Deasonville complex. Twelve sherds of the coarse
ware of the older culture, having lugs or projections
Notched, But Otherwise Undecorated Rim
on their rims, were found on the site. Two of these
Sherds: Of these there are 44; thickness from 5 to
have triangular lugs, somewhat resembling those
12 mm.; colors, browns and grays, Two have red
found on Coles Creek vessels. The remainder do
slips.
not.
Notched and Banded, But Otherwise
Undecorated Rim Sherds: Three of the sherds have
Conclusions
both the notched rim and the encircling band above
Two ceramic sequences in point of time are
referred to; color, brown; thickness, 7 to 9 mm.
indicated by the pottery from Bayou Macon in
Many plain, square bottoms of this ware were Arkansas. We have classified the later horizon as
found; thickness 7 mm. to 2 cm. In rim profiles, Tunican for the reason that the vessels as a whole
texture and general appearance no distinction is more nearly resemble those of the Tunica complex
noted between the pottery that is cord
marked and that which is not. As will have
been noted, the styles of decoration, other
than cord marking, are the same. Hence,
it would appear that all of the types above
mentioned are of the Deasonville complex.
Sherds of the Marksville Complex
Fourteen sherds of the Marksville
complex were found on the Brown site.
Both of Setzler’s types are represented.
This pottery is of finer texture, is better
fired and is superior to the other ware of
the older culture found on Bayou Macon.
The colors are brown, of varying shades,
and gray; thickness of rims, from 6 mm.
to 9 mm. in all instances, with one
exception in which the thickness is 1 1/2
cm.
Coles Creek Complex
One sherd that especially appears to be
of the Coles Creek complex was found on
the site. It has two deeply incised parallel
lines below the rim and a faint encircling
line on the lip; color, dark gray, rim
thickness 7 mm. There is some
resemblance between the sherds which we
have classified as “banded but otherwise

PLATE 6
No. 1. Clay Object V-160, Refuse Pit, Brown Place,
Rohwer Site.
No. 2. Clay Object V-159, Mound Brown Place,
Rohwer Site.
No. 3. Pipe P. 117, another view of this unusual
pipe.

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

than any other. Ford, in his analysis now being
published, lists the following among others as
characteristics of Tunica ware: (a) in vessel shapes:
bottles, shallow concave bowls, beakers and effigy
vessels; (b) in paste: shell tempered and light porous
gray or black ware; (c) in pottery decorations: small
ridges raised by pinching, “U” shaped festoons of
incised lines, herringbone design, scrolls formed by
numerous lines, interior decorations of straight lines,
and brush markings made with bundles of fibers.
These characteristics are in evidence on some of
the entire vessels found by us. On the other hand, a
number of the distinguishable features of Tunica
pottery found elsewhere are missing, such as pots
with handles, knobs, Decorated outflaring lips, and
fairly hard gray or brown ware; and, as has been
seen, Caddo and other outside influences are
manifest. On the whole, our vessels of the later
period, with the exception of those showing such
influences, appear to be more nearly akin to the
pottery found by Ford and Chambers on the Dupree,
Gross, Smith and Pocohontas sites in the Big Black
River Valley of Mississippi than any other. The burial
customs of the two peoples are also similar. In Big
Black Valley, Ford and Chambers (as detailed in
Ford’s analysis referred to) found skull burials with
the usual burial furniture but lacking the rest of the
bones, burials extended on their backs, and flexed
burials. Our assignment of the ware to the Tunica
complex is based mainly upon the foregoing
considerations.

Apparently the Coles Creek complex did not
manifest itself as the Deasonville complex did in
this region. Only two sherds that might be definitely
classified as Coles Creek were found during the
entire stay on Bayou Macon. These are of one Coles
Creek type of decoration only, that is “incised
encircling lines parallel to the rim.” In one of these
sherds the lines are not “overhanging.” The vessel
V-1136 from the Gibson Mound has characteristics
of this complex, but it is by no means typically Coles
Creek.

The sherds we have assigned to the Deasonville
complex differ in some respects but resemble in
others the ware found by Chambers at Deasonville.
A number of our plain and cord marked rim sherds
display notches and a raised encircling band; none
such are illustrated by him. Collins found red and
white painted ware at Deasonville. We collected
some red slipped sherds (one of Ford’s “marker”
types of the Deasonville complex) but no painted
specimens. Ford says that the pottery found at the
Deasonville site is slightly typical of the complex
to which that name has been given, and notes that
red and white painted ware has not always been
found associated with the cord marked pottery of
this complex. Collins found sherds bearing lugs and
handles, but these appendages were restricted to
shell tempered vessels decorated with punctations
or incised lines. We have seen illustrations only of
Collins’ pottery and have not had the opportunity
to examine any of the actual ware itself. However,
One time horizon only is indicated by the pottery we have compared our cord marked sherds from
of the earlier complexes. We found no evidence on Bayou Macon with the collections of cord marked
Bayou Macon which would tend to show that the sherds of the Deasonville complex loaned us by Mr.
different types of this ware were the products of Ford and in texture, colors, vessel shapes as
separate peoples. X-rays of the several types of indicated by the sherds, and in the application of
sherds were made by Dr. P. F. Titterington, of St. the cords to the clay, the pottery is practically the
Louis, Missouri. He reported that all of the sherds same. Cord marked sherds have not been heretofore
contain pieces of gravel; that dark streaks appear reported from Arkansas; hence, the influence of no
in all of the pictures, due probably to poor puddling complex other than Deasonville is indicated.
of the paste; that he was unable to determine
The complexion of the first pottery horizon
different characteristics for the groups of sherds;
appears to be predominately Deasonville plus a
and that from an x-ray standpoint all could have
small amount of the Marksville ware.
been made by the same people.
The Bayou Macon area in Arkansas is important
Our Marksville sherds are almost identical in
from an archaeological standpoint. Unfortunately,
decoration with those found on the Marksville site.
floods and the plow have destroyed most of the

Archeological Investigations On Bayou Macon
evidence. Due to the comparatively short length of
time that we could devote to the project, our
investigation there was necessarily limited. An
intensive exploration of the sites and mounds in
the area should be made before further damage
ensues.

25

(10) Jackson, A. T., “Types of East Texas Pottery,” Bulletin
of The Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 6, p. 38, 1934.
(11) Pearce, J. E., “The Present Status of Texas
Archaeology,” Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, p. 44, 1932. Also, Pearce, J.
E., “Archaeology of East Texas,” American Anthropologist,
Vol. 34, No. 4, October-December, 1932. Also, Pearce, J.
E., “Tales That Dead Men Tell,” Anthropological Papers,
Vol. 1, University of Texas, 1935.

200 First National Bank Building, Hope, Arkansas.
State A. & M. College, Magnolia, Arkansas.
May 1, 1937.
(12) Lemley, Harry J., “Discoveries Indicating a Pre-Caddo
Culture on Red River in Arkansas,” Bulletin of The Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8, 1936,
pp. 25-55, pls. 3-11.
(1) Collins, Henry B., Jr. “Potsherds from Choctaw Village
Sites in Mississippi,” Journal Washington Academy of
Science, Vol. 17, No. 10, pp. 259-263, May, 1927.
(2) Collins, Henry B., Jr., “Excavations at a Prehistoric
Indian Village site in Mississippi,” Proceedings of the U. S.
National Museum, Vol. 79, Art. 32, pp. 1-22, pls. 1-13.
(3) Ford, Jas. A., “Ceramic Decoration Sequence at an
Old Indian Village Site near Sicily Island, La.,”
Anthropological Study No. 1, p. 3, note 5, Dept. of
Conservation, La. Geological Survey, New Orleans, 1935.
(4) Fowke, Gerard, “Archaeological Work in Louisiana,”
Smithsonian, Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 78, No. 7, pp.
254-9, 1927. Also Fowke, Gerard, “Explorations in the Red
River Valley in La.,” 44 Annual Report B. A. E. pp., 405434, 1928.
(5) Setzler, Frank M., “Pottery of the Hopewell Type from
La.,” Proceedings of the V. S. Nat. Museum, Vol. 82, Art.
22, pp. 1-21, pls. 1-7. Also Setzler, Frank M., “A Phase of
Hopewell Mound Builders in La.,” Exploration and Field
work of the Smithsonian Institution in 1933, pp. 38-40.
(6) Ford, Jas. A., “Ceramic Decoration Sequence at an
Old Indian Village Site near Sicily Island, La.,” Dept. of
Conservation La. Geological Survey, New Orleans, 1935.
(7) Ford, Jas. A., “Outline of Louisiana and Mississippi
Pottery Horizons,” Louisiana Conservation Review, Vol. 4,
No. 6, p. 33, April, 1935, New Orleans.
(8) Moore, C. B., “Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River,”
Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia,
1912. Also, Moore, C. B., “Antiquities of the Ouachita
Valley,” Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia, 1909.
(9) Harrington, M. R., “Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas,”
Indian Notes and Monograms, Museum of The American
Indian, Heye Foundation, New York, 1920.

(13) Dickinson, S. D., “The Ceramic Relationships of the
Pre-Caddo Pottery from the Crenshaw Site/’ Bulletin of The
Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8,
pp. 66-68, 1936.
(14) Swanton, Jno. R., “Indian Tribes of the Lower
Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast to the Gulf of
Mexico,” B. A. E. Bulletin 43, pp. 306-7.
(15) Swanton, Jno. R., op. cit., map, frontispiece.
(16) Moore, C. B., “Some Aboriginal Sites In Arkansas and
Louisiana,” Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences,
Philadelphia, 1913.
(17) Moore, C. B., “Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley,”
Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia,
1909.
(18) Moore, C. B., “Some Aboriginal Sites in Louisiana
and Arkansas,” Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences,
Philadelphia, 1913.
(19) Moore, C. B., “Some Aboriginal Sites on the
Mississippi River,” Journal of the Academy of Natural
Sciences, Philadelphia, 1911.
(20) Ray, Cyrus N., “Multiple Burials In Stone Cist Mounds
of the Abilene Region,” Bulletin of The Texas Archaeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, 1933, pp. 19-20.
(21) Ray, Cyrus N., op. cit., pp. 22-23.
(22) Moore, C. B-, “Some Aboriginal Sites in Louisiana
and Arkansas,” Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences
of Philadelphia, plate 2, 1913.
(23) Moore, C. B., “Certain Aboriginal Remains of the
Black Warrior River,” Journal of the Academy of Natural
Sciences, Philadelphia, Vol. 13, figs. 1, 2 and 3, pp. 131-2,
Philadelphia, 1905.
(24) Thruston, Gates P., “Antiquities of Tennessee,” p. 187,
fig. 84, Cincinnati, 1897.

26

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

(25) Moore, C. B., “Certain Aboriginal Remains of the
Black “Warrior River,” Journal of the Academy of Natural
Sciences, Philadelphia, Vol. 13, p. 234, figs. 165-6.

(30) West, Geo. A., “Tobacco, Pipes and Smoking Customs
of the American Indians,” Bulletin of the Public Museum of
the City of Milwaukee, Vol. 17, p. 662. pl. 91, 1934.

(26) Moorehead, Warren K., “The Stone Age in North
America,” Vol. 2, p. 81, fig. 488, 1910.

(31) Moore, C. B., “Moundville Revisited,” Journal of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, p. 357, fig.
22, 1907.

(27) West, Geo. A., “Tobacco, Pipes and Smoking Customs
of the American Indians,” Bulletin of the Public Museum of
the City of Milwaukee, Vol. 17, p. 660, pi. 90, 1934.
(28) McGuire, Joseph D., “Pipes and Smoking Customs of
the American Aborigines,” Annual Report Smithsonian
Institution, 1899, Part I, p. 539, fig. 158.
(29) Brown, Calvin S., “Archaeology of Mississippi,” p.
259, fig. 221, University of Mississippi, 1926.

(32) For comparison see: Setzler, Frank M., “Pottery of the
Hopewell Type from Louisiana,” Proceedings of the U. S.
National Museum, Vol. 82, Art. 22, plate 3C, 1933.
(33) de Booy, Theodoor, “Pottery from Certain Caves in
Eastern Santo Domingo, West Indies,” American
Anthropologist (N.S.) Vol. XVII, No. 1, January-March,
1915, pp. 95-97.

