Some Unusual Cremated Burials

9

SOME UNUSUAL CREMATED BURIALS FOUND
NEAR COLORADO, TEXAS
BY CYRUS N. RAY
In the summer of 1929 Mr. E. W. Douthit of
Abilene asked the writer to examine some unusual
holes in large boulders, situated on his ranch in
Mitchell County. Soon thereafter the writer visited
the site and examined 84 boat-shaped or oval mortar
holes which had been made in hard sandstone on
the tops of large bed rock outcrops located along
the edge of a hill overlooking a wide flat valley.
Through this valley the channel of a shallow, dry
wash meanders its way. There are shallow pools of
water in the holes of the wash which remain for
several weeks after rains, but there is not now
enough water to sustain the life of such a large
campsite, as once existed on the hillside above the
mortar holes, closer to the site than ten miles, where
there is a spring on another small creek branch. It
was stated by a resident of the region that a spring
once flowed on a mountain across the valley about
a mile distant, but no signs of it show now.
The flint and mussel shell debris of the site above
the mortar holes would indicate a rather heavy
occupation over a long period of time, which would
have been impossible for a primitive tribe without
a permanent water supply.
In the centers of some of the largest boulders
were a few intact oval mortar holes which were
filled level with the tops with grass sod. Probably
these had filled with wind-blown earth early and
this had protected them. These protected mortar
holes were from 15 to 17 inches deep, 17 inches
long, 7 to 8 inches wide, and pointed at each end.
The outline of the holes from above is boat or canoe
shaped. (Note 1).
On most of the boulders where any slant
whatever existed, the stone had been washed away
in varying degrees, depending on how far from the
centers of the boulders the holes were. Forty-four
of them were eroded deeply. Since the flat boulder
tops and ledges are high above any chance of flood
waters causing this erosion, one must assume that
it was solely due to elements borne in the air such

as wind-blown sand and rain. It is probable that
sand was not the cause, since the erosion is not
equal but is progressive from the flat topped centers
of the stones to the edges, and much greater where
any slope exists. One then concludes that the erosion
was caused by the run off on each boulder of only
the rain which fell from above on that stone. How
long it would take rain to wear away the surface of
a hard sandstone boulder down 15 inches the writer
does not know, but of some holes only the bottom
1.5 to 2 inches still remained. Of some others
remnants 3, 4, 5 and 6 inches deep remained. (Note
2).
Later study showed that this type of mortar hole
is found in great numbers oh branches of the
Colorado River near Colorado, Texas, in a number
of different sites described in Vol. 3 of this Society’s
Bulletin. (Note 3).
Back of and close by the original mortar hole
site, a small mountain or large hill rises abruptly.
On the face of this hill lie some large overhanging
rocks. When we examined this hill in 1929 Mr. J.
E. Lowry found under a large rock a beautiful
abalone shell pendant of the type commonly made
and worn by the Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New
Mexico. The shell of which it was made is found
only in the Pacific Ocean. The finding of this Pueblo
type artifact indicates either Pueblo trade
connections that far east, or that Pueblo Indians
camped at the site. When we examined the top of
the mountain a rock structure of circular form,
consisting of large stones set into the earth closely,
was found. This rock structure was 14 feet in
diameter and consisted of one layer of stones.
Below the stones was 1.5 feet of hard, dry earth
filled with small stones. Much to our disappointment
after the hard labor of clearing the stones and earth
away under a temperature of above 100 degrees
we came to hard, flat bed rock, and apparently
projecting out of the center of this were some large
rough stones which we supposed were part of the
same ledge.

10

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the two end holes on the inside of the curve; the
object is ½ inch wide. The use probably was as a
bandeau ornament, probably worn on the forehead
to hold back bobbed hair. Its curve would be about
right to fit the head of a small child. A large stone
ring 1 15-16 inches in diameter was found. Two
peculiar polished gray-green stones of the shape of
about a third of a circle, or of about the shape of
the visible portion of the sun when a little more
than a third has risen, were found. The rounded
portions of both are notched or serrated. One is 5
7-16 inches long, and 2 3-16 inches wide in the
However, nothing was done about it until the
middle and it has 18 serrations. The other one is 5
summer of 1935, when the writer returned to the
10-16 inches long and 1 15-16 inches wide in the
site with James G. Morrow, and we again dug out
center, and it has 19 serrations, but there is a small
the refilled earth down to the projecting stones, and
piece of the edge missing at one end where two
then found that we were able to pry them loose in
more serrations probably were. There were a great
the center.
number of small polished fire blackened quartz
There were six large stones wedged in tightly, pebbles scattered all through the cremated
and when these were removed, more black earth materials; these varied from a third to a half inch in
was found beneath them. The space they occupied diameter, and probably were used inside dry land
was a round hole three feet across, which had been terrapin shells as rattles. Portions of broken polished
cut down into the solid bed rock for about a foot in bone tubes were found, and much burnt shell which
depth. We found this filled earth to be full of small was too fragmentary for one to determine from
burned bone and shell fragments and soon the writer what it came. Three thick, roughly made, stemmed
unearthed the largest stone pendant that he ever and shouldered, flint projectile points, probably
saw, an oval gray stone pendant, with an hour glass spear or atlatl points, were found with the burial.
shaped hole at one end. It was 5 1/8 inches long,
Reconstructing the scene the best we can we
and slightly over 2 inches across. It was nicely
visualize the death of a small child of some
proportioned but was a rather large ornament for
important chieftain. The selection of a site on the
the small child that wore it. The fragments of bones
point of a mountain overlooking all the wide valley
were quite small and fire-blackened, and the finding
below. The removal of the earth covering the bed
of two very small milk teeth showed that the
rock and then the laborious cutting with flint tools
cremation was that of a very young child. This child
of a hole in the hard rock three feet in diameter and
must have been that of an important chief when
a foot deep. Then filling this hole with fuel, laying
one considers the number of artifacts of unusual
the body thereon with all of its toys, rattles, beads,
nature found with the cremation. In addition to the
and most valuable ornaments, and then setting fire
large pendant there were four other oval stone
to the pyre, to the end that this fire, sacred agency
pendants; one was 3 inches long and 7-16 inches
of their sun god, would consume the remains, and
wide, rounded at the top and pointed at the bottom;
the burial fixtures, and carry their spirits to their
one was 2 ½ inches long and 14-16 inches wide;
home in the sun. When the fire had cooled then six
one was 2 1/4 by 11-16 inches; one was 2 by 1 6large stones were wedged tightly into the opening,
16 inches. In addition a smaller pendant of shell 1
earth heaped above, and then a wide circular
14-16 inches long and a shell bead 7-16 inches
pavement of stones set on top.
across were found. A curved stone object, 2 2-16
inches long on the inside of the curve, was found.
A month later on another trip to this site with
A hole was drilled in each end and a groove connects Mr. M. B. McClure the writer found a small cave
Reluctantly we came to the conclusion that we
had wasted our efforts on a gas blowout or some
other natural formation. However, the writer had
always wondered about this site, after later digging
up some long headed burials in stone lined graves
which were buried 4 and 5 feet deep. In 1932 the
writer dug up a similar structure situated about 30
miles north of this site, and found a flexed long
headed skeleton, buried below the earth and stone
covering in a pit cut into the solid rock beneath it.
(Note 4).

Some Unusual Cremated Burials
opening under a large boulder about half way up
the south face of the same small mountain. On
digging into the floor debris of the west end of the
small shelter the flexed, charred remains of a
cremated adult were found. This skeleton was much
better preserved than the child’s, which was reduced
to small charred bits, as large sections of the long
bones, although scorched, were otherwise nearly
intact. Four serrated arrow points, of what this
writer now believes to be the latest of several
successive phases of The Sand Dune Culture, were
found. Apparently out of the same ashes came a

11

much rusted metal trousers button. Whether it was
part of the clothing of the person cremated, or was
later taken into the site by rats, the writer cannot
say, but the fact is rather unsettling to some previous
views. While there is no doubt in the writer’s mind
that the top level (“Sand Dune Culture Complex,”
(Note 5), extends back far into the past based on
evidences of patination and otherwise, there is also
some evidence to indicate that this long headed race
also lived in the region late enough to make contact
with the Spaniards. In 1928 the writer found in the
bottom of a sand dune blow-out basin near Abilene

PLATE 1.
No. 1. Mussel shell fragments. No. 2. Charred tissue. No. 3. Skull fragments. Nos. 4 and 5. Long
bone fragments. No. 6. Abalone shell pendant. No. 7. Folsom shaped dart point found with abalone
shell pendant. No. 8. Stone bandeau ornament. No. 9. Shell bead. Nos. 10, 11, and 12. Heavy dart
points. Nos. 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17. Stone pendants. No. 18. Mussel shell pendant. No 19. Stone
ring. Nos. 20 and 21. Serrated edged, polished stone objects. No. 22. Iron button. Nos. 23, 24, 25,
26 and 27. Serrated arrow heads. No. 28. Dart point. No. 29. Half of four edged knife. No. 30.
Flake scraper from child’s burial. No. 31. Fragments of polished , bone tubes. No. 32. Scorched
pebbles probably used in rattles. All of above objects were found in child’s cremated burial except
Nos. 6 and 7, which were in a rock shelter on the west face of the mountain, Nos. 28 and 29 which
were found at the foot of the mountain and Nos. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, and 27, which were found with
an adult cremated burial in a cave on the south side of the same mountain.

12

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

a number of typical serrated arrow points of the
Sand Dune Culture Complex of exactly the same
type as those found charred with this cave cremated
burial, and found amongst them one peculiarly made
large blue glass bead. During the summer of 1929
while Dr. Walter Hough of the Smithsonian was
here, he was shown the bead, and he then stated
that it was a Venetian blue glass bead of a type
which had not been made in the past three hundred
years. On a visit to the same blow-out on a windy
day about a year later, a long headed, flexed
skeleton, was found in position where the winds
had just exposed it. It was in the exact place where
the serrated arrow heads and the blue glass Venetian
bead were previously found. This site is located so
far from any present day water supply that it is
unlikely that two periods of inhabitation could have
occurred on the site although it is a possible
explanation. In this instance as in the case of the
cremated burial no other object showing white
contact has ever been found.
In the usual Indian burial whenever metal objects
are found one also always finds quantities of glass
beads. No beads of any kind were with the cave
cremated burial, nor any other artifacts of white
manufacture.
On digging deeper in the same cave and into a
rather firm compact tan colored soil a foot or more
beneath all evidence of the cremated skeleton
another skeleton was found which showed no signs
of cremation. It was in flexed position, lying on the
side in the east end of the small cave near the
entrance. This was of a somewhat larger individual,
and no artifacts of any kind were buried with the
skeleton. A few animal bones were found at the
same level, and with the human bones, but whether
they were left at the same time with the burial or
not the writer cannot determine.
The deeper bones, both of man and animal, have
the appearance of being rather old but well
preserved, and it is very probable that they are the
remains of a burial made a long time before the
cremated burial found in the loose ashes above
them.

The finding of the typical Pueblo type of abalone
shell pendant in the rock shelter on the west face of
the mountain and the child’s burial containing the
abundance of ground and polished stone ornaments
in the grave on the top would indicate Pueblo
culture contacts.
Another feature suggestive of this, is the finding
of several cists or pits lined with flat stones near
the mortar holes which evidently were constructed
to hold the meal ground in the mortar holes.
However, not one pottery sherd of any kind has
ever been found by the writer in that region.
Considering the differences in the methods used,
and of the burial furniture in the three burials, it is
probable that each of the three were made at
different time periods.

Box 62, Abilene, Texas.

Bibliography
(1) Ray, Cyrus N., News of Ancient Man Reported
From Texas, Science Service, Daily Science News
Bulletin, Dec. 10, 1929. Ray, Cyrus N., Traces of
Ancient Man Reported, Science News-Letter, Dec.
21, 1929.
(2) Ray, Cyrus N., Report on Some Recent
Archeological Researches in the Abilene Section,
Vol. 2, 1930, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society.
(3) Ray, Cyrus N., Recent Archeological
Researches in the Abilene Section, Vol. 3, 1931,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society.
(4) Ray, Cyrus N., Archeological Research in
Central West Texas, Vol. 4, 1932, Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
(5) Ray, Cyrus N., A Differentiation of the
Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Section, Vol.
1, 1929, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society.

