14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

SOME FLINT SOURCES IN CENTRAL WEST TEXAS
BY E. B. SAYLES
Edwards Limestone
The source of flint of the
aboriginal inhabitants of Central
West Texas was principally from
the limestones of the Edwards
Plateau. The flint occurs about
the middle of the Lower
Cretaceous series and varies in
color from a lead or blue slate
to nearly black, while some is
grey, specked or mottled with
lighter or darker colors.
Other strata of this formation
carry much cherty material, a
great deal of which has eroded
out and has been deposited with
the flint nodules upon the high
gravel hills along streams in this
section. This re-deposited
material
was
worked
extensively, but apparently was
not wholly satisfactory as there
are thousands of rejects.

Figure 1
FLINT QUARRY AND VICINITY
1. Gravel deposits carrying flint
artifacts.
1a.
2. 3.
2a. Artifacts on surface in soil.
4. 5. 6. 7. Hearths; worked flint.
A. Rock circles; camp site.
Two mortar holes in limestone
ledge at Creek.
B. Quarry, following outcrop of
limestone bearing flint.

Where the flint has recently
eroded out of its limestone bed,
many localities show worked
material. But this material
appears to be hardly more
satisfactory than that which was
deposited upon the plains, for the
rejects are numerous.
The most satisfactory
material for working appears to
have been that which was taken
out of its limestone bed by the users. Evidence of
such a quarry exists upon the head of Elm Creek in
Taylor County. Through the courtesy of the owner
of the land, Mr. K. Stoker, this site has been
investigated with the help of Carl Chelf, and a
number of interesting things were found.

Flint Quarry
First in interest are the flint quarries. For 2450
feet the hillside has been dug up, following the
outcrop of the flint bearing stratum, so deeply that
even now some of these trenches are three feet deep.
A test trench placed across the old ditches showed
that the flint bearing stratum was 8 feet deep where

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

15

Figure 2
FLINT QUARRY

the digging was abandoned. Much of the diggings
may have been just as deep.

Flint Quarry Used by Pottery Makers

Two potsherds of the same buff colored ware
The removal of the overlying dirt probably was that is found elsewhere in this section were found
done by the use of large heavy axe-like flint blades in the camp site close to the quarry. Also other
and scrapers, a number of which were found on the artifacts were found here of forms typical of the
surface and nearby, and some in the old ditch where pottery sites, and it is likely that this flint was being
sought by the pottery users of this area.
the test trench was dug.
The material from this quarry was taken out in
large nodules after the embedding limestone had
been broken off by the use of stone boulders. Some
of the used hammerstones were found in the old
diggings and these were as large as a man’s head,
and were battered over the entire surface. Then the
flint apparently was broken into more or less thin
sections, if the great quantity of similar material
that lies upon the ground correctly tells the story.
Some of this work was done at the quarry site, but
more of it at the camps nearby. From these thinner
sections, the flint was further worked into large leaf
blades. Tons of flakes, and hammerstones, scrapers,
hearths and other evidences of occupation nearby
extend continuously for at least three miles along
Elm Creek. Few other specialized implements have
been found on the surface. From the number of
fragments of large leaf blades found, it seems that
this was as far as the work was carried in the vicinity
of the quarry. The same type of artifact is found
along Elm Creek for fifteen miles to the east, and to
the southeast some thirty miles away, where the
same kind of dark flint appears in abundance in the
camp sites, together with completed implements of
similar material.

Long Use of Quarry
This flint must have been used during a long
period of time. Many of the worked fragments are
heavily patinated, and at different places along the
course of Elm Creek below, artifacts are found in
the gravel deposits. Worked flint in place is found
at depths ranging from two to five and a half feet
below the present ground level. Yet in some of the
camp sites the flint is actually on top of the grass,
as though it might have been worked but yesterday.
Rock Circles and Rectangles.
In the campsite nearest the quarry is a series of
stone circles and rectangles that evidently formed
a part of the camp there. The smaller circles of
stone are twelve to sixteen feet in diameter, and the
rectangles are of similar area. One large circle is
about 150 feet in diameter. So far as is known, no
other prehistoric remains like them are found in
this immediate section.
A similar circle of stones, approximately 300
feet in diameter is found on the eastern extension of
the area occupied, and about three miles from the

16

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

quarry. This has all the appearance of having once
been a low stone wall, such as sheep herders use
in building temporary corrals. But from a careful
search of the surface and from several test holes,
there is no evidence of white occupation or even
contact, and so far as it has been possible to verify,
no early cattle camps were located in this immediate
vicinity.

nearest the quarry, a test hole shows them to extend
for nearly three feet below the present surface.
Burial

Across the Creek from the circle of stones to
the east, a recent burial covered with stones, was
found in a rock crevice. Hair still clung to the skin,
and there was a fragment of some utensil of wood.
At this site the soil is filled with flint flakes, this might represent a Mexican rather than an Indian
down to a depth of 18 inches, while at the site burial, however. The cranium was found by the
discoverer of the burial but
unfortunately it disappeared before
Figure 3
an examination could be made.
SKETCH MAP OF FLINT QUARRY AND CAMP SITE
(Note: Map shows relative positions only, Sites A and B
drawn to different scale).
Mortar Holes.
In a ledge of limestone
immediately adjacent to the Creek
at the camp site nearest the quarry
are two round mortar holes.
Probably further investigation of
the quarry site will show other
points of interest.
Other Sources of Flint
The majority of the flint artifacts
found in this section (with the
exception of those found in the Sand
Dune sites) appear to have been
made from the nodules coming from
the Edwards limestone. But
numerous flint artifacts are found
near Abilene that are made of flint
that is not known to exist in place
here. These are the reds, banded and
brightly mottled materials, which
occur farther to the northwest. Yet it
is possible that the material for many
of these implements might have been
found upon the surface in the same
washed deposits, where so much of
the flint from the Edwards limestone
has been deposited. Here unworked
nodules of flint dissimilar to that
found in place in the Edwards
Limestone occur.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Sand Dune Flint
The material that was used by the Sand Dune
people, did not come from any locally known
stratum in the Edwards limestone. This material is
either of a translucent grey agate, a light grey, or
most frequently of a rich light cream colored flint.
Nodules of the same kind of flint are frequently
found within the camp sites in the dune sand, but it

17

is not known whether they occur there naturally, or
have been carried there by the occupants of these
sites.
It may be that this material was brought in from
the southeast of Abilene where all of the flint
artifacts that have been examined by the writer are
of similar material.

Plate 3
FLINT QUARRY
1. Test trench: Depth from present ground surface to limestone ledge is 8 feet. Fill above flintbearing
stratum contains many flakes of worked flint and some artifacts.
The flint, in large flat nodules, is found between the two layers of limestone.
3. Campsite north of Quarry. Small circle of large flat limestone rocks. Flint flakes and some artifacts
are found in this site; also hearth stones, and tones of partly worked flint from the Quarries.
4. Type of blade used in removing overcover of soil and clay from the flint-bearing stratum. Implement
on right is 4" by 8", 2" thick. The other is fashioned similarly to a common type of scraper found in
this section, that is, one side had been left unworked.

