The CVAS
Monthly Newsletter
January 2007

San Angelo, Texas
Meeting Place: The San Angelo Community Medical Center, 3501 Knickerbocker Road; Conference Rooms 1&2.
Meeting Time: 25 January 2007 at 7:00PM
th

Horn Shelter

On January the 25 , at 7PM Albert Redder will present the “Horn Shelter”.
Located on the western bank of the Brazos River approximately seven miles
downstream from the Whitney Dam, the Horn Shelter is a 150-foot-long rock
overhang. The discovery of a burial site within the shelter by amateur archeologists
Albert Redder and Frank Watt is contributing directly to the current academic
discussion of the origin of man in the Americas.
Radio Carbon tests showed that the shelter was about 11,200 years old. The
burial site is on of the oldest known Paleo-American burials in Central Texas and
one of only three in the United States with burial goods.
The significant find has claimed international attention and ranks among the
most important in the United States. Mr. Redder will describe their work in
unearthing “Sam” known as Son of America.
An exhibit recently opened at the Bosque Memorial Museum in Clifton Texas
that tells of Sam and the unwritten story of those that came before us.
Read about this find from the article The Face of Ancient Texas in January 2007
issue of Texas Co-op Power Volume 63 Number 7, or go online at
http://www.texas-ec.org/publications/documents/tcp0107.pdf
Moving Megaliths on TAC – email article was asked to be passed on by Ward Gregory –
Friends and colleagues: Supposedly "primitive" Neolithic farmers in Western Europe moved huge
boulders across the landscape to construct ritual monuments. How this probably was done is the subject
of The Sledge of the Stone Age: Transport of a Megalith, the latest video feature on our nonprofit
streaming-media Web site, The Archaeology Channel (http://www.archaeologychannel.org).
The huge stones of Neolithic and Bronze Age tombs in Europe often inspire questions about how
people using simple technology could have transported them from their quarries. Those who ask such
questions tend to underestimate the ingenuity of people living thousands of years ago. This very short
but effective film by Kurt Denzer confirms that there is no need for giants to move the gigantic rocks of a
megalithic tomb. In a demonstration of experimental archaeology, a group of young students shows how
simple it is to transport the stones.
This and other programs are available on TAC for your use and enjoyment. We urge you to support
this public service by participating in our Membership (http://www.archaeologychannel.org/member.html)
and Underwriting (http://www.archaeologychannel.org/sponsor.shtml) programs. Only with your help can
we continue and enhance our nonprofit public-education and visitor-supported programming. We also
welcome new content partners as we reach out to the world community.

Richard M. Pettigrew, Ph.D., RPA
President and Executive Director
Archaeological Legacy Institute
http://www.archaeologychannel.org

Page 1 of 3 pages.

CVAS Director
Notes
Southwestern Federation of Archeological Societies Symposium
March 24th and 25th, 2007 at the Iraan Civic Center in Iraan, Texas
The Iraan Archeology Society (IAS) is hosting this year’s SWFAS Symposium and other planned activities for the weekend,
which we hope will be an “Old Fashioned Camp Meeting”.
Because Iraan is located so far south of the other member societies, we want to attempt to make it easier for everyone to arrive
early and stay late by providing a place to stay the night before and the evening after the planned paper presentations on
Saturday, March 24th.
The IAS will provide free tent camping and recreational vehicle parking on Friday, March23rd and Saturday, March 24th in the
Pecos County Park (located on the west edge of Iraan). The camping is within 100 yards of the Iraan Civic Center where the
symposium papers are to be presented. Electricity outlets are located on the curbside camping sites with many nearby water
faucets within water hose distance. Two restrooms are located in the park. Those wishing to have full RV hookups can get a
space in the Iraan City RV Park for only $10 a night. A free dump station is also located in this city park which is only ¼ mile from
the fee camping area. Those not wishing to camp out can find motels in Iraan, Ozona, Rankin, McCamey and Fort Stockton. All
of those motels are from 25 to 60 miles away.
Because of a limited amount of restaurants in town on weekends, the IAS will provide a free stew and cornbread supper the
evening of Friday, March 23rd for both campers and motel arrivals. This will take place in the Civic Center building starting at 6PM
until (?). No one should go hungry on the night of arrival.
For lunch on Saturday, March 24th complimentary homemade sandwiches, chips and drinks will be provided by IAS.
The evening meal for Saturday will be a “cookout” in the county park (after returning from a planned field trip to a Crockett
County site). All campers and motel occupants will be asked to bring their steaks, hamburgers, sausages or hot dogs to be
BBQed on several available cooking pits located behind the Civic Center (and near the camping site).
Field trips are planned for mid-afternoon Saturday and early Sunday morning to nearby sites in Pecos and Crockett Counties.
The field trip Sunday will end early enough for everyone to return to your communities on Sunday afternoon.
A brief summary of the above discussed items:
Friday, March 23rd –
12 noon until? – Campout in County Park near Civic Center or get motel rooms. Meal of stew and
cornbread provided for all arrivals.
Saturday, March 24th –
Symposium paper presentation 9AM to 3PM in civic center. Field trip to Crockett County
McMullan rock shelter site 3:30 PM to 6PM. Cookout in park will follow.
9AM go to Pecos county rock shelter 41pc23 near Iraan that was excavated by the University of
Sunday, March 25th –
Texas in the 1930’s and found it to be a major archeology site. Some very faint rock art is still
located inside this very large shelter.
For additional information call Iraan Symposium Chairman, Evans Turpin at 432-639-2361 or email: etandal@apex2000.net
Notice of Call For Papers
This is a call for speakers for the Southwest Federation Symposium on Saturday, March 24th, 2007. We need a presentation by
each of our member societies. Slide projectors or PowerPoint will be available I Iraan at the Civic Center. Please present a title,
abstract and a biography of yourself. Please allow 20 to 30 minutes for your program. Contact Evans Turpin at 432-639-2361 or
P. O. Box 925, Iraan, TX 79744 or email etandal@apex2000.net . Please send this information by February 15th, 2007 deadline
so we can print the final programs for this 43rd Symposium.
Dues are Due
CVAS membership is due for 2007.
Cost:
$15 for individual membership
$20 for family membership
See Ward Gregory at the Meeting for an application form
. The CVAS is a non-profit organization, with the purpose of bringing people together who have
an active interest in the archeology and Southwestern prehistoric heritage in an atmosphere
conducive to the exchange of information and ideas.
Meetings are on the 4th Thursday of each month except during July, November and December at
7PM at San Angelo Community Medical Center, San Angelo, Texas in Conference Rooms
Rooms

1& 2.
Page 2 of 3 pages.

CVAS members:
Please read the attached list and consider volunteering for one of the society positions listed
for the year 2007. The nominating committee suggests that there are members with time, interest,
skills, and concern for the members and the mission of Concho Valley Archeological Society who
would be willing to serve and make valuable contributions to our organization. We encourage
each member to be an actively involved participant in the best interests of the Society.
The list includes officers who have agreed to serve another year in their present position.
Members may volunteer to be added to the slate and/or nominate members (with their
permission) to fill any position.
A slate will be presented for election by members at the January 25th meeting. Please return
your nominations by mail/email to the Committee by January 21st so that a ballot may be
prepared.
Again, we encourage your active participation in the election of officers and committee chairs
for 2007. Please add your own name where you will be willing to actively serve. Please give the
nomination slate your serious consideration.
The nominating committee also suggests that an executive committee meet prior to the
monthly meeting to discuss and submit the agenda to the newsletter before the CVAS meeting.
Thank you,
Brownie, Arnetta, Fred
Nominating Committee
Brownie Q. Roberts
Arnetta Cooper
Fred Braziel

3329 Lindenwood Dr. San Angelo, TX 76904
325-949-1073;
1218 South Concho Park Dr., San Angelo,
TX76903
325-651-4245
10198 Raccoon Rd., San Angelo, TX 76901
325-653-7705

bqroberts@earthlink.net

catnip4theo@cox.net

Cut and detach the nomination list and return the list to a Nominating Committee Member above.
?
CONCHO VALLEY ARCHEOLOGY SOCIETY
Officer and Committee Chair Nominations
January 25, 2007
Officers:
Position
Agreed to Serve
Nominee
President
Richard Fiveash-one more one-year term
Vice President
Secretary
Treasurer
Ward Gregory-will continue to serve
Position
Committee Chairs
Committee Member(s)
Newsletter
Program
Meeting Room
Hospitality(Christmas party
and monthly refreshments)
Publicity
Archeology Fair
Larry Riemenschneider
Archeology Awareness
Field Trips
Project Director
In 2003, we added a board of directors which includes the president, the past president and
one member.
Elected Board Member-

Page 3 of 3 pages.

