A Prehistoric Cremated Burial

13

A PREHISTORIC CREMATED BURIAL OF THE ABILENE REGION
BY JAMES G. MORROW
The writer overheard a conversation concerning
a rock mound which had been found by some boys
while hunting on a ranch situated twenty miles
southwest of Abilene. The owner agreed to allow
an excavation after being convinced that scientific
research was the writer’s only purpose in
excavating.

and milky quartz points were grouped in a space
that could be covered by a man’s hand.

At a depth of two feet the earth in the center
showed ashes and at this level a double bitted ax
was found. [Notes (1) and (2)]. On the northern
edge was found another group of points; a gray
flint dart point; a brown quartzite point and a gray
The surrounding country probably was at one purple striped flint point. At the same level near
time well watered, and an ideal camping place. the southeast edge a varicolored flint knife was
There is a valley running east and west which found.
averages about a half mile in width. The floor of
An inch or so under the ax the gravel and earth
this valley is strewn with hearth rocks and flint chips.
showed signs of scorching, and contained some bits
On the south side of the valley is a sandstone of charcoal. In the center, and badly scorched, lay
capped mountain that has an elevation of about 200 a leaf shaped knife. Eighteen inches to the south
feet above the dry creek bed which halves the camp- were found two patinated points, and near the
site. The upper portion of the northern side of this eastern edge was a translucent flint point. Below
mountain is nearly perpendicular for a distance of is a description of the artifacts found:
fifty feet.
Artifact No. 14 is a large thick gray quartzite
Ten feet south of the edge of this cliff there was square stemmed and barbed spear head 5 7-8 inches
a clump of scrub oak bushes. Upon examining this long, 1 ¾ inches wide and 9-16 of an inch thick.
clump closely we found that it was growing up
Artifact No. 17 is a brown quartzite chipped,
through a mound of rocks. The bushes were cleared,
grooved, double bitted ax which is 5 5-8 inches
and the mound measured. It was ten feet in
long. The bits are 2 7-8 inches wide; the groove for
diameter, and about two feet in height. The top
hafting is 1 7-8 inches wide; the greatest thickness
rocks were of irregular size and placed in no regular
is 1 3-16 inches. Only two of similar type have been
order, and extended in depth to the original ground
found in the Abilene region. One is of a pink stone
level of the mountain top. At this depth large
not found in this region and of a size too small for
sandstone slabs were wedged tightly in the hole.
use, which was found in a pottery site where several
These continued to a level of a foot below the
pueblo sherds, and obsidian flakes were also found,
original surface. Around the edges of the excavation
and the other one is a flint ax found farther
solid sandstone was exposed.
southwest in the same region.
The next six inches consisted of rocks of about
The following numbered projectile points while
the size of a man’s fist, and coarse gravel. At the
varying greatly in colors and materials have several
bottom of this layer and exactly in the center of the
points in common, all are much thicker than the
hole was found a peculiarly marked stone. It is of
average later date projectile points of the Abilene
limestone and is only one-half of the original artifact.
region. In all the blades the place of maximum width
This is shown on Plate 2, No. 13. (See Editorial
is at the shoulders or barbs. Many have the widely
Note). Two inches directly below this stone was
expanded stems to be found here most often in quite
found a large gray spearhead and on the same level
ancient patinated flint projectile points which erode
and near the north edge the red jasper, black flint
out of very old campsites.

14

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

No. 12. Fine gray flint, leaf shaped knife, 7-16
inch thick, 5 1-8 inches long, 1 7-16 inches wide.
This blade probably was a knife of the Solutrean,
or pointed at each end type, although nearly an inch
of one end has been broken off.
No. 11. Red jasper, square stemmed, and barbed
spear point, 7-16 inch thick, 3 1-4 inches long,
greatest width at barbs 1 1-2 inches.
No. 6. Black flint expanding stemmed, and
barbed, atlatl or dart point, 1-4 inch thick, 2 5-8
inches long, 1 inch wide.
No. 3. Milky quartz dart point 1 3-8 inches wide
at barb, 2 1-8 inches long. This point has a slightly
expanded base and has a barb on only one side. It
probably never had a barb on the other side.

broken off, 1-4 inch thick, 2 1-2 inches long, 1 916 inches wide at shoulders.
No. 5. Translucent flint, light gray, shouldered
dart point with expanded stem 3-8 inch thick, 2 516 inches long, 1 3-8 inches wide.
No. 10. Varicolored flint knife similar to
Panhandle Alibates flint, blade slightly curved, and
curved stem which ends in a point.
No. 4. Gray flint dart point, bevelled, serrated,
shouldered, with expanded stem.
No. 9. Gray purple striped flint, shouldered
round stemmed knife, stem not straight.
No. 7. Tan colored patinated flint dart head,
shouldered, with expanded stem.

No. 2. Brown quartzite shouldered square
No. 8. Varicolored flint, resembling Panhandle
Alibates flint shouldered dart point, base of stem stemmed dart point.

Plate 2
Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 are dart points and knives of flint, jasper and quartzite
from the cremated burial. No. 12 is a flint knife. No. 13 is a Nueces scored stone from the grave.
No. 14 is a gray quartzite spear head. Nos. 15 and 16 are Nueces Canyon scored stones found by
Vane Huskey and are shown here for comparison. No. 17 is a brown quartzite double bitted flaked
ax from the cremated burial.

A Prehistoric Cremated Burial

15

(3). Huskey, Vane, An Archeological Survey of the
Nueces Canyon of Texas, Bulletin of Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 7,
All of the earth and sand from the burial mound
1935, plate 15, No. 166, fifth artifact from the left.
was carefully screened twice, but no small artifacts
nor shells were found. The walls of the cup-like (4). A. T. Jackson recently stated that Texas
cavity were in solid rock and the hole probably was University’s collection contained two Nueces
excavated at the time burial was made. At some Canyon scored stones which he had collected in
places, although the walls were scorched, the earth the Nueces River region.
next to them showed no signs of ashes. The
cremation required a very hot fire. Evidently there
were only smoldering coals in the center of the fire
Editorial Note
when the covering rocks and soil were pitched into
the burial.
“The artifacts found in a grave, in the Abilene
Another peculiarity of this burial is that no region, by Mr. James G. Morrow, are with a few
mussel shells were found. Most all burials found in exceptions, made of materials such as quartz,
this territory contain shells in so far as the writer quartzite, and stones other than local flint, of kinds
which were used rarely by the makers of stone
knows.
artifacts in the Abilene region. The type of chipped
The group of artifacts found at the edges of the double bitted quartzite axe found, is typical of
burial may or may not have had ceremonial certain regions of Arkansas, (Note 1), and also of
significance. The beauty and workmanship of some certain Pueblo regions (Note 2).
would indicate the high standing of the buried
In the Editor’s collection of many thousands of
person during his life. He probably was a trader
and had met death while in this region procuring artifacts from the Abilene region there is only one
gray quartzite knife, one beautiful patinated brown
flint from the nearby mines.
quartzite Yuma spear point, and two or three
The broken scored stone probably had projectile points of quartzite. All of the remainder
ceremonial significance in that it was broken so that are of flint, chert, or some other flintlike material,
its spirit might accompany the owner’s. The fact except a certain type of roughly percussion chipped,
that such stones are frequently found in the Nueces sinuous edged, hand axes which show no signs of
River region and that the ax is of the Pecos Pueblo hafting grooves on them. In fact all but the cutting
type suggests that the owner was a trader and more edge has usually been left rough with its original
than likely a well traveled one. [Notes (1) and (2)]. crust.
No. 1. White patinated flint, shouldered, widely
expanded stemmed, dart point.

The artifacts found on this expedition are the
The fact that this grave was found near to
property of Hardin-Simmons University and will prehistoric flint mines, which were visited by some
be on display in their museum.
users of Pueblo pottery who left sherds in the region,
and the fact that his artifacts were not of local used
Hardin-Simmons Univ., Abilene, Texas.
materials would indicate that this individual brought
his supply of atlatl darts, knives and spears with
Bibliography
him on his journey to the Abilene region flint mines.
(1). Moorehead, Warren K., Archaeology of the The finding of a Nueces Canyon scored stone would
Arkansas River Valley 1931, p. 16, fig. (8), left hand also indicate a contact with the people of that region
and middle axes on top row.
(Notes 3 and 4). The Editor knows of no previous
(2). Kidder, Alfred V., Artifacts of Pecos 1932, page instance where Nueces Canyon scored stones have
been found in the Abilene region. This stone listed
59, Figs. A and B.

16

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

by Morrow as No. 13 is of gray limestone and is
one-half of a Nueces Canyon type of scored stone.
In 1934 Vane Huskey of Uvalde sent two of this
type of stones to the Editor of this Bulletin with a
request for information concerning them. Prior to
that time we had neither seen specimens, nor
descriptions of them. In Huskey’s correspondence
(Note 3) he first described Nueces Canyon scored
stones. On April 9, 1935, Mr. Huskey wrote as
follows:
“I have also found several things that have
puzzled me very much as to their use or purpose.
One is a lime stone. (I have 12 or 15 of them).
They are just common burnt rocks, about 3 inches
around and 5 to 7 inches in length and they all have
from three to nine parallel lines on them. Never
very deep. None crisscrossed as in sharpening bone,
etc.; but all of a uniform pattern like this. I’d sure
like to know their use.”
At the end was a drawing of a long oval stone
with four parallel scores down the middle.
Again on May 1, 1935, he wrote as follows:
“I am sending you one of the rocks with the
parallel lines on it. You may have it. These lines
mean something. They run from 3 to 7 generally,
sometimes, very rarely, 9 lines. I thought for a while
they were abrading stones, but no; because lines
never cross; they all run parallel.”

stones are found in and around both types of
artifacts and mounds. Of course the logical reason
would be that the later group picked up the custom
from the older group. My opinion is that stones
were used as ceremonial stones. No, you may keep
the two that I sent you. I do not need them.”
One of the Huskey Nueces Canyon scored stones
is six inches long, and 2 5-16 inches wide at the
widest portion and 1 1-2 inches thick. It is shaped
roughly in a long oval, and is almost foot shaped.
It is of gray limestone, flat on the bottom and
rounded on the top. In the center of the top is a
series of eight parallel scores 2 inches long; all are
even and of the same length.
The other of Vane Husky’s scored stones is 4 34 inches long and is a well rounded oval limestone
with the thickness and the width about the same, 2
1-4 inches. This stone is rounded at one end and
broken off at the other, and has the appearance of
the broken end of a stone pestle. It has four well
defined parallel grooves on one face which are 2 58 inches long and like the others run lengthwise of
the stone and all end even at each end.

The grooved limestone found by James Morrow
in the Abilene region grave, evidently was broken
after the grooves were made and probably is about
half of the original stone. It is 1 7-8 inches long, 2
3-8 inches wide and 1 9-16 inches thick. The convex
central portion has three parallel longitudinal scores
And again on May 21, 1935, he wrote as follows: down the center and on each side of these scores
are longitudinal polished flutes fitting the thumbs.
“Now to answer your question about the scored
There is one parallel flute on each side of the scores.
stones. The grooved or incised lines run from 3 to
In the matter of the fluted depressions paralleling
9 lines; never more than 9, and very seldom over 7
the scores this stone is different from any described
lines. They are found both in the mounds and on
by Huskey, but is otherwise quite similar.
the surface. The most confusing thing is that these
—Cyrus N. Ray.

