Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

15

THE CANADIAN VALLEY EXPEDITION OF MARCH, 1930
BY W. C. HOLDEN
The Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society of September, 1929,
Volume I, contains an account of the excavations of
the Tarbox ruins during March, 1929, by the writer
and some colleagues from McMurry college.1 In
March, 1930, Texas Technological college sent an
expedition to the same vicinity of the Canadian
Valley. Dr. M. A. Stainbrook, Dr. A. L Strout, Dr.
John C. Granberry, Dr. W. M. Young, Dr. C. C.
Schmidt, Professor F. A. Kleinschmidt, Mr. H. B.
Carroll, faculty members, and Clyde Drake,
Herschel McFarland, Leland Mast, and Charles
Adams, students, accompanied the writer. The site
for our excavations had been previously selected
for us by Mr. Floyd V. Studer of Amarillo, who had
already secured excavation privileges from the
owner of the property where the ruin was located.

loam and the surface is only a few feet above the
creek bed. This supplied the fields with subirrigation; and here was raised the corn which the
inhabitants ground on the huge metate stones found
in the ruin. As for defense, a storming party would
have approached with difficulty from three
directions. The weakness in defense lay in one
direction, the west. Incidentally, the founders of the
ruin chose the most beautiful spot in the whole
country.

The ruin is 163 feet long and 52 feet wide.2 The
north section of the ruin, 26 feet in length, exhibits
characteristics quite different from the remainder
of the building. The wall foundations are much
narrower; the stones used in them are more
diminutive; and the rooms are smaller and much
more irregular. In fact, there are many evidences
When we arrived in Amarillo, Mr. Studer that the north section is the oldest, and that the
conducted us without loss of time to the ruin, which building progressed from north to south.
is located on a small creek near there. The ruin is
The A-C ruin is one of the largest and best
difficult of approach; the camp equipment and
preserved ruins of the slab stone type in the Texas
supplies had to be carried down a steep slope
Panhandle. It has suffered some at the hands of
several hundred feet to a site suitable for a camp.
vandals, but its isolated and somewhat inaccessible
The place had previously been designated by location has caused it to sustain less damage from
Mr. Studer as the A-C ruin, and we continued to “bonehunters” than many other ruins in the region.
refer to it in the same way. Its location was, at the By far, the greatest injury suffered by the A-C ruin
time of its habitation, ideal for utility, defense and has been due to the oil industry. A pipe line
aesthetics. The creek on which it is located flows construction crew, while laying a pipe line across
north, and makes a horseshoe bend to the east. A the canyon just above, cut and blasted a wagon road
ledge of ground of perhaps an acre extends out into transversely across the north central part of the ruin.
the bend of the creek at an elevation about midway
The expedition was fortunate in having among
between the creek bottom to the east and the top of
its members persons of varied and specialized
the bank to the west. The ledge commands a view
training. Mr. Clyde Drake, senior geological
of about two miles up the creek to the south and
engineering student, with a plane table instrument
five miles down the creek to the north. The ruin
and other equipment, did the mapping and plotting
extends north and south almost across the entire
of the site. Professor F. A. Kleinschmidt, head of
east side of the ledge. When the site was inhabited,
the architectural engineering department of the
as well as today, water was to be had in the creek
college, made numerous sketches and detailed
below. Both above and below the ruin the creek
drawings. Dr. M. A. Stainbrook, geologist and
bottom widens in several places sufficiently to
paleontologist, furnished valuable technical
permit of fields of several acres. The soil is a sandy
information.

16

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

We started excavating with a trench from the
southwest corner of the ruin and extended it
northward inside, and along, the west wall. For
convenience we used the southwest corner as a
starting place for all measurements. The west wall
is of solid and well ordered construction. The
bottom has an average thickness of from four to
four and one-half feet. The lowest course is
composed of two layers of flat stones from twentyfour to thirty inches in height set on edge about three
feet apart. Between the two layers of stone is hardpacked earth. The second course of the wall consists
of two other layers of flat rocks on edge set inside
the outer layers of the lower course. These layers
are filled with hard-packed earth. A third course of
the same kind, but narrower, appears above the
second course. The second and third courses have
occasional rocks put in transversely, apparently for
the purpose of tying the wall together as bricklayers
often place bricks transversely in a wall for the
purpose of holding the longitudinal layers together.
For the most part only the first course of the wall is
left standing. In several places however the second
course is in place and undisturbed; and in one place
the third course is intact. There is evidence that
there was a fourth course consisting of a single row
of rocks on edge and held in place by adobe. At
one spot where the third course is still in place, the
wall is almost five feet high. Another course would
have made the wall approximately six feet high.
There were sufficient loose rocks which had fallen
just inside or outside the base of the wall to have
brought it to that height. The space between the outer
edge of the first course and the base of the second,
as well as the outer edge of the second and base of
the third, was filled with hard adobe material of
yellow clay. In other words this adobe was packed
into the offset with the outside sloping from the
bottom edge of the first course of stones to the top
edge of the second course, and so on. Inside the
wall, the yellow adobe was plastered with a
material somewhat the color of gypsum or of wood
ashes. In all, the wall was substantial and well
ordered, and should have been adequate protection
against wind and rain.
As we extended the longitudinal trench northward
we came to a transverse wall at exactly sixteen

feet from the south end wall. The transverse wall
was primarily of adobe, but contained a rock core.
As to whether this wall runs entirely across this
portion of the ruin will not be known until complete
excavations can be made. Our trench at this point
was four and one-half feet wide, hence we
uncovered only that much of the wall. For
convenience we will designate the space between
the south end of the ruin and this first transverse
wall as room 1.
One of the most important discoveries in the AC ruin was made in room 1. It has long been a
matter of considerable speculation as to what kind
of roofs these stone slabs had. Beneath the floor
level we found evidence which is not conclusive
but fairly indicative of the nature of the roof. The
floor level in room 1 is from twenty-six to thirty
inches below the present surface and is easy to trace.
It consisted of about four inches of yellow clay
which was carried in when the house was built and
tamped on the surface of the original ground level.
The old ground soil was a grey river sand. The top
of the clay floor is covered by a thin layer of ashes
and charcoal. In many places it has a rich greasy
color. In room 1 we dug below the floor level,
thinking we might find burials. We found no
skeletons, but we did find four holes in the sand.
The holes were in a line north by south four feet
from the west wall. The holes were two, five,
eleven, and fifteen feet, respectively, from the south
wall. Each was two inches in diameter and from
eighteen to twenty-four inches deep. When we
uncovered the first hole we attached no particular
significance to it. When the others were discovered
to be in line with the first their importance became
evident. It is most probable that they supported the
roof timbers. If this were the case, the room
evidently consisted of a light framework of wood
covered with some king of light material.
Speculations as to what the “light framework” might
have been was a matter on which the discussion
turned around the camp fire in the evening. Every
possibility was introduced. By a process of
elimination all the possibilities were discarded until
two remained. The party became unanimous in the
belief that the covering was either a thatch made of
bear grass (yucca) which is abundant in that region,

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
or it was made of buffalo hides put on in shingle
style. To the first alternative someone objected
that the grass may not have grown in the vicinity
when the ruin was built. Dr. Stainbrook pointed
out that geologists were of the opinion that
conditions in that region had changed very little
during the last 5000 years and that it was highly
probable that the tall bear grass was more abundant
one thousand or two thousand years ago than now.
On the other hand the region was the very heart of
the buffalo range. The living water in the creek
caused the buffalo to come to it during the dry
seasons in countless numbers. The deep canyon
walls together with the irregular meanderings of
the creek made it comparatively easy for the
builders of our ruin to have killed the buffalo, even
with their crude spears. The buffalo hide theory
seems as highly probable as the grass thatch theory.
To return to the holes beneath the floor level in
room 1, the fact that the holes were below the floor
with no evidence that they extended above the floor
constituted a mystery needing explanation.
Someone soon framed a theory which seems
perfectly plausible. The roof and wood work of
the building could have burned down at the time of
its abandonment or later. In that case the slender
upright posts would have burned to the floor.
Subsequent centuries of wind action filled in soil
above the old floor. In time the parts of the posts
below the floor level rotted away, leaving their
impressions in the packed sand.
It may be well to mention a third roof type
possibility with a reason for its elimination.
Someone suggested a flat roof of adobe. Such a
type seemed highly probable. A roof of that kind
would have required heavy logs as cross timbers.
The cross timbers would have had to have been
long enough to have reached across the widest room,
a distance of twenty-six feet, or they would have
had to have been supported at the joints by heavy
upright timbers. In regard to the first alternative,
there are no timbers in that region long enough and
straight enough to span twenty-six feet, and in regard
to the second, the posts that fitted into the holes we
found could not have supported heavy timbers, to
say nothing of the additional weight of the adobe.

17

Granting that the roof was of grass thatch or of
buffalo hide shingles, it must necessarily have had
considerable slope. The width of the rooms in the
central and south sections of the house was too great
to have permitted of all the slope being in one
direction, in lean to fashion; so it is most probable
that the roof sloped from the center. It is to be
remembered that the whole theory of the roof
restoration had been based on the assumption that
the holes beneath the floor level once contained the
roof supports. It is possible that these premises are
wrong.
Twenty-five feet from the south end of the ruin
or nine feet from the first transverse wall we
encountered a second transverse wall. It was
fourteen inches thick and composed of slab stone
on edge filled in between with adobe. Room No. 2
then is nine feet long and of unknown width.
At the second transverse wall, the main west
wall offsets about eighteen inches to the west. Due
to this offset our trench from the second transverse
wall to the third wall was six feet wide. This
widening of the trench enabled us to discover a
longitudinal wall extending from the second
transverse wall to the third transverse wall, making
room 3 six feet wide and seventeen feet long, inside
dimensions. Almost in the center of room 3, reaching
entirely from the east wall to the west wall was a
bench five feet and nine inches wide and twelve
inches high. It was made by placing a number of
stones on edge, all of them extending just twelve
inches above the floor level, and filling in between
with natural clay which was carried from the canyon
bank at some distance away. The top and sides of
the bench were covered with a one inch layer of
the same yellow clay of which the floor was made.
The cleavage between the superimposed wind
blown soil and the bench was so distinct that when
the filled in soil was removed the yellow covering
of the bench remained smooth and firm. The finding
of the bench brought forth many speculations from
members of the party as to what its use may have
been. Someone designated it as the “bed”; and
“bed” it remained in the expedition’s parlance.
The third transverse wall, which is forty-two
feet from the south end of the ruin, is of unusual

18

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

interest. It is almost two feet thick. The first eighteen
inches of the wall consists of adobe with a core of
large stones set on edge. Above this course is
horizontal masonry of flat stones set in mud mortar.
We ascertained the length of this wall by extending
a transverse trench along it on its north side. No
intervening longitudinal walls were encountered.
This makes room 4 twenty-four feet wide, inside
dimensions. The fourth transverse wall, sixty-seven
feet from the south end, or twenty-four feet from
the third transverse wall, is of adobe, and in
thickness and construction is very similar to the
first transverse wall. Room 4 is twenty-four feet
square.
The fifth transverse wall is thick and heavy and
similar in construction to the third transverse wall.
The first course of eighteen inches is of adobe with
a stone core. Above this is horizontal masonry. The
size of room 5 is problematical as our trench along

the west wall was not over four feet wide. The
north wall and a part of the west wall of room 6
are missing. Erosion has carried away the
superimposed soil to the floor level at that place.
The stones of the missing walls could have washed
over the bank of the ledge nearby or they could
have been carried away. The road made by the pipe
line workers passes through rooms 6, 7, and 11.
The fifth and sixth transverse walls are in part
exposed. The sixth transverse wall is similar in
construction to the second transverse wall. An
unusual feature of the sixth wall is a door thirty
inches wide at its intersection with wall B. This
was one of two doors found in the ruin, both of
them in the interior. Our trench followed along wall
B to the seventh transverse wall and east along that
wall to the northeast corner of room 8.
That portion of the ruin north of the seventh
transverse wall constitutes a separate unit of the

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

ruin. As stated before, the rooms are small and
irregular in shape. The foundations of the exterior
walls are on much smaller scale than the other parts
of the building. Several of the interior walls consist
of a single layer of stones on edge. Time did not
permit of the excavation of this section. The walls
and rooms which we traced out are indicated in
Figure 1.
An interesting place in the north section is Room
12. The room is semicircular in shape and sixteen
feet in diameter from north to south. From east to
west it is twelve feet across. On the floor below on
the east side is a hearth. On the west side leading
to room 9 is a passage twenty inches wide with
walls of even and well fitted stones on edge on
either side. Some curious relic hunter had already
dug a huge hole in the center of room 12. He had
gone below the floor level and destroyed whatever
evidence there may have been there. It is possible

19

that this room was some form of kiva. Just to the
south of the west end of the passage connecting
room 12 and 9 is an object which strongly resembles
a modern pueblo fire place. The rocks above did
not appear smoked, but charcoal and ashes were
found in the bottom of it.
Longitudinal walls C and D are of the sametype and construction as wall A on the west side. It
is quite probable that rooms 18, 19, and 20 are cut
into a number of smaller rooms by short transverse
walls between C and D. Room 21, which is eight
feet wide and nine feet long, extends down the
slope, and its floor level is between two and three
feet below that of the main part of the ruin. It is
possible and probable that a series of rooms
extended north of room 21 along wall D, and that
wall E once extended at least to the fifth transverse
wall. If that were true erosion has destroyed the
major portion of wall E.

20

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Artifacts

The artifacts which were discovered in the A-C
ruin are not so numerous as one would expect from
the imposing size and appearance of the place. With
less than one-tenth of the total area excavated, there
is yet time for the quantity of artifacts to become
considerable. At the risk of becoming tiresome, I
will list and describe the things we found in
connection with the ruin; for the value of this paper
depends largely upon the accuracy and diligence
used in describing the utensils and implements used
by the builders of these slab stone houses.
In room 1 the floor level was on the average
twenty-six inches below the present surface. In this
room, as everywhere else in the ruin were numerous
faint chips of various sizes and shapes some of them
being exceedingly thin. On the floor level in the
southwest corner of the room was a very good piece
of charcoal about one inch square. Nearby was a
fragment of bone spade and a mussel, or fresh water
clam shell. Mussels are still to be found in the
streams of the region. The shells were probably
used by the occupants of the slab-stone ruins as
scrapers, scoops and ornaments. The excavated
portion of room 1 contained two hearths. One,
which was six feet from the south wall and four
feet from the west wall, was fourteen inches below
the floor level; the other, nine feet from the south
wall and one foot from the west wall, was on the
floor level.

coarse grained, fire blackened, a thin black slip on
the inside and basket like indentions on the outside.
A comparison of the A-C sherds with sherds from
the Tarbox ruin, something like twenty miles to the
northeast, shows the two types to be similar in
appearance, workmanship and material; but all the
A-C potsherds have a thin black slip on the inside
while those from Tarbox have no slip. A pressure
flaker was found near the west wall. A few feet to
the north lay a potsherd much larger and thicker
than the first.
Room 5 contained on the floor level a large
potsherd like the other sherds, a flint scraper, a
portion of a bone spade and a well worked flint
core. The transverse trench along the north side of
the third transverse wall revealed a number of
broken animal bones, some potsherds and a large
mussel shell. Two post holes were uncovered
below the floor level. The holes were one foot from
the west wall and five feet apart.
Room 5 was found to have the usual broken
bones, flints, flakes, and potsherds. Below the floor
level three feet from the west wall and five feet
from the north wall was a hearth two feet in
diameter. It was made by setting flat stones on edge
in a circular fashion. The hearth was more than
twelve inches deep, and was filled with ashes, small
round stones, and fragments of large buffalo bones.

Near the west wall of room 2, about fifteen
inches below the surface and fourteen inches above
the floor level, beneath a well placed layer of rock,
was the lower jaw of a buffalo. The layer of stones
had every evidence of a Plains Indian burial, but
nothing save the buffalo jaw bone was found. The
bone mentioned was evidently placed there by the
subsequent Plains Indians, as it was clearly above
the floor level. Fragments of buffalo bone were
found at various places on the floor level of the
ruin.

In the northwest corner of room 7 on the floor
level we found a crushed pot. Some of the pieces
are missing, but the pot can be easily restored. Its
mouth is seven and three-quarters inches in
diameter. The neck is two inches long and the body
is round. The rim tapers off almost to an edge. The
bulge of the neck is fully a third of an inch in
thickness. The material is of the one coarse, grey
substance as the sherds already described. The
inside of the pot contains a thin black slip. In the
northeast corner and below the floor level some
eighteen inches is a hearth very much like the one
below room 5.

The floor level of room 3 was from thirty to
thirty four inches below the present surface. On the
floor level near the south wall of the room we
encountered our first potsherd. It was of grey color,

Room 8 revealed nothing but a crude spearhead
and a flint scraper. In the center of room 12 were
two hearths, one below the other. The first hearth
was twelve inches below the floor level and was

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
ten inches deep and thirty inches in diameter. Ashes
to the depth of six inches covered the bottom. This
hearth was floored with flat stones one and onehalf inches in diameter. The second hearth was
twenty-four inches below the floor level. It was
about ten inches deep and eighteen inches in
diameter. About two gallons of animal bones were
taken from the two hearths. A part of a broad flat
spade made from a buffalo shoulder blade, and an
excellent bone awl came from the first hearth. About
five inches below the second hearth was a layer of
large, flat stone. One stone was twenty inches long,
eighteen inches wide and eight inches thick. The
others were not taken out, but appeared as large.
Below this layer of stones was the clear, Yellow
River sand. It is to be remembered that neither of
these hearths had any connection with the hearth
found on the floor level of this room.
To the east of the ruin near the edge of the hill
are four small, isolated, circular rooms shown in
Figure 1 as Cl, C2, C3, and C4, respectively. The
largest one is C2, which has a stone floor and is
eight feet in diameter. The most interesting one was
C4, which was excavated by Mr. Studer. It is four
feet in diameter; and in the southwest side on a
narrow bench, about eighteen inches from the
surface and twelve inches from the floor level was
a small hearth of yellow clay. On the floor level
were a perfect specimen of bone spade highly
polished, two fragments of flint knives, several
mussel shells and many broken animal bones.
At the base of wall D on the east side we
uncovered a huge metate. It is significant to note
that no arrow points were found in the excavation.

21

Mr. Studer had previously found one on the foot of
the bank where the road was cut through the ruin,
but he was not certain whether it had come from
the floor level or whether it had slid down from the
surface. It is also to be remembered that no arrow
points were found in the Tarbox. Many were found
on the surface, but none on or near the old floor
levels. Spear heads were found there in abundance,
but no arrow heads.
There is much more to be done on the A-C ruin.
The most immediate task is to make several
transverse trenches, and then longitudinal trenches
along walls C and D. Eventually it is our plan to
excavate the entire area but that will no doubt be a
matter of three or four years. We could have made
a more spectacular showing this time, but it was
our purpose to begin a systematic plan of
excavation, and we doggedly held to our purpose,
leaving the spectacular finds to come in season.
We made no attempt to find the burials or the rubbish
heaps. That will provide thrills in the future. Our
main object on this trip was to discover the anatomy
of the ruin as nearly as possible for purposes of
restoration. In this we succeeded even better than
we expected at the outset. The relationship of the
hearths below the floor levels to the ruin proper is
a matter which we can not explain as yet, but
doubtless future excavation will clear this matter
up.
1. For a general description of the Canadian region and the
distribution of the slab stone ruins in the Panhandle see Bulletin of
the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Volume
I, September, 1929.
2. See Figure 1.

