Excavation of Murrah Cave

27

EXCAVATION OF MURRAH CAVE
BY W. C. HOLDEN
Murrah Cave is located in Val Verde County, on
the lower Pecos River, approximately fifteen miles
from the Rio Grande as the crow flies, and some
twenty-five or thirty miles as the river winds. The
Pecos, in this vicinity, makes a number of horseshoe bends which have diameters ranging from
three-quarters of a mile to two miles. The cave is
in the east bank, facing west, of one of these bends
whose circular side is to the east. The river in this
region has cut several hundred feet through the
Comanchean limestone. The east bank, on the
outside curve, is practically perpendicular, with
overhanging ledges here and there, and some debris,
and very steep, near the base.
A number of caves of varying sizes are found in
this bank, but Murrah Cave, the largest of them all,
is the only one with evidence of prehistoric
occupation. It is located approximately two hundred
feet above the water level of the river, and sixty
feet from the top of the cliff. It extends back into
the cliff one hundred and twenty-four feet, is
twenty-four feet wide at its mouth, thirty-five feet
wide at a distance of forty-five feet from the
entrance, thirty-seven feet wide at sixty feet from
the entrance, and forty-five feet wide at one hundred
feet from the entrance. Toward the back it narrows
down abruptly to a passage-way only a few feet
wide which extends some twenty-four feet farther.
The floor has only a slight dip downward for fifty
feet where the decline becomes approximately thirty
percent to the rear. The ceiling in the mouth of the
cave is nine feet and six inches from the floor. It is
almost level for about eighty feet back where it
begins tilting downward. Toward the rear it is
approximately twenty-five feet from the floor.
Human occupation was confined largely to the
comparatively level stretch of floor in the front fifty
feet. Behind this the bats have lived, and the guano
is from two to three feet deep. (See Plate 7).

century. In March, 1936, Mr. W. G. McMillan and
the writer, accompanied by Mr. Puckett, visited the
cave for two days. A survey convinced us that the
site was rich in materials and had been molested
very little. Permission was granted by Mr. Jim
Murrah, the owner, to excavate the place.
We began planning an expedition for March,
1937. This season was selected as a time when
rattlesnakes would not be so active as later in the
spring, and when the weather would be neither too
hot nor too cold. As it happened, both predictions
turned out contrary to plans; we killed a rattler
under foot while eating supper one night, and two
days and nights we nearly froze, while one day was
as hot as in May.
The expedition was sent out under the auspices
of the West Texas Museum which, in turn, is under
the joint control of Texas Technological College
and the West Texas Museum Association. The
sponsors who financed the expedition were Mr. W.
G. McMillan, Dr. C. J. Wagner, Mr. H. L. Allen,
and the writer.1 These gentlemen, with the exception
of Mr. Allen, accompanied the party. In addition
was Mr. W. L. Pearson, electrical engineer, and six
students: Henry Clay Bailey III, Clifford Gibbs,
Barney McCasland, Gordon Moore, Jim Huffman,
and Winston Reeves. Mr. Reeves, a photographer
of considerable skill, made an excellent series of
pictures. The writer made the tenth member of the
expedition. Dr. John Clark, field paleontologist of
Texas Technological College, visited the site for a
short time.2

The inaccessibility of Murrah Cave made it
necessary to camp on a high rocky point several
hundred feet above the river, and a mile from the
cave. All the equipment for the cave, including the
wheelbarrows, had to be carried on our backs down
a deep canyon, up over a high ridge, down another
steep decline, and along a narrow ledge high on
The existence of the cave was first reported to
the face of the cliff. Water from the river was far
the Department of History and Anthropology by
too brackish to be used; consequently, water for
Mr. Wylie Puckett who trapped and fished in the
the camp had to be hauled five miles from Sullivan’s
vicinity for a number of years just at the turn of the

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

we returned to the Museum, we laid out all materials
according to class and layers. A careful study failed
to indicate any cultural change whatever in the flint,
bone, and wood items. The types and percentages
of the bottom layer were approximately those of
the other two. Only two items of stratigraphy were
The cave was well located from the viewpoint
exceptions to the rule. The top layer contained much
of defense and esthetic outlook. It is not possible
more fiber bed matting than did the others. In a
to see the entrance from any direction until one is
small area, eighteen inches from the surface, was a
within thirty feet of it except from the ridge far
four-inch layer of wind-blown dust distinctly
across the Pecos valley. A large rock partially
stratified. This would seem to indicate an
conceals the view from that direction. The west
interruption in the occupation. Either the occupants
bank of the river slopes upward at a ten to twenty
were gone for some time during normal weather
per cent grade. In order for a person to get sufficient
conditions, or the absence was for a shorter period
elevation to see the cave from that side of the river,
during a widespread, severe drought when dust
he would be so far away he could not detect the
storms ravaged the region. It has been suggested
cave’s entrance without field glasses.
One can be along the water’s edge
below and cannot see from that place
any evidence of the cave’s existence.
On the other hand, one standing in the
cave has a marvelous view across the
Pecos. Out on the ledge in front, one
can look down and see large catfish
swimming along the bottom of the
greenish waters of the Pecos.
well over a road which did not exist. In the camp,
not a single tent stake could be driven. It was
necessary to tie the tents to cacti, lechuguilla,
juagilla, sotol, and the other scant shrubs of desert
vegetation.

The ash heap in the forward fifty feet
of the cave varied from eighteen inches
to fifty-two inches in thickness. The
ashes were light, dry, and dusty. It was
necessary for members of the party to
wear respirators while working.
Without a respirator, one would choke
up in a few moments.
The heap was worked in three levels.
The first two levels were worked over
the entire area. When it became evident
that we would be unable to finish the
entire heap during our allotted time, we
made two trenches to the floor, one
along each side of the cave. The
trenches constituted the third level, and
gave us a representative sample of the
bottom layer. Materials from these
levels were carefully kept segregated
in order to determine whether or not
any kind of cultural change had taken
place from the bottom to the top. When

PLATE 7.
Map of Murrah Cave. See text.

Excavation of Murrah Cave
WHOLE
No. on Plate 8A
Type No.
Proj. Points
Percentage
1,2 -------------------------- 1
91
.23
3 ---------------------------- 2
39
.10
4 ---------------------------- 3
48
.12
5, 6 ------------------------- 4
98
.25
7, 8 ------------------------- 5
16
.04
9, 10 ------------------------ 6
21
.05
11 --------------------------- 7
21
.05
12 --------------------------- 8
45
.12
13, 14, 15, 16 ------------- 9
16
.04
Total ----------------------------------------- 395
1.00

29
BROKEN
Proj. Points Percentage
104
.30
33
.10
14
.04
144
.39
5
.05
27
.07
26
.07
8
.02
0
.00
361
1.00

The types and number of points, with
that this stratum might have been deposited during
the great protracted drought beginning in the percentages, are given as follows (see table above):
Southwest about 1275.
We did not find an irregular distribution of the
Inasmuch as we were unable to detect any points by layers, as did Pearce and Jackson, but
cultural changes in the stratigraphy, and in order to rather a geographical distribution. Fully fifty per
keep this preliminary report from becoming unduly cent of projectile points came from within two feet
long, we shall lump the layers together and give of the walls of the cave on either side. A few of all
types had been blunted by resharpening.
the results by way of a summary.
All of the deposits removed were screened. The
Knives
ashes were sifted through the quarter-inch mesh
We secured 190 whole knives and a larger
screen into wheelbarrows and dumped from the
number of broken ones. The broken knives will be
mouth of the cave into the river below.
included below under uncatalogued flint artifacts.
The whole specimens varied in length from one and
Projectile Points
three-eights inches to four and one-half inches, the
A total of 395 whole projectile points and 361
average being two and one-half inches long and
broken ones were found. Of the broken points, only
one and one-half inches wide. Some of the knives
the bases, or butts, were counted. Because of the
show exceedingly fine workmanship. No cornerfact that the point end of a broken flint artifact may
tang specimens were found. (See plate 8B, and
be either an arrow point, a spear point, or a knife,
pictures 5, 6, 7, and 8).
all such pieces have been placed in a special category
below.
Scrapers
We found that all the projectile points tall under
The number of scrapers was small compared
nine types, with some possible sub-type variations.
with other flint artifacts. Only 29 were found, and
Pearce and Jackson, who excavated a rock shelter
these are crude, irregular in size, and follow no
of what appears to be the same culture in Val Verde
single clearly defined type. (See plate 9B, pictures
County some thirty to forty miles from Murrah
8, 9, and 10).
Cave, also classified their projectile points under
Gouges
nine types.3 In a general way, our classification
coincides with that of Pearce and Jackson. We could
Gouges were more plentiful, a total of 61 whole
have easily grouped our points under their types. specimens being secured. Some of them were
However, we treated the spiral points as a separate skillfully fashioned; others were crude. The number
type, while they placed them under their type includes several specimens which are clearly
number 1.4 On the other hand, we combine Pearce combination tools: each tool a combined gouge and
and Jackson’s types 3 and 5 under our type 8.
knife. (See plate 8B, pictures 1 and 3).

30

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Fist Axes

Uncatalogued Flint Artifacts

Of fist axes, there were 58. These vary in length
from two and one-half inches to four inches. There
is considerable variation in shape and technique.
None show evidence of having had handles. (See
plate 8B, picture 2).

There were found 1,562 flint objects which were
not catalogued. This number included broken
projectile points other than bases, knives, scrapers,
gouges, fist axes, awls, and other unclassified items.
Many of these broken specimens are of excellent
shape and workmanship.
Pebbles

Flint Awls
Four whole awls and two broken ones were
secured. One of the whole awls had a corner-tang.
(See plate 9B, pictures 1, 2, 3, and 6).
War-Club Spikes
It is problematical whether any war spikes were
found. Two specimens may have been spikes, or
they may have been the points of broken awls. (See
plate 9B, pictures 4 and 5).
Bone Crushers

A considerable number of pebbles were found
throughout the deposit. Some 29 specimens show
evidence of having been used for rubbing. One
pebble has incised marks on it. These, however, do
not make any symbol or design.
Stone Objects
Eighteen manos were secured, but no metate
was found. This is singular in that Pearce and
Jackson got thirty-two in their rockshelter. One
abrading or sharpening stone turned up.

On the sifting screen we found a round, black
Eight bone crushers were secured. These
showed signs of much battering on their blunted stone with a sub-luster, about the size of a large
points and edges.
marble. From its appearance one might infer it was

PLATE 8.
A. Flint artifacts from Murrah Cave. B. Flint artifacts from Murrah Cave; see text.

Excavation of Murrah Cave
something highly prized by the prehistoric
inhabitants of the cave. Professor W. I. Robinson,
Mineralogist of the Department of Geology, Texas
Technological College, examined the specimen,
found it to be non-magnetic, yet it gives a red iron
nitrate stain when touched with nitric acid. Its
specific gravity is 3.7. By grinding it with an
abrasive, it gives off a yellow powder. Professor
Robinson is of the opinion that the specimen is
limonite. He suggested that the fact a yellow
pigment could be obtained from a black mineral
was surprising enough to be regarded as magic by
the aborigines. (See plate 9A, picture 13. The highlight in the picture makes the black metallic ball
appear as a bead).

31
Human Jaw

No burials were found, however, it is possible
that some may be found in the area still to be
excavated. The only evidence of human bones was
an articular end of a lower jaw. It is significant that
this fragment was charred. This might denote one
of three facts: attempts at cremation, cannibalism,
or carelessness in handling of skeletal material by
the ancients.
Paint

Forty-one specimens of a red clay paint were
secured, the most of them were either on, or in the
vicinity of the loin cloth mentioned below.
Associated with the red clay were a number of
pieces of soft, chalky limestone which, no doubt,
Bone Tools
supplied the cave-dweller with the white he needed.
Twenty-six bone awls were obtained. These A piece of bituminous limestone gave him his black.
ranged in length from six inches to one and one- This specimen is one and one-half inches long and
fourth inches, and in width from one inch to one- about one-half inch in diameter.
quarter inch. Six of the number had been charred
until black and the surface polished. This gave them
Cordage
a luster. (See plate 9A, pictures 4, 5, 6, 7, and 12;
A total of one hundred and eighteen pieces of
numbers 4 and 12 are typical of the polished ones
cordage was secured, aside from pieces containing
with a luster).
knots. These varied in size from fine pieces of string
Two bone chisel-like implements were found. no larger than a small fishing line to rope a quarter
One is three inches long, one and one-half inches of an inch in diameter. Fibers from lechuguilla, sotol,
at the base, and one-halt inch at the pointed end. and Spanish dagger seemed to have been used.
The other, one and three-eighths inches long, is the Three pieces have one strand, one hundred and
broken point of a longer implement.
twelve pieces have two strands, and three pieces
have four strands. An examination of the two-strand
Twelve antler pressure flakers were secured.
pieces shows that in ten of them the fibers within
These varied in length from five and one-half inches
the strands are twisted in a counter-clockwise
to one and one-half inches. (See plate 9A, pictures
direction, while the strands are twisted in a
1, 2, 3, and 7).
clockwise direction. The reverse is true of the other
Twenty-one points, or prongs, of deer horn were 102 pieces; the fibers are twisted clockwise, while
obtained. These vary in length from five inches to the strands are counter-clockwise. (See plate 12A,
one inch. Several of them are polished on the pictures 16, 18, and 20).
pointed end, indicating that they were used as
gouges or for flaking.
Cordage Knots
Of a total of forty-eight cordage knots, twentyfive are larkshead, seventeen square, and six
Seventeen long bone beads of the types shown overhand. (See plate 12A, pictures 16 and 21).
in plate 9A, pictures 9, 10, and 11, were secured.
Only one round, flat bead turned up. (See plate 9A,
Netting
picture 8).
Three pieces of netting came to light. One was
charred so badly it could not be photographed, nor
Beads

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

PLATE 9.
A. Deer antler flakers, bone awls and beads, from Murrah Cave. See text. B. Flint drills and
scrapers, from Murrah Cave.
could its knots be studied. Another with a two and
one-half inch mesh is shown in plate 12B, picture
5. It has larkshead knots, such as is illustrated by
Pearce and Jackson, A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in
Val Verde County, Texas, page 95. The third piece
is shown in plate 12B, picture 8.
Skin-Wrapped Cords
Three skin-wrapped cords were found. (See
plate 12A, picture 17). Pearce and Jackson suggest
that these were probably used for blanket weaving
or as tassel adornments of clothing.
Leaf and Fiber Knots
A considerable use was made of leaves, split
leaves, or fibers, in the tying of bundles. The blades

of sotol, lechuguilla, Spanish dagger, and sacahuiste
(Nolina texana Watson) were used. Of 155 knots,
109 are square knots; the others were not classified.
(See plate 12A, pictures 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 13, 14 and 15). The specimen shown on plate
12A, picture 12, is quite a mystery. It consists of a
net made of hundreds of fibers tied together with
square knots. Through the center of the net is a
lechuguilla blade bent double, with the two ends
tied together at the bottom. The specimen is five
and one-half inches long, and has a fan-like
appearance. As yet we are at a loss as to its use.
Dr. R. A. Studhalter suggested it might have been
a strainer. It might also have been an ornament for
the hair.

Excavation of Murrah Cave
Basketry

33
Skins

Twenty-seven fragments of baskets came from
the cave. The six, or perhaps seven, types of weaves
are shown in plate 10B. The number of weaves here
represented are not as large as reported by Pearce
and Jackson, or by Setzler.5

The loin cloth shown in plate 11A is ten ‘inches
wide and seventeen inches long, not including the
fringe which is seven inches. The material is of soft
buckskin and is in a good state of preservation. The
piece at the bottom has been sewed on with thread
made of fiber. On one of the strings of the fringe
are two beads, and another bead is on a string to
Sandals
itself. It was found fifteen inches below the surface,
Four whole sandals and twenty-nine fragments
lying neatly folded on a bundle of Mormon tea. On
were secured. The whole ones have a linear
top of the cloth were seven chunks of red paint.
measure of seven and one-half, nine, nine and onehalf, and ten inches, respectively; and are all
Four fragments of tanned buckskin were found
approximately the same width: four inches. Two of near the bottom. These vary in size from two to
them are shown in plate 10A, pictures 3 and 4. The four inches square. One of them has a lechuguilla
materials and construction of these sandals seems string tied in a corner.
to be identical with those described by Pearce and
There are four fragments of buckskin thongs,
Jackson.6
two straight and two twisted. One of the straight
pieces consist of two pieces tied together with a
neat, square knot.

PLATE 10.
A. Sandals and mats, from Murrah Cave. B. Basketry from the cave. See text.

34

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

being at the comer of a quadrangle about two feet
square. The other two stakes were isolated and
seemed not to have any definite relationship with
any other stakes. The lengths of the six ranged from
twelve to eighteen inches, and their diameter from
one and one-half to one and three-fourths inches.
The only explanation we could think of was that
Feathers
they were used as racks for drying or for cooking
Twenty-nine hawk and eagle feathers give rise
purposes. Pearce and Jackson found similar stakes
to speculations as to whether they were used in the
in their rock shelter in Val Verde County. Ten other
hair, in blankets, or were just the remains of birds
pieces of wood with diameters about equal to those
used for food. It is probable, however, that they
mentioned above, but the lengths varying from six
were used as some form of adornment.
to twenty inches, were found but not in upright
position. They may have been used as stakes, but
Bed Mats
had been broken, or knocked over and lost in the
Approximately twenty-five sleeping mats were ashes. All of them had been cut while green with
found either on the surface or within fifteen inches hint axes. The method of severing seems to have
of the surface. At the time of our visit to the cave in been to cut the limb on either side about a fourth or
March, 1936, two of these mats, almost intact, were a third of the distance and then twist the piece off.
clearly visible on the ash deposit. They were The upper end of the piece shown in plate 11B,
approximately two and one-half feet wide and six picture 10, shows the cutting and twisting method
feet long. They were made of a heterogeneous mass of severance.
of grass and yucca fibers and averaged about three
A wooden shovel, six and one-half inches long
inches thick. The mass of fibers had become mixed
and two and one-fourth inches wide, was found
and packed with ashes and was rather hard and rigid.
twenty-four inches from the surface. (See plate 11B,
When a portion of this bedding was thrown on the
picture 7).
screen, the ashes quickly sifted out, leaving the fiber
A broken piece of what was probably a rabbit
mass light and fluffy. For samples of bedding fibers,
stick, or perhaps an atlatl, was found at the same
see plate 10A, pictures 1 and 2.
level. This specimen is one inch wide, one-half inch
thick, and has four grooves down each side. (See
Reed Artifacts
plate 11B, picture 11).
Thirty-five reed artifacts, most of them broken,
Another fragment of wood, six inches long, one
were found. They vary in width from threesixteenths to one-half inches. The larger ones were inch wide, and one-half inch thick, has twenty-one
projectile shafts. One of these had been reinforced cross-wise grooves on the lower two inches of one
by inserting a piece of solid wood three-sixteenths end, and four length-wise grooves extending the
of an inch in diameter into the hollow interior of rest of the distance. (See plate 11B, picture 8).
the reed, and then securely wrapping the exterior
Ten sticks, probably hide-stretchers, slightly
of the reed with sinew. This wrapping is an
curved and pointed on each end, varied in length
exceedingly fine piece of workmanship. (See plate
from eight to nineteen inches. (See plate 11B,
11B, picture 1).
picture 16).
Several short pieces of reed, cut squarely at the
One wooden fore-shaft, probably used to
ends, indicated they may have been used for beads.
reinforce a reed main-shaft, is shown in plate 11B,
picture 14.
Wooden Artifacts
Only one wooden arrowshaft was found. It had
Six upright stakes were found near the surface.
the bark peeled off, but was unpolished. (See plate
Four of these seemed to have formed a unit, each
11B, picture 2).
Twelve twisted strips of skins with the fur on
indicated they might have been used for blanket
weaving. Both rabbit and cat fur seems to have been
used. (See plate 12B, picture 3). Two squirrel tails
were probably used as tassels.

Excavation of Murrah Cave

35

Food
Of fire-making implements, four hearth-sticks
(plate 11B, pictures 6 and 12), five drills, and one
The ancient cave-dwellers were hunters of small
drill-cap were found.
game. Of the 623 bones found, only four were from
animals larger than deer. These four, which
Two awl-like sticks of five and six inches,
consisted of two heel bones and two broken pieces
respectively, in length came from the upper level.
of femur, were from buffalo. Of the small game,
The pointed end of each is polished. One of the
Dr. John dark and Professor W. F. Landwer7 have
specimens is shown in plate 11B, picture 5.
identified the following: raccoon, jack-rabbit,
An unidentified spliced stick is shown in plate cotton-tail rabbit, ring-tail cat, badger, kit-fox or
11B, picture 13. Also unidentified is specimen 9 in “swift,” coyote, wolf, deer, antelope, turtle,
plate 11B. It has a well-defined groove around the terrapin, rat, squirrel, coatimondi, ocelot, several
main prong, just below the crook. Thirty-seven kinds of fish, and several kinds of birds. Snail shells,
other sticks or segments of shafts, of varying sizes both charred and uncharred, were abundant
throughout the deposit. The same was true of
and lengths, are likewise unidentified.
mussel shells of which several species were found.
Especially noticeable was a large type which

PLATE 11
A. An Indian’s loin cloth from Murrah Cave. See text. B. Bone and wood artifacts from Murrah
Cave.

36

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

measured from four to four and one-half inches in
length. A large mummified rat was found on a
narrow ledge of the wall just below the ash level.
Several fragments of horned toads (Phrynosoma
cornutum) were secured at various depths.

The buckskin apron was on the bundle of Mormon
tea brush. The plant is known to have been used by
some American Indian groups in the treatment of
venereal diseases. Dr. Studhalter wondered if this
could be the explanation for the association of the
cloth with the bundle of tea brush.

Of vegetal foods, sotol (Dasylirion texanum
No evidence of domesticated plants, such as
Scheele) was the most abundant.8 The crowns were
found throughout the deposit. Next in importance corn, squash, or melons, was found.
were lechuguilla quids. Thousands of them
appeared on the sifting screens.
Other Botanical Specimens

Juagilla (Wá-hé-ya) beans seemed to have been
A number of branches of desert willow
an important item of food. One and one-half pounds (Chilopsis linearis) came from a depth of eighteen
of these beans were sifted from the ashes. They are inches. In approximately the same level was a bundle
larger than mesquite beans, are dark brown in color, of needle grass (Aristida).
and have a hard, smooth surface.
Needles
A considerable number of dried prickly pears
(Opuntia) were found. A piece of human dung
consisting entirely of prickly pear seeds adhered
together.
Mesquite beans (Prosopis glandulosa) were
fairly well distributed through the deposit.
Several hundred small western walnuts (Juglans
rupestris), most of them parched, were found fairly
evenly distributed through the ask heap.
A considerable number of Texas laurel or coral
beans (Sophora secundiflora), seeds, and pods were
found. The seeds, when unburned, are a coral red;
however, a majority of those secured were parched.
In view of the fact that the seeds are poisonous,
one wonders at their presence in the cave. Pearce
and Jackson give a plausible explanation.9
That the prehistoric cave dwellers liked a little
seasoning with their food is attested by the presence
of a number of small wild onions.
A few acorns, most of them parched, were found.
Three species of grass seeds (as yet unidentified)
were found.
Of considerable interest was a bundle of
Mormon tea, or teamster’s tea (Ephedra), found
associated with the loin cloth shown on plate 11A.

Perhaps the most intriguing objects found were
two needle or spine containers. Each was made of
a bundle of soft fibers wrapped cross-wise with fiber
thongs. One (Plate 12B, picture 6) contained ten
fish-hook cactus spines. These may have been used
as fishhooks or as needles. The other bundle
contained four straight cactus spines (Plate 12B,
picture 7). Both bundles are examples of
exceedingly delicate workmanship.
Conclusion
All the evidence indicates that the inhabitants of
Murrah Cave were prehistoric. Nothing was found
to indicate they had ever come in contact with
European civilization. If the last persons to live in
the cave left before the arrival of the white race,
one may surmise from the amount of ashes that the
first inhabitants date back a considerable period
before the beginning of historic time. The people
had primarily a sotol culture, and were entirely
without pottery. Their skill lay in the making of
cordage and exquisite flint artifacts.
Anthropology Department,
Texas Technological College,
Lubbock, Texas.

Excavation of Murrah Cave
(1) The expedition is Indebted to Mr. H. L. Allen for the
donation of a field unit of electrical lighting apparatus, and
for the loan of an electrical engineer. Through Mr. Alien,
the Texas-New Mexico Utilities Company provided the
expedition with a truck.
(2) The expedition is grateful to Mr. and Mrs. Denny
Sullivan, whose ranch house served as a sort of base for the
camp, for numerous favors. Mrs. Sullivan, a former
Anthropology student of Texas Technological College, was
extremely helpful because of her knowledge of surface sites
in the vicinity.
(3) Professor J. E. Pearce and Mr. A. T. Jackson of the
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, published
the results of their work In an admirable and exhaustive
manner in 1933, “A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde
County, Texas,” University of Texas Bulletin, Bureau of

37

Research in Social Sciences Study No. 6, Anthropological
Papers, Vol. I, No. 3.
(4) See Pearce and Jackson’s report, Plate XII (a).
(5) F. M. Setzler, “Prehistoric Cave Dwellers of Texas,”
Explorations and field work of the Smithsonian Institution
in 1932.
(6) Op. Cit., pp. 96-103.
(7) Professor M. F. Landwer Is Associate Professor of
Biology, Texas Technological College.
(8) We are Indebted to Dr. R. A. Studhalter and Dr. E. L.
Reed of the Department of Biology, Texas Technological
College, for Identifying the botanical specimens.
(9) Pearce and Jackson, “A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val
Verde County, Texas,” p. 131.

PLATE 12.
A. Cordage from Murrah Cave. See text. B. Cordage and; cactus fish hook bundles. See text.

