18

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

THE PICTOGRAPHS AT THE HUECO TANKS
BY COLONEL M. L. CRIMMINS
There is a giant pile of granite known as the Hueco
Tanks thirty miles east-northeast of El Paso. These
tanks were a landmark for the emigrants to California
from 1849 on, and before that they had been used for
many centuries by various tribes of Indians.
Captain Randolph Marcy, 5th U. S. Infantry, in
laying out a new route from El Paso to Fort Smith,
Figure 4
PICTOGRAPHS, HUECO TANKS.

Arkansas, camped as this place in September 1849.
He remarked about the great natural beauty of the
place and many Indian rock pictures decorating the
walls of the caves.
John Russell Bartlett, the chief of the AmericanMexican boundary commission, passed there the
following year and was much impressed with their
unusual geologic formations. He copied
many of the pictographs as shown in his
Personal Narratives, U. S. Mexican
Boundary Commission 1850-54.
Geology of the Area
This groups of rocks is an igneous
intrusion, forced up through the earth’s
surface many millions of years ago, which
accounts for their appearance in an upright
position. This happened long before the
Rocky Mountains appeared above the level
of the sea, and when a large part of the
present United States was covered with
water, from the Hueco Tanks to the
Labrador Shelf on the east. Therefore no
cretaceous animal life is found below these
rocks. These rocks form a great natural
amphitheatre, with huge rocks thrown upright in wild confusion, extending about a
mile in length, half a mile in width, and form
one hundred to one hundred and fifty feet in
height. Much of the granite is in place, while
huge boulders are piled up like pebbles on
the sides of the summit.
Favored Location
These tanks cover an area of about five
hundred acres, and the rocks are in three
groups forming a natural amphitheatre.
Water is usually found in some rock water
holes. This place has been a favorite resort
of the Indians since the earliest prehistoric

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

19

Human Figures
days. This is evidenced by the large circular mortar
Under an overhanging rock is a large tank measuring
holes worn in the solid granite from twelve to fifteen
inches deep. In these holes they ground and crushed about thirty by eight feet and in it there is a permanent
water supply. This tank contains as much as four feet
their corn, grain, seeds, and acorns.
of water at times and has for thousands of years been
These rocks are surrounded by a barren desert
a popular camping place. The granite has been worn
and the nearest permanent water is the Rio Grande
so smooth, that you cannot walk over the slopes in
about thirty miles away. Consequently these Tanks
leather soled shoes, without slipping and falling.
were of great value to the hunters of this region, who
The walls near the tank are covered with many white
would lie there in concealment and kill game as it came
to the water holes. It was important that proper shelter rock pictures, showing human figures dancing. One
should be available for the protection of the hunters’ shows the rabbit dance which took place before their
families, and therefore it is probable that these caves big rabbit drives, which was a prayer for success in
were marked with the sign of ownership, just
Figure 5
as we brand cattle. This may have been the
PICTOGRAPHS,
HUECO
TANKS. ANIMALISTIC.
origin of many of the pictographs, especially
the animalistic types. It seems to have been
the custom of most of the primitive races of
America to take the names of animals singly
or in combination.
Pictographs
Many of the caves near the mortar holes
are decorated with pictographs. They are
usually of the following colors: Black, red,
white, yellow, and one green. The black
pictures are the most common and are made
from a paint composed of grease and
charcoal. The red pictures are from hematite
or cinnabar and the yellow ones are made
from an ochreous sandstone. The white was
made from either kaolin, gypsum, or lime.
The green pictures are characteristic of the
Navajo Indians of northern New Mexico
and Arizona, and their paint was made from
a copper oxide.
The groups of figures have been divided
into the symbolic, the meaning of most of
this is unknown; the animalistic in which the
animal is usually recognized, and the
anthropomorphic in which the human element
is shown. Many of the caves have the same
figure repeated and they may be totemic
signatures of the owners of the caves.

20

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

their hunt. Another is a huge red sun with a white snake
projecting upwards from it. There was one picture
found in this group of the human hand. This picture is
usually associated with the Basket Maker culture of
more than three thousand years ago. We also find some
pictures not unlike those of the Mayas of Yucatan of
about two thousand years ago. We have a picture
painted in red of a god-like figure wearing plumes on
his head. Others show circular numerals similar to those
of the Mayas and Aztecs.

“Council Chamber”

There is a cave near the mouth of the amphitheatre
which has a large flat table-like rock that has been
worn smooth on top. It is the largest cave thereabouts,
and is called “The Council Chamber Cave.” It has
two large white snakes painted on the wall and each is
over fifty feet long and about a foot wide. Bartlett
reports that the Indians held councils in the great
amphitheatre. On one occasion after the Indians had
committed depredations and murders around El Paso
they were trailed by the Mexicans to this amphitheatre.
They were driven to the far end
and then built a wall of rocks from
Figure 6
one perpendicular rock to the
PICTOGRAPHS, HUECO TANKS, SYMBOLIC.
other. Here they were besieged
and being cut off from food and
water, they were eventually
overcome and one hundred and
fifty were killed.
A Site Worthy of Preservation
There are about two thousand
Indian rock pictures at the Hueco
Tanks. Many of these pictures
have been destroyed and defaced
by vandals, during the past eighty
years. Even Bartlett in his
“Personal Narrative,” Vol. I,
pages 172 and 173 wrote as
follows in reference to the Indian
rock pictures:
“Over them are figures of
late travelers and emigrants”
who have taken this means to
immortalize their names and
let posterity know that they
were on their way to
California.”
There are few places in the
world where such an interesting
collection of pictographs can be
found in such an easily accessible
location. The State of Texas
should follow the example of other
States in preserving their
archeological sites for the study
of present and future generations.

