Discoveries Indicating A Pre-Caddo Culture

17

DISCOVERIES INDICATING A PRE-CADDO CULTURE
ON RED RIVER IN ARKANSAS
BY HARRY J. LEMLEY
The purpose of this paper is to present certain
evidences of the discovery of a pre-Caddo culture
on the Crenshaw Place on Red River in Miller
County, Arkansas. Heretofore, in so far as we are
aware, no definite report has been made of the
finding in the Red River area in Arkansas of any
evidence of a culture other than that of the Caddo.

of the further exploration of which forms the body
of this paper, he reported finding five burials in
Mound “D” (maximum depth five feet) and 7
pottery vessels “of a coarse, heavy ware and almost
without decoration,” none of which is figured or
otherwise described; in Mound “B”, five burials
(maximum depth 3’) and 24 vessels, none of which
were particularly described, but 5 of which were
The Crenshaw Place is located on the west bank
illustrated. The vessels figured by Moore were not
of Red River, near Dooley’s Ferry, and about
identified with any particular burial but were all
fourteen miles east of the Texas line. Upon that
unquestionably Caddoan.
part of the place situated in the Northwest quarter
of Section 36, Township 14 South, Range 26 West,
In view of the later discovery on the Crenshaw
is a group of six mounds. These were visited and Place of distinct evidences of two separate cultures,
certain of them were investigated to a limited extent we have made an effort to secure photographs of
by Clarence B. Moore, in 1911. A report of his the 26 vessels found by Moore but not illustrated
explorations will be found in his “Some Aboriginal by him, together with data tending to identify the
Sites on Red River”1, on page 621 of which is a vessels with the burials. In this connection, we are
plan of the mounds, designated by him as Mounds advised in a letter from Dr. E. K. Burnett, Acting
“A” to “F” inclusive. We will follow this Director of the Museum of the American Indian,
Heye Foundation, in which the Moore collection
designation.
has been deposited, that the museum has but 7 of
In 1906, Mr. W. P. Agee, Jr., a local collector,
the 31 vessels found on the Crenshaw Place, 5 of
did some digging in the upper levels of Mound “D”
which are those illustrated in Moore’s paper. Dr.
and removed a part of the mound. He made no
Burnett has courteously sent us photographs of the
record of his findings but advised the writer that
2 remaining vessels but stated that he has no way
the mound at the time was roughly circular, that a
of knowing from which mound either came. One
number of burials (he does not recall how many)
of the vessels is Caddoan, but the other probably is
were uncovered, and that he found 11 pottery
of the older culture, resembling somewhat the large
vessels and 276 delicate, finely chipped implements
urn (V-1375) illustrated by us.
in the mound, the latter in one lot around the head
In the years 1933-’34, Mr. Glenn Martin, of
of a skeleton. Fifteen of these implements were
figured by Moorehead,2 who stated that they Texarkana, assisted at times by certain other young
“represent as high an art in flint chipping as is to be men of that place, did considerable digging in the
found anywhere in the world.” Several of the vessels upper level of mounds “B” and “D” and in a
and a number of the implements discovered by Mr. cemetery discovered by him southwest of Mound
Agee were figured in this report.
“D”, unearthed a number of burials with artifacts,
some of which artifacts are described and illustrated
Moore reported3 finding three burials in Mound
herein. In the latter year, Mr. Martin exhibited to
“C”, near one of which “was a coarse cooking-pot”
Professor S. D. Dickinson, of the State A. & M.
not illustrated or otherwise described: and no burials
College, of Magnolia, Arkansas, and the writer, a
in Mounds “A” and “E”. He made no investigation
number of typical Caddo vessels taken by him from
of Mound “F.” With reference to Mounds “B” and
Mound “B” and also other vessels removed by him
“D”, the two burial mounds of the group, an account

18

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and his associates from Mound “D” and the
cemetery referred to. The vessels last mentioned
did not appear to be Caddoan and indicated the
existence of another culture on the place. With Mr.
Martin’s consent, and after a preliminary
examination of the site made with the assistance of
Professor Dickinson, the writer began work on the
mounds with a force of men on February 11, 1935,
which was continued intermittently until July 20,
1935. Mr. Martin remained with us throughout as
our field foreman.

three upper burials in Mound “B” we found Caddo
burials, furnished with pottery and other artifacts
typical of that culture. A detailed report follows:
Mound “D”
4

Moore, described what he termed the “irregular
remainder” of Mound “D” as being 50’ x 30’ and 6’
high. We endeavored to ascertain its original size
and, after examination concluded that originally it
was roughly circular and 60’ in diameter. A
considerable portion of the west part had been
In the course of our work, we removed all of removed. The surface of practically all of the south
Mound “D” except a small segment about 8’ wide half and a small portion of the north half had been
at the north end which was tested for burials by recently dug over; most of the north half was
means of trial holes and probing, we thoroughly covered with saplings. The upper layers had been
explored Mound “B”, and finished the digging of displaced in many places, but no evidence of
the cemetery near Mound “B”. In the body of disarrangement was found in the lower parts. The
Mound “D” and in four burial pits under Mound mound was composed of layers of sand separated
“B” which had been dug before the erection of the by thin layers of clay ranging from 2” to 4” in
mound we found burials and artifacts of a culture thickness and was approximately 7 ½’ high at the
differing radically from that of the Caddo, whereas, center. At the base was a layer of dark colored earth,
in two intrusive pits cut down from the surface of from 8” to 12” thick, mingled in which was village
Mound “D” and in eight similar intrusive pits and debris. Our method of procedure was to begin on

PLATE 3.
Certain cross sections of Mound B. See text.

Discoveries Indicating A Pre-Caddo Culture
the layer of village soil and work inward, removing
the mound as we proceeded. All of the burials in
the mound with the exception of a group of five
skulls (Group Burial No. 1) were in the south half.
In this area were found a number of burials in the
mound proper and the two intrusive pits above
referred to. In certain instances nothing remained
of burials found in the mound proper except the
crowns of teeth associated with which were certain
artifacts. In other cases, groups of deposits of
artifacts were found with no bones, the latter having
doubtless decayed. These deposits will be described
along with the burials. In all cases the burials and
groups of artifacts were found on the thin layers of
clay indicating that the mound had been built by
stages, an additional layer being added as a burial
or group of burials was made.
Burials in Mound:

19

“D”, were in a poor state of preservation. We will
treat them as a unit, although they may or may not
have been buried in a group. No. 1 was found 13’
from the center of the mound in a northeasterly
direction; No. 2, 4” to the south of No. 1; No. 3,
20” northeasterly from No. 1; No. 4, 12” north of
No. 3; and No. 5, 3’ 4” northwest of No. 4; Nos. 1,
2, and 3 were headed north and Nos. 4 and 5 south.
Four inches under No. 4 was a small arrowhead;
and in both Nos. 1 and 3 one small arrowhead lay
about 1’ to the east of each.
Burial No. 2, a skull headed south, with no other
bones was found at a depth of about 3’ in the
southwestern segment. Nothing was with this skull
unless it was buried with vessel V-1289, which was
found on the same level and 39” northwest.
(Catalog, rather than field numbers, of artifacts are
given.)

Burial No. 3, a skull headed south with no other
Group Burial No. 1 consisted of five skulls with
bones was found at a depth of 42”, about 8’
no other bones, all found on the same level and at
southwesterly of the center of the mound.
depths of from 10” to 12”. These skulls, as well as
Immediately above this skull, with about 4” of sand
all of the other skeletal remains found in Mound
intervening, was a broken conical cooking pot, (V-

PLATE 4.
Plan of Pit No. 3, Mound B. See text.

20

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

1292) of plain, light brown ware, 4 ½” tall with
small square bottom, rudimentary feet and inward
curving rim. The last coil of clay applied on the
inside had not been entirely obliterated, a feature
of some of the more crudely made pottery of this
culture. This vessel, as well as all others found in
the body of Mound “D”, with one exception, was
grit tempered. About 6” northwest of the skull was
a well-made, shallow, triangular ladle (V-1290) of
polished light brown ware. Two closely spaced
incised lines encircle the rim. This vessel had been
purposely mutilated by means of deep scarifications
which appear in clusters on the interior walls. The
scarifications, apparently pecked out, suggest the
funerary practice of “killing” vessels, evidence of
which is found in Florida and the Southwest. A like
distance northwest of the skull was a plain cookingpot of heavy polished brown ware with curving
body and broad, flat, round base, the rim of which
is missing. Scarifications, similar to those referred
to, occur on its outer surface.
Burials 4, 5, 6, and 7. In the southeastern
quadrant, four cremated burials were found, rather
close together, and at depths of from 3’ to 3 ½”, all
in pits cut down from the surface. The calcined
bones were in small fragments. No evidence of fire
was found and apparently the cremations had been
made elsewhere and the remains thereafter interred
in the mound. Moore5 reported finding a deposit of
cremated remains in this mound.
Burial No. 8. In the southeastern quadrant at a
depth of 46” was a deposit of 36 arrowheads on
each side of which and in close proximity were a
number of the crowns of human teeth, all that was
left of two skulls. Nineteen of these points are of
finely chipped pink, white and gray translucent
novaculite, from l ¼” to 1 7/8” in length and very
thin. These are of as fine workmanship as those
found by Mr. Agee and resemble them to a marked
degree, but are wider at the base and more deeply
notched. The remaining points are of jasper and
novaculite and are from ¾” to 1 1/8” in length.

Deposit of Artifacts:
In the same quadrant and on the five foot level
was a deposit of eight small, crude points. No
evidence of a skull appeared, but judging from our
experience in this mound these flints originally were
with a burial.
Group of Artifacts:
The following described group (or groups) of
artifacts was found in the southwestern quadrant
about 9 ½ north of the south edge, all on the same
thin layer of clay. At a depth of 3’, a deeply
hollowed-out boat-stone of grayish green stone,
probably sianite, notched at the ends; almost in
touch with the hollow of the boat-stone was an oval
pebble which readily nests in the stone; 29”
northwesterly of the boat-stone was a conical
cooking-pot (V-1286) of rather thin polished light
brown ware, inward curving rim, small base, with
an incised line encircling the rim, suggesting a
degeneration of the typical band found around the
rims of the better pottery of this culture; 34” north
of the boat-stone was another conical cooking-pot
of polished brown ware decorated with two incised
lines, suggesting a band, around the rim; 30” east
of this vessel was a crude asymmetrical cooking
pot of heavy dark grayish brown ware, plain, with
slightly flaring rim, thickness at base ½” and 4 ½”
southeasterly of the latter was a globular bowl of
heavy gray-ish-brown ware, 4 ¼” high and 6 ¼” in
diameter, two crudely incised lines surrounding the
rim. This is the vessel mentioned as having been
found 39” from the skull in Burial No. 2. Three
feet north of east, and the same distance from this
vessel, was an unpolished triangular celt of brown
sandstone, 3 5/8” in length; and 1’ north of the celt
were 32 small barbed points of novaculite and
jasper. Undoubtedly, these artifacts were with one
or more burials, the bones of which had totally
disappeared.
Burial Pits:

Two burial pits, extending from the surface down
Burial No. 9. In the southeastern quadrant and
through the mound and into the sand under the
at a depth of about 4’ was another lot of the crowns
mound were discovered. These pits contained
of human teeth in close proximity to which were
Caddo burials and artifacts, and in both instances
three small, crude points of flint.

Discoveries Indicating A Pre-Caddo Culture
they were readily traceable. Moore6, Harrington7,
Jackson8, and Pearce9 have discussed and described
Caddo and related burials and artifacts to such an
extent that we do not feel that it is necessary to go
into a detailed description of the artifacts found with
these pit burials. To do so would extend this paper
beyond the space allotted us. We shall, therefore,
content ourselves with a general description.

21

which is a slender, rounded projection 1” in length;
stem entirely missing; height at bowl, l ¾”. This
pipe resembles the Caddo pipes found in the
intrusive pits in Mound “B”, hereafter mentioned,
but the bowl is taller, the bowls of the Caddo pipes
referred to averaging slightly less than 1” in height.

(4). A slender, polished bone needle, 3 ½” in
length and slightly over 1/8” in diameter at dorsal
Pit No. 1, in the southwestern quadrant, was 9’ end, with which was the fragment of a similar
x 6’ and extended 18” below the base of the mound. needle; both embedded in the basal layer.
Above the base, as shown at the sides of this pit,
(5). Two small crudely made points.
were nine layers of sand separated by thin layers of
clay. The pit contained three adult burials, all
(6). A number of sherds of the heavy coarse ware
extended. The bones were in bad condition and found in the mound proper.
many had disappeared, but the condition of the
remains was such that one could determine that one
Isolated Artifacts From Body of Mound:
extended between the upper extremities of the
(1). A plain, crude cooking-pot, of heavy dark
remaining two. With the burials and around and
grayish-brown ware, with curving body, scarified
over certain of the skeletal remains were 34 pottery
on outer surface in the manner hereinbefore
vessels, one pair of large clay-stone ear plugs,
mentioned.
showing copper stains, 2 celts and 2 arrow-heads.
The vessels, many of which were broken, were of
(2). A somewhat conical cooking-pot (V-1295)
the usual Caddo type, consisting of engraved bottles of heavy brown ware; wide mouth; wide, round
and bowls, including cazuela bowls with and thick base.
without handles, and incised cooking pots. In the
(3). A small chisel, of polished gray slate, length
lot was a fish effigy bowl, highly conventionalized.
1 7/8”.
Pit No. 2, located with its northwestern corner
(4). A finely chipped, thin point of translucent
about 4’ southeast of the center of the mound, lay
white novaculite about 2” long, similar to those
north-northeast and south-southeast, was 7’ x 6’
found by Mr. Agee, but somewhat wider at base.
and extended 18” below the mound floor. The pit
contained three adult burials, side by side, extended
Cemetery
on their backs with skulls to the south. With the
burials were 14 vessels of Caddo ware, many of
Mr. Martin, in his digging in the plowed field
which were in fragments.
south of Mound “D” had found four burials with
Caddo pottery, and southwest of the mound had
found a cemetery containing a large number of
Artifacts Found in and On Mound Base:
burials with pottery of the older culture. We
(1). A crude, plain cooking pot of heavy red clay
completed the digging of this cemetery. The
with brown slip, slightly flattened rim, heavy base,
following burials were found:
maximum thickness ½”, height 4”; found on basal
layer.
Burials Nos. 1 and 2, both adults, lay in an east
and west position, 22” deep with skulls to the east
(2). A plain, oval platter of polished brown ware,
and facing each other, with teeth touching. No. 1
upon the lip of the rim of which is an incised
was in a flexed position with its bended knees across
encircling line; found on basal layer.
the right leg of No. 2; the latter burial, in an extended
(3). Embedded in the layer of village soil was position on its back. By the right leg of No. 2,
the bowl of a pipe of red clay, extending out from extending from the hips down, were 11 very small

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

barbed serrated points of novaculite. The skulls of
these two burials were in better condition than any
that we found of the older culture. However, we
were advised by Dr. P. F. Titterington, of St. Louis,
and Dr. E. G. Wakefield, of the Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, both of whom have
examined these crania, that they cannot be restored.

the left side of the skull were three small, crude
points.
Burial No. 5, an adult extended, with skull to
the southwest, depth 33”, remains in bad condition;
no artifacts.

Description of Other Artifacts From
Burial No. 3, an adult extended on its back, was
Mound “D” and the Cemetery:
lying at a depth of 14” with the skull to the
In 1906 Mr. W. P. Agee, Jr., found 276 flint
northeast. A part of the bones only were traceable;
implements and 11 pottery vessels in Mound “D”
no artifacts.
We have been fortunate in securing these
Burial No. 4, an adult extended, with skull to
implements and also six of the vessels, all that now
the north, depth 22”, bones in bad condition. Near
remains of the eleven found by him at the time.
These are of the older culture.
Mr. Martin and his associates
also removed a number of stone
implements and pottery vessels,
all of the older culture, from
Mound “D” and the cemetery
referred to. These gentlemen
have kindly permitted us to add
the specimens found by them to
our collection from the
Crenshaw Place.
Among the flint implements
found by Mr. Martin are certain
specimens similar to those
discovered by Mr. Agee,
including 4 double-notched
points of the same type. A
photograph of a number of these
implements of the older culture
is shown on plate (11). Three of
the four double-notched points
referred to are shown in the
center of the photograph, most
of the remainder being
specimens found by Mr. Agee.

PLATE 5.
Pit No. 9, Mound B. See text.

Mr. Martin found stone
chisels in the mound and
cemetery similar to specimens
removed by us from graves of the
older culture. He reported
finding with crowns of teeth in

Discoveries Indicating A Pre-Caddo Culture
Mound “D” a small deeply hollowed-out polished
boat-stone of granite, 26 finely made points, a
number of which are similar to those found by Mr.
Agee, and 5 pottery vessels of the older culture,
one of which (V-1462) is illustrated by us. We have
deemed it advisable to describe and illustrate certain
of the vessels referred to:

23

is an incised continuous scroll with punctate
background; usual incised encircling line on lip.
Apparently the vessel is partly shell tempered and
in this respect differs from the usual grit tempered
ware of this culture.
V-1450: (Mound “D”). A small squat
quadrilateral vessel of thick light brown ware with

V-1443: (Mound “D”) a large pear
shaped vase of polished brown ware
with broad band around rim,
decorated centrally by a rectilinear
incised design, based on the scroll,
with punctate background; incised
encircling line on the lip of the rim.
V-1145: (Mound “D”) A
quadrilateral vessel of grayish brown
ware with band in low relief around
rim, upon the lip of which are two
incised encircling lines. Vertical bands
at corners divide the vessels into four
panels, two of which, one opposite
the other, are plain, the remaining two
decorated, one each, with a large
vertical incised scroll and punctate
background.
V-1447: (Mound “D”). A large
elongated globular jar of hard baked
red ware with wide band in relief
around rim; lip of rim bisected by
usual incised encircling line; body
divided into panels by vertical bands
between which is a design composed
of undulating incised bands with
punctate background; kaolin has been
rubbed into the incisions.
V-1454: (Cemetery). A large jar
of polished brown ware with band in
relief around rim and incised
encircling lines on lip; body decorated
with a series of incised concentric
semi-circles and punctations.
V-592: (Mound “D”). A conical
jar of grayish-brown polished ware
with a broad rim slanting inward at
an angle of 45 degrees, upon which

PLATE 6.
Photograph of part of Pit 3, Mound “B” (a pre-Caddo
pit), cut through by Pit 5 (an intrusive Caddo pit).

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

band around rim. On each of the four sides is a circular spaces in each of which is a crudely incised
different incised design, these designs being based design. This vessel has been purposely mutilated
probably on the scroll, highly conventionalized.
on the exterior as is shown in our photograph.
V-1451: (Mound “D”). A small vessel of heavy
dark brown ware somewhat similar in shape to V1450, upon which is a band around the rim and a
crudely executed incised design on the body,
composed of scrolls and punctations.

V-1176: (Near Mound “D”). A small vessel with
two broad and two narrow vertical sides; band
around rim; usual encircling line on lip. The broad
sides are each decorated with a composite scroll
and punctate background.

V-1230: (Mound “D”). A conical bowl of
brownish-gray ware with usual band, in this instance
in low relief, around rim, bisected by an incised line.
Upon the lip are three parallel incised encircling
lines.

V-1464: (Mound “D”). A small bowl of yellow
ware with projecting lobes, having on its bottom
an elaborate design composed of a combination of
scrolls and punctations.

V-1442: (Mound “D”). A square bottomed
cooking pot of heavy brown ware, somewhat
quadrilateral, with usual incised lines forming a band
around the rim; rim lip flat and bisected by typical
incised encircling line.
V-1441: (Mound “D”). A deep bowl of brown
ware with narrow band around rim. The line
encircling the lip of the rim occurs.

V-1462: (Cemetery). A small oval ladle of light
brown ware, plain, except for incised encircling line
on lip of rim; scarified at end.
V-1461: (Mound “D”). A small semi-globular
bowl of light brown ware; narrow band around rim;
two encircling lines on lip; body decorated with
incised scrolls.

V-1460: (Mound “D”). A small boat-shaped,
ladle-like bowl of brown ware with narrow band
V-1440: (Mound “D”). A semi-globular cooking around rim, the lip of which carries an encircling
pot of rather heavy brownish gray ware, with body line.
curving inward to meet a short vertical neck,
V-1463: (Near Mound “D”). An elliptical platter
separated from the body by an incised line, thereby
of yellow ware upon the bottom of which is the
forming the typical encircling band. The usual
usual band around the rim; incised encircling line
incised encircling line appears on the rim.
on lip.
V-1446: (Mound “D”). A shallow circular
platter-like bowl of polished brown ware 7 ½” in
Mound “B”
diameter; typical band, bisected by an incised line,
Moore described Mound “B” as irregularly
encircles rim; incised encircling line appears on lip.
circular with a diameter of about 85’ and about 5
V-1449: (Mound “D”). A bowl of yellow ware ½’ high. He reported five burials (including two
with rounded bottom and flaring rim, decorated deposits of bones), the greatest depth at which they
with incised and punctate lines on exterior and were found was 3 ½’. All of the pottery from this
mound illustrated by him is Caddoan. At the time
inside.
of our visit the mound was about 80’ in diameter,
V-1457; (Mound “D”). A flattened globular
and the height at center as reported by Moore. It
bowl of brown ware with wide band around rim;
was composed from top to base of a dark, heavy
band decorated with incised and punctate
red clay, mixed in which was a very small amount
decorations; rim lip has two parallel incised
of sand. Under the mound was a layer of dark
encircling lines.
colored sand, in which was village debris. Several
V-1456: (Cemetery). A bowl of brown ware with fire places were found on this layer. Under the floor
incurving rim; body decorated with enclosed was light colored river sand, except where displaced
by burial pits.

Discoveries Indicating A Pre-Caddo Culture
The remains of seven skeletons were found in
the mound. These will be referred to as “Upper
Burials”. Twelve pits, containing the remains of a
total of 70 skeletons, were found under the mound,
and a burial of two infants in the layer of village
soil at the base. With all of the upper burials, except
one which contained no artifacts, were specimens
of Caddo pottery. Of the twelve pits found, four
(Nos. 2, 3, 6 and 9) had been dug before the erection
of the mound and extended down from the layer of
village soil only. These pits, the smallest of which
was 11 ½’ x 15’, and the largest, 13’ x 22’, contained
respectively, 12, 14, 18 and 12 burials, all adults,
extended on their backs and apparently buried at
the same time. In these were a very few pottery
vessels and other artifacts, the pottery being of the
older culture, evidences of which were found in
the body of Mound “D” and the cemetery nearby.
These four pits of the older culture were filled with
sand darker than the river sand, and in which was
village debris. The remaining pits, all of which had
been cut down from the displaced surface through
the mound and into the sub-surface, ranged in size
from 4 l-3’ x 8 1-6’ to 5 ½’ x 8’ and contained in
four instances one burial each, in three instances
two burials each, and in one instance four burials,
in all of which were Caddo pottery and other
artifacts, in most cases in great profusion. These
pits had been filled in with a mixture of clay and
sand, many lumps of clay separated by sand being
in evidence, and were readily discernible from the
surrounding soil. In one instance, one of these
Caddo pits (Pit No. 5) had been cut down through
one of the earlier pit burials under the mound (Pit
No. 3) and had penetrated the sub-surface under
the last mentioned pit to a depth of 18”. In another
case, a Caddo pit (No. 8) had been cut down until
its diggers came into contact with certain skeletons
in the earlier pit (No. 3), thereupon they gathered
up the bones which they had displaced and placed
them around the ends and sides of the pit they were
digging and then refilled the grave with 10” of dirt
and made the one burial found therein.

25

from the surface and extended 4’ under the mound.
Directly above this pit, Pit 10 containing Caddo
burials had been dug to a depth of 6 ½’ and, in the
digging of the latter, Upper Burial 3 had been
entered at a depth of 20” and was cut through,
leaving at the outer edge of the latter pit the hip
bones and lower extremities of two adult skeletons
in the upper burial.
But little space will be devoted to a discussion
of the upper burials and the pits cut down from the
top of the mound, since both contained Caddo
burials. The pits which were dug before the erection
of the mound will be described in detail.
Pit Burials of the Older Culture:
Pit 2, situated in the southwestern part of the
mound lying in a northwesterly and southeasterly
direction, had been dug before the erection of the
mound to a depth of 2’ from the ground level and
was 12’ x l5’. It contained 12 adult skeletons buried
in two rows of six each, which were extended on
their backs with the heads toward the west. The
burials in the row to the east were parallel with the
short sides of the pit, while those in the row to the
west were placed at angles to avoid crowding. All
of the burials were lying on a thin layer of colored
sand which extended about 6” around each skeleton
but did not cover the floor of the entire pit. This
sand, found with all of the burials in the older pits,
was somewhat mottled in appearance and showed
faintly the colors white, green, red, yellow and
brown when first uncovered. Upon being removed
and after drying out, the colors disappeared. We
have had a sample of this sand analyzed and find
that it contains a large amount of oxide of iron in
various stages of hydration.

All of the skulls found in this pit, as well as those
in all of the other pits of the earlier culture, were
crushed by the weight of the earth, and the
remaining bones, while present, were in a poor state
of preservation. No evidence of violent death
appeared. Between the skulls of Burials Nos. 5 and
A most interesting example of stratification was 6 was a quadrangular vessel of polished brown ware
found in the case of Pit 9, Pit 10 and Upper Burial (V-1357) with somewhat lobular corners; the rim
3, as shown by our map of Mound “B”. Pit 9, cut band being in relief and well marked, with the usual
from the ground layer only, at its bottom was 9’ incised encircling line occurring on the lip. By the

26

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

left knee of No. 1 were 24 small, barbed,
serrated points of novaculite and jasper (H373). Just below the left knee of No. 11 were
8 similar points (H-375), and on the chest
of No. 7 were two badly crushed delicate,
long stemmed, clay pipes (P-171-2). No
other artifacts were with these burials.
Pit No. 3, of the earlier culture, which
was found in the southeastern part of the
mound, was 13’ x 22’. It was cut down from
the layer of village soil to a depth of 2’ under
the mound and contained the remains of 14
skeletons, all adults. The intrusive Caddo pit
No. 5 had cut through this pit and the skull
and a part of the upper extremities of Burial
No. 11 and all of No. 14 except the lower
extremities had been destroyed. Likewise,
the digging of intrusive Pit 8 had destroyed
a part of the lower extremities of Nos. 10,
11 and 12. All of the burials were extended,
and the skulls were in a more or less easterly
direction with the exception of two. The
right arm of No. 6 and left arm of No. 5
were flexed. This pit contained but one
pottery vessel, a jar (No. V-1358) of brown
ware, having a flattened body and
comparatively tall neck, with a horizontal
band in low relief about the neck. Upon the
lip of the rim are six parallel encircling lines.
Incised lines on the neck remind one of bands
occurring in related specimens. This vessel
was lying between the skulls of Burials 5
and 6. Near the skull of No. 6 was a polished
bone awl, 7 ½” in length, made of the leg
bone of a deer, and at the right side extending
from the skull to the elbow were 21 small
arrow-heads (H-376) all, with one
exception, of the same type as those found
in Pit. 3. Near the left side of the skull of
No. 2 were 9 arrow-heads (H-374) and ten
arrow-heads (H-377) were at the left of the
skull of burial No. 4; 4 similar arrow-heads
(H-378) were at the left of the skull of No.
8. Near the left foot of No. 4 was a bone
needle (D-113), similar in shape and size to
the needle found by us in Mound “D”, but
grooved at the dorsal end, To the right of

PLATE 7.
1. Pear-shaped vase, No. V-1443; from Mound “D”.
2. Quadrilateral vessel, No. V-1145; from Mound “D”.
3. Vessel with cylindrical body and square bottom, No.
V-1376; from Pit 6, Mound “B”.
4. Globular jar of red ware. No. V-1447; from Mound
“D”.
5. Semi-globular jar, No. V-1454; from cemetery
southwest of Mound “D”.
6. Conical jar, No. V-592; from Mound “D”.

Discoveries Indicating A Pre-Caddo Culture
and touching the skull of No. 7 and in a crushed
condition were 3 tortoise shell rattles which
contained many pebbles. In the bottom of each shell
were two small perforations, evidently made for
the purpose of attachment.
Pit No. 6, a large pit of the older culture, 13’ x
20’, was cut from the ground layer to a depth of
about 18”, and contained 18 adult skeletons. Three
pottery vessels were with the burials: At the top of
the skull of Burial No. 6 was a large, graceful urn
(V-1375) of plain, polished gray ware, 8 5/8” tall,
having a comparatively small bottom and
rudimentary feet, curving body and flaring rim;
against the right side of the skull of No. 17 was a
vessel of brown ware (V-1376) having a cylindrical
body and square bottom with a well defined band
in relief around the rim, the lip of the rim was
decorated by two incised encircling parallel lines;
between the skulls of No. 14 and No. 15 was a
deep bowl (V-1377) of polished brown ware with
a band in low relief around the rim bisected by an
incised line. The rim lip has two incised encircling
lines. Near the skull of the No. 2 were two small
stone chisels, one of brown jasper, 3 1/8” in length,
and the other of light gray stone, somewhat
triangular in shape and 3 ¼” in length. Near the
skull of No. 4 was a small bone awl; and above the
left knee of No. 6 were 13 small arrow-heads of
jasper, similar to those found in Pit 2. At the hips
and also at the feet of No. 7 were a large number of
small pebbles, probably the remains of rattles. On
the chest of No. 5, in small fragments, were 3
delicate, long stemmed pottery pipes.
Pit No. 9, the remaining pit of the older culture,
was 11 ½’ x 15’ and lay with its southwestern corner
almost in the center of the mound. It had been dug
down from the ground level to a depth of 4’ and
contained the skeletons of 12 adults, the
arrangement of which is shown in our sketch. The
burial of skeleton No. 9 directly under the hips of
Nos. 4, 5, and 6 will be noted. Between Nos. 1 and
2 and extending over the left humerus of No. 1 and
the right humerus of No. 2 was a large well made
bowl of dark brown polished ware (V-1400), with
a wide band encircling the rim bisected by a
horizontal encircling line. Upon the lip of the rim

27

were two incised encircling lines. Between the skulls
of Nos. 6 and 7, was a small cylindrical, square
bottomed vase (V-1401) of polished brown ware.
Two bands in low relief encircled the bottom and
the top, leaving a horizontal panel upon which was
an incised continuous scroll. The usual encircling
lines were on the lip. At the left wrist of No. 2 was
a shell bead, almost disintegrated, (X-715). At the
left hip of No. 7 were the crushed remains of 3
tortoise shell rattles, (M-293) and 6 more (M-294)
all badly crushed were found at the inside of the
lower leg bones of this burial. A girdle of small
mussel shells (M-291) (sphaerium scopoli) ground
down and perforated at the umbo, encircled the
waist of No. 10.
Infant Burial:
In the layer of village soil under Mound “B” and
about 3’ westerly from the northwest corner of Pit
9, was an extended burial of 2 infants with heads to
the south, side by side, near the neck of one of which
were 5 small badly decomposed shell beads. The
infants were of the same size, approximately 44” in
length; skulls crushed, bones in a poor state of
preservation.
Caddo Burials:
The Caddo burials in Mound “B” were all
intrusive, and 3 of them, termed “Upper Burials”,
were found in the mound proper, the remainder in
8 deep pits, cut down from the disturbed surface of
the mound into the sub-surface under the mound.
In all instances these burials were extended and
pottery typical of that culture was found with them.
The pipes found with these burials are of the long
stemmed type figured by Moore10 and Harrington11.
We will describe the Caddo burials and artifacts
found with them briefly below.
Upper Burial No. 1, found at a depth of 2’,
contained the skeleton of an adult and 6 pottery
vessels.
Upper Burial No. 2, also found at a depth of 2’,
contained the skeleton of an adult and 1 pottery
vessel, 1 pipe, 1 celt and 6 small arrow-heads.

28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Upper Burial No. 3. Pit 10, had cut through this
burial at a depth of 20”, leaving the hip bones and
lower extremities of two adult skeletons. Between
these lower extremities, with skull toward the feet
of the adults, was the skeleton of an infant, near
the head of which were 8 small shell beads; 4 pottery
vessels were with one of the adult burials.

drinking cup, 2 bone needles, 13 quartz crystals, 1
ceremonial knife, and a deposit of perforated mussel
shells. On each side of the skull at the cheek bones
was a large copper covered, spool-shaped ear plug.
In the digging of Pit 8, some of the burials in the
earlier Pit 3 were disarranged, as has been noted in
our description of Pit 3.

Pit No. 1, contained the remains of
two adults and was 5’ x 7 ½’ and 5’ deep.
In the burials were 7 pottery vessels, 1
celt and 3 bone implements.
Pit No. 4, 7 ½’ x 6 ½’ and 5’ deep
contained the remains of 4 adults; it had
been partially cut through in its
northeastern corner by another pit, and
the lower extremities of one of the
skeletons in Pit 4 had been removed.
Unfortunately, we did not get to dig the
lower pit. We had dug down to its level,
but during our absence another person
came in and removed the burial. We later
secured from this individual the only
entire pottery vessel found by him. It is
Caddoan in type, in our opinion. We also
saw a few fragments of other vessels
which he found in the pit. They, likewise,
were of Caddoan type. In Pit 4 were 2
pottery vessels, a mass of red paint, and
a fragment of cloth which had been
preserved by a copper ornament. The
ornament itself had almost entirely
disintegrated.
Pit No. 5 was 5 ½’ x 7’ and 6 ½’ deep,
and contained the skeleton of one adult
with 12 pottery vessels. In the digging of
this pit, Pit 3 of the older culture was
PLATE 8
entered and certain of the burials in Pit 3
1. Small quadrilateral vessel, No. V-1451; from Mound “D”.
were disarranged.
2. Small cylindrical, square bottomed vessel, No. V-1401;
Pit No. 7 was 5’ x 8’ and 8’ deep and
from Pit 9, Mound “B”.
contained the skeleton of 1 adult, 15 3. Small quadrilateral vessel No. V-1450; from Mound “D”.
pottery vessels, and 79 small arrow heads. 4. Large urn, No. V-1375; from Pit 6, Mound “B”.
Pit No. 8, 5 ½’ x 8’ and 9’ 2” deep, 5. Large bowl, No. V-1400; from Pit 9, Mound “B”.
also contained the skeleton of an adult. 6. Conical bowl. No. V-1230; from Mound “D”.
With the burial were 12 pottery vessels, 7. Jar No. V-1358; from Pit 3, Mound “B”.
33 small arrowheads, 1 conch shell 8. Bowl No. V-1377; from Pit 6, Mound “B”.

Discoveries Indicating A Pre-Caddo Culture

29

Pit No. 10, contained the skeleton of an adult, incised encircling lines on lip of rim; and the
was 5 ½’ x 8’ and 6 ½’ deep. With the burial were variation in design on the several sides of
11 pottery vessels, 3 long stemmed pipes, 1 celt, 5 quadrilateral jars.
bone implements and 3 sandstone objects, possibly
The following similarities are noted; extended
hones.
burials; small points, celts and bone implements with
Pit No. 11, 8’ 2” x 4’ 4” and 6’ 8” deep, contained burials; grit tempered pottery; long stemmed pipes;
the remains of 2 adults, with which were 9 pottery the use of shell ornaments; the use of punctations
vessels, 1 conch shell drinking cup and a mass of and of scroll combinations in designs on pottery;
the rubbing of pigment into designs; and the
white paint.
decoration of the bottoms of bowls.
Pit No. 12, the deepest of the pits, was 7 ½’ x 5
200 First National Bank Bldg.,
½’ and 10’ 9” deep. It contained the skeletons of
Hope Arkansas,
an adult and an adolescent, both extended, the
April 1, 1936.
adolescent on top of the adult with its skull resting
on the chest of the latter. With the burials were 13
pottery vessels and 1 large celt.
Comparison of Cultures

1. Moore, C. B., “Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River.”
Journal of The Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia,
1912.

Limiting the comparison strictly to the Crenshaw
Place, the following cultural features are noted as 2. Moorehead, W. K., “The Stone Age in North America.”
tending to differentiate the older culture from that Vol. 1, Fig. 199, 1911.
of the Caddo:
3. Moore, C. B., op. cit. p. 620-627.
Multiple burials in one pit; the small number of
vessels with burials; the intentional scarification of
vessels; the thickness of the ware; the absence of
copper, ear plugs, shell drinking cups and of
deposits of paint in graves. The finding in graves of
rattles and boat-stones, platters, ladles, square
bottomed vessels, conical vessels, quadrilateral jars,
jars with vertical sides or walls, and vessels with
flat rims. The lack of bottles, cazuela bowls, effigy
vessels, and vessels with handles as distinguished
from lugs. With particular reference to design; the
lack of design on cooking vessels, of engraved
designs, and of sun symbols. The prevalence of
horizontal and vertical bands in relief, of “overhanging” incised lines, of isolated or single scroll
design, of longitudinal bisection of scroll, of
horizontal panels between designs, of background
filled with punctations and hatching instead of crosshatching, of triangular punctations, of straight lines
terminating in punctation, of punctations along
median line of scroll, of undulating bands, and of

4. Moore, C. B., op. cit., p. 623.
5. Moore, C. B., op. cit., p. 623.
6. Moore, C. B., “Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley,” Journal
of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, 1909.
Also, Moore, C. B., “Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River,”
Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia,
1912.
7. Harrington, M. R., “Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas,”
Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum of the American
Indian, Heye Foundation, 1920.
8. Jackson, A. T., “Types of East Texas Pottery,” Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol.
6, 1934. Also Jackson, A. T., “Ornaments of East Texas
Indians,” Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, Sept. 1935.
9. Pearce, J. E., “Archaeology of East Texas,” American
Anthropologist, Vol. 34, No. 4, October-December, 1932.
10. Moore, C. B., “Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River,”
Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia,
1912, p. 549.
11. Harrington, M. R., op. cit. Plate CI.

