Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

21

THE QUATERNARY MAMMALS OF TEXAS
BY C. A. HOWARD
The Upper Tertiary or Pliocene Age closes with a Undifferentiated alluvial sand, gravel, and clay deposits
world rich in life, a world replete with Asiatic and of the intermontane areas of Trans-Pecos, Texas.
African influence. This age is followed by the
In many other parts of Texas there are deposits of
Quaternary. This latter age is the one to which this
Pleistocene Age. These consist of three kinds: 1. The
paper is confined.
The cenozoic age, which
includes the Quaternary, is also
called the age of mammals
because of their predominance
and importance from the beginning
of the era to and including the
present. As will be noted the era
is divided into two periods,
Tertiary and Quaternary, the first
lasting until the appearance of the
great ice sheets and the second
from that time to the present. They
were of very unequal duration, the
former being several millions of
years long, the latter perhaps less
than one million.
While the Tertiary period does
not come under our subject, it is
well to make this brief mention of
it to better show its specific place
in Cenozoic time. The Pleistocene
age is nearly always referred to
as the Glacial period. While
glaciation is an important factor in
this age, the ice sheet did not
Figure 7
advance as far south as Texas; the
MAP OF TEXAS SHOWING QUATERNARY DEPOSITS,
southernmost boundary being
AND FOSSIL MAMMAL BONE LOCATIONS.
that of the north borderland of
Kansas, although the great North
American ice sheet covered four million square miles.
Lafayette Sands, Clays and Gravels forming the
The map shows where the Quaternary formations cappings of the upland surfaces over much of Texas
of Texas are found. A brief description of these and also forming the deposits of the higher stream
formations are as follows: Lafayette, Lizzie, Uvalde terraces in the Edwards Plateau; 2. The second
and Reynosa gravels and sands of Gulf Coastal Plain, bottoms or terraces of Texas streams, generally known
Port Hudson, Beaumont or Coast Clays, and as the Columbia deposits; 3. The clays and sands of
Columbia stream terrace deposits of Gulf Coastal Plain, the Gulf Coast Country, as already mentioned.

22

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Professor Osborn points out that the mammals of
the Quaternary have by no means progressed as far in
America as in Europe. It will be many years before
the succession can be worked out with precision.
According to Osborn’s arrangement there are three
successive Pleistocene faunas, two of which appear
to have coincided with interglacial stages, and the third
with the last re-establishment of glacial conditions on
a grand scale. The Mammalian fauna of the Quaternary
is almost wholly peculiar. It differs greatly from the
Tertiary fauna preceding it and the present succeeding
fauna. The species are, moreover, very numerous and
many of them are of extraordinary size, for it is the
culmination of the Mammalian age.

Lizzie, Wharton County, a well preserved skull of a
fossil horse was taken from a bed of sand and small
pebbles cemented together in places with lime. The
skull was the species Equus francisci, Hay.
The remains of a mastodon have been taken from
the banks of Caleta Creek, eight miles West-Southwest
of Victoria.

From beds on Taranchua Creek, a branch of San
Diego Creek, vertebrate fossils of Pleistocene age were
collected by Wm. Taylor and G. W. Marnock and
identified by Cope. The species include Elephas
primigenius Blum, Canis sp., Glyptodon petaliferus
Cope, Equus tan Cope, Equus semiplicatus Cope,
Equus excelsus Leidy, Equus occidentalis Leidy and
We shall now see what mammals the Quaternary
Equus crenidens Cope. The beds in which the fossils
formations of Texas have produced. In listing the
occur consist of limy sand and gravel.
various animals we shall also describe the formation in
which the fossils were found and also give the county
In terrace No. 2 along the Brazos River forty to
and specific location when possible.
fifty-five feet above the bed of the river the deposit
consists largely of red sandy clay but has more or less
In the Lizzie gravel, Wharton County, previously
gravel in its basal part. A considerable vertebrate fauna
described by Kennedy as the Columbia sands, are
has been collected from this terrace by Dr. Mark Francis
found the Equus beds, so named from bones of the
of the Texas A. & M. College at Munson Shoals, five
ancient horse.
miles Southeast of Stone City. The specimens were
In the Gulf Coast area West of the Guadalupe River found from twenty to forty feet above the stream. The
the formation includes beds of white limestone, lime forms identified by O. P. Hay include Equus,
conglomerate in which limestone and flint pebbles are Megatherium, Mastodon, Gomphotherium, Elephas
cemented with lime, and gray and ash colored sand, Columbi, and Testudo Crassiscutata. Terrace No. 2
silt and clay, which are in places calcareous, in general is well shown at Waco, Valley Junction, Stone City,
having a strong resemblance to those of the Reynosa near Clay, Hidalgo Bluff, San Felipe, Simonton, Arcola
formation. Here are found many vertebrate fossils of and Brazoria.
early Pleistocene age, such as Equus Complicatus,
A number of fossils have been found in the materials
Equus Francisci Hay, Trucifelis Fatalis, Elephas
covering the terraces along the Colorado River. Thus
Imperator, Bison Latifrons, and Glyptodon. Outcrops
in terrace No. 2 at Austin the tooth of a mammouth
of the formation appear in Victoria, Jackson, Lavaca,
and a fossil turtle (Terrapene Whitneyi) have been
Colorado, Wharton, Austin, Fort Bend, Goliad, Bee,
found and in the same terrace at Stones Ford the tooth
San Patricio, Duval, and Jim Wells. Nueces and Brooks
of a Mastodon. About two miles East of the State
Counties. It forms the Alice terrace. The formation
insane Asylum at Austin a molar of Equus excelsus
extends eastward into Eastern Texas and Louisiana.
Leidy, a very early Pleistocene species was found in
Early Pleistocene vertebrates were collected more terrace No. 6 at Ridge Top. At Hemphill Bend, near
than seventy-five years ago by William Hough of San Goodman, the skeleton of a Modern Buffalo was found
Felipe, Austin County, from certain beds in the banks about 10 feet below the top of terrace No. 1. Five
of the Brazos River and were described by Dr. Wm. miles upstream from Bay City a tooth of Elephas
Carpenter. The species included Mastodon, Elephas Columbi was found.
Columbi, a tapir, Bison latifrons, Mylodon and Elephas
Dr. E. W. Shuler has described in a very interesting
Imperator. At a depth of twenty-five feet in a well at
manner the occurrence of several fossil Pleistocene

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
mammals that have been taken from sand and gravel
beds in and around Dallas. The terraces on either side
of the Trinity River are remnants of ancient flood plains.
The highest of these is found in Oak Cliff as seen
Northeast and Southwest of Cliff Park. The gravel
and clay of these deposits has a reddish color. The
gravel contains considerable clay and broken fragments
of chalk rock. In the various sand beds that have been
opened there have been found numerous fossils.
Fossil skulls, more or less complete, of thirteen
elephants have been found in these sand and gravel
pits around the City of Dallas since the first specimen
was noted in 1887. With each skull has been found
bones from other parts of the skeleton. Three fine
specimens of the skulls have been preserved in
Northern universities. One occupies a place of honor
in the Peabody Museum of Yale University. One of
the largest specimens is to be seen only partially
mounted in the Hyer Hall of Science at Dallas. Besides
the bones of the Imperial Elephant have been found
the bones of Equus Scotti, the Texas horse, an ancient
Bison, species undetermined, bones of smaller animals,
as yet undetermined and bony scutes of the giant sloth.

23

*Equus cf fraternus Leidy, cannon bone humerus.
Order Proboscidea.
Family Elephantidae.
Subfamily mammatinae.
*Elephas Columbi Falconer.
Professor Lull further describes the fossils:
*Smilodon cf. Fatalis (Leidy).
A finely preserved occiput of a large sabre-tooth
cat is present. Its affinities with Smilodon are clearly
shown by the relatively great vertical extent of the
mastoid processes, together with their being directed
downward and forward so that the auricular fossa is
nearly closed below, whereas in Felis it is wide open
and the vertical extent of the Mastoids is relatively slight.
The occipital condyles are also Smilodon-like and show
a greater habitual range of vertical movement than in
Felis. All this is correlated with the great development
of the sternomastoid muscle in Smilodon for use in
striking its prey and is highly diagnostic of the genus.
*Odocoileus Sp.

Two specimens—One is a single spike-like antler
Dr. Shuler in a letter to Professor R. S. Lull of Yale,
which had apparently been shed by its owner and the
March 1921, lists a few Mammalian fossils found in
other the distal end of a left humerus. They pertain to a
one of the principal sand beds. They are as follows:
deer somewhat smaller than the black-tailed deer of
today, the antler, of course, being that shed by a yearling
Class Mammalia.
buck. It is complete, except on the tip, and shows no
Order Carnivora.
sign of branching. The humerus is essentially
Family Felidae.
indistinguishable from that of odocoileus, except for
Subfamily Machaerodontinae.
proportions and size.
*Smilodon fatalis (Leidy) Cranium.
Order Artiodactyla.
*Camelops Huerfanensis Dallasi, Subsq. Nov.
Family Cervidae.
The material consists of a broken but well
*Odocoileus sp. Humerus, antler.
preserved
skull, a cervical and a dorsal vertebra, right
Family Antilocapridae.
ulno-radius, astragalus, and metatarsal, the last
*Tetrameryx shuleri, gen et sp Nov. cranium,
incomplete. The remains indicate an animal about the
maxillary.
stature of a modern Arabian Camel or Dromedary.
Family BovSldae.
*Bison alleni Marsh. Left mandible.
Family Camelidae.
Camel, Gen, Et Sp. Indet.
*Camelops huerfanensis dallasi, suosp, Nov,
An almost perfect rear cannon-bone represents a
skull, etc.
considerably smaller camel than that last named and
Camel, gen et sp indet, cannon bone.
the ratios from measurements indicate a very shortOrder Perissodactyla.
footed camel for its bulk.
Family Equidae.

24

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Quaternary deposits occupy the greater part of the
El Paso quadrangle. The bases of the mountains are
buried by accumulations of debris and the Hulco
Bolson is underlain by unconsolidated material. The
Rio Grande Valley is covered with river alluvium.
Pleistocene fossils have been found in the upper part
of the balson deposits. These deposits consist chiefly
of gravel, sand and clay derived from the disintegration
of the rocks of the highlands.

Texas seems to have been especially blessed with
at least three Quaternary mammals that we think may
merit special description, due to the fact that their fossil
remains have been reported from such a wide range
over the State. They are *Equus, the horse,
*Mammoth, the elephants, and the Mastodon.
Equus.

Although reported from many Texas Counties, the
Several fossil bones were found in 1906 in Rous’ principal locality seems to be in the Panhandle in
gravel pit at the head of North Virginia Street, El Paso. Donley County, where at least seven different species
They were obtained at two horizons in cross-bedded have come to light and perhaps at least two more to
sand and gravel, thirty and sixty feet below the top of be suspected. From the Rock Creek beds already
an erosion of the balson plain at the base of the Franklin mentioned comes the E. Semiplicatus, which in certain
Mountains. The bones include the teeth of a Mammoth cranial characters, as well as in the size and proportions
and of a horse and the jawbones and teeth of a tapir, of its teeth, seems to present a close relationship to
which have been determined by Dr. J. W. Gidley of the Ass (E. Asinus). On the staked plains of central
the National Museum to represent *Elephas Columbi, Texas has been found E. scotti, intermediate in size
Equus Complicatus, and Tapirus Haysii.
between E. complicatus and E. pacificus, with a long
face, relatively large head, long body, short neck,
In beds extensively exposed along the South side
resembling in its proportions the quagga (E. burchelli).
of Rock Creek or Tule Canyon which runs in a
From Southwestern Texas comes also E. giganteus,
Northeasterly direction diagonally across the Southeast
the largest species of horse hitherto recorded, the teeth
part of Deaf Smith County and toward the east into
exceeding those of the largest modern draught horses
Randall County where it joins Paloduro Creek, are
by more than one third of the diameter of the latter.
found many fossils of Pleistocene age, a division of the
Quaternary. The formation represents a period of river
The Mammoth and Mastodon (after Prof. H. F.
or flood-plain formation laying down broad bands of Osborn’s Mammoths and Mastodons of Nortb
fluidtile, of alluvial and aeolian origin, composed of America).
cross-bedded sands, gravels and clays. The mammals
represented consist wholly of land forms and some of
The Mammoth
the bones show weather-checking. They contain the
Today nearly everyone knows that the Mammoth
characteristic lower Pleistocene forms: the horse
was a sort of big, hairy elephant, now extinct. It may
(*Equus), the elephant (*Elephas imperator), the great
be said in passing that the Mastodon i9 only a second
sloth (*Mylodon sodalis), two camels or cameloids
or third cousin of the Mammoth, but that the existing
(*Halomeniscus sulcatus H. Macrocephalus), two
elephant of Asia is a very near relative. Popularly, the
large land tortoises and a peccary (*Platygonus).
Mammoth is supposed to have been a colossus, but
Only a few days ago Dr. E. W. Shuler, Head of the his actual height was not as great as generally
Department of Geology and Paleontology in Southern supposed. Somewhere near thirteen feet in height seems
Methodist University, called the writer’s attention to a to be a good average to place on the Mammoth.
fine group of fossils sent to him by an experienced
This great beast seems to have very early in its life
collector from Donley County. There were in the group
been stricken with the “Wanderlust” as have the various
about seven different species of horse (the fossils
races of man. Not only to overcome changes of
consisted chiefly of teeth and jaw bones containing
environment, but also to gratify their intelligent curiosity
teeth). Also a few small foot bones of a sabre-tooth
ever to explore fresh fields, they have gone to the very
cat, and many other mammal bones as yet unidentified.
ends of the earth and have far surpassed man in

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

25

adapting their clothing and teeth to all
possible conditions of life. Thus the
romances of elephant migration and
conquest are second only to the romances
of human migration and conquest. Variety
is the spice of elephant life as it is of human
life. The reaching out in every direction
for every kind of food, every kind of
habitat, is in itself the cause of divergent
evolution and adaptation. So strong was
the migratory impulse that only six out of
sixteen races of Mastodons and elephants
failed to reach America.
Texas abounds in Mammoth remains.
Bones or teeth have been reported from
nearly every part of the State. Indeed, few
Counties are without Mammoth relics of
some kind.
The Mastodon
The Mastodon must have appeared
very much like any other elephant, though
a little shorter in the legs and somewhat
more heavily built than either of the living
species, while the head was a trifle flatter
and the jaw much longer. The tusks vary,
sometimes bowing outwards, sometimes
upwards to form a half circle. They were
never as long as the largest Mammoth
tusks, but to make up for this they were a
shade stronger for their length. The size
of the Mastodon has often been overestimated. Some say they did not attain
the height of a full grown African elephant.
In great contrast to the Mammoth were
the teeth of Mastodons. The crown or
grinding face of the tooth is formed by
more or less regular cone-shaped or
pyramidal-shaped projections, covered
with enamel. (See Plate 26 opposite Page
86, Volume 2, Bulletin 1930 Texas A. 8~
P. Soc., showing difference in Mammoth
and Mastodon teeth). The range of the
Mastodon in Texas while not as wide as
the Mammoth covered a considerable
area.

Plate 4
COLUMBIAN MAMMOTH, FOUND ABOUT
THREE MILES SOUTH OF DALLAS
1. Pelvic bones, upside down.
2. Large leg bones in foreground; side of pelvic bone,
and skull with tusks in back ground.

26

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Serrate-Toothed Mastodon *( Serridentinus
Productus) Tree Browsing
The fossil remains of this species of elephant are
found in much older deposits than the Quaternary and,
therefore, it does not come under our assignment of
“Quaternary Mammals.” However, due to the fact that
the animal is a remarkable one whose history is equally
remarkable and better still, whose remains have been
found in Texas and only at one other place in North
America, the temptation is too great to pass up a brief
mention of such an animal, especially when ~such a
wonderful description is given by one of the greatest
authorities on fossil and living elephants, Prof. H. F.
Osborn. The Serridentines, or serrate-toothed
Mastodons have only recently, as a result of
investigation, become distinguished from the longjawed Mastodons on the basis of the structure of the
relatively few teeth found in other parts of the world.

proboscis, aided by a lower jaw with tusks of medium
length, a jaw more elongate than in the true Mastodons
but less elongate than in the extremely long-jawed
forms. The species, while very bulky, is by no means
as massive as the ordinary Mastodons nor as high.

From ancient river alluvium, sands and gravels in
terraces along the banks of the Colorado River in
Bastrop County, and the Trinity River in Liberty
County, comes fossil bones, skulls, horn cores of the
great Bison (Bison latifrons). The early and gigantic
form B. latifrons reflects the favorable conditions of
life during the age contemporary with the Mammoth
and Mastodon in Texas and elsewhere where their
bones have been found. The horn cores are so long
and thick that they exceed by two feet on each side
those of the existing old and new world bison. Horns
in one Northern museum measure six feet and six
inches along the curve from tip to tip. Another
They form a race of their own, to which the generic specimen measures six feet across from tip to tip and
name Serridentinus has been given. Enroute to America eight feet and six inches along the curve. This appears
one member of this race succumbed and left a fossil to be the record in size; although the complete skeleton
jaw on one of the ancient rivers of Mongolia and here is unknown we may judge from the size of the skull
two teeth were unearthed by an American Expedition. that this great Bison far exceeds any of its living
Eight thousand miles eastward and southward of this relatives.
spot, which is in the desert of Gobi, the Americanized
Texas offers a great field for Paleontological
descendants are found in the marls near Santa Fe, New research. Few other places are so rich. Some species
Mexico, and in the ancient river sands near Clarendon, of fossil mammal remains have been found here that
Texas, in a formation of Lower Pliocene Age. A so far have not been found at any other place.
beautiful restoration has been made and is now in the Fragments of other fossil mammals have been found
American Museum of Natural History, New York, from that give us only a vague idea of what the animal looked
a nearly complete skeleton of a Serridentine found in like and only future exploration will ultimately give us
Northern Texas. A photo shows the Mastodon to be this much needed information, as well as the possibility
a tree browser, and is reaching for foliage with its of still bringing to light other forms that are still unknown
in this part of the country.
TABLE OF COMPARATIVE HEIGHT OF CERTAIN
ELEPHANTS AND MASTODONS IN GENERAL
Common Name
Imperial Mammoth
African Elephant
Indian Elephant
American Mastodon
TEXAS SERRIDENTINE
Young Congo Elephant
Fayiim Moerithere

Scientific Name
Archidiskodon imperator
Loxodonta africana
Elephas indicus
Mastodon Americanus
Serridentinus productus
Loxodonta African Pumilio
Moeritherium andrewsi

Height
13
11
10
9
5
4
2

feet
”
”
”
”
”
”

6 inches
4 ”
6
8
5
1

”
”
”
”

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

BIBLIOGRAPHY
PRINCIPAL WORKS CONSULTED IN THE PREPARATION
OF THIS PAPER:

27

7. Scott, W. B. —A History of Land Mammals in
the Western Hemisphere.
8. Lucas, F. A. —Animals of the Past.

1. Deussen, Alexander—Geology of the Coastal Plain
of Texas west of the Brazos River. U. S. G. S.
Professional Paper No. 126.

9. Dana, J. D. —Manual of Geology.

2. Geologic Atlas of the U.S. (El Paso Folio No. 166).

11. Shuler, E. W. —The Geology of Dallas County.

3. Texas Archeological & Paleontological Society
Bulletin No. 2.

12. Udden, J. A., Baker & Bose. —Review of the
Geology of Texas.

4. Osborn, H. F. —The Age of Mammals.

13. Lull, R. S. —Fauna of the Dallas Sand Pits.

5. Osborn, H. F. —Cenozoic Mammal Horizons of
Western North America.

14. Dumble, E. T. —The Cenozoic Deposits of
Texas.

6. Osborn, H. F. —Mastodons and Mammoths of
North America.

15. Gidley, J. W. —A new species of Pleistocene
Horse from the Staked Plains of Texas.

10. LeConte, Jos. —Elements of Geology.

