22

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

A ROCK SHELTER IN COKE COUNTY
BY E. B. SAYLES
Through the courtesy of Mr. C. H. Wylie, the
owner of the land, a small rock shelter on Oak Creek
in Coke County, Texas, was investigated. In it were
found a number of petroglyphs and three hearth
levels. The shelter is in a ledge of sand stone twenty
feet above the bed of the Creek, but below flood
level. (Plate 4, Figure 1).
The opening of the shelter faces toward the north
and is thirteen feet across. The depth of the shelter
is eleven feet, and the height at the entrance to the
undisturbed clay level is eight feet. Greater height
is given to the eastern half of the shelter than to the
western part by a half dome in the ceiling. It is on
that part of the ceiling where the half dome joins
the western part of the shelter that the principal
petroglyphs appear. (Plate 4, Figure 2, also Plate
5, Figure A).
They fill a space seven feet eight inches long,
and at the widest point, are twenty inches in height.
There is no confusion in their appearance as they
are not superimposed. They were evidently made
by some blunt implement that was rubbed on the
sand stone, after the design had first been outlined.
Some of the deepest and widest figures are a perfect
fit for the forefinger, as the bottom of these
engravings are rounded. Only a few of the larger
incisions have angles where the two sides meet.
This is a characteristic, however, of the narrowest
and shallowest lines, which appear to have been
cut by some sharp instrument.
Immediately below the offset in the ceiling
where the majority of the petroglyphs appear, and
near the entrance to the cavern, is a separate group
of figures. (Plate 5, Fig. C). On the rear wall is
another small group principally composed of
incised lines about eight inches long, parallel and
staggered with some cross hatching.
Another large group appears upon a slab of sand
stone that at one time must have been attached to
the ceiling, or immediately adjacent to it. (Plate 5,
Figure B). When in place, this slab divided the
shelter in two almost equa1 parts. On the upper
portions of this stone partition, and facing the east,
are a number of deeply incised designs. Many of

them seem to be in prolongation of similar lines
from above, crossing in a variety of patterns. Some
of these lines are an inch and a half deep, the usual
depth of the other figures being from a half to threequarters of an inch.
An additional set of figures was discovered upon
a large stone that extends along the entire eastern
part of the shelter. (Plate 4, Figure 3). This stone
forms a fairly even shelf forty-seven inches below
the ceiling and sloping from the front toward the
rear of the shelter. From its flat top an apron extends
at an angle of about 45° toward the floor of the
cave. On this sloping apron are some designs
similar to those on the slab that once divided the
shelter.
A single incised line of the same general shape
as those just described, but only about twelve inches
in length, is cut on the face of the opening on the
northeastern wall. While it is greatly eroded, its
general form is that of the other long cigar shaped
lines in other parts of the shelter.
The sand stone that forms the shelter and on
which the petroglyphs appear is hard, impregnated
with iron, with a great number of small pebbles
imbedded in it. It is light yellow in color banded
with white and light buff, but within the shelter it
has weathered a dark brownish red similar to the
adjacent soil. The entire ledge is covered with green,
blue and yellow lichens, which also appear on the
ceiling in the western part of the shelter, covering
the petroglyphs there, and the single line on the
northeastern wall.
When the shelter was found, it had been gone
into by “treasure hunters.” Sand, clay, charcoal,
fragments of river shells, bones, and flint, had been
thrown out of the shelter, almost closing the
entrance. An investigation was undertaken with the
aid of Carl Chelf, a young, enthusiastic and helpful
companion on many of my archaeological trips.
The material that had been thrown out together
with the disturbed soil within the shelter was first
screened. In this were found deer and turkey bones,l
a flake knife, a triangular point, and a thin flake
scraper, with numerous flakes and chips of flint.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

23

Five inches of light red silt and clay separated
With this done, it was seen that the shelter had
filled in from its floor level of undisturbed clay a this hearth level from that above, which consisted
depth of six feet, six inches, which had brought the of two inches of dusty ashes mixed with a great
fill within twelve inches of the
ceiling at the entrance along the
eastern side and covered part of the
ceiling to the west. The removal and
screening of the undisturbed fill in
that part of the shelter that had not
attracted the treasure hunters was
next undertaken. This was found to
be filled with a mass of living roots,
many as large as two inches in
diameter. The top of the fill was so
close to the ceiling that it was
difficult to commence a shelf that
might be carried downward. Three
days were spent in the tedious work
of loosening the soil about the roots
in excavating to the undisturbed clay.
During the progress of this work,
four strata of charcoal and other
evidences of occupation were
encountered, each separated by a
stratum of sterile silt and clay. These
all appeared along the north eastern
part of the shelter and directly below
the opening in the roof. But there was
no evidence of fire on any part of the
ceiling or without the shelter, such
evidence being confined entirely to
the stratified levels within the shelter
itself.
In describing the different hearth
levels, the lowest, being the one
nearest the original floor of the
shelter, is described first.
The undisturbed clay floor
consisted of a light bluish clay and
immediately on top of it was a thin
stratum of yellow sand and pebbles,
mixed with small pieces of sand
stone. Then appeared a stratum
eleven inches thick of light yellowish
pink sandy clay and pebbles. Resting
directly on this was a hearth of small
sand stones, with very small pieces
of charcoal, also the bones of deer,
skunk, turkey and a species of small
bird, fragments of heavy fresh water
shells, and many flakes of flint.

Plate 4.
ROCK SHELTER IN COKE COUNTY.
1. Entrance to the shelter in back of man; sandstone ledge.
2. Part of petroglyphs on projection from ceiling in the
eastern part of the shelter.
3. Large stone along eastern wall of shelter, bearing a
number of incised lines; hearth stones in place.

24

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Plate 5.
THE PRINCIPLE GROUPS OF PETROGLYPHS
A. On the ceiling facing east; particularly shown in Plate 4, Fig. 1. (The length of the group is 7
feet 8 inches. All of the other figures drawn to scale).
B. On partition slab.
C. On ceiling near entrance. (The relative positions of the three groups in the drawing are those of
the various groups in the shelter itself.)
quantity of very fine charcoal. In this stratum were
numerous thin flakes and some large nodules, of
flint; fragments of heavy shells, the bones of deer
and turkey; two chips flaked along the edge; one
thin flake worked to a point, with a long flake
removed on each side, and four fragments of small
points, all finely worked. The hearth covered an
area two by three feet and was efficiently built of a
number of pieces of sand stone resting in a trough
formed by the large stone along the eastern part of
the shelter and a smaller one just to the west of it.
This hearth was placed directly below the opening
in the ceiling and extended almost to the wall on
this part of the shelter. This level appeared to have
been used longer than any of the others, judging by
the accumulation of debris.

the eastern part of the shelter were below this hearth
level, many of them extending below the level of
the hearth below it.
Every stratum between hearth levels was sterile.

Five inches above the last hearth and separated
from it by a stratum of silt and clay appeared eight
inches of charcoal in large firm pieces, some partly
burned wood, mixed with sand. In this eight inch
stratum there was no flint, hearth stones, nor
artifacts, but the bones of deer, turkey, and some
smaller bird; there was also a quantity of bluish
green bottle glass. A part of the bottom of the bottle
showed it to be a “short” bottle with deep
indentations, similar to those appearing at a close
by frontier post, abandoned in 1867. This stratum
Seven inches of clay and silt separated this was not horizontal, but sloped sharply from the
hearth from that above, which consisted of three opening above the eastern wall toward the rear of
pieces of sand stone, the farthest resting against the the shelter. This deposit was only thirty-four inches
below the ceiling near the entrance. On top of it
wall to the northwest. In this hearth level were
pieces of charcoal, fragmentary bones of turkey and was a stratum twelve inches think of sandy silt and
deer, and some flint, making a stratum three inches on top of this there was ten inches of light yellowish
thick. All of the charcoal in this and the first two pink sandy loam, which contained a great deal of
hearth levels was readily powdered when pressed leaves, sticks, and pebbles. Since the level
between the fingers, and each of these hearth levels containing the glass was so near the ceiling, it is
probable that is does not represent an occupied
was horizontal to the original clay floor of the
shelter. All of the figures upon the large stone along level, but had washed in from above. This is further
suggested by the decided slope in the stratum itself,

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

25

totally unlike the other levels, and no hearth stones overlying soil had not been disturbed, as it was
were found in it.
thickly matted with the roots from close by living
trees.
The western part of the shelter was not
investigated as this had largely been disturbed by
In addition to this shelter with its petroglyphs,
treasure hunters. A test hole was placed eight feet the vicinity of this site has some interesting features.
in front of the shelter. At a depth of three feet, six Extending along the eastern bank of Oak Creek for
inches through the same red silt and clay that formed a distance of four hundred yards to the south of the
the various strata on the inside of the cavern, shelter are scattered workshops, with numerous
charcoal and burned sand stone were found. This rejects, and a few finished implements,
hammerstones, etc. Immediately to the east of the
shelter are a number of small circular stone hearths,
and to the north of them is a low natural mound on
which a burial was reported and from which a large
quantity of white, blue, green, and red glass beads
were picked up. Further to the north are two burned
rock mounds, twelve to fifteen feet across, with an
extensive camp site adjacent. In the sand stone
ledge on the bank of the Creek to the west of this
campsite are two deep boat shaped mortar holes,
one largely eroded away. And still further to the
west were found a number of hearths and a level of
occupation three and a half feet below the present
surface of the ground. There is also another
campsite on the west side of the stream and about
six hundred yards lower down, containing a great
number of hearths. And from the narrative of an
eye witness2 the general vicinity of this site was
occupied by more than twenty thousand Plains
Indians for several months in 1854 during a
conference with Government officials, with the
view of their locating upon reservations.
The glass in the highest level above the hearths
would suggest that the shelter was occupied prior
to the establishment of the nearby post in 1852.

Plate 6.
ARTIFACTS FROM ROCK SHELTER
1. Scraper; showing flake removed length
of artifact.
2. Reverse of scraper.
3. Cross section of scraper.
4. Flake point.
5. Reverse of flake point.
6. Cross section of flake point. (Natural size).

While only a few artifacts were found within
the shelter, they are not wholly dissimilar to the
types of artifacts found on the surface in the adjacent
camps, and in other camp sites in the general
vicinity. But the technique of the flake scraper and
the small point, each made by retouching the edges,
and each with long flakes removed from the surface,
so that the implement is thinner through the center
than towards the margin, is only known in one other
site of the more than two hundred recorded sites in
this section of the state. (Pl. 6).
1. All of the bone material was submitted to and identified by Dr.
J. W. Gidley, of the Nat’l. Mus., Washington.
2. Account of E. L. Deaton, quoted in Frontier Times, Vol. 5,
No. 5, Feb., 1928.

