38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FOLSOM AND YUMA POINTS AS KNOWN TODAY
BY E. B. RENAUD, PH. D.
In order to render this subject clear for both
professional and amateur archaeologists it may be
best to begin by giving descriptive definitions of
these beautiful stone points which have, in recent
years, attracted so much attention and caused many
discussions.

of Yuma points. This was to avoid confusion and
to establish a clear difference between the real
Folsom points and similar ones, on the one hand,
and, on the other hand, the finely flaked points of
various types, but not “fluted” or “grooved.” The
name Yuma came from Yuma County in northeast
Colorado, where the largest number of these
Let us start with the Folsom points, the first type
specimens and the greater variety of types had so
to be found or recognized as distinct from ordinary
far been found. The selection of the terms Folsom
Indian weapon points. Besides, as they are more
and Yuma is, therefore, in the best archaeological
highly specialized, their characteristics can be better
tradition which generally gives to a class of artifacts
described. A Folsom point is a pointed blade with
or to a culture or a cultural phase the name of the
either nearly parallel or convex edges and a base
first or more famous site, or of the nearby town, or
rarely straight but often concave and even
of the region where principally found.
“squarish” or “wavy.” The flaking, generally fine,
is done by the pressure method. The most distinctive
Yuma points are pointed blades with faces finely
characteristic is a longitudinal groove beginning at flaked by pressure, and edges either parallel or
the base and extending upward toward the tip of convex, or with sub-triangular form, the base being
the point, the length and width of this groove or straight or concave, rarely convex; some have a
channel varying with the specimens and being stem, but never any barbs.
usually seen on both faces of the blade, resulting in
If we compare Yuma and Folsom points we will
a bi-concave cross section. A look at the plate will
at once notice that they have in common, in most
make this description, necessarily long and detailed,
cases, an unusually fine pressure flaking over both
much more clear. To avoid possible confusion it
faces and often with marginal retouch and not
should be remarked that a Folsom point never has
infrequently the lower section of the lateral edges,
any stem nor barbs such as are found in many cases
near the base, ground smooth, probably to avoid
on spear heads or lance points, so called “buffalo
cutting the sinew employed in holding fast the stone
points,” or arrowheads. The Folsom points were
point at the extremity of the wooden shaft. The
thus designated because the first typical specimens
surface flaking is frequently narrow and ribbon like,
of the kind were found, or, at least, recognized, in
forming rows of skillfully made shallow grooves,
the course of paleontological excavations
running parallel to each other and often obliquely
conducted by the Colorado Museum of Natural
to the edge, across part and sometimes all the width
History of Denver, near the little town of Folsom,
of the blade according to specimens. This is less
east of Raton, in northeast New Mexico, during
noticeable on Folsom points as the longitudinal
the seasons of 1926 and 1927.
groove, typical of that class, has removed an
Soon after, a certain number of beautiful points, extensive portion of the original surface of the blade.
but without the characteristic lengthwise groove However, the flaking is not equally good on all
of the typical Folsom points, although displaying specimens and some either show the lack of skill of
other elements in common, were found on the some workers, or haste in making the artifacts, or
Western Plains and were wrongly named “Folsom decadence in workmanship in some regions or in
points.” I first called attention to their differences some phase of the culture, or also possibly material
and later named that new group by the generic term of less quality.

Folsom and Yuma Points As Known Today
Besides this common trait in pressure flaking
technique and its frequent excellence, the Yuma and
Folsom points share in two blade shapes, the one
with parallel edges (Type 1) and the other with more
or less convex sides (Type 2). They also have in
common some points with straight bases, and many
with concave bases. However, the “squarish” and
the “wavy” base types are reserved to the Folsom
points and the convex bases rare on Yuma points
are never seen on Folsom specimens, as far as I
know. And, whereas the stemmed type is one of
the Yuma complex, the longitudinal groove is the
strict and distinct feature of the Folsom points.
By the way, the term point is used here to
designate a “pointed blade” as already described,
and refers, principally, to the shape without
prejudice of the use or destination of the artifacts.
By reason of their form and size, and still more
convincingly due to the fact that they were several
times found in close connection with bones of
animals, it seems obvious that they must have been
used as weapon points for hunting and in war. But
this purpose need not be exclusive as some blades
would make efficient knives, others could function
as side scrapers, and a few are pointed enough to
be occasionally used as borers. Unfortunately, at
the beginning, some persons untrained in
archaeology called Folsom and even Yuma points
“arrowheads.” It clearly seems that most of those
specimens are too large and too heavy to he
properly shot as arrowheads with the ordinary
Indian bow, except, possibly, the smallest Folsom
points. Moreover, if the Yuma-Folsom weapon
points really are as old as claimed by some scientists
worthy of our confidence, they obviously cannot
be arrowheads, as the invention or introduction of
the bow and arrow in America, according to present
evidence, seems much more recent. On the other
hand, judging from their shape, size and antiquity,
the Folsom and Yuma points can more logically be
considered as heads or points for darts, assagis or
javelins, or even lance or spear, some of these
weapons being held firmly in hand by their shafts,
others being thrown by hand or otherwise.

39

to the definition previously given in order to discuss
the different varieties. My typology of the Yuma
point was, at first, purely empirical, that is to say,
only based on the observation of shapes so far
found. Happily the relatively small group of
specimens then on hand turned out to contain
practically all varieties ever discovered. Thus, as
early as my first paper published in January, 1931,
was I able to establish a descriptive terminology
and a basic typology, which has endured to date,
with only the addition of a sub-type of stemmed
point later recognized. The definition of the Yuma
points proposed at the Symposium of the Antiquity
of Man, held at Philadelphia, last March on the
occasion of the 125th anniversary of the founding
of the Academy of Natural Sciences, practically is
a summary description of the types which I have
presented in several papers. Let us pass them rapidly
in review.
First, the blade types: Type 1 has straight or
nearly straight and parallel edges. Type 2 has more
or less convex sides, with base from slightly
narrower than the maximum breadth of the blade
to base very narrow or constricted, thus forming
respectively sub-type 2-a and sub-type 2-b. Type 3
comprises the elongated, sharp tipped, triangular
points of sub-type 3-a and the much more rare
points of sub-type 3-b with a squarish base, broader
than the blade. Some implements of this last variety
seem to have been used as alternate scrapers and
possibly borers; in other words they may be more
exactly called tools than weapon points. In the same
manner, as already suggested, artifacts of types 1
and 2 could make serviceable knife blades when
properly hafted for that purpose. Type 4 is reserved
for stemmed points. It is divided into two styles:
sub-type 4-a, lanceolate points with a stem rather
narrow and fairly thick, and with rounded shoulders,
whereas sub-type 4-b is a blade of type 1 or 2 with
a stem of same thickness and surface flaking, in
most cases, as the body of the point and only a few
millimeters narrower.

All points of types 1, 2, and 4, have a lenticular
or bi-convex cross-section. Points of type 3, being
The types of Yuma points being more numerous narrower, are often thicker in order to give enough
than those of the Folsom class, we must come back strength to the elongated sharp blade, and they tend

40

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

PLATE 13.
Blade and Base Types of Folsom and Yuma Points.

Folsom and Yuma Points As Known Today
to develop a dorsal ridge, lengthwise along the
middle part of the two faces. This lateral contraction
coupled with the median thickening causes the
cross-section to assume a lozengic shape. On the
contrary, as already said, the typical Folsom point
owing to the removal of a broad and relatively deep
spall on both faces has a bi-convex cross section
with lateral ridges.
Not much can be added to the typology of the
Folsom points as it has been stated in the definition
that it is a pointed blade with either fairly straight
and parallel or with convex edges. The tip is often
more rounded as in types 1 and 2 than truly sharp,
and never acute as in type 3. The only thing to
discuss is the characteristic grooving. In any fairly
extensive series one will at once notice the variety
of length, breadth and regularity of the longitudinal
groove. Although most of the specimens are
“fluted” on both faces, a few have only one
lengthwise groove. In some cases it appears obvious
that the first spall removed went deeper than
anticipated and left the blade too thin to attempt
flaking a second one off the other face. Other times
the reason is not obvious. On some pieces the
grooves are neither as long nor as broad on both
faces, and, the same as on other specimens. They
are irregular in shape and direction, not following
the long axis of the blade, they are “wavy” in depth
and contour like a poorly struck flake. Only in the
best points, and such pieces are not rare, do we see
the grooves skillfully made very nearly similar in
shape and dimensions on both faces of the blade.
In such cases the fluting extends almost to the tip
of the point and the edges of the groove are parallel,
or nearly so, with the sides of the blades and thus
they form a lateral ridge with a gentle slope both
ways, toward the sharp edge of the point and the
central groove.
If one arranges a series of Folsom specimens,
designated as type 5 in our scheme of classification,
according to the length of the longitudinal groove,
sub-types can be established for the sake of
convenience in describing these points and their
characteristic “channel.” Some Yuma points, it
might be remarked at the start, display a thinning
of the base by means of marginal retouch or small

41

flakes removed apparently to facilitate hafting. The
same reason seems to have inspired the ancient
artifact maker to strike off the base line, usually
concave, of some Folsom points a few narrow and
more or less long flakes on one or both faces, or
else one broader, scale-like flake. This would be a
natural extension of the previously noted practice
of thinning the base. Such specimens will be pooled
into our sub-type 5-a, with flakes or grooves not
exceeding about one-third of the length of the blade.
Then there is a group of points with grooves more
or less irregular in shape and proportions, some
broad from even the base line, others and more
numerous ones, a narrower start and a progressive
broadening, but in either case not longer than
approximately one-half the total length of the piece.
This, which seems to mark an advance in the skill
or daring of the prehistoric weapon maker, may be
termed sub-type 5-b. Sub-type 5-c is reserved to
points with a channel or groove covering at least
two-thirds of the length of the blade; a few are even
longer and in some instances the workman overshot
his mark and the flake removed goes from base line
to tip of the point, making it very thin. In fact, if
the first flaking off of the blades from the base was
in order to help in mounting it on a shaft, the
increase in the length and breadth of the spall must
have been done to reduce weight. Finally, the
Folsom man, having fully mastered the art of
producing this daring fluting, manufactured elegant
points, shapely and light, but the excess in removing
a long and broad spall weakened his weapon point.
This is proved by the large number of fragments
found, either tips or the portion of the basal section
held by the shaft end. Such things could not stand
the impact when the point struck its aim. It may be
in search of a remedy to this fragility that the Folsom
points of that beautiful sub-type 5-c are smaller than
most other Yuma and Folsom types, even reaching
such a short size, although often relatively broad,
that they could be used as missiles shot with a bow.
Several facts postulate a close relation, between
Yuma and Folsom points. First, they both were
made by means of the same skillful pressure method.
Second, they have in common the shapes of types
1 and 2, and the straight and more often concave
base forms. Third, the thinning of the base seen on

42

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

many Yuma artifacts seems to be the starting point
of the increasingly more daring and skillful flaking
of a longitudinal groove becoming the main
characteristic of the Folsom points without which
it often could not be distinguished from a Yuma
specimen. Every step of the progressive evolution
from a plain Yuma of type 1 or 2 to a fully developed
Folsom of our sub-type 5-c can be followed on
specimens of a representative collection. Fourth,
on points with only one groove the other face has
the same appearance of flaking as a Yuma blade;
on specimens with short and irregular grooves, the
rest of both faces is again such as seen on Yuma
points; a couple of pieces with a single groove
showed a “hinge fracture” which spoiled the work
and explains why the specimen was left unfinished
and rejected. On a Yuma point an unsuccessful
attempt had been made to remove a spall in order
to fashion it into a Folsom point. Finally, at several
sites, attentive observers collected finished Folsom
artifacts and the spall which had been struck off in
order to produce the characteristic longitudinal
groove. When placed back on the piece, it filled
the channel; the Folsom point was again a Yuma
point. Nothing could prove more conclusively the
morphological and probably cultural relation of the
two types. It also clearly suggests that the simpler
and generalized Yuma must have preceded, as a
type and as an individual point, the more highly
specialized Folsom point. It does not preclude the
possibility of their coexistence in the same culture
or even in time in two cultural phases of different
distributions, one remaining with Yuma only and
the other evolving the Folsom type. Further field
work is needed to establish their actual
chronological relation. It can be settled by
uncovering Yuma and Folsom specimens together
in clearly stratified sites; also in comparing the
species of animals whose bones are seen in close
association with the different types of points. Then
and only then, after the correct interpretation of
facts has been made, will we be able objectively to
accept or reject the conclusions suggested by
typological observations.
It is a bad practice in taxonomy to multiply
uselessly the number of types and their subdivisions.
It causes confusion for the amateur and annoying

complexity for the field and the museum men. A
classification must be simple, logical and objective;
it must overlook individual variations and small
local peculiarities. To create as many types as there
are possibilities of combination of blade types with
base types is undesirable in its impractical
multiplicity and unwarranted by the very small
number of specimens for each of the numerous
classes. However, it may be interesting to note the
association of base types with blade types.
On the basis of the inspection of 348 Yuma and
119 Folsom points the following percentage of base
types were observed. It was found that these Yuma
points had 31.03 per cent base type A, or straight,
36.49 per cent base sub-type B-1 or slightly concave
and 29.02 per cent sub-type B-2 or deeply concave,
with only 3.44 per cent of D type or convex. The
Folsom points showed the small percentage of 4.20
with a straight base; then 20.16 per cent, with
slightly concave bases, but the large proportion of
63.86 per cent with deeply concave bases and 11.7
per cent of concave bases with a squarish or wavy
line. In other terms pooling together all concave
base forms we have 65.51 per cent for Yumas and
the enormous percentage of 95.78 for Folsoms
which makes it truly typical for those points.
Going a step further we may inquire as to the
association of base types with point types and subtypes. On the basis of our records of past years we
have following figures. Blade type 1, with parallel
sides, 11 straight and 30 concave bases; type 2,
with convex edges, 48 straight, 133 concave and
five convex bases; type 3, or triangular points, 15
straight, 52 concave and 4 convex bases; sub-type
4-a, or lanceolate points with narrow stem, 6
straight and 5 concave bases; and sub-type 4-b, or
blades with a broad stem, 28 straight, 18 concave
and 3 convex bases. For the Folsom points we have:
sub-type 5-a, with very short groove, 43 concave
base and 6 squarish or wavy; sub-type 5-b, with
medium groove, 1 straight, 26 concave and 1
squarish base; finally, sub-type 5-c, or typical
Folsom with long and broad groove, 4 straight, 31
concave and 13 with squarish or wavy base line.
The consideration of the dimensions of Yuma
and Folsom may best be presented in the form of

Folsom and Yuma Points As Known Today

43

tables taken from our publication of October, 1934, and all the others approximate the same medium
“The First Thousand Yuma-Folsom Artifacts.” The width.
length of the points is the following with indication
As to thickness the following table reveals that
of minimum, maximum and average by sub-types.
the typical Folsom points, shortest of all, are also
the thinnest. The 4-b sub-type is. thickest; all the
Types
Minimum Maximum Average others have closely similar thickness.
1
36
83
52.83
2-a
29.5
99
58.33
Types
Minimum Maximum Average
2-b
30
121
63.86
1
4
7.5
5.77
3-a
34
150
67.01
2-a
4.5
8
6.03
Yuma 3-a D base 50
57.5
53.10
2-b
3
9.5
6.05
3-b
48
98
72.20
Yuma 3-a
3.5
9
5.97
4-a
33.5
88
69.60
3-b
4
8
6.66
4-b
42.5
110
66.80
4-a
4.5
9
6.77
4-b
5
9.5
8.69
5-a
31
115
65.27
Folsom 5-b
44
102.5
67.20
5-a
5
14
7.00
5-c
17
75
45.41
Folsom 5-b
3.5
10.5
6.73
5-c
3
6
5.38
This shows that true Folsom points are by far
the shortest. The types 1, 3-a with convex base,
Something may be said now about the quality
and 2-a form a medium group, while all the others
of workmanship. Perfect symmetry of contour,
are longer and very close together, except 3-b which
elegance of shape and good proportions, can hardly
is probably a tool more than a weapon point.
be expressed in a comparable manner, and degree
The breadth of the Yuma-Folsom points is of skill cannot be estimated exactly in words. That
shown in the table below.
is why, a few years ago, I used two centimeters as
a measuring unit and counted the number of flakes
Types
Minimum Maximum Average at various places along the edges of the points in
order to obtain an average figure thus expressing
1
15
31
21
in a clear and comparable manner the relative
2-a
17
29
22.06
fineness of the flaking. A few figures will suggest
2-b
13
31
22.04
the results for Yuma points: type 1, 4 to 8, average
3-a
13
43
20.71
5.8; type 2, 3 to 8, one case 17, average 5.3; type
Yuma 3-a D base 14.5
29
18.88
3, 4 to 8, average 6.5; type 4, 4 to 7, average 5.5.
3-b
22
33
28.10
This shows that three types have almost the-same
4-a
17
31
22.87
average degree of workmanship, although there are
4-b
12.5
30
21.91
variations in the manufacture of the different points.
It also translates the fact, often observed, that the
5-a
16.5
33
25.78
long, narrow triangular points are frequently of
Folsom 5-b
20
36
26.40
beautiful fracture and display fine regular flaking,
5-c
14
32.5
21.94
their average being clearly superior to that of the
other types. In the Folsom group we find a great
It will be noticed that the widest artifacts are
variation in quality. For instance, 5-a points have a
those of sub-type 3-b already noticed as being the
range from 3 to 12 flakes for 2 cm. and 5-b points
longest, then the points with short and medium
3 to 9, but their averages, respectively 5.8 and 5.7,
groove, 5-a and 5-b, while the 3-a sub-type with
are practically the same and also similar to those of
convex base, already mentioned, is the narrowest,

44

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the three ordinary Yuma types or slightly better,
except for type 3, suggesting again their relationship
to them. As for the original Folsom points, once
more they reveal a difference of fineness. Their
flaking fluctuates between 4.5 and 15, with an
average of 8.87, well above all other classes,
although a few are somewhat roughly made, as
previously mentioned. They seem to represent a
final achievement in skill; in that they are really
comparable to the best Solutrean artifacts of
Western Europe.

Work done by archaeologists, geologists, and
paleontologists, at various sites of New Mexico,
Colorado and Nebraska, so far seems to indicate
an antiquity reliably estimated by several scientists
between 10 and 15,000 years, possibly more. Thus
these beautiful points are the oldest human artifacts
scientifically dated until now in America. They have
been discovered, as expected, in association with
other implements such as hunters of the late Old
Stone Age used elsewhere in the world: side
scrapers, end-scrapers, borers, knives, utilized
flakes, etc.

Last, a few words about the materials used in
making the points. For the Yuma group we find the
Such is our present archaeological knowledge
following percentages: chalcedony 34.56, quartzite of these points, the best shaped artifacts
20.37, chert 16.66, agate and petrified wood 14.19, manufactured by the ancient Americans toward the
jasper 7.46, the rest made of miscellaneous kinds end of the Pleistocene period.
of stone. For the Folsom series we have: chalcedony
University of Denver,
53.84, jasper 12.30, quartzite and chert, each 7.84,
Denver, Colorado.
petrified wood 6.15, and miscellaneous 12.30. In
April, 1937.
both groups chalcedony was then the preferred
material, but jasper passed from the fifth place to
the second in the Folsom types, quartzite and chert
Bibliography
are fairly strong; in both classes, with agate-petrified
Barbour, E. H., and Schultz, C. B., The Mounted
wood following. It is interesting to note that
Skeleton of Bison Occidentalis and Associated Dart
chalcedony, leading in the main groups, is the
Points, Nebraska State Museum, Bulletin 23, Vol.
material used in the fashioning of three-fourths the
1, 1932, pp. 263-271.
number of true Folsom, 5-c type points, probably
for its beauty and fine grain allowing especially
Cook, H. J., New Geological and
skillful flaking.
Paleontological Evidence Bearing on the Antiquity
of Mankind, Natural History, Vol. XXVII, No. 3,
It would be useless to discuss the geographical
May, 1927, p. 240.
distribution of the Folsom and Yuma points as it is
constantly changing and expanding. They have been
Cook, H. J., Glacial Age Man in New Mexico,
found from the Rocky Mountain region, seldom Scientific American, Vol. CXXIX, July, 1928, pp.
west of it, clear to the Atlantic sea coast, with 38-40.
possible local variations of detail, and from the
Cook, H. J., More Evidence of the “FolsomMexican border to southern Canada. But the area
Culture” Race, Scientific American, Feb., 1931, pp.
of greater concentration of the finds, so far, seems
102-3.
to be on the Western Plains, principally in eastern
Figgins, J. D., The Antiquity of Man in America,
Colorado and eastern New Mexico, in western
Nebraska and eastern Wyoming, as well as western Natural History, Vol. XXVII, No. 3, May, 1927,
Texas. Folsom and Yuma specimens have been pp. 229-239.
found together, at other places only the one or the
Figgins, J. D., An Additional Discovery of the
other type, and the respective distribution of the
Association of a “Folsom” Artifact and Fossil
two main classes is not yet sufficiently known to
Mammal Remains, Proc. of the Colorado Mus. of
draw conclusions as to their cultural and
Nat. Hist., Vol. X, No. 4, Sept. 26, 1931.
chronological relations.

Folsom and Yuma Points As Known Today

45

Figgins, J. D., A Further Contribution to the
Renaud, E. B., Prehistoric Flaked Points from
Antiquity of Man in. America, Proc. of the Colo. Colorado and Neighboring Districts, Proc. of Colo.
Mus. of Nat. Hist., Vol. XII, No. 2, Aug. 1,1933. Museum of Nat. Hist., Vol. X, No. 2, March, 1931.
Gould, Ch. N., On the Recent Finding of
Renaud, E. B., Yuma and Folsom Artifacts,
Another Flint Arrowhead in the Pleistocene at (New Material) Proc. of Colorado Museum of Nat.
Frederick, Okla., Journal of the Washington Hist., Vol. XI, No. 2, Nov., 1932.
Academy of Sciences, Vol. XIX, No. 3, Feb. 4,
Renaud, E. B., Archaeological Survey of
1929.
Eastern Colorado (Third Report), Chap. V, March,
Hay, O. P., On a Recent Discovery of a Flint 1933.
Arrowhead in Early Pleistocene Deposits at
Renaud, E. B., Archaeological Survey of
Frederick, Okla., Journal of the Washington
Western Nebraska, Chap. V, May, 1934.
Academy of Sciences, Vol. XIX, No. 5, March 4,
1929.
Renaud, E. B., The First Thousand YumaFolsom Artifacts, University of Denver, October,
Howard, E. B., Grooved Spearpoints, The
1934.
Pennsylvania Archaeologist, Vol. 3, January, 1934,
No. 6.
Roberts, F. H. H., Jr., A Folsom Complex,
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collection, Vol. 94, No.
Howard, E. B., Evidence of Early Man in North
4, June 20, 1935.
America, The Museum Journal, Vol. XXIV, Nos.
2-3, The University Museum of the University of
Schultz, C. B., Nebraska State Museum
Pennsylvania.
Proceedings, Bull. 24 and Bull. 27, Vol. I, 1932.
Howard, E. B., An Outline of the Problems of
Strong, W. D., Recent Discoveries of Human
Man’s Antiquity in North America, The American Artifacts Associated with Extinct Animals in
Anthropologist, New Series, Vol. 38, No. 3, July- Nebraska, Science Service Research
Sept., 1936.
Announcement, No. 130, June 27, 1932.
Renaud, E. B., L’Antiquité de l’ Homme dans
L’Amerique du Nord, L’Anthropologie, T.
XXXVIII, 1928, pp. 23-49.

