46

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A STUDY OF INDIAN PICTURES IN TEXAS
BY FORREST KIRKLAND
Our North American Indian, like primitive man
in most other parts of the world, had a profound
interest in picture making. He decorated his pots,
his baskets, and his clothing with conventional
designs; he painted his body in stripes and figures
or decorated it with elaborate tattoos; he often
pictured his brave deeds on his buffalo robe or on
the walls of his tepee; and when rock walls or cliffs
were available, he often carved or painted on them
designs and figures common to his culture. Most
of these designs, except those on the rock walls
and cliffs, have perished with the material on which
they were painted; and, only rarely, a fortunate
archaeologist uncovers some specimen that has
escaped complete destruction. But many of the
shelter walls and overhanging cliffs, on which the
Indian painted his pictures, still stand, like great art
galleries, crowded with these dim and crumbling
designs—the last extensive examples of our
aboriginal art.

cliffs. This type of Indian art is, by far, the most
abundant in Texas, being found in large groups near
Paint Rock, Comstock, Langtry, Dryden, Fort
Davis, and El Paso; and in smaller groups, from
the Nueces River Valley to the West throughout
the Big Bend and the Davis Mountains, and north
to the Canadian River in the Panhandle.
Pictographs Are in Very
Bad State of Preservation

The thing that impressed us most when we saw
our first group of Indian pictures, the group at Paint
Rock, was their deplorable state of preservation.
Their location, on a stratified rock cliff above the
Concho River, is near an old ford of the river. A
campground: first, for the Indians; then, for the early
travelers and settlers; and since, for fishing and
picnicking parties. Thousands of curious people
have climbed up this cliff to look at the crude Indian
pictures and to leave their names painted, penciled
or carved on the rocks. We noticed one name dated
Definition of Terms
as early as 1852. Hundreds of these names are
Wherever smooth, protected rock surfaces occur written across the Indian designs. Some of the
in North America, Indian pictures are found. These designs have been painted over with housepaint;
pictures may be divided into two general classes— others have been hacked off with an axe or used as
petroglyphs and pictographs. Petroglyphs, as the a target for a rifle. Fires at the base of the cliff have
name implies, are the pictures which have been destroyed many designs on the lower rocks.
carved, scratched or pecked into the surface of the Destruction is in evidence everywhere.
rock. They are usually without color and are, as
For example: Originally, the ends of 175 stones
might be expected, generally in a much better state
along the rugged cliff had contained from one to a
of preservation than the painted pictures. The
dozen or more Indian pictures or designs. In 1934,
number of petroglyphs in Texas is small compared
when we made copies of the group, the designs on
to those reported in other .Southwestern States;
41 of these stones had been completely destroyed,
however, there are several very fine groups in the
and 81 single pictures on the remaining 134 stones
district around Van Horn.
had been ruined. We returned in 1935 to check our
Pictographs are the pictures and designs that copies with the originals, and found that many of
have been painted on the rocks with some kind of the pictures had received additional damage during
color. Usually, they are found on the back wall or the one year since we were there. It is distressing
ceiling of dry shelters, but sometimes they occur the way careless sightseers are destroying these fine
on the protected sides of boulders and overhanging examples of primitive art.

A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas
We have found the condition at
other sites just as bad, and in some
cases, even worse. Groups like Paint
Rock, near public picnic grounds,
have suffered most from the hand of
the white man. But the white man
has destroyed many less designs than
did the Indian himself. At almost
every location, there has been a great
deal of overpainting. One Indian
artist, apparently, had little respect
for the work of another. In the basket
maker shelters of Val Verde County,
this over-painting on the back wall
was continued generation after
generation, until all that remains now
in some shelters, is a confusion of
color from which, only now and
then, a fragmentary design or figure
can be distinguished. There are
hundreds of feet of wall space in
these shelters on which the pictures
are destroyed. And this destruction
is always worse in shelters where the
midden deposit has accumulated in
very large quantities. Evidently, the
first designs were painted at a
convenient level, about five feet
above the original floor. As time
went by, the pictures were overpainted again and again; and the
accumulating refuse in the floor
raised its level until, at length, the
pictures were at the very feet of the
occupants; thus they were scuffed
and scarred until they were
completely destroyed. Basket maker
shelters have been found in which
the pictures were almost completely
covered by the midden deposit.
Fortunately, in a number of shelters,
the pictures have been protected by
a shelf, or hump of rock at the base
of the back wall; from these shelters
we have secured our best examples
of this art.

47

PLATE 14.
Typical basket maker designs from four shelters in One
Mile Canyon, one mile east of Langtry, Texas. Figures 1
and 2 are from the same shelter and are continuous on the
wall. They represent a total length of 36 feet. Fig. 3 is all
that remains of a large group of pictures in the largest shelter
in the canyon. Fig. 4 is of special interest because these
designs were originally completely buried by the debris. They
had been recently uncovered by a trench against the wall
and could only be seen when wet. Fig. 5 comes from a small
shelter in the bank of the Rio Grande just below One Mile
Canyon.

48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

At Meyers Springs near Dryden
and at a few other locations we have
found very good evidence that
certain designs were deliberately
smeared or otherwise mutilated by
the Indians themselves.
Fires and smoke have done much
damage to pictures at many
locations. In the Davis Mountains,
the pictures were often painted very
low on the sloping backs of small
shelters used chiefly as fire places.
These pictures, usually painted in
black, and very difficult to find, have
been badly damaged by the fire, and
can only be seen clearly when wet.
Most designs on the ceilings of
shelters have suffered to some degree
from the accumulation of soot.
The hand of man, however, is by
no means the only enemy of Indian
pictures. At Langs Mill near
Fredericksburg we found a large
group badly damaged by a gray
lichen which is gradually covering the
damp walls of the shelter. A similar
lichen is growing over the paintings
in one of the shelters in the Seminole
Canyon. Exposure to sunlight,
blowing sand, rain, and the effect of
flood waters — weathering — is
another most unrelenting and certain
PLATE 15.
agency of destruction. The rate of
Basket maker designs from a small shelter in Rattle Snake
this weathering depends, to a large
Canyon
on Babbs’ Ranch, eight miles west of Langtry, Texas.
measure, on the amount of exposure
Figures 1, 2 and 3 are continuous from left to right on the
and the type of rock. Chalky surfaces
shelter back wall and ceiling. The total length is 75 feet.
weather away much faster than those
The designs are now very dim but easily seen when wet
of hard limestone or granite. The
with water.
designs at Comanche Springs near
Lajitas on a chalk bluff, although
comparatively recent, are almost
perhaps less— and time will have finished its task
weathered away. At Aqua Frio in the Big Bend, of erasing the art of our American Indian.
also, the very hard, igneous rock is splintering off
I know of no effective method of checking the
in huge flakes, taking the designs with them. At
natural
weathering of the rocks, but many years
every location the effects of weathering and flaking
can be seen. A few more years—fifty or a hundred, may be added to the life of some of the paintings if

A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas
the people who visit the sites will show the respect
due such examples of art and refrain from the use
of pencils, paints, rifles, and chisels. The chalking
or oiling of pictographs for photographic purposes,
even by scientists, should be discouraged. This
practice does irreparable damage to the pictures
and is quite unnecessary. We have found that an
application of clean water is the most effective
method of temporarily restoring very dim pictures
to their original strength.
How We Became Interested in Indian Pictures
My wife and I became interested in Indian
paintings after a visit to Paint Rock in 1933.
Realizing that in a few years these pictures would
probably be gone forever, we decided that
something should be done at once to save them for
the future. And it was only natural, since both of us
are professional artists, that we should think first
of making accurate copies to be filed away in a
safe place for future study. To make correct copies,
even of this one group, would take time. And we
were told that there were many other groups. Our
spare time consisted, chiefly, of our summer
vacation, but we were definitely interested; so in
1934, we returned to Paint Rock, and as an
experiment, made scale copies of every design and
picture on the cliff. This work proved so successful
and met with such favorable comment from both
artists and archaeologists that we have adopted
Indian pictures as our pet hobby, and have devoted
all of our spare time since to copying and studying
the pictures at other well known locations.

49

we hope that this and subsequent papers will prove
the value of such an undertaking, it may be well to
give some attention to our methods for the benefit
of other artists or archaeologists, who may wish to
undertake similar work in other sections.
The Advantages of Scale Drawings
Over Other Methods of Copying
Tracing, photographing, and making scale
drawings, are the three methods generally employed
to get copies of Indian pictures. The chief advantage
of tracing is that this method can be used by any
one not skilled in making drawings. The difficulties
encountered, however, in obtaining tracings of very
large designs, and designs high above the floor; and
the very bulky copies that result, make the method
unsatisfactory for use on a large scale.
Photography is the method most commonly
used. First, because it requires so little time and
can be done by almost any one who has a suitable
camera; second, because photographs are generally,
but without sufficient reason, accepted as the most
accurate copies possible. There are, however,
several very serious drawbacks to this method:
1. Many designs clearly visible to the eye are
entirely too dim to photograph successfully.
2. The imperfections of the background and
over-painted names, etc., show up so clearly on
the photograph that the Indian designs are difficult
to determine.

3. Many pictographs are painted in positions that
make it almost impossible to focus a camera on
At the time of this writing, complete copies have
them.
been made of the pictographs at 30 locations
4. Photographs of pictures on curved or uneven
scattered over most of South and West Texas.
Because the painted pictures are weathering away surfaces are only accurate in the center. Designs at
so much faster than the petroglyphs, we have each side are always badly distorted.
worked exclusively at pictograph locations,
5. There is no way of securing a uniform scale
reserving until last the sites where petroglyphs are
in a series of photographs. Size can only be judged
found.
by some known object placed in the picture.
So far as I know, we are the first to undertake
6. This is very important—ordinary photographs
the task of systematically copying and studying
do not record the colors of the original pictures.
Indian pictures on a very large scale. It was,
The only serious objections to making scale
therefore, necessary at the very beginning to
develop a procedure best suited to the task. Since copies are that this method requires considerable

50

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

time, and that the artist must combine professional copies are finished, these boards can be sealed in
skill with a keen interest in archaeology. We chose cellophane envelopes, and with reasonable care,
this method for making our copies because we were should remain unchanged almost indefinitely.
fortunate enough to have the professional skill, and
because this method, when properly used,
overcomes almost every objection
raised to tracing and to
photography. Every design that can
be clearly seen and reached for
measurement can be accurately
copied to scale, and designs too
high to be measured can be drawn
freehand almost as accurately as a
photograph. Every design can be
shown in the same scale without
distortion and without a distracting
background. The copies are small
and of uniform size. And, what is
more important in the case of
pictographs, every design can be
shown in its correct colors.
Materials Used For Making
Copies
Water color was chosen as a
medium because water color board
is most suitable for careful pencil
drawings, the color can be quickly
and accurately matched and
applied over the pencil sketch, and
will dry immediately. Since the
copies are intended to be filed away
as a permanent record, only the
best standard materials are used.
Our colors are chosen from an
absolutely permanent palette of a
reliable make, and our paper is
hand made English linen mounted
on six-ply board. All copies are
made on uniform size cards, eleven
by fifteen inches, which is onefourth of a standard water color
board. This size is ideal for
handling and storage, and has
proved a very convenient shape for
copies at most locations. When the

PLATE 16
Pictures from the back wall of a flooded shelter in the
Seminole Canyon, just below the highway bridge eight miles
west of Comstock. All of the pictures are in red except two
or three designs which are in yellow. They are associated with
a burnt rock mound which is on the bank in front of the shelter.

A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas
Choosing the Scale For the Copies
The size and type of the pictures at a location
determine the scale. For the sake of easy
comparison, however, we try as often as possible
to use the same scale on all pictures at one place.
Very large pictures can, of course, be reduced
successfully to a much smaller scale than very small
or complicated designs. One-half inch to one foot
is the usual scale for large designs, although one
and one-half inches to one foot is best for groups
or small pictures. When the pictures are continuous,
or almost so, on a long wall, a scale is chosen that
will fit the group to a series of boards or plates, as
we call them, so that no important design will be
divided, and so the group can be reconstructed in
its true relations by placing the plates end to end.
(Plate 15). To do this requires considerable
measuring and planning before the copies are begun,
but the plan has worked out remarkably well at
every site where the pictures were continuous. If a
blank space is on such a wall, a break is shown in
the copy and the distance omitted is noted on the
plate. If for any reason, a picture has to be moved
from its correct position, a note is always attached
explaining the alteration. Where the designs are
scattered about over the wall or cliff so that the
above procedure is impractical, they are copied or
numbered as nearly as possible in their order from
left to right. (Plates 17 and 18).
Procedure of Making Copies At A Location
Our actual procedure at a location is as follows:
1. A careful survey of the location is made to
determine the number and type of designs to be
copied.
2. The walls are measured, the scale chosen, and
the designs to go on each plate determined.
3. The section allotted to the first plate is divided
in convenient spaces, usually three or four feet,
depending on the scale, and marked with upright
sticks. (We avoid chalking the wall if possible).
This greatly simplifies the work of copying.

51

the skill of the artist and the care with which he
performs this operation.
5. When every design on the first section has
been copied in pencil, the general tone of the
background is painted in. No attempt is made to
show small imperfections in the rock or slight
variations of color, which would only confuse the
Indian designs.
6. Seated in front of each design, we recheck its
copy for accuracy, match its color, and paint it in
on the plate. For the sake of legibility, it is necessary,
in most cases, to use stronger color than is now
found on the paintings. As a rule, we try to make
our copies about the strength of the original paint.
Slight breaks in lines and figures from flaking or
other injuries are disregarded in the copy, but no
part of a picture is ever added that we cannot be
positively certain about.
7. The above procedure is continued with each
section until the entire group is copied. Then, a
careful survey is made of the location for artifacts,
mortars, burnt rock hearths, and other cultural
indications.
8. Photographs are made of the shelter or cliff
and of any other objects of interest at the location.
9. Notes are made of the location and of every
interesting thing observed during our survey of the
grounds. The kind of rock on •which the designs
are painted, the condition of the designs, the colors
used, the over-lapping of designs, and any other
unusual feature of the paintings, are carefully
recorded in these notes. A condensed draft of these
notes and the photographs made at the location are
later attached to the back of the copies. The original
notes are filed away as a permanent record of the
survey.

In the beginning we were interested chiefly in
the artistic merit of Indian pictures, and although
we felt that our copies might be an aid in the study
of Texas Archaeology, we had little knowledge of
the subject and no thought of qualifying for the
work. However, after our first field trip, we decided
4. Each design in this section is carefully
that the archaeological point of view was essential
measured and copied to scale on the plate in pencil.
to a complete success of our undertaking; and so,
The accuracy of the final copy depends entirely on

52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

we began collecting and studying all available
material on the subject. From this study and from
the ever increasing knowledge gained from the field
trips, we have developed a keen interest in the
scientific aspect of Indian pictures, and have come
to believe that much light can be thrown on Texas
archaeology by their study.

There are three general approaches to the study
of Indian pictures: First, a study of the color with
which pictographs are painted or the type of carving
used on petroglyphs; second, a comparative study
of the designs used at different sites; and third, a
correlation of the artifacts and other cultural
evidence with the pictures at each location. Study
along these lines should throw light on the material
culture of the Indian, his artistic taste,
and his ceremonial and religious
practices; it should indicate the
general distribution of cultures; and
should furnish a means of determining
their approximate age. Although our
survey is yet far from complete, the
following brief discussion of what we
have learned should give some idea
of the information we may expect
from a complete systematic study:
The Color Used On Indian
Paintings
The study of Indian color has been
an interesting part of our survey. The
material from which the color was
made is about the same at all
locations. Reds, browns, orange, and
yellows were all made from oxide of
iron, found in abundance in most parts
of The State, in the form of soft lumps
or concretions. Pieces of this color,
showing signs of use, are often found
in dry shelters. Black was made from
charcoal or some other form of
carbon, and white from clay or chalk.
Some of the smaller designs at
most locations were drawn with the
sharp edge of a piece of dry color,
but the great majority of the paintings
were made with liquid paint, with the
aid of some kind of brush.

PLATE 17
Designs from the cliff on the bank of the Concho River
about two miles north of Paint Rock, Texas. Note the
horses at the bottom of Figure 1 and the devil at the left
of Figure 2.

This paint was prepared by
grinding the color in small mortars
and mixing it with some kind of liquid
binder. Mortars and grinding stones
have been found, still stained with the

A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas
color. Little is known, however, about the binder.
It, evidently, varied somewhat, with different
mixtures of paint, which explains why certain
designs have flaked off much worse than others on
the same surface. On one shelter in the Seminole
Canyon, we found three, large, human figures in
light yellow, where every other figure was red. On
close examination, it developed that these pictures,
originally, had been red, also, but the
color had almost entirely flaked off
leaving a yellow stain on the chalk
rock. This stain, no doubt, was due
to oil in the binder which had soaked
into the porous sur face. Lumps of
prepared color have been found (as
before stated), but, as far as I know,
no brush, still containing color, has
yet come to light.

53

Of all the six or more colors used, purple-red is,
by far the most common; then comes bright red,
black, orange, yellow, and white in the order named.
We have never found blue or green pigment,
although it has been reported at certain locations
within the state. Red, in its various shades, appears
to be the most durable color. White is seldom very
clear and black is always very dim. The carbon,

As simple as the Indians’ color
was, we must admit that it has stood
up well under the conditions. At
Meyers Springs, the pictures are on
a wall that faces west and receives
the full force of the afternoon sun
from about the middle of the
afternoon until sundown, and are so
near the water level of the stream that
runs under the shelter, that the lower
designs are submerged with its every
rise; yet many of the pictures are as
bright as if they had just recently been
painted. We know, however, that
many of the pictures in this group are
comparatively recent, because of the
evidence there of white influence.
The paint in all basket maker
shelters is very dim. This is due, more
to an accumulation of dust through
the ages, than to the fading of the
color. This is indicated by the way
the color is restored when the surface
is wet. Designs on chalky walls often
appear dim because much of the
color has fallen away in very fine
flakes, giving the designs the
appearance of crayon drawings.

PLATE 18
Designs from the Paint Rock group. This illustration
shows two of the complete plates from that site. It required
13 such plates to hold all of the designs at that place.

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

from which black was made, has not stood very
successfully the test of time.
Although three or more colors are found at
practically every location, they are, as a rule, used
separately on different designs, and only rarely
combined in one design. At Paint Rock, Meyers
Springs, Rock Pile Ranch, and at many of the basket
maker shelters, however, we have found exceptions
to this practice. Many of the geometrical designs
at Paint Rock are executed in two or three well
chosen colors; two colors are combined in many
pictures at Meyers Springs; and two very large
intricate designs, at Rock Pile Ranch in the Davis
Mountains, are done in four colors—red, yellow,
black, and white.

others highly conventionalized; some animals
nondescript, others accurately drawn. Several easily
distinguished types were often found at one
location. Seldom were all the designs at two
locations of the same type.

We naturally wondered if these distinctly
different types of design, had resulted from
difference in ability or taste of the individual artist
or from fundamental cultural differences. And,
although certain experienced archaeologists
contended that the difference was due to the
individual artist, we felt that it was too profound in
many cases to be the result of anything short of
cultural differences. If this were true, our problem
was to devise some means of isolating the designs
that belonged to only one culture. The first large
The basket makers, however, made the most of
groups which we copied, Paint Rock and Meyers
polychrome painting. Their favorite colors were
Springs, presented such an array of types that our
purple-red, red, pink, orange, ocher, yellow, and
task looked hopeless. It was only at the very end of
black. In a few instances, we have found two of
our second year’s work that any hope of a solution
these colors over-painted to give still a different
was found.
shade. White has never been found on their designs.
Usually, they used two or three colors on one figure,
It came first, with the discovery of two small
but one fine group, in a shelter in the Seminole shelters in the Davis Mountains, containing only
Canyon, was painted with six colors. The basket very small pictures of animals painted in black (Plate
makers were fond of two-tone outlining, and 20, Fig. 1), and second, with the discovery of four
alternating colors in stripes. Their taste for color dry shelters in One Mile Canyon near Langtry,
was very well developed; some of the best examples containing designs of only one type, very different
of their art, when fresh and bright, would have from any we had copied before. (Plate 14). The
rivaled the work of some of our present day mural small animal drawings were certainly the
distinguishing work of a particular culture in the
painters.
Davis Mountains, and served well to indicate it at
other locations, but the number of drawings in the
The Study of Designs At Different Locations
shelters was too few to represent the full work of
An exhaustive study of the designs at the various
the culture.
locations will certainly add a great deal to our
knowledge of the Texas Indians. Such a study will
Val Verde County Basket Maker Culture
require much time and cannot be pursued with any
degree of finality, until all the important pictures in
In One Mile Canyon, it was different. There we
the state have been reduced to scale copies, and found four locations with many different designs
are available for easy comparison. This, of course, and figures, and yet, obviously, all of the same type.
has not yet been done; so, it is only possible here to We returned to this district at the beginning of our
suggest the course this investigation may take, and last field trip, July, 1936, and spent two weeks
the results that now seem likely.
copying and studying similar designs at other
locations, and positively determined that this type
We observed, very early in our survey, a great
of design was the work of the Val Verde County
difference in the type of designs. Some designs were
basket makers. These Indians always occupied dry
simple, others very intricate; some figures crude,
shelters, usually, high up steep canyon walls, and

A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas
chosen, it seems for their inaccessibility; and perhaps
for that same reason, these shelters were seldom if
ever occupied by later Indians; so their art is usually
unmixed and can instantly be recognized by any
one familiar with their designs. (Compare Plates
14 and 15, and Fig. 4, Plate 20 with
other illustrations.) Their human
figures are very distinctive and of
two different types—very large,
slender figures and much smaller,
squatty figures.

55

Our next discovery along this line was a very
large shelter in the Seminole Canyon just above the
large basket maker shelter explored and reported
by the University of Texas in 1933. Here, we found
scores of figures, animals, and designs totally

Usually, a slender, broad
shouldered man, wearing a fringed
robe, holding in his upraised hands
a scepter and a broken plant, will
be surrounded by several of the
small, plump individuals. Serpents
and animals, as well as, plume-like
designs are common. The
consistency with which many of the
figure groups and designs are
repeated at different locations,
indicates a very well developed
mythology in the culture. This is,
by far, the finest type of work we
have studied, and certainly deserves
a more detailed report when the
survey in that district is finished.
Type Stations in the Study of
Indian Pictures
Finding locations at which only
the basket makers had lived and
painted, gave us hope of finding
other locations at which only one
culture had left its art. If other such
locations could be found, they
might be designated as type stations
to serve as a basis for the study of
their particular culture. And here,
we suggest the Rattle Snake
Canyon shelter (Plate 15), eight
miles west of Langtry, as the type
station for the basket makers, until
a better location is found.

PLATE 19
Here are shown three sections from the Meyers Springs
group, 18 miles northeast of Dryden, Texas. Each section
represents a length of 18 feet. The group is continuous on
the wall and was copied in ten sections. Note the white
influence, evidenced by the horses, the stage coach, and the
church steeples.

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

different from those of the basket maker; very
obviously, the work of one single culture (Plate 16).
And, what was more interesting, the figures
correspond exactly with a certain type which we
had already observed at both Paint Rock and
Meyers Springs. The floor of the shelter is level
with the bottom of the canyon and is flooded with
every rain, which, no doubt, explains why it was
never occupied by the basket makers, who occupied
four other shelters near by. There were many
mortars under and near the shelter, and on the bank
immediately in front was a large burnt rock mound.
The Indians responsible for the paintings at this
location, evidently, had lived on the bank in the open
and cooked on a community hearth. This
corresponded exactly with the location at Meyers
Springs—the flooded shelter, the mortars and the
burnt rock mound—so, it was no surprise that many
of the designs at Meyers Springs were of this
particular type. Tentatively, we have designated this
location, type station for the burnt rock mound
culture.

Another method of studying Indian designs, for
which we have had little time as yet, has been made
possible by our scale copies. With these copies, it
is a simple matter to transfer each design at a
location to small individual cards, which can be
grouped or shifted according to any desired
classification, and percentages and other figures
arrived at that would be difficult or even impossible
from any other method of study. These cards can
also be used in making comparisons of designs at
different locations and, perhaps, in many other ways
that may be suggested when such study is
undertaken.
Indian Handprints

One kind of a design found at many locations in
Texas and sufficiently interesting to warrant special
study, is Indian handprints. Handprints are of two
kinds: Positive prints, made by dipping the hand in
color and stamping it on the wall; and negative
prints, resulting from placing the hand on the rock
and spraying color around it. Red was the color
In comparing the designs at Paint Rock with most commonly used in making handprints,
those at Meyers Springs, we noticed that the small, however, yellow and white were sometimes used,
simple, geometrical designs, so plentiful at the first and one shelter was found in which handprints were
place, were not common at the other. (Compare made with gray mud on a black ceiling.
Plates 18 and 19). This suggested that these designs
We have found handprints in only two basket
were the work of a particular culture which had
maker shelters; these were undoubtedly intrusive,
camped a great deal at Paint Rock and not at Meyers
but certain of the basket maker designs have a close
Springs; if this be true, we might expect to find
resemblance to the open hand, except that they are
somewhere a location occupied only by this culture
usually larger. In the shelter mentioned above as
and containing only its designs. We did this very
type station for the burnt rock mound culture, are
thing on our last field trip! At Chalk Draw,
more than 100 handprints, some as high as 12 feet
Comanche Springs, and Hot Springs, all in the Big
above the floor and so arranged in more than one
Bend, we found stratified rock cliffs very much like
place to form a definite design on the wall. (Plate
the cliff at Paint Rock, on which were painted only
16, Fig. 3). Not all of the prints were made by men.
small, geometrical designs almost identical to those
On the ceiling of one shelter 12 miles west of Fort
at Paint Rock. Either of the three locations might
Davis, are 20 handprints, 19 of which are those of
serve as a type station for the culture (Fig. 2, Plate
children or women. Children’s handprints are also
20).
found at Paint Rock. Perhaps the handprint was
Our investigation along this line gives the Indian’s signature which he left, like the white
considerable promise, but it has no more than begun. man, as evidence of his visit to the shelter or bluff,
Many more sites will have to be copied and studied but, more likely, it was a part of some initiation or
before the full value of type stations, in the study ceremony. Some light may be thrown on this point
by further study.
of Indian pictures, can be determined.

A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas

57

Pictures As A Means of
Determining Age
The question of age is one of
great interest, and one on which the
archaeologist is constantly striving
to throw more light. The study of
Indian art offers several means by
which the age of pictures, and
through them, the age of cultures,
may be approximated. Any picture
showing white influence such as the
horse, the gun or the church, must,
necessarily, be placed in historic
time. Many locations contain such
pictures, but that does not mean that
every picture at the location is,
necessarily, recent. A total absence,
however, of white influence at an
extensive group may be accepted as
strong evidence that the pictures
date back to a time before the
coming of the white man. Very dim
and badly weathered color,
especially on a firm rock surface, is
always an indication of extreme age.
From this sign alone, the basket
maker culture would rank among
the oldest in the state. This evidence
is strengthened by the accumulation
of many feet of midden deposits in
many of their shelters, until, in some
cases, the pictures themselves have
actually been covered. An
indisputable discovery of pictures of
extinct animals, like the pictures
found in Europe, would be hailed
as positive evidence of great age,
but no such pictures have yet been
found. It may be of interest,
however, to note that although
bows and arrows are found at most
other locations, they are totally
absent in the 10 basket maker
shelters where we have made
copies.
One method of studying age
which we may find very helpful in

PLATE 20.
Here are shown four distinctly different types of Indian
pictures.
Fig. 1. Small black animal drawings from a shelter 12 miles
west of Fort Davis. Similar animal drawings occur in
other shelters in the Davis Mountains.
Fig. 2. Simple geometrical designs from Comanche Springs,
12 miles west of Terlingua, Texas. Compare these with
the designs at Paint Rock.
Fig. 3. A section from the shelter in the Seminole Canyon
described in Plate 3.
Fig. 4. Basket maker designs in a small shelter in the Seminole
Canyon only 200 yards from the shelter from which
Fig. 3 was taken.

58

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the future is the overlapping of designs. If it is
definitely proved that different types of designs are
the work of different cultures, and the chief designs,
belonging to each culture, can be determined
through the study of type stations, then the
sequence, at least, of the different cultures can be
determined by a close study of over-lapping designs
at locations like Paint Rock and Meyers Springs
where so many different types of work are found.
This investigation, however, must await further
study of the type stations.

mythology; but our work along this line is so
incomplete at the present time and the subject of
so much interest that it seems best to defer this
discussion until space will permit of a fuller
treatment.

The purpose of this paper has been to call
attention to the Indian pictures in Texas, the way
they are being destroyed, and the importance of
their study; to tell of the systematic survey which
my wife and I have undertaken and the methods
we are using; to relate briefly some of the interesting
things we have observed; and to suggest some of
The Question of Interpretation
the ways our investigation may contribute to a better
A preliminary survey of the Indian pictures in understanding of our Texas Indians. This paper is,
Texas cannot properly be concluded without a few therefore, offered only as an introduction to the
words, at least, about the interpretation of the study of Indian pictures in Texas. At the invitation
designs. The prospect of finally being able to read of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological
the pictographs is, perhaps, the one thing that fires Society, we are planning to prepare an additional
most the imagination of the average person but, paper each year for its annual bulletin. It is planned
unfortunately, offers the least in a scientific that each paper will report in detail some phase of
investigation. It is quite true that the American our work and that the complete series will constitute
Indian was struggling with the problem of recording a full report of our survey.
his ideas, and a large part of our Texas pictures
It is unfortunate that our enthusiasm for the work
are, no doubt, illustrations of a system of writing in
and our professional skill as artists can not be linked
the making, but even the clearest examples of
with years of archaeological experience. This
writing among these pictures are far below the stage
handicap, however, has been largely overcome by
where an accurate interpretation is possible. At best
the helpful suggestions and the hearty cooperation
the Indian pictograph was only mnemonic—it
of every one who has learned about our
served only to prompt an individual in telling a story
undertaking. This, we deeply appreciate. We hope
which he carried in his memory. When the story
that we may be able to pursue our delightful hobby
teller and his audience were gone the interpretation
each year until the survey has been finished and the
of the pictograph was forever lost.
results recorded and passed on for whatever they
It is probably true that pictures of thunder birds, may be worth in the study of the Indian in Texas.
sun emblems, and certain other designs had some
general meaning in the ceremonies of most tribes;
618 North Texas Bldg.,
and the unique designs of the basket makers must
have had some definite connection with their
Dallas, Texas.

