28

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

TEXAS TECH ARCHEOLOGICAL EXPEDITION SUMMER 1930
BY W. C. HOLDEN
The archeological activities of Texas
Technological College during the past year have
centered around the attempt to explain the
relationship between the slab-stone house culture
along the Canadian River in the Panhandle of Texas
and the Pueblo culture of the Southwest.
Prior to this past summer no slab-stone ruins of
the Panhandle type had been reported on the Canadian
River west of Tucumcari, New Mexico. It seemed to
be a reasonable theory that if the Panhandle slabstone culture were related to the Pueblo culture there
should be some indications of such a connection
between Tucumcari and the Pecos valley. The most
eastern pueblo ruins reported on until the summer of
1929 were those on the Tecolote River about a mile
below the village of Tecolote on the Las Vegas-Santa
Fe highway. During the summer of 1929 Dr. J. Alden
Mason and party from the Museum of the University
of Pennsylvania reported the finding of a ruin near the
town of Watrous, N. M., located at the confluence of
the Mora River and Sapello Creek. In his report Dr.
Mason said in part: “In architecture the site somewhat
resembles that on the Canadian (in the Panhandle),
the underground walls and floors being made of adobe
mud, but smooth and finished. However, instead of
enclosing single rooms, the walls were partitions
between rooms, and the group on the ground
excavated consisted of a dozen or more. The same
superposition of floors was noted and the same
charred beams and lumps of fire-baked clay with the
impressions of poles or reeds. The latter were
unusually frequent, and charred beams rare. In
contradistinction to the Texas site, potsherds were
common and flaked implements very rare; the country
evidently did not produce much flint. The pottery was
of unmistakable Pueblo type, mainly black corrugated
ware but with a fair quantity of painted black on white
and a few pieces of black on red.*
The discovery of a ruin almost mid-way between
the Pecos valley and Tucumcari resembling the

Canadian ruins in architecture and containing
unmistakable Pueblo potsherds made the possibility
of establishing a relationship between the Panhandle
and Pueblo cultures seem a little bit nearer at hand. It
seemed clear that the most vital region to work, in
attempting to solve this problem of relationships was
between the Tecolote River west of Las Vegas and
Tucumcari. It was decided to explore minutely the
intervening region for more ruins; then to begin with
known Pueblo and pre-Pueblo ruins on the Tecolote
and excavate typical ruins towards the east to known
Canadian ruins of the Panhandle type, noting where
and how the transition from the Pueblo to Panhandle
culture took place.
Tecolote Ruin
With a program like this in view the first camp for
the field school conducted by the College in July-August
1930 was made at San Geronimo Ranger Station on
the Tecolote River some eighteen miles west of Las
Vegas. From this place exploring expeditions were sent
out along the Gallinas and Tecolote Rivers, affluents
of the Pecos, and along Sapello Creek and Mora River,
tributaries of the Canadian. A number of slab-stone
ruins of the single room Panhandle type were found,
some within ten miles of Las Vegas. Mr. William Elfield
of that place was instrumental in locating these. Time
did not permit of the excavation of any of this type of
ruin in the Las Vegas vicinity.
Excavations at Tecolote
The second week of August was spent excavating
in a pre-Pueblo ruin on the Tecolote. There are three
known groups of ruins on the Tecolote River. The group
where we worked is located on the south bank of the
river about a mile below the Mexican village of
Tecolote. The ruins consist of ten mounds varying in
size from 24 feet to 180 feet and in height from 2 to 7
feet, and scattered over an area approximately 900
feet long and 430 feet wide.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

29

Figure 8
TECOLOTE RUIN, DISTRIBUTION OF MOUNDS
Our work was confined to Mound A. The north
part of this mound has been carried away by the
river’s washing the bank away beneath it. Here and
there along the perpendicular cliff can be seen cross
sections of walls of horizontal rock masonry.
Because of the fact that it is in immediate danger of
being carried away by the cutting back of the river,
we selected this mound for our excavations. A series
of three rooms on the west side of the mound and
adjacent to the river bank had already been
excavated by two ladies from Pennsylvania during
the summer of 1929. We were unable to learn their
names or whether or not their results have been
published. The walls are still exposed as they were
left. Rooms (a) and (b) are approximately 10 feet
square. Room (c) is approximately 7 by 10 feet.
The north wall of room (c) is still in place; the
north wall of (b) is partially gone and all of the
north wall of (a) has fallen into the river. The walls
of the rooms still standing are between 36 and 40

inches high and 10 inches thick, and made of
brownish sandstone. The most interesting thing
about these rooms is that they are built over an older
and more massive ruin. Cutting diagonally across
and running underneath room (c) about three feet
high, 12 inches thick and of the same material as
the upper walls is a wall but of far superior
workmanship. See wall x, y, z, in Figure 9.
Some 16 feet east of room (c) is room (d) which
was excavated by our party. This room is 15 feet in
diameter and semi-circular. The north part of the
wall has fallen into the river. A segment is gone out
of the part of the wall still standing. (The missing
segment is indicated by a dotted line on Figure 9).
The floor level in (d) was found at a depth of about
30 inches. Something like a half bushel of potsherds
were found on or near the floor level. Among them
there seem to be fragments of three whole pots
which probably can be restored. The sherds for the

30

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

most part are black on white and charred corrugated
ware with an occasional black on red. The floor
was made of small flat rocks covered with adobe.
The major part of our excavations consisted in
digging a longitudinal trench along the crest of the
mound beginning at the river bank and running 52
feet south, and a traverse trench 28 feet long cutting
the longitudinal trench about the center. For
convenience will hereafter refer to k o, l o, m o and
n o, on Figure 9 respectively as north trench, east
trench, south trench, and west trench.

Four boxes of potsherds and artifacts were taken
from the trenches. The material is now in our
workshop awaiting study regarding stratification.
Potsherds were plentiful and of the following kinds;
black on white, incised, and crude grey, coiled
cooking ware, fire blackened. It seems that the
amount of black on white becomes more scarce
towards the bottom.
Artifacts

Aside from potsherds the north trench contained
an
excellent stone hammer, found just below the
Contrary to our expectations, we encountered
but few walls. Three inches below the surface in surface; numerous broken bones of buffalo, deer,
the east trench a wall was found running in a north antelope, turkey and small rodents; three manos
and south direction. On tracing the wall out to the were found at depths of 6, 8, and 40 inches, four
south it was found to end abruptly six feet from the arrow points were found at 12, 20, and 40 inches,
East Trench. On following it to the north it veered a scattering of charcoal and bits of wood, several
northeastwardly to the bank. Four feet from the bank ash beds and a thin ash stratum, a bone needle was
another wall branched off to the east for 14 feet, found at 42 inches; and a turquoise pendant was
and then it turned southeast for 16 feet where it found at a depth of 40 inches. The pendant is almost
ended. The purpose of both these walls is not easy one half inch square and has a hole in one corner.
to explain as they do not seem to be connected with The East trench yielded at a depth of two inches a
a house in any way (see walls f g and f h in Figure well-shaped polished celt, five and one-fourth
9). Trench k m (north and south trenches combined) inches long and two inches wide at the butt end;
was dug through an old dump heap to undisturbed three arrowheads, at depths of 7, 16, and 48 inches.
soil. The original ground level is three and one half A bone awl was found at 40 inches, a shell ornament
feet below the present surface on the north end of at 24 inches, several ash beds, and potsherds were
the trench at the river bank and seven feet below distributed as in the north trench.
the present surface on the south end of
the trench. This indicates that the
original ground level sloped rather
sharply from where the river bank is at
the present toward the south. Judging
from the position of what is left of the
ruins and from the thickness of the dump
heap to the south, it is highly probable
that the main body of the ruins has been
carried away by the river, and that only
the most southern walls remain. Wall f
h was built a long time after the place
was first inhabited, as is evidenced by
the fact that its base at the south end
rests on three and one half feet of dump
heap. Since the wall was built another
three and one half feet of dump heap
Figure 9
was accumulated.
TECOLOTE RUIN, EXCAVATIONS IN MOUND A.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
The South trench, aside from potsherds,
contained a metate at a depth of 16 inches, a mano
at 12 inches, two broken pots at 16 inches, one
black on white and the other a plain, blackened,
cooking bowl. A stone ax was found at 24 inches, a
bone needle at 32 inches, a bone awl at 42 inches,
a fragment of human skull at 40 inches, burnt corn
cobs at 50 inches, an arrowhead at 52 inches, a
burial at 64 inches, a flint knife at 72 inches, and
scattered broken bones and ash deposits. The burial
was in a small oval vault
of flat rocks. The
skeleton
was
in
embryonic position with
the head towards the
southeast. The bones had
deteriorated so badly
that only a few fragments
of skull and four teeth
could be taken out.

31

in diameter and eight inches deep. It was lying on
its side and had been crushed by the large flat stone
covering the 6keleton. Both pots contained bones
of small animals.
Terrace Floor

A peculiar thing about mound A was a layer of
small flat stones about 16 inches below the surface.
The stones were one and a half to two inches thick,
two to twelve inches in
diameter and placed as
one would pave a floor.
The
layer
was
encountered in all the
trenches and could be
traced for fifty or sixty
feet
along
the
perpendicular river
bank. As the layer
occurred outside the
The west trench was
rooms no one was able
the most interesting of all
to advance a plausible
from the standpoint of
theory as to its purpose.
artifacts. Aside from an
It may have been that the
abundance of potsherds,
yard around the pueblo
charcoal, ashes, and
was paved at one time.
Figure
10
animal bones, it
Another feature worth
TECOLOTE
RUIN,
SEGMENT
OF
WALL
contained an arrowhead
noting was that hard
at a depth of 12 inches,
chunks of adobe were
a mano at 24 inches and four bone awls at 24, 26, found here and there in the trenches.
28, and 34 inches. Burnt corn cobs were found at
A great deal more work will have to be done on
24 inches, an arrow shaft polishing stone at 16
the Tecolote ruins before any conclusions can be
inches, a pot handle at 18 inches, a shell pendant at
drawn.
32 inches, and a shell necklace at 40 inches.
Burial
A perfect pre-Pueblo burial was found at 40
inches. The skeleton was lying in embryonic
position on its left side with its head toward the
south and facing west. It was in fair condition but
the skull cracked badly when exposed to the air.
With the skeleton were two mortuary pots. One was
black on white, about 8 inches in diameter and 4
inches deep, with a conventionalized terrapin
design in the bottom, and in perfect condition. The
other was a corrugated cooking pot about five inches

The Tierra Blanca Ruin
On August 14 our party left Tecolote and went
to Hereford, Texas, where we spent four days
excavating. The ruins are located on a place owned
by Mr. Tom Ivy, eight miles east of Hereford on
Tierra Blanca Creek. These ruins were first
reported February 23, 1925 by Mr. Jobe H. Green,
amateur archeologist of Hereford. Mr. Green sent
Dr. H. P. Mera, at present, staff archeologist of the
Laboratory of Anthropology at Santa Fe, a
description of the ruins together with specimens of
potsherds of the true glazed type. Dr. Mera has since

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

insisted that Texas Technological College make a
more intensive investigation of the Tierra Blanca
Ruins. In view of the fact that decorated pottery of
true Pueblo type was found in typical slab-stone
ruins, it seemed probable that these ruins might
prove to be the “key” that we have been searching
for to show the real relationship of the Panhandle
culture to the Pueblo culture. Accordingly we made
out plans to work a few days at Hereford. The
Tierra Blanca is a beautiful stream fed by springs.

Artifacts
The first layer of six inches contained four
potsherds, a few flint flakes, several fragments of
mussel shells, a few flakes of obsidian, and a
considerable quantity of broken buffalo bones. Of
the potsherds, three were glazed polychrome and
one was dark grey, plain cooking ware, fireblackened.

The second layer contained sixteen sherds; one
perfect arrow point, one and one fourth inches long;
The ruins are located on a point of the south three scrapers; several flint flakes; two pieces of
bank—on the general plains level—commanding a charcoal; and broken animal bones. Of the potsherds,
view for miles up and down the valley. At this place one was red ware, one white, and fourteen
the creek channel meanders close to the south bank polychrome.
within a hundred yards of the ruins. A strong spring
The third layer reached to the old floor level. It
in the south bank of the creek channel insured fresh
contained nine potsherds, some mussel shells, a flake
water for the ancient inhabitants of the ruins. There
of obsidian, several flint flakes, one reamer, and a small
are about a dozen of the ruins, more or less circular
quantity of broken bones. Of the nine potsherds, six
in shape, varying from six to thirty feet in diameter,
were red and polychrome of the Pueblo type and three
and scattered over about four acres of ground. The
were plain, crude grey of the Canadian type.
buildings were originally laid out in an irregular
fashion with apparently no thought whatever of
Among the potsherds of the Pueblo type mentioned
defense, aside from the fact that they commanded a above, Glazes II, IV, and V have been identified.
splendid view. In appearance and construction,
these ruins are of the true Panhandle type. They are
Conclusion
not nearly so imposing as those on the Tarbox or
Evidence is rather too scant as yet to hazard a
Antelope Creeks, but very similar to hundreds of
conclusion in respect to the finding of Pueblo pottery
ruins to be found in the Canadian valley.
in ruins of typical Canadian architecture. The present
Due to the hardness of the ground we concentrated indications however do not establish any relationship
our work on one ruin, the most promising of the group. between the slab-stone culture of the Panhandle and
It was approximately 23 feet in diameter north and the Pueblo Culture of New Mexico. It is our opinion
south, and 27 feet east and west. The floor level was that Pueblo Indians much later made temporary camps
from 16 to 18 inches below the surface, most of which at these old slab-stone ruins on the Tierra Blanca for
we almost completely uncovered. For convenience we the purpose of hunting buffalo. Conditions were ideal
divided the room into six sections like a round pie cut there for such a camp. It is probable that their selection
in six parts. Section I was toward the southwest, section of this site was due to its fine water supply, the
II towards the south, and so on around. We took the proximity to buffalo hunting grounds and the fact that
soil out in 6 inch layers.
these houses of an earlier people afforded them some
shelter. If this be correct, we are as far from explaining
the Canadian and Pueblo relationship as we were
before.

