30

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

CERAMIC RELATIONSHIPS OF THE PRE-CADDO POTTERY FROM
THE CRENSHAW SITE
BY S. D. DICKINSON
unpublished manuscript read by the writer several
years ago, that certain pieces of pottery figured by
Harrington in “Certain Caddo Sites” were not
Caddoan in type. This belief was later partially
substantiated when Fowke and Setzler established
the existence of a Southeastern Hopewell culture
in Louisiana. In discussing the possible extent of
the Hopewell pottery complex throughout the
Lower Mississippi Valley, Setzler stated that two
From 1894 to 1915 Clarence B. Moore of the
vessels found by Harrington at Washington and
Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences
Ozan, Hempstead County, Arkansas, were similar
excavated extensively throughout the Lower
in design to some from the Marksville, Louisiana
Mississippi Valley. The enormous amount of
site.3
material exhumed by him aided decidedly in
presenting a more detailed picture of the similarities
Until 1934 no positive stratigraphic evidence of
and contrasts among the archaeological remains in the residence of any prehistoric group, other than
the South. Moore’s collection of Arkansas those whose descendants were living in the region
antiquities was especially noteworthy, as he had at the coming of the Spaniards, had been obtained
excavated sites and mounds in the valley of every in southern Arkansas, although Harrington’s
navigable stream in the state. Moore demonstrated discoveries in the Ozark bluff-shelters in the
that Arkansas as well as other neighboring states northern part of the state suggested occupancy by
could be further subdivided into smaller peoples of two cultures in that region. In that year
archaeological zones based on the indigenous Mr. Harry J. Lemley first obtained evidence of a
cultural achievements of each river valley. pre-Caddo culture in Red River Valley, and the
Unfortunately during the limited period in which writer discovered remains, which seemed somewhat
Moore had to obtain a representative collection related, beneath material belonging to a later culture
from each river valley, time would not permit him in southeastern Arkansas.
to make stratigraphic tests.
The pottery exhumed by Mr. Lemley from the
The third step in the scientific development of pre-Caddo graves in mounds “B” and “D” on the
Arkansas prehistory was made by M. R. Harrington, Crenshaw Plantation ranges from crudely made
who in “Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas ”2, domestic vessels to beautifully finished specimens
attempted to reconstruct the daily life of the Caddo worthy of being considered as art objects. Some
by interpreting the archaeological remains of the vessels are slipped and polished while others are
Ouachita and Red River valleys by consistent not. Some are asymmetrical, others well balanced.
references to the ethnological data of the region. In several instances decorative motifs have
With the ethnological attitude foremost in his mind, apparently been applied without much forethought.
Harrington classified all of the archeological On the other hand, some bowls and pots have
material, excavated by him in southwestern carefully executed designs, demonstrating that the
ancient pre-Caddo artisans had developed an
Arkansas as Caddoan.
understanding of harmony, rhythm, balance,
The late Joseph B. Thoburn, director of the
emphasis, and proportion. The “Agee Points,”
Oklahoma Historical Society Museum, stated in an
referred to in Mr. Lemley’s paper, in turn, indicate
Systematic study of Arkansas archaeology really
began with the publishing of William Holmes’ paper.
Ancient Pottery of the Mississippi Valley1, in which
the author divided that valley into three ceramic
areas. These districts, Upper, Lower, and Middle
Mississippi areas, could roughly be correlated with
the known distribution of Indian stacks at the dawn
of the historic period.

Ceramic Relationships of the Pre-Caddo Pottery

31

a high degree of craftsmanship. Culturally, these bottom of a cooking vessel having rudimentary feet
people were on a plane equal to that of the Caddo. was also found here.
There are also evidences of occupancy by the
pre-Caddo culture along the tributaries of the
Ouachita River in Clark County. In large midden in
that region a number of typical sherds of this
complex were found. Caddo Indians at a later period
had constructed an earthen lodge on the same refuse
heap, leaving broken pieces of their pottery within
the structure above the older remains. In another
campsite nearby the author discovered a square
bottomed pot of poor ware beneath Caddo sherds
A ceramic group, having such definite types as
in the same midden.
those of the early Crenshaw pottery, would certainly
have not been confined to a single site. One would
In mounds and campsites along the Bayou
naturally expect to find similar vessels in aboriginal Macon and its tributaries in Chicot and Desha
sites in other parts of the Red River Valley. Although counties in southeastern Arkansas two distinct
the Red River district of Arkansas has been cultures were found by the writer. The later culture
extensively excavated, no site was intensively included bundle burials, wattle and daub huts such
studied until Mr. Lemley excavated the mounds on as those described by Du Pratz, elbow pipes, and
the Crenshaw Plantation.
shell tempered pottery similar to that type which
Ford termed Natchez ware.7 Nothing in these
In burial Number 4 at the Haley Place in Miller
graves indicated intercourse with Europeans.
County, Arkansas, Clarence B. Moore found a
Beneath the remains of this culture countless sherds
vessel which has a general resemblance to some of
and a few whole vessels of an entirely different type
the specimens from the pre-Caddo graves on the
of pottery were found. Possibly more than one
Crenshaw Plantation. Moore described this
ceramic complex is represented.
specimen as follows:
Similarity in vessel forms, temper, and paste of
“This pot of rather common ware, having two
this earlier ware and the pre-Caddo is apparent. In
holes for suspension, has a coarse, incised and
each group pots and bow are the chief forms. Many
punctate decoration showing traces of red pigment
of the former type have square, flat bottoms with
of which, however, little remains.”4
wide, circular mouths. The quadrilateral pot of the
The grave from which this specimen was taken pre-Caddo also occurs here. Bowls normally have
varied somewhat from others in the same mound. round, convex bottoms. A few sherds from the
For instance, “strangely enough, no mortuary Bayou Macon appear to be portions of ladles
deposits lay on the chest or near the arms and hand somewhat similar to such vessels from the
of this burial.”5 Moore also stated that he was not Crenshaw Place. In several instances sherds of
able to fully determine where the pit, which bowls having triangular lugs projecting from the
contained this burial, began in the mound.6
rim were found. In the refuse heaps of the earlier
culture in southeastern Arkansas several specimens
The pre-Caddo pottery complex extends beyond
of the early Bayou Macon ware have a red slip
the Red River Valley in Arkansas, but its confines
which reminds one of the painted vessel of precannot at present be determined. On a campsite near
Caddo pottery from the Crenshaw site.
Bayou Dorcheate in Columbia County sherds of
The greatest difference to be found is in the
thick, heavy ware, similar to specimens found in
”
the village debris of Mound “D at the Crenshaw decoration of the pre-Caddo and the older pottery
Place, have been picked up by the writer. The square from the Bayou Macon sites. On a minor portion
This ceramic group, as Mr. Lemley has clearly
proved, can be definitely separated from the later
Caddo complex. A few culture traits, such as incised
designs, the scroll motif, and occasional
punctations, appear on Caddo domestic vessels
where they would be most expected. This is natural,
for succeeding potters would certainly have either
retained or borrowed a few cultural elements from
their predecessors.

32

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

of the vessels from the latter region is decorate with
polished bands and scrolls against a background of
punctations, which is so typical of the early

Crenshaw pottery. Here, as in pre-Caddo ware, the
principal decorative motifs occur in a horizontal
zone on the vessel body. This zone is also separated
from the vessel rim by one or more
incised, parallel lines. An incised line
sometimes occurs in the rim proper.
The majority of the sherds from the
early sites in the Bayou Macon
country, however, are cord marked.
The rims of these vessels are often
thicker than the walls, and sometimes
serrated.
The antiquity of the first culture at
the Crenshaw Place is further
suggested by its relationships to other
ancient pottery complexes southward
and eastward. According to Ford’s
researches in Louisiana and
Mississippi, the Southeastern
Hopewell culture is the earliest
pottery complex so far known in that
region.8 Incidentally, the type site of
this culture is in the Red River Valley.
The Marksville complex. Ford says,
was replaced in southern Louisiana by
the Coles Creek ceramic group, and
by the Deasonville in the northern part
of that state. 9 Both of the latter
complexes had some criteria in
common with Marksville ware. They
in turn gave way to Caddo, Tunica,
Natchez, and Choctaw pottery which
was still being produced in 1700.10

PLATE 9
1. Cooking pot of heavy ware, No. V-1295; from
Mound “D”.
2. Cooking pot of heavy ware. No. V-1442; from
Mound “D”.
3. Cooking pot, No. V-1286; from Mound “D”.
4. Deep bowl, No. 1441; from Mound “D”.
5. Vessel No. V-1357; from Pit 2, Mound “B”.
6. Cooking pot. No. V-1440; from Mound “D”.
7. Platter-like bowl, No. V-1446; from Mound “D”.
8. Bowl No. V-1449, showing inside decoration; from
Mound “D”. (See Plate 10, 2 for view of exterior).

The pre-Caddo pottery found by
Mr. Lemley has certain similarities to
the Coles Creek complex. Some
vessel forms are similar. Coles Creek
bowls have convex bottoms, and the
pots have flat bottoms which are
sometimes square. The latter vessels
may also have rudimentary feet just
as pre-Caddo specimens do. Instead
of handles Coles Creek bowls
sometimes have lugs or ears. The
rectangular lugs of a bowl. Vessel V1464, from the Crenshaw site may be

Ceramic Relationships of the Pre-Caddo Pottery
comparable. Ford illustrates a triangular rim lug
from a Coles Creek vessel which is almost identical
with two from southeastern Arkansas. So far as
the writer can discover, no reference has been made
to platters (such as those from the Crenshaw site)
in discussions of Coles Creek pottery. Both Coles
Creek and pre-Caddo vessels are tan, brown, black,
and dark gray in color, and are tempered with grit.
Perforations, and an incised line in the rim of bowls
and pots are also typical of the Coles Creek
complex. Incised lines below a vessel rim is another
feature common to both ceramic groups. Several
pots from the Crenshaw site have incised
“overhanging” lines which Ford stated is typical of
Coles Creek ware. “Overhanging lines,” as that
writer explained, “were incised with a flat-pointed
instrument at such an angle to the vessel wall that
the top of the line is deeply incised while the bottom
rises to the surface of the wall.”11
In discussing the range of the Coles Creek
complex, Ford stated that a minor portion of the
decorations of this ware is similar to designs on
vessels found by Clarence B. Moore along the
northwest coast of Florida. There is not only in
decoration, but also in vessel forms, a decided
similarity between the pre-Caddo pottery and some
of the specimens from western Florida.
Quadrilateral pots, inverted conical vessels having
square bottoms and sometimes rudimentary feet,
and ovoid bowls with circular apertures are as
common in Moore’s collections from the western
coast of Florida as they are in the Lemley collection
of pre-Caddo ware. The conical jar with a narrow
mouth (V-1443) and the lobed vessel (V-1357) from
the Crenshaw site also have their counterparts in
Florida. The elongate, oval bowl (PI. 1, Fig. 1)
which Moore found in Florida is comparable to
vessel V-1460. Water bottles are conspicuously
absent in both regions. The triangular ladle (V-1290)
in the pre-Caddo collection may be a highly
conventionalized shell form.
Flat and rounded rims are typical of each ceramic
group. The former type, in Florida as well as in
Louisiana and Arkansas, frequently has the typical
incised line in the edge of the rim. Carelessness in
only partially obliterating on the interior the coil of

33

clay forming a vessel rim is apparent in both preCaddo and northwestern Florida vessels.
Effigy forms and vessels profusely perforated
for ceremonial purposes from the northwestern
coast of Florida have no exact counter parts in preCaddo pottery. It is worthy of note, however, that
these forms occur principally in the above
mentioned area, and are not found in the central
coastal region of the peninsular state.12 This might
indicate a purely local specialization of a widespread
culture. If, as Mr. Lemley suggests, the intentional
scarification of pre-Caddo vessels is a type of
ceremonial “killing,” we have a kindred practice
among people with the same animistic belief, but a
more refined symbolism. In a mound on Saline
Point, Louisiana, Moore found a pot, somewhat
resembling several from the Crenshaw site, whose
bottom had been perforated prior to firing.13
Similarity in the decoration of West Floridan and
pre-Caddoan ware is noteworthy. The execution
of the patterns is surprisingly similar. In both regions
the designs have been incised. Raised, vertical bands
at the corners of quadrilateral vessels are found in
each complex. Some four-sided pots of the preCaddo culture have a different design on each wall.
The same feature has been noted in Florida.14 Only
two sides of a quadrilateral vessel (V-1145) from
the Crenshaw site have incised designs. Moore
observed the same feature on Vessel No. 35 from
the larger mound near Burnt Mill Creek,
Washington County, Florida.15 The chief incised
decoration of pots and bowls from the western coast
of Florida occurs within a horizontal band, outlined
by lines. We have already referred to this same
decorative feature of the pre-Caddo ware. Two
perforations beneath the rim are also common in
Florida pottery.
The scroll and undulating band with a
background of punctations, or diagonally incised
lines, which is so typical of pottery from the
Crenshaw site, was also a favorite decorative
combination of pottery along the western coast of
Florida. Another distinctive feature pointing toward
some relationship between pre-Caddo and western
Florida pottery is the line which frequently bisects
longitudinally the scroll and undulating motifs. This

34

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

line sometimes terminates in a triangular or circular
punctation. The latter type of punctation is often
placed more or less equidistantly along the median
line of a motif. Straight and curved lines terminating
in punctations are not only found on pre-Caddo

and western Florida wares, but also on pottery from
Marksville, Louisiana, and the West Indies. Mr. A.
T. Jackson of the University of Texas has informed
the writer that he has seen straight lines ending in
dots in the petroglyphs of Texas.
Moore found this motif on bird
effigy vessels from the
northwestern Florida coast so often
that he concluded that it was a bird
symbol. He says, “Symbols of this
class are found on practically all
bird-vessels, and consist of straight
or curved lines with circular or
triangular enlargement at one or
both ends. These bird symbols are
sometimes found on vessels
apparently having no connection
with bird forms, though they may
indicate some connection with the
bird.16 The occurrence of a bird
symbol when considered with other
features of pottery of the west
coast of Florida and the pre-Caddo
ware suggests some relationship to
the Marksville complex.

Certain general culture traits,
such as bowl and pot forms,
polished scroll and undulating band
motifs against a roughened
background, paste, and temper,
which are common to both
Marksville and pre-Caddo
complexes, would lead one to
PLATE 10
believe that there was at least an
1. Flattened globular bowl, No. V-1457; from Mound “D”.
indirect relationship between them.
2. Bowl No. V-1449, showing exterior decoration; from
Flat and inverted rims, square
Mound “D”. (For interior see Plate 9, 8).
bottoms, and the lobed vessel from
3. Conical bowl No. V-1456, showing intentional scarification
the Crenshaw site also point
on exterior; from cemetery southwest of Mound “D”.
4. Small quadrilateral vessel, No. V-1176; from near Mound “D”. toward this. On the other hand
there are important differences;
5. Small bowl, No. V-1464; from Mound “D”.
Marksville vessel rims do not have
6. Small bowl, No. V-1461; from Mound “D”.
incised encircling lines in the flat
7. Triangular ladle, No. V-1290; from Burial 3, Mound “D”.
edge of the rim; normally, the rim
8. Ladle-like bowl, No. V-1460, from Mound “D”.
panel of pre-Caddo pots and bowls
9. Ladle No. V-1462, showing scarification at end; from
had little decoration; no realistic
cemetery southwest of Mound “D”.
representations of birds occur on

Ceramic Relationships of the Pre-Caddo Pottery

35

pre-Caddo specimens, and they also lack roulette specimens. Sherds of typical Marksville ware were
work.
discovered associated with cord-marked pieces in
southeastern Arkansas.
The Marksville complex, however, had
affiliations in Arkansas. As Setzler pointed out,
Present data would suggest the following
Moore found a vessel at the Foster Place in hypothesis concerning the relationships of preLafayette County, Arkansas, which showed definite Caddo pottery. Possibly, at consecutive periods
Southeastern Hopewell traits.17 There is in the Marksville and Coles Creek ceramic complexes
Lemley collection a small four-lobed pot from the extended throughout the Lower Mississippi Valley.
Battle Place on Red River which reminds one of Certain aboriginal towns in the delta were foci from
Marksville ware. This specimen (V-1125) has a which radiated cultural stimuli. Changes in the
design composed of polished straight and ceramics of those cultural centers were slowly
curvilinear bands enclosed by trailed lines with a passed on to villages in the hinterland by means of
background that has been roughened by some fine culture creep. Consequently, pottery of the preinstrument. Mention has already been made of the Caddo groups in Arkansas changed more gradually
two vessels found by Harrington at Washington and and was less distinctive than that of type sites in
Ozan, and their similarity to Louisiana Hopewell the delta. More intensive work in Arkansas and in
adjoining states must be done before
this supposition can either be accepted
or rejected.
The discovery of the pre-Caddo
culture at the Crenshaw Place is the
most important step so far made in
the study of Arkansas archaeology. It
affords the student of Arkansas
aboriginal antiquities material for the
study of various aspects of a purely
prehistoric culture antedating the
Caddo. A tentative chronology, which
may be elaborated later, can now be
established. A detailed study of
pottery, stone work, architecture and
burial customs may later establish a
definite connection between the
aborigines of Flordia, Louisiana, and
the pre-Caddo. As the pre-Caddo
pottery complex had ramifications
eastward in Arkansas one would
naturally expect it to also extend
westward into Texas, and possibly
into Oklahoma.

PLATE 11.
Finely chipped implements of the pre-Caddo culture.

State A. & M. College,
Magnolia, Ark.
April 1, 1936.

36

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

1. Holmes, W., Ancient Pottery of the Mississippi Valley,
Ann. Rep. Bur. Amer. Ethnol., pp. 367-436, 1882-’83.
2. Harrington, M. R., Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas.
Indian Notes and Monog. Mus. Amer. Indian, Heye
Foundation, New York, 1920.
3. Setzler, F. M., Pottery of the Hopewell Type From
Louisiana, Proceedings. U. W. Nat. Mus. pp. 18, 20, 1933.
4. Moore, C. B., Aboriginal Sites on Red River. Journ. Acad.
Nat. Sci. Phila., vol. 14, p. 557, 1912.
5. Ibid., p. 535.

11. Ford, J. A., “Ceramic Decoration Sequence at an Old
Indian Village Sit Near Sicily Island, Louisiana,”
Anthropological Study No. 1, Louisiana Geological Survey,
p. 14, 1935.
12. Moore, C. B., “Certain Aboriginal Mounds of the Central
Florida West Coast,” Journ. Acad. Nat. Sciences, Phila.,
Second Series, vol. XII, Part ; p. 364. 1903.
13. Moore, C. B., “Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River,”
Journ. Acad. Nat. Sciences, Phila., Second Series, vol. XIV,
Part 4, p. 498, 1912.

6. Ibid., p. 535.

14. Moore, C. B., “Certain Aboriginal Remains,” From Acad.
Nat. Sciences, Phila. Sec. Series, vol. XII of the NW. Florida
Coast, Journ. Part 2, p. 143, 1902.

7. Ford, J. A., “Outline of Louisiana and Mississippi Pottery
Horizons Louisiana Conservation Review, pp. 33-39, April,
1935.

15. Ibid.

8. Ford, J. A., “Outline of Louisiana and Mississippi Pottery
Horizons,” Louisiana Conservation Review, p. 33, April,
1935.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.

16. Moore, C. B., “Certain Aboriginal Remains of the
Northwest Florida Coast,” Journ. Acad. Nat. Sciences, Phila.
Second Series, vol. XII, Part 2, p. 238, 239, 1902.
17. Moore, C. B., “Certain Aboriginal Rem.” Setzler, F. M..
“Pottery of the Hopewell Type from Louisiana,” Proceedings
U. S. Nat. Museum, vol. 82, Art. 22, pp. 19, 1933.

