26

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

ORNAMENTATION ON THE POTTERY
OF THE TEXAS COASTAL TRIBES
TEXT AND ILLUSTRATIONS BY WENDALL H. POTTER
Along the Texas coast from Baffin Bay
northward to the Matagorda Peninsula, including
the islands of Padre, Mustang, San Jose (St. Joseph),
and Matagorda, potsherds are found on most of the
Indian campsites. These sherds differ from those
found North and East of Matagorda which are easily
recognizable as of Caddoan origin. They differ also
from the sherds found South and West of Baffin Bay
and along the Rio Grande, the territory occupied
by tribes of a stock known to have been
Coahuiltecan.
In the territory covered by this article resided
many tribes which have been classed as
Karankawan, the southern section occupied by
tribes mentioned in Fray Garcia’s “Manual” as
speaking the Coahuiltecan tongue, and many tribes
or groups of individuals as yet not classified.
However, as the potsherds found are all evidently
of one culture, and as they answer in most features
to the pottery described by Gatschet as having been
seen in process of manufacture by the Karankawa
Indians, and, as they differ entirely from the
potsherds found in the heart of Coahuiltecan territory
along the Rio Grande, these may safely be attributed
to the Karankawas or to such of the Coahuiltecan
tribes as lived in close proximity to the Karankawas
and had adopted their methods and style in pottery
making. These sherds may be roughly divided into
three classes, and each of these into many
subdivisions, but, as it is with the third of these
only of which this article treats, the first two will
be passed over with but brief mention.
Class I
Cooking ware of heavy type, seven to nine
millimeters in wall thickness, smoothly finished on
outside, roughly within, and frequently showing
impressions of the fingers of the makers. Sherds of
this type all show direct contact with hot coal and
are sometimes thickly encrusted with soot. Large

flakes of shell appeared plentifully in the structure
of these sherds.
Class II
Cooking ware of lighter type, four to six
millimeters in wall thickness, usually smoothly
finished both inside and outside, but some
specimens showing small grooves and ridges on
the surface, probably made to reduce the
slipperiness of the vessel and thereby lessen the
danger of breakage. These ridges or grooves were
evidently made with a tool of shell, notched along
one edge, specimens of which have been found on
the campsites. But a small percentage of the sherds
in this class show the tempering flakes of shell which
are very prominent in those of Class I, and the flakes,
when present, are smaller. Vessels of this class
show contact with smoke and soot, but it is doubtful
if they were placed in direct contact with the coals.
Class III
A ware made to contain water and other liquids,
wall thickness varying between two and four
millimeters in thickness, with some pieces found
measuring as little as one and one-half millimeters.
It is in this class that practically all the decorated
sherds as yet found appear, and in this class only
that the practice of waterproofing with crude asphalt
obtained. Thousands of sherds show smooth coating
of asphalt, sometimes on the outside of the vessel,
sometimes on both sides, but usually inside.
Gatschet mentions the use of asphalt paint by the
Karankawas, made by melting the crude product
with animal oil. He also mentions a red paint as
being used by them, but if such was used it was not
lasting as no sherd shows red decorative features.
Pots waterproofed with asphalt on the inside were
heated, the coating material melted in the vessel
which was then turned and twisted until it was
evenly distributed. Sherds in this class do not show
any tempering shell.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
DRAWINGS

27

No. 1. A border made by two incised lines
running around the pot and parallel with the edge,
the space between the lines divided into triangles.
No. 2. A border made by a series of groups of four
short incised lines, each group touching the other
and making four continuous lines parallel with the
edge, a series of saltires or crosses incised below.
No. 3. A border made by a single incised line
running around the vessel, the edge of the bowl
painted black, the space between the incised and
painted lines occupied by a roughly-made dancette
line. No. 4. A border composed of a single incised
line. No. 5. Ornamental edge made by pressing a

small bone or twig into the rim while the material
was still soft. No. 6. Ornamental edge made by
cutting notches of triangular shape into the edge. In
some specimens these notches were made while
the material was still soft, in others the notches were
made after the pots were baked. Two holes drilled
near the edge were evidently for the purpose of
suspension. No. 7. Ornamental edge made by
pressing bone or twig into the rim at somewhat
irregular intervals. No. 8. Ornamental edge made
as was No. 6, the notches made after the pot had
been baked. In addition to the notches, the edge of
the vessel had been thinned by abrasion, the
spaces between the notches made somewhat
pyramidal. No. 9. An embattled edge made by
removing rectangular pieces at intervals from the

Plate 7.
TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY

Plate 8.
TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY.

Plate 7

28

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

edge. No. 10. Ornamental edge made while the
vessel was still soft, the implement made in cutting
it being pressed straight downward, then twisted
upward to remove the clay from the notch. Many
of these notched edge sherds show a narrow border
of asphalt paint around the outside of the rim, this
border never being as deep as the accompanying
notches on the outside of the vessel, but sometimes
extending down inside the vessel for a half inch or
more.

Plate 8
No. 11. Neck of a water bottle with bordering
edge of asphalt paint and downward stripes of the
same material, between each pair of painted stripes
a parallel line of tiny “v” shaped incisions picked
out with a fine pointed tool. No. 12. Similar to
No. 11, but with tiny and very uniform depressions,
evidently made with a roulette wheel, taking the
place of the “v” markings. No. 13. Similar to No.
11, but decorated with asphalt paint only, the stripes
being closer together. No. 14. Similar to No. 11
and No. 12, but with a row of short incised
horizontal lines between the painted stripes. No.
15. A small bowl ploughed up in almost perfect
condition from the soil of Arrowhead Island in the
Laguna Madre. Sherds found on most campsites
show this form of decoration to have been
exceedingly common.
Plate 9
No. 16. Water container reconstructed from
sherds found on the Blink Bonnie campsite, Aransas
County, North of Rockport. The sherds from this
specimen were found at different times and are now
scattered. One is in the National Museum, another
in the Museum of the University of Pennsylvania,
etc. Sherds showing the necks of the vessels ringed
with asphalt paint, spotted with the same material
below, are not very common, but have been found
on campsites in Aransas, San Patricio, and Nueces
Counties. No. 17. Vase from the northern end of
the Live Oak Peninsula, Aransas County. Only
portions of this specimen were found. It is not
certain that two handles were attached to this pot,
as portions of only one were found with it. A very
narrow border of black paint edges the opening.
Although Gatschet mentions that Karankawan
pottery was always made without handles, several
handles have been found. Another unusual feature
worthy of note was the finding on Arrowhead Island
of part of the neck of a pot which had within it a
shoulder on which a lid could rest. This specimen
showed traces of asphalt paint decoration.

Plate 9.
TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY.

