Kitchen Middens of Upper Red River Drainage

37

KITCHEN MIDDENS OF THE UPPER RED RIVER DRAINAGE
BY ADOLPH HENRY WITTE
Innumerable traces of stone age men are to be
found in this section of the upper Red river drainage.
Commonly, the evidence is not plentiful and consists
only of stone artifacts. Usually, there is little or no
thickness to the soil stratum that contains the manmade debris. The artifacts found are of local and
imported materials, and certain technical criteria
serve to identify some as of Folsom, and others as
of Clear Fork culture types. (Note 1). Other
paleolithic types have not been classified, and the
early human horizons from which they came, are
up to the present date, unrecognized. Several
stratified sites, somewhat deeply buried, have been
found. The overburden of sterile soil is quite thick
and the expense of properly excavating the areas
will be large. It is the sincere hope of the writer
that these deep sites will be carefully investigated
in the near future by qualified individuals.
Kitchen Middens
During 1935 several similar kitchen midden sites
were discovered. Measurements indicated a
thickness of 48” or more in certain spots, and each
midden was found to extend over a number of acres.
Numerous flint rejects, bones, potsherds, perfect
and broken tools, etc., were visible in the eroded
slopes. Apparently each deposit contains thousands
of bones and artifacts.

of similar cultural traits. Almost identical bone tools,
chipped and polished artifacts, potsherds, etc., were
found in each midden.
The sites described are situated near the largest
streams within this area where a supply of water
was always available. In addition, a large permanent
spring is closely adjacent to the Ht. site. No evidence
was found during the excavations that would
indicate that the areas were ever submerged during
the period of occupancy.
Our excavations showed that the campelevations were capped by a sandy soil stratum,
human and aeolian in origin. The second stratum
which is barren of bones or human evidences, is a
compact red clay which probably has lain
undisturbed since originally deposited during
Permian ages. The author is not competent to
classify the upper or human stratum as to geological
age. The following conclusions are offered,
however. During the geological history of these old
river valleys, a period of time was reached in which
erosion ceased on the clay elevations, and a period
of upbuilding was begun by wind action. It appears
that the Indians arrived and occupied the sites soon
after this original upbuilding process started,
because many bones and artifacts are found in situ,
in close proximity to the second, or sterile clay
stratum.

This writer was strongly impressed by the visible
The test pits uncovered large numbers of bones,
evidence. Data of outstanding importance to the
the majority of which were broken. In certain small
Southwestern area were likely to be found by
areas, many showed the effects of fire.
excavating these middens.
Concentrations of bones and camp rubbish usually
Excavations were completed in the late fall, and occurred where the soil deposit was the thickest in
a considerable amount of archeological data and depth. All of the fire pits were found in the middle
materials were obtained. A summary of the results and bottom levels and these often were filled with
that were disclosed by the excavations follow.
deposits of ashes, and generally contained
concentrations of bones. These bones from the
ashbeds were usually in much better condition than
Similar Sites
those uncovered in ordinary soil. A number of fish
Judging by the artifacts found, the middens
scales came from one ash-pit. The most
tested by the excavations, were occupied by people
disappointing results came from the top 18” level.

38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

In this level, the soil is invariably damp after rains
and many of the bones were in an advanced stage
of decomposition. Rodents, by their burrowing
proclivities have destroyed and mixed the
stratigraphic evidence in certain areas. Most of the
bones that were found were in the middle and
bottom levels.

surfaces of each of the deposits and our failure to
locate definite burials was one of the major
disappointments of the investigation. The discovery
of broken and fragmentary human bones, mixed
with other camp rubbish may indicate cannibalism.
Archeological evidences of cannibalism have been
reported by others in Texas and adjacent states
(Note 2, Note 3).

A staple food is indicated by the large number
of freshwater mussel shells, desert tortoise
Fragments of deer skulls were not uncommon
carapaces, and turtle bones that were found in all and many broken segments of lower jaws with the
levels.
In conducting the excavations, the
soil was removed in 6” levels, and
nearly all of the excavated material
was screened. This was a laborious
task but we were amply repaid, for
many small objects that would not
have been noticed were discovered on
the screen.
Nothing was found in the sites that
would indicate European contact. A
check of the bones collected, showed
none identifiable as belonging to the
horse. Occasionally, some bones
displayed a most interesting feature.
Deep knife marks are to be seen,
usually near the articular ends. These
accidental cuts were made by the
aboriginal
hunters
while
dismembering the animal carcasses.
Commonly, two or more marks are
seen, and these are ordinarily parallel.
A tentative identification of the
bones by the writer include the
following: dog, bison, deer, rabbit, rat,
duck, turkey, flicker, beaver, coyote,
antelope, etc. Fish bones, belonging
to several different species, and also
several species of freshwater mussels
were noticed. A few human bones
were found mixed with broken animal
and other camp trash. Nothing was
observed that could be considered a
burial. Fragmentary parts of human
crania were found on the eroded

PLATE 12.
1. Bone artifacts including awls and flakers.
2. Four-edged knives, and a carved stone pipe.
3. An unfinished sandstone pipe.

Kitchen Middens of Upper Red River Drainage

39

Bone Fish Hook
teeth usually intact were found. Neither whole nor
Almost an entire fish hook, carefully fashioned,
fragmentary bison skulls were found, and only a
sparse number of bison teeth were picked up in the was found in the Ht. midden near the top of the
clean, eroded, surface of the middens. From this deposit. It is obvious that the tool was manufactured
evidence it might be presumed that the Indian from a thick flat bone, possibly a bison scapula.
hunters, commonly did not fetch the bison skull into
camp.
Gaming Bone
Two small local areas were found where grains
of corn, embedded in the usual camp deposit could
be distinguished. The maize was free from the cob
and carbonized. The grains are small, compared to
modern corn and might be described as “short” and
“plump”. The salient features of these grains were
no doubt somewhat different before contact with
fire. It is to be regretted that more of this interesting
cereal could not be discovered, especially specimens
of complete ears. In both instances, the corn was
located near the bottom of the midden deposit.
Bone Tools
A surprisingly large number of bone artifacts
were well preserved in the deposits. Awls rank first
in number. One group of these were shaped from
mammal leg bones. This group can be divided into
four classes:
Awl with entire head of bone left intact.
Awl with head of bone unaltered except original
splitting.
Awl with head of bone partly worked down.
Splinter awl. No modification of original splinter
beyond sharpening tip.
A second group of awls were fashioned from
mammal ribs. These show several classes, splinter
and worked types, as well as minute forms.
Awls of various sorts were found in all levels.
Occasionally, specimens have been fire tempered.
Flakers
A few blunt punches of antler tines and of thick
mammal leg bones very likely should be classified
as flakers. Broken fragments of thick deer antler,
with polished surfaces, have not been classified.

A small bone artifact was found in a shallow
deposit, near the edge of midden B. It is likely that
the tool was made from a deer phalange. W. D.
Strong has described and illustrated a similar bone
artifact from Nebraska deposits. According to
Strong’s classification, the artifact is a cup for the
“rin-and-pin”, game of the prehistoric Indians.
(Note 4).
Bison Scapula Tools
Two complete bison scapulae were found in the
pits. A careful examination disclosed no evidences
of use as tools. However, at various levels, a number
of tools fashioned from different parts of bison
scapulae were discovered. These tools were usually,
in a poor condition, due to rough usage. The
consensus of opinion is that these were used as
digging implements—the cutting edges are often
fractured and dull. No notches, nor other evidence
that would serve as proof of halting has been
observed. The basal ends of the tools are well
rounded and polished—further evidence that the
artifacts probably were used as hand tools.
Bison Skull Tools
An ingenious ladle or tool was made from a part
of the bison skull and horn core. The horn core and
a few inches of the attached concave bone tissue of
the forehead were utilized. When complete, the
edge of the bone tissue was sharpened, and half of
the horn cone was left which formed a convenient
handle. Evidently these tools received long hard
usage as the beveled edges were chipped and dull,
similar to the scapulae digging implements.
Specimens were found in situ in the pits, buried
from 18” to 4-2” in depth. The majority of all found
were in the lower parts of the deposits. A number
of fragments of these skull tools were found on the
eroded surfaces of the St. and H. midden and

40

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

possibly, were a rather common tool in this locality.
Nothing is known as to the distribution of the bison
skull implements, but since others have not reported
them elsewhere (except Strong, Note 5) the
distribution is presumed to be limited. Average
length, 8”, or 200 mm.
Bison Metatarsus End-Scrapers or Fleshers
These were found in the middle and the bottom
levels, and range from four to eight inches in length
(95 mm. to 185 mm.) In fashioning these tools, the
entire sponge-like bone tissue was removed from
the marrow cavity. In addition, the cavity was
extended entirely through the articular end of all
the specimens that we found. The reason why the
handles of these fleshers were completely tunnelled
“out” has not been determined, unless the
classification is accepted that was given a somewhat
similar tool, illustrated in plate 78, Explorations and
Field-Work of the Smithsonian Institution in 1932.
The tool is described as a combination flesher and
knife handle. (W. D. Strong).

expanding, but there are aberrant types. Whether
these types with tangs and barbs denote intermittent
occupations of the middens by peoples from other
cultural centers, remains to be determined.
The excavations proved that all of the above
discussed types were in use throughout the entire
history of the middens. The only noticeable feature
was that small points from the lower levels were
usually somewhat cruder than those gathered from
the upper parts of the deposits.

Small triangular points with side notches and
straight, concave, or notched bases have been found
over a vast part of the present United States. This
was the predominant type at the Pecos Pueblo,
(Note 6). “Tens of thousands of this type came from
the Great Cahokia Mound Group in Illinois,” and
are known locally as “Cahokia Points”. (Note 7).
This type, notched and without notches came from
the upper level at Signal Butte. (Note 8). In Texas,
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, reports this type from Abilene.
(Note 9), Mr. Floyd V. Studer reports this type in
the Texas Panhandle house ruins. (Note 10). Mr.
Vane Husky describes and pictures this type from
Weaving Tools
kitchen middens in the Nueces Canyon (Note 11).
Several complete ulnae of small animals were Mr. E. B. Sayles found this type widely distributed
discovered in the lower and the middle levels. These over Central and West Texas, and has classified the
ulnae have been fashioned into tools with flat points, people who used this type as late Caddoan. (Note
quite different from awls or flakers. Tools of this 12). From a dated ruin in Western New Mexico,
sort with flat points have been classified as weaving (1000 to 1030 A. D.) nothing but this type with
implements by several authorities. Fragments of a straight bases were found. (Note 13).
number of bison ulnae were found. From this
evidence it seems likely that these were largely
Abrading Stones
utilized as tools, until broken.
Rubbed, grooved, and incised stones, presumed
to be mostly of local origin were found in numbers
Small Points
on the surface, and each test pit disclosed others at
Many small triangular points were found on the
all levels. The grooved and incised stones range
surfaces of the middens. Approximately 50% of all
from small irregular shaped stones to rectangular
have a single notch on opposite edges. The base is
and “buffer” shaped tools, carefully fashioned.
usually straight or concave. A variant pattern has a
(Note 15). It is usually presumed that the shaft
convex base. (Rare). Specimens with a notch in the
polishers were used in pairs, but none were found
middle of the base are found. About 10% of the
together in situ. Nearly all of the rectangular shaped
small triangular points are without notches. It is
specimens were broken when found, due to the
likely that some of these points without notches
fragile material utilized— a coarse sandstone. The
are rejects.
grooves in the shaped stones are all lengthwise, and
Additional small points were “Trianguloid with multiple grooves are common. Occasionally
stem”, (Note 14). The stem is usually straight or grooves are V-shaped instead of semicircular in

Kitchen Middens of Upper Red River Drainage
cross section—tell-tale evidence of fashioning
points on tools, such as needles and awls. The shaft
polishers that are square or rectangular in cross
section often have one or more grooves or incised
marks on each face. In some tools the depth of the
channel or groove is variable, the result of grinding
and working short objects, perhaps bone beads. The
largest and most carefully made shaft grinder that
we found came from the top level in a test pit. The
unshaped and crudest specimens commonly came
from the lowest levels. Measurements of the
grooves that are semicircular in cross section vary,
occasionally diameters are as large as ½”. The
average is approximately 3/8” in width. It might be
mentioned here that measurements of shaft grinders
from the ruined Pecos pueblo in New Mexico,
showed that the Pecos archers preferred 3/8” shafts
or foreshafts for their arrows. (Note 16).
The mano stones found in the tests were the
usual oval-shaped type, and came from all depths.
No entire metates were found. Judging from the
fragments discovered in the deposits, those with a
rather deep basin were preferred.
Knives
Few knives and large projectiles were found in
the excavations. One four-edged bevelled knife was
found. It is of Texas Panhandle flint and was
screened from the top six-inch level. Cumulative
evidence places this knife in use up to a late period.
(Note 17). A fragment of a large knife was found in
situ, 18” from the surface in the Bk. Site. It was
slightly notched on each edge and exhibited no
“bevelled technique.” The material is local, a
quartzite. The writer has picked up from the surface
of each of the midden deposits under discussion
flake knives, four-edged bevelled knives, leafshaped knives, and triangular knives. The last
pattern has a straight, sharp base, in fact three
cutting edges. The four-edged bevelled knives
found on the surface are either of Texas Panhandle
flint, Central Texas flint (various color phases), and
local quartzite. The flake knives were also of the
above mentioned materials. The leaf-shaped knives
are of Central Texas and local “flint”, but none of
Panhandle flint. The triangular knives were also of
local, and Central Texas materials. This is perhaps

41

the most uncommon type. The large projectile
points found in the excavations are so few in number
as to make any sort of classification of little value.
Unless further tests prove to the contrary it would
seem that spears or atlatls were not used. Additional
evidence, from the writer’s surface collection from
the St. midden substantiates the above statement.
Out of a total of 200 projectile points, gathered on
the surface of this midden, only 6 large projectiles
were found. Five of these large points were found
in a small eroded area, and at a somewhat lower
level than the midden deposit. It appears that the
large points are in a strata below the midden, and
erosion has exposed this earlier level, only in this
one spot.
Local Quartzite
This material varies in color and granular
appearance. It is obvious that it is exceptionally
difficult to “work” but tools were found in all levels,
chipped from this local stone. The finished artifacts
are usually somewhat thick.
Numerous outcrops of quartzite occur in the
south part of this county (Clay) and in the adjacent
county east (Montague).
A number of four-edged knives of this material
were found in the I cultivated surface of the St.
midden. In using local quartzite for points, scrapers,
knives and awls, the Indians who left the midden
deposits merely followed the same routine
established by paleolithic men, who discovered and
used this material unmeasured centuries ago. A
“grooved” Folsom spear of this local “flint” came
from the surface of a high river terrace near Ryan,
Oklahoma. Specimens of blades and axes, with
sinuous edges, deep patina, and of antique
appearance, are often of this local “flint.” That these
belong to early horizons, cannot be questioned.
Texas Panhandle Flint
Artifacts of this material are not found in large
numbers within this area. However, tools made of
this chert were discovered in all levels of the
deposits. It is true also that sites without pottery
usually yield Panhandle flint specimens. Apparently,
this region is near the eastern edge of this material

42

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Fragment of small plain tube pipe, material, red
distribution. The Cardwell flint collection, gathered
near Nocona, Texas, contains only one artifact of sandstone, origin unknown, 16” level, H. midden.
that material.
Fragment of a carved sandstone pipe, type not
Floyd V. Studer has reported the widespread use determined, material local, 36” depth in H. midden.
of this material in the Texas Panhandle area.
He also has drawn attention to some of the
sources, along the Canadian River, near
Amarillo, Texas, where vast quantities were
quarried in prehistoric ages. A. V. Kidder
found numerous artifacts of Texas Panhandle
flint at the ruined Pecos Pueblo, New Mexico.
During a brief investigation in the Galisteo
valley (farther to the west), the writer found
several snub-nosed scrapers and part of a fouredged knife, all fashioned from this beautiful
“flint”.
Earth Covered Lodges
The digging exposed chunks of burned clay
wattle in various levels. Impressions of grasses
and small twigs are discernible. This burned
clay was roofing material and is unquestionable
proof of earth covered dwellings of some sort.
Later, in several of the test pits we uncovered
what appeared to be definite floor levels.
Several fire-pits, and small storage cists were
found below the floor levels. The mouth of
one cist was covered by a stone slab. The
contents of the cists were screened out, but
nothing was found except the average camp
rubbish.
Pipes
An unfinished elbow pipe of local sandstone
came from the surface of the St. midden. It is
obvious that this object was pecked to shape
as each end is deeply pitted. The small end
cavities show a most interesting preparatory
technique, for of course this served to guide
the bit of the drilling apparatus when the
drilling started.
Fragments of other pipes found in the
excavations are listed as follows: Fragment of
small plain tube pipe of local sandstone. 18”
level. H. midden.

PLATE 13.
1. Bison skull tools. Artifact on the right 7 1/2
inches in length.
2. Gray-green stone pestle, 22 1/2 inches in
length and oval in cross section.
3. Bison metatarsus tools. The longest is eight
inches in length.

Kitchen Middens of Upper Red River Drainage
Fragment of plain elbow pipe, of sandstone,
possibly not local, Surface find in St. midden.

43

bone, etc. Some sherds have a honeycombed
appearance due to the aplastic materials leaching,
or weathering out of the specimens.

Fragment of large pottery pipe, diameter,
From the evidence of the sherds it would seem
approximately 3”, plain, 16” level, H. site. Type
not determined.
that few small vessels were made. A small number
of sherds might be classified as “cord marked”, but
Fragments of large pottery pipe, approximate
nearly all of the remainder are plain, without
diameter 3”, 16” level, H. midden. Type not
decorative attempts of any sort. It is evident that
determined but profusely decorated with incised
most of the occupants of the middens gave little
finger nail imprints.
time to pottery making and beyond shaping the rims
and necks of the vessels in a number of different
Specimens of Paint Stones
ways, cared or understood little about the technique
Nodules of various sizes were found on the of ceramic decoration. Trading relations or pilfering
surface and in all levels. These were usually of either excursions into the adjacent eastern areas might
hematite or copper ore, and occasionally white, and account for the few decorated East Texas sherds
brown pigments were also discovered. Some of the found. One decorated sherd of a hard, black ware,
materials could not be identified as local. Certain came from the surface of the Glascow site. The
nodules showed results of having been subjected fragment is a segment from the rim of a vessel and
to fire, and these were usually quite soft. One small just below the plain cylindrical neck is the decorative
thin, hematite object, from the surface of the H. feature, a row of somewhat regularly spaced nodes.
midden is polished on both faces, and a number of
Vessels with handles, or lugs, were rarely made.
parallel crudely drawn lines have been incised on
Two handles and one lug were the only sherds of
the surface.
this sort found.
Pot Sherds
Pot sherds were found on the surface and in all
levels of the excavations. No whole pots were
discovered. It appears that most of the vessels were
fairly large mouthed with funnel-shaped, or straight
cylindrical necks. Sherds were found mixed in the
same levels, belonging to each neck type. The
bodies were globular, and there are round and flat
bottomed types. It would appear that the flat
bottomed type of vessel was in somewhat late use
only. Sherds that could be identified as belonging
to this type were all found in the upper levels of the
excavations. The largest number of sherds came
from the middle and upper parts of the test pits and
the number is not large. The few sherds found in
situ in the lowest stratum very likely found their
way there by way of cists, firepits, animal burrows,
etc. No improvement in technique or paste is
noticeable, when the upper level sherds are
compared with those from the bottom levels.
Shell is the most common tempering material
with an occasional sherd showing sand, gravel,

Additional Artifacts
Other articles found in the camp-middens include
small snub-nosed scrapers (two, notched
specimens), awls of flint, bone beads (tubular),
entire and fragmentary, polished celts, and a number
of worked and polished bone and stone objects that
have not been classified.
It would appear that polished stone celts were
in use within this region, prior to the introduction
of pottery. Three polished celts in the writer’s file
came from non-pottery sites.
Future excavations probably will disclose data
unsuspected at this date. The author wishes to
emphasize the fact that only a small area in each
site has been excavated.

Henrietta, Texas.

44

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Bibliography

10. Studer, Floyd V., Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin
1. Ray, Cyrus N., Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in No. 55, Bulletin of Texas Arch. and Pal. Soc., Vol.
Texas, p. 111 Vol. 6, Bulletin of Texas Arch. and 6, p. 92, plate 16.
Pal. Society.
11. Husky, Vane, An Archeological Survey of the
2. Pearce, J. E., Tales That Dead Men Tell, p. 10, Nueces Canyon of Texas, Plate 15, Vol. 7, Bulletin
Plate 11.
of Texas Arch. and Pal. Soc.
3. Fowke, Gerard, Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 76, p. 77.
4. Strong, W. D., An Introduction to Nebraska
Archeology, p. 192, plate 18, j.
5. Strong, W. D., An Introduction to Nebraska
Archeology, p. 260.
6. Kidder, A. V., Artifacts of Pecos, p. 20.

12. Sayles, E. B., An Archeological Survey of Texas,
Privately printed. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
Medallion Papers, 1935, p. 80, plate 22.
13. Roberts, Frank H. H., Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin No. Ill, Plate 59.
14. Black, Glenn A., and Paul Weer, A Proposed
Terminology For Shape Classification of Artifacts,
American Antiquity, Vol. 1, No. 4, p. 293.

7. Throop, Addison J., Mound Builders of Illinois,
15. Strong, W. D., An Introduction to Nebraska
p. 26.
Archeology, p. 260.
8. Strong, W. D., An Introduction to Nebraska
16. Kidder, A. V., The Artifacts of Pecos, p. 80.
Archeology, p. 231.
17. Ray, Cyrus N., The Pottery Complex Artifacts
9. Ray, Cyrus N., The Pottery Complex Artifacts
of the Abilene Region, Bulletin No. 7, Texas Arch.
of the Abilene Region, p. 62, plate 8, Vol. 7, Bulletin
and Pal. Society, p. 74.
of Texas Arch. and Pal. Soc.

