Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

33

TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY
BY GEORGE C. MARTIN
The surfaces of many campsites in the coastal
section of Texas lying between Matagorda and Baffin
bays are littered with lumps of hard-baked and burned
clay. The pieces are irregular in size and shape, and
when found on the surface are usually much weathered.
Some show actual contact with fire and soot, others
being merely baked with heat.
In my early investigations of these campsites the
clay lumps were accounted for as the result of
campfires built directly on clay surfaces, but I began
to find them in places where they could not have been
created in such a manner. They were numerous in the
shifting sand-hills south of Falfurias and plentiful on
the sandy campsites on the north end of Padre island,
on the Live Oak Peninsula, and at Ingleside. They were
found on the surface and in the topsoil of blackland
campsites on Copano bay, and on Oso and Petronella
creeks. Occasionally they were found in shell-heaps.
In many cases they were in sand five, ten, even fifteen
feet above any clay strata, and on Padre island were a
mile or more from any clay. They contain no tempering
shell as do the sherds from pottery and were not residue
lumps of the paste from which pottery was
manufactured. Even when found on clay surfaces their
content of sand appears to be far greater than that of
the clay on which they rested.
Some might be accounted for as the remains of
clay coatings of fish cooked under the coals of fires,
such method of preparation being witnessed, and the
fish partaken of, by Mr. Sam Allardyce at a small Indian
encampment in the vicinity of Matagorda Bay in the
early eighteen-seventies, but it is doubtful if such
coatings would have been baked to such an extent
that they would not have long since disintegrated in
the moisture to which they have been subjected.
Manufacture of Pottery
Altogether, the lumps were very puzzling and the
reason for their existence did not begin to dawn upon
me until a freshly eroded bank on Oso creek, Nueces

county, yielded numerous unweathered baked and
burned lumps many of which had one smooth side.
Some of these surfaces were convex, others concave.
Several fitted roughly together and had certainly
formed part of a cast of the inside of a pot. Evidently
they had something to do with the manufacture of
pottery, but, there was still not enough evidence to
indicate the why and wherefor of them. Conclusive
evidence of the method of their creation and the reason
therefor was yielded by a site on a small island in the
Playa Lodosa, Aransas county (Site 81, Martin and
Potter “Preliminary Archaelogical Survey”). A heavy
downpour had deeply eroded the banks just previous
to one of my visits to the site and in one spot I found a
bed of baked clay-lumps in place. Other lumps and
numerous sherds were scattered over the newly
exposed surface. Where the lumps were bedded in
place they showed that they had once formed one solid
bed that had been crumbled by heat, and in the center
thereof were three hemi-spherical depressions wherein
the bases of clay vessels had once stood. Many of the
scattered loose pieces showed the convex and concave
surfaces previously noted on specimens from the bank
of Oso creek. Beyond question I had found a place
where pottery had been fired by Karankawan Indians
or by some coastal tribe which made pottery
corresponding exactly with that found on known
Karankawan sites.
Process of Firing Pottery
Close study of the refuse permits me to describe
the process of firing which was as follows:—After the
vessels had been shaped and dried, a shallow hole
was dug into the soil and the bottom of it thickly
covered with a specially prepared mixture of
dampened sand and clay put together in such
proportions that it could be readily crumbled after it
was baked. The pots which were to be fired were set
into this flooring and more of the mixed clay and sand
was introduced into the hole and packed around, in,
and over the vessels. The entire mass was then

34

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

permitted to dry and fires were built over it and
kept burning until the desired result was attained.
After cooling the mass was picked to pieces, the
pots were taken out and the sandy clay removed
from their interiors in small lumps. The burned and
sooty specimens were those which had come into
direct contact with the fires on the surface, those
merely baked being from the interior of the mass
and the insides of the pots.
Confirmatory evidence that this was the actual
method of firing was found in the form of potsherds
from this same site which were given to Mr. Samuel
Woolford, connected with the Witte Museum, San
Antonio, for examination. Mr. Woolford succeeded in
fitting together and reconstructing about one-fifth of a
bowl and was surprised to find that the upper portion
was of a deep red color shading three to four inches
below the edge into dark brown. No better proof that
the heat had been applied from above the vessel could
possibly be desired. Some of the local clays contain
much oxide of iron and when pastes are made of such
the vessels attain a deep red color where the heat is
greatest, shading into dark and light brown where less
heat has been applied. Evidence that the practice of
filling vessels with packed sandy clay before burning
obtained as far inland as San Antonio was also found
by Mr. Woolford in the form of a cast of the interior of
the neck of a water-bottle of burned clay. This cast
was found in the soil in Brackenridge Park, in the
confines of the city.
Earthenware Handles
Gatschet states, in his work on the Karankawa
Indians, that pots with handles were unknown to this
tribe. This is incorrect. Earthen handles were rare, but
are occasionally found on campsites known to have
been occupied by Indians classified as Karankawan.
Specimens are included in the George C. Martin

Texas Coastal Collection in the Witte Museum, San
Antonio. Of this type of handle the four known
existing specimens show that they were attached
vertically. They were made by rolling the paste
between the hands until it attained the desired length
and thickness. Holes were made in the walls of the
vessel to which the handles were to be attached
and the two ends thrust through these to the interior
whereupon the ends were expanded by pressure
and merged into the walls of the pot with moistened
fingers. The final process was to mold the materials
of the handles and of the outside of the vessel
together by moistening and rubbing. Actually the
handles were riveted to the pot.
Handles of Fiber or Hide
The common type of handle used in the coastal
section of Texas was made of fiber or hide and run
through holes bored in the sides of the vessel and
twisted. Occasionally the holes were made in the walls
before the material had dried, pushed through with a
twig or fishbone, but the common method was drilling
after the vessels had been fired. Sherds show these
holes were made commonly about one half inch from
the edge. Sometimes only one hole was made on each
side of the vessel, sometimes two holes to the side,
these one-half to one inch apart. Cooking pots were
used in direct contact with the fire and when suspended
the fiber or hide handles were thickly covered with
clay which prevented burning. Such coverings of
handles were of a temporary nature as they did not
usually come closely enough into contact with the heat
to become permanently baked, but one specimen
about four inches in length and showing the impression
of a twisted cord having passed through it was found
by the writer on a Copano bay site in Aransas county.
Edges of potsherds that have been drilled for suspension
are quite common on coastal sites.

