Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

29

REPORT ON SOME RECENT ARCHAEOLOGICAL
RESEARCHES IN THE ABILENE SECTION
BY DR. CYRUS N. RAY
While this paper will give a general account of
the most important of the author’s investigations
during the past year, it will deal more in detail
with the deeply buried stratified human camp site
deposits. Investigations have revealed many
evidences tending to confirm the author’s early
conclusion that the Abilene section was one of the
areas occupied by human beings in very ancient
times. Whether or not any of these very deeply
buried occupation levels were tenanted by man in
any previous geological period, I am not prepared
to say at the present time; however, I will offer
evidence to prove that they extend into exceedingly
remote times.
A Folsom Culture Camp Site
Between two mountains near Abilene there is a
deeply eroded dry gully in which water is found
only immediately after rains. It appears that
formerly the valley had filled with gravel at the
bottom and this had been covered with ten or
twelve feet of light soil composed of a mixture of
red clay and sand (probably partly wind blown).
Later deep gullies had worn through this pinkish
soil down to the gravel. In the sides of the eroded
banks several feet below the original surface are
exposed old human hearths, mussel shells, flint
flakes, and artifacts of unusual design. Several
arrow points with channels up the centers were
found here. A typical one measures 2 1/8 inches
long and 7/8 of an inch wide, has no notches, and
the barbs are formed by the projections on each
side of the deeply recessed bases. While the above
have been said by authorities, “to closely approach
the Folsom points” they were larger and not of so
fine workmanship. Recently while showing this site
to Mr. Floyd V. Studer, of Amarillo, the latter found
a part of the central portion of a Folsom point
which is typical in every way except size of the
finest Folsom technique. Plate 10, Fig. 6, 7. The
piece is 1 3/8 inches long and 6/8 of an inch wide
and deeply channelled on both faces. A broad thin

scraper with a minute retouch around the edge of
one side was found buried in the side of the vertical
clay creek bank here at a depth of eight feet from
the original surface. (Plate 10, Fig. 1.) Artifacts
from the above site are shown on plate 10 and are
numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10 and 11. Figures 8
and 9 are of two very heavily patinated specimens
from a surface site. They are totally unlike the other
artifacts from that site.
Limestone Incrusted Artifacts
Both in the Folsom camp site described above
and in other sites exposed by deep erosion in such
formations the author has found flint artifacts which
have large areas of their chipped surfaces covered
with heavy limestone incrustations. The tools most
commonly found with hard stone incrustations over
flint flaked surfaces belong to the large, thick,
deeply recessed based implements of unknown use
described on page 18, Vol. 1 of the Bulletin of The
Society.
While the above mentioned artifacts are not at
all similar to the Folsom points, several were found
at about the same level in the same valley. Plate 10
Fig. 2.
Carved Fossil Bone Artifact
Situated near Abilene is a small dry creek which
only contains water during rains or immediately
after. This small shallow branch winds through its
flat valley floor and its overflows have exposed a
quite large camp site covering the flood plain. In
this site many crudely made large projectile points,
hammerstones and small hearths containing from
eight to ten large stones were found.
In the bottom of one of the side gullies the author
found a heavy hard petrified bone of some large
animal (Plate 12 Figs. 6, 7). It is 9 ½ inches long, 2
5/8 inches wide at the larger end and 2 1/16 inches
wide at the smaller end. It has been further flattened

30

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
petrified. Another similar fossil animal bone was
found in a human hearth which had eroded out of a
gulley in the highest gravel terrace. Plate 12, Figs.
8 and 9.
Deeply Buried Texas Hearths
After the finding of the two peculiar mineralized
skeletons described in the May 1929 issue of The
Scientific American, the author began a systematic
investigation to determine if such or deeper sites
existed elsewhere in the river banks of Central West
Texas. In August 1929 a spear head was found
embedded in another high Brazos River bank at a
depth of eight feet accompanied with traces of
hearth stones and charcoal. Plate 14 Fig 9. In
September in a third high bank far distant from the
first, a definite stratum containing ashes, charcoal,
burnt hearth stones, flint chips, mussel shells and
animal bones was found in the high bank of a small
creek near where it entered the Brazos River. This
stratum outcropped eight feet from the surface of
the ground. Here excavation was carried back into
the face of the nearly vertical bank for several feet,
Mr. E. B. Sayles, Prof. Otto Watts and Dr. J. Richard
Spann assisting in the work. Views of bank and
hearth stones shown on Plate 11, Figs. 1 and 2.

Plate 10.
ARTIFACTS FROM FOLSOM CAMP SITE
Figs. 1 and 2 show limestone incrustation.
Fig. 7. Cross section of Fig. 6.
Scale: Fig. 11 2 ½ inches in length.
at the larger end by cutting away about one half of
the articular portion although the other side and end
of the articular facets are smooth and solid. At the
smaller end the articular facets are intact but the
shaft just above them has been carved down on both
edges to make a handle which nicely fits the hand.
The peculiar feature about this specimen is that it
is now composed of too hard material to have been
carved with flint tools but there is no evidence in
the site of metal tools. It is the author’s opinion that
the bone was carved while fresh and has since

Many fragments of large animal bones which
had been broken to extract the marrow were found.
These had very sharp, hard, thin edges as though
just broken, although the bones were yellowed with
age and had a resonant ring when knocked together
as though partly mineralized. One bone had several
transverse cuts in it. In addition to the numerous
bones and mussel shells, flint chips, and burnt
hearth stones were very abundant. Beaver teeth and
deer bones were found. One battered quartz
harmmerstone was found. At one place where hearth
stones were particularly abundant in a layer of
charcoal and ashes the stones seemed to have been
set in a concentric layer. Just outside the edge and
on the original floor level, Mr. Sayles found a thin
nicely chipped square based knife or spear head. It
was 3 3/16 inches long and 1 13/16 inches wide at
the base. Plate 14, Fig. 8. A short distance down
the creek and on the opposite high vertical bank
was another charcoal, shell and burnt rock stratum.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

31

The charcoal seam here was much thinner but was could be had to the seven or eight feet of vertical
outlined by occasional hearth stones and shells. bank face at the top.
Assisted by Prof. Otto Watts, steps were cut into
Measurements showed this stratum to have been
the almost vertical lower portion so that access
deposited much later as it was buried only four
feet below the soil surface. Despite the
difficult footing, we dug several shallow
test holes back into the stratum. Many
humanly made flint flakes were found
embedded. The author dug back about
eight inches into the bank and exposed a
small bird point embedded in place.
Plate 14 Fig 11. This proved to be an
arrow point of one of the Sand Dune
types with only the tip of the point
missing. This find as well as the other
bird-point found buried between six and
seven feet deep with the two peculiar
skeletons on the Matthews Ranch shows
that these patterns of bird points were
used for a long period in this region. Plate
14 Fig 12. Several hundred yards farther
up this small creek is another high bank.
At this place is a thick stratum of hearth
stones, ashes, charcoal and mussel shells
buried at a depth of fourteen feet below
the soil surface. This layer is situated on
top of a stratum of red clay which is about
a foot thick, this red clay layer lies on
top of an undisturbed horizontal stratum
of Permian limestone which here
constitutes the creek floor or bed. Little
digging has been done here thus far on
account of the depth of the stratum and
the hardness of the clay. Thus far no flints
have been found at this site.

Plate 11.
STRATIFIED OCCUPATION LEVELS.
Figs. 1 and 2 show excavation of hearths where charcoal,
artifacts, and bones were found buried at a depth of 8 feet.
Figs. 3 and 4 show hearth site where two projectile
points were found buried at a depth of 24 ½ feet; Fig. 3
shows artifact in place at center of lower half of picture.

Situated about a mile from the last
described site and on the high bank of
the Brazos River where another dry creek
branch enters it is another series of
stratified human camp sites. Beginning
with the soil surface there is a large flint
worker’s camp site covering the hill top
above the river. This site shows no
evidence of white contacts, yet the
hearths and flint and shell debris is still
mostly exposed on the soil surface. The

32

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Brazos River flows near the foot of the hill and at
this place are situated some high banks where a
small creek entering the river curves in such way
that it washes against and caves in one side and the
river the other side of the high river bank. Here on
both faces are exposed flint, shell and charcoal
hearth layers at several depths approximately four,
six, and eight feet deep. At another site situated on
Elm Creek many miles from the above described
group of camp sites is the deepest buried series of
hearths ever found by the author (24 to 27 feet).
Plate 15.

center of the lower third of the picture, the other
end being firmly embedded in the hard clay.
Surrounding it were two embedded flint flakes. At
various places along the bank several other humanly
made flint flakes were found embedded in place.
A hundred feet further down stream a flint
projectile point was found embedded at the same

This site was discovered by the author in January
1930. At this place Elm Creek is undercutting its
vertical high banks where a curve of the stream
throws the current against them. Here lie exposed
various regularly laid horizontal strata of sands,
clays, and gravels. At a depth from the surface of
the soil of twenty-four feet lies a stratum of hard
solidified gravel of an average thickness of eight
inches. The edge of this gravel stratum lies exposed
at the same level for a distance of several hundred
yards along the vertical face of the high creek bank.
From immediately below this gravel layer to a
distance of three feet below it are several strata of
charcoal and burnt hearth stones. The charcoal
varies from thin streaks to heavy hearth deposits of
from four to six inches thickness surrounding fire
blackened stones. Deposits of ashes, charcoal, and
flint chips may be traced for a distance of one
hundred and twenty-five feet along the face of the
bank. Plate 11. Figs. 3 and 4 and Plate l5.
At the time the site was discovered several
projectile points and numerous humanly made flint
flakes and a much battered hammerstone were found
in the loose gravel of the dry creek bed immediately
below the charcoal outcrops. Also three humanly
made flint flakes were found embedded in place in
the charcoal levels below the hard gravel stratum.
After the heavy spring rains and high creek rises,
the author again visited the site and found that the
bank had caved off to a considerable extent. Six
inches below the hard gravel stratum and in the
charcoal deposit, he found the point of a peculiar
flint object projecting straight out from the vertical
face of the red clay bank. A picture of this artifact
in place is shown on Plate 11 Fig 3; it is seen in the

Plate 12.
ARTIFACTS AND BONES FROM CENTRAL
WEST TEXAS SITES
Fig. 1. Stone pestle.
Fig. 2. Abalone shell pendant from mortar hole site.
Fig. 3, 4, 5. Flint points from same site.
Figs. 6 and 7. Petrified carved animal bone.
Figs. 8 and 9. Petrified animal bone from hearth.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
level. Mr. E. B. Sayles and Prof. Otto Watts of
Simmons University were taken to the site and the
specimens were photographed in place. Later with
the assistance of Mr. Sayles excavation was made
above and down to the top of the hard gravel

33

stratum at two places to determine whether any
openings may have existed in the gravel stratum
through which the artifacts below could have been
washed at some previous time. Plate 11, Fig. 4. No
openings were found and the gravel was found to
extend in a very hard unbroken floor
back into the bank. The artifacts found
both in the loose gravel in the creek
bed immediately below and those
firmly embedded in place were of
peculiar and distinctive forms.
Figs. 3 and 5, plate 14 are those
found embedded in place. Figs. 1, 2,
6, 7 and 10 of Plate 14 are some of
the artifacts found in the loose gravel
in the creek bed below. None of these
projectile points showed any
evidence of barbs, stems or notches.
All were of leaf shapes. The one
found imbedded with point sticking
out was a slender well made artifact
of the solutrean double pointed laurel
leaf type. Plate 14 Fig 3. The tip of
the point of one end had been broken
off. The other point found embedded
was broader, thicker, rounded, and
flattened at one end and pointed at the
other. Plate 14, Fig. 5. The broader
end had evidently been flattened for
hafting. This long oval type was also
found in a specimen from the loose
gravel below. Plate 14 Fig. 6.
It is also interesting to note here
that the same type of point (Plate 14
Fig 4) was also found deep in a gravel
pit on Dead Man Creek by Mr. Watts,
the pit owner.

Plate 13.
BOAT SHAPED MORTAR HOLE SITE
Figs. 1 and 3. Eroded holes.
Fig. 2. Sandstone ledge on top of which holes are found.
Fig. 4. Two well preserved holes.

While visiting the site with the
author, Mr. Ernest W. Wilson found a
projectile point in the loose gravel of
the creek bed which had an unusually
thin, sharp pointed blade which was
slightly twisted, square based, and
beautifully chipped. Plate 14 Fig 7.
The charcoal found at these sites has
been tested in the chemical laboratory

34

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
of Simmons University and found to be
real charcoal.
How old these various hearth levels
are the author will not attempt to say, it
will require much further study before
one can be able to estimate age.
In this same region exist hundreds of
stone age camp sites and hearths and
some of these lie on the surface soil
immediately above some of the deep
sites. None of these stone age surface sites
show any contacts with white
civilization. Texas is one of the places
where some of the earliest white contacts
in America were made with the Indians.
Presumably then iron should have
superseded flint at an early date in this
region. Yet we find that time has either
not yet covered up the larger number of
Indian camp sites or they are still within
plow depths. In the light of the above facts
the author cannot see how the above
described sites can be other than
exceedingly ancient.
Some Ancient Mortar Holes

Plate 14.
ARTIFACTS FROM DEEPLY
BURIED EARTH LEVELS
Figs. 3 and 5. Found firmly imbedded in place at a
depth from the surface of 24 ½ feet.
Figs. 8 and 9. Found in place at 8 feet below the
surface.
Fig. 11. Found in place at 4 feet below the surface.
Fig. 12. Found in place at between 6 and 7 feet below
the surface.
All other figured artifacts found loose in the creek
bed below the 24 feet deep hearth level.
Scale: Fig. 7 is 4 inches in length.

Mr. E. W. Douthit of Abilene, Texas,
recently requested the author to examine
some peculiar holes in a ledge of rocks
located on his ranch, southwest of
Colorado, Texas. A week end trip was
made to the place in company with Mr.
J. H. Lowry, and it was found that the
holes were made by man. Two weeks
later on another week end trip complete
measurements were made by the author
and photographs were taken by Mr. E. B.
Sayles.
The weathered conditions of the
mortar holes found, and the remarkable
features connected with the associated
camp site were unusual enough to require
detailed description. (Plate 13, 1, 2, 3,
and 4).
The site is on the east side of a north
and south mile wide valley in the low

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
mountains. This valley is a nearly flat flood plain
of a small dry creek which is only a few miles
long. Water does not flow except immediately after
summer rains and this collects in shallow pools
which remain not more than a month after. The
rainfall is not great and falls mostly during the
summer months.
Rising abruptly out of the east edge of this plain
is a ridge of hard sandstone twenty-five or thirty
feet high which projects like a peninsula out into
the plain from a higher hill back of it. Immediately
back of the ridge the land slopes to a basin like dry
drainage which arises on the hill back of the ledge.
This leaves a ledge which drops abruptly in front
and slopes slightly away to the back of it. This ledge
is composed of quite large boulders of very hard

35

sandstone most of which lie flat or nearly so. All
along the crest of this ridge for a considerable
distance, some ancient race of people has excavated
numbers of boat shaped mortar holes. Counting
remnants as well as complete holes, we found a
total of eighty-four mortar holes. Forty-four of these
had eroded badly. (Plate 13, Figs. 1, 3). The erosion
may have been partly due to wind blown sand but
in the opinion of the author was mainly due to the
mechanical wear and chemical action of the water
which has fallen on each rock during the ages since
the holes were made. The reason for this belief is
that where the rocks have lain perfectly flat, the
holes have filled with wind blown sandy soil and a
thick growth of grass has preserved them. Where
the latter were dug out and measured little erosion
was shown.

Plate 15.
DEEPLY BURIED HEARTH LEVEL.
The author is pointing to charcoal stratum buried 24 ½ feet deep where two flint points were found
embedded in place. Three feet below this stratum is another charcoal and flint chip stratum.

36

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

One of a group of ten soil filled holes situated
on a level topped rock, showed the following
measurements; the length was 15 ¾ inches, the
width 6 ¾ inches in the middle widest part, and the
depth was 13 inches. One rock had seven holes,
five filled with soil. The center one was dug out
and measured as follows: length 17 ¾ inches, width
7 ½ inches, depth 17 inches. (Plate 13 Fig. 4.)
Another one in the same rock showed length 17
inches, width 10 ½ inches and a depth of 15 inches.
The latter though partly filled with soil was eroded
near the top. The width was abnormal due probably
to its situation near the edge where rain water
flowed across it from the middle portion of the rock.
One stone had four holes in it. Nearly half of this
stone was worn away to a considerable depth
leaving only the bottoms of three holes on the
southeast side where there must have been a slight
slope. (Plate 13, Fig. 3.) The northwest portion had
been more level, a hole which had evidently been
situated on the edge of the point where the marked
erosion began had its northwest end intact and the
depth here was 13 inches. The southeast end of the
same hole was only six inches deep. From this point
southeast the whole rock had been removed to
considerable depth. The next hole east of it had
only five inches of the bottom left. Another one had
only 3 ½ inches of the bottom left and another hole
was only 4 ½ inches deep. If these holes had
originally been only thirteen inches deep like the
remaining end of one of them evidently there had
been an erosion of the top of the stone varying from
9 ½ to 8 ½ inches at the southeast end and some
less where the slope started.
On another rock which had a little more slope
there were five bottoms of holes. The deepest one
was situated on the highest part of the rock where it
was nearer level, its length was 14 inches, its width
6 ½ inches, its depth 8 inches. The length of another
one was 13 inches, its width 5 inches, its depth 6
inches. The dimensions of one lower down were
length 8 ½ inches, width 4 ½ inches, depth 4 inches.
Measurements of another were length 6 inches,
width 2 ½ inches, and depth 1 ¼ inches. The latter
was the most shallow and as to be expected was
situated on the lower side of the slanting surface of
one of the larger rocks. The rocks varied in size

from six to eight or ten feet across, and there is no
possibility that any water has ever flowed over them
except that which has fallen from the skies directly
on each rock. As the most perfectly preserved grass
sod filled holes varied from 15 to 17 inches deep
and seemed rather uniform in depth, form and size,
it seems reasonable to make the deduction that all
were formerly of somewhat near that depth. As the
rock is very hard, somewhat like limestone in
hardness, it must have taken ages of time for rain
drops and the small flow that they would create on
each rock to have worn the solid surfaces of these
rocks away to depths of l1 to 15 inches. The
problem of figuring such an age is more than the
author cares to undertake.
One hundred and two scrapers of crude design
were found, also three additional scrapers of fine
keel backed type. Five complete arrow heads (Plate
12, Figs. 3, 4 and 5), and twenty-eight broken
projectile points, five flint hammerstones and three
manos were found. One large paleolithic type
sinuous edged hand axe was found. It was 7 inches
long and the blade was 4 ¾ inches wide. It was
found in the edge of a hearth which had been
exposed by the erosion of a gulley wash. The slope
immediately back of the ledge and the rocky hill
east of it were strewn with flint chips. A few
fragments of mussel shells were found and one
almost complete shell which was deeply fluted was
found.
One peculiar scraper with a long channel down
the center lengthwise was found. A paddle shaped
arrow head made from a flat flake and left flat on
one side was found. (Plate 12, Fig 4.).
Search of the area revealed no source from
whence a large number of people could have
obtained water enough to have established the kind
of permanent camp indicated. Ranchmen say that it
is many miles to any permanent spring or stream
where a reliable water supply now exists.
Furthermore there were no oak or other nut trees
near there from which seeds or nuts could have
been obtained. The valley below was filled with
mesquite trees and it is possible that the makers of
the holes may have ground the hard mesquite beans
in them.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
Mr. D. D. Parramore stated that he had first
observed the holes twenty-eight years ago and that
they were then worn down as much as at the present
time and that he had not observed the slightest
change in them during that period.
On the side of a mountain situated about one
quarter of a mile east of the ledge, Mr. Lowry found
a beautiful iridescent Abalone shell pendant 3 inches
long, 1 1/8 inches wide at the top and 1 7/16 inches
wide at the bottom. It had three holes drilled in the
top. (Plate 12, Fig. 2). This pendant and also a
recessed based unbarbed projectile point, nearly
two inches long found by the author, (Plate 12, Fig.
5), were found in a small gulley below a large
overhanging rock where they evidently had washed
from under its shelter. It is possible that these may
have been lost under the rock shelter at a later date.
A very interesting find was made by Mr. Sayles
immediately back of the ledge containing the mortar
holes. It was the larger portion of a small bird point
which was flat on one side and of exactly the same
culture type as the one later found in the soil taken
from the graves of the two flat headed
dolichocephalic skeletons found by the author in
Shackelford County. The author has examined other

37

groups of mortar holes at several widely separated
points in Texas, notably near Christoval and San
Saba, Texas. All other such holes seen have been
quite round and about eight inches across and a
foot deep. The boat shaped holes maintain the same
shape from top to bottom. A remnant only a few
inches long is wide in the center and brought to
dull points at the ends exactly like the uneroded
ones. How the work was done is hard to deduce.
(Plate 12, Fig. 1, shows a stone found in Jones
County which may have been a pestle. It is twentythree inches long and 2 1/3 inches in diameter. Such
pestles of stone or wood may have been used but
none were found on the site. However, three flat
mano stones were found on the site.) No other
artifacts which might have been used either as
pestles or grinding stones have been found.
When we take into consideration the many
indications of age, such as stone erosion,
disappearance of water supply and the presence of
a known ancient form of arrow point with the fact
that the site is within thirty-five miles of Colorado,
Texas, where the extinct form of bison skeleton was
found associated with flint projectile points, we
have a site of very interesting probabilities as to
extreme age.

