Further Remarks on the PreColumbian Relationships

59

FURTHER REMARKS ON THE PRECOLUMBIAN RELATIONSHIPS
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND MEXICO*
BY J. ALDEN MASON
It is generally believed that most of the higher
elements of North American aboriginal culture
originated in Mexico and spread from there to the
less highly civilized peripheral regions. North of
Mexico the areas of highest development were the
Pueblo region of our Southwest, and the Mound
region of the Mississippi Valley and the Southeast.
The cultural relations between these two regions
and between each of them and Mexico is one of
the most important problems of American
archaeology and one upon which much superficial
theorizing has been done, generally a generation or
two ago, but very little sound rationalization to date.
It needs much more study, and the present paper is
an attempt to formulate some of the problems and
the present state of our knowledge.
The temporal element especially needs to be
carefully considered. It is generally accepted that
agriculture and pottery had their origins in Mexico,
yet the rise and spread of these cultural elements
took place at such a remote period that we do not
generally consider them under the heading of
“Mexican influences” any more than we consider
the Indian himself as an Asiatic, despite the fact
that his remote ancestors probably came from that
continent. At the time of white settlement corn
culture had spread to practically its maximum
possible natural limit of cultivation, and all the tribes
cultivating it had no traditions, except mythological
ones, concerning origin. Pottery had an area of
distribution practically equal but probably spread
at a later period since the earliest agricultural people
of the Southwest, the Basket-makers, apparently
were ignorant of the art of pottery-making. By
“Mexican influence” we mean influences of a later
period from the higher cultures. If, for instance,
we find in the United States corn culture of a
specifically Mexican type, such as is indicated by
the use of the metate, or pottery of specifically
Mexican types, then we may truly be entitled to
posit Mexican influences.

Of recent years we have become a little less
certain of influences from Mexico. The rather heavy
crude pottery of the Northern regions, of the
Algonkians and the Eskimo, may have had a
different center of distribution, possibly even an
Asiatic one. The ceremonial ball-courts, of which
several have been found in Arizona, need not be
ipso facto of more southern origin; they might
belong to an old common cultural background, or
it is not impossible that the influence ran in the
opposite direction.
In the Mississippi Valley, especially in the
prehistoric mounds, are found some resemblances
to later Mexican culture, which may possibly be
due to direct contact with or influences from
Mexico. Among these may be mentioned the custom
of making large mounds, somewhat resembling the
pyramids of Mexico, certain shapes of pottery
vessels, elements of design such as the horned or
feathered serpent and human figures found on shell
and copper gorgets, and some elements of social
and religious organization found among some of
the tribes, such as the Natchez, at the time of the
first European occupation. Yet between this region,
the Southwest Pueblos, and the nearest high
civilization of Mexico stretch hundreds of miles of
prairie or arid land or of desolate swamps, which
were populated at the time of discovery by peoples
of lower and different cultural status, with little or
no agriculture, pottery or weaving. How, then, was
Mexican influence, if such there was, spread?
Doubtless we must look to archaeological
investigations for the answer, and these have been
greatly neglected in these intervening regions.
Probably the first question requiring
determination is: Is there any proof of actual
relatively late Mexican influence in the Mound
region? Unfortunately practically all of those who
have written upon this topic, with the exception of
Mrs. Nuttall1 and Spinden2, have been specialists
upon the Mound region with little knowledge of

60

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Mexican archaeology, and any unusual and
especially excellent object found has been
considered as resembling Mexican work, or as
showing Mexican influence, without due
consideration of the characteristics of the many
different Mexican areas, or of the temporal
elements. Many of the older writers, who regarded
the “Mound-Builders” as a separate and now extinct
higher culture, leaped at once to a conclusion of
direct Mexican migration, many of them considering
the Mound-Builders as Aztecs or Toltecs, some
even reversing the direction of migration. Now that
it is generally believed that the mounds were made
by the ancestors of the present or recent Indians of
that region, such close relationships are no longer
accepted, but Mexican influence is still generally
credited. Such influence could have occurred in one
of three ways: by a large scale migration; by
migration of a small group which might have
introduced a small number of definite elements; or
by an infiltration of cultural elements and ideas by
means of slow spread or diffusion from tribe to tribe
without any introduction of alien blood or language.
In comparing two cultures in order to appraise
the degree of diffusion of cultural elements between
them, it is essential to consider not only elements
that occur in common, but also the absence of
fundamental elements. The importance of such
absences must be appraised differently in accord
with the nature of the hypothetical method of
diffusion, or rather they will indicate the method.
Thus in a mass migration the most fundamental
elements of the autochthonous culture will remain
in the new area, the details changed. Resemblances
should be found in physical type, language folklore
and fundamentals of economic culture. Among the
most fundamental elements of Mexican culture are
the use of the metate and the toasting of corn cakes,
stone masonry, and loom weaving. None of these
is found in the Mound region. I think it would be
generally agreed that all these elements differ
radically in the Mexican and Mound regions, and
that therefore this hypothesis must be ruled out. In
cases of slow diffusion without migration, readily
adaptable elements might be spread, but it is obvious
that these elements would be found in the
intervening regions. In the hypothesis of a rapid

migration of a small group, close or exact
correspondences in minor details may be found, but
the major elements of culture would be unchanged,
and no such correspondence need exist in the
intervening areas.
The following elements of possible Mexican
origin in the southern Mississippi Valley, apart from
the older generalized elements such as agriculture
and pottery, have been suggested by Moorehead3:
truncated pyramids or temple mounds, monolithic
hatchets, seated human figures, sculptured idol
heads, plumed serpents as decorative or symbolic
design motives, vessels with tripod feet, certain
engraved shells, spool-shaped ear ornaments, and
long ceremonial swords chipped from flint.
These nine elements might be classified into three
groups as regards their natures: (1) the very
generalized trait of building truncated pyramids; (2)
the very specific comparison of the figures of the
plumed serpent and the human figures of the shell
and copper gorgets; (3) the other six.
The building of truncated pyramids is a very
fundamental element of lower Mississippi Valley
culture, and obviously on an ancient horizon. It
could hardly have been introduced by a small
immigrant group; it must either have been brought
by an early mass migration, accompanied by the
other fundamental elements of culture, or spread
by slow contact. In the latter case certainly, and in
the former case probably, similar structures would
be found in the region intervening between the
Mississippi Valley and Southern or Central Mexico;
apparently they do not. On the other hand, the
concept of an elevated substructure for a temple,
which must of necessity be truncated, is such a
natural one, and occurs in so many different places
in the world, that the possibility of independent
origin is very great, and more specific and detailed
points of resemblance with Mexican templepyramids must be advanced before any connection
can be considered as proved. It must also be
remembered that in the region where these are most
frequently found the land is low, frequently flooded,
and the mounds even today used as refuges in case
of flood. Even in this area probably the majority of
mounds are mortuary rather than domiciliary or

Further Remarks on the PreColumbian Relationships
ceremonial, which is never the case in Mexico; they
are uniformly made of earth instead of stone or
adobe as in Mexico, and, on the whole, the case
for independent origin is probably better than that
for diffusion.
Monolithic axes are unknown in the Mexican
and Maya regions, but are especially typical of
Caribbean Colombia and the Antilles. In the
southeastern United States the occurrence is rare
and sporadic. A good case may be made out for
Antillean connections, but independent origin is by
no means ruled out.
Long ceremonial swords chipped from flint are
also not typical of Mexico, nor of the Antilles either,
in which latter region chipped objects are almost
unknown. They should probably be regarded merely
as a high development of a characteristic art of the
Eastern United States.
Seated human figures and sculptured idol heads
are common in the higher Mexican cultures, but
here again the concepts are so general and
unspecific that I cannot consider them as proving
connections without more details in common or
proof of continuous distribution. Independent origin
is very plausible.
Vessels with tripod feet are very characteristic
of Mexico but far less characteristic of the Mound
region. In Mexico they are most commonly found
on flat dishes or bowls, in the Mound region on
narrow necked vessels. Spool-shaped ear ornaments
are found in both regions, but here again relatively
few types of ear ornaments are possible and the
spool type is found in many widely separated parts
of the world and was almost certainly evolved
independently several times.

61

certainly look superficially very Mexican-like, but
more than superficial resemblances must be found
before Mexican influence can be considered as
proved. Mrs. Nuttall has compared certain ones in
which Mexican elements seem to be most obvious,
mainly from Etowah, Georgia, with Mexican
figures, generally those from various codices, and
has published her comments upon these. She was
apparently furnished with photographs of all
Etowah art objects and searched for resemblances
in Mexican art. Considering the wealth of Mexican
material and Mrs. Nuttall’s unexcelled familiarity
with it, it is but natural that a number of
resemblances were found. Her best analogy is with
the Etowah gorgets showing a human figure with a
nose like an eagle’s beak, lines on the cheek which
may indicate the eagle’s mouth and tongue,
headdress with dots which might represent pearls,
fringed loincloth, and circular ear ornaments,
brandishing in one hand an object which might be a
spearthrower (although spearthrowers have been
found in the eastern United States only in Florida),
and in the other a decapitated human head, or an
object in that form, around the eyes of which are
lines which may represent tears. These she compares
with figures from Mexican codices depicting “eagle
warriors” which show the eagle face, dotted
headdress, fringed loincloth and circular earornaments. Out of the hundreds of other Mexican
figures she has found some which show prancing
figures holding spearthrowers and figures holding
decapitated heads with tears in their eyes. Between
other Etowah gorget figures and Mexican figures
she notes resemblances in the kneeling and crosslegged postures, and serpent heads with recurved
upper jaw and triangular lines in the tail.4

Mrs. Nuttall also suggests possible Mexican
The remaining two elements are concerned with influences in Etowah spider gorgets, and notes the
art, and are more specific and distinctive. The resemblance in spool-shaped earplugs. She notes
plumed or homed serpent is a very characteristic the absence of woodpecker figures in Mexico.
element of Mexican religion and art, not so
Mrs. Nuttall makes a good, but not quite
characteristic, but still important, in the Pueblo
convincing case. She does not commit herself
region, and even less common in the Mississippi
regarding the method of transfer, contenting herself
Valley.
with concluding that it is not impossible that a band
The shell and copper gorgets of the eastern of Aztecs may, in the unsettled period immediately
Mound region with their human and animal figures following the Spanish Conquest, about 1520, have
wandered to Georgia.

62

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Mr. Moorehead, with greater assurance, states
it as his theory that the contact was in very early
times, and that a group of Indians crossed from
Yucatan to Cuba, populated the Antilles, and then
crossed to Florida, from which group the Mound
Culture developed. Although this problem will later
be taken up in more detail it might possibly be
objected at this point that such an early migration
could not explain the Etowah gorgets, whose
detailed resemblances are with specifically Toltec
and Aztec art.
Dr. Spinden has studied the question more
deeply and reached more tenable conclusions which,
even though he has published his data only in brief
form, carry great weight though not absolute
conviction. The “Eagle Warriors” in his opinion
were a cult of the Toltecs who flourished at about
the beginning of the current millennium. They are
depicted in both regions as anthropomorphic eagles
bearing decapitated human heads. The plumed
serpent was one of their symbols. The far-flung
trade relations of the Toltecs carried this cult and
the art motives and symbols associated with it,
together with certain technique such as that of
engraving shell and copper gorgets, to the Mound
and Pueblo regions in the United States, to Peru to
the South. Probably the traders to the Mississippi
Valley bartered for native copper from the Great
Lakes region, those to the Southwest for turquoise.
The hypothesis seems very reasonable, but we
should await Dr. Spinden’s presentation of his
complete data and argument before considering it
as proved.
These detailed resemblances in art are in a class
apart from the other seven that we have considered
and are explicable on Spinden’s hypothesis of
trading bands. They are relatively on a late horizon
(Spinden apparently thinks about the thirteenth
century). The contacts could not have greatly
affected the relatively civilized peoples of the
Mound region, and could have had little if any effect
on the nomadic peoples of lower culture in the
intervening regions.

To summarize my opinion as regards these nine
elements which have been proposed as indicating
Mexican influence in the Mississippi Valley;
Monolithic axes and long ceremonial swords
chipped of flint I do not consider as typical of
Mexico, and therefore should be ruled out of
consideration. Seated human figures, sculptured
idol heads and truncated pyramids or temple
mounds seem to me so unspecific and general in
character that a hypothesis of independent origin
would seem more plausible than one of diffusion.
Pottery vessels with tripod feet and spool-shaped
ear-ornaments may also be of independent
development, but diffusion has here a better
argument than in the case of the other five. Only
certain of the art elements in shell and copper and
that of the plumed or horned serpent seem to carry
a presumption of Mexican origin.
The latter two elements apparently did not
appear in Mexico until the Toltec horizon and could
therefore not have been diffused until that time.
Pyramids and tripod vessels are found in the Archaic
Cultures of the Valley of Mexico, and seated human
figures, spool-shaped ear-ornaments and sculptured
human heads were also probably characteristic of
these and some of them probably also of the archaic
Maya Q-complex. These might therefore have been
diffused at an earlier period. If this were the case,
before the development of trade routes, these
elements should be found in the intervening regions.
Let us now consider the regions intervening
between the Mississippi Valley and Mexico to see
if possible migrations or diffusions may have left
traces of Mexican influences here.
There are three routes by which Mexican
influences could have reached the Mississippi
Valley: (1) from Yucatan via Cuba to Florida; (2)
from the Southwest Pueblo region, where certain
few Mexican influences are indubitable and
accepted; (3) directly from Mexico via the Texas
coast A table showing the occurrence of the nine
elements, which have been considered in these
regions might be suggestive; X denoting presence,
O absence, and ? uncertainty.

Further Remarks on the PreColumbian Relationships

Mexico
1.Monolithic axes
O
2. Flint swords
?
3. Seated human figures
X
4. Sculptured idol heads
X
5. Truncated pyramids
X
6. Spool-shaped ear plugs X
7. Tripod vessels
X
8.Plumed serpent
X
9.Art of engraved gorgets X
7

Pueblo
O
O
?
O
O
O?
O
X
O
1

It is seen from the foregoing table that of the
nine elements proposed as indicating Mexican
influences, two of which are not characteristic of
Mexico, not one has been found in the typical Plains
region or on the Texas Coast; almost all are also
missing in the Pueblo region, the majority are absent
in the Antilles, and most not even found in Florida.
While the archaeology of the Texas Coast and the
Plains is but superficially known, and future
researches may reveal the presence of one or two
of these elements, yet it is practically certain that
almost all of the nine elements never existed in these
regions. It is difficult to see, therefore, how they
could have served as corridors for the transfer of
Mexican elements into the typical eastern mound
region, by means of mass migrations or slow
diffusion. The route via the Antilles and Florida has,
on these grounds, a little better case, but by no
means a good one.
As regards this route, Miss Gower5 concluded
that “So far there are no satisfactory indications of
Central American influence on the culture of the
Antilles.” That there are Antillean influences in the
southeastern states she accepts, regarding them as
“too great to be purely fortuitous,” and she
considers them as due to “a series of not extremely
intimate contacts occurring at intervals during a
long period of time,” together with the “existence
of a common primitive culture.” Mexican and
Antillean cultures are so unlike that Moorehead’s
hypothesis of a very early migration from Yucatan
to Cuba, thus populating the Antilles, cannot be
accepted. Neither is the slow diffusion theory

Plains
O
O
O
O
O
O?
O
O
O
O

Texas
Coast
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O

Miss.
Valley
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
9

63

Florida
O?
O?
O?
O?
X
X
O
X
X?
4

Antilles
X
O
X?
X?
O
X
O
O
O
4

acceptable, since no objects of a nature resembling
Mexican have ever been found, to my knowledge,
in Cuba or the other islands. It is not impossible, of
course, that at the time of the conquest, or possibly
in the days of the late Maya Empire, a band may
have crossed from Yucatan to Cuba and thence to
Florida and Etowah, where they introduced the
supposedly Mexican art elements. However there
are no other indications of trade over this route
and I consider such a journey to Etowah by this
route as highly improbable.
The other two possible routes have been
discussed at more length in my former article in
this Bulletin. In the Arkansas mound region are
mounds, generally ascribed to the Caddoan peoples,
the pottery of which shows surprisingly close
connections with that of the archaic Q-culture of
Central America as pointed out by Vaillant.6
The influence that brought this must have been
more of the nature of a true migration than the
ephemeral trade relations that may have influenced
the culture of the eastern mounds, such as Etowah.
It was also presumably on a much earlier horizon.
Strangely, there are few evidences of such passage
in the areas between Arkansas and either the Pueblo
region or northeastern Mexico. In the former region
there appear to be none, but on the Gulf Coast there
are a few evidences, mainly in ceramics, that indicate
that the influence may have taken this route.
There are, then, the following possibilities of
influence from Mexico in the United States: an early
extensive influence or migration from eastern

64

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

lowland Mexico to Arkansas; early contacts
between highland central Mexico and the Pueblo
region; late ephemeral trade relations between
central highland Mexico and both the Pueblo region
and the eastern mound area.

Hamburg in 1930, has never been published in full, but some
of his conclusions are given in his article on “Indian
Symbolism,” one of the publications of The Exposition of
Indian Tribal Arts, New York, 1931.
(3) Warren K. Moorehead, “The Mound Builder Problem to
Date”; American Anthropologist (n. s.), 31, 3, 544-554,
1929.

Museum of The University of Pennsylvania, (4) Possibly impertinently I may remark that I am not
convinced that one of the reasons why the serpent stands as
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
a symbol for water in Mexican and Mexicanized cultures is
*This paper is the revised and revamped remainder of a
longer article from which the section with special reference
to Texas was excised and published in this Bulletin as “The
Place of Texas In Pre-Columbian Relationships between the
United States and Mexico,” Vol. 7, 29-46, 1935.
(1) Zelia Nuttall, “Comparison between Etowan, Mexican
and Mayan Designs,” in “Exploration of the Etowah Site In
Georgia,” by Warren King Moorehead, 137-144; Department
of Archaeology, Phillips Academy, Andover, Mass., New
Haven, 1932.
(2) Dr. H. J. Spinden’s monograph on “Toltec War Cults,”
read at the International Congress of Americanists in

the resemblance between the Aztec words coatl, snake, and
atl, water. The symbol must be a very old one and extends
beyond the bounds of the Aztec language. The ending tl, it
must be remembered, is a nominal suffix; the roots are coa
and a, surely not close enough to be a causative factor. The
use of these words in rebuses must be secondary and
relatively late.
(5) Charlotte Gower, “The Northern and Southern
Affiliations of Antillean Culture,” Memoir 35, American
Anthropological Association, 1927.
(6) G. C. Vaillant, “Some Resemblances in the Ceramics of
Central and North America,” Medallion Paper 12, Gila
Pueblo, Globe, Arizona, 1932.

