Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

35

POTTERY OF THE EL PASO REGION
BY EILEEN E. ALVES
The pottery found in the vicinity of El Paso,
Texas, presents an amazing number of different
types. A collection of sherds made from one of the
wind swept, water washed village sites, about half
a mile long by a quarter of a mile wide, situated
within fifty miles of El Paso, will include a
representation of types known in Arizona, New
Mexico, and Old Mexico, as well as
types less widely scattered.
The sherds described in this article
are surface finds only, no known
stratigraphic work of any importance
having been done in this locality. Very
few refuse piles, or remains of buildings
suitable for stratigraphic work, have
been found in the ruins near here.
This paper is a mere statement of
pottery found, and does not pretend to
do more than report the many types of
pottery scattered on mesa and plain
within a fifty miles radius of El Paso.
Red and Black on Brown
A red and black on brown pottery is
found here in the greatest abundance,
Plate 5
POTTERY SITES, AND POTTERY
OF EL PASO DISTRICT
1. Campsite San Adreas Mountains,
Jornada del Muerto Range Reserve.
2. Excavations at Hot Wells, Texas.
3. Mimbres pottery.
4. Chihuahua Pottery.
5. Chihuahua Pottery, polychrome.
6. Chuperdero Black and White
Pottery Jug, Three Rivers, New
Mexico.
7. Stone bowl, and animal effigy.
8. Bowl.

sharing with Chuperdero as being the dominant type
of pottery in this region. It is called El Paso Black
and Red on Brown, or El Paso Polychrome.
A whole bowl found near Newman, New
Mexico, contained several beads, twelve
beautifully made arrow points, pieces of asbestos,

36

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and two lumps of some other mineral. The black
and red geometrical figures on this coarse brown
bowl make a rough but handsome appearance.
This pottery is found in great quantities as far
south as Casas Grande in Mexico, but seems to fade
out towards Three Rivers, New Mexico.
Plate 6
POTTERY OF EL PASO DISTRICT

Chuperdero
Another common example here is the black on
white pottery called Chuperdero; very different
from the beautiful black on white Mimbres. This
Chuperdero pottery is a familiar type of sherd on
our old village sites. The square base, the grey color
and the rough striated interiors as if done by a coarse
brush, and the rather crude decorations
are among its characteristics.

1. El Paso Red and Black on Brown.
2. Top: Chihuahua.
Middle: Chuperdero.
Bottom: Mimbres.
3. Top: Corrugated and coiled ware.
Bottom, left: Middle Gila Polychrome, variation.
Bottom, right: Little Colorado, variation.
4. Miscellaneous; handles, coarse, brown, and buff ware.

A few sherds, apparently of this
same ware, found at Hot Wells Ranch
had a very delicate pink wash over the
interior. Otherwise it resembled the
same black on white Chuperdero. Most
likely it was simply an individual idea
of the potter making it, without any
significance.
Little Colorado and Middle Gila
Polychrome.
These two kinds of pottery or very
close relations are found in sufficient
quantities to put them out of the stray or
intrusive class. They are usually
represented in every village site
although in very small quantities.
Mimbres and Casas Grande
Polychrome
Mimbres is ordinarily found at
every site, which is true in a much
lesser degree with Casas Grande or
Chihuahua polychrome. It is generally
conceded that Mimbres is the older of
the two. The clear cut designs of black
on white, the smooth interior, and the
naturalistic or geometric figures are of
extreme beauty.
Three fourths of a wonderful bowl
was found along the Ruidoso River in
the White Mountains. It had a
naturalistic design of a mountain sheep
filled in with a very complicated
geometric pattern. This may tend to
carry Mimbres culture rather further

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

37

east than was at first suspected. Perfect pieces of
In line, color and material Chihuahua stands
this pottery are found in great numbers near Deming, easily first, but Mimbres runs it a very close second.
New Mexico, the center of this culture. There are
several fine collections here gathered from the
Miscellaneous
immediate vicinity of Deming—one of which
Corrugated and red ware are also found as well
contains a fine example of Mimbres polychrome
as many incised pieces. Painted birds are reported,
which is very rare.
and also several pottery animals. At the Hueco
Tanks a small clay arm was found with a bracelet
Chihuahua, or Casas Grande Polychrome
around it, very similar to some from San Juan de
Of Chihuahua pottery, the sherds mostly found Teotihucan far to the south, near the City of Mexico.
are the polychrome painted ware, beautifully made
Recent acquisitions to our collection are four
of fine clay, and very artistically decorated. This
food bowls in red and black, and a red on terracotta
ware is generally conceded to have reached the
bowl, all from our district—and apparently rather
high water mark in prehistoric ceramics.
rare.

