38

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

BURNED ROCK MOUNDS OF SOUTHWEST TEXAS
BY ERNEST W. WILSON
From the time of the first settler down to the present
day the South one-half of the Western part of Texas,
has been a ranching country. In this section of the State
the searcher after archaeological remains will find them
to be least disturbed. The camp sites, mounds and
other remains of peoples who inhabited this section in
the past, have, in many counties, never been explored
or studied by the archaeologist.

mounds are found, but only those mounds having these
peculiarities will be discussed in this paper.

The writer has found mounds on the headwaters
of the Frio, Llano, San Saba and Colorado rivers and
on the lower Pecos. All of these rivers have their heads
in the part of Texas described in the beginning of this
paper. Plate 16, Figure 1, shows a burnt rock mound.
Plate 16, Figure 2, shows a cross section of a mound
It is a curious fact that in parts of this section of the which was fifty feet in diameter. It has been cut across
State, there are found piles or mounds of burned rocks. by road making. In the center it is less than three feet
The size of the rocks in them is less than one’s doubled thick.
fist. They are in circular piles or mounds. The mounds
vary in circumference from
possibly 16 to 50 feet, and
from a few inches to sometimes
3 feet high in the center. When
dug into, they are found to be
composed of stones of the
general size referred to above
mixed with ashes and dirt. The
base of the mound proper
always extends into the ground.
They are covered to depths
which vary to as much as two
feet. The rocks in the mounds
are of limestone similar to those
found in abundance on the
nearby hills. The entire mounds
show the effect of having been
thoroughly burned, but not
excessively burned. When the
rocks have not been disturbed
the mounds are always round.
A farmer who had hauled off
the rocks of mounds, would
often remark that after being
leveled and plowed for many
years the burned foundations of
them always remained and
Plate 16. BURNED ROCK MOUNDS
could not be effaced. Hearths
1. Mound; rocks scattered by erosion and cattle.
and possibly other types of
2. Cross section through mound, cut by road grading.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
This section of Texas, is sometimes called the
arid part of Texas, but it is well watered with many
streams of clear water, and they are bordered with
tall timber among which are some of the finest pecan
trees in Texas. On top of the hills the country varies
from cedar brakes to rolling black divide land
covered with liveoak trees. To this day game is
found, and particularly is the wild turkey common.
It was an ideal place for Indians or pre-historic
man to live. There are thousands of these mounds
scattered over this section. The finest specimens
are found in Menard, Edwards, and Kimble
Counties, and Westward from there towards the
Pecos. Every river and small creek and water hole
has its quota.

39

numerous and have the same general characteristics
there must have been a practical reason for their
existence. The following general characteristics of
the mounds are summarized:
FIRST: No mound of this type has been found
by the writer out of the sotol country. This statement
calls for a description of the sotol plant. It was
commonly called soto grass by the settlers. It
belongs to the yucca family, there being at least
two species in the state. Dasylirion texanum in south
and central Texas, and Dasyliriom wheeleri in the
western portion of the State west of the Pecos and
Devil’s River. The plant has serrated leaves of
something over one-half an inch in width. The
leaves grow out of a large bulb. The bulb was used
as food by the Indians, and the first settlers. It has
been almost exterminated by the early cattlemen
feeding it to their cattle in dry winters. They would
go out with grubbing hoes and dig up the bulbs for
the cattle to eat. This plant grew in profusion over
the section described at the time the first settlers
came in. The area covered by the mounds was also
originally covered with the sotol plant.

The location of a particular mound was always
near wood and water at the time of its construction.
The watercourse near its location might have since
changed its course, but the old creek or river bed
remains to tell the story. Some mounds are located
on the divide country, but they are always near a
wet weather water hole or lake. When placed near
a water course the mound was placed above the
ordinary high water mark, but the open space
SECOND: The mounds are composed of
desired back of a camp-site did not always appear
limestone rocks only. A kind of rock which will not
desirable in locating a mound.
stand excessive burning.
The writer lived in Kimble County on the
THIRD: Every mound has been well burned but
headwaters of the Llano river from the year he was
not excessively burned.
born until the year 1920. When he was a boy, the
country had just been settled and was devoted to the
FOURTH: Every mound contains ashes and dirt.
live stock industry as it is today. The mounds were a
FIFTH: They are located, as a rule, some distance
great source of interest and curiosity to him. His
from a regular camp-site.
grandfather, who was in this section before it began to
be settled by white men was approached on the subject
SIXTH: Every mound dug into extends into the
and he pronounced them to be Indian remains. But ground.
few people had even noticed them, but those that had,
The early literature relating to this particular locality
thought them to be Indian remains. But their purpose
will be called upon to tell us something about this
was a sealed book. For many years the writer has
subject. The first quotation will have to do with “soto
been trying to find out why piles or mounds of burned
grass” or “wild artichokes” as a food, and is as follows:
rocks should have been left by Indians or pre-historic
The dinner consisted of bear steaks,
man.
flapjacks, fried in bear’s oil, hard tack, a pot
Every indication points to the fact that the Indian
of boiled rice, coffee, etc., and wild
or pre-historic man of this section of Texas, was a
artichokes, which last grew abundantly in the
practical man. He did not waste effort, and every effort
vicinity of the camp. The wild artichokes
was used to sustain life. Since the mounds are so
mentioned in the foregoing bill of fare, grow

40

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

abundantly in some portions of northwest
Texas, usually upon rocky and barren soils.
The plant is very similar in appearance to
“bear grass,” but its leaves are serrated and
of a deeper green The best mode of cooking
them in the woods, is the same as that for
cooking a beef or deer’s head. A trench is
dug and a fire built in it. When thoroughly
heated, the ashes and coals are raked out and
the roots put in and covered with them, where
they are left for several hours. Prepared in
this way they are really an excellent
vegetable, and make a very acceptable
addition to the hunter’s ordinary repast.l
Another interesting statement which seems to
bear on the mound proposition is a statement made by
F. M. Buckelew, who was captured by Indians when
he was a boy fourteen years of age, in the year 1866.
He was captured in the Sabinal Canyon by the Lipan
Indians and taken further West to the Pecos country.
Another choice food of these Indians, and
one in almost constant use, was the “Soto”
root, or bulb of the soto plant, which grew in
great abundance along these western rivers,
and which, when accessible, formed a choice
winter food for cattle. In the preparation of
this plant for food, large quantities of the bulbs
were gathered and collected in a place
suitable for a large kiln. A large circular hole
was then dug three or four feet deep and
several feet in diameter. In this hole they
would place a large pile of wood and rock
in such a way that the rocks would become
thoroughly heated by the time the wood was

consumed. The rocks were then replaced in
such a way that the soto could be placed on
and around them. When this was completed,
brush and leaves were placed next to the soto,
and the entire heap covered over with dirt so
as to make it air tight. This was allowed to
remain several days during which time the
heat from the rocks would penetrate the soto,
and thoroughly cook it. When satisfied that
the contents were thoroughly cooked they
would remove the dirt and leaves, exposing
a glistening white heap of crisp soto. The
bulbs were then spread out in the sun where
they could dry. When perfectly dry, the flakes
or thin layers would separate easily. This
completed, the task of preparing it for food
was just begun, as it was necessary to make
large holes in rocks or logs in which the soto
was placed when it was beaten and ground
by large wooden pestles until it resembled
white flour. This flour was then mixed with
water and made into small cakes and baked
in the ashes and embers of a fire.2
The Lipan Indian method of cooking “Soto Grass”
very easily fits into the description of the burned rock
mounds as they exist today. The dirt would be removed
after the cooking process had been completed, next
came the removal of the bulbs. This would leave the
pile of rocks, and they naturally settled into a mound
of burned rocks mingled with ashes and dirt.
1. Young Explorers, or the Adventures of Jack Doebel, pp.
129, 130.
2. F. M. Buckelew, Buckelew, The Indian Captive, published
by the Mason Herald, 1911, pp 72, 73.

