Excavation of Pueblo Grande de Nevada

65

EXCAVATION OF PUEBLO GRANDE DE NEVADA
BY M. R. HARRINGTON
Immediately after the completion of Boulder
Dam, the rising waters impounded by it, now called
Lake Mead, began to inundate the sites of camps,
villages, caves and rockshelters once occupied by
ancient man along the Colorado river and its
affluents in Nevada and Arizona. Two of these sites
were of real importance, one a late Basketmaker
village at the junction of the Virgin and the
Colorado; another, Puebloan in character, at the
mouth of the Walapai Wash.
The loss of the Basketmaker site is especially
unfortunate, because its ruined pit-dwellings
contained charred timbers, some of them pine drift
logs from the Colorado, by which the place might
have been dated by the tree-ring method. This date
once established it would have been possible to
figure approximate dates for other ancient
settlements in the vicinity; for instance the so-called
Lost City of Nevada which we know followed the
Late Basketmaker occupation. The “city” cannot
be dated by its own charred timbers for these are
always willow or some sort of mesquite which are
useless for the purpose.

incidentally in adjacent territory while the work of
rescue was going on.
Last but not least a trailside museum was erected
by the Park Service near the little town of Overton,
Nevada, to house the finds.
The “Lost City,” it may be remembered, was
discovered in 1924 by two brothers, John and Fay
Perkins, local residents, and reported by them to
Col. J. G. Scrugham, now Congressman, but at that
time Governor of Nevada. The writer visited it with
the Governor in the fall of the same year. It was
officially christened “Pueblo Grande de Nevada”
but some newspaper writer dubbed it the “Lost
City” and this name caught the popular fancy.

It turned out to be a group of ruins, more or less
covered by sand dunes, scattered along east of the
Muddy River between Overton and St. Thomas for
nearly six miles. The period, judging from the
pottery, was Early or Developmental Pueblo also
known to archaeologists as Pueblo II, which
proceeded the building of the Cliff Dwellings and
the great four-story communal houses marking
Pueblo III, the Great Period of Pueblo Indian preLost also beyond recall are a salt-mine containing
history.
a deep aboriginal deposit, about six miles up the
Virgin from its mouth; also a dry cave at Pierce’s
Excavations sponsored by the Museum of the
Ferry, on the Colorado just below the mouth of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, and assisted
Grand Canyon, in which sandals and other by the State of Nevada, were continued in the “Lost
perishable objects from Basketmaker age up to City” two seasons, in charge of the writer, and many
recent Walapai Indian were perfectly preserved.
of the ancient houses were uncovered. It was found
that these houses, constructed usually of adobe, or
So much for the darker side of the picture; there
of adobe and stone combined, were one-story
is fortunately a much brighter side. Thanks to a
affairs, commonly with small rooms arranged
happy three cornered arrangement between the
around a court or patio. The number of rooms ran
National Park Service, the Southwest Museum and
usually from six or eight to twenty or thirty, but
the Civilian Conservation Corps it was possible to
one house was uncovered comprising nearly one
save much of scientific and popular interest before
hundred rooms arranged about two courtyards. An
the water reached it, especially from the “Lost City”
interesting feature of this house was the fact that
itself and elsewhere in the Moapa Valley; moreover
part of it had been destroyed and rebuilt three times
many things were found within the very portals of
with a somewhat different floor plan, the buried
the Grand Canyon, not to mention discoveries made
foundations, one below the other, telling the story.

66

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

When the Museum of the American Indian
closed its work in 1926 this house remained
unfinished, and its completion was one of the first
tasks attempted when excavation was resumed
under Park Service auspices in 1933, with the
writer, now Curator of the Southwest Museum,
again in charge. Although a large sand-dune had to
be removed to get down to the crumbling walls,
the force of about thirty CCC boys under two
experienced foremen made short work of
completing this task and turned then to other ruins
the excavation of which had not been hitherto
attempted. When the writer left the project in 1935
more than one hundred distinct houses had been
uncovered in the “Lost City” and a large number of
specimens unearthed, of which the Southwest
Museum received a representative collection.

Since 1935 the work has preceded with the
writer in the capacity of consultant, and at last
accounts was still continuing in a race with the
advancing waters, and the collections have been
greatly enriched, although with a smaller crew and
only one foreman in the Moapa Valley sector. The
museum was completed in 1935 and has already
been visited by thousands of tourists and students.
The material removed from the ruins consists,
for the most part, of pottery, usually broken of
course, but with plenty of whole vessels to give an
excellent idea of what the ancient people could
make along this line—bowls, graceful water jars,
canteens, cooking pots, occasional toys, and odd
pieces. The decoration is mostly confined to the
inside of bowls, although other vessels were
sometimes ornamented on the outside. The patterns
are geometric, frequently well planned
and executed, and are made with black
lines painted on a gray, white or
sometimes a lustrous red background,
and made permanent by firing.
Corrugated ware—that is, pottery
ornamented with parallel ridges,
sometimes modified by notching, is
very common, especially in the latter
houses of the “Lost City” and the
outlying settlements.

PLATE 21.
Nos. 1 and 2. Stone hammers with original wooden
handles, from the ancient salt mines near Pueblo
Grande De Nevada ruins.
No. 3. War-club made of Elk antler, Pueblo Grande
De Nevada ruins.

In heavy stone-work we have first
of all metates upon which the people
ground their corn—trough-shaped
slabs open at one end, and the manos
or hand stones used with them range
from elliptical to rectangular and are
usually rather long and flat in
proportion. There are a few pestles
made of stone, used in mortar holes in
ledges, but no grooved stone axes;
rudely chipped choppers held in the
hand apparently answering this
purpose. However, grooved mauls are
sometimes found in the turquoise mines
worked by these people, and notched
hammers are common in their saltmines, occasionally with wooden
handles still attached. For ordinary

Excavation of Pueblo Grande de Nevada
hammering purposes a more or less globular tough
stone was preferred although flat pebbles showing
use as hammer stones sometimes appear. Classified
also as heavy stonework are the hatch-covers
chipped from flat slabs used to cover smoke-holes
and hatchways in the roofs of the houses.

67

implements doubtless used in chipping flint, and,
shaped from elk-antlers which must have been
imported from the west, large war-clubs with
projecting points, really formidable weapons.

Shell was, of course, all imported from the
Pacific coast or the Gulf of California; and in this
The characteristic arrowheads of the “Lost material we find bracelets, beads and pendants made
City” Pueblos were thin and well
made, with narrow stems and wide
shoulders or barbs; the knife-blades
stemless; the drill-points varied in
form, some intended to be used with
a wooden shaft, others to be held in
the hand. An unusual implement was
a thick type of drill about three inches
long and half an inch or more in
width. Spear-heads were not found.
The typical flint scraper, flat on one
side with beveled edge, used by many
eastern tribes and even in Nevada in
earlier days did not appear at the
“Lost City” where the only implement
apparently intended for scraping
purposes was an oval blade chipped
from both sides.
Among smaller stone objects
might be mentioned flat gaming disks,
about an inch in diameter, chipped
and ground into form, pendants made
of various fine-grained, not-too-hard
stones, including turquoise; and
beads of similar materials, some of
them very minute, the last of black
and red stone.
Straight pipes of cigar-holder form
were made not only of stone but
pottery as well.
Turning to bone we find numerous
awls usually made of splinters from
the leg bones of mountain sheep or
deer; occasional bone blades
suggesting the hair ornaments of the
California coast; elliptical and circular
bone dice; and now and then a bone
bead. In antler we find thin cylindrical

PLATE 22.
No. 1. A corrugated pot in situ. Pueblo Grande De Nevada.
(Third or Mesa House stage) “Lost City” of Nevada.
Courtesy Museum of the American Indian, New York.
No. 2. Pottery bowls, Second or “Lost City” stage. Pueblo
Grande De Nevada, “Lost City” of Nevada.
No. 3. Pottery bowls (first stage) Pueblo Grande De
Nevada, “Lost City” of Nevada. Courtesy of the Southwest
Museum, Los Angeles, California.

68

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

from various bivalves and such univalves
as the abalone and the olivella. The
bracelets, especially, came from the Gulf,
and must have been traded up the
Colorado river.
So much for the more or less
imperishable articles found every day in
the rooms of ruined buildings, in the ashdumps outside, or with human burials.
We also found a few things ordinarily
perishable in such places, due to charring
and other conditions especially favorable
to their preservation. Among the most
interesting of these were pieces of cotton
cloth, some of it surprisingly fine, found
with burials where graves had been
carefully covered with an impervious
layer of adobe clay. Most of these textiles
were plain white in color, but in some
cases, apparently for women’s dresses,
they were dyed a sort of purple.
There were also diagonally woven
bands, especially headbands worn by
men, that showed a square or diamond
shape interwoven pattern, usually in
black, as well as a fringe along one edge.
Men wore kilts or breechclouts of white
cotton cloth, supported by waist-cords
composed of many strands of soft cotton
string loosely twisted together.
Both sexes seem to have worn
blankets woven of strips of rabbit-skin
twisted around a yucca cord to make a
strong furry yarn, or of cotton, and
sandals woven of yucca fiber. One
infant’s grave yielded the entire yuccacord foundation of a little rabbit-skin
blanket.
Speaking of infants, we know that
these Pueblos used the cradle-board, not
alone from the flattening of the back of
many skulls, probably due to this cause,
but from the fact that a clay toy was
unearthed representing a baby tied on its
cradle-board, which was provided with

PLATE 23
No. 1. Part of ruin showing adobe and stone wall
construction. Pueblo Grande De Nevada or “Lost City”
of Nevada. Courtesy Museum of American Indian, Heye
Foundation, New York.
No. 2. A typical metate in situ, Pueblo Grande De
Nevada or “Lost City” of Nevada. Courtesy of
Southwest Museum, Los Angeles.
No. 3. Archeological foreman and C. C. C. boy
uncovering a skeleton at Pueblo Grande De Nevada or
“Lost City” of Nevada. Courtesy of the Southwest
Museum, Los Angeles.

Excavation of Pueblo Grande de Nevada

69

a sort of hood to protect the infant’s head. Rude
Several specimens of basketry were found in
clay dolls or figurines, always broken, and miniature graves or ruins, but as a rule these were too far
dishes and conical pack-baskets made of clay were gone in decay to preserve. One was a large conecommon.
shaped coiled pack-basket with a geometric pattern
in red; the others bowl-shaped plain coiled baskets.
In one grave only was there
enough left of the arrows to see that
they were made of cane with
hardwood foreshafts to which the
stone points were attached; in
another the wooden handle of a flint
knife remained and fortunately could
be saturated in dilute ambroid and
preserved.
In the dry caves and rockshelters
near the “Lost City” in deposits
known, from the pottery, to be of
Pueblo origin, a few other articles
appeared not found elsewhere.
Among these were a wooden spindle
with a whorl of unbaked clay and rags
of typical Pueblo feather blankets—
yucca strings wound with downy
feathers which had once been woven
in blanket form.
One of these caves yielded cottonbolls almost exactly like those of
modem Hopi Indian cotton, which
showed that the cotton so abundantly
used in the “Lost City” was in part
at least, home grown. Pieces of
squash shells, squash seeds, corn,
corn cobs and husks, reddish beans,
complete our picture of Pueblo
agriculture, already suggested by
quantities of charred corn found in
the ruins.
The burial customs of the “Lost
City” Pueblos were peculiar, for they
seem to have preferred to bury their
PLATE 24.
No. 1. Pottery canteens, right, first or second stage, left, third dead near the abodes of the living,
either in ruined buildings, in ashstage. Pueblo Grande De Nevada or “Lost City.”
No. 2. C. C. C. boys uncovering a house-ruin at Pueblo Grande dumps near buildings, or most
De Nevada or “Lost City.” Courtesy of The Southwest Museum, frequently of all, beneath the floor of
the room that had been occupied by
Los Angeles.

70

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the deceased. In this case after filling the grave they
burned the roof and threw down the walls upon it.
Frequently personal belongings such as pottery,
implements and ornaments were deposited with the
dead and sometimes even dogs, or pet wild animals.
In the early days of our explorations at “Lost
City” it was thought that the Pueblo occupation
represented only one stage of Pueblo II; later it was
seen that there were two stages, and very recently,
thanks to the Park Service work, it has become
plain there were three, made apparent through
changes in the architecture and especially in the
pottery.

produced much well decorated black on white and
some black on red ware, with intricate designs and
skillful workmanship, but very little corrugated
ware—simply the type known as “banded neck”;
while the last Pueblo stage was marked by the great
popularity of corrugated ware.

Any attempt to date the “Lost City” or to
correlate it with the development of Pueblo centers
farther east without a tree-ring checkup must be
fraught with uncertainty. We can say definitely that
Basketmaker III survived in the Moapa Valley while
the Pueblos had begun their development in
northeastern Arizona, through to Pueblo II, when
the influx took place. We also know from pottery
When the first Pueblos entered the Moapa Valley
evidence that the Moapa Valley people were still in
(already occupied by Late Basketmaker or
Pueblo II so far as architecture was concerned when
Basketmaker III people) their dwellings were
the Great Period, Pueblo III, had begun in their
groups of small isolated huts, often of wattle-andformer home. We may guess that the Nevada Pueblo
daub construction, built partly underground. Near
episode lasted from about 600 A. D. to between
these huts were small storage bins built of adobe,
800 and 900 A. D., but with the “peripheral lag” an
or adobe and stone, sometimes singly, sometimes
unknown quantity we can not state accurately.
in rows.
After the departure of the Pueblos the Moapa
In the next stage, that of the “Lost City” proper,
Valley was occupied by a much more primitive
we have the living rooms, still sometimes partly
people, the Paiute or some tribe of similar culture,
underground, connected directly with the bins, now
and the Paiute still survive to the present day.
grown to the dignity of storage rooms, so as to
form a continuous row of rooms encircling, except
Before the coming of the Pueblos the territory
for a gateway, a rounded court or patio.
was inhabited by Late Basketmaker (Basketmaker
III) people, as has already been mentioned, and
In the third or “Mesa House” stage, after the
before these again vestiges of still earlier occupants
decline of the “Lost City” we find the same form of
or visitors remain to be studied. With the exception
dwelling, but most of the rooms were built on the
of the one Basketmaker village at the mouth of the
surface of the ground, and the house was often
Virgin river, mentioned as being already submerged,
situated in a place capable of defense, such as a
most of these earlier traces are above the watermesa top.
line of Lake Mead, and there is still hope that they
The first Pueblo pottery in the Moapa Valley may yield information of value.
was characterized by bold patterns in black, rather
Curator of Southwest Museum,
carelessly done, with the outlines slightly smudged;
Los Angeles, California.
and no corrugated ware; the “Lost City” stage

