Interesting Artifacts of Clay County

45

INTERESTING ARTIFACTS OF CLAY COUNTY, TEXAS
LEONARD D. BENNETT
While putting down a test to determine the depth
of the deposit in a local Indian campsite the writer
had the good fortune to strike a pocket at a depth
of 22 inches from the surface, which contained
several well preserved bone implements of unusual
form. Some of these were different from any that
he has seen described in archeological publications.
The campsite in which these artifacts were found
is located on a low sand dune situated barely above
the high-water line, on the north bank of the Little
Wichita River, one mile northwest from Henrietta,
Clay County, Texas. The deposit, at the point where
the test was made, proved to be 48 inches in depth,
and consisted of charcoal and ash impregnated sand,
underlain by a deposit of sterile undisturbed red
clay. Throughout the deposit of sand were numbers
of broken and unbroken fresh water mussel shells,
broken and burned bones of various animals, and
many pieces of broken and burned sandstone.
Although all of the material excavated was carefully
examined and screened, and an extensive search
was made over the entire area of the campsite which
resulted in the finding of over a hundred points,
scrapers, and knives, nothing was found that would
show that the occupants of this campsite were in
contact with white people.
The implements which the writer considers of
unusual form were fashioned from parts of the skulls
and the bony structure inside the horns of bisons.
In making these artifacts, the outer horn was
removed, the bony structure of the inner horn was
split from tip to base, and a part of the skull was
left adhering to the upper half of the split horn. The
bony part of the horn was then ground to a flat
surface on the split side, thus forming the handle of
the tool The inner side of the part of the skull left
attached to the horn base was smoothed and
polished, being decidedly cupped when completed,
and resembling a large spoon or ladle. The outside,
or convex side, of the skull portion was polished,
and the edges ground and polished to give the shape
best suited to the purpose for which the tool was
intended.

The variation in the shape of the implements
show that they were made for various purposes.
Some are shaped as if they were intended to be
used as ladles or spoons, being very definitely
cupped and having the edges blunted and rounded
as illustrated in figure (1) of plate 14, while others
are shaped and sharpened in such manner that there
is no doubt that they were intended to be used as
knives. Figure (2) of plate 14 illustrates this type.
The cutting edge ii very sharp and would be an
effective tool in skinning, fleshing, or dismembering.
From the shapes of other specimens noted by the
writer, scrapers, fleshers, knives, and digging tools
were made in the same manner. Strong’s
Introduction to Nebraska Archeology mentions a
fragment of an implement made from a part of the
skull of a bison, but his description is not definite
enough to chow whether or not it is an example of
this type of tool.
Another type of bone implement, pictured in
plate 14, No. 3, found with the above described
tools, was a hoe or digging tool made from a section
taken from the scapula of a bison. Several tools of
this type were found, and although no two of them
are exactly alike, the one pictured in plate 14 is
fairly representative in size and general contour.
The average length is about 7 inches, No doubt the
variation in shape and size was due to the inaccurate
method used in roughly shaping the implement and
to the irregular wearing away of the bone while the
tool was in use. The flaring or barb-like end of this
implement has been ground to a blunt point, and
the thinner bone, forming the barb shaped side, has
been ground to a sharp cutting edge and is highly
polished from use. On examining the specimens of
this type, the writer came to the conclusion that
some of them had been hafted, since they have a
roughly shaped handle or base but none of the rough
edges of it have been smoothed or polished as one
would expect them to be had they been used in the
hand very much. One of the specimens shows faint
striations as if it had not been very securely bound
to a handle. Others were evidently hand tools, as

46

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the rough edges of the handle portions, or bases,
have been rounded off and show well defined polish,
with no notches or striations that would give
evidence of the attachment of handles. The theory
that this type of tool was used as a hoe might be
supported by the fact that flint hoes are not usually
found in this section. The writer knows of only one
that has been found in this region. William Duncan
Strong described several scapula tools similar to
the one described here, in the Smithsonian
publication, An Introduction to Nebraska
Archeology, though from his descriptions and
illustrations there are several marked differences in
the artifacts.

the antler and will average about six inches in length.

Other objects coming from the same test include
five highly polished bone beads cut from the leg
bones of birds or small animals; one bone disc onehalf inch in diameter and one-sixteenth of an inch
thick, made from turtle shell and highly polished;
one spatula shaped tool made from the ulna of some
small animal, possibly wolf or fox; several sections
of broken mano stones of quartzite and sandstone;
one broken, flat type, metate; several small notched
and unnotched triangular points made from
materials that could have been obtained locally; one
bevelled knife, three inches in length, made from
blue flint; two finely chipped flint awls or drills of
One bone awl, or punch, made from the the hair pin type; four snub-nosed scrapers of blue
unsplit cannon bone of a deer, two bone awls made and white flint; several shards of undecorated shell
from the split cannon bone, two awls made of and bone tempered pottery, and three shards of
fragments of ribs, and three made from heavy undecorated pottery tempered with sand and fine
unidentified bone slivers,
were found in the same test
at depths ranging from six
inches to 36 inches from
the surface. All of the awls
are very well preserved
and exhibit careful
workmanship on the part
of the maker. They vary in
length from three inches to
eight and a half inches. The
points of three of them
show evidence that they
have been heated, probably
for the purpose of
tempering them. Two
pieces of deer antler found
might also be classed as
PLATE 14.
punches, as their points
1.
Ladle
or
spoon
made
from
the inner part of a horn and part of the
have a polish resulting
skull of a bison.
from much use. Another
2. Bone implement made from the bony base of a horn and part of the
section of antler shows
skull of a bison similar to No. 1 except that it has been sharpened
signs of use as a flaker, as
to a keen edge on the skull end. Would make a nice digging tool,
it has several pits and
hide scraper, spoon, ladle, or knife.
striations near the tip that
3. Bone implement made from scapula of bison.
probably resulted from
4. Human effigy. This figure is no doubt intended as an effigy of a
contact with sharp rock
human being. It could have been used as an ornament on a pottery
fragments or flakes. These
vessel. May have been either a doll or an idol.
sections are from the tip of

Interesting Artifacts of Clay County
gravel; one small fragment of very hard pottery,
round in section, about three-eighths of an inch in
diameter, one inch in length, with two small knobs
or projections near one end, the entire surface has
been decorated with diamond shaped incisions, each
diamond having an incised dot in its center.
|
All of the artifacts and objects described in this
paper to this point came from an excavation four
feet wide by ten feet long that varied in depth,
according to the depth of the deposit, from 14 to
48 inches.
In another small test in the same campsite, 18
inches from the surface, the writer made an
interesting discovery in the form of a poorly fired
object of red clay representing a human figure,
(Plate 14, No. 4). The object represents a sitting or
kneeling figure which measures two and one-half
by two by five-eighths inches. The arms are at the
sides and are set off from the body by finely incised
lines. The stomach is represented, as are the legs,
by knobs or rounded projections five-sixteenths of
an inch high and near a half-inch in diameter at their
base. The area around these projections is incised
with fine lines forming a sort of cross hatching
where they cross one another. Unfortunately, the
area representing the nose and upper lip had been
broken off when the object was found, and as the
break was an old one, it was probably the cause of
the object having been discarded. The eyes are
represented by rectangular incisions one-eighth inch
long by one sixteenth of an inch wide, and show by
their form that they were punched into the soft clay
with a sharp rectangular sectioned awl or incising
tool. The forehead is represented by two parallel
lines incised one-eighth of an inch apart with two
rows of incised dots filling the space between them.
On the portion of the effigy that would be
considered the throat, there is a rectangular incision
similar in size and shape to those that represent the
eyes. From its appearance, it suggests that some
sort of an ornament might have been attached to
the effigy. A part of the base seems to have been
broken off, indicating that it might have been
attached to a vessel as an ornament, though the
lack of having been completely fired and the
difference in the material from which it is made from

47

that of the known types of pottery in this section,
tend to discredit this theory.
The writer sent this object to Mr. A. T. Jackson,
field foreman of Texas Archeology, for inspection,
and takes the liberty of quoting the following from
his letter concerning it:
“The clay object is very unusual. After
examining it, I discarded the potterysmoother idea. It is very suggestive of a
human effigy and may have been from the
rim of a vessel. I have before me the head
of a small animal effigy from a campsite
on Red River near Kiomatia, Red River
County. The clay is almost identical with
that in your specimen and is no better
worked, although I am inclined to think
that both specimens have been but poorly
fired. There is a possibility, of course, that
your specimen may not have been attached
to the rim of a vessel, as the break would
seem to indicate. At any rate, it is the first
of its kind that I have seen in Texas.”
The campsite from which the artifacts described
in this paper came, offers great possibilities for
archeological research into the history of the culture
which occupied it. The entire site covers
approximately thirty acres, but there remains only
about two acres of the sand dune which have not
been put into cultivation. As this portion lies nearest
the bank of the river, it should prove to be the richest
portion in cultural material. Further research should
be made in the immediate future, for it will be a
matter of a short time before much of the site will
be turned up by curio hunters.
The writer, working in conjunction with Mr. A.
H. Witte of Henrietta, has made an effort to preserve
all data possible in connection with all artifacts that
have been removed from this deposit, and will gladly
co-operate with any movement toward a more
complete study of the site. He has refrained from
advancing any theories as to the cultural types
represented in the material taken from this site, for
to do so, on the limited amount of material at hand,
would hardly be advisable.
Henrietta, Texas.

