Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

41

SHELTER CAVES OF THE EL PASO DISTRICT
BY EILEEN E. ALVES
In giving a report on the work being done in the
immediate vicinity of El Paso, you must think of
the location in which we find the caves and
scattered villages as on the high mesas between
the Franklin and Organ Ranges on the west, and to
the east, the Sacramentos and Huecos. The region
covered does not exceed fifty miles to the north
and east of El Paso, and is not in the Rio Grande
valley, but south of the Tularosa basin. The Jarillas
to the north, with their wealth of turquoise account
for the many turquoise ornaments found in the caves,
and on the desert sands.
It is a region of dry lakes, fed by the
storm drainage of the enclosing
mountains, but also being filled up by
sand by the erosion of water and wind.
The water contained in these lakes
grows less year by year, and now waves
of sand, instead of waves of water are
lapping over the very villages
themselves. The pueblos are situated
around these lakes while the caves are
high up on the western rim of the Huecos.

energetic type have reduced the interior to a state
of chaos, but even so, it has been possible to trace
two or more former occupations by the layer of
ashes, fiber, and grasses under the guano and rats’
nests. The votive offerings massed in the front part
of the cave may belong to a different tribe and time,
than the sandals and planting sticks buried in the
rear. But I am sorry to say, the objects found must
be described as a whole, as no care was ever
exercised in unearthing them as to position of layer,
and rabbit stick and lovely pendant were merely
treasure but never looked on as torn pages of an
ancient history.

In some of the caves have been found
unmistakable signs of the Basket Maker
Period, such as the atlatl, or dart thrower.
Others have wonderful petroglyphs
which Col. Crimmins has pictured and
described. The ruins below may belong
to the early Pueblo Period, though some
we are excavating now are very like pit
houses from the thin walls plastered on
the sand bank itself, the floor sloping
apparently to an entrance, the holes for
the roof poles and the little circular
firepits. But it is too early to even hazard
a guess, and we are waiting for some
expert opinions on the subject.
The large cave, called the
Ceremonial Cave, found by R. W.
Stafford, is the subject of this report, and
contained the collection I will describe.
Treasure hunters of a most malignant and

Plate 17.
ARTIFACTS FROM CAVES IN THE EL PASO DISTRICT

42

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

The condition of the cave with broken prayer
sticks, atlatl darts, and torn and shattered sandals
lying just any where, would have made the angels
weep.
In dividing the artifacts under the
heading of stone, wood, textiles, etc., or
under the subtitles of ornaments I want
very much a careful comparison with the
shelter caves of other parts of Texas. We
have been so identified with the
archaeology of Arizona and New Mexico
that some way we hardly realize we are
a part of Texas. The Peabody Museum
of Harvard includes our Ceremonial
Cave with the Chaves Caves at Las
Cruces, New Mexico, in their late
report, and we speak of our pottery
sherds as Little Colorado, Middle Gila,
Middle Rio Grande, Casas Grandes, and
Mimbres, and we do not know if your
pottery, your artifacts, or your cultures
are akin to ours or not.

basket, a mat 8 inches long and 5 inches wide, and
part of a burial basket. The Cosgroves found several
fine burial baskets which are now at the Peabody
Museum. All through the sand, cactus and guano
are found strings in great quantities, also knots,

Ornaments
In ornaments we have many beads,
many of them on the original string. They
are made of stone, shell, bone, wood,
turquoise and the little pearl seeds that
grow in northern New Mexico. (Plate
17, Figure 1, also Plate 19, Figure 1).
In mosaic are two pieces of pearl
mosaic, and one pendant of turquoise
laid on wood. A large arm band is the
finest thing in our collection. It has 123
pieces of turquoise mounted on a coiled
basketry foundation fastened to it with a
red vegetable gum. Pendants in highly
polished abalone, also in malachite and
other stone make a brilliant showing of
the jewelry of these ancient peoples.
(Plate 18, Figs. 1, 2 and 3).
Textiles
In textiles were secured specimens
of different styles of weaving. Styles that
have been found in northern New
Mexico and as far south as Yucatan,
Mexico. We have a large bag, a small

Plate 18.
ARTIFACTS FROM CAVES IN THE EL PASO DISTRICT
Fig. 1. Shell inlaid comb.
Fig. 2. Shell Beads.
Fig. 3. Ornaments of abalone shell.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

43

Stone
netting, a string apron and cords showing little coils
that at one time contained feathers. In one morning
In stone, a few manos, one ball, some spear
Mr. Cosgrove and Mr. Alves dug up 110 sandals, heads, knives, atlatl points, and many beads and
and later over 800 more went to the Peabody pendants. (Plate 19, Figure 2).
museum (Plate 17, Figure 2).
Pottery
Pottery, very conspicuous by its
absence, only a few sherds scattered
outside, 3 to be exact, and those may have
been left by a wandering Indian of a much
later period. A tiny bowl, one and a half
inches in diameter, of very crude
construction, was buried deep in the
debris of the cave far to the back.
Wood
However, fortunately, articles of
wood were found in great abundance and
wood tells the story of the long, long
years. There were several atlatl darts
hollow at one end and well bound with
fiber or rawhide. The stone points tied
in the split foreshafts were still in the
darts exactly as the dead owners left
them. (Plate 19, Fig. 3). A carved black
stone and several forearm pieces showed
these people used the atlatl instead of
bows and arrows, and the use of the atlatl
proves a great antiquity. Rabbit or
throwing sticks, showing the carving of
the four interrupted parallel lines, this
carving being found far to the north and
south, were in great numbers. We have
12 perfect ones.
Long stalks of yucca bound in fiber
with tassels and streamers suggest prayer
sticks, very different to the short peg like
prayer sticks of the much later cliff
dwellers.
Fine polished sticks of hard wood
about 14 inches long, and bound in groups
of 5 or 6, might have been used in the
threshing of the delicate grass seeds, or
again may have been hair ornaments.
Plate 19.
ARTIFACTS FROM CAVES IN THE EL PASO DISTRICT Good authorities differ on their use.
Fig. 1. Wooden objects.
Fire sticks tell their story plainly, so
Fig. 2. Atlatl points with original hafting; large flint points. does the charred rim of cotton wood bark
Fig. 3. Fiber wrapped sticks.
that fits the hand and could only have been
used to shovel sand or ashes.

44

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

Pieces of turtle shell, a bone with a saw toothed
edge, awls made of bone, a needle of cactus thorn
with the long fiber thread attached and strips of
wood sewed together too fragile for a cradle board,
may be part of masks used in ceremonial dances.
They must have raised small gardens of squash
and corn in those far off days when waves of
precious water washed the shores of the now dry
lakes for we have several much used planting sticks
and many pieces of squash rinds and tiny corn cobs.

The squash rinds have been repaired with fiber
stitching, and the only grain of corn we have is of a
bright red color.
Burials
Mr. and Mrs. Cosgrove for the Peabody
museum, found three magnificent burials with
several baskets, and a fine fiber mat. The three
bodies, a man, a woman and a tiny child were lying
in a natural position of sleep and were closely
wrapped in robes of fur and feathers.
This burial was in a hole in the rock floor
of a small adjoining cave, not as deep as
the usual cist burial of a Basket Maker.
Soon, I hope, we will have a report on
the shape of the skulls, etc.
Passing from the dust and darkness of
the cave, below lie the many ruins of
pueblos or pit houses. Badly washed by
floods, cattle daily cross its wind swept
surface. It is most surprising the amount
of beads, pendants, arrow points, and
bracelets that still can be picked up. A
carved frog in a white satiny stone, a
carved stone for the winding of thread, a
tiny paint pot cut in a solid stone pebble,
and arrow points too fine except for
ceremonial purposes, are gems of art of
which any age may well be proud.

Plate 19a.
ARTIFACTS FROM CAVES IN THE EL PASO DISTRICT
Fig. 1. Objects of wood and fiber.
Fig. 2. Turquoise studded armlet.

To sum up, the caves and pueblos have
many things in common but in so many
ways are different. The lack of pottery
in the cave and the mass of sherds from
so many cultures in the pueblos, the same
thing with the stone artifacts are
outstanding differences. The atlatl in the
cave, the arrow points on the plains. Do
they mean a difference in time, a different
culture or do they merely mean that the
dry atmosphere of the protected cave has
preserved sandals, baskets, etc., that
could not have survived the years on the
wind swept or flooded mesas? The
scattered pages are all around us, but oh,
the care we must take in reading their
meaning until the whole volume is
complete, which I am afraid will be
never. Those great vandals, Time and
Man, have done their work of destruction
only too well.

