Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas

71

EXPLORATION OF CERTAIN SITES
IN CULBERSON COUNTY, TEXAS
BY A. T. JACKSON
During October and November, 1934, the writer
headed an expedition sent by the Anthropology
Department of the University of Texas to explore
sites in the east-central and northeast parts of
Culberson County, Texas. The sites, consisting of
two sink-hole shelters, three other caves and a
burnt-rock ring-mound or midden circle, are located
from 32 to 49 miles northwest of the town of Toyah.
All were completely excavated.
The region has an elevation of about 3700 feet
above sea level, is semi-arid, sparsely settled and
devoted exclusively to the ranching industry. The
average annual rainfall is 17 inches. Scrubby
mesquite, greasewood, yucca and cacti abound in
places. Jack rabbits and quail are plentiful. The
rolling prairie and Culberson Plateau merge into
the Rustler Hills and Delaware Hills as one goes
northeast and west.
Types of Sites
Numerous caves are found in the low hills. Some
are real caves, with small openings that lead into
large chambers. Others are called “sink-hole
shelters,” due to the entrance being a large
depression or hole with parts of the wall
overhanging. Adjacent to the caves usually are a
few burnt-rock ring-mounds or surface middens.

Site No. 1 Caldwell Ranch
Work was started on Cave No. 1, Caldwell
Ranch. Since it is fairly representative of other sites
in the region, the work there will be described in
some detail. Only the outstanding features of other
sites will be mentioned.
Site No. 1 is of the sink-hole type, with an
opening 90 x 74 feet. The shelter proper begins at
the north end of the surface-hole and extends northnortheast for 110 feet. The floor has a gradual, but
fairly steep slope from front to rear. This resulted
in the low back portion, and a drain along the west
side of the shelter, made it damp and unsuited for
habitation. Likewise, the steepest part adjoining
the edge of the overhang was unoccupied. The
concentrated midden deposit, in the center of the
cave, covered an area about 50 x 35 feet. Some
one previously had dug a part of the deposit.
Four small midden mounds of the circular type
are located very near the cave. Inside the shelter,
worn into hard limestone, is a mortar hole. Four
others are in the flat-topped rocks outside the cave.
Three are circular and two “boat-shaped.” They
range in depth from 7 to 9 1-2 inches, and in
diameter from 6 to 7 inches.
Cross Section of Midden

Water Supply
The question of the water supply for the
aborigines is a perplexing one. Some of the large
sites, that show extensive occupation, are located
as much as two to six miles from permanent water.
For a few weeks after a heavy rain, pools of water
might have been sufficient for the requirements of
small bands. But it seems likely that during most of
the year water was secured by digging shallow pits
in some nearby valley. Ranchmen report that in
certain places water can be found by digging from
three to six feet in the sandy soil.

A cross section in this first cave was as follows:
1”-9”—Trash deposit consisting largely of small
sticks and twigs, some grass and midden material.
A few fish-tail sandals and wooden implements.
10”-48”—Brownish-yellow ashy deposit
intermixed with a great number of small burnt rocks,
some limestone boulders (from roof) and much
gravel. Considerable charcoal; a few small animal
and bird bones. Several potsherds at depths ranging
from 10 to 28 inches. An occasional fragment of
charred matting.

72

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

49”-61”—Blackish
ashy
deposit, much the same as the level
just above, except that this one
contains much trash intermixed
with gravel. Very few burnt rocks.
Few flint chips and short pieces of
cordage.
62”-76”—Trash
deposit,
containing matting, basketry,
cordage, wooden implements and
a few potsherds. Some stones
among grass, weeds and twigs.
77”-86”—Black material like
that from 49”-61”.
87”-99”—Trash
deposit,
consisting largely of grass and twigs
intermixed with some burnt rocks
and pebbles. Contains matting,
cordage, yucca-leaf spliced “rope,”
a potsherd (at 88 inches), and an
occasional wooden artifact.
100”-112”—Undisturbed small
stones (limestone).
113”—Bedrock.
It thus will be seen that evidence
of human habitation extended to a
depth of 99 inches.
So-Called Storage Pit
In the course of the excavation
there was found what appeared to
be a trash pit or abandoned storage
pit. Its upper part was 33 x 20,
increasing to 42 x 28 inches at a
depth of 65 inches. Beneath a
quantity of grass and twigs there
was a well-arranged layer of large
fragments of matting and basketry.
The edges of the pieces overlapped
and the whole had a concave
surface 20 x 15 inches.
Under the matting, and
extending 13 inches further west,

PLATE 25
BASKET AND POUCH CONTAINING MESQUITE BEANS
1. Basket found in an inverted position at a depth of 22 to 28
inches in cave deposit at Site No. 1 C. M. Caldwell Ranch,
Culberson County. The basket is 6 inches tall and 14 ½ inches
in diameter. One side is decayed, due to location at edge of a
small drain coming from the mouth of the sink-hole. Inside
the basket is a pouch made from coils of grass stems and
leaves twined together with small fiber cords spaced one inch
apart. In the pouch were hundreds of mesquite bean seeds.
Pods apparently had been devoured by insects.
2. Bottom of basket, showing reinforcing stitches of yucca
leaves.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas
was a 4-inch layer of grass and small brush. Next
below was a layer of ash 2 to 5 inches deep; then a
17-inch thickness of matted grass and twigs, with
pieces of charcoal and a few rabbit bones. Bedrock
was found at a depth of 87 inches. Partly
surrounding the lower 20 inches of the pit were
four limestone slabs. It is possible that these may
have been the remains of a stone-lined cist.
Found in the pit were four fragments of matting
of diagonal weave, five of the over-two-under-two
technique; five pieces of basketry of split-stitch type;
a small piece of rabbit skin; a fiber cord 20 inches
long and 3-16 inch in diameter, with ends tied by a
square knot; and a section of reed shaft 9 inches
long and 5-16 inch in diameter. The unbroken end
had been trimmed then compressed by wrapping
with sinew; a second wrapping was 1 3-4 to 2 1-4
inches from the first. The fragments of matting
varied in size from 7 1-2 x 5 to 12 1-2 x 7 inches;
the basketry from 11 x 2 to 15 x 7 inches.
Yucca-Leaf Spliced Rope
From a depth of 94 inches came a “rope” made
by tying together 13 strips of split leaves of Spanish
dagger (Yucca treculeana). The strips, about 1-4
inch wide, were united with 9 square, 2 granny and
one double-granny knots. The length of the rope is
8 feet 10 inches. It was found doubled up in a
bundle, with a quantity of grass and twigs beneath.
Cache in Basket
At a depth of 22 inches was an almost complete
basket. Six inches tall and 14 1-2 inches in diameter,
it was in an inverted position with the rim 28 inches
deep. The basket was surrounded by small burnt
stones and black ash. One side, next to a drain, was
rotted away, while the remainder was dry and well
preserved. Of split-stitch technique, the basket has
walls 5-16 inch thick. The bottom is reinforced or
repaired with a row of yucca-leaf stitches.

73

and leaves twined together with small fiber cords
spaced one inch apart. The Ethnobotanical
Laboratory1 at Ann Arbor reports that “The grass
is of the wiry bunch-grass type and has convolute
leaves. Although it may not all be of the same
species, identifiable parts of Pappophorum sp.
(probably Pappophorum vaginatum) were found.”
In the storage pouch, intermixed with ashes and
numerous small lumps of charcoal, were hundreds
of mesquite (Prosopis juliflora) bean seeds. Near
the center of the deposit of beans was a heap of
reddish powdered material. This may have been the
remains of the bean pods devoured by insects.
Not far from the basket, at a depth of 19 inches,
was about a pint of mesquite bean seeds in a heap.
They were in no kind of a receptacle.
Possible Net Snare
At a depth of 30 inches was part of what appears
to have been a snare for birds or small animals. It is
made of very small fiber cord, knotted into 2 1-4inch mesh. The present size of the net proper is 11
x 7 inches; an end-cord or loop adds another 5
inches to the length. The bottom of the end-cord
contains a small loop, into which the main cords of
the snare or net are attached by simple loop knots.
The end-cord may have served to attach the snare
to a bush or stake. This specimen is suggestive of a
net snare found by Nusbaum.2
Pottery
Most significant of the finds in Caldwell Cave
No. 1 was the pottery. No whole vessels, but 44
potsherds, were found. Eleven per cent came from
the surface; 55 per cent from the midden deposit at
depths of 10 to 36 inches; and 34 per cent from 60
to 88 inches. No sherds were found between 37
and 59 inches.

The question of the association of the pottery
with the various types of artifacts is an important
In the bottom of the basket was a thin layer of
one. After eliminating all doubtful cases, due to
grass. Next was a fiber cord net with mesh 4 x 3
disturbances of any kind, there remain a number of
inches. Inside the netting was a pouch-like
others representing unmistakable associations.
receptacle or bag, made from coils of grass stems
These are summarized as follows:

74

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Fish-tail sandals were found with potsherds at
depths of 10, 14, 20, 26, 34 and 78 inches. One
sandal, at the latter depth, was in a bad state of
decay, undisturbed and with a potsherd at the same
depth and at a distance of 6 inches.
A basket bottom, at a depth of 49 inches, was
11 inches above a potsherd. The basket containing
mesquite beans was uncovered at a depth of 22
inches, and near by at the same level were potsherds.
Other basket fragments from depths of 12, 20 and
26 inches were with pottery. At a depth of 65 inches
were two basket fragments and a piece of matting
of the over-two-under-two diagonal weave; 26 feet
away and at depths of 78, 86 and 88 inches were
potsherds in an undisturbed deposit.
Rabbit-sticks, from 15 and 33 inch depths, were
in levels with and not far removed from pottery.
A reed shaft and wooden foreshaft from 19 inch
depth and the nock end of a reed shaft from 16
inches, were in levels at which pottery was found.
Mera3 of the Laboratory of Anthropology at
Santa Fe identified representative sherds from this
and nearby sites. From Caldwell Cave No. 1 were
Chupadero Black-on-white, Red-on-terracotta, El
Paso Polychrome, El Paso Brown and a probable
hybrid. Sherds, from depths indicated, were
described by him as follows:

No. 5. Depth 86 Inches: This is probably a
hybrid. The paste is of the El Paso sort, but the
thick red slip on the interior is derived from an, as
yet, unnamed ware, that ranges from Northern
Chihuahua to the Mimbres region where it is very
common.
No. 8. Depth 19 Inches: El Paso Polychrome;
somewhat reburned by use but typical. A fine
example of the best period of thin walled vessels.
With regard to sherds from the different depths
he stated: “I should say that all of these sherds,
from what data we have at present, and regardless
of depth, can be considered as contemporaneous
within, to be on the safe side, fifty to one hundred
years at the most.”
In discussing the Chupadero Black-on-white he
adds: “This particular type seems to have existed
over a much longer period than many other blackon-white sorts. We think that its range would be
from in the neighborhood of 1300 A. D., or perhaps
a little earlier, to circa 1600. * * * Inasmuch as
black-on-red occurs concurrently with the black and
white during a period up to about the middle of the
14th century, but probably not later, as it seems to
disappear about that time, although the black and
white appears to have lasted much longer.

Setzler4 makes the following comment regarding
the Culberson County pottery: “The details
regarding the association of pottery in the C. M.
Description by Mera
Caldwell cave are convincing, and I would certainly
No. 1. Depth 12 Inches: Chupadero Black-on- agree with you that the inhabitants, who for the
white. Difference in appearance due to a thinly most part belong to the western Big Bend culture,
applied paint and over-firing. Also has a better polish had contact with the Pueblo people in the eastern
than usual.
part of the Southwest.” * * *
No. 2. Depth 26 Inches: Red-on-terracotta.
Sandals
Related to Three Rivers Red-on-terracotta. The
type has not yet been named because of some doubt
Seventy-two sandals from Caldwell Cave No. 1
of its relationship to the classical type.
were of the fish-tail type. Of that number, 52 per
cent were of the narrow unsplit leaves of beargrass
No. 3 Depth 68 Inches: El Paso Polychrome
(Yucca tenuistyla Trelease); 40 per cent from split
from an undecorated part of a large vessel. The
leaves of the same species; and 4 per cent each from
finish sets it apart from the earlier El Paso Brown.
split leaves of Spanish dagger (Yucca treculeana
No. 4. Depth 60 Inches: El Paso Brown.
Carr) and split leaves of Agave lechuguilla.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas

75

The sandal frames, or warp
elements, are in most cases of
multiple strands. Particularly is
this true of ones made of the small
leaves. The frames form one
rounded end; but cross at the
opposite end, leaving a V-shaped
protrusion—thus giving rise to
the popular term “fish-tail sandal.”
The weaving technique seems to
be uniform, the weft strands
crossing near the center.
A number of the sandals are
reinforced by attaching pads of
fiber or yucca leaves on the
bottom side. Some of the pads are
more than 1-2 inch thick. They
may have been attached originally
or later when the bottom became
badly worn.
There are several variants of
the general sandal tie-string. In
each case there is a loop, of the
same material, at the rounded end;
a string attached to the frame at
each side near the center. The
strings are united by square knots.
In one case the two loops
interlock; again, a third loop
interlocks and joins these two.
Apparently no string was used
back of the heel, the ones found
being for use between the toes and
over the instep. Of the sandals
with tie-strings remaining, 27 per
cent each were of the two-looptwo-strand and two-loop-fourstrand; 18 per cent each of twoloop-three-strand and three-loopthree-strand; 10 per cent of them
were three-loop-one-strand. The
loop at the toe-end usually is a
continuation of the warp element,
tied by an overhand knot.
The sandals are comparatively
small, many appearing to have

PLATE 26.
BASKETRY AND POTTERY FOUND IN ASSOCIATION
1. Close-up of decayed edge of basket, illustrating the splitstitch technique with single-bundle foundation.
2. Potsherds found at various depths in the cave deposits.
The pottery includes Chupadero Black-on-white, El Paso
polychrome, vertically indented coiled ware, fine rubbed
plain coil and other types. The former, according to Dr. H.
P. Mera, may range from about 1300 to 1600 A. D. Some
of the sherds were found at the same level and near the
basket.

76

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

been for infants. The sizes range from 8 x 4 to 3 1Skin thongs were from 1-8 to 3-8 inch wide with
2 x 1 3-4, with an average of about 6 x 3 inches. lengths as much as 13 inches.
These sizes compare very closely with those of the
At a depth of 12 inches was a fiber cord
same type of sandals reported by Smith5 from a
containing 24 knots. Yucca leaf fragments in two
shelter near Alpine.
of the knots suggested that the cord came from a
twined mat.
Fabrics
Of 125 knots found in the debris, 110 were
A fragment of a blanket, mat or pouch, 7 x 5
square; 4 each larkshead and single half-hitch; 2
inches, was found at a depth of 12 inches. It seems
each clove hitch and overhand slip knot; one each,
to be similar to a “blanket-like fabric of soft fiber”
slip, granny and square with overhand knot.
from Brewster County illustrated by Coffin.6 The
Ethnobotanical Laboratory identified the material
Skin Fragments
from the Culberson County specimen as follows:
Five skin fragments were from almost paper
“The warp is of grass stems and leaves matted
thinness to a thickness of 1-10 inch. The sizes varied
together. * * * The grass of which the warp is
from 3 1-4 to 1 1-4 to 10 x 4 inches. There also
composed is of the wiry bunch-grass type and has
were 6 coils of rabbit skin. They were about 1-2
convolute leaves. * * * The weft strands are twined
inch in diameter and 3 to 6 inches long. Originally
around the warp. The weft is of two-ply cord about
they may have been part of a rabbit skin blanket or
1-32 of an inch in diameter and is of lechuguilla
robe.
fibers. (Agave lechuguilla).” * * *
Other Fragments of Basketry

Metates and Manos

Two whole and one broken metate, seven whole
Three basket fragments, found with pottery, have
and four broken manos were found in the camp
been identified by Setzler of the United States
refuse. The metates were fairly small, being 12 1-2
National Museum as follows:
x 10 x 5 1-2 and 16 x 10 x 1 1-2 inches. One was
“Fragments Nos. 71 and 74 belong to the type used on both sides; the other on only one side.
described as a single bundle foundation with yucca
Most of the manos were little used and poorly
thread stitches split on the convex or non-work
shaped. A few showed much use. One large mano,
surface, sewed toward the left of the worker on
used on both sides, had black paint smeared over
the concave or inside of the basket. Fragment 35
one side. Another, from 6 inches deep, had red paint
belongs to the type known as the interlocking stitch
on one edge.
with a single bundle foundation. My researches
seem to indicate that the split stitch type is more
At a depth of 24 inches was a mano worn down
prevalent than the interlocking stitch in the from both sides to a sharp edge. It was 5 1-4 x 4 1southwestern part of the Big Bend, while the 4 inches and varied in thickness from 1 3-4 to 3-16
interlocking stitch is the more prevalent around the inch. Another specimen of edged mano came from
Pecos River drainage.”
20 inches in the camp refuse. Manos of this type
have been reported from Brewster County by
Coffin7, from Val Verde County by Pearce and
Cordage and Knots
Jackson8 and from Llano County by Jackson9.
Of 110 pieces of cordage found in the first cave,
93 were fiber, 15 skin and 2 yucca leaf. The greater
A stone pestle, 7 1-2 inches long and showing
portion of the fiber cordage was made from considerable use on one end, was found at a depth
lechuguilla fibers and consist of two strands. The of 9 inches.
sizes vary from 1-16 to 1-4 inch in diameter. The
lengths range from one to 28 inches.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas
Flint Work
Only 33 flint artifacts were found in the cave.
These included 22 scrapers, 5 projectile points, 3
so-called warclub spikes, 2 spokeshaves or
woodworking knives, and one awl.

77

A large very crude projectile point was found
an inch beneath a potsherd at a depth of 10 inches.
The other points were somewhat crude but of
medium and small size. One from the surface was a
broken microlith or so-called “bird point.”
This extreme scarcity of flint
artifacts is in striking contrast to the
situation in regions where there is
abundant local supply of flint.
Rabbit Sticks
Fewer rabbit sticks were found in
the first than in some of the other caves.
The specimens came from depths of
15 to 43 inches. Certain distinctive
features are: groups of finely carved
lines encircling the small rounded end
of the implement; three parallel
grooves or lines on each side, running
lengthwise. The width of the specimens
range from 9-16 to 2 1-2 and thickness
from 1-4 to 5-8 inch. None from the
first cave was complete, so that the
exact lengths could not be determined.
An interesting feature on two
specimens was the working down on
one edge, for about half the length, to
a sharp knife-like finish.
Fire-Making Implements

PLATE 27.
ATLATL OR SPEAR-THROWER
1. Close-up view of obverse and reverse sides of an atlatl
fragment. Found in debris at a depth of 4 inches in Shelby
Brooks Cave, Culberson County, Texas. The groove is 2
¾ inches long, 3-8 wide and 3-16 inch deep at the spur
end. The spur protrudes 1-8 inch. 2. Entire fragment of
atlatl. Length, 11 1/2 inches; width, 1 3/8 ; thickness, 516 inch.

In the debris were found six yucca
fire hearth sticks and a hardwood fire
drill. A split sotol (Dasylirion texanum
Scheele) flower stalk, 23 inches long
and one inch in diameter, had one pit
near the edge of the stick. There was a
groove beneath, to facilitate the spark
reaching the tinder. The specimen was
found at a depth of 94 inches. It is
interesting to note that fire-hearth
sticks from many of the caves in Val
Verde County do not have a groove or
side opening to the drill pit.
The fire drill seems to have been a
combination device to serve as drill and

78

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

digging stick. One end was round
and charred, the other sharpened. Its
length was 18 3-4 inches and
diameter 1-2 to 3-4 inch. It came
from a depth of 16 inches.
An oak scoop, 5 x 2 1-4 x 5-16,
was found at a depth of 26 inches.
One end was broken; the other end
and sides were charred. It may have
been used for carrying coals, or for
scraping ashes, etc.
Other Wooden Artifacts
A wooden foreshaft, from a depth
of 49 inches, was 7 1-8 inches long
and had a sharpened point.
The nock end of a wooden shaft
came from 34 inches in the camp
refuse between boulders at the rear
of the cave. The shaft was 9 1-4
inches long with a diameter varying
from 3-8 to 1-2 inch. The notch, in
the small end, was very shallow.
Subsequent to its use as a shaft, the
specimen was severed by hacking
and breaking. It is of hardwood and
in good condition.
Articles of Reed
The nock end of a reed shaft was
against the southeast wall and 16
inches deep. Wrapped at three
places, the shaft had a length of 6 916 inches, diameter of 5-16 and
notch 3-16 inch deep. Various other
fragments of reed shafts were found.
A possible reed pipe, suggestive
of some described by Coffin10 and
Martin11, came from a depth of 12
inches. It was 4 inches long and 516 inch in diameter. Cut at one end
and broken at the other, the only joint
has a hole through its septum. The
specimen, however, is not charred.
A similar one, from 18 inches, was 3

PLATE 28.
WOODEN BUNT POINTS, FORESHAFTS AND REED SHAFTS
1a, and 2a, are close-up views of bunt points and nock end of
complete shaft illustrated in No. 3. Found at depth of 7 inches
in Brooks Cave (near spot where an atlatl fragment was found).
The reed is 30 inches long and 5-16 inch in diameter. The
wooden bunt point increases the length to 33 inches. The notch
is 3-16 inch deep. Remains of attached feathers may be seen.
The wooden stem is 1 ¾ inches long to point where it merges
into the bunt proper; the latter is 1 ¼ inches long and 3-4 inch
in diameter, rounded and battered at the end. 1b is a reed
fragment, from a depth of 9 inches in same site, containing a
wood bunt point. 1c and d are wooden foreshafts in place in
reed shafts and 1e is the point of a tiny reed shaft, all from
deposits in caves on M. McAlpin Ranch, Culberson County.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas

79

A few agarita berries, grass and yucca seeds and
inches long, 11-32 inch in diameter and charred at
numerous fragments of sotol crowns were found.
each end.
There were a number of quids resulting from
chewing pieces of fibrous stalk—such as Agave
Bone Artifacts
lechuguilla flower stalks—when young and tender.
A few bone awls, from depths of 11 to 25 inches,
But they were not as abundant as in cave deposits
ranged in length from 3 to 4 1-2 inches.
in Val Verde County.
A possible whistle or call found 20 inches deep,
Rabbit bones were abundant; bones of other
was made from a bird bone. A hole was drilled
rodents also were found. Among these were the
through to the hollow near one end; the other end
kangaroo rat (Dipodomys sp.) and wood rat
was broken off.
(Neotoma albigula). At a depth of 18 inches was
the flattened carcass of a quail, with feathers
Gourd Fragments
missing.
One whole and two fragmentary wild or Mexican
A badger skull (Taxidea taxus) was found 26
gourds (cucurbita foetidissimi) came from the
inches deep. Bones of the turkey vulture (Catharus
debris in the upper 20 inches. Three pieces of large,
aura) were found. The head of a horned lizard or
thick gourds were found at 10, 12 and 18 inches.
“horned toad” (Phrynosoma cornutum) was found
One fragment had a carved edge, suggestive of a
at a depth of 83 inches. Bones of the great horned
vessel rim. The gourd may have been a foot or more
owl (Bobo virginianus), lynx (Lynx rufus), and
in diameter. There was no paint on any of the
pronghorn antelope (Centelocapra americana)
fragments.
likewise were found.
Food

Caldwell Cave No. 2
Cacti and mesquite beans seem to have been the
This site, a typical “sink-hole shelter,” was
chief items of food. Next in importance came rabbits
similar in many respects to Site No. 1. The entrance
and birds. Large game was scarce, but an occasional
is circular, with a diameter of 74 to 77 feet. The
deer and antelope furnished a feast. No buffalo
walls have a sheer drop on all sides of 8 1-2 to 27
bones were found in this cave.
feet. Except for the east and southeast, the circular
No corn was found. A lookout was kept for cobs, wall has a considerable overhang, under which the
husks or kernels, but none were found.
Indians lived. Back of the shelter is a low-roofed
chamber, leading by a narrow passage to a large
Intern odes of the cactus stem, or prickly pear
cave toward the west. The cave extends several
(Opuntia lindheimeri), were plentiful. From most
hundred feet, but shows no signs of human
of them the spines had been removed. Some
habitation. On the surface adjacent to the cave are
appeared to have been roasted. Tunas or fruit of
the usual mortar holes and ring mounds of “midden
the prickly pear also were present in the midden
circles.”
deposit.
Flint artifacts were just as scarce as at the
Other species of cacti were more plentiful. Single
previous site. Scales from the roof with painted
finds were numerous and at times they were in
designs were found at depths of 4 to 8 inches. The
heaps. At a depth of 30 inches were 15 cactus
paint was black. Nine stones had roughly circular
fragments. It seems the inner portions were eaten,
areas on one side covered with black paint.
leaving only the “rinds.”
Eighty-four potsherds were found and these
In addition to the cache of mesquite beans,
were at all depths down to 34 inches (the deposit
previously mentioned, many others both in the pod
was only 36 inches deep). Thirty-one per cent of
and out were scattered through the debris.

80

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

the sherds were black-on-white and came from the
upper 15 inches.
Among the 14 manos from Site No. 2 were two
of the edged type. They came from 9 and 12 inches.
Thirteen rabbit sticks came from depths of 5 to
19 inches; one from 30 inches. The longest was 20
x 1 x 1-2 inches. Three had no carving; on three
others lines encircled the ends. Some had three
continuous grooves, others two sets of three
grooves each, running lengthwise. Martin12 reported
similarly grooved sticks from along the Rio Grande.
An unsplit firehearth stick of lechuguilla flower
stalk, from a depth of 16 inches, contained eleven
charred pits.

second mat. The grass of which it was made was
twined with fiber cords. A number of loose cords
on top of some of the bones suggested that
originally the body may have been covered with
the grass mat.
The second burial was between boulders at a
depth of 12 inches. There was grass above and
beneath the burial. All that remained of the skeleton
were two ribs, a few vertebrae and the skull—minus
the lower jaw. The skull was that of a child of
perhaps two years.
The skull was on the concave part of a mat that
measured 16 x 13 inches. The mat, badly gnawed
by rats, was made of fiber coils 1-4 inch in diameter;
twined with rows of fiber cord spaced 3-4 inch
apart. There were no offerings other than the mat.

Bone specimens included an awl and flaking tool.
A deer antler pick or digging implement, from 30
Another possible disturbed burial, or mat-lined
inches, was 10 1-2 inches long. It was cut and
storage pit, was at a depth of 20 inches. The top
broken at the large end; the small end was badly
mat, made of whole leaves of Spanish dagger,
worn from hard use.
measured 18 x 14 inches. It had a concave upper
The 35 sandals from Site No. 2 were much surface. The weaving technique was over-oneunder-one and over-two-under-one. A small mat
the same as those from Site No.1.
of beargrass leaves had a size of 10 x 7 inches. A
At a depth of 22 inches were found softwood
bundle of the same kind of leaves was at the east
sticks pierced and twined on fiber cords. This
and another at the west. Beneath the matting were
probably was part of a mat.
many twigs and a quantity of grass. Several
limestone slabs lay near by.
Burials, Caldwell Cave No. 2
Two burials were found at this site. The first, at
a depth of 18 inches, was on a fiber mat or blanket
that measured 36 x 15 inches. The upper surface of
the mat was slightly concave. At the south end was
a round depression, as if made by the skull; but the
latter was missing—as were most of the other
bones. Remaining were four ribs, a femur, several
toe and finger bones, radius, ulna and humerus. It
seems that the skeleton may have been placed with
the head to the south and feet to the north. The
length of the femur was 16 1-2 inches. The length
of the mat suggests a flexed burial. Apparently rats
gnawed and scattered the bones.
The bottom mat was made of coils of fibrous
material about one inch in diameter and twined with
rows of fiber cords spaced some 2 1-2 inches apart.
At the south end of the grave were the remains of a

Ring-Mound Group, Caldwell Site No. 3
This site consists of a group of ten burnt-rock
ring-mounds—sometimes called “mescal pits.” The
place is located in a draw, at the edge of a lowland,
where water was available for several months in
the year. The draw extends in a northwest-southeast
direction and is hemmed in on both sides by chains
of hills. The region is at the edge of the Alkaline
Plains, which extends east to the Pecos River.
The dimensions of the ring-mounds vary from
57 to 19 feet outside diameters; 23 to 6 feet
diameters of the inner depressions or “pits”; and
from 33 to 6 inches in heights of the outer rocky
portions. In addition to the ten mounds there were
a number of smaller ones so badly scattered by
erosion, or the trampling of cattle, that no definite
measurements could be made. The area covered

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas

81

by the group is about 600 x 150 feet, following the on or near the ground, seems best explained on the
assumption of the use of the rock pile as a wind
course of the wet-weather stream.
break; and as a base for the tipi or house over and
These ring-mounds are made up chiefly of small
about the fire.”
angular pieces of burnt limestone. The appearance
Mera 15 who for several seasons conducted
and content of the ring of burnt rocks is practically
the same as the flat-topped and conical burnt-rock expeditions in the Guadalupe Mountains area, and
middens of Central Texas. But the depression or excavated or trenched a number of the “pits,” stated:
“pit” contains very few stones, and
a large quantity of ashes.
Of more than 50 middens of this
type observed by the writer on the
expedition, only three showed
evidence of digging. In no case was
the amateur “dig” larger than 3 x 2
feet. The reason may be found in
the fact that these middens yield few
artifacts. That fact probably gave
rise to the belief that they were not
ordinary midden deposits. On the
basis of surface examinations and
certain historic accounts, the”
“rings” have been referred to as
“mescal pits.”13
A number of years ago Pearce14
made the following statement about
such ring-mounds:
“* * * Often the mounds in those
parts are perfect circles with
circular depressions in the middle.
Sometimes they are elliptical with
a trench-like depression. This
suggests very strongly that the
stones and earth of the kitchen
middens were used, after sufficient
accumulation, to make earthlodges. * * *
He later added as follows:
“These mounds—in all their shapes
and sizes and in all regions where
they are found—are of kitchen
midden character. In West Texas,
the annular character of many of the
mounds with the fire place in the
middle and with the burnt rock
thrown back, so as to keep the fire

PLATE 29.
NETTING AND MATTING
1. Section of net showing technique of manufacture; A,
obverse; B, reverse sides. Cords are twined from fibers of
Agave lechuguilla.
2. Fragment of a mat. Warp consists of bundles of fibrous
material about 1-8 inch in diameter; weft is two-ply twisted
cord. Both warp and weft seem to be of the same material.

82

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

“* * * It was definitely determined that they were
not pits, in any sense of the word; nor were they
concerned especially with the preparation of mescal
for food. Instead, they were found to be specialized
refuse heaps. These circular mounds contained, in
addition to the more obvious small cracked rocks,
accumulations of ash, charcoal, food bones and
other camp debris. As the term ‘mescal pit’ is
obviously a misnomer, and as it is likely to be
perpetuated by usage, the writer feels that a
designation more in keeping with the character of
the structures should be chosen. Therefore, the
name ‘midden circle’ is proposed.” * * *
In order to secure additional first-hand
information our crew excavated the largest mound
of the above described group. Work was started
on the east, or lowest, side near the draw and the
mound completely excavated. It was found that the
maximum depth in the outer ring of burnt rocks
was 33 inches; while that in the ashy deposit of the
central depression was 19 inches. The bottom of
the ash deposit in the center was on a level with the
bottom of the burnt-rock ring and the surface of
the surrounding land. Apparently no pit was dug.
Finds in Midden Circle
Of a total of 77 complete artifacts from this site,
only 21 were dug up; the others were from the
surface of the entire group. Of 74 potsherds from
the site, 48 came from the large mound; nine from
the surface and 39 were excavated. The artifacts
found in the midden were as follows:
Type of Artifact
No. Specimens
Bone Pendant ---------------------------------------- 1
Manos—Whole 1; Broken 2 ---------------------- 3
Flint spokeshave ------------------------------------ 1
Flint side scrapers ----------------------------------- 6
Flint fist axes, crude -------------------------------- 4
Flint bone crushers ---------------------------------- 4
Flint knife, small ------------------------------------ 1
Flint projectile point -------------------------------- 1
21
The flint artifacts were uniformly crude. The
projectile point was found at 10 and the knife at 8

inches in depth. The bone pendant, at a depth of 8
inches, was in the burnt stones near the east edge
of the “ring.” The specimen measured 1 1-4 x 7-16
x 1-8 inch, the edges were rounded, and a small
hole was drilled at one end.
Of the 39 potsherds dug from the midden, 21
were black-on-white, and were found in the upper
seven inches. Mera identified sherds from the
midden circle as follows:
Description by Mera
Sherd No. 9—Depth 4 Inches: Unnamed.
Probably belongs, as a late form, to the Mogollon
series which has not been completely worked out.
Sherd No. 10—Depth 18 Inches: Coarsely
indented coiled utility (cooking) ware. Indented coil
was derived from the Pueblo region to the north;
but in the south, particularly, the same appearance
was often imitated by scoring or other kinds of
impressions. This seems to be the result of the latter
process. Probably originated from Northern
Chihuahua. Not named as yet.
Sherd No. 11—Depth 13 Inches: El Paso
Polychrome. Classical.
Sherd No. 12—Depth 8 Inches: Coarsely
indented coiled utility ware. This specimen was
actually built up by coiling, as opposed to No. 10.
Provenience probably the same or perhaps Southern
New Mexico. The several forms inter-relate.
Sherd No. 13—Depth 10 Inches: Fine rubbed
plain coil. A treatment of coiling native to a section
of country generalized as Upper Gila but also
extends south into the Mimbres area, possibly from
the latter source. Not specifically named as yet.
Sherd No. 15—Depth 14 Inches: Related to the
red-on-terracotta series. I am not familiar with this
sort, but as it is not normal to New Mexico sites so
far as I know, think it may be Mexican.
Sherd No. 16—Depth 8 Inches: Chupadero
Black-on-white, with paint fired to a glaze. This is
not unusual and does not seem to indicate any
developmental difference.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas

83

The roof in the dark, steep west end showed
little evidence of smoke-blackening; on the roof in
the other sections there was a dense accumulation
of soot. In places fire at one time consumed much
fibrous material. That no doubt smoked the roof;
but the densest deposit of soot is on the roof, back
for some 40 feet from the main entrance—where
Sherd No. 18—Depth 14 Inches: Smoothed and
the fibrous floor deposit did not burn. This suggests
polished ware. The more normal variety of which
that the camp fires were kept burning on the fairly
No. 10, 12 and 17 are more unusual.
level part of the central section.
Sherd No. 19—Depth 11 Inches: Indented coil
One small circular mortar hole is located in a
technique borrowed from Pueblo sources to the
rock ledge outside and near the west entrance.
north, though the paste indicates a relationship with
that of the El Paso group. Very likely an aberrant
Disturbed Burials
form.
A few years before our visit “treasure hunters”
Sherd No. 20—Depth 8 Inches: Belongs to the
had dug large holes near two boulders next to the
terracotta group from Southern New Mexico and
south wall along the steep incline in the west section.
Northern Chihuahua.
In the soil cast out were broken human bones,
These pottery finds in the burnt-rock ring-mound together with two damaged grass mats, a yucca
suggests that sites of this type are contemporaneous mat, a rabbit net torn into many pieces, two rhythm
with the cave deposits where like sherds are found. sticks (one with 70 notches), a bone bead, horn
pendant, three flint projectile points and a small flint
Among the surface finds on the site was an
knife.
obsidian side-scraper and three stone hoe blades
From the disturbed burial also came part of a
(?). The latter were chipped off on one side to form
a digging edge—much like certain hoe blades along large cord or rope 29 inches long and 3-8 inch in
diameter. It is twined from 27 small cords. Each
Red River near Texarkana.
small cord is twined from two strands. The
Ethnobotanical Laboratory at Ann Arbor reported
Brooks Cave
on the cord as follows:
A large cave on the Shelby Brooks Ranch proved
to be of considerable interest. The cave, with several
“Strands are two-ply and tightly twisted
small openings in the side of one of the numerous clockwise. The material is cotton (Gossypium sp.).
hills, is located some five miles from a water supply. They have been dyed or stained an orange-red color,
But water is said to be obtainable at a depth of six after having been twisted. The color penetrated only
feet in a draw 1-2 mile southwest of the cave. The part way, the central portion remaining uncolored.”
main cave opening faces west and has much burntAnother hank of cotton cords had a knot 2 inches
rock and other evidence of camp life in front of the
in diameter that united 74 small cords.
entrance.
One fragment of the rabbit net was 46 x 22
For record purposes, the cave was divided into
inches; another 40 x 10 inches. The warp was of
three sections. The first, at the west end, measured
double cords and woof of single cords looped
180 feet long with a maximum width of 110 feet;
around the warp. The mesh was 1 x 1-4 inch.
the central portion has a north-south length of 160
and east-west width of 170 feet; the east end is 150
Skull Burials
long with the greatest width 110 feet. This makes
a total east-west length of 500 and maximum northAgainst the south wall in the west end of the
south width of 160 feet.
cave, some 12 feet southwest of the disturbed
Sherd No. 17—Depth 6 Inches: Vertically
indented coiled utility ware. This type of coiling
seems to have been developed in the Middle Gila
section of Southern Arizona but the paste assigns
it to the same group which includes No. 10 and 12.
Not named.

84

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

burials, were two skulls in what appeared to be
undisturbed deposit. No artifacts were with them.
One was at a depth of 4 inches the other immediately
beneath at 12 inches. No other
skeletal remains showed up near the
skulls.

The skeleton on top was that of an adult female,
lying on the stomach face down. The body was
straight from the head to the pelvis; the right knee

Other Burials
In the east end of the cave, eight
feet from the wall, was a grave
partly disturbed by rats. The depth
to the top of the mat covering was
10 inches, and to the grave floor 20
inches. The length of the grave was
33 inches; direction, southeastnorthwest. The head was to the
northwest, with face to north. Some
hair remained in place on the skull;
the ears were found in a desiccated
condition. The lower limbs were
missing.
A grass mat, 51 x 40 inches, was
beneath the body and was folded
back as a covering. The mat was
made of bundles of grass twined
with rows of fiber cords spaced 3
to 4 inches apart. Another mat,
made of fiber coils and twined with
cords two inches apart, measured
24 x 18 inches and was immediately
beneath the skeleton. Rabbit skin
cords represented the remains of a
fur blanket that was in a bad state
of preservation. There was a small
polished mano but no other stone
artifacts in the grave.
The remaining burial was found
in a large crevice in the rock, in the
central section of the cave. Above
the topmost of the two skeletons
was a fill of stones and ashy soil to
a depth of 22 inches. The width of
the crevice was 28 inches and the
length 11 feet; with the burial
slightly south of its center.

PLATE 30.
RECORDS DESTROYED BY RATS AND VANDALS
1. Fragment of a beaded pouch, found in a rat nest beneath
a large boulder in McAlpin Cave
No. 2. One piece is 5½ x 3, another 9 x 7 inches. The seed
beads are from some species of Lithospermum; and are on
small undyed two-strand cord; the larger cord has been dyed
or stained an orange-red. Mesh, 1-4 inch. 2. Highly polished
horn pendant, with remains of human-hair cord in suspension
hole. Cast out, along with human bones, by “treasure hunters”
who dug large holes in Brooks Cave. Dimensions, 1¾ x 1 x
3-16 inch. 3. Desiccated human right hand, found in debris
in Brooks Cave. Probably gnawed off and removed from
grave by rats. Note the long finger nails.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas
was beneath the stomach, with the foot against a
boulder; the left knee at the east side of the crevice,
with the foot doubled back against the rock. The
left humerus was extended outward over one femur
of the skeleton beneath; the arm was flexed with
the left hand over some matting; the right arm was
bent beneath the stomach. The right side of the skull
was against the west wall. The femora were 17 1-2
inches long. The teeth were small and badly worn;

85

the rear molars of the lower jaw were missing—as
was the case in certain skulls reported from Val
Verde County16.
A digging stick protruded 15 inches from
beneath this skull. Another stick had one end near
the left ear. The top skeleton was above a yucca
leaf mat of two-over-two-under weave. Just
beneath the mat, under the left hand of the upper
skeleton, was a bundle of five sticks with a large
fiber cord net of 2-inch mesh wrapped
around them. Beneath the lower
skeleton was a mat made of coils of
fiber twined with cords. A little-used
mano was just above the skeletons.
The lower skeleton, that of a child,
was on the right side, with the head to
the northwest and the feet to the
southeast. The legs were semi-flexed,
with the left foot across the right ankle.
The body was bent with the front of
the skull against the west wall. The
right arm was bent with the hand
beneath the pelvis; the left hand was
south of the chin. The length of the
femora was 11 1-2 inches.
In the grave was a short piece of
yucca flower stalk decorated on one
side with paintings in black. Another
specimen from the grave was a
wooden foreshaft 8 1-2 inches long
and 1-4 inch in diameter.

PLATE 31.
FISH TAIL SANDALS OF YUCCA LEAVES
1. Tie-string consists of large central and small toe-loop,
united by a third loop. Apparently there was no string
back of the heel. Found in Brooks Cave. 2. Two
interlocking yucca-leaf loops served as tie-strings. The
weft strands cross near the center, giving the sandal a
symmetrical appearance. From Caldwell Cave No. 2.

The roll of netting, approximately
18 feet in length, may have been used
as a rabbit net or snare. The sticks on
which it was wound have one sharp
end with the other notched. If stuck
in the ground at intervals they would
facilitate stretching the net, the upper
cord of which might rest in the notched
ends.
Remains of another badly decayed
fiber cord net found beneath and above
the feet of the lower skeleton which
suggests that a portion at least of the
body may have been encased in the net;

86

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

or possibly a net fragment was used as a rope to
bind the matting around the legs.

Grooved Rabbit Sticks, Brooks Cave

The bottom of a basket was located beneath the
abdomen of the adult. Its diameter was 6 1-2 inches,
with a hole about 2 inches in diameter in its center.
Although the remainder of the basket was not
found, the pierced bottom suggests ceremonial
“killing.”

One of the most abundant and outstanding types
of artifacts in this cave was the grooved rabbit stick
or so-called throwing club. Forty-one specimens
of this type were found in the cave. Some of the
clubs were as much as 24 inches long; the average
width was 1 1-4 inches and the average thickness
3-8 inch.

Destruction by Fire

Twenty-eight per cent of the specimens had no
grooves; 48 per cent had three grooves; 20 per cent
four grooves; and 4 per cent two grooves. Five per
cent of the grooved clubs had the lines arranged in
five sets; 9 per cent in four sets; 13 per cent in three
sets; 17 per cent had two sets; while 56 per cent
had continuous or unbroken grooves.

In the east part of the cave much of the deposit
of fibrous materials, sticks, and other debris had
been destroyed by fire. In some places the loose,
feathery ash showed the trash deposit originally to
have been as much as five feet deep. In other
sections there seem to have been several fires, with
periods of occupation between. When the flames
Seven of the fragmentary specimens were
reached large boulders, the fire sometimes was charred at one end. This suggests that after the
checked. This resulted in several small areas being sticks were broken they may have been used as fire
saved. The fires may have been accidental; or started “tongs,” shovels or torches.
intentionally to clear the space of excess debris.
Three specimens were wrapped with thin skin
or sinew. Being near the ends, the wrappings may
Cross-Section, Brooks Cave
have served to give a better hand grip or to guard
A cross-section, at a point 6 feet from the wall against splitting.
at the east side, was as follows:
Many specimens gave evidence of having been
1”-10”—Surface material composed largely of put to hard usage. Often one end was battered, as
also occasionally were the sides. This seems to
bat guano.
confirm their use as throwing or striking sticks.
11”-28”—Camp refuse, composed of sticks,
Eight specimens had scratching or fine carving
fibrous material, small limestone slabs, some burnt,
and brown ash. A few rabbit sticks, fire hearths and near one end. These sometimes took the form of
an arrowshaft. No flint. Small quantity of bat guano. crosshatch and almost invariably encircled the stick.
They may have been intended as a form of
29”-55”—Same as level just above, except that
decoration or to roughen the surface and thus assist
sticks are more numerous and there are a few more
a firmer grip on the stick. In the latter event they
stones. Rabbit sticks and two badly decayed sandals
would serve as a substitute for wrapping.
of yucca leaves. No flint. Rabbit bones and a few
wolf and wildcat bones. Deer antlers. No cordage;
An occasional specimen had a large notch or
no pottery. Grass stems make up a large part of the hacked-out place in one edge near the end. This
trash, intermixed with sticks. Latter vary in size from too may have been a form of handgrip.
small twigs to branches 1 1-2 inches in diameter.
The parallel grooves running lengthwise seem
Many of the sticks are charred at one or both ends.
to have been primarily for decoration. The fact that
Some have been hacked with a flint or other crude
many of them are divided into groups lends strength
implement and then broken.
to the assumption. The prevalence of three and four
56”-59”—Undisturbed yellow shale.
as “magic” numbers should be noted.
60”—Bedrock.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas

87

Types of Basketry, Brooks Cave
No whole basket was found in
this cave. One bottom, 5 1-2
inches in diameter and employing
the split-stitch, came from only
two inches deep. Another of the
same type was at 12 inches. This
bottom, 6 inches in diameter, had
been patched by use of fiber
cordage. A fragment using the
interlocking stitch was from 7
inches. Specimens sent to Setzler
were identified by him as follows:

PLATE 32.
1. So-called rabbit sticks, from Brooks and McAlpin Caves.
Lengths: A and C, 24 inches; B, 19 ½ and D, 21 inches. Note
the groupings of the grooves, the end-wrapings and notched
hand-grips.
2. Fragment of yucca stalk firestick, with charred pits and
notches. Length, 5 inches.
3. Entrance to McAlpin Cave No. 2.
4. Burial of adult and child in crevice between boulders.
Brooks Cave. Note the matting and netting. The mat, about
40 x 14 inches, is of two-over-two-under technique.

“After examining the coiled
basketry fragments, I have come
to the following conclusions:
Fragments Nos. 117 and 119
belong to the type described as a
single bundle foundation with
yucca thread stitches split on the
convex or non-work surface,
sewed toward the left of the
worker on the concave or inside
of the basket. Fragments 97 and
120 belong to the type known as
the interlocking stitch with -a
single bundle foundation.
Fragment No. 183 is most unusual.
My analysis indicates a single rod
foundation with non-interlocking
stitches, some of which are split
on the concave or inside of the
basket. An example of this type
will be found in ‘Preliminary
Classification of Prehistoric
Southwestern Basketry,’ by Gene
Weltfish,
Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections, Vol.
87, No. 7, p. 18, fig. 12. This is
considered by Weltfish as of rare
occurrence, which she analyzed
from the Wetherill collection.”

88

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Bows and Arrows

One fragmentary and two
practically whole bows were found
in the Brooks cave. There also were
found one reed arrowshaft, with
wooden bunt point, and the distal end
of another; two wooden foreshafts;
one nock end of a wooden shaft; and
three probable wooden arrows.
At a depth of 6 inches was an end
section of what appears to be a bow.
It is 20 1-2 inches long and 1 1-2
inch in diameter. The undamaged end
bears a notch, the other end is burnt.
A curved bow-shaped stick, with
remains of red stripes around it at
close intervals, was found on the
surface in the central part of the cave.
Its length is 28 1-2 inches and
diameter 5-8 inch. The ends are
decayed.
One of the outstanding finds, at a
depth of 7 inches, was a reed shaft
30 inches long and 5-16 inch
diameter, with a wood bunt point 3
inches long, making a total length of
33 inches. The nock end has a notch
3-16 inch deep with two sets of
wrappings within 1 1-2 inches from
the end. A third set of sinew
wrappings, with remains of three
feathers, is 4 inches below the notch.
The bunt “stem” is in place in the
reed shaft and bound with wrappings
one inch wide. The stem itself is
wrapped near the bunt proper. The
wooden stem is 1 3-4 inch long to
where it merges into the enlarged
blunt point. The latter is 1 1-4 long
and 3-4 inch in diameter, rounded
and battered at the distal end.
At a depth of 9 inches was a
fragment of a reed shaft with a similar
bunt point inserted in it. The reed
section is 8 3-4 inches long; the bunt,

PLATE 33.
GRAVE AND OTHER FINDS
1, 2. Matting and basket fragments arranged in concave
deposits, Caldwell Caves Nos. 1 and 2. Apparently not
graves, as no skeletal remains were found. Immediately
beneath the matting in No. 2 was a layer of grass. 3. Fiber
cord net wrapped on six sharpened-and-notched sticks.
Longest stick, 32 inches. Found in Burial Z-2, Brooks Cave.
Diameters: roll, 6 inches; outer cords, 1-8; inner cords, 110 inch. Two-inch mesh. Probably a rabbit net to be
stretched on the sticks. 4. Skull of adult from Burial Z-2,
Brooks Cave. Note absence of lower molars and presence
of adhering matting over left eye. 5. Burial Z-1, Brooks
Cave, showing large grass mat (51 x 40 inches) partly turned
back revealing skeletal remains. Grave was beneath camp
debris and bat guano. Burial disturbed by rats.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas

89

one inch long and 5-16 inch in diameter. The entire sharpened and the other notched. It came from a
stem is imbedded in the reed. The outer end of the depth of 8 inches.
bunt is badly battered and has a fragment broken
out.
Evidence of the Atlatl
In comparing these specimens with one from
An atlatl fragment, from the distal end, was
Brewster County, illustrated and classed by Setzler17 found at a depth of 4 inches in the east section of
as an “atlati bunt point,” photographs and full the Brooks Cave. The specimen is 11 1-2 inches
descriptions were sent him. He replied as follows18: long, 1 3-8 inches wide and 5-16 inch thick. If the
groove originally was in the center, the total width
“* * * Photograph showing the complete shaft
of the atlati was about two inches. The wood is
and bunt point illustrates an unusual specimen. It is
polished on each side. The groove is 2 3-4 inches
the first that I have seen from that Texas region.
long, 3-8 inch wide and 3-16 inch deep at the spur.
There seems to be no question but what it was an
The spur protrudes about 1-8 inch.
arrowshaft, unless these people had some other
method for propelling shafts with nock ends. The
Setzler 19 writes as follows concerning this
nock end, feathering and the fact that the shaft is specimen: “* * * I would identify the specimen * *
made from a reed 33 inches long would certainly * as a crude atlatl; however, one of the best
indicate an arrow-shaft. This, of course, raises the examples I have seen from the Big Bend. The
question as to whether my so-called bunt point finding of this specimen, together with examples
might not also have been hafted to a cane arrow- of the bow and arrow, would seem to agree with
shaft. I have consulted with several colleagues here, the numerous examples I have found. Here again,
trying to determine the difference between a bunt we have evidence showing their contemporanity
point used in an atlatl shaft in contrast to one used comparable to the Pueblo I period in the Southwest.
in an arrow-shaft. We all agree that it is practically This does not, however, indicate a similar time
impossible to tell definitely the difference—as it chronology for the Big Bend.”
would be in determining a flint projectile point—
The specimen has a shorter spur than ones the
unless the specimen was actually hafted. My
writer has seen from the Hueco Mountains near El
identification was based primarily on the opinion
Paso, and from a cave in Sierra de Pajarito,
of Kidder, Nusbaum, Roberts and Judd. They may
Chihuahua, Mexico; and apparently the spur is
have been led to believe that it was an atlatl bunt
shorter than one from Oklahoma illustrated and
point because of its association with the handle of
described by Baker and Kidder 20. The spur
an atlatl and the foreshaft which were found
protrudes very slightly above the surface on this
associated in this cave.
Culberson County, Texas, specimen.
“The only possible criterion that I can think of
The atlatl from Culberson County is unlike that
at the moment would be the degree of tapering.
reported from Val Verde County by Gardner and
One used in an atlatl shaft would probably be larger
Martin21.
and less tapering than one used in the smaller reed
shafts. Bunt points are commonly used in arrowOther Finds in Brooks Cave
shafts reported from historic Indian tribes and
Roberts feels that bunt points would be more rare
Among the miscellaneous finds was a polished
with atlatl using people than with the former. The bone 8 inches long and 1-2 inch in diameter. It was
measurements on my specimen are 3 1-8 inches long ground down at one end. The U. S. National
and 1 1-8 inches in diameter, which is practically Museum identified it as a bone of the Golden Eagle
the same as yours except for the diameter.” * * * (Aquila Chrysaltos).
Fire-making implements included 5 hardwood
A wooden arrow, perhaps a toy, is 13 1-4 inches
long and 1-4 inch in diameter, with one end drills and 10 yucca stalk hearth sticks. The lengths

90

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

McAlpin Caves No. 1 and 2
of the drills are 10 1-4 to 22 1.2 inches, with an
The excavation of two small caves on the
average of 16 inches. A small bow, That possibly
may have been used for drill rotation, came from a McAlpin ranch, while thoroughly worth while,
depth of 24 inches. The length of the bow was 26 brought to light very little new data. Hence a
inches; diameter, 3-8 inch. There is a notch half detailed report of the work will not be given here.
way around one end; the other is broken where the
groove was cut. But the drills do not seem to show
Summary
the use of a bow.
Perhaps the most important result of the work
A so-called game carrier consisted of a fiber cord was the finding of potsherds at various levels in
10 inches long attached at one end to a rabbit bone two caves. This gave the first inkling as to the
“needle” or stringer, and at the other to half of the approximate chronology of the cave culture of the
pelvic bone of a rabbit. It came from a depth of 8 region. It likewise indicates that the culture is not
so old as some archaeologists had assumed. But
inches.
there was no evidence of European contact.
Only 16 flint specimens were found. A lump of
The available evidence suggests a combination
red ocher, showing evidence of use, came from a
of the Pueblo culture and Pueblo physical types.
depth of 11 inches.
The atlatl and bow and arrow appear to have
Four potsherds were found in this cave. They
came from the upper level, none being deeper than been contemporaneous.
four inches.
There was found no evidence of corn.
Skeletal Material

Food consisted largely of small game and fruit
of native plants.

A detailed study of these, along with other,
skeletons from West Texas caves has been made by
Flint work was extremely scarce.
a physical anthropologist and will appear as a
Rabbit sticks were well made and very abundant.
separate publication. The present evidence seems
Sandals were prevailingly of the so-called “fishto indicate for Culberson County a mixture of the
round-headed Pueblo type with the long-headed Big tail” type.
Bend type. But much more work needs to be done
Basketry and matting illustrate an interesting
before arriving at any conclusions.
variety of weaving techniques.
Food, Brooks Cave
While a buffalo bone, a number of deer bones
and bones of the coyote (Canis sp.) were found
most of the bones were those of small animals—
particularly that of the jack rabbit (Lepus sp.). Quail
bones were plentiful. A horned toad in a desiccated
condition, with the insides removed, came from a
depth of 8 inches.
Cacti were not so abundant as in the Caldwell
caves. Mesquite beans were numerous. There was
no corn.

The midden circles in the open appear to be of
about the same age as the cave deposits.

Department of Anthropology,
University of Texas,
Austin, Texas.

Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas
(1) Ethnobotanical Laboratory, University of Michigan,
Museum of Anthropology, Report No. 70-B, by Volney H.
Jones, Ann Arbor, February 12, 1935, Lab. No. 718.
(2) Nusbaum, Jesse L., “A Basket-Maker Cave in Kane
County, Utah,” with Notes on Artifacts by A. V. Kidder and
S. J. Guernsey, Museum of American Indian, New York,
1922, pp. 145-147.
(3) Mera, H. P., “Letters to A. T. Jackson,” dated December
7 and December 17, 1934, with report on pottery.
(4) Setzler, F. M., “Letter to A. T. Jackson,” March 14, 1935.
(5) Smith, Victor J., “Hord Rock Shelter,” Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 6,
September, 1934, p. 98.
(6) Coffin, E. F., “Archaeological Exploration of a Rock
Shelter In Brewster County, Texas,” Indian Notes and
Monographs No. 48, Museum of American Indian, New
York, 1932, pp. 50-52, PI. XIV.
(7) Ibid, p. 23.
(8) Pearce, J. E., and Jackson, A. T., “A Prehistoric Rock
Shelter In Val Verde County, Texas,” University of Texas
Bulletin No. 3327, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 3,
Austin, 1933, p. 88.
(9) Jackson, A. T., “A WPA Archaeological Project on the
Colorado River In Central Texas,” Anthropological Papers,
Vol. 3, No. 1, Austin, 1937.
(10) Coffin, B. F., Op. Cit., pp. 15, 32.
(11) Martin, G. C., “Archaeological Exploration of Shumla
Caves,” Bul. 3 Southwest Texas Archaeological Society,
Witte Memorial Museum, San Antonio, 1933, pp. 62-63.

91

(12) Ibid, pp. 31-32.
(13) Howard, E. B., “Caves Along the Slopes of the
Guadalupe Mountains,” Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, September,. 1932, pp. 8-9.
(14) Pearce, J. E., “Indian Mounds and Other Relics of Indian
Life In Texas, American Anthropologist (NS), Vol. 21, No.
3, July-September, 1919, P. 231.
(15) Mera, H. P., “ Mescal Pits’—A Misnomer,” Science,
Vol. 77, No. 1989, February 10, 1933, pp. 168-169.
(16) Pearce, J. E., and Jackson, A. T., Op. cit., p. 71.
(17) Setzler, P. M., “Prehistoric Cave Dwellers of Texas,”
Exploration and Field Work Smithsonian Institution, 1932,
Washington, 1933, fig. 56, c.
(18) Setzler, F. M., “Letter to A. T. Jackson,” February 9,
1935.
(19) Setzler, F. M., “Letter to A. T. Jackson,” March 14,
1935.
(20) Baker, W. E., and Kidder, A. V., A Spear Thrower from
Oklahoma, American Antiquity, Vol. Ill, No. 1, July, 1937,
pp. 51-52.
(21) Gardner, Fletcher, and Martin, G. C., “A New Type of
Atlatl from a Cave Shelter on the Rio Grande Near Shumla,
Val Verde County, Texas,” Bul. 2, Southwest Texas
Archaeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum, San
Antonio, 1933, pp. 15-18.

