38

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

ARCHEOLOGICAL NOTES OF THE BIG BEND REGION
BY VICTOR J. SMITH
During the past few years, studies and surveys
conducted by the University of Texas and several
Texas scientific societies have established the fact
that Texas is an area containing a great variety of
cultural evidence, destined to become outstanding
in its contributions of knowledge concerning
prehistoric man in North America. Texas has within
its boundaries climatic conditions that range from
almost tropical to conditions in many respects equal
to the northern portion of the temperate zone. This
paper deals with the Big Bend area, that section of
the State lying west of the Pecos River
The importance of the Big Bend, or Trans-Pecos
section, as an archeological field may readily be
visualized if a map is consulted and its relationship
with districts to the east and north determined,
together with the fact that it either borders on, or is
a part of, the Southwestern Division.
Climatic conditions in the Big Bend are more
nearly like those of the Southwestern states than
other parts of Texas to the east. Naturally such semiarid conditions have been favorable to the
preservation of specimens which, in many sections
would have long ago perished. Such dry weather
conditions, together with a rugged topography, offer
numerous sites where fragile materials have been
preserved in a bone dry state for many years.
Mountains in the vicinity range from 300 to 3,000
feet above the adjoining plains or valleys with their
peaks from 5,000 to 9,000 feet above sea level.
The rock shelters found in these mountains will be
mentioned in a later paragraph. The many caves in
limestone or “lava” rock, however, offered unusual
opportunities for shelter; the mountains provided
conditions of refuge not usual to a level country;
game abounded in the section; and springs and
mountain streams, always provided a much more
sure supply of water to the Indian than a casual
observance of the country today would lead one to
believe.

So far as possible accurate records have been
made covering sites in this section of the State. It
is important that complete ones be secured before
the damage or entire loss of materials make
investigations impossible. For example,
pictographs in certain localities are being rapidly
obliterated by vandals, and treasure hunters are
digging into much valuable scientific material with
no thought of the havoc being wrought to
anthropological research. The records referred to
include field notes, maps, drawings, photographs,
and museum specimens. Sites from which such
evidence has been gathered number 168 and range
in size or importance from small open camps to
extensive sites indicating habitation for possibly
thousands of years.
Open Camps
In a discussion of open camp sites, it should be
said that the Big Bend is known as an Apache
country and that the Mescalero branch of the tribe
is supposed to have occupied the section as far back
as authentic history can trace. The very geographic
location of the area, however, has always made it
subject to forays, migrations, and hunting
expeditions. History records the fact that the
Comanches from east of the Pecos river made
inroads into the Apache territory. As Texas became
more settled, these inroads became more frequent
until finally the Davis and Chisos Mountains
became the scene of the last stand of the Indian in
Texas, the last group of any numerical importance
being driven out of the Big Bend in 1870.
Many of the open camp sites show evidence of
scant use, therefore, these may have been occupied
by the Comanches, who were unused to the rock
shelters and preferred tents with other forms of
prairie living. There can be little doubt that the
Comanches, when traveling quickly as they often
did used the caves for temporary occupation. Types

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

39

Plate 7
BIG BEND AREA
1. A typical dry rock shelter. The rock in the mouth of this cave is almost completely covered with
“V” shaped lines.
2. Pictographs. Aqua Frio Bluff, Brewster County, Texas. These interesting figures all in red.
Small figures about 7" in height. With the exception of the horse and rider here shown, only one
additional site has yielded evidences of white influence among the pictographs of the Big Bend.
This illustration also shows the man with inverted bow which occurs in many widely scattered
localities.
3. A mortar with fragments of pestles found near. This hole is eight inches in diameter and eighteen
inches deep. It is the most perfect specimen known to the writer. “Volcano Village Site,” Jeff
Davis County.
4. Mortars at Molino Cliff, Brewster County. These represent two of the sixteen on the elevated
shelf of rock. The marks of the human body are still clearly visible.

40

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

of artifacts yielded by the open camps are: metates,
manos, scrapers, arrowheads, and some rocks with
lines or inscriptions. Rock circles still mark the
location of tepees. Burnt rock mounds are found in
abundance but as a rule there is no evidence of
extensive camping in the immediate vicinity.

in all of the larger caves and the bones of deer,
bear, and antelope are rather common. Implements
made from bone are restricted to the awl type.

The rock shelters which have been mentioned
are found in canyons, at the faces of bluffs, or at the
top of the talus. The most important of these sites
take the form of long open shelters with overhanging
rocks which afford protection, or they are caves
extending back into the rock. All of the caves, save
a few with irregular rock floors, are covered with
litter from six inches to six feet in depth. The last
mentioned type of shelter varies from ten to thirty
feet in width at the mouth and from ten to fifty feet
in depth. Such shelters, of course, afford unusually
good protection from the weather (many of them
face south). Indians often added to the comfort and
safety of these shelters by building walls in front
or by closing undesirable openings with rough
masonry or rock piling.

The characteristic pestle is circular in cross
section (usually broken when found) and generally
from eleven to fourteen inches long when
undamaged. The point or nose is the distinguishing
part, being round, and slightly pointed with an
evident worn surface. At one location where the
rock was rather hard red sandstone, the smooth,
almost polished, surface of the rock indicated
clearly long contact with the human body just as
may be observed at the mouth of narrow caves.
This glossy surface indicated that the squaw sat
flat with legs on each side of the mortar hole while
she did the laborious work at the mill.

Grinding Devices

These are the mortar and pestle, and the metate
Practically all camps, regardless of type, are and mano. Measurements of hundreds of mortar
situated within a mile of a water supply.
holes made in living rocks indicate that the average
diameter is seven and one-half inches and the
average depth is fourteen inches. Often there is a
Rock Shelters
Swallows have nested, and both wild and “side rest” of shallow depth. The cross section
domestic animals have lived in the shelters and shape of the typical mortar hole is like that of a
caves for ages, thus contributing much to the cave conical projectile. It is our conclusion that, once a
deposits. Also rocks have fallen from the roof in depth of fourteen or more inches was reached,
many instances; and there are large accumulations another such grinding hole was developed, starting
of ashes which treasure hunters have often “stirred,” at some gas hole or depression in the rock. This
all of which produced a” condition making accurate change was made necessary because of the
investigation difficult. Large masses of bulky difficulty in securing rock pounding stones or
materials must be moved as well as an exceedingly pestles of sufficient length. It is probably true also
fine dry dust constantly to be contended with. But that stones tied to stick handles may have been used
the very condition that has just been described has in some of the seventeen to twenty inch holes. The
made possible the preservation of some very size range o£ these grinding “mills” vary from the
unusual and fragile types of specimens—available smallest smooth pocket to a maximum of 12” in
only because of the exceeding dryness and possible diameter by 24” deep.
chemical assistance secured by the presence of
In these mortars such food as mesquite beans,
ashes.
acorns, corn, and similar materials were pulverized.

Rock Shelter Artifacts
The bones of animals, as might be expected, are
found in great profusion—split bones being found

Metates and Manos
Almost as common as the mortar and pestle are
the many metates and mano stones to be found in
all types of camps and among excavated specimens.
A typical metate is about twelve or fourteen inches

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
wide, sixteen to eighteen inches long, has a concave
surface dished about 1 1/2” to 2” deep, and weighs
from 25 to 175 pounds, according to thickness. The
texture varies from a very coarse lava formation to
a very smooth surface and exceptions to the
preceding range to huge specimens in living rock,
deep basins going entirely through the stone, and
exceedingly heavy artifacts.

41

place for dressing and working upon the skins of
animals.
Artifacts of Wood

We have believed that the collection of wooden
artifacts is much more important than that of stone,
even though the effort involved is greater and the
results achieved are always much less extensive
The typical mano, or grinding stone, is an oval and showy.
stone which fits a large hand well and has the
A brief tabulation of such articles of wood
general shape of a cake of soap.
follows:
(a) Fire sticks. These are of soft punky wood,
about 3/8” in diameter with the characteristic holes
Other stone artifacts include a variety of
allowing air. Much fine bark and vegetable matter
weapons. Almost 90% of the arrowheads or points
accompany the cave finds.
found in the open are of rough material and
represent rather unskilled or hasty workmanship.
(b) A “wooden knife” or shaft straightener.
No flint mines of importance have been found and This is a single specimen which might formerly
it is assumed that this shortage of material accounts have been an atl-atl converted into another
for the type of craftsmanship. A number of very implement because of damage. The size, material
finely wrought flints, however, have been found, (polished post oak), shape, and characteristic
notably those from the “Santiago Peak Grave” and carving leads to the above conclusion. The diagonal
the “Livermore Cache.” At this latter place 1250 hole in this specimen is about one inch in diameter
museum specimens were unearthed, most of which and is highly polished from constant rubbing.
are small points representing good material and
(c) Sharpened sticks. The diameter varies from
workmanship.
l/2” to 3/8” and they are a foot or more long.
A few spearheads indicate nothing unusual as Possibly they were used as forks or skewers.
to type and but a single axe or stone hatchet
(d) Sticks wrapped about with fiber string. One
probably represent an imported specimen. I should
of these specimens was wrapped with fiber bristles
mention, however, a single specimen of unusual
indicating its use as a crude brush.
interest. This is a small hafted hatchet, still set into
an agave stalk of 2” diameter; the handle was burned
(e) Large sticks placed for the protection of
off a short distance from the blade, which was of burials or caches. Sometimes bent and tied at the
good quality flint.
top. Larger pieces were used for firewood.
Other Artifacts

Scrapers and Knives

(f) Shafts. Possibly used with the atl-atl.

(g) Throwing sticks (atl-atl). Typical size, 5We may close this brief discussion of stone
8” thick, 1” wide, and 14” long.
implements by mentioning the knife and scraper.
The former is found in exceedingly crude form and
Artifacts of Fiber
the latter is usually of the turtle back type and
exhibits a variety of sizes and degrees of
Almost of equal importance with the above are
workmanship. It is believed that the scrapers and the materials made from the fiber of desert plants.
knives were used in the preparation of skins. Quite
(a) Baskets are largely of coiled bowl shaped
often a large rock surface over a large area will be
types and without decoration. The largest sizes are
found smooth and glossy, indicating a probable
nine inches high and twenty inches in diameter.

42

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

As this is being written additional types of smaller
baskets have been placed in the Museum but, as
yet, neither classified nor studied.
(b) Sacks, nets, storage sacks, and containers.
A variety of woven articles evidently used to carry
children, store or carry food, or for the burial of
infants. Similar in weave to the mats but of finer
texture and sometimes openwork resembling a
coarse fish net.

Ornaments
Another important phase of ethnological study
is that of the ornament, since it represents the most
advanced progress made by Neolithic man.
Possibly beads form the most important group in a
study of ornaments as they relate to the section under
discussion. The specimens collected range from a
single piece to as many as 70 found in one grave.
These beads fall, according to size, shape, and
material, into the following groups:

(c) Mats. Several types of weave and edging.
(d) Sandals. With thongs, vary in sizes from
child to man. Most of these specimens are badly
worn but a variety of weaving methods may be
observed. No leather footgear was found.
(e) String and rope work. Hundreds of short
pieces of string have been found in the caves. These
range in size from 1-16” in diameter to ½”. Two
types of manufacturing include a three strand spiral
twisted string and a three strand plait of smaller
string.

1. Tubular, cylindrical—thigh bone of fowl.
2. Short cylindrical bone—quite smooth and
sometimes polished.
3. Discoidal beads—bones.
4. Round and Oval beads—turquoise.
5. Seed beads—elliptical shape—holes size
of pin.

In some cases beads are found strung on a cord
but usually the string has long since rotted away.
One of the tubular bone ornaments is marked with
A large number of chewed fiber “cuds” often a tabulation consisting of nineteen small marks or
showing the marks of human teeth, seems to scores. Turquoise is found near Valentine, Texas.
indicate that the fiber was softened in this manner
Pendants
before being twisted into string.
Large numbers of specimens include more
roughly made materials used for tying. While there
is no fishing in the district away from the Rio
Grande, some of the finer materials suggests a net,
possibly for catching rabbits.
Other Cave Artifacts
Other items in a typical list of cave finds include
charcoal, ochre, crude salt, paint balls, gourds (one
18” high and decorated, evidently a grain storage),
small corn cobs, firewood, cactus hulls, ashes,
acorns, Spanish walnut shells, flint chippings, rocks
used about the camp fire, crayon, and coils of fiber.
These coils, sometimes with strings holding the
material in place, resemble pot rests or basket rests
but may have been merely materials held in storage.
The very limited pottery finds indicate late
imported specimens or only the crudest beginnings
of pottery work.

Closely associated with beads as ornaments are
pendants, two classes of which have been observed.
The largest group in size is typically of a triangular
shape wrought from a rather soft white stone. Next
in size are the ovate type varying from ¾” to 1½”
in length and about 3-32” thick. These are usually
made from materials resembling shell but they do
not reflect colors like mother-of- pearl.
Charms
Another group of specimens border upon a
classification between ornaments and pictographs.
These are charms, pocket pieces, and problematical
articles. Among them are found a stone article about
the shape of a small doughnut; the shoulder blade
of a deer inscribed with tiny black figures of snakes,
animals, and conventional lines; a hemispherical
stone carved with lines indicating the eyes, nose,
and mouth of a man; flat oval stone objects with
painted figures; and polished pebbles.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

43

Plate 8
PICTOGRAPHS AND PETROGLYPHS, BIG BEND AREA
1. Pictographs at Painted Springs near Dryden. Ancient hand prints are shown dimly as compared
with more recent drawings.
2. Pictographs at Painted Springs near Dryden. Sun symbol, men, animals, conventional symbols,
and an eagle with outstretched wings and body in various colors of concentric circles.
3. Lobo Petroglyphs near Valentine. This huge rock (note two foot rule) is covered with conventional
symbols which continue around the edge and over the top.
4. Pictographs in Nation’s Canyon, Jeff Davis County. The tall snake figures are in red and the
stripes to the left are in white, orange, and red. At the base of the cliff a shoulder blade of a deer
was found, upon which had been painted tiny pictures representing snakes, a mountain goat, and
conventional figures.
5. Lobo Petroglyphs near Valentine. This is said to be a snake dance figure.
6. Lobo Petroglyphs near Valentine. The drawings have no pigment but secure their tone by the
freshness of the rock removed as compared with the older surface. No chalk or other material
was used to bring out the contrast in taking these photographs.

44

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Pictographs

The paintings more commonly found are
pictographs. It should be said the Big Bend is a
fertile field for the study of pictographs. Their
abundance is probably due to an excellent supply
of cinnabar and other pigments and partly because
of sheltered rock surfaces which have preserved
the drawings. Twenty-three sites have been
recorded which have pictographs in varying
numbers. Most of the pigments are red (cinnabar).
Other colors, in order of numbers and importance,
are: Orange, white, yellow and black. In many cases
crayons were used to apply the color, in others a
brush. Handprints were sometimes sprayed from
the mouth or the hand dipped for the process.
Two great divisions include the types of
drawings used. These are the geometric forms in
one group and the figures of men and animals in
another. In the former are found dots, circles,
rectangular shapes, lines, arcs, spirals, triangular
shapes, and many elaborate combinations, possibly
representing maps or conventionalized forms
conveying messages to those familiar with their key.
Animals, sometimes most realistic in their
expression of action, form a large group and the
human figure another. Hunting scenes in which both
appear are frequently observed but weapons of the
hunt are primitive and not those of European
influence. In fact, with the exception of but two
locations, one of these quite minor, there is to be
found no white influence among the pictographs
messages left by ancient man. Speculation as to the
age of the pictographs is fruitless but evidence

indicates that they reach back to basket maker times.
Some locations reveal old painting superimposed
upon one or two layers still more ancient.
Petroglyphs
Of still greater age are the petroglyphs,
laboriously pecked upon the rock by hand, which
are often so old that the once fresh lines are so
dimmed with age that they are traced with difficulty.
Only two petroglyph locations are important, but
these are extensive and present valuable fields for
study.
Pottery
It may be said with some certainty that the Big
Bend Indians did not make or use pottery to any
extent.
Basket Makers
This brings us to our most important conclusion,
namely, that there is constantly accumulating
evidence in the deeper finds representing a culture
so closely resembling Basket Maker that
anthropologists are warranted in considering a
major portion of the Big Bend well within the area
admitted as basket maker territory. Space forbids a
detailed tabulation of evidence bearing upon this
point but future investigations will show the same
evidences over an area extending to the east as far
as the Devil’s River and the Pecos Valley.

