48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

THE POTTERY HORIZONS OF TEXAS
BY VICTOR J. SMITH
A few years ago Texas was thought of as having
pottery of scant amount and small importance. In
comparison with the vastly richer ceramic areas to
the east and west this was partially true. During
the past decade, however, many published reports
in the field of archeology have focused attention
upon the fact that the variety, distribution, and
importance of the ceramic field in Texas is deserving
of far more attention than has previously been
accorded to it. The general idea that Texas was not
important in this respect may also have resulted
from the fact that a great north and south bison
strip extended down through central Texas, nearly
to the coast, and this vast territory is generally
considered to be a non-ceramic area.

many directions: Southwestern, Southeastern,
plains, and even upper Mississippi Valley influences.
All of these carried certain environmental patterns
which may be observed in the design units of the
group, including pottery decorations from the
several parts of the State.

Thus it is quite natural that there should be
a drift of the typical designs of the Rio Grande and
other Pueblo groups into Texas in the neighborhood
of El Paso and to the South and East of that place.
Along with other distinguishing material culture
traits the use of pottery decorated in color is one of
the most important culture differentiations. The
Southeastern periphery of the Pueblo area herein
discussed lies south of the general area of the TexasIt is the purpose of this paper to point out the New Mexico line. It should be understood, of
several distinct pottery districts of the State, to course, that the western portion of this district, as
suggest some of the principal types of each district, might be expected, yields more abundantly of
and to indicate the sources of reference which are pottery evidence than does the eastern portion of
available for further study. While all of the State the area where evidence thins out to scattered finds.
shows some evidence concerning the use of pottery Sites generally are scattered along the valley,
by early peoples, Texas may, as a result of recent sometimes well back from the river itself; others
research, be divided into definite areas or districts are on the plains where old lake beds or “dry lakes”
within which pottery was manufactured and used. indicate a former seasonal water supply; and at other
While other sections may be said to be entirely points where water was available such as at the
without such evidence save for an occasional Hueco Tanks or other favorable camp locations in
intrusion which is to be expected where articles mountainous areas. Of the three types of camp sites
were left by hunting parties and in an area where listed above, I have observed that sherds are most
the distribution of the culture trait was still in abundant in the dry lake camps. At several points
progress as it was in Texas at the time of white they lie so thickly scattered that it is impossible to
invasion.
take a step without trampling upon a fragment of
pottery.
Archeological evidence points to the fact that
Texas generally may be classified as an agricultural
Cosgrove, Mera, Stallings (19), Alves (1), and
area with the maize complex strongly developed in others have recognized a native black-on-white
close agreement with the better developed ceramic (Chupadero) ware as typical of the El Paso
areas in West Texas, and in the northeastern part of neighborhood, although similar types extend north
the State.
into New Mexico for quite a distance. My own
collection of sherds from the dry lakes indicates
From the standpoint of design, Texas tribal
the following distributions:
groups brought into the area strong trends from

The Pottery Horizons of Texas
Dry
Hueco
Lake
Tank
Sherds Sherds

Type
El Paso Polychromes and Related
Wares (Black-on-Brown) -------- 101
Chupadero (black-on-white) ---------50
Undecorated (brown) ------------------ 5
Corrugated Ware -----------------------31
Related Scored Ware ------------------- 5
Chihuahua Polychrome ----------------19
Little Colorado:
Black-on-Red ------------------------16
Black-on-White ---------------------- 7
Polychrome --------------------------- 1
Mimbres ---------------------------------- 3
Upper Gila ------------------------------- 2
Three Rivers Red on Terra Cotta ----- 2
Unidentified ------------------------------ 2

15
12
80
1
1
—

49

part of the area, and on the periphery of Pueblo
influence, as further studies are made. The
undecorated brown ware occurs as heavy, sand
tempered, and brick-colored pottery. The brown
ware in decorated form is found as polychrome and
infrequently as black-on-brown. Red and black on
brown form geometric decorations as line designs,
stepped elements, rim decorations, etc. The red
wares do not extend north in a fashion
corresponding to the black-on-white but rather
spread south into Old Mexico.

—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Representing an eddy of types from New
Mexico, Arizona, am Old Mexico are the less
common ceramic specimens which are included in
the El Paso area as Casas Grandes, Gila (Middle),
Little Colorado, Mimbres (black-on-white), Rio
Grande (northern), and Chihuahua. These are not
to be thought of as trade wares and fragmentary
intrusions but form a definite though small part of
This tabulation of course, is significant only with the El Paso ceramic pattern. The area shares with
respect to the relatively small number of sherds other Texas regions the need of further research
collected from two dry lake sites and seven Hueco and published reports.
Tank locations.
To the north and East of the El Paso area lies
The design elements of the black-on-white wares
includes dots, striping, checkers, triangles,
diamonds, massed design elements, and other line
decorations of geometric patterns.
The pottery of the El Paso district consists chiefly
of flat-bottomed bowls of assorted sizes, ollas with
handles, and smaller varied forms. To the east of El
Paso and down the river valley the decorated wares
decrease in extent of distribution. In the
neighborhood of Lobo, Texas, I have found a plain
red ware which Dr. Mera has identified as similar
to materials found in Southeastern New Mexico
and associated with Chupadero and the El Paso
brown ware iron which it is distinct.
Stallings (19) has suggested the name of “El Paso
Decorated’ Brown” as a name for the native brown
wares. I understand that this has been shortened to
El Paso Polychrome in more recent reports. Within
the district this brown ware is also found
undecorated and I am inclined to think that the
distribution of the plainer wares will be found to
extend in greater relative quantity to the Eastern

another ceramic field although it is less marked with
this important culture trait. This is the Panhandle
Area of Texas, where pottery is found with
examples of the art of masonry, and the consequent
improved opportunities for stratigraphic studies.
The pottery found with these one-story rock
buildings is represented by numerous sherds
indicating extensive use of ceramics by the former
occupants of the ruins. Studer (13), after extensive
research, stated that the pottery represented is,
“nearly all fairly wide-mouthed, cylindrical necked,
round bottomed, globular bodied vessels made for
culinary use.” He further concluded that there is
no change between earlier and later types and that
there were no ceremonial developments in the
Panhandle pottery. Sherds of these utensils are
found of different thickness; black, red, and gray,
in various hues, constitute the predominating colors,
and the exterior treatment is without design save
for incised textile “basket or cord” impressions
which give the exterior of the vessel an appearance
comparable with the corrugated ware which I have
mentioned from the El Paso district. Tubular pipes

50

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

are somewhat more ornate in decoration though
still in the indented type of decoration. Years ago
investigators thought the Panhandle pottery to be
of Pueblo origin. It is now considered to be plains,
with a good many instances where Pueblo wares
have been intruded into the area.

one inch, while the inside diameter of the stems is
one-half inch. Line decorations form the principal
applied designs and the pipes generally are
comparable with those of Arkansas to the east, as
are also many elements in the pottery complex.
Students interested in the ceramics of the East Texas

If the ceramic areas of Texas were listed
according to quality of workmanship, design,
and variety of forms, neither the Southwestern
types in Texas nor the Panhandle pottery
would rank so high as that of East Texas. It is
in this district that Prof. J. E. Pearce (10 and
16), University of Texas, and his associates
have done extensive research. The Caddoan
peoples of the Northeast section of Texas
were a definite part of the Southeastern Area
(Mississippi Valley) groups, although their
shelters were somewhat different from the
true Mississippi type, and other material
culture traits blend somewhat with those of
the Plains culture to the west. Here again the
agricultural activities of the group closely
paralleled the ceramic arts, and pottery
became a distinctive culture trait.
Students will find that Jackson (6) has
summarized this portion of the East Texas
pottery complex in a most helpful manner and
has tabulated the ceramic articles in order of
frequency as: bowls, pots, bottles, jars, and
pipes, together with the burial customs related
thereto. Many unusual types of pottery lend
distinction lo the East Texas field: tripartite
bottles, well formed ollas, varieties of bowls,
jars in different forms, pedestal types,
suspension utensils, ladles, etc. The
decoration of these many forms is often found
in the shape of the article itself such as body
shape, ornamental handles, projecting nodes,
modelled ribs, pedestals, some variation in
color and finish, and rim treatment. Applied
designs occur as incised circles, scrolls,
triangular and other geometric elements.
Among the clay pipes most frequently
reported from the East Texas area are the
conical bowl, elbow, and stemmed types. The
approximate inside diameter of the bowls is

PLATE 15.
1. Jar from Frank Mills collection, Coleman County.
Courtesy A. T. Jackson.
2. A pot found in the Davis Mountains, possibly
Apache pottery, Courtesy A. T. Jackson.
3. Black pot from Panhandle region, 12 inches high
and 10 inches in diameter. Courtesy Floyd V.
Studer.
4. Caddoan jar from Bed River County. Courtesy
A. T. Jackson.

The Pottery Horizons of Texas
field should visit the exhibits assembled at the
University of Texas at Austin, or read the articles
referred to at the close of this paper. It is to be
hoped that the University will publish additional
specialized reports which are confined to specific,
areas or to particular problems.
Along the curving Gulf coast of Texas is a long
and narrow ceramic field, which is almost
continuous and which widens out considerably as
Louisiana is neared. This strip, however, is
comprised of several rather distinct ceramic areas,
as certain criteria indicate East Coast, Central, and
Brownsville areas, with possible sub-divisions
which cannot be clearly distinguished until more
extensive research has been done in this field. South
of the Northeastern woodland, or Red River Caddo
group, are found pottery evidences left by the
members of the Hasinai Confederacy. Mr. A. T.
Jackson has called attention to the fact that there
are marked differences m shape as well as in
decoration in these two groups. In the south the
predominant East Texas influences gradually shade
off until the Gulf is reached. Agriculture had
disappeared, as sea foods became more important,
although the Attacapan are generally considered to
be agricultural peoples. Potsherds are found
abundantly throughout the territory from Galveston
Bay on to the north and east. The mortuary custom
of pottery burial with the dead is recorded for lower
East Texas but nearly all of the picture of the
ceramics of these peoples has been reconstructed
from sherd evidence. In places the long action of
natural forces such as flood, wind, tide, and waves,
have built up huge shell reefs containing water worn
sherds in homogenous but scant distribution. Some
incised line work indicates a knowledge of applied
design but the bulk of the lower East Texas pottery
is undecorated, although well formed and generally
of excellent quality.
As one travels down the coast from Matagorda
County to Kleberg County, the sherd evidence is
found in less quantity and in cruder form. This is
Karankawan territory. The crudeness of the pottery
is entirely in harmony with the evidence available
concerning these people, who are known to have
practiced cannibalism, and to have been of

51

comparatively low culture. Potter (11) has
recognized three classes of ware in this section of
the coastal area; heavy cooking ware, lighter
cooking utensils, and an abundant representation
of water vessels which are more extensively
decorated than the first two types. This decoration
is in the form of simple line work. Asphalt was used
both for water-proofing and as a part of the design
elements. Interior designs are seldom found. A few
intrusions from the Mississippi valley are recorded.
Handles are rare but provisions for cord or fiber
lifting devices have been noted. Most of the utensils
of the central coast are round bottomed.
From Kleberg County south, sherds are less
abundant. The territory is, nevertheless, of
archeological importance and studies of the
ceramics of the district should be continued. This
South Coast or Brownsville district, is now
attracting attention because of the possibility of
Huaxtec types. Painted figures on unslipped buff
and brown wares are typical of the southern tip of
Texas. Conflicting reports concerning the use of
pottery by the Coahuiltecan groups suggest again
the desirability of further research in the South
Texas field. I have personally been keenly interested
in the scholarly discussion by Dr. J. A. Mason (9)
in which he recognized Huaxtec influences in the
pottery finds of the Brownsville area and also so
far north as 150 miles. Between the Brownsville
district and the pure Karankawan area on the north,
he recognized a strip of coast in which there may
have been a dual occupation, and has suggested
that the Coahuiltecan peoples may have been
responsible for the traces of Huaxtec influence in
this area.
I have, to this point, indicated several rather
distinct ceramic areas of Texas. I know of no part
of Texas, however, where occasional intrusions
have not been located, usually as shallow or surface
specimens. But the whole of the older Trans-Pecos
region is without pottery; and a huge wedge of
territory extending through central Texas from the
north, and almost to the coast is likewise nonceramic in its material culture traits. The two
districts differ, however, in that the Big Bend cave
dwellers were agricultural while the central Texas

52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Indians were nomadic hunters. It should be said
that the older cave dwellers of West Texas lived in
nearly all of the territory which I have previously
described as being occupied by Pueblo pottery
peoples.
It is also true that all of the distinct pottery areas
described herein influence to a more or less degree
the neighboring areas, sometimes more for one
culture trait than another. Pottery extensions, for
example, follow up the river valleys beyond the
limits of the East Texas pottery district, and
Panhandle artifacts of ceramic manufacture extend
eastward and in other directions to some extent.
The Abilene neighborhood represents one of two
marginal areas which I should like to mention. Dr.
Cyrus N. Ray reported by letter that pottery sites
are scattered throughout an area centering in
Abilene and that more sherds are found south and
southwest of Abilene than north, but that a thin
distribution is found as far as 75 miles north and
northeast. I have generally thought of the Texas
and Pacific Railroad as a rough boundary between
the thinly scattered and mixed pottery sites which
appear to the north and west of this line and which
diminish to zero to the south and east of the same
boundary. In Bulletin 7 of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society Dr. Ray has pointed
out the types and relationships of the Abilene sherds.
This article, supplemented by Dr. J. B. Griffin’s
analyses in the same publication, will make further
comment here unnecessary save to point out the
fact that the incised line decorations suggest East
Texas influences and the sites with striated
decorations may have had their origin in the
Panhandle. It may be well here to suggest the further
study of corrugated ware in Texas since there is
such a high percentage in the western part of the
state about El Paso and also to the northeast.

are suggested. Here again ceramics overlay the old
cave culture of the Big Bend to some degree but
the sherd evidence does not extend far from the
river valley.
I have suggested that the continuation of detailed
studies related to ceramics is an important phase of
Texas archeology. Many problems of migration,
diffusion, and chronology, will be partly solved
when exact and extensive reports of this data are
published. Possibly a general clearing house, such
as the University of Texas should be the center of
such records with the Laboratory of Anthropology,
the Ceramic Repository, and other cooperating
agencies contributing to the progress of the work.
An example of the importance of further studies
lies in the problems surrounding the pre-Columbian
relationship of Old Mexico to the United States.
Texas studies should assist materially in determining
the origins of pottery in the United States. The
three-legged types of pottery found by the
University of Texas are strong reminders of Mexican
and Central American types of similar form. With
respect to the present evidence bearing upon this
important problem I am inclined to agree with the
conclusions of Mason (9) that the Texas coast
provides a far more likely link than either the CubaFlorida hurdle or the Pueblo-Panhandle route of
diffusion. Present evidence against the Gulf coast
route, however, seems to preclude any safe
conclusion save of a larger migratory wave of
peoples to the North-East without a prolonged stay
at any one point on the gulf. Such a migration may
have occurred before the highest developments in
the Mayan cultures. It seems important further to
point again to the possibility of connecting more
definitely than is now possible to some of the
relationships between the Caddo of the Red River
and the Jumano of the Big Bend and Northern
Mexico.

Another area which is now being given careful
Summarizing the Pottery Horizons in Texas we
archeological consideration by Mr. J. Charles Kelly
have:
is the Jumano district which extends into Texas
along the Rio Grande from a point near Ft. Hancock
1. A distinctly Pueblo Horizon known as the El
down as far as the Grand Canyon of Brewster Paso Area in Western Texas which extends eastward
County. Sayles (17) mentioned this ware, and I also in reduced intensity.
have before me an unpublished report by Mr. Kelly,
in which some important archeological conclusions

The Pottery Horizons of Texas

53

W. S. Stallings: Its focus (El Paso Polychrome)
is in the vicinity of El Paso, Texas, where its
collective abundance is more than twice that of any
other decorated ware. * * * * Type locality, the
Hueco Basin. * * * * Conditions indicate that El
Paso Polychrome was developed by late Mimbres
Black-on-White times, that it probably reached its
peak of use during the times of the greatest
popularity of Gila Polychrome, Chihuhus
3. An East Texas ceramic area of unusual quality
Polychrome, and Chupadero Black-on-White in the
and variety which occupies the wooded section of
Mimbres area, and that it did not persist later than
Northeast Texas and which had influences reaching
Rio Grande Glaze I red.
westward and south to some degree.
2. The Panhandle Area. Floyd V. Studer: We have
4. A coast strip showing evidence of pottery the
never found an unbroken pot. It is my understanding
entire length. Beginning at Brownsville the pottery
that a few Panhandle Pueblo Culture sherds have
evidence increases somewhat as the East coast is
been found in Southwestern Kansas * * * also in
reached. This area contains distinct and important
the Panhandle of Oklahoma. Most of this type
sub-divisions.
pottery, however, is found on the Canadian River
5. Certain pottery evidence scattered thinly over and its tributaries. A few pieces have been found
other portions of the state, especially the northeast on the Tierra Blanca but they do not appear to the
section, with evidence indicating profitable research south. Single room houses of a type similar to the
near Abilene, Coleman, Presidio, and elsewhere. Texas Panhandle People have been found in
This is the rough picture of the Pottery Horizons in Oklahoma, although the rooms are not joined
a great area the geographical position of which together, and seem to be single room structures.
should command the attention of competent Most of the houses in the Texas Panhandle are built
research groups while there is yet opportunity to with two rows of vertically laid stones for the
draw valid conclusions from the pages of foundation, but horizontally laid stones are used
archeological history before they are ruthlessly for the walls. Sherds are black in color or have a
destroyed by unskilled collectors interested only in red slip. While the red sherds are not uncommon,
they are not found in great quantities. Pottery sherds
the “pictures” while the text is forever lost.
are found at all Panhandle Culture ruins. Some yield
but a few pieces while others yield thousands of
Notes From Workers in the Field
fragments.
The following paragraphs are quoted from letters
of field workers which contain later data than that
3-4. East Texas Area. A. T. Jackson; Your
listed in the Bibliography.
attention is called to the difference in the types of
vessels from the Caddoan tribes of Northeast Texas
1. El Paso Area. H. P. Mera: Evidence points to
and the Asinai Indians of East Texas. The bottles
the fact that Chupadero Black on White was fully
and bowls from the respective regions show a
developed at the time Rio Grande Polychrome,
marked difference in shape as well as decoration.
Glaze I red, made its appearance, and carried on
6. Coastal. G. C. Martin: The pottery north of
through the years side by side with these glaze
periods from I to IV into historic times * * * * The Corpus Christi Bay is found only on the surface of
type location chosen (Chupadero) is a ruin situated sites. The Karankawas were the earliest inhabitants.
eight miles southwest of the Pueblo of Tabira * * * Deep Karankawan sites show one culture from
* As undoubted trade ware it is found * * * * south lowest to uppermost levels in debris five or more
to sites near El Paso.
feet in depth. There is no evidence of pottery in
any of the deep sites, until the surface is reached.
2. A Panhandle Phase pottery associated with
the rock house culture of the Canadian valley
neighborhood. To the west of this area are some
Pueblo intrusions, and some indications of Caddo
influences extend into the eastern part of the area.
Many other scattered pottery sites lend interest to
the ceramic picture of the Panhandle and to the
south.

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The Coahuiltecan tribes first made their appearance
on the coast after escaping from the San Juan
Mission in 1754. None were previously mentioned
as on the coast until that year. They spread north
and easterly along the coast from the north bank of
the Nueces and its bays. It was at this time that the
pottery was laid down on the sites from Corpus
Christi Bay to Matagorda. * * * Other tribes joined
the Karankawas after this time. Some of these were
pottery makers.

7-8. Southern Coast. A. E. Anderson: In a
general way, as you go north along the coast for 50
miles from the Rio Grande sherds become more
scarce and the quality of the ware becomes more
inferior. As you go south for a similar distance the
situation is reversed, more pottery is found and, as
a rule, of better quality. Some of the best
“Huastecan” ware however, is found to the north
and the inferior ware is plentiful to the south. The
crudest of this inferior pottery seems to have been
the small bowls and cooking pots,
sometimes decorated with a black
asphalt band around the rim and
vertical zigzag lines from the rim
downward. This resembles very much
the pottery found near Rockport and
has been described by Potter in the
No. 3 Bulletin of the Society. This
ware, as a rule, is less than one-fourth
inch in thickness and is poorly fired,
the interior being black and the
exterior surface red, black, or brown.
The tempering material is usually
crushed shell. Apparently the base of
a typical vessel was round, not
concave as is characteristic of other
local wares.

PLATE 16.
1. An East Texas Caddoan bottle. Courtesy A. T. Jackson.
2. An Asinai water bottle from Anderson County.
Courtesy A. T. Jackson.
3. Typical Gulf coast sherds. Edges and decoration are
with asphalt paint. Courtesy Mr. George Martin.
4. Gulf coast incised line designs and asphalt spot
decorations. Courtesy Mr. George Martin.

I call the best high grade pottery
found locally “Huastecan”. Dr. Mason
does not definitely place it as
Huastecan, but he calls attention to
the fact that it resembles that ware in
several particulars. This ware may be
subdivided as follows: 1. Polychrome.
Scarce. Two specimens found south
of the Rio Grande. 4 ½ gal. ollas. 14”
diam. and 14” high. Small neck
opening indicates use only as water
vessels. Found in burials. 2. Dark
brown line decoration in curvilinear
design on cream colored ware. Both
sides of river. Large and small ollas.
Sometimes with eccentrically spaced
handles. 3. Black-brown solid painted
inside and outside except along
outside of rim which may be
decorated by painted designs. Bowls.

The Pottery Horizons of Texas
Found both sides of Rio Grande. 4. Unpainted
cream colored to reddish ware of uniform texture.
Scarce. South of river only. Bowls and other vessels
of odd shape decorated by horizontal grooves or
raised bands with circular depressed rings. 5. Red
slip solid. Found both sides of Rio Grande. One
restorable vessel was a large jar of five gallons
capacity. Probably used for cooking purposes.
Other types have not been studied but are present.
Tempering materials are crushed shell, sand, sand
and shell, crushed pottery, and a fiber of some type.
Broken vessels were often mended by thongs tied
through perforations opposed to each other across
the break. Some pottery was molded around the
outside of woven baskets and some sherds plainly
show the weave impressions. Pipes were also made
of clay. They measure from two to four inches long
with a top diameter from two to three inches,
tapering to about one inch at the bottom which was
perforated in alignment with the bowl. Some appear
to have been molded about a form of twigs or grass
which burned out and formed the bowl cavity. Small
round discs from ¼” to 2” in diameter were
manufactured from pottery sherds. I also have two
disc beads of pottery which were made from sherds.
Occasional rectangular * * * sherds were carefully
smoothed at the edges for some purpose. An
examination of camp debris has not yielded
satisfactory age comparison evidence. A study of
numerous other material culture evidences indicate
that the Rio Grande Delta has had only one basic
archeological culture. * * * Apparently here we
have many different kinds of pottery but no real
change of culture.
George A. Matin: The pottery of the Brownsville
area is Tamaulipecan (Huastecan). The Borrados
resided here, a Tamaulipecan tribe. The Maraquitas,
also Tamaulipecan, resided from the north boundary
of Borrado County to Corpus Christi Bay. With
them, in the same territory, was the Manos de Perro,
also Tamaulipecan. These three tribes have been
loosely classified as Coahuiltecan because the
Borrados and Manos de Perro are recorded on the
title page of Father Bartholomeo Garcia’s, “Manual
Para Administrar Los Santos Sacramentos de
Penitencia”, etc., as understanding the tongue in
which the “Manual” was written. Something which

55

all who have so classified have overlooked,
however, is the fact that Garcia also wrote—that
the language was understood only by the young
people of the Borrados and Manos de Perro (he
does not mention the Maraquitas in his list) (y toda
la juvuntud de Borrados, Pihuiques, Sanipaos y
Manos de Perro). This alone indicates that the
Borrados and Manos de Perro were not
Coahuiltecan. As the coastal Lipans made no
pottery until very late in their history, and as there
are but two distinct cultures between Corpus Christi
Bay and the Rio Grande on the coast, the pottery
now found there must be Tamaulipecan.
9. The Abilene District. Dr. Cyrus N. Ray:
Potsherds have been found in only 22 sites in the
Abilene region, and in some of these only a few
sherds have been found. The sites which contain
the most sherds are in Taylor County, on small
branches of the Colorado River, and on two small
branches of the Brazos River which rise in the same
region. In some pottery sites, on branches of both
rivers, flakes of New Mexican obsidian and two
obsidian artifacts have been found. In two of these
sites four Pueblo painted potsherds have been
found, two in each site. All of these sherds are of
Rio Grande Glaze paint. In one of these more
obsidian has been found than in any other site. This
is listed as Site (1) in Ray, The Pottery Complex
Artifacts of the Abilene Region, Vol. 7, 1935,
Bulletin of this Society, and it also contains pottery
with a plain red slip, which is different in color from
that in any of the other local sites. The pottery of
this region is usually colored either brown, gray,
tan or black. Much of the local pottery is plain,
undecorated and varies in thickness from an eighth
of an inch to nearly one-half inch. There are also
many sherds showing scratched or brushed surfaces,
encircling scored bands, finger nail marks, cross
hatches, and occasional chevrons. The tempering
material commonly used in sherds of the Abilene
region was of ground fossil bone or Collophanite.
(Matson, Identification of Aplastic Present in
Pottery Sherds From Texas, Vol. 7, 1935, Bulletin
of this Society). There is also one type which
contains no fossil bone, but in which sand has been
used as the tempering material.

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

8. Matson, F. R., Identification of Aplastic
It would be interesting to trace the distribution
of this use of fossil bone as tempering material, Present in Pottery Sherds, No. 7, 1935.
which appears to be very unusual, to see whether
9. Mason, J. A., The Place of Texas in the Prethis trait originated in Taylor County, or spread
Columbian Relationship Between the United States
thence from some other region.
and Mexico, No. 7, 1935.
Sites containing potsherds are spread thinly over
10. Pierce, J. E., Present Status of Texas
an area roughly fifty or sixty miles wide, from east
Archeology, No. 4, 1932.
to west, and one hundred and fifty miles from
11. Potter, W. H., Ornamentation on Pottery of
northeast to southwest, and centering in Abilene.
The sites which contain the most sherds lie south the Texas Coast Tribes, No. 2, 1930.
of Abilene. No whole pots have been found in the
12. Ray, Cyrus N., Archeological Remains in
region except one small cup found sixty miles north
Central West Texas, No. 4, 1932; Pottery Complex
of Abilene.
Artifacts of the Abilene Region, No. 7, 1935.
Washington, D. C.
13. Studer, Floyd V., Archeological Survey of
the North Panhandle of Texas, No. 3,1931; Texas
Bibliography
Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55, No. 6,1934.
From the Bulletins of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Abilene.
Other References
1. Alves, Eileen E., Pottery of the El Paso
Region, No. 3, 1931.

14. Hodge, F. W., Handbook of American
Indians.

15. Kelly, J. C., Unpublished manuscript and
2. Anderson, A. E., Artifacts of the Rio Grande
conference.
Mr. Kelly assisted materially in
Delta Region, No. 4, 1932.
identifying sherds listed.
3. Goldschmidt, W. R., A Report on the
16. Pearce, J. E., Archaeology of East Texas,
Archeology of Titus County, No. 7, 1935.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 34, No. 4, 1932;
4. Griffin, James B., Report on Pottery Sherds Significance of the East Texas Archaeological
From Near Abilene, Texas, No. 7, 1935.
Field, Bulletin of the National Research Council,
5. Holden, W. C., The Canadian Valley Washington, 1932; Tales That Dead Men Tell,
Expedition of March, 1930, No. 2, 1930; University of Texas Bulletin No. 3537, 1935.
Excavation of Saddle-Back Ruin, No. 5, 1933;
17. Sayles, E. B., An Archaeological Survey of
Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northeast Texas, Gila Pueblo, 1935.
Texas, No. 1, 1929; Texas Tech Archeological
18. Smith, V. J., Prehistoric Texas, the State of
Expedition Summer of 1930, No. 3,1931.
Texas Book, Austin, 1936.
6. Jackson, A. T., Indian Pipes of East Texas,
19. Stallings, W. S., Notes on the Pueblo Culture
No. 5, 1933; Types of East Texas Pottery, No. 6,
in
South-Central
New Mexico and in the Vicinity
1934.
of El Paso, Texas, American Anthropologist, Vol.
7. Martin, G. C., Notes on Some Texas Coast 34, No. 1, 1932.
Campsites and Other Remains, No. 1, 1929; Two
20. Wissler, Clark, The American Indian, Oxford
Sites on the Callo Del Oso, Nueces County, Texas,
University
Press.
No. 2, 1930; A Vase and Some Carved Stones and
Pebbles from Nueces County, Texas, No. 2, 1930;
Texas Coastal Pottery, No. 3, 1931.

