Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

45

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF
THE NORTH PANHANDLE OF TEXAS
BY FLOYD V. STUDER
This report briefly lists the results of the
Plate 9
archeological researches of the writer in the Texas
TYPICAL POST BASKET MAKER SITES,
Panhandle region during the past twenty-four years.
NORTH PANHANDLE OF TEXAS
During this period 110 major ruins have been 1. Large rectangular room in center, outlined by
located and platted. A careful record of the minor
projecting stones showing outside walls.
artifacts has also been kept.
2. Group of rooms. Several walls outlined by
projecting stones,
The section of the State covered by this report
3.
Small group of rooms on rim of flat topped hill
is characterized by high level plains which are cut
overlooking Canadian river.
by east and west drainages of the Canadian and
other streams on which sandstone,
limestone and other materials
outcrop, all of which were used
extensively by the pre-historic
inhabitants. While the Plains are
generally bare of trees, the river
courses are usually lined with
cottonwood, hackberry, willow and
chinaberry trees; with an
abundance of mesquite trees on the
Plains along the various tributaries
of the larger rivers. Wild animal
life and game are abundant in this
area, and the bones of these are
found in practically every site.
The prehistoric ruins are
characterized by a type of location
which apparently was chosen
primarily for protection from
warring tribes and the elements.
Even a convenient water supply
was sacrificed, though most of the
streams carry water throughout the
year and numerous springs are
found.
The general characteristics of
each type of site in this section will
be given, with accompanying
artifacts, rather than a specific
description of any particular site.

46

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Post Basket Maker

Many Post Basket Maker sites
recorded show later occupation by
the Plains tribes. Many of the Post
Basket Maker sites are entirely
covered, their presence being
indicated by sherds, flint, etc.,
carried to the surface by rodents.
The Post Basket Maker sites are
characterized by masonry and
pottery. Some of the sites consist
of only three rooms; one site is
known to have 55 rooms and the
rooms in all of the sites will vary
from six or seven feet across to
twenty or thirty feet, and are usually
square or rectangular in shape.
Typical Post Basket Maker
pottery is coarse, heavy ware,
tempered usually with mica, but
sand and shell were also used as
temper. All of it is of the “basket”
type, showing the basket weave
impressions. Occasionally, thin
types are found.
The inside of the pottery is
smooth and is covered both inside
and out with a slip which is most
frequently either of a dull greenish
grey or black, and less frequently
of a light red. The majority of the
sherds are heavily blackened with
soot from use.
In only two of these sites has
typical pueblo pottery, as identified
Plate 10
POST BASKET MAKER SITES
1. Floor in Post Basket Maker site. Shows fireplace adjoining ash pit, and post holes.
2. Small cist adjoining Post Basket Maker site. Three feet in diameter and 20" deep. Resting on a
layer of stones the size of one’s fist, and immediately below the stones showing on the surface,
were two sections of antlers, approximately 7" long. Beneath these, was fill consisting of loose
soil.
3. Round mortar holes in stone ledge.
4. Four superimposed floors in Post Basket Maker site. In each instance, the floor of packed and
smoothed clay was laid on top of debris filled with ash and charcoal, bones, and artifacts.
5. Wall of Post Basket Maker site. Two rows of vertically laid stones.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

47

by Dr. A. V. Kidder and Dr. Warren K. Moorehead, is 110 miles Southwest of Amarillo, and outside
been found. At one of these sites, No. 63, four of the Canadian river area.
superimposed floor levels have been found.
The site covers several acres, and the large
The masonry of the Post Basket Maker sites is hearths and heavy debris, suggest long occupation.
generally of the vertically laid wall type, consisting
Black on white pottery, and coiled and finger
of two parallel rows of stone slabs set on edge with
decorated types occur; also a red slip, all distinctly
the centers filled with adobe and stones. The
pueblo and not Post Basket Maker.
outside stones are from three to eight inches thick,
and sometimes measure as much as thirty-six by
Obsidian objects, one copper point, and a copper
forty-eight inches. Some of the walls are only 12 ring, buffalo bones, and a complete buffalo skull
inches thick, and others are 40, the average being were found.
30 inches.
Here, an unusually large number of scrapers
The roofs were evidently of thatch covered with smaller than those appearing at the typical Post
adobe, as indicated by frequently found remains Basket Maker sites were found, and incidentally,
of burned clay which 6how distinct marks of reeds the largest scraper known in this part of the State.
and small twigs.
Plains Sites
The floors of the rooms are of clay, with fire
pits of either plaster or adobe, or of small flat stones
The Plains sites are of historical occurrence, and
in the form of hearths. Cists and post holes are also frequently are located at old Post Basket Maker
frequently found in the floors.
sites, where the foundation stones were used for
hearths and rings of stones show where they held
The artifacts accompanying this type of site are:
down tepee edges.
Metates and manos, beveled projectile points and
knives and double beveled knives; notched knives;
Pottery found at the Plains sites is a smooth
scrapers; drills; and in one site, a tubular pipe.
coarse ware, rather thin without decoration and
usually tempered with coarse clean sand.
Bone, flakes of flint, charcoal and ashes, all
appear in abundance. Obsidian flakes are frequent.
At a Plains site four miles from Post Basket
Maker Site No. 5-G. C. at the head of a spring,
Pottery; bone implements; incised bones;
many artifacts and fragments of flint, hearths,
basketry; corn, mussel shell, hammer stones of flint
buffalo bones and charcoal were found. Most
and quartzite, and abrading stones of “rottenstone,”
significant of all, ashes, flint, charcoal, and buffalo
are also found.
bones occur in a high embankment adjoining a
At one Post Basket Maker site there is horizontal small stream fourteen feet below the soil surface.
masonry, consisting of a wall four feet high in the
The typical Plains sites artifacts are:
corner of a room. The other masonry at this site,
which is near the New Mexico line, is vertical. At
Plains pottery (not found at all of the sites);
another site, No. 28, one room shows horizontal metates, of thinner slabs of stone than the Post
masonry over vertical masonry. There are four Basket Maker, but of the same material. All
layers of horizontal stones in evidence.
projectile points, knives, and scrapers are heavier
and coarser than the typical Post Basket Maker
types.
Sand Dune Site
One site unusual to the Panhandle section is
Small hearths, bone, and large scrapers are
located in a large drifting sand dune, the dune is characteristic of the Plains sites.
about 20 feet high and is close to shallow water. It

48

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Rock Shelters

Rock Circles

The rock shelters in this area, so far as known
Other types of burials were surrounded by small
have not been used for habitations, but in them circles of vertically set stones. Artifacts are only
pictographs and petroglyphs appear. Also the burial found in some of these, while in others there are
described in this paper.
no skeletal remains.
However, a rock ledge facing south, 8 to 15 feet
high and extending for several hundred feet, in the
immediate vicinity of the shelter in which the burial
was found, has been extensively used. This ledge
shows a heavy accumulation of debris along its
entire base and there is evidence of a Post Basket
Maker site in connection with it, as well as a Plains
site.
A fine supply of water near at hand was probably
the main at traction, as well as the protection the
site provided.
Cliff Dwelling
At the Post Basket Maker site in the vicinity of
the location just described, a part of the ledge has
been utilized as a room wall, similar to the cliff
dwelling sites to the west of this section.
Burials
Three or four types of burial occur within this
area.
Post Basket Maker
Some of these are found within the abandoned
rooms of ruins, as at the Handley ruins. Other
similar burials are within close proximity to the
various Post Basket Maker sites.
Rock Shelter
A few rock shelter burials are found, that near
Post Basket Maker Site No. 15 was completely
sealed with horizontal masonry. Pack rat holes had
caused water to run into this burial, but several bone
fragments were found and there were quite a
number of pieces of typical Post Basket Maker
pottery.

Rock Mounds
Some burials occur with the skeletal remains
entirely covered with a small mound of loose
stones.
Recent
One burial accompanied by metal artifacts and
glass beads was found in soil, along a small water
course. There were no stones about the grave.
A similar burial was also found accompanied
by metal artifacts and glass beads, but entirely
enclosed with small stones and resting on stone.
Pictographs and Petroglyphs
Both incised and beautifully painted rock
pictures are found in this area, a great number of
them occurring at the rock shelter site described in
this paper.
Flint Mine
Flint mines have been located at two places in
this section.
Site No. 58 is an unusually large agatized
dolomite quarry. Most of the flint is in brilliant
colors. Evidence indicates that thousands of tons
of this material have been taken out. A bird’s eye
view from a distance shows the top and sides of
the mesa to be pock-marked with large excavations,
which extend for six tenths of a mile. Many
workshops adjoin the site for a distance of a mile
or more.
Such mines are not very plentiful in Northwest
Texas, although there are several outcroppings of
agatized dolomite on the north aide of the Canadian
river, but none of them were worked so extensively
as this one. This prehistoric quarry is located within
a mile and a half of the large Post Basket Maker

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

49

Site No. 28. There are also many Plains sites spear heads are found made from this material.
adjoining the quarry.
Various types of scrapers, knives, hammer stones,
axes, awls, hoes, and lances made from the same
There is another primitive mine of some
material occur throughout this section. But there
consequence between Silverton and Clarendon.
are also found artifacts made from other materials.
This agatized dolomite appears to be easily worked
as many projectiles from small points to the largest
Plate 11
NORTH PANHANDLE OF TEXAS ARTIFACTS
1. Typical Metate from Post Basket Maker site
2. Moccasin Last.
a. Side view.
b. View from above.
c. Sole.
3. Typical Post Basket Maker projectile points.
4. Typical knives, Post Basket Maker sites.

