92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

MORE EVIDENCE CONCERNING ABILENE MAN
BY CYRUS N. RAY
The first two skeletons of the Abilene type of
dolichocephalic man were found by the writer on
the Brazos River near Albany, Texas, in January
1929. (1). These were buried in stone slab cists in
an old charcoal and burnt rock floor stratum which
lies between six and a half and seven feet below the
present soil surface. Later other ancient buried floor
levels were found by the writer fifty miles nearer to
Abilene, buried at depths of 6, 8 and 15 feet below
the soil surfaces, also on the Brazos River. These
were on the W. Myatt place, located twenty-two
miles northeast of Abilene. (2)
In January 1930 the Gibson site (Site 7), situated
seven miles south of Abilene, was discovered by
the writer where three distinct strata of charcoal,
flint chips and burnt hearth stones outcrop, one
above the other, in a vertical bank at depths of
twenty-four and a halt, twenty-seven, and thirty feet
below the present soil surface. (See plate 36, Nos.
1 and 2). In this bank the writer first found the
distinctive, thick, base flattened, leaf shaped type
of projectile point, (3) (later termed Abilene Points)
(4) embedded in place, in a stratum 24 ½ feet below
the present soil surface. Later a total of close to
fifty skeletons of the Abilene type have been
excavated by the writer (5) and (6), which has
proved that this is a distinct type of man, and that
the skeletal peculiarities were not monstrosities as
at first claimed by some, or again rare and isolated
family characteristics found in only a few skeletons
(7).
This longheaded skeletal type, buried in typical
stone slab cist buried mounds (8) has been found in
a region extending 175 miles from east to west,
and sixty miles from north to south, centering in
Abilene. The deeply buried camp floor sites have
been found in a similar area, centering in the same
region, on the different branches of the Colorado
River, and on both the Clear Fork, and the Salt
Fork of the Brazos River, but wider in the diameter
from north to south, it being one hundred and fifty

miles from deeply buried sites on the Salt Fork of
the Brazos, to others on the Colorado River which
have been inspected.
Buried campsites have been found by this writer
in Taylor, Jones, Callahan, Nolan, Mitchell,
Shackelford, Runnels, Haskell and Concho
Counties, and these sites doubtless exist over a
much wider area. The writer has had neither the
time nor the money with which to investigate the
space limits of inhabitation of this ancient long
headed Texas race. The territory is so large, and
the evidences of ancient inhabitation are so
abundant as to suggest that this area must have been
populated with a considerable number of inhabitants
in a period when most of America had few, if any.
In the center section, where the longheaded
burials have been found in greatest numbers, the
deeply buried ancient floor levels are also found to
be the most numerous, and are almost continuous
on every vertical eroded Brazos River bank for a
distance of six miles or more. In the center of this
Jones County area, on the Hollis Roberts place, is
a small hill which stands close above some of these
deeply buried ancient floor levels, and here in 1932
the writer excavated eighteen burials from four
buried mounds, each grave enclosed in a separate
stone slab lined cist (6) and (8). Of these seventeen
were flexed burials, and one a cremated infant
burial. However, the mound containing the
cremated infant bearing cist, also contained three
adults, and another infant, not cremated, buried in
flexed position in stone burial cists.
Two Extended Burials
About a half mile to the south of the low hill on
which the multiple cist mound burials (6) and (7),
referred to above, were found, rises a high flat
topped hill, on which the writer noted structures
which he believed were burials; these he did not
excavate for several years, in the hope that Texas
University would get time to assist in the work.

More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man

93

PLATE 34.
No. 1. Top layer of stones with earth removed, W. Myatt Flexed Burial (3).
No. 2. Middle layer of stones, earth removed, W. Myatt Flexed Burial (3).
No. 3. Another view of middle layer of stones, W. Myatt Flexed Burial (3).
There is always considerable danger in leaving such
sites unopened over any considerable period,
because of the fact that the country is full of persons
hunting for mythical treasure pots, who frantically
dig into any structure which remotely suggests the
work of man, and deliberately destroy all of its
contents.
Finally on September 23, 1936, the writer
decided to excavate them with the assistance of two
Hardin-Simmons University students, Mr. J.
Morrow and Mr. Gerald Jarvis.**

flat pavement arrangement. Beneath this second
layer, and at a depth of about three and a half feet
below the surface, lay the bones of the arms and
legs of two skeletons, which were extended at full
length. The articular ends of the bones were
decayed, but while the bone shafts were quite
fragile, they were carefully dissected out in place.
The two bodies apparently were laid on their backs
with the arms and legs extended at full length. The
bodies and skulls of both were completely decayed,
and the space they had occupied was filled with
large hard masses of caliche. No artifacts were
found with the burials. Not all of the mound was
excavated, and it is possible that others may be in
the same structure. Pictures were made but on
account of weather conditions did not turn out well.

On top of the highest point of this hill the writer
found a rock pavement laid solidly in two layers
covering an area 22 feet north and south by 23 feet
east and west. The two top horizontally laid stone
layers were closely fitted together and were
These are the first fully extended burials found
somewhat over a foot thick. Beneath the top layer
in the Abilene region.
of stones were two feet of clay which showed little
signs of ever having been moved. It was full of
Three More Flexed Burials
caliche nodules which apparently had formed since
the burial was made. Beneath the clay was another
On the south end of the same hill were three
layer of flat stones laid down in a single layer of smaller collections of stones consisting of three or

94

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

four surface stones each, which slightly protruded
from the soil, in a row which extended from north
to south. The three graves were so close together
that the earth excavated from the second was used
to fill the first, and the earth from the third to fill
the second excavation.

structure, to determine that the structure was the
work of the Abilene longheaded type of man.
No. (2) W. Myatt Flexed Burial

The top of this burial was also covered with large
stones and it also was only about three feet across.
Beneath this structure was another much longer
No. (1) W. Myatt Flexed Burial
roof-like stone structure about five feet long from
This burial was three feet deep. When the top east to west. When this was removed under the
structure of large close set stones was removed center of it were some thin shale slabs laid in roof
other long limestones were found extending shape over the bones. The skull lay in the lowest
endwise down into the earth and when these were portion of the hole (the east end) and the body lay
removed, and some flat rocks which lay in on its back, with the arms flexed so that the hands
horizontal position were removed a few bone and lay beside the face. The thighs were flexed on the
teeth fragments of a broken skeleton were found. chest, and the knees bent so that the feet rested on
the pelvis. The body lay from east to west.
Two land snail shells with perforations for
stringing were also found. Not enough bones were
The body probably had been sewn up in a bag,
found to reconstruct a skull but enough fragments and tied in the flexed position prior to burial. No
were found, with the typical stone slab cist burial artifacts were found. This individual belonged to

PLATE 35.
No. 1. Third layer of stones, W. Myatt Flexed Burial No. (3), Dolichocephalic Abilene Man.
No. 2. Another picture of the third layer of stones, W. Myatt Flexed Burial Cist (3).
No. 3. Flexed adolescent skeleton, exposed in bottom of pit 4 feet deep, down in caliche, W.
Myatt Flexed Burial Cist (3).

More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man
the primitive type, Abilene longheaded race,
previously described in the Bulletins. The skull has
all of the teeth. One L. L. second molar tooth, and
one upper wisdom tooth, were affected by dental
caries.
A Primitive Tooth Type
The teeth are unusually massive and have some
quite peculiar distinctions. In fossil apes, the three
molar teeth decline in size from the third molar or
wisdom tooth, to the first molar, which is the
smallest. In some ape-like skulls dating very far back
in the time of man’s development this primitive
Dryopithecus tooth pattern still existed. In modern
man the reverse order exists. The third lower molars
on this skull are the largest human third molars
which the writer ever has seen (10).
In table II prepared by Gregory and Hellman in
The Dentition of Dryopithecus and The Origin of

95

Man it would seem that only the orang-utan and
the gorilla have antero-postero third molar
diameters greater than the left third molar of this
Abilene man skull. Apparently none of the
chimpanzee third molars listed were so large.
This extremely dolichocephalic skeleton has
molar teeth of very unusual size and shape. Their
longest diameters are from front to back. It was
difficult to measure the second and third molars on
account of the impaction of the third molars under
the edges of the second molar’s mushroomed
crowns. The diameters of L. L. M. 2 will have to
be estimated because of a large cavity in the
posterior end, which extends to the tooth’s center.
The following table of measurements were kindly
made with instruments of precision, by a gunsmith,
Mr. F. A. Davis of Abilene. See review concerning
Minnesota Man, in back pages of this Bulletin for
some other measurements of these teeth made by a
physicist.

PLATE 36.
No. 1. Gibson Site southwest of Abilene where 274 flint flakes •were unearthed at 30 feet below
the surface. Buried floor levels at 24 ½ , 27 and 30 feet below surface. Flints found between
pick and handkerchief.
No. 2. Close-up of flint layer where 274 man made flint flakes found 30 feet deep.
No. 3. Hodges Site where 3 levels are exposed, the lowest at 19 ½ feet below the soil surface, 18
miles northeast of Abilene.

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Measurements of W. Myatt (2) Skull
Lower Molars

No. (3) Myatt Flexed Burial

The top of this burial was covered with a few
Left lower molar 1, antero-postero diameter, 33large stones and was about three feet across. (Plate
64 inch.
34, No. 1). Beneath the top layer was a long roofLeft lower molar 2, antero-postero diameter, one
like structure over six feet long. (Plate 34, Nos. 2
end decayed, probably above 1-2 inch.
Left lower molar 3, antero-postero
diameter, 19-32 inch.
Left lower molar 1, tongue to cheek
diameter, 31-64 inch.
Left lower molar 2, tongue to cheek
diameter, probably 1-2 inch; caries
makes measurements uncertain.
Left lower molar 3, tongue to cheek
diameter, 33-64 inch.
Right lower molar 1, antero-postero’
diameter, 17-32 inch.
Right lower molar 2, antero-postero
diameter, slightly over 17-32 inch.
Right lower molar 3, antero-postero
diameter, 35-64 inch.
Right lower molar 1, tongue to cheek
diameter, 1-2 inch.
Right lower molar 2, tongue to cheek
diameter, 1-2 inch.
Right lower molar 3, tongue to cheek
diameter, 15-32 inch.
Pictures of these teeth are shown on
Plate 38, Nos. 1 and 2. Both third molars
are larger than the other molars. These
teeth appear to be nearer to the
anthropoid pattern than any heretofore
excavated by the writer. It may be the
type of man who lived on the deepest
buried river bank levels below. (See Plate
36, No. 3, and Plate 37, Nos. 1, 2 and
3). The extreme length of the skull is 7
½ inches. The breadth is 5 1/8 inches.
There is considerable facial prognathism,
as there is in all of these skulls.
No artifacts were found with the
burial. The skeleton lay 3 feet 11 inches
below the soil surface. Pictures of this
skull are shown on Plate 38, Nos 1 and
2, Plate 39, Nos. 1 and 2.

PLATE 37.
Three pictures of Hodges site at different places, each
containing three buried floor levels, to which the men
are pointing. Located not over a mile from Abilene Man
burial sites.

More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man
and 3). Beneath the center of this was a small round
stone structure consisting of one horizontally laid
flat limestone surrounded by stone slabs set on edge.
(Plate 35, Nos. 1 and 2). About a foot beneath this
lay the closely flexed skeleton of a small adolescent.
(Plate 35, No. 3). The long bones had not completed
their growth and the epiphyseal ends were detached.
The bones of the body lay closely flexed beside the
skull in a very small space. The skull was in good
condition. This skull also belongs to the same old
extremely longheaded Abilene race which probably
inhabited this region thousands of years ago (11).
No artifacts were found with this burial. It was
buried four feet deep. The third molars were
showing but had not erupted in this skull; the other
teeth were well developed. The skull length is 6 7/
8 inches, and the width 4 13-16 inches.
All three of these burials had been placed, in
round holes, two of which were close to four feet
below the soil surface and just in the top layer of
the hard shale and caliche formation, and all showed
signs that caliche had formed adhering to the skulls,
and a considerable amount of caliche stone had
formed inside the skull of W. Myatt Flexed Burial
No. 3. One finger bone was also inside the skull.
These circular basins had been cut down several
inches into the caliche, in which the closely flexed
bodies had been placed. (See Plate 35, Nos. 1, 2
and 3). Then a small circular stone structure in two
graves, and a roof-shaped stone structure in one,
covered the burial basins. On top of this was a great
mass of heavy stones covering a large area in the
center of the grave. (See Plate 34, Nos. 2 and 3). A
third or top layer extended up barely to touch the
soil surface. The top and middle layers were buried
in the tan colored soil, which has in course of time
been deposited by wind action, on top of such high
flat topped hills.

97

blown tan colored soil, so that now only an inch or
so of the top three or four stones project above the
present level soil surface. It is not a reasonable idea
to the writer that primitive man would, with the
inadequate flint tools then available, have buried
such masses of stones three to four feet deep.
More Deeply Buried Middens
Until June, 1936, the writer had found only one
other site where the campsite debris was buried at
a depth approaching that at (Site 7 or Gibson Site)
and that was at (Site 6) situated 18 miles southwest
of Abilene where in 1929 he found a fossil horse
bone embedded in a bank at the same level with a
stratum of charcoal and flint chips and hearth debris
at 18 feet below the soil surface.
Recently another buried campsite was found in
an eroded nearly vertical river bank situated on a
stream bank 18 miles north of Abilene (Hodges
Site). Three superimposed campsite floor strata
lie exposed in a nearly vertical stream bank for a
distance of 200 yards or more. The highest is 8 feet
below the soil surface, the middle one is 14 feet
below the soil surface, and the bottom stratum lies
buried in clay 19 ½ feet below the soil surface. There
is an abundant outcrop of several species of mussel
shells in each of the charcoal strata. From the clay
in the 19 ½ or bottom level, the writer dug out a
mano or hand mill stone, which had been ground
down by use on both faces to a thin edge on one
side. At another place in the same level he dug out
an embedded paleolithic type flint axe. Flint flakes,
mussel shells, burnt hearth rocks, and charcoal were
more abundant in all of the three levels at this site
than any other. A number of the shells were removed
and taken to “The International Symposium on
Early Man” which met in Philadelphia at The
Academy of Natural Sciences in March, 1937. The
Secretary of The Academy, Edgar B. Howard, had
these shells identified and his report is as follows:

The writer suggests that the circular bottom layer
covering the caliche basins may have been the only
portion of the structure originally buried in the earth
May 3, 1937.
and that the great amount of heavy stones in the
The following is a list of the shells which you
center and top layers were originally, a very long
time ago, piles of rocks heaped up on the soil surface left here to be identified. The work has just been
over the graves, and that the passing of a long period completed by our Department of Invertebrate
of time has covered the whole structures with wind Paleontology.

98

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Tritogonia verrucosa, (Raf.) 8 ft. floor level
Quadrula apiculata. Say 8 ft. floor level
Lampsilis coloradensis. Lea. 8 ft. floor level
Quadrula, apiculata. Say 19 ½ ft. floor level
Tritogonia verrucosa, (Raf.) 19 ½ ft. floor level
Lampsilis coloradensis. Lea. 19 ½ft. floor level
Quadrula houstonensis. Lea. 19 ½ ft. floor level
Quadrula houstonensis. Lea. 14 ft. floor level
Quadrula apiculata. Say 14 ft. floor level
Lampsilis berlandieri. Lea. 14 ft. floor level
Tritogonia verrucosa, (Raf.) 14 ft. floor level
Lampsilis coloradoensis, Lea. 14 ft. floor level
(Signed) EDGAR B. HOWARD.

This river bank site is located about a mile from
the top of the highest, nearest hill on top of which
were the graves previously described in this article,
and within two miles of this site a total of twentythree longheaded burials have been excavated from
nearby hill tops by the writer during and since 1932.
Of course there is yet no direct evidence to connect

these long heads with any buried campsite except
those usually found at depths of 7 and 8 feet (1)
and (9).
The circumstantial evidence, however, would
point to this type of man as the one who may have
occupied all of these ancient buried strata.
More Flints in Gibson Deepest Site
During 1937 more flints were found in the
Gibson deepest site than ever before. Many flint
flakes have been found embedded in place in the
deep charcoal strata each year since 1930, but these
have been mainly scattered in, or just below, the
hard gravel stratum at twenty-four and a half feet.
Recently ten flint flakes were seen to be projecting
from the charcoal stratum at thirty feet below the
top of the bank. On digging into this area a depth
of one foot, and a distance of 18 inches along the
stratum, a total of 274 thin, man-made flint flakes
were excavated, from a thin charcoal layer in the
red clay. (Plate 36, Nos. 1 and 2).

PLATE 38.
No. 1.Front view of W. Myatt (2) Skull “Abilene Man.”
No. 2. Lower maxillary Will Myatt (2) skull showing Dryopithecus
dental pattern, and “Abilene Man’s” huge third molars.

More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man

Flints Near Mammoth Bones
In the summer of 1934 the writer found two
thin flint flakes projecting from a stratum 18 inches
above the lower jaw and two teeth, ribs and portions
of leg bones of a mammoth on Lick Creek located
thirty miles southeast of Abilene. E. B. Sayles
secured some of these bones and later E. H. Sellards
secured part of them. Thus far six man-made flint
flakes have been found in the same stratum. (See
Plate 40, No. 1).
Oldest Terrace Hearth
In 1930 the writer found a highest terrace
thirteen miles south of Abilene in which a hearth
forty inches across projected five feet below the
top. This hearth was composed of a solid layer of
burned stones on top, underlaid by a thick layer of
charcoal. The hearth was so inaccessible that a long
ladder had to be used to reach it. This is the only
place where any large stones occur in the bank, the

99

rest of the bank seems to have been laid down in
rather sluggish back waters, since it is composed
of fine tan soil with horizontal lines of very small
pebbles ribboning through it occasionally. For flood
waters to top that bank now would first flood all of
the area below the mountains. So the five feet of
apparently water laid soil over the hearth must have
been put there before the valley eroded out to its
present depth. (See Plate 40, No. 2).
It would seem that the Abilene region would be
the logical place for those who seek evidences of
ancient man in America to look, instead of denying
that such evidence exists, as some do, and then
refusing to inspect the evidence. The evidence
certainly was here many millenniums before any of
those who say that it does not exist came on the
scene, and in the main will continue to be here after
they are gone, as after all there are few persons
able to dig far into banks nineteen and a half, twentyfour, twenty-seven and thirty feet deep; and those
who simply deny, without examination of the

PLATE 39.
No. 1. Side view of W. Myatt (2) “Abilene Man” skull.
No. 2. View of vertex of the W. Myatt (2) “Abilene Man” skull.

100

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

evidence are not adopting the scientific attitude of
an open mind, but instead become propagandists
of unproved theories.

(3) Ray, Report on Some Recent Archeological
Researches in The Abilene Section, Vol. 2, 1930,
Bulletin of Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, pp. 45 to 52, Plates 10, 11, 14 and 15.

Geologist Believes These Sites to Be Ancient

(4) Ray, Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas,
Vol. 6, 1934, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, pp. 107, 108, 109, 110,
and 111, Plate 18.

At least one geologist (Antevs) believed these
sites to be of considerable geological age, and wrote
thus concerning them: “Surely old and significant
finds of artifacts and hearths have been made . . .
near Abilene, Texas, in river terraces that record
several distinct climatic and physiographic changes
in the region since the arrival of man.” In 1934 Mr.
Antevs visited the above described deeply buried
sites, discovered by this writer in 1929-30, in the
company of a man who, among several others,
assisted this writer in excavating several of his
discovery sites five years before.
This writer was not notified of the Antevs’
inspection of his sites until after it had been
completed. This was unfortunate in that Antevs
subsequently gave primary credit for the well
documented discoveries, which this writer has
made, to the wrong person in the article in the
publication quoted above and to which citation is
made (12).

(5) Ray, Archeological Researches in Central West
Texas, Vol. 4, 1932, Bulletin of Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, pp. 66, 67, 68 and 69,
Plate 14.
(6) Ray, Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds of
the Abilene Region, Vol. 5, 1933, Bulletin of Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, pp. 14
to 24, Plates 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8.
(7) Hooten, Ernest A., Notes on Five Texas Crania,
Vol. 5, 1933, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society.
(8) Ray, Recent Archeological Researches in The
Abilene Section, Vol. 3, 1931, Bulletin of The Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Plate
12.

(9) Mason, J. Alden, The Texas Expedition, The
Museum Journal of The University of Pennsylvania
**Part of the expense of this digging was borne Museum, September-December, 1929, pp. 318,
from a digging fund contributed by Mr. J. L. 322, 323, Plate XLII.
Bridwell of Wichita Falls, Texas.
(10) William K. Gregory and Milo Hellman, The
Dentition of Dryopithecus and The Origin of Man,
Table II, pp. 38 and 39, Anthropological Papers of
Bibliography
The American Museum of Natural History, Vol.
(1) Ray, Cyrus N., New Evidences of Ancient Man XXVIII, Part I, New York, N. Y., 1926.
in America, Scientific American, May, 1929. Ray,
(11) Ray, Skeleton With Big Teeth May Show
A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the
Ancient American Type, Science News-Letter,
Abilene Section, Vol 1, 1929, Bulletin of Texas
March 20, 1937.
Archeological and Paleontological Society, pp. 20
and 21, Plate 3.
(12) Antevs, Ernst, The Spread of Aboriginal Man
in America, The Geographical Review, American
(2) Ray, Traces of Ancient Man Reported, Science
Geographical Society of New York, April, 1935,
News-Letter, Dec. 21, 1929.
p. 309.
P. O. Box 62, Abilene, Texas.

More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man

101

PLATE 40.
No. 1. Mammoth jaw and teeth, ribs and fragments of long bones, found embedded 18 inches
below stratum containing six man made flint flakes. All are in same gray pleistocene deposit.
Found 30 miles southeast of Abilene.
No. 2. Hearth 5 feet below surface on highest river terrace overlaid by quiet water deposited clay,
13 miles south of Abilene.

