Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

45

SOME INDIAN ILLUSTRATIONS PREHISTORIC AND HISTORIC
BY COL. M. L. CRIMMINS
Our American Indians had several ways of
recording their ideas and I will tell of some of their
more common methods in the southwest, during
prehistoric and historic times.
The earliest evidences of an ideograph is the
petroglyph and Dr. Walter Hough and others mention
them as being associated with the Basket Makers.
The common petroglyph associated with them was
that of the Rocky Mountain sheep. The petroglyphs
cover a period probably extending from the earliest
Basket Makers to the Pueblo Indian culture of
historic times. Most of them were photographed at
Judge A. B. Fall’s Ranch at Three Rivers, New
Mexico. Two miles from these petroglyphs we
found the site of a pre-Pueblo village which was
located through the study of these petroglyphs. From
the designs of many we decided that they belong to
the same period as the pre-Pueblo Mimbres. We
therefore looked around for a site such as this
people selected for their villages, and having found
it, excavations were made by Mr. and Mrs. C. B.
Cosgrove, now with the Peabody Museum at
Harvard, in June, 1925. Our prediction was
confirmed and a typical pre-Pueblo village was
unearthed.
The pre-Pueblo Mimbres petroglyphs were so
striking that Dr. J. Walter Fewkes, who was then the
Chief of the Bureau of American Ethnology at the
Smithsonian Institution, contemplated writing a
monograph on thirty-five petroglyphs he selected from
my collection of photographs, as being typically
Mimbres. The brachycephalic head with the eye on
the side is quite typical of the Mimbres. Then we had
some Pueblo designs such as the terraced cloud
symbol and the rain, and also the geometrical figures
which were so popular among them. We had many
petroglyphs of the Basket-Makers’ Mountain sheep,
and probably some of the petroglyphs, were made by
the post-Basket-Makers, as there was reason to
suppose there was a lapse of occupation of this
section.

We are often asked to express our opinion of the
meaning of these petroglyphs. We do not wish to go
to the extremes of Henry R. Schoolcraft who evidently
wanted to show Congress that he had earned the
$80,000.00 appropriated in 1842 and found a meaning
for everything. We are rather inclined to follow the
views of Dr. Julius H. Steward of Berkeley, California.
Schoolcraft married the granddaughter of an Indian
Chief about 1823, while agent of Indian affairs, so he
evidently was in close touch with Indian methods of
thought. However, an understanding of one tribe of
Indians does not always aid us in understanding others,
for a symbol in one tribe may have a different meaning
in another. Although the Hopi and the Zuni are
neighbors the colors and animal symbols for the
different cardinal directions are not the same.
While we are on the topic of the Hopi I will
show some colored pictures of their Katcines.
These Katcines were intermediary between man and
Gods, by whom petitions were sent to the deity
through “Intermediate channels”–as we say in the
army. The religious figures of saints and their
statues correspond as closely as anything we have
in common. They did not worship the Katcina doll
which replaced the man actor when he was absent.
But the doll was an explanation or symbol. After
the dance was over it was given to the children,
who were taught the meaning of the symbolic dress
and decorations, just as we teach our children that
the figure of St. John the Baptist is shown as a
shepherd with a shepherd’s crook in his hand and
that of Christ with a crown of thorns on his brow.
From the study of the Katcina pictures we can
judge the desires of these people. 1. Powamu is the
Katcina of Bean-Planting, (Plate 20, Fig. 1). Her
festival is the first of the year, it is the most
elaborate, and it starts about February first and lasts
from sixteen to twenty days. It celebrates the return
of the Katcinas from their sojourn below the earth.
Beans are planted in all the kivas in Walpi,
Sichumovi, and Hano where they are forced to grow

46

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

means an appeal is made to the powers
who preside over the cardinal
directions for help to procure white
earth from which to make fine pottery.
Then we have Momo, the bee Katcina.
(Plate 20, Fig. 3). The importance of
bees who produce the only saccharine
food for these people, is paramount.
He is shown with a bow and arrow
and shoots blunt arrows at children,
and when they cry out from being
struck, he squirts water over the sore
spot from a syringe which is supposed
to cure it like a mother’s kiss will with
our children. Tetanaya is the wasp
Katcina. The Macibol Katcina carries
a huge rattlesnake, with his left arm
inserted in his body to give it life-like
movements, and a false left arm
hanging from his shoulder to deceive
the spectators. Buli Mana is the
butterfly Katcina on whose head is a
tablet showing the rain clouds in
terraces and spoken of as “the steps
to heaven.” She is not able to show
her hair in whorls on the side of her
head which shows that she is a
maiden, so she has the symbol of
maidenbood, the squash blossom,
painted on the tablet. Tunwup Taamu–
the mud-head clown, is shown with
yucca whips in his hand and a diabolic
expression on his face and he chastises
and frightens children. Nuvak is the
beautiful snow Katcina. Snow is
always associated with good crops,
Plate 20.
for the melted snow is absorbed by
KATCINAS.
the soil and is of much more benefit
1. Powamu.
2. Tumae
3. Momo
4. Televai
than the heavy showers which
sometimes come in the spring and do
in super-heated rooms. Ahul, the sun god, is not soak in the soil. White snow about the eyes, is
supposed to arise on the night of February 1, and surrounded by green, as grass is at the edge of the
his picture is shown herewith. Tumae, the white snow capped hills and mountains. Spring lightening
earth Katcina is shown with a white mouth (Plate is shown by little red snakes on the head with
20, Fig. 2). Her left eye is yellow, the Hopi color sprouting corn between them. Alosaka is the new
for east, and the right is green for west, and chin fire of life or germ Katcina. Fire is a living being,
red for south, and by these different directions, it like love was to the ancients and is a mystery and a

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

47

spirit. The creation of fire is
symbolic of the creation of life.
The making of new fire is a
sympathetic magic or symbolic
prayer for the rejuvenescence of
nature. Muzribi is a bean Katcina
and the curved sprouts of the bean
are shown on his cheeks.
Helilulu has a yellow east and a
green west eye with a mountain
lion’s skin around his neck and
Yucca whips in his hands. He
took part in the sun festival called
Pamurti. Pohaha is a four-horned
Katcina and is shown as a
terrifying stranger with a fringed
legging like those worn by the
Plains Indians–the Comanches
and Apaches who murdered their
men and stole their women,
children and crops. Kwacuc Alek
Taka is a Katcina of Zuni origin
and is shown with upright Eagle
tail feathers on his head and a
green mask with a red back.
Sioavatc Hoya is a man dressed
like a woman, and he makes a
rasping noise with a sheep’s
scapula scraped over a notched
stick. Pautima is a Zuni sun god,
who takes, part in the beansprouting festival.
The pottery designs of the
Mimbres are the most brilliant
ceramic expressions of the prehistoric Indians of our southwest.
The bird design shown has
outstretched wings with hanging feathers of
exceptional form. (Plate 21. Fig. 2). Legs are not
shown which leads to the belief that the back of the
animal is represented. The tail was obscurely shown
in the photograph, which made it impossible to
obtain a good drawing of this organ. This is one of
the few dorsal representations of a bird, most of
the others being shown from one side. The position
of the hanging feathers of the wings is exceptional.

Plate 21.
MIMBRES POTTERY DESIGNS
(Note: On the reredos of the Owakulti altar at
Sitcomovi on the East Mesa of the Hopi there is a
similar figure with drooping wing feathers. Here it
probably represents the Sky god, as there are
several stars near it.)
One of the most instructive pictures in the Eisele
collection is the bowl shown in Plate 21, Figure 3,
upon which are represented three butterflies with

48

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
light cream and the figures are painted
in brown merging into black. The
ordinary symbol of the butterfly is, of
course, triangular; but in this case we
have this insect shown from one side,
which is a very rare position in Pueblo
pictography.
Here we have a form where wings,
body, tail, and head are outlined with
straight lines. The head is triangular,
black in color, with two dotted eyes. The
wings are also triangular and are
crossed by parallel lines. The body is
rectangular and the tail ends in two
triangular black points. The peripheral
zone of decoration of this vessel is zigzag
and triangular lines, the character and
shape of which are shown in the figure.
(Plate 21, Fig. 7) .
Whether this picture represents
fishermen who have captured a large
fish, some fish legend or a ceremony
connected with fishing, is unknown, but
each of the four participants have a line
connected with the fish’s mouth and
above the group, is an upright pole with
feathers attached at intervals. (Plate 21,
Fig. 8). Every man has a different attitude
and faces of all are painted white and
black.

Plate 22.
MIMBRES POTTERY DESIGNS
outspread wings, two with extended and one with
retracted probosces. Each butterfly has two wings,
around the edge of which are the customary dots
which are almost universally found on butterfly
figures from the Hopi to the Gila Valley. In the
middle of this group stands a man who carries on
his head a small vase which he holds in position.
One of the butterflies clinging to the elbow of the
man by its feet, extends its proboscis as if to take
the contents of the vase. The color of this vase is

This figure represents two
quadrupeds with heads of lions and two
geometric designs irregularly terraced,
with white border. (Plate 21, Fig. 9). The
interior is marked with parallel lines.
The head is short and calls to mind that
of a carnivorous animal, there is a white band about
the neck, the tip of the tail is white. The rectangular
body is lozenge-shaped with dots.
This figure belongs to the Eisele collection and
was found in the same ruin as Figure 1. It represents
a wading bird (ibis) with correspondingly long legs
and neck, along which are four small fishes. (Plate
21, Figure 10). A short distance from its beak is
another fish, apparently about to be devoured by
the bird.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

49

There are four figures in this picture
all different; two were evidently intended
to represent men with human bodies and
heads of animals. (Plate 22, Figure 11).
Each carries a rattle in one hand and a
stick to the end of which is attached a
feather, or a twig with leaves, in the other.
This picture shows a mountain sheep.
(Plate 22, Fig. 12).
This picture represents a trapper
snaring birds in the snow. His hair is tied
down his back, he has a blanket wrapped
around him. He has made a wattle fence
with four openings, and has placed a
snare in each. He has caught three birds.
(Plate 22, Figure 13).
This picture represents a Mesilla
quail. (Plate 22, Fig. 14).
This picture shows a fish being eaten
by two cranes. This fish has the general
contour of a “buffalo fish” and the same
square flappers and semi-lunar gills
found in pictographs on the Detroit Ranch
70 miles northwest of El Paso. (Plate 22,
Fig. 15).
This picture is of a Grasshopper.
(Plate 22, Fig. 16).
I will now give you an idea of
pictographs made during the historic
period. The black pictographs found at
Plate 23.
Ft. Davis have two of the mule deer or
PETROGLYPHS
ON
THE FALLS RANCH,
black tailed deer shown in its
THREE RIVERS, NEW MEXICO.
characteristic high-bounding gait in
1. Prepueblo Mask with vertical pupils like rattlesnakes;
which it takes off with all four feet at the
puma’s paw on chin.
same time and lands on all four at the
2. Buffalo; probably of Jumano’s origin.
same time. The antlers have the tines
3. Figure with Brachycephalic prepueblo profile,
pronged while the white-tailed deer have
holding sky and rain symbols; to the left, geometric
undivided tines. The pictograph shows
symbol and horned lizard.
an Indian riding a horse. It will be noticed
that this horse has an arched neck like
deer or white-tailed deer. The antlers are
the early Spanish horses of the Arab type and not characteristic of those of a full grown buck, as they
the straight-necked mustang of a later period. The have no brow tines and the branches are directed
pictographs from Meyer’s spring near Camp Bullis, forward. A stagecoach with a sack of mail strapped
seventeen miles north of Dryden show a red Virginia on behind is shown by another pictograph.

