Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity Drainage

57

INDIAN CAMPSITES OF THE UPPER TRINITY RIVER DRAINAGE
BY R. K. HARRIS
second class is a little thinner and seems to have
been used to hold liquids. The third class is very
thin and appears to have been used to hold solids
such as grain and nuts. The most common
tempering substances used in their pottery were
The writer has spent the past eight or ten years
bone and shell. The thick cooking pottery has plenty
in making a survey and study of these sites, and has
of tempering material in it. The second and third
come to the conclusion that the sites on East Fork,
classes have very little tempering material.
and also those located on the east side of Elm Fork,
All of the designs on their pottery are incised.
show remains of a people which was closely related
to the Caddo Nation. The camps situated on the Most of these were made with small implements or
west side of Elm Fork all seem to have been made twigs; however, some were made by using the finger
by people culturally related to those which were nails.
located to the west of them, along the Brazos River.
Their pottery wares consisted mostly of large
The writer judges this from the almost complete
and small cooking pots, large and small seed bowls,
change of flint and also the change in type of
pipes, and water bottles. The predominating colors
artifacts found in camps on the west side of Elm
of pottery found in these camps are gray, buff,
Fork.
brown, and some red on black or brown.
This paper describes Indian camp sites situated
along East and Elm Forks of the Trinity River, and
their tributaries, located in Rockwall, Collin,
Kaufman, Dallas and Denton Counties.

Camp Sites Along East Fork
Wylie I.
Camp sites along East Fork of the Trinity, usually
This camp site is located on a low sand hill on
are located on small sandy hills or ridges situated
about 1/8 to ¼ mile from the river. Rarely are they the banks of Pilot Creek near the place where Pilot
Creek flows into East Fork. It covers about one
over ½ mile from the river or its tributaries.
acre of land. Judging from the flint, bone, and shell
The flint most common along East Fork is a red debris, this camp probably was occupied for a long
quartz flint. This red quartz flint was rather hard to period of time.
work. A white flint is also found in these camps.
The bone workers of this camp seem to have
This flint probably was traded from tribes to the
reached
a high degree of skill. A number of needles,
west of them. There is also a cream or yellow and a
smooth red flint found in these camps. This smooth awls, and beads of bone have been found in this
red and the yellow flint seem to be identical with site.
flints found along the Red River.
The arrowheads usually are somewhat crude.
There are three flint quarries in the region that
were worked extensively by the Indians. One is
located on White Rock Creek about 3 miles east of
Dallas. Another one is about 2 miles east of Pleasant
Grove on Scyene Creek. The other is on Muddy
Creek, a tributary of East Fork. Most of the flint of
these three quarries is red quartz flint.

The small points, however, show a high degree of
workmanship.
The pottery sherds are like those usually found
in camps in this part of the State. The three common
classes of sherds are found. The pottery of this camp
shows very little shell mixed in it.

A stone bead was found which is shown on Plate
The Indians of East Fork were highly skilled in 18, Figure 33. The bead was made from a white
the pottery art. They made three classes of pottery. stone. It was drilled from one side.
The first class is a heavy thick cooking ware. The

58

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

One unusual shell object which is shown on Plate
19, Figure 4, was found. It was used as either a
pendant or a digging tool.
Rockwall I.
This site covers about 3 acres and is located on
a sandy ridge extending to East Fork bottoms. It is
about 1/8 mile from the camp to the river. Since
there is a large amount of flint, shell, and bone
debris, the writer believes that this camp was
occupied over a long period of time.
Flint: The arrowheads are mostly heavy, coarse
points, with stemmed base and small barbs, and are
usually about 1 1/2 or 2 inches long. There are also
a few rectangular stemmed points. Some of the best
of these points are shown on Plate 18, Figures 9,
15, and 16.
Some of the small points are thin, slender, long
stemmed points with wide sharp barbs. Others are

thin, slender, short stemmed points, with wide
flaring barbs, and serrated edges. A few are thin,
wide, flaring stemmed square barbed points. Some
of these points are pictured on Plate 18, Figures
10, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, and 28.
Flint drills are of two types. First is the flake
based drill with long slender point and base not
worked, and then the flaked drill with short stubby
point and base worked into a rounded edge. I, also,
have one drill from this camp which has a slender
point with the base worked into a long straight edge.
This drill could have been used for a scraper, also.
It is shown on Plate 18, Figure 5. Some of the other
drills from this camp are shown on Plate 18, Figures
3, 4, 6, 7, and 8.
Scrapers are of three types. The first type is a
small, round snub nosed scraper, with the end
sometimes pointed. The second type is a slender
keelbacked scraper with the end worked into a sharp
point. The third type is a small scraper which has

PLATE 17.
Shell and bone beads, bone awls, scrapers, drills and projectile points from campsites of the Upper
Trinity River drainage.

Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity Drainage

59

worked down and then highly polished. I have
talked with a few old settlers of Rockwall regarding
the old bricks, and they all said that there were no
brick buildings there when they settled. They have
all said that the bricks were in ruins when the land
Shell: Very few shell artifacts were found in
was cleared.
this camp. The writer has found a few shells which
have been drilled or punched like the shell pictured
The main rise, however, was occupied much
on Plate 19, Figure 2.
longer than the one with the brick ruins on it. On
the southeast side of the main camp is located the
Bone: The bone implements are well made. The
remains of a place which was used for firing pottery.
writer has one bone awl, and two bone needles.
I judge this from the pieces of burned clay and pieces
The bone awl is 3 1/4 inches long. It is made from
of broken pottery scattered around in the burned
a piece of split bone. This awl is shown on Plate
soil.
17, Figure 15. One of the bone needles is 2 1/10
inches long; the other is 1 7/8 inches long. The first
Stone: The writer has a small grooved quartzite
one is shown on Plate 17, Figure 11, and the second axe in his collection from this location. It is shown
is shown as Figure 10 on the same plate.
on Plate 20, Figure 1. The object is the only whole
one of its kind, found on the river so far. Another
Pottery: Most of the sherds show that the art of
interesting stone object from this camp is a little
pottery making had reached a high level. Almost
red dog shaped object. The dog stone seems to be
all of it was tempered with shell and bone, although
made of hard red paint- stone. This stone is shown
some sherds show very little tempering material.
on Plate 17, Figure 1.
While most of the pottery is either gray, buff, or
brown in color; some sherds are red, brown on
Flint: Arrowheads from this camp are of several
black, and some nearly black. Plate 21, No. 1, shows types. One type is a coarse, heavy, stemmed base
some of the shapes and designs of pottery from point with small barbs. Another type is a short
stemmed base point with wide barbs. Some of the
this camp.
arrowheads from this camp are shown on Plate 17,
Figures 41, 42, 43,44, and 45.
Rockwall II.
Small points from this camp are about the same
Rockwall II, is located on a low sand rise in the as those of other East Forks camps. However, in
bottoms of East Fork. The camp covers about 2 ½ this camp one more type of small point was found.
acres of land and is approximately ½ mile from the This type is a triangular point with indented notches
river. It was occupied for many years. Flint, shell, on each side. One of this type is shown on Plate 17,
and bone debris cover the entire camp, and extend Figure 27. The writer has 98 fine small points from
down below the ordinary plow level. On the east this camp, and knows of about 150 more points in
of the main camp, there is another small rise collections of his friends. Some of these small points
covering about 3 acres. On this rise are the remains are shown on Plate 17, Figures 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
of an old brick building of some kind, which was 28. 29, 31, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, and 40. One of
built of handmade sun-dried bricks. From all the finest and most unusual small points from this
indications, the brick ruins may have been there camp is shown on Plate 17, Figure 30. It is a gray
when the Indians used the campsite. I judge this triangular point, with side notches and indented
from the arrowheads, pottery sherds, scrapers, base. One unusual thing about this specimen is the
manos and metates, and other artifacts which I have fact that not only the sides are serrated, but also
picked up among the bricks. I also found a broken the base.
celt among the bricks. It was made of a greenish
The writer also has another point from this site
granite rock. The cutting edge had been finely
that is unusual. This is about 1 inch long and is
the appearance of a retouched arrowhead which
has had the point broken off. Some of the scrapers
are pictured on Plate 18, Figures 11, 12, 13, 14,
and 20.

60

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

pointed on both ends. A friend has a fine collection
of Louisiana Cane points. The last mentioned point
is identical with these Cane points.

which has been drilled through the long way and
used as a bead. Fresh water mussel shells were used
as material for beads, pendants, and other
ornamental artifacts. One of the best mussel shell
Two good specimens of flint knives have been
artifacts is shown on Plate 19, Figure 2. It was
found in this camp. They are shown oh Plate 17,
probably used as a pendant.
Figures 18 and 19.
Bone: Bone work was highly developed. Bone
The drills are of the same type as those of the
needles, awls, and beads were used. Some of the
last mentioned camp. Two of these are shown on
bone needles and awls are shown on Plate 17,
Plate 17, Figures 32 and 33.
Figures 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, and 14.. Two bone beads
Two types of scrapers are found, one is of the from this site are shown on Plate 17, Figures 2 and
type of scraper shown on Plate 17, Figure 17, and 4. A bone ceremonial object shown on Plate 17,
the other is a thin, round snub nosed scraper shown Figure 3 was also found. It is grooved around the
on Plate 17, Figure. 20.
neck and is engraved on each side.
Pottery Sherds: Some very beautiful pottery
Shell: Shell objects were in demand by the
inhabitants of this camp. One of the best shell pieces sherds were found at this camp, and these are shown
is shown on Plate 17, Figure 5. This is a sea shell on Plate 21, No. 2.

PLATE 18.
Various types of projectile points, drills and scrapers of the Upper Trinity River drainage sites.

Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity Drainage

61

Figure 21, Plate 17, is the remains of a beautiful
Pottery sherds are about the same as at other
clay pipe. It resembles white stone, but it is of shell East Fork camps. However, one sherd found here
tempered pottery.
has a perfect sun design engraved on it.
Rockwall III.
This site covers about 2 ½ or 3 acres and is
located on a ridge near Rowlett Creek. It was not
occupied long, but the Indians left some well made
implements. One of the best of these is a small point
shown on Plate 19, Figure 34. It is 1 7/8 inches
long and 5/8 inch wide at the barb, and is made of
a very light tan flint. The small points shown on
Plate 19, Figures 31, 32 and 33, are also from this
camp. About 50% of the arrowheads from this camp
are either triangular, or leaf shaped points.

Arrowheads with the exception of triangular and
leaf shaped points, are of about the same types as
at other camps along the river.
Kaufman I.
This camp site is located on a low sand ridge on
Buffalo Creek. The camp covers about ¼ of an acre
of land. The camp site probably was not occupied
very long.
The pottery sherds appear to be in the same class
as sherds from other camps along the river.

The flint work is very fine. Small arrowheads,
One broken bone awl and two or three broken
and scrapers from this camp are finely chipped.
needles were found.
Figure 36, Plate 19, is a well made arrow point
from this location.

PLATE 19.
Mussel shell artifacts, arrow heads, and knives of the Upper Trinity River drainage sites.

62

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Kaufman II.

on a high hill overlooking East Fork and the larger
part of the camp. The camp has many cooking pits
in it. These cooking pits are about four to six feet
in diameter, and about ten to fourteen inches deep.
The writer has dug most of these pits and has found
In the southeast corner of the camp is located a
shell, bits of flint, bones, and ashes in all of them.
large circle which is about 25 or 30 feet across.
The best find was at a depth of about 8 inches. This
The soil in this spot is burned from a dark gray to
object is a large shell with an oblong hole worked
almost black. This circle seems to contain a group
in the center of it. It probably was used as a digging
of cremated burials. This is indicated by the number
tool, or may have been a cooking implement. It is
of pieces of human skulls, and teeth found in this
shown on Plate 19, Figure 5. Another shell object
spot. On the north side of the circle, I found a bone
is a shell bead shown on Plate 19, Figure 1.
implement which was used as a flaker. This is
pictured on Plate 17, Figure 16. I have also found
Flint work and pottery are about the same as in
a number of shell artifacts there. Most of these shell other camps along the river. Some of the arrow
objects have been used as scrapers. Probably some heads are shown on Plate 18, Figures 1, 2, 40, 41,
of them may have been used for scraping arrow 42, and 44.
shafts and other objects of that size; while others
Some of the small points are shown on Plate 18,
have deep narrow notches in them. These probably
Figures 18, 29, 30, 31, 34, 35, 38, and 39.
were used for dressing bow strings. One of the
larger shell scrapers is shown on Plate 19, Figure
Many metates and manos have been found at
3.
this camp.
This camp, which covers about l 1/2 acres, is
located on a sandy slope near Buffalo Creek on
which Kaufman I lies.

In this black spot I have found several broken
bone needles and awls; but have yet to find a whole
needle or awl. Most of the flint objects are fine
specimens.
In the middle of the black circle many fine small
points have been found. Some of these are pictured
on Plate 18, Figures 36, 37, 32. One unusual
arrowhead was found in this black spot. It is about
1 3/4 inches long, and is beveled to the left. This is
pictured on Plate 18, Figure 43.

Camp Sites Along the Elm Fork
Camp sites along Elm Fork of the Trinity, usually
are located on small sandy hills; however, these
differ from those of the East Fork in that they are
more scattered. This condition is due to the fact
that most of the land along East Fork is black land,
while most of the land along Elm Fork is sandy.

Elm Fork of the Trinity seems to be the dividing
line between Caddo and western Indian cultures.
At this camp the writer found the remains of a Camps along the east side of Elm Fork appear to
grave which had been displaced by a plow. The be closely connected with East Fork camps;
bones were in very bad condition. I found 3 large however camp sites found on the west side of Elm
pieces of the skull and about 8 or 10 of the teeth. Fork show indications that they were more closely
This grave was located on top of the ridge between connected with the western Indian cultures.
the creek and the river.
The flint most common along Elm Fork is a
Kaufman III—Gilkey Hill

smooth white flint which probably came from flint
quarries located along the Brazos River.

This camp, which covers about 8 acres, is the
largest I have found. It is about ¼ mile off of East
Fork. There are two parts of the camp. The larger
is located nearer the river on a low rise which
extends to the bottoms. This was occupied longer
than the smaller part. The smaller part is located

Camp sites along Elm Fork of the Trinity River
show a lack of pottery sherds; however, two camps
in this vicinity show some little evidence of a
knowledge of pottery. Pottery sherds found in the
two mentioned camps are all very crude specimens.

Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity Drainage

63

Small points found show a
high degree of workmanship.
Most of them are thin points with
flaring short stems and wide
sharp barbs. Some of these are
shown on Plate 19, Figures 21,
22, 23, 24, 27, 28, and 29.
Figure 25, Plate 19, is a
triangular point from this camp.
Figure 26 on the same plate is
the only triangular point with
indented sides found so far in this
camp.

PLATE 20.
Pecked and ground artifacts, and arrowheads of the Upper
Trinity River drainage sites.

Denton I.
This site is situated on the east side of Elm Fork,
near the Lake Dallas dam. It is now impossible to
determine how much land this camp covered, due
to the fact that the lake now covers most of it;
however, about two acres remain above the water
level. With the lake removed one could see that
this camp is located on a ridge which slopes off to
the river.

Pottery: Pottery seems to be
lacking, thus far only one pottery
sherd has been found. This sherd
belongs to the cooking ware
class. It is from the bottom of
the pot and shows quite a bit of
crushed shell has been used as
tempering material. Stone work
in this camp consists only of
grinding and milling tools such
as manos and metates.

During the past year, the
action of the waves on Lake
Dallas has exposed three graves.
In one of these, pieces of a large, deeply hollowed
out metate were exposed. This metate was turned
face down about the chest of the skeleton. The
skeleton was stretched out with the head to the
south. The metate was the only mortuary object
found with the burial. The second burial contained
one arrowhead, which was of the typical East Fork
type. The third contained no mortuary objects. All
three were adult burials.
Denton II.

Flint: Arrowheads while few, are well shaped
This camp covers about four acres and is located
and well chipped. Arrowheads are about the same on a sand slope on Denton Creek, a tributary of
as the types of East Fork with a few exceptions. Elm Fork.
These probably are trade points from tribes to the
Flint: Most of the arrowheads are typical
west of them. One arrowhead is shown on Plate
western points. Two of the points found at this
19, Figure 30.
location are shown on Plate 19, Figures 19 and 20.

64

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Small points found in this camp are also typically
western points, with the exception of two which
are pictured on Plate 19, Figures 14 and 15. These
two seem to be of a type which is rare along Elm
Fork and East Fork. Only one other whole point
like them has been found anywhere along East Fork
or Elm Fork. Other small points from this site are
shown on Plate 19, Figures 16 and 17.
Figure 18, Plate 19, is a small keelbacked scraper
from this camp.
Pottery: Pottery consists of a very few crudely
made sherds.

indications the inhabitants were closely related to
the Indians of East Fork. Some very well made flint
artifacts have been found; the most important of
these being a small point identical with the one
pictured on Plate 19, Figure 15.
There is a difference between this camp and
those of Elm Fork in that many fine pottery sherds
were found. These are closely related to East Fork
sherds. A number of fragments have been found
that are identical with the red on black sherds found
along the Red River in Lamar County.
Dallas IV.

Dallas I.
This camp covers about one and one-half acres
and is located on a low sand mound on the banks
of Elm Fork. It probably was occupied during a
longer period than any other site along Elm Fork.

This camp is located on a hill overlooking White
Rock Lake, about 1 1/2 miles above White Rock
Dam. Nothing of importance has been found here
as this camp is in pasture land. Of all the small points
found here, about 75% are triangular. No pottery
fragments have ever been found at this location.

The flint is very similar to that found in East
Dallas V.
Fork camps, with the exception of arrowheads.
Most of the arrowheads are similar to those in the
This site is situated below White Rock Dam, on
vicinity of Mineral Wells. Figure 13, Plate 19, is a the creek. Most of the camp has been washed away
small point from this camp.
by the lake overflow. One round flint scraper, two
There is very little shell work to be found, arrow points, and numerous small bones were found
mixed with ashes, about two feet below the surface
although a few shell scrapers were found.
of the soil. The continual overflow of the creek
washed away the bank in which these were found.
No pottery fragments have been found at this
Dallas II.
location.
On Mountain Creek, is a very small camp site.
Dallas VI.
This camp appears to have been occupied only a
short time, as only a few well worked flint artifacts
This site which covers about 5 acres is located
were found. Most of the large flint artifacts are on Scyene Creek in Dallas County.
pictured on Plate 19, Figures 11 and 12. Figure 11,
This camp is closely related to East Fork in types
Plate 19, is a triangular lance head about four and
one-half inches long, and two inches wide at the of projectile points, but the lack of pottery sherds
back end. Figure 12 on this same plate is a lance is peculiar. Some of the types of arrowheads and
head about 4 3/4 inches long, and about 1 inch wide small points are shown on Plate 20, Figures 2, 3, 4,
at the base. Nearly all of the small points in this 5, 7, 8, 9, and 10. The writer has a record of 1,200
camp seem to be of western types. Some of these arrowheads and small points from this camp.
are shown on Plate 19, Figures 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10.
Dallas III.

Miscellaneous

The artifact photographed on Plate 20, Figure
This camp covers about two acres and is located
6, is a grooved net sinker made of hard sandstone.
on a ridge on White Rock Creek. From all

Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity Drainage

65

It was found at a small site on Little Elm Creek,
The object pictured on Plate 20, No. 11, is a
about one-half mile above the junction of this Creek gray slate, pendant. This fine article was found
and Pecan Creek, in Denton County.
amongst a group of broken small points, and chips
of flint.
The arrowhead shown on Plate 19, Figure 40,
The artifact shown on Plate 18, Figure 17, is a
is from this camp.
large hide scraper found on Cedar Creek in Dallas
The small points pictured on Plate 19, Figures
County.
37, 38, and 39 were found at this camp.
Dallas, Texas, November 2, 1935.

PLATE 21.
Pottery sherds of the campsites on the Upper Trinity River drainage.

