102

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A CARANKAWA FIRE IMPLEMENT
BY CLYDE T. REED
interpreted to be fire implements. They are of about
the same size and are composed of some kind of
plastic or cement. The skeletons were those of
females and with one was also found two flint rocks
of small hand size, which showed signs of active
use in fire making. One of the tools—the one
figured—contained about 250 c.c. of coarse
This was the Carankawa tribe, or perhaps race; bitumen and ashes. (See Plate 41, Nos. 1 and 2).
since, these Indians were quite distinct in both The ashes were in the bottom and the unburned
anatomical characters, and social or cultural traits. bitumen was on top, indicating that the fire was fed
from the large
Their origin, and
open end. The
relationship with
bottom has a hole
other primitive
through it into
people of this
which
was
region, are not
inserted
a
short
known. They
shaft of hollow
inhabited the
bone about five
coastal country
centimeters long.
from Galveston
The bone was
to
unknown
highly polished
limits on the
and browned
south. At a point
from heat. There
on the Laguna
were numerous
Madre, or an
other segments
embayment
of hollow bone
extending over
which without
PLATE 41.
considerable area
doubt
were
No. 1. A Picture of Carankawan fire making device.
and called Baffin
“spare” mouth
No. 2. Another picture of the same device.
Bay, I discovered
pieces for these
a burial of these
torches. These
Indians.
“furnace” torches were apparently means of
The site was one and a half miles by road, or transporting an effective source of intense heat.
about a mile along the shore, southwest of a place They were not connected in any way with
called Carolina Beach in Kleberg County. It was ceremonials; but, rather with the very practical
on a rather high point of land extending between business of keeping the fire of the tribal colony
two small creeks that flowed, or rather their basins burning. No other artifacts of any kind—except an
spread out into the bay, and included the point arrow head between the ribs of this female
between them. Here I found twenty-one skeletons. skeleton—were found. Nearby are several bone
The count was based on certain skull fragments and shell middens, but without sherds or other
together with other whole skulls. In many cases evidences of handiwork. These remains were
the bodies seemed to be piled together. In others exposed first by erosion and were excavated further
they were singly distributed. With two of these during the early spring of 1927.
skeletons were found two tools, which can only be
Cornell University.
The broad level coastal plains of Texas, even
more than the interior plains and hilly regions, were
the “homeland”—if wandering races can be said to
have a homeland—of many tribes of Indians.
Among these many tribes was one of special
interest, both ethnologically and historically.

