50

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

RECENT ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCHES
IN THE ABILENE SECTION
BY DR. CYRUS N. RAY
PREHISTORIC TEXAS BURIALS
SANDSTONE RECORDS OF ANCIENT MEN AND ANIMALS
The Stone Grave People

Another Stone Grave

Late in 1930 Mr. W. J. Van London and the
writer were kindly granted permission to make
archeological examination of the De La Fosse ranch
by the owner, Mr. George De La Fosse. At this
place Hubbard Creek turns north and crosses the
paved highway between the towns of Albany and
Breckenridge, Texas at a place ten miles west of
Breckenridge. On the west side of the bridge and
on the south side of the road the ground rises
gradually at first, and then steeply to a high rocky
ridge which parallels the east and west course of
the creek at this place for a mile or more. All along
the foot of the hill are gullies and where these cut
through the rather high north banks of the creek
are exposed outcrops of a stratum of camp site
debris which lies buried under ten inches of soil. It
consists of burnt rocks, numerous mussel shells,
flint flakes, hammerstones, manos, metates,
scrapers, and a few heavily patinated broken
projectile points. These artifacts have a thick white
shell of patina on the outside with blue flint centers.

About a half mile farther up the same side of the
creek in a high bank the writer, on a later trip,
observed small portions of the edges of three flat
stones projecting from the soil slope. Upon digging
these out another oval enclosure of flat stones set
on edge was found and again the center was filled
with long flat stones set horizontally and below
these also rested a skeleton lying in the flexed or
embryonic position which also had the head to the
west and facing the south and the hands on either
side of the face. There were no artifacts in the grave
although as before there were many flakes of rotten
mussel shells and considerable charcoal mixed in
the soil, however there were no signs of fire on
either bones or stones.

While we were examining this site the writer
noticed about an inch of what appeared to be the
rounded edge of a metate projecting out of the
ground. Upon digging this out, it was found to
consist of one half of a broken metate setting on
edge which was one of a small oval enclosure of
buried flat stones set on edge. The center was found
to be filled in with more flat stones laid horizontally.
When these were removed to a depth of two feet a
skeleton was exposed which was lying on its right
side with the head to the west and facing south.
The knees were flexed and the thighs flexed on the
body. The arms were flexed and the hands rested
on each side of the head.
The broken metate set at the head was the only
artifact found although many rotten shell flakes may
have been remains of shell ornaments.

Stone Grave Skeleton Exposed by Erosion
Mr. L. A. Beyer living four miles northwest of
Abilene has a valley field which was crossed by the
meanderings of a small creek branch which was
usually dry. A few years ago he dug a ditch four
feet deep through the valley to straighten the stream.
After a heavy rain a skeleton in good condition
washed out of the bottom. Mr. Beyer realizing that
the bones might be of scientific interest excavated
them carefully and brought them to town. The
writer secured these bones and visited the site with
Mr. Beyer. This skeleton from all accounts lay in
no special order, nor was it in a stone grave. Stream
erosion had washed it out of the bottom of the ditch
at a depth from the surface of four feet. It came
from an old valley floor level which has since been
covered with that depth of soil. At this four foot
level at several other places along the same ditch
erosion had exposed small hearth rings composed
of burnt stones three or four inches in diameter and
flint flakes. Also a few portions of broken flint
artifacts had eroded out. This skeleton had all the

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

51

peculiar anatomical features of the other
Stone Grave skeletons. Its absence from
the typical grave is unexplained;
however, the frontal bone on each side
just above the outer ends of the orbits
shows six long deep scratches in the
bone, three over each eye as though they
had been made by some cat like animal
in trying to scratch out the eyes. The
wounds must have been quite severe.
Burial in Waterless Camp Site
Ten miles south of Merkel, Texas is a
small dry creek branch of Mulberry
Creek which carries no water except
immediately after rains, however this
creek branch has a quite extensive old
camp site on both of its banks. The larger
part of the camp debris lies on a neck of
high ground left between two creeks
where another smaller creek joins
Mulberry creek. From all evidences this
camp site has been covered with
considerable soil since its abandonment
but the reverse process is now under way
and its margins are being gullied and
washed away. The site shows several
burnt rock mounds of smaller size, and
erosion has exposed an almost
continuous layer containing burnt rocks,
mussel shells, flint chips, manos,
metates, scrapers, hammerstones, knives
and many of the larger sized so-called
arrow heads (they may have been atl atl
heads).
The site bears every indication of
having been the permanent camp site of
a populous village over a considerable
period of time. There is now no spring,
water hole, nor permanent water supply
within many miles of this site. During
the greater part of the year this site
presents an appearance as dry as that of
any part of this section. Either the site
must have existed when climatic
conditions were more moist and such

Plate 12
STONE GRAVE BURIAL IN WATERLESS CAMPSITE
1. View after top soil has been removed from over grave
stones.
2. View of gravestones after the dirt had been removed from
between them. The oval ring of stones in this grave had
evidently fallen inward. In the usual stone grave, the outside
ring of stones sets on edge sometimes vertically and
sometimes leaning slightly outward at the tops.
3. View showing skeleton in place after removal of grave
stones. Mussel shell in foreground beside ribs.

52

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

small branches contained permanent water, or a
spring on the site has vanished. It is certain that no
primitive camp site could be maintained there now.
This burial also was under a stone grave made very
similarly to the others. The skeleton also lay in the
flexed position with the head to the west but in this
case the face was turned to the north. The bones

were small and contained all of the peculiar features
of the type.
Lying against the ribs on the right side were the
remains of a tortoise shell and beside them and also
in contact with the ribs was nearly all of one side of
a large mussel shell; this shell was polished
somewhat on the outside and the hinge projection
had been sawed off even with the inside
rim of the shell and polished smooth. This
shell probably had been in use as a spoon.
The skeleton lay about two feet deep,
covered by the rocks which were almost
entirely covered with soil, and the general
appearance seemed to indicate that soil
accretion had covered almost all of the
grave stones since the burial so that there
was little on the surface to indicate its
location. The level on which the skeleton
lay appeared to have been an old
occupied floor level and was full of flint
flakes. At a distance of eighteen inches
north of the skeleton and on the same
level a crude patinated flint drill or awl
was found.
The Bones of Peculiar Type

Plate 13
STONE GRAVE SKULLS
1. Skull from De La Fosse Ranch, Shackelford
County. Top.
1a. Facial aspect; note heavy brow ridges.
1b. Lower jaw.
2. Skull from Beyer farm, found four miles from
Abilene. Top.
2a. Facial aspect.
2b. Lower jaw.
3. Skull from dry campsite, Taylor County. Top.
3a. Facial aspect.
3b. Lower jaw.

The four skeletons from the sites
described above are so similar that the
same description will fit all of them.
While found in three different places
separated many miles apart the racial
anatomical peculiarities in these four
skeletons show more agreement in
characters than one could reasonably
expect in the nearest relatives.
The first skeletons found in this region
having anything like comparable features
were the two very primitive skeletons
found under six and one-half feet of
horizontally laid undisturbed clay strata
on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River
near Albany, Texas and described in The
Scientific American of May 1929 issue.
The skeletons then found were
incomplete in that parts of the ends of

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
some of the long bones were gone; however in each
case the other end of the other bone was usually
intact. By comparisons the shape of the whole shaft
could be found.

53

were very wide spreading. The lower molar teeth
of some jaws were worn down very much from
the outside edges in a peculiar manner.

These skeletons were buried in stone
graves and were lying in flexed position
facing south and with the hands lying on
either side of the face.
The striking features of these
skeletons were as follows: the skulls were
long and narrow and the eye brow ridges
extremely heavy, the shin bones or tibiae
were nearly flat on cross section, the thigh
bones or femora were curved or bowed
from front to back similar to neanderthal
femora, the forearm bones or radii were
curved and the lower jaws were massive,
with heavy much worn teeth. These two
skeletons were of people of good size and
height and were heavily constructed in
all of their parts.
Similar to Clear Fork People
The method of burial of the Clear Fork
people was the same as that of the
diminutive Stone Grave People. The
peculiarities of the Clear Fork People
were all present in the Stone Grave
People in modified or lessened degree
except that while the Clear Fork People
were large, heavy and tall, the Stone
Grave People were very small.
The Stone Grave People all had
unusually heavy eyebrow ridges but theirs
were not as extremely developed as those
of the Clear Fork People. All had antero
postero curvature of the femora, all had
flattened tibiae, all had short thick lower
jaws with much worn teeth, and all had
low foreheads and long narrow skulls.
The writer would not describe the chins
as being as prominent as those of the
modern Indians but still they had chins.
The ascending rami of the lower jaws of
all were unusually wide and short. The
lower jaws while short from front to back

Plate 14
EGG-SHAPED SKULL, AND CURVED FEMORA
1. Facial aspect of egg-shaped skull.
2. Top of egg-shaped skull.
3. Lower jaw of egg-shaped skull
4. Beyer skeleton curved femora on right. Modern
straight femora on left. An iron knife was found with
the skeleton showing the straight femora.
5. Articulated knee joint of the Beyer skeleton.

54

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Probably Descendants of Clear Fork People
We have thus seen that the four Stone Grave
People have the same anatomical characteristics in
somewhat lessened degree as the Clear Fork People
and also used the same type of burial customs. The
difference in the earth levels or strata in which they
lived would indicate that this type of man lived in
the Abilene region throughout a long period of time
before being superseded by the more modern type.
Long enough indeed to become both very much
smaller in size and less brutal in appearance.
However the Stone Graves themselves and
associated camp sites are well covered with soil
except where erosion has exposed them. The
associated flints when broken show a blue flint
center and a thick shell of white patina going into
the stone rather deeply. Thus we not only have
extreme patina but in one case a total disappearance
of a water supply adequate for a large village, which
facts would seem to indicate that even the Stone
Grave People lived very long ago.
Fortunately whole femora and tibiae and nearly
whole skulls were found of this race. The femora
and tibiae of both legs of the skeleton found on the
Beyer place were in good condition.

bird or blow gun points had been found above it
prior to its exposure by the sand being blown off of
it.
Another skeleton was excavated in the bottom
of a sand blow out in Callahan County where the
sand had blown off down deep enough so that the
skull was smashed by the farmer’s plow. On digging
below the skull fragments the skeleton was found
sitting upright but also arranged in the flexed
position described previously.
Sand Dune Skeletons Also Peculiar
It appears that bones are not preserved in as good
condition in the sand as are those in clay soils,
however the writer has examined skulls and long
bones from four Sand Dune Burials and is able to
state that in each of the cases examined the skulls
were long and narrow with heavy lower jaws and
much worn teeth. The eyebrow ridges were
unusually prominent and there was a marked antero
postero curvature of the thigh bones. The articular
ends however were usually too much decayed to
make any comparisons of the joints.
Peculiar Egg Shaped Skull

In the 1929 issue of the Bulletin the writer
described the finding of a skeleton having a small
When an attempt is made to fit together the thigh low narrow egg shaped skull which also had curved
and shin bones at the knees and to extend them in thigh bones. This skull was dissimilar to all others
the position assumed by the knee joint in modern found near here in having no palpable eye brow
man when the leg is straight or extended the bones ridges. However this skull was exceedingly low and
are found not to fit together. The only position in unusually narrow in the frontal region. When
which these bones appear to have functioned is with viewed from above it had an egg shaped outline
a marked bend at the knee.
with the small end in front, with this skeleton were
two petrified beads. One was made of a Gulf of
Sand Dune Burials
Mexico sea shell of which the spiral had been
Two burials in Sand Dune Culture Camp sites removed and small holes bored in each end. The
have been excavated by the writer and the sites other was bored longitudinally and was made from
where portions of two additional ones were found the center of a conch shell. Both were somewhat
over an inch in length.
have been visited and the bones examined.
People With Bent Knees

A Sand Dune skeleton was found by the writer
exposed in the bottom of a sand blowout near
Hawley, Texas. This skeleton lay in the usual flexed
position with the head to the north and facing east.
No artifacts were found with it but numerous small

Femoral Curvature Common in Texas
The writer has some much curved femora sent
him from near Rockport, Texas (on the Texas coast)
by Mr. George C. Martin. The writer also has in his

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

55

collection a markedly curved femur found in a stone
covered grave by a farmer at a site four miles
northeast of Abilene. The skull was given to some
country doctor and the writer never was able to
trace it or get a description of it.

a report on this unusual site was printed in the 1930
issue of the Society Bulletin. The eighty-five oval
or boat shaped mortar holes found were not only
of an unusual shape not previously described, in so
far as the writer knows, but a majority showed
evidences of such extreme erosion of hard stone
that one is justified in believing them to be very
Peculiar Features Not Accidental
old. It was then noted that a few of the mortar holes
Thus we see from the numerous instances cited
which were situated near the centers of the large
that the peculiar anatomical features described
above were not instances of disease
or of accidental or monstrous
deformation but were instead racial
features of wide territorial
distribution which probably existed
during a long period of prehistoric
time.
Since stone age hearth site strata
of prehistoric man have been found
by the writer extending from
present soil levels down to depths
as great as twenty-four to twentyseven feet below the present soil
surface, along streams of the same
region, we should expect to some
time find the remains of a kind of
man of an even more brutal type
than any yet found.
Sandstone Records of Ancient
Men and Animals
Among the most convincing
evidences of ancient man in Texas
are the records he left in the hard
sandstone ledges near his ancient
camp sites. The deep erosion
shown by hard sandstone ledges
filled with mortar holes which were
so situated that nothing but natural
rainfall and wind erosion could have
operated on them is very
interesting.
Two years ago the writer
investigated a site on the Douthit
Ranch located thirty-five miles
southwest of Colorado, Texas and

Plate 15
SITE NEAR LORAINE, TEXAS
1. Shows a view of the oval mortar hole near Loraine, Texas.
Mr. Van London in center.
2. Shows one good round mortar hole at right side of picture
and the shallow remnants of three ancient mortar holes to left
3. Shows two mortar holes with raised edges.
4. Shows remnants of bottoms of three eroded mortar holes
5. Shows an oval eroded mortar hole with raised margins
6. Shows two eroded oval mortar holes with raised edges.
7. Two eroded oval mortar holes.
8. Round mortar hole in foreground. Three eroded bottoms of
oval mortar holes in upper corners of picture.

56

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
stones had evidently been filled at an early
date with wind blown soil in which a grass
sod had grown which had protected them.
These were from sixteen to seventeen
inches deep and from fifteen to seventeen
inches long and eight inches wide at the
centers. The sides sloped to points at the
ends. Their general shape was similar to
the inside of a canoe. However those nearer
the sloping edges of the ledge had eroded
away in varying degrees down to some
which only showed the bottoms of holes
which were only one and a half inches in
depth.

Plate 16
SEVEN WELLS SITE
l. Shows where bison ascended sandstone ledge from
water hole.
2. Shows individual bison tracks in foreground and trench
full of tracks in background.
3. Shows five distinct tracks where trail crosses convex
stone in path.
4. Shows tracks where the bison ascended a steep ledge
and in lifting their hoofs up from one track to the other,
their cloven hoofs cut twin grooves in the stone.
5. One of the five tracks on the convex stone.

Recently Mr. W. J. Van London stated
that he believed that he had found three
other oval mortar hole sites of the same
type in the same County. While on the way
to these three sites yet another oval mortar
hole site was found by the writer and Mr.
Van London on two low sandstone ledges
just above Champion Creek, situated on
each side of a dirt road which parallels the
Bankhead Highway a mile south and three
miles west of Loraine, Texas. On the north
side of the road two oval mortar holes were
visible on the exposed pert of a ledge which
was mostly covered with soil and it is
probable that more holes are covered up
there. Across the creek on the south side
of the road is a ledge in which sixty-five
oval and five round mortar holes were
counted. Most of the oval mortar holes in
this site were eroded badly and exhibited
indications of extreme age and erosion
similar to those of the Douthit Ranch. A
new feature was the presence of the five
round holes. It is probable that the round
holes are the work of people of a later
period as they are in a much better state of
preservation wherever found, than those of
oval type.
A peculiar thing noticed at this site was
that the edges of many of the eroded oval
mortar holes remained considerably higher
than the surrounding rock surfaces as

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
though the substance which had been ground in
them had gone into the walls of the holes and caused
them to become harder than the surrounding
sandstone so that the stone between them had
eroded more rapidly. A white substance still adhered
to the insides of some of the holes.
The Seven Wells Site
We then visited a site situated on Champion
Creek seven miles southeast of Colorado, Texas.
Here a smaller creek joins Champion Creek and
both have channels through steep vertical walls of
sandstone. In the stone bed of Champion Creek
there are several large deep well like holes from
which there is a spring flow of water in even the
dryest of seasons. The writer had often heard of
the existence of buffalo tracks or trails worn into
the solid rocks leading down to the water at this
place but was not prepared for the sight which
confronted him. It appears that there were three
places in the steep banks where the bison could go
down to water. Converging on these were five well
marked bison trails which evidently had been made
by thousands of buffaloes following each other in
single file down to water, each carefully stepping
into the others tracks.1 This had gone on throughout
ages of time until the hard stone was worn away by
the countless hoof beats into deep individual tracks
showing the shape of the buffaloes hoofs in the
rocks. Even the two parallel grooves worn in the
ends of the holes, as the cloven hoofs were
withdrawn from the holes, remain plainly showing.
In most places the stone has been worn down into
trenches or trails with the holes in the bottoms but
at one or two places there are rocks in the trail
which show no trenches but the tracks go across
these and connect at each end with the track filled
trenches. One of these stones with a raised slightly
convex sloping surface has five evenly spaced tracks
on it. These track holes are from six to eight inches
deep. No buffaloes have existed in the region since
the seventies, yet the foot track holes are as
symmetrical and rounded as though just made. One
of the track trails was sixty yards long, one was
forty yards, one was twenty-six, one fifteen, and
another ten yards long.

57

This must have been a place of considerable
interest to primitive man, there is a camp site on
the higher land above it which contains much flint
debris. Just below the Indian camp site and on a
slightly higher level of the ledge just east of the
animal track holes, are a large group of oval mortar
holes made in bed rock. At this and several other
smaller groups nearby, eighty-five oval, and three
round mortar holes were counted. At this site also
the oval mortar holes showed the same indications
of extreme age and erosion as those previously
reported. The three round holes at this place were
also in good condition. One peculiarity of the two
types of mortar holes noticed by the writer was
that he never has seen oval mortar holes except in
large groupings. On the contrary he never has seen
a group of round mortar holes exceeding seven in
number. The usual number is four or five and this is
true whether found alone or in association with a
large group of oval holes.
There not only were numerous mortar holes to
be found in the bed rock ledges at the Seven Wells
Site but also several typical portable shallow
sandstone slab metates of the type so common near
Abilene were seen in local collections. The manos
were also of similar forms. It is possible that this
form of portable milling stone represents a third
period of occupation by peoples using grinding tools
besides the round and boat shaped mortar hole
peoples. Where this phase comes in is not nearly so
evident as the relative ages of the two types of
mortar holes.
Colorado River Site
From this place we proceeded to a stone quarry
on top of a high hill above the Colorado River. This
is situated one half mile west of Colorado, Texas.
Here there was a smaller oval mortar hole site on
the ledge on top of the hill. The holes were on the
opposite side of the top of the hill from the River.
This seems peculiar when there were accessible
ledges on the River side of the hill top.
Many of the mortar holes at this place have been
destroyed by road building quarry operations but
some still remain.

58

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

This was evidently the grave of a recent Indian,
probably of the period of the last Indian occupation
Four miles west of Colorado, Texas, the paved of Texas. Its nearness to the mortar holes had no
highway crosses a small creek known as Morgan’s significance except that both were beside a water
Creek. The valley of this creek and the low hills hole which had attracted man throughout a long
near it on the north side of the road are strewn at period of time.
irregular intervals with very large abrupt sandstone
ledge outcrops which are usually slightly sloping
Mortar Hole Camp Site
or flat on top. Many of these ledges are covered
On the other side of the creek is a low rocky
with oval mortar holes. Quite a number were ridge which shows much flint chips and rotten
inspected and Mr. Van London stated that they were mussel shell fragments where gully erosion has
to be found for a considerable distance along this exposed the old land surface. This camp site yielded
creek. Just after crossing the bridge going west and few artifacts for two reasons. It has been hunted
ascending a little hill on the highway we stopped over by local arrow head collectors for a long time
and walked to the creek only a short distance below. and also for the reason that most of the camp site
Here were two large stone outcrops. The south surface is still covered with soil.
mass had many ancient oval mortar holes in the
However at this site some mano stones and one
middle of the top portion. Across the west and south
small
metate were found. The manos differ
edges and in rows across the center were some
deep, straight, round, bored holes of a diameter of somewhat from the flat type most commonly found
two and one-half to three inches. These holes were near Abilene in being more rounded and much
located about three feet apart and were a foot or thicker.
more deep. For what purpose they had been drilled
and at what time there was no indication. They may
Grooved Hammers Found
have been test holes made by early prospectors
One distinctive culture feature of the Colorado,
attracted by the mortar holes or may have been Texas, region is the presence of large quartzite
made to hold poles to support a brush arbor built grooved hammers. They were made from smooth
by Indians of the last century. It is unlikely that they water worn quartzite boulders in which a ring was
are very old.
pecked about the middle to fit a handle. Of only
Morgan’s Creek Site

Indian Grave
In the northwest wall of the sandstone mass lying
close by on the north, is an opening extending back
several feet which is about three feet high. In the
bottom of this Mr. Van London found about eight
inches of hard packed sand. On sifting it some very
small human bone fragments, and hundreds of small
blue and white glass beads of the size which modern
Indians used in decorating moccasins were found.
A few larger red, white and blue beads were found,
and a small round brass bell shaped like a sleigh
bell, a brass arrow head, and a smooth brass button
with the makers name in English printed on its back
were found.

four stone hammers in the two large Abilene
collections three were found close to Colorado,
Texas.
It is understood that such hammers are
frequently found in that region. In so far as the writer
knows none have ever been found within fifty miles
of Abilene despite its abundant camp sites at
different levels going back to a remote period. The
problem of what were used as pestles in the oval
mortar holes is yet unsolved, they may have been
made of wood.
Study of the associated artifacts and of the
territorial distribution of each type of mortar holes
should shed much light on the distribution of ancient
Texas cultures.

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
San Saba County Mortar Holes
On a trip with Mr. J. F. Morrison one hundred
and fifty miles southeast of Abilene four relatively
well preserved round mortar holes were found on
Mr. William Motes’ place located eleven miles north
of San Saba, Texas. These holes were in a flat ledge
of limestone in the bed of a small creek branch.
Immediately above them on a slight rise of ground
was a typical Texas burnt rock mound thirty-five
feet across.
On a later trip to the place with Mr. Henry Dixon
a hole was dug in the center down to the original
white lime soil. The mound was forty inches thick
and contained small burnt lime stones, much
powdery coal black earth and occasional mussel
shells. No artifacts and few flint flakes were found.
Whether it was built by the round mortar hole
people or not cannot yet be determined but the
evidence is suggestive. On another similar ledge
located about a hundred yards farther up the Creek
are the remaining bottoms of two typical boatshaped mortar holes. What is left of these holes are
now only one and three-fourths inches deep. If these
holes were originally fifteen to seventeen inches
deep like some well protected holes on the Douthit
Ranch it must have taken a tremendous lapse of
time for the infrequent flow of water of this usually
dry creek branch to have worn the whole surface
of this hard limestone ledge down to that extent.

59

top and tubular on cross section. The average hole
is ten or twelve inches deep and seven or eight
inches in diameter at the top.
At Paint Rock, Texas, situated seventy miles
south of Abilene and in the burnt rock mound area,
are four round mortar holes located on a ledge of
rock on the west side of the north end of the River
bridge. Near Paint Rock is a notable collection of
Indian rock paintings which press reports say are
soon to be destroyed.
It is a sad commentary on our state of culture
when prehistoric remains of such great scientific
value are permitted to be destroyed in quarry
operations when usually such regions are full of
unpainted limestone of no scientific value. It is
probable that some of the paintings at Paint Rock
are rather ancient. A gully immediately below them
has exposed hearths fifty-three inches below the
surface.

Round mortar holes have been reported from
the Alpine region hundreds of miles southwest of
Abilene by both Mr. Victor J. Smith and Mr. Henry
J. Fletcher. Mortar holes of undetermined type have
been reported from the Pecos River region. Dr. J.
Alden Mason stated to the writer that he had
observed some oval type mortar holes in New
Mexico near a shelter. Mr. E. B. Sayles has reported
oval mortar holes on Mulberry Creek south of
Merkel, Texas, on Oak Creek in Coke County near
a rock shelter, and near Breckenridge, Texas, and
Mortar Holes Widely Distributed in Texas
round holes south of Merkel in Taylor County. Oval
On a ledge of limestone in the edge of Christoval,
mortar holes have also been reported from near
Texas, which is situated in the burnt rock mound
Stephenville, Texas.
area one hundred and twenty miles southwest of
Abilene, is another group containing seven well
preserved round mortar holes. This type of mortar
1. Natives of the region state that a few old men still living in
hole is usually perfectly circular in outline at the the region shot bison in these trails in the 1860’s and 70’s.

