50

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

ARCHAEOLOGICAL REMAINS IN THE BLACK
AND GRAND PRAIRIES OF TEXAS
BY FRANK BRYAN
bed of soft marl of Cretaceous age. This marl is so
soft and exfoliable that it actually disintegrates faster
where unprotected by soil than even sandy soil
erodes away. Even in still water it goes into a
suspended solution. That feature of the subterranean
strata has also worked against the accumulation of
any large amount of prehistoric camp debris in one
spot. The marl, which is some three thousand feet
With such a history, one can but wonder what
thick and tilted toward the southeast at a low angle,
the prehistory was. Of all the great area of the North
is not all of even hardness. Interstratified through it
American continent, no one section combined more
from top to bottom are numerous thin layers of chalk
natural features favorable to aboriginal man. The
and sandstone which are comparatively hard. The
winters were mild and the summers not overly hot.
streams in cutting down through the marls, (and they
Alive with buffalo and small game and broken at
are cutting down at a remarkably fast rate on account
regular intervals by well watered streams, lined
of the country as a whole being rapidly lifted up by
with heavy timber that furnished ample protection
some great pressure from below,) strike those hard
from the occasional storms of winter and the hot
layers. Here the drainage courses find the cutting
noon day sun of summer, those prairies offered all
vertically, much harder than horizontally. So the
that aboriginal man must have desired.
hard layers are used as tilted floors to work on and
But here the abundance of natural advantages the marl beds ahead on the down dip side are
worked against the development of any spectacular undercut. This the streams find so easy that they
remains of prehistoric man. The flimsiest of shelters keep steadily on the down dip side of their flat
was all that was necessary in the way of housing. bottoms. And here on their flood plains are dumped
Game was so plentiful that any kind of a permanent the sand and gravel debris that is brought down
dwelling place was a liability in that the game would during high water periods.
soon learn to avoid it. Any place in the shady
This tendency of the streams of riding a hard
bottoms of the streams was a suitable camp site.
ledge down dip, leaves its mark on the topography.
Even today no peoples of equal culture elsewhere
With the flood water debris dumped on the up dip
live in such temporary abodes as do those of the
side and a clean marl bank ahead to work on, a file
plains.
tooth profile remains. The long north and south
With the very nature of the country breeding a ridges have steep west faces and long gentle slopes
free and easy existence it is to be expected that the that dip to the east at about the angle of dip. The
remains of the prehistoric peoples would be freely lower portions of the slopes are smeared over with
distributed, and that those remains would, at first a feather edge of the sand and gravel debris that
glance, appear to be insignificant. But the more the trail behind the bottoms.
prairies are searched and the finds classified, the
Since the best location for a camp is in the
more significant they become.
bottom on the up dip side of the stream, a good
To properly interpret the remains of prehistoric shady camp site on the bank of a stream today will
man, as found on the Black and Grand Prairies of be across the bottom at a later period. Some time
Texas, it is necessary to get a clear picture of the later it will be hanging precariously to the side of
origin of the prairies themselves and examine into the hill, and still later, the sand and gravel will
the changes that time has made in them. These have washed off, leaving the site exposed.
Prairies derive their black waxy gumbo soil from a
In modern times no portion of Texas has played
a more important part in history than the Black and
Grand Prairies. No section has been so sought after
nor has any other been under more flags. Fought for
by the French, Spanish, and Indians, it has been in
turn owned by Spain, Mexico, Republic of Texas,
and the United States.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
On the prairies, prehistoric man was wont to
shift his camp with the stream. Thus he has left his
history strewn out all along the long gentle dipslope hills instead of in neat, well stratified middens
as he did not far away in the limestone country to
the west and southwest.

51

In those middens the oldest cultures are found in
the lowest levels. The accumulation of camp debris
has been confined to a very limited area, instead of
back farthest from the streams as is the case on the
prairies. In the middens all of the bones and other
perishable material has been preserved as the
deposits have not been
torn into by the agencies
of erosion. On the
prairies, once a camp site
has been left a few
hundred yards in the rear
by a nomadic stream,
erosion sets in and all of
the sand and gravel is
cleaned off the site, taking
with them bone fragments
and other readily
disintegrating material.
Only those artifacts made
of indestructible materials
withstand those assaults.
Even the hard sandstones,
from which metates are
usually made, become so
soft as to crumble in the
fingers.

Plate 24.
BLACKLAND BELT ARTIFACTS
1 to 5 inclusive. Sand dune types
6 to 14. Types found only with pottery.

There are those who
argue that the somewhat
insignificant prairie sites
are nothing more than
small summer hunting
sites; that early man, in
these parts, made his
permanent home around
the large springs of the
Balcones fault zone. Here
the middens of camp
debris, mingled in a
number of instances with
a large amount of talus
from the adjacent steep
hill sides, measure up to
close to ten feet thick.
With their hundreds of
tons of waste and their, no
doubt, great antiquity,

52

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

those middens are apt to give a false impression as
to where ancient man preferred to live. There are
comparatively few of them when figured on a square
mile basis and the material in them has been
transported only a few hundred yards. Hence the
amount of waste, is in proportion, much higher than
on the prairies where every stone had to be
transported over a hundred miles, at least, and
probably over two hundred miles as a whole, as
the great bulk of it came from the Ouachita
mountains of southeastern Oklahoma and western
Arkansas. With few exceptions, the mano stones
are of Arkansas novacolite which outcrops in a very
limited area just south of Fort Smith, Arkansas.
There is on the prairies hardly an acre of ground
that does not have a few pieces of that stone or
some fragments of imported flint on it. Every stream,
including the smallest drains, has been lived on
continuously from one end to the other. In tons of
imported and worked material the prairies, as a
whole, probably, on a square mile basis, exceed
the fault zone country by ten to one.

There are certain shapes that cling to the streams
and some that cling close to the tops of the hills.
Then a great intermediate class are apt to be found
almost anywhere but usually clinging pretty close
to the edges of the bottoms; where they are washed
down with the sand and gravel terrace debris as it
follows the stream’s down dip.
Roughly the artifacts can be easily separated into
three general classes, high, low, and intermediate;
based on elevation above the beds of the streams.
Of these three general classes there are, of course,
numerous minor classes. The low, artifact found
right in the flood plains of the streams, are readily
divided into two general classes, those found
associated with pot sherds (Plate 24, Figures 6 to
14), and those not associated with sherds.

The pot makers, and those using polished stones
(celts of a dark serpentine are the only polished
stone implements so far found), were among the
last of the aborigines to live on the prairies as their
camp sites are always on sand flats where the
topography has altered little since they left. Their
From a point of security, the prairies had all the
camp sites are somewhat larger than the average
advantages as there is no cover as safe as open
and it is possible that they cultivated some land as
cover. On them the chances of being ambushed, the their camps are always on sites well selected for
favored tactics of aboriginal war, were negligible. that purpose. Several different types of sherds are
In the limestone hill country the midden sites were found.
comparatively easily surrounded. As a hunting
The flint work of the pot makers is of the highest
ground in both summer and winter the advantage
type,
and practically all show pressure flaking.
was all with the prairies.
They were, however, either immediately preceded
That the prairies were inhabited continuously or followed by some of the crudest inhabitants of
over a long period of time is evident by the
the prairies–a people so crude as to have no skilled
enormous amount of material that is found
workmen among them and evidently so unreliable
everywhere. Not only is the volume large but the
that they had no commercial intercourse with other
range in type and kind is large. Of arrowheads alone
parts, where high grade flint was to be had. They
there are twenty three distinct classes, that range in
depended entirely upon local gravel deposits for
age from heads of black flint so fresh as to not have
their material and broke crude heads of a simple
the first mottled specks of patina on them to heads
thick shape out of pebbles and small boulders taken
of the same black flint so old that they have a rind
from that gravel. Their crude heads are found in all
of white patina over a sixteenth of an inch thick.
of the lower sites. When found in sites which contain
There is a definite tendency for the color of the
no other heads show them to have been a people
flints found to change as the distance from the
who traveled in small bands as those sites are rarely
streams increases. The unaltered ones being almost
more than a couple of rods across and sparsely
universally found in sites below the present flood
covered with broken pebbles and crude quartzite
water levels. Not only does the color change with
knives and projectile points.
distance from the stream but the shape also changes.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society
The highest and older cultures can be separated,
geologically, from the intermingled intermediate
zone by a general terrace level, caused by a pause
in the uplifting of the country as a whole. This pause
lasted long enough for the streams to be forced to

53

stop cutting downward and spread out laterally
forming flood plains somewhere close to five times
as wide as their present flood plain levels. Since
that pause the country as a whole has been lifted up
about fifty feet and the evidence of that pause is
still plainly seen in the even
height of the general sand and
gravel terrace level.
For convenience the artifacts
found in that general terrace level
will be called “sand hill types”
as the terrace level is pretty
generally marked by barren sand
hills (Plate 24, Figures 1 to 5).
Once the land on them was
cleared and put under the plow the
wind erosion began and in places,
where old stumps and such have
been left as markers, the top four
to six feet has already blown off.
The artifacts, being too heavy to
be moved by the wind, have
settled down and now on the
surface there is concentrated in a
few inches in depth all the flints
that were in the four to six feet
that has blown off.

Plate 25.
BLACKLAND BELT ARTIFACTS.
From intermediate and lower sites, with no pottery.

Peculiar to the sand hills are
five projectile point shapes, found
there and nowhere else. They are
a quartzite bobbin (Quartzite
pebbles ground down and notched
on both ends; some being finely
balanced in shape but the great
majority being very crude; some
having no work done on them
other than the fine grooves cut into
their ends.) None of the ordinary
end scrapers are found in the sand
hills but, instead, the scrapers are
made by sharpening the thin edges
of the flakes in a straight line,
whereas the ordinary keel backed
end scrapers, common to the
lower levels, have the thick end
of the flake finished in a
semicircular shape.

54

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

It is on the sand hills that the highly patinated
specimens are found, some arrowheads being
altered to a depth of more than a sixteenth of an
inch. Since none of the artifacts have been found
actually in place in the terrace deposits, which are
immediately post glacial in age, the question as to
whether they belong to the age of the terrace is
unanswered. The evidence points that way.
Back above the sand hill level are found
occasional remnants of an even older terrace, that
stands close to one hundred and fifty feet above the
beds of the streams. In the remnants of that terrace
only four artifacts have been found. They are all of
about the same size and shape and are, in fact,
nothing more than sharpened stones, remarkably
similar in size and shape to the European “Coupde-pong.” Their age is also an open question.
In addition to these two terrace levels, and of
probably even greater importance as to the antiquity
of man on the American continent, is a thick deposit
of Quatenary sands and gravels in northern
McLennan County. At present there is a thickness
of some two hundred feet of that deposit exposed
in an area where it has been faulted down next to
cretaceous beds. In it are found, in place, numerous
flints that with little imagination can be said to have
been artificially shaped. That phase, of all so far
found, is open to doubt, and until unquestionable
shapes are found nothing will be proved. The finding
of artifacts in those deposits would put the age of
man on this continent back into preglacial times
and, for that reason, they justify a close searching.

In conclusion the Black and Grand prairies
contain gravel deposits which may contain evidence
of first importance as to the age of man on the North
American continent. They are strewn with all the
implements common to stone age man the world
over, some of great antiquity as measured by
patination; they contain polished stone implements;
and several ages of pot makers made their homes
upon them. One image, typically Mayan, has been
found close to McGregor in McLennan County and
on White Rock creek in northern McLennan County
is an old crucible shaped lime kiln that, from the
size of the trees in it and the absence of local history,
is at least Spanish if not Mayan, it is said to be
typical in shape to both. Thus with all ages of
American man present on the prairies for a day, as
it were, and each leaving his mark, the prairies have
a brief of his history in stone—a history that can be
written once all the facts are known and properly
correlated and interpreted.
This writer has covered some sixteen hundred
square miles of the prairies in close detail in the
course of geological field work and in an effort to
interpret the story told by the thousands of artifacts
that have come under foot has made a special map
for that purpose, a map barren of all confusing lines
except roads and streams for location. On it the
exact spot that each artifact is found is recorded. It
is from that map, as it stands today in its partially
finished state, that the ideas herein expressed are
drawn. There is much yet to be learned; and many
wrong conclusions will probably be drawn; so that
the keeping of a collection in a well organized
workable condition remains of first importance.

