66

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

A “PERPETUAL FIRE” SITE
BY A. T. JACKSON
The A. C. Saunders site is located near the
western edge of the East Texas “redlands.” It is
one-half mile west of the Neches River, three and
one-half east of Frankston, and 25 miles northeast
of Palestine, Anderson County. The region is
timbered with pine, oaks, gums and smaller trees.
Wild berries and fruits abound. There are numerous
small spring-fed streams emptying into the muddy
water of the Neches. A permanent spring is about
one-fourth mile from the site.
At this place are found an ash mound, a large
housesite—outlined by postholes—and a dense
midden deposit.

refuse as to create a problem. On the other hand,
work in the midden deposit was so productive and
representative of the culture complex of the area
as to make desirable the excavation of the entire
midden.
Thus, after a lapse of four years, the work was
resumed. From October 1 to 10, 1935, the midden
was completely excavated, a second trench dug into
the ash mound and additional work done in an effort
to locate the cemetery.
Ash Heap

In an attempt to discover of what use, if any, the
The ash mound is 7 feet high and its diameter ash mound was, 2,500 cubic feet of hard-packed
varies from 120 to 150 feet. The midden heap is 2 ashes were moved. The net result of all this pick1/2 feet in height and from 50 to 60 feet in diameter. and-shovel work was mostly negative. Only about
(See contour map). It is of particular interest not a dozen small fragments of pottery, and even fewer
only on account of being one of the largest of its splinters of animal bones were found. A typical
kind in East Texas, but also because we here find cross-section near the center of the mound showed
archeology dovetailing with historical records. The the following:
archeological record seems to indicate that the
1”-8”—Sandy loam, top soil. Contained one
occupancy of the site was confined to the prehistoric
potsherd.
period. Yet many of the findings coincide with facts
9”-20”—Red sand intermixed with red clay,
noted by early Spanish writers.
some charcoal and a small amount of ashes. No
For these reasons, I shall first give an account
bones or sherds.
of the exploration of the site, calling attention to
21”-26”—White ash, containing a few lumps of
similarities with other regions; and follow with
certain historical references that tend to throw light charcoal and red clay. No bones or sherds.
on the problem.
27”-62”—Brownish-black ash containing much
Mr. Saunders very kindly granted full permission hard-packed red sand that has the appearance of
for the University of Texas to excavate the site and clay. A potsherd and piece of split animal bone were
extended many courtesies to the workmen while found near the top of the stratum.
they were on his place. His co-operation is greatly
63”-80”— Undisturbed red sand.
appreciated.
81”—Undisturbed red clay.
The first work, in the nature of a preliminary
The edges of the mound, for about 15 feet
test, was done on October 23 to 25, 1931. Four
men were employed digging a trench in the ash inward, contained no ashes. The actual diameter of
mound, another in the midden deposit, and testing the ash heap was, therefore, from 90 to 120 feet.
for a cemetery. The test work in the ash mound
The man-made mound or ash heap was started
disclosed so little in the way of artifacts and camp
on a two-foot elevation or natural knoll. The finding

A “Perpetual Fire” Site
of so few sherds and bones would seem to show
that it was not used for domiciliary purposes, and
that the ashes came from fires located elsewhere.
The small amount of midden material could have
found its way into the mound along with the ashes
when conveyed to the dump.
The stratum of mixed earth overlaying the ash
indicates that, after ashes ceased to be dumped
there, the later occupants added a layer of earth;
but still did not live on the mound. The work so far
has brought to light no evidence of human burials.
Additional work needs to be done in this and other
ash heaps of the region.

67

midden deposit at the eastern edge was only six
inches deep, but gradually increased to an average
depth of 24 inches. The greatest depth—exclusive
of fire pits and postholes—was 31 inches, reached
at 20 feet inward.
For the first twenty feet increasing numbers of
potsherds, animal bones and mussel shells were
uncovered. Intermixed with the midden materials
were numerous whole and fragmentary artifacts.
This made it necessary that most of the work be
done with small pointing trowels.

There being no easily recognized levels, the
returns were arbitrarily kept separate by ten-inch
layers. These, designated as top, middle and bottom
Returns from the Midden Deposit
levels, served as a basis by which to determine
It was in the midden deposit, 125 feet south of differences—if any—in cultural traits of the
the ash mound, that quantities of interesting inhabitants in the various periods. Several things
materials and information were unearthed. The worthy of mention came to light.
refuse heap had an average diameter of 53 feet.
The discussion of pipes from this site, included
Excavation began at the extreme east edge, with a
in a previous article1 was based on the preliminary
55-foot north-south trench sunk to the unmoved
work done in 1931. The subsequent complete
red clay. The “broadcast” method was employed—
excavation materially altered some of the findings.
the entire area dug—working toward the west. The

PLATE 22.
Plan of the house ring, illustrating the spacings of the postholes, locations of fire pits, etc.

68

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
SUMMARY
Number of Sherds by Depths

Depth Range—Inches
1-10
11-20
21-30

NumberSherds
3,583
2,697
881
7,161

Percentage
50
38
12
100

Of 108 fragmentary pipes recovered from the
In one case the mouth and eyes were not shown;
midden, thirty per cent came from the upper, fifty in the others they were deeply gouged. Most of
from the middle and twenty from the bottom level— them had short necks. Long, sharp ears
in the middle (11 to 20 inches) were found as many predominated. The figures bore only a fair polish.
as in the other two combined.
All the animals are too highly conventionalized
Another interesting feature concerning the pipes to permit of definite identification. Some, however,
is that, with a single exception, all those bearing suggest the dog or wolf.
punctate decoration were from the upper ten inches.
Bird effigies were twice as numerous in the
The exception came from a depth of 13 inches,
middle as in the bottom and four times as plentiful
bearing punctate decoration on one side of the stem
as in the top level. Most of them are highly
and four concentric incised circles on the other. This
conventionalized, but some seem to represent the
distinctive form of decoration on pipes thus seems
duck.
to be comparatively recent.
Pedestal vases, on the other hand, were twice
Many of the pipes from the middle level had
as abundant in the last period of occupancy as in
deeply incised, carved and grooved, or trailed lines
the one just preceding, and were not found in the
around the outer ends of the stems and the lower
bottom level. The twelve fragmentary pieces came
back portions of the bowls. Most of the pipes from
from depths of 5 to 19 inches. The fragments are
the bottom level show lack of decoration of any
identical with whole vessels found in nearby graves.
kind. Two large, long, plain stems, from depths of
27 and 30 inches, are much like some from the T.
One small bowl, in perfect condition, was
M. Sanders site, Lamar County, Texas. It is worth discovered at a depth of 11 inches. It was with no
noting that the shapes of most of the pipes—conical other artifacts and is one of the very few whole
bowls with large stems—remain much the same vessels found in East Texas not with a grave. The
from the surface down to the deepest finds. The bowl is 2 inches tall and 3 3-16 inches in diameter.
deepest one—from 47 inches in a fire pit— is of
At a depth of 10 inches were uncovered the
the same shape and as well made as those in the
fragments of two large pots. The pieces were spread
top layer.
over an area 30 x 26 inches. One of the pots bore
Modeled animal effigies—broken from vessels— nodes around the rim.
were about evenly distributed from the top down
About 600 pounds of potsherds were found in
to a depth of 25 inches. This agrees with nearby
the midden. Fifty percent came from the upper, 38
finds of effigy bowls in old graves as well as in some
per cent from the middle and 12 percent from the
where the skeletal material was in a good state of
bottom level. The sherds showed fewer types of
preservation. From these facts one might conclude
design elements as one went downward. Red and
that the placing of animal effigies on the rims of
yellow slips and paint rubbed into the incised designs
bowls was started at an early date and continued
were found in small numbers in the upper level, but
until the abandonment of the site.

A “Perpetual Fire” Site
were not found at lower depths. Only one sherd
with white paint in the incisions was found. It came
from a depth of three inches. This scarcity of white
paint in prehistoric sites has been noted in various
cemeteries in the vicinity.2
The sherds show what appears to be shell and
sand tempering material. The question of whether
this is shell or other calcareous material has not
been definitely settled.
In addition to the ware common to the region,
there were a number of sherds of foreign or aberrant
types. These included corrugated and deeply ridged
ware, large nodular lines, and a rim bearing square
notches. The latter type of decoration may be merely
a variation of the more common form of saw-tooth
or triangular-notched edge. It, however, seems
worth noting that the square and rectangular
notched edges of certain sherds from Texas coastal
campsites3 bear a close resemblance in technique
to this one from Anderson County.

69

that no large vessels are found in graves of the
region. A question accordingly is raised as to
whether there was an Asinai taboo against placing
very large pots in their graves. (Among the Caddo
large pots are common in graves). The large handles
were evenly divided between the upper and middle,
but scarce in the lower, levels. The large knobs or
“lugs” were almost twice as plentiful in the middle
as in the other two levels combined. The
percentages of the large handles and knobs from
the various depths are as follows:

Types
Handles
Knobs

Percentages from Depths Shown
0-10”
11”-20” 21”-30”
42
42
16
21
64
15

Both the handles and long hand grips were
attached vertically, with the upper ends very near
the edges of the vessels. Many of them bear punctate
and gouged decorations. A few show fingernail
Another interesting feature was the finding of indentations. The lengths of the handles vary from
123 pot handles and knobs. Many of them are 1 1-2 to 3 1-2 and the width from 1 to 2 inches.
massive, the sherds showing they were from large, The long hand grips range from 1 to 3 inches in
thick pots. This is in striking contrast to the fact length, with widths of one-half to 1 1-2 inches.
TYPES OF POTTERY DESIGNS BY DEPTHS

0-10”
Types of Designs
No. %
Brushed or Combed --------------- 2141 .597
Incised and Engraved -------------- 366 .102
Fingernail Impressions and Gouges 95 .206
Corrugated or Coiled ---------------- 41 .012
Red paint in incisions ---------------- 37 .011
White paint in incisions --------------- 1 .—
Red slip -------------------------------- 10 .003
Raised or Applique -------------------- 3 .001
Punctate ------------------------------- 12 .004
Grooved or Trailed -------------------- 4 .001
Plain (Undecorated)---------------- 757 .210
Brushed—Incised -------------------- 40 .012
Brushed—Gouged ------------------- 73 .020
Punctate—Incised --------------------- 3 .001
3583 100

SHERDS BY DEPTHS
11”-20”
21”-30”
No. %
No. %
1532 .571
537 .610
302 .112
88 .100
124 .046
41 .047
19 .007
7 .008
31 .011
2 .002
.— .—
.— .—
.— .—
.— .—
11 .004
2.002
5 .001
1 .001
5 .001
1 .001
628 .232
186 .211
8 .003
3 .003
32 .012
12 .014
.— .—
1 .001
2697 100
881 100

TOTAL
No.
4210
756
260
67
70
1
10
16
18
10
1571
51
117
4
7161

%
.588
.106
.036
.009
.010
.—
.001
.002
.003
.001
.219
.007
.017
.001
100

70

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

These handles and knobs are, on the whole, larger sherds, show that the coil method of pot-making
than those found in Northeast Texas in the so-called was employed.
Caddo territory.
Only eighteen flint artifacts were found in the
Of twenty-one perforated sherd discs, five were camp refuse. Fourteen of these were arrowpoints
whole and sixteen broken. The diameters of the of the typical small, tanged type common in Asinai
discs range from 1 1-4 to 3 1-2 inches. The graves. The arrowpoints were found at depths
percentages from the various depths were as ranging from 2 to 48 inches. Half of them, however,
came from the bottom, with one-fourth each from
follows:
the other levels. They varied in length from 5-8 to
11-4 inches, and in maximum width from 1-2 to
Depth
Percentage
13-16 inch. They were fairly well made and bore
Surface
14
sharp points; but they did not exhibit the splendid
1”-10”
22
workmanship, extreme thinness and needle-like
11”-20”
50
points typical of Caddo burial points.
21”-27”
14
No large projectile points came from the midden
deposit, although twelve such were picked up on
Exactly half of them came from depths of 8 to the surface adjacent to the housesite. A few small
16 inches.
arrowpoints and a flint drill also came from the
Fragments of two clay coils, from depths of 8 surface. Most of the few scraping implements were
and 14 inches, together with a number of corrugated of the side-scraper type. They were found in all
levels.

PLATE 23.
1. Uncovering the house ring. It was not difficult to follow the line of postholes.
2. Postholes exposed in one section of the house ring, looking toward the east. Note the
variations in spacings and sizes of the holes.

A “Perpetual Fire” Site

71

A type of bone implement peculiar to this region
came almost exclusively from depths of 10 to 14
inches. It is of the general class commonly called a
flaking implement, but is differentiated by a beveled,
screwdriver-like end. The edges appear to have been
ground fairly sharp and show little evidence of wear.
One is thus caused to wonder whether it was used
for flaking arrowpoints or for some other use—
perhaps as an incising tool for decorating pottery.
The flakers of the round-end type, on the other
hand, are much worn and bear scratches and cuts.
Of 58 bone flaking implements, 26 were from
the upper, 27 from the middle and five from the
bottom level. More than half of them were from
depths of 9 to 14 inches. This is surprising in view
of the facts stated above concerning the depths of
the arrowpoints.
Half of the used antler came from the upper level;
with the remaining half divided about equally
between the other levels.
Twenty bone awls came from the midden. Six
were from the upper, eight from the middle and six
from the lower level. The awls were comparatively
crude, with the sharp end fairly well worked but
the remainder, in most cases, left in a rough state.
Most of them are of deer, a few of fish bones. These
partly worked awls are in striking contrast to the
well worked artifacts found in rockshelters in West
Texas.
Shell artifacts were scarce. A few mussel shells
(Unio sp.) were ground down to’ form so-called
spoons. Two—from depths of 8 and 12 inches—
were perforated, either for use as rattles or for
hafting. One showed use as a digging implement.
The ornaments included a small conch shell
pendant, a conch shell bead, three beads of bird
bones and one which probably is of antler. All these
came from the upper 12 inches.
The pendants’ measurements were 1 1-8 in. by
3-8 in. by 1-8 in.; and it had two drilled holes 1-8
inch in diameter, separated by a space of 1-16 inch
and 1-8 inch from one end. The edges were roughly
smoothed and, except for the perforations, the
workmanship was poor. It came from a depth of
only one inch.

PLATE 24.
1. Bone and antler artifacts. “A” may have
been used as a pestle or grinding
implement; B, C, and D, beads; E, F, and
G, awls; and H, an incomplete awl.
2. Bone flaking tool and probable pottery
incising implements. Specimen “A” has a
rounded end, while “B” and “C” have
beveled edges.
3. Shell artifacts from the midden. A is a
digging implement; B possibly strung as a
rattle; C, a so-called spoon.

72

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The conch shell bead, made from the columella
of the shell, was found at a depth of 11 inches. It
measured 2 3-4 inches long and 1-2 inch in diameter.
It bears a horizontal and a vertical hole. The
longitudinal hole was drilled from each end and has
a diameter of 1-4 inch. The hole drilled through the
side of the bead may have been for the purpose of
connecting the two ends of the long hole. The side
hole is 3-16 inch in diameter. The specimen shows
fair workmanship and is in an excellent state of
preservation.
The bone beads have lengths of 3 5-16 inch,
3 inch and 2 inch; diameters of 1-4 inch, 3-16 inch
and 3-8 inch. They were found at depths of 8 inch
and 12 inch. The ends of the two long beads have
been cut but none were smoothed.
The antler specimen has a maximum length of 4
1-8 inch, a minimum of 9-16 inch and a maximum
diameter of 3-4 inch. Each end bears a gouged-out
hollow 7-16 inch deep, from which runs a
longitudinal hole 1-8 inch in diameter. Around the
edge of the large end are a series of shallow notches.
The small end apparently was unfinished. Similar
antler specimens have been found in certain burntrock middens of Central and West Texas.
The following tabulation gives a list of specimens
found in the housesite and environs:
Summary of Finds
Types of Artifacts

Antler:
Flaking implements--------------------- 30
Picks (?) -----------------------------------4
Pestle---------------------------------------1
Bead----------------------------------------1

36

Bone:
Flaking implements--------------------- 58
Awls -------------------------------------- 20
Cut bones----------------------------------4
Beads --------------------------------------3
Gouge --------------------------------------1
Hog tusk awl ------------------------------1

87

Shell:
Mussel shell “spoons” -------------------9
Perforated mussel shells (hoes) ---------4
Mussel shell awl (?) ----------------------1
Conch shell pendant----------------------1
Conch shell bead -------------------------1

16

Total specimens --------------------------

Number
Specimens

Stone:
Flint and chert arrowpoints ----------- 24
Flint spearheads --------------------------4
Flint knives --------------------------------2
Flint side-scrapers ------------------------6
Flint end-scraper--------------------------1
Flint triangular scraper-------------------1
Flint awls and drills ----------------------3
Flint ax -------------------------------------1
Manos--------------------------------------5
Pitted stones ------------------------------5
Pottery smoothing pebbles -------------- 9

Earthenware:
Bowl, whole ------------------------------1
Pots, broken-------------------------------2
Discs, perforated ----------------------- 21
Pipes, fragmentary --------------------108
Pot handles and knobs ----------------123
Bases of pedestal jars (broken) ------- 12
Animal effigies (from vessels) -------- 10
Bird effigies (from vessels) --------------7
Coils (short pieces)-----------------------2 286

61

486

Included in some 400 pounds of bone and shell
were evidences of the following foods: Deer (more
abundant in the upper level, squirrel, rabbit,
opossum, raccoon; turkey, dove; mussel, snail
(few); fish—large and small; and a few tortoise.
No buffalo bones were found. No charred remains
of corn, beans or other vegetable foods were
discovered. In this connection it may be mentioned
that only five manos and no metates were found.
This, however, is not significant; early writers
mention the grinding of corn by the use of wooden
mortars and pestle.4-5-6

A “Perpetual Fire” Site
“Fire Temple”
One of the outstanding features of the place was
the housesite, outlined by postholes. Before the
digging had progressed very far several holes were
discovered. (See map No. 2). These first finds
appeared to be in no orderly arrangement. A few
broken animal bones and potsherds were removed
from the bottom of nearly every hole. Most of them
contained ashes and some charcoal. Some of the
holes were not vertical—as ordinarily would be
expected of postholes—but showed to have been
dug at an angle of fifty to sixty degrees. A little
farther on a series of holes with a gradual curve
came to light. When completely uncovered, the

73

latter proved to be almost a true circle. It had an
east-west diameter of 46 and a north-south diameter
of 43 1-2 feet. The narrow opening or doorway
was to the east. This latter fact corresponds with
Spanish accounts,7 that state:… “The Indians have
the doors of all their houses toward the east…”
The depths at which these postholes were found
ranged from 22 to 25 inches. There was no
intimation of a hole until the refuse was penetrated
to its bottom. The fact that all the holes were
overlaid with some two feet of undisturbed midden
material shows that they were dug before the camp
refuse accumulated. The holes were readily
discovered by the difference
in color of the fills. They had
been dug into solid red clay
and were in most cases filled
with a mixture of red sandy
soil, ashes and some charcoal.
While the surrounding clay
was extremely hard, the fill
was loose and easily removed
with the hand. This loose soil
probably accounts for the
finding at various depths—
particularly at the bottoms of
the holes— of a few
potsherds and broken animal
bones.
Rodents
had
numerous burrows in the
midden deposit and could
have been responsible for the
articles in the postholes.

PLATE 25.
1. Effigy bowl from a grave on Jim Alien farm, Cherokee County,
some ten miles from the A. C. Saunders site. Note the striking
resemblance to the fragmentary animal effigies pictured from the
latter place.
2. Tubular pipe of clay, showing side and end views.
3. A restored pipe of unusual effigy form. From the midden deposit.
Note the punctate decoration and the deeply incised lines about
the stem.
4. A pedestal vase from a burial on Mrs. J. M. Cook’s farm, about
five miles from A. C. Saunders site, where fragments of the same
type of vessel were found.

The holes outlining the
housesite were of various
sizes, depths and distances
apart. They had top diameters
ranging from 5 1-2 to 15, and
bottom diameters from 2 1-2
to 10 inches. The depths
varied from 6 1-2 to 30, with
an average of 17 inches. In a
number of cases there were
alternate large and small
holes. The large ones usually
were deeper. But even some

74

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Comparisons With Other Sites
of the small ones went to depths of more than two
No other site in East Texas exactly comparable
feet. The holes were separated by distances varying
from 2 to 52 inches—the latter being the eastern to this one has been explored by the University of
entrance or doorway. Most of them were from 3 to Texas. There are, however, two or three places
within a radius of fifteen miles that bear a close
22, with an average of 8 inches apart.
resemblance to the A. C. Saunders refuse heap. It
The circle was made up of 99 postholes. Three is the writer’s opinion that complete excavation of
additional holes were spaced in the east-west these might disclose additional house rings.
diameter. One of the latter was very near the exact
There also are several outstanding moundcenter of the house. It was 30 inches deep, had a
shaped
middens in the edge of the Caddo territory—
top of 12 and a bottom diameter of 10 inches.
where vessels of Asinai shapes have been found.
There was a considerable quantity of ashes One might find circular house foundations at these
intermixed with much of the camp refuse, both places. Further work needs to be done in this
inside and to the east of the house; also five fire connection.
pits or hearths that contained concentrated ash
The problem of the ash heaps does not appear
deposits. One of the hearths was located five feet
to
be easy of solution. Only one or two other
southwest of the central posthole; one outside and
15 feet southeast of the house; one to the northeast, mounds in the region that might be classed as such
in the line of postholes, was rectangular, 34 in. by are now known. They differ from the Saunders ash
21 in., with a depth of 12 in. It contained ashes, mound and are not connected with a circular midden
broken bones, sherds and charcoal. Another was heap, although there is a campsite nearby.
near the entrance, just inside the east wall. The latter,
On the Pace McDonald or Royal place on
the largest of the hearths, was somewhat irregular Mounds Prairie, some fifteen miles south of the
in shape but roughly 53 x 72 inches. It was 60 inches Saunders site, is a mound 191 x 123 x 10 feet. A
deep, filled with ashes intermixed with charcoal and test pit eight feet in diameter showed that the mound
an occasional lump of burnt clay. The clay showed is artificial. At a depth of 84 to 103 inches was a
no signs of reed or pole imprints. Numerous layer of ashes that contained charcoal, lumps of red
artifacts were found in, and immediately above, the clay and some sand. Beneath this was a stratum of
ashy deposit. A smaller number of specimens and sandy clay that contained a potsherd and a few
fragments of bone.
sherds came from the other hearths.
The question arises as to whether the two fire
pits located in and adjacent to the line of postholes
may have been used after the house was no longer
standing. The walls having been covered with grass
would seem to preclude the use of these hearths
while the house was standing.
The midden material was not evenly distributed
over the entire housesite. It was more plentiful just
outside to the east, and near the east and north sides
of the interior. It gradually decreased toward the
center as well as to the south and west. Around the
two latter sides was an almost barren area: where
the blackish-red midden soil contained less ashes,
charcoal; and fewer bones, shells, clay lumps,
potsherds and artifacts than any other part of the
house.

A small mound, 60 feet in diameter, located some
300 yards southeast of the large one, is made up
almost entirely of ashes. After penetrating six inches
of ash-laden surface soil, a deposit of about 95 per
cent pure ashes extended downward for 26 inches.
The ash was very loose. Intermixed with the ashes
were a few small lumps of red and yellow clay and
an occasional sand streak. There was no midden
material. Beneath the ash deposit was red clay.
On the northwest side of the small mound, a
cross section showed 6 inches of soil mixed with
ashes. From 7 to 22 inches was a stratum of hardpacked ashes, with occasional gravel and lumps of
red clay. No midden material. From 23 to 39 inches
were alternate strata of red and yellow clay and
sandy soil. Layers were irregular and merged in
spots.

A “Perpetual Fire” Site

75

at the original ground level—with a later mound
built on top. The others were in mound soil several
feet above the original earth level. The structures
he found were square, rectangular and oblong with
rounded corners. The largest was 30 x 30 feet. The
postholes were 4 to 5 inches in diameter, spaced 6
Postholes outlining housesites have been
to 18 inches apart and 12 to 20 inches in depth.
uncovered at three sites in Northeast Texas. These
Two entrances were to the southeast and one each
were in earthen mounds and were found at depths
to the east, west and southwest.
ranging from two to fourteen feet. No ash heaps
were found with the sites.
It will thus be seen that the Arkansas structures
bear a much closer resemblance to those in
Postholes were found near the base of a fifteenNortheast Texas than to the A. C. Saunders in East
foot mound on the George L. Keith place,8 Titus
Texas.
County, Texas. A wide trench, dug in 1934,
indicated that the mound was built on a shallow
In going farther afield for comparative data
midden deposit and added to from time to time. dealing with post” hole sites, there is the case of
The trench disclosed, in the black bottom stratum, House Ring No. 1 in Yazoo County, Mississippi,
a posthole-outlined semicircle with a radius of excavated by Henry B. Collins, Jr.11
fifteen feet. To the east and west of these holes
The latter place bears certain similarities to, as
were others in straight lines. Complete excavation
well as various differences from, the Saunders site.
of the mound probably would reveal a circular
These comparisons are brought out in the following
housesite and possibly show evidence of a larger
tabulation (located at end of article):
rectangular structure or enclosure. Except for the
seeming shape of the house and the fact that the
Historical Records
holes were in the bottom midden deposit, this partial
excavation furnishes no definite tie-up with the
So much for the archaeology. Now let us take a
look into the historical records describing Asinai
Anderson County situation.
sites such as this one. One learns about the house
At the T. M. Sanders site, Lamar County, Texas,
in which the so-called perpetual fire was kept, and
postholes were found outlining rectangular earth
various other details, from the account of Father
lodges. They were small, ranging in size from 8 x
Morfi as translated by F. C. Chabot:12
10 to 10 x 12 feet. A peculiar feature was that there
were no holes at one side—either the south or west.
“. . . Its construction does not differ from that
The entire side of the small structure would seem of the other houses of the community, except that
to have been used as a doorway. The holes were it is larger. ... In front of the bed there is located a
small, ranging from 2 1-2 to 4 inches in diameter. little square stool. ... On this stool it was customary
In depth they varied from 5 to 28 inches; in spacing to have tobacco, pipe and some feathers, little pots
from 9 to 50 inches apart. The fire pit was near the of clay—where they burned tobacco and grease.
middle of the structure, and contained some camp The sacred fire is in the middle of the temple, and
refuse. But the situation there is entirely different they always keep it burning with four very long,
from that in Anderson County.
thick and heavy logs, which they constantly attend,
arranging them in the direction of the four principal
Harrington10 reported a number of mounds in
winds; the little wood with which they light them
Southwestern Arkansas that contained postholes
they keep out of the house alongside the walls piled
and other remains of structures of the earth-lodge
in pyramids. . . . They exercise great care in taking
type. None, however, are comparable to that on
out of the temple the ashes of the sacred fire, which
the A. C. Saunders site. Of five sites where
they keep to make large mounds. When they
Harrington found postholes, only one had the holes
Further work may prove that these ash deposits
are of similar origin to that on the Saunders place.
The work probably will be barren insofar as returns
of artifacts are concerned. But it should be done
for the sake of the information to be secured.

76

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

celebrate the removal of the bones of their enemies,
killed in battle, they bury them in these ashes.

round, and has no windows, daylight entering
through the door only. ... In the middle of the house
is the fire, which is never extinguished by day or by
“. . . When they attain a victory over their
night, and over the door on the inner side there is a
enemies they bring to their country as many heads
little mound of pebbles very prettily arranged.
as they can as spoils, and hang them up together on
Ranged around one-half of the house, inside, are
a tree, until the time for their burial is determined.
ten beds, which consist of a rug made of reeds, laid
. . . As soon as day breaks, they all paint their heads
on four forked sticks. Over the rug they spread
and arms with earth, take the skulls to the fire temple
buffalo skins, on which they sleep. ... In the other
and in the ashes kept for this sole purpose they bury
half of the house, where there are no beds, there
them with many ridiculous (superstitious)
are some shelves about two varas (5 1/2 feet) high;
ceremonies. . . .
and on them are ranged large round baskets made
“An early fire temple, the house of the Governor of reeds (in which they keep their corn, nuts, acorns,
or Caddi of the Nabedache, was described by Father beans, etc.), a row of very large earthen pots . . .
Manzanet in 1690 as ‘built of stakes thatched over and six wooden mortars for pounding corn in rainy
with grass; it is about 20 varas (55 1/2 feet) high, is weather. . . .

PLATE 26.
1. Flaked artifacts from in and near the housesite. Specimens A to I are from the surface; others
from depths of 12 to 48 inches. All flint except E and G which are chert. Specimen C, 3 7/8 inches
long.
2. Perforated earthenware discs of problematical use. Various uses are attributed to them, ranging
from spindle whorls and shaft smoothers to hair ornaments. Many are found in camp refuse; but
none in a grave. In some cases the edges of the sherds have been smoothed.

A “Perpetual Fire” Site
“At the distance of a short gun shot from the
large temple, they construct two other little ones,
which they call the houses of the two Coninicis.
These, they say, are two children who were sent
from heaven by their Great Captain, to be consulted
when in doubt. . . .
“Casanas says the grand Xinesi deceived his
vassals by telling them that the two children . . .
came from the other side of heaven, that they ate
and drank, and that whenever he wanted to talk to
God, he did so through them. All the tribes were
called by the Xinesi to the house, where he kept
the two children . . . and a ceremony performed to
request favors of God. . . . Around the little box he
had placed some crumbs from the bread which the
Indians brought him as an offering. In the middle
of the box was a hole, into which tobacco was put.
The Xinesi told Casanas that the tobacco was for
the two children to smoke. . . .
“This great fire house ... is like the Metropoli of
the whole province; in addition to this one there is
a second at the Notches, and a third among the
Nacogdoches and Nasonis, to which fire was taken
from the first. Generally the Ainais and Netches
meet in the principal one; and the Nacogdoches and
Nasonis in the last. Both the former and the latter
fear that the fire will get angry with them; and to
satisfy it, they make offerings to it of their first corn,
tobacco, meat from the chase; and, in a word, all of
their crops. . . . When in need they always appeal
to the fire. . . .
“. . . . From this temple all the households of the
surrounding tribes kindled their fires, directly or
indirectly.” In 1710 Hidalgo13 wrote: “The fire the
Tejas Indians have in their houses was brought from
the house of their high priest. ... If the fire goes out
they start immediately for the house of the priest to
get new fire. It never goes out in the house of
sacrifice. . . .”

77

To Morfi’s statement that the construction of
the fire house did not differ from the other houses,
except that it was larger, Espinosa 15 adds the
following; “. . . . Their houses are built of wood
with very long, flexible laths. . . . They go the rounds
and leave at each ranch one of the little sticks, so
that he who receives it may take care to cut and
clean a lath and bring it and put it in the hole
designated for it. Another member of the household
is placed in charge of a sufficient number of men to
continue the work of lacing the laths together. These
thongs, made of the bark of a tree, are so strong
that they can not be broken between the hands,
however thin they may be. To the Indian women,
one or two from each house, is given the duty of
bringing a load of grass. This grass is coarser than
the largest wheat and is used to cover the whole
roof. ... At sunrise, upon the first call of the
messenger, each comes running with his lath on his
shoulder and puts it in the hole which he has
previously dug. The laths are placed in a circle and
in the middle they put up a very tall pole with knots
on it for climbing. Two Indians are placed oh top
on a cross made of two pieces of wood. Each
throws out a noose and seizes a lath by the top,
working in unison. They continue to tie them until
they have formed a figure like a half-orange. They
then cover the laths with heavy timbers, all working
at the same time; . . . each working upward upon
his own lath, they do not take more than an hour to
finish it from bottom to top. Others come in to
relieve them and cover the house with grass to a
thickness of three hand breadths. They work from
the bottom, exactly opposite to the way the
Spaniards thatch their houses. They work so
dexterously that a little after midday they are
finishing the hut, forming of carefully tied grass the
figure which their imagination suggests to them.
The building finished, they cut the middle post off
at the bottom and the building is thus left standing.
. . .”

Confirming the matter of the two children “sent
Regarding the ash mound Espinosa 16 also
from heaven,” another writer makes this
corroborates Morfi’s account: . . . “The ashes from
observation: “. . . . It was all a lie for no other
their fire continue to accumulate outside and when
purpose than to deceive his people in order that
they bring any bones of the enemy whom they have
they might bring him quantities of supplies.”14
killed, they bury them in the ashes…”

78

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

By way of setting forth the views of the Asinai
1—The historical records state that the skulls
Indians regarding the distinction between their of slain enemies were buried in the ash mound. The
sacred “perpetual fire” and the temporary or profane archaeological work thus far done in this particular
fire of others, Espinosa17 gives the following:
ash mound has revealed no skulls or other skeletal
remains.
. . . “They declare that our fire is different because
it is made with a rock and iron while that of the
2—History tells us that the “perpetual fire” was
Asinais is made with sticks rubbed one on another. kept in the center of the fire house or temple. It
. . . They were asked why they did not, like all the implies that there was fire in no other part of the
Indians at the missions of the Asinais and the building. Our field work has brought to light
Naichai, leave their houses during buffalo
time, when the Nazonis and
Nacogdoches all left? A fakir answered
that it was so the fire would not go out if
wood failed; that the Nazonis and
Nacogdoches had a different kind of fire,
which they made by rubbing two little
sticks together. In this way they could
leave their fire hanging up in their houses,
while the Asinais and Naichas had fire
from their forefathers. The tradition is still
preserved.”
For the sake of better orientation, it
may be well to state that the “fire temple”
described above was located near the
junction of San Pedro Creek and Neches
River, in what is now the northeast edge
of Houston County. The mission at that
place was founded in 1690. The ash
mound in Anderson County, described in
the first part of this paper, is located some
35 miles up the Neches River from the
old San Francisco Mission. This distance
is about the same as that between the
above named mission and the one at
Nacogdoches, where was another fire
“temple.”
Merging of Archaeology and History
Now, let us take note of some of the
differences and similarities between the
archaeological finds in Anderson County
and the historical account in Houston
County. Among the differences are the
following:

PLATE 27.
1. Rim sherds illustrating various types of decoration.
2. Pot handles, illustrating the various sizes and forms used.
The handle on Specimen A is 2 ¼ , inches long and 1
1/2 inches wide. All the handles are decorated.

A “Perpetual Fire” Site

79

evidence of fire pits or hearths both near the center
4—It is mentioned that each workman dug one
and toward the eastern part of the house.
of the holes. This fact might easily account for the
great variation in sizes, shapes, depths and spacing
3—It is stated repeatedly that the houses were
of the postholes.
thatched with grass. But no charred grass,
recognizable as such, showed up in the excavation
5—The term “laths put in holes” refers, of
of this site.
course, to the tall uprights, or posts, sunk in the
postholes.
4—No mention was made of interior holes
except at the center. We found two other holes in a
6—The records show that the doors were
line with the central one.
toward the east. The archaeological find verified
this fact.
5—The early writers say that in the fire house
were kept baskets containing corn, nuts, acorns and
7—The statement is made that a tall pole was
beans. Although such articles, in a charred placed in the center. We found a large central hole.
condition, have been found in certain other sites,
8—To one’s surprise, the records state that the
none was turned up here.
middle post— after having served in drawing in
6—The Spaniards assert that buffalo skins were the tops of the others—was cut off at the bottom.
used on the beds in the fire house. No buffalo bones We found considerable refuse above the central
were found in the midden deposit.
posthole. This might be considered as indicative of
the post having been cut off. But it must be noted
7—It was stated that two small houses were
that a similar condition prevailed above many of
erected about a gunshot away from the fire house.
the other holes. Hence it is not taken as conclusive
Postholes that may have been remains of such small
proof that the central pole in this case was cut off.
structures were uncovered much less than a gunshot
away. These, however, may have served other
9—It is said that there was a small pile of pebbles
purposes—such as housing the supply of small over the inside of the door. A number of small,
wood.
smooth pebbles were found in the refuse just inside
the doorway.
Among the outstanding similarities between the
historical records and the present archaeological
10—Large pots were kept on a shelf. Two large
finds are the following:
pots were found crushed, and in the approximate
position ascribed to the shelf.
1—The historians state that the ashes were
carefully removed from the fire “temple,” and
11—Ten beds were ranged around one-half of
deposited nearby to form a large mound. At the the house. We found a decided lack of camp refuse
site under discussion there is such an ash mound around the west and south part of the housesite.
located very near the large housesite.
This suggests the locations of beds.
2—We are told that the fire house was circular
12—It is declared that the Indians made offerings
and larger than the other buildings. Postholes to the fire. We found considerable midden material
outlining a large circular house were uncovered; and a number of artifacts in the ashes of the fire
but no others found.
pits. Some of these may have been sacrificial.
3—The records are to the effect that the fire
13—The Indians brought quantities of supplies
house was about 20 varas (55 ½ feet) high. to die keeper of the perpetual fire. The great
Although the height may have been overstated, the abundance of camp refuse in such a small area might
sizes and depths of the postholes would bespeak easily have resulted from such a practice.
the use of long poles.
14—Tobacco was offered to the keeper of the
fire and to the sacred children. Tobacco and a pipe

80

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
were always kept on a certain stool in the fire
house. This may offer an explanation for the
finding in the midden of an unusually large
number of broken pipes.
15—Surrounding tribes came for fire. This
doubtless resulted in the bringing of offerings of
effigy vessels and other unusual, highly prized
articles for the keeper of the fire. That might
help to account for numerous specimens found.
16—The early writers speak of an enemy tribe
burning a fire house in 1714. Such a thing also
might have occurred in prehistoric times. Some
evidence was found indicating that the posts of
this house burned.
17—They did not go on buffalo hunts like
the other Indians, because the perpetual fire
would go out. This may account for the lack of
buffalo bones in the midden deposit.
18—There were only three “fire houses” in
the Asinai territory in the early historic period.
Their wide separation, if a similar situation
prevailed in prehistoric times, might explain why
there is no comparable site in the near vicinity
under discussion. But one cannot be certain
about the latter until more work has been done
in the region.
Conclusion
From the foregoing it would seem that:
1—This site may be the former location of a
fire house and ash mound such as described by
early Spanish writers.

PLATE 28.
1. Fragments of earthenware pipes: (a), top;
(b), middle; (c), bottom level. Specimens
from the top bear punctate decoration;
trailed or grooved lines on those from the
middle; and undecorated ones from the
bottom level.
2. Pot knobs or “lugs” on sherds from midden
deposit. Those illustrated by A and D are most
common at this site.

2—Differences between certain details of the
historical accounts and the archaeological finds
at this site might easily be due to either or both
of two causes: (a) Lack of thorough investigation
by early observers; and the omission by them of
what were considered irrelevant details; (b)
Differences due to local variations in customs of
the aborigines and to possible changes over a
long period of time—this site seeming to be
prehistoric.

A “Perpetual Fire” Site
3—The stratum of soil above the ashes in the
mound indicates that the keeping of the “perpetual
fire” and the dumping of the ashes onto the mound
ceased before the final abandonment of the site.
The mound apparently was not used for domiciliary
purposes.
4—The finding of numerous artifacts in the
midden deposit outside, to the east of the
house, inside near the entrance and in
gradually decreasing numbers toward the
west and south, indicate that the people lived
near the entrance and that the beds, described
by the Spanish writers, were “ranged around”
the west and south half of the interior.

81

10—The work furnishes a striking example of
how history may be used to supplement
archaeology. It also suggests that one should not
blindly accept all the details of history when
archaeological evidence does not agree.
—Department of Anthropology,
University of Texas, Austin, Texas.

5—There is no proof of more than one
culture; but indications of an increase in the
practice of the ceramic art and of certain
changes in the types of ware and design
elements. This is particularly noticeable when
comparing materials from the upper and
lower levels.
6—The arrowpoints are of the small
tanged type frequently found in the
prehistoric graves of this region. None of the
very thin, sharp-pointed, tangless points, such
as are common in Caddo graves, was found
here.
7—This was an important site occupied
over a long period of time.
8—There is some evidence to indicate that
the middle level represented the so-called
“golden age” of the inhabitants of this site.
There were greater numbers of pipes, bird
effigies, beveled bone implements, perforated
discs, in that level.
9—The similarity of this prehistoric site
to some among the historic Asinai as
described by early writers, is significant. This,
coupled with the finding of the same types
of pottery in both prehistoric and historic sites
of the region, suggests a long occupancy by
the same or a closely related people.

PLATE 29.
1. Heads of animal effigies, broken from vessels,
and fragments of the bases showing where the
legs were attached.
2. Potsherds illustrating some of the various types
of decoration common in the camp refuse.
Specimen D illustrates the typical scratched or
combed ware from this site.

82

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Comparisons Between the Texas and Mississippi Sites

Features Compared

Anderson County, Texas

Yazoo County, Miss.

Where posts set up

On level surface

In bottom of trenches

Direction of house entrance

East

West

Manner of refuse accumulation

Gradual on surface

Gradual in open trench

Form of housesite

Circular

Circles with square inside

Large central posthole

Found

Found

Entrance shelter or cover

Postholes southeast of entrance

Indicated by postholes

Diameter of house ring

46 feet

More than 60 feet

Spacing of postholes

Most of holes 3” to 22” with an
average of 8” apart. In some
cases there were alternate large
and small holes. Depths ranged
from 6 1/2” to 30” with average
of 17”. A few holes at random.

Large holes (12”-15” diameter)
spaced about 5 feet apart.
Between them were 1 or 2
smaller holes about 6” in
diameter. Certain holes were
placed at random.

Locations and sizes of fire pits

One fire pit, located 5 feet SW
of the central posthole; another
was near house entrance just
inside east wall. A third was
outside 15 ft. SE of house. The
fourth was in line of postholes.
The one at entrance was 53” x
72” and 60” deep. Filled with
ashes, charcoal, artifacts and
other camp refuse.

Small fire pit, 19” wide and 30”
deep, just west of central
posthole. Another, 6’ in
diameter and 2’ deep. Latter
extended over inner house ring
and over row of postholes in
square. Filled with ashes, soil
and refuse.

Contents of postholes

In most cases filled with
mixture of soil, ashes, and some
charcoal. Sherds and broken
animal bones in many holes—
frequently at bottom.

Filled with black earth and
village refuse

Strata through which holes
passed

Dug through thin stratum of
former surface soil and into
solid red clay. Holes overlaid
with unmoved midden material,
indicating its accumulation after
holes were dug.

Sunk through village refuse and
into clay below. This indicates
holes were dug after the refuse
had accumulated.

A “Perpetual Fire” Site

83

Features Compared

Anderson County, Texas

Yazoo County, Miss.

Position of floor

Not sunk below surface.

Not sunk below surface.

Evidence of stratification

Some noticeable differences in
decoration of sherds from the
various depths. Quantity of
sherds decreased greatly toward
the bottom.

No distinction in sherds from
various sections and depths;
same mixed type found
everywhere.

Distinctive feature of pottery

Great number of fragmentary
pipes

Some sherds had a line incised
along the top of the rim.

Punctate decoration

Found

Found

Effigies on vessel rims

A number of animal and bird
effigies from vessel rims found
in refuse.

One animal effigy head from
rim of vessel found on surface.

Pot handles and rim knobs

Many handles and knobs found
in midden material.

Handles and knobs found in
refuse

Dog bones in camp refuse

None found

None found

Animal bones most abundant

Deer

Deer

84

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

1. Jackson, A. T., “Indian Pipes of East Texas,” Bulletin
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 5,
Abilene, September, 1933, pp. 77-78.

9. Pearce, J. E., “The Archeology of East Texas,” American
Anthropologist, Vol. 34, No. 4, October-December, 1932,
p. 680.

2. Jackson, A. T., “Types of East Texas Pottery, Bulletin
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 6,
September, 1934, p. 55, Abilene.

10. Harrington, M. R., “Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas,”
Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, New
York, 1920, pp. 39, 49, 52-53, 122, 293-297.

3. Potter, Wendall H., “Ornamentation on the Pottery of the
Texas Coastal Tribes, Bulletin Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, Abilene, September, 1930,
Plate 7, Nos. 9 and 10, p. 43.

11. Collins, Henry B., Jr., “Excavations at a Prehistoric
Indian Village Site in Mississippi,” Proceedings U. S. Nat.
Museum, Vol. 79, pp. 1-22, Washington, 1932.

4. Chabot, F. C., “Indian Excerpts (Translation of Memorias
for the History of Texas)” by Father Morfi, Naylor Prtg.
Co., San Antonio, 1932, p. 44.
5. Hatcher, M. A., “Descriptions of the Tejas or Asinai
Indians, 1691-1722,” Sw. Historical Quarterly. Vol. XXXI,
No. 2, Oct., 1927, Austin, p. 177.
6. Harrington, M. R., “Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas,
Museum of the American Indian,” Heye Foundation, N. Y.
1920, p. 239 (Quoting Joutel, Relation, Paris, 1887, p. 367.)
7. Hatcher, M. A., “Description of the Tejas or Asinai Indians,
1691-1722,” (Fray Francisco Hidalgo to Fray Isidro Cassos,
Nov. 20, 1710, translated from Spanish by M. A. Hatcher),
Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. XXXI, No. 1, Austin,
July, 1927, p. 52.
8. Goldschmidt, W. R., “A Report on the Archeology of Titus
County In East Texas, Bulletin Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 7, Abilene, September, 1935,
pp. 97-99.

12. Chabot, F. C., “Excerpts from the Memorias for the
History of the Province of Texas,” by Padre Fray Juan Agustin
de Morfi, Naylor Printing Co., San Antonio, 1932, pp. 24;
39-40; note 7, p. 23; 26-26.
13. Hatcher, M. A., “Descriptions of the Tejas or Asinai
Indians, 1691-1722,” (Fray Francisco Hidalgo to Fray Isidro
Cassos, Nov. 20, 1710, translated from the Spanish by M.
A. Hatcher), Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. XXXI,
No. 1, Austin, July, 1927, p. 51.
14. Ibid. (Pray Francisca Casanas de Jesus Maria to the
Viceroy of Mexico), S. W. History Quarterly, Vol. XXX, No.
4, Austin, April, 1927, p. 293.
15. Ibid. (Pray Isidro Felis de Espinosa), Vol. XXXI, No. 2,
Austin, October, 1927, pp. 154-155.
16. Ibid, p. 160.
17. Ibid, p. 169.

