Reviews, Reports and Editorials

85

REVIEWS, REPORTS AND EDITORIALS

The University of Texas Bulletin, No. 3618, May
8, 1936, The Corner-Tang Flint Artifacts of Texas,
by J. T. Patterson, Professor of Zoology, Bureau
of Research in the Social Sciences, Study No. 18,
Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 4, published
by The University of Texas, Austin, Texas, contains
56 pages of text, twelve pages of photographs of
48 different corner-tang knives, and also six
drawings of knives, size 6 by 9.

The illustrations of the various types of cornertanged knives are unusually good and clear.
Professor Patterson has obtained authentic records
of a total of 533 corner-tanged knives.

The center of distribution seems to be in the
south central portion of Texas, and few are found
in East or in Northwest Texas, and the Abilene
region lies along the northern boundary of their
distribution although this reviewer has sixteen
The world’s lazy and incompetent ever corner-tanged knives in his collection from that
increasing legions, who never in their whole lives region.
have done anything well, have an untrue saying to
The reviewer agrees that most of the cornercomfort their wounded vanity when they hear of
tang knives probably are not many hundreds of years
some one doing several things well. It runs thus:
old. There are two reasons for that belief, lack of
“He is a jack of all trades, and a master of none.”
patination on many of them, and the levels in which
Literally the contrary of that old saying is always
they are found. However the reviewer has not heard
true. Any person who can do one thing well, can
of any evidence which he is willing to accept that
do a half dozen other things equally well. The one
would indicate that these knives were made in
who does not have sufficient brains and energy to
historic times. In no instance known to him have
do a half dozen other things well, does not have
glass beads or any other historic aged artifacts been
sufficient to do one thing well. The average man is
found with this type of knife. Of course such
extremely lazy, and wastes in entertainment or as a
evidence may yet be found but the reviewer has
spectator of others’ activities, enough time to learn
doubts.
several languages, acquire skill as a painter, sculptor,
astronomer, botanist, or proficiency in any of several
One regrets that the author of this valuable piece
other arts and sciences.
of research did not also make a study of the
patination of the different types of these knives to
One wonders what the progress of the world
determine whether or not certain types are
would be, were all to turn to constructive
uniformly patinated and others unpatinated and if
amusements and hobbies. In this respect we think
so, illustrate the types separately. The reviewer has
that J. T. Patterson, a professor of zoology, has
an idea that such differences would have been found
done a very valuable piece of scientific work in
based on what he has observed.
preparing this Bulletin on Corner-Tang Knives. It
embraces special research in a field where little has
Entirely too little attention has been given to
been done before, concerning a type of artifact the question of patination of American artifacts, and
which probably is exclusively Texan. While it may especially those of Texas. These show wide
yet be found elsewhere as a result of prehistoric variations in patination, which are found with certain
trade, the home of its makers was in Central Texas. technical differences of form and stone chipping.
He only has data concerning one alleged instance
of a hafted corner-tanged knife. This reviewer has
* * * *
also seen that knife, and thinks that its authenticity
Texas Technological College Bulletin, Vol. XII,
is open to debate.
No. 1, January, 1936, Studies of the Yaqui Indians

86

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

of Sonora, Mexico. Scientific Series No. 2, burials. It contains 1 long, and 16 short articles, by
published by Texas Technological College, local amateurs. Price $2.75.
Lubbock, Texas. Size 6 by 9. Contains 142 pages
An article by Dr. Aynesworth entitled
text and illustrations, 15 pages of plates.
“Biographic Studies of Twenty-one Skulls of
This attractive Bulletin contains nine articles, five Central Texas Indians,” describes some skeletal
of these are by Dr. W. C. Holden, and one each by materials of somewhat similar type to one of the
W. G. McMillan, Dr. C. J. Wagner, C. C. Seltzer, long headed races discovered, and first described
and R. A. Studhalter.
by this reviewer in Scientific American, May, 1929,
Science Service, 1929, and later issues of Texas
These articles describe the history, religion,
Archeological and Paleontological Society
government, and social structure of the tribe, its
Bulletins.
architecture, medical knowledge, agriculture, and
the physical types to be found amongst the Yaquis.
However Dr. Aynesworth’s skulls are not so
dolichocephalic as the oldest, most extreme type
This Bulletin gives details of Yaqui life which
found here, but are nearer to the Sand Dune man’s
were obtained by a well equipped and staffed
type.
scientific expedition, led by Dr. W. C. Holden which
was sent to the little known region of Northern
“Chronic Arthritis in the Early American Indian
Mexico, occupied by the Yaqui Tribe, by Texas in Central Texas” by Fred A. Turner is an interesting
Technological College early in 1934.
four page report on some evidence of arthritic
changes in Indian bones.
An early report of this expedition’s valuable
contributions to science was made in the 1934
“A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Texas,” by Frank H. Watt gives a good description,
Paleontological Society, and reports were read by well illustrated, of the excavation of a number of
the staff at the 1934 meeting, giving details of the burials in a rock shelter.
specialized knowledge acquired. The large
“Buried Midden on the Brazos” by J. K. Mason
collection of Yaqui artifacts obtained by the
gives details of the finding of some deeply buried
Expedition was also shown then.
hearths in Central Texas. Apparently these are of
There should be more such studies of those similar depths to the series first discovered by this
Indian tribes which have not yet lost all traces of reviewer near Abilene in 1929-30.
their primitive civilizations. Many things which we
Whether the sites near Waco are as old as
find in archeological sites in portions of the country
those previously found near Abilene, only geological
where the Indians have vanished, could be explained
research can determine, but it seems reasonable to
by better studies of such tribes. Texas Technological
believe that careful examination will show similar
College is to be greatly commended for issuing this
buried sites in other parts of Texas.
scientific study of the Yaqui Indians.
“Flint Arrowhead Wounds of Bones as Shown
in Skeletons in Central Texas” by K. H. Aynesworth
* * * *
is a scholarly article which describes some instances
of the finding of flint arrowheads imbedded in Indian
Bulletin of Central Texas Archeological Society,
bones.
Number 2, March, 1936, published by The Society
at Waco, Texas, size 6 x 9. It has a total of 95 pages
The Bulletin would be improved for students’
of pictures and text, of which 12 2-3 pages are of use by bibliographical citations, since some similar
photographs. About 11 pages are devoted to site type sites have been previously described in other
maps and 8 pages are drawings of bones and publications.
artifacts. One folder shows positions of some cave

Reviews, Reports and Editorials
*

*

*

*

Evidence of Early Man in North America, by E.
B. Howard, published by the University Museum
of the University of Pennsylvania, 1935. Contains
122 pages of text and illustrations including 14
pages of photographs, and 12 pages of drawings.
Size 8 by 11. Price $1.50.
This paper-covered book describes and
illustrates some excavations of E. B. Howard’s, in
Burnet Cave in New Mexico, in which he found a
generalized Folsom point in a hearth with musk ox
bones, and some sand dune blow-outs in the same
region in which Folsom points have been found in
old lake beds, close to bones of mammoths and
other extinct animals.
The photographs and drawings are unusually
good and clear, but the terminology of the text could
be improved. We note that Howard lists Abilene as
a region where only the rough generalized type of
Folsom point has been found. That statement is
erroneous, since this reviewer has found both types
of points in the same campsite near Abilene with
artifacts of the Clear Fork Complex.
Another error occurs on page 148 where we
read this statement, “E. B. Sayles and C. N. Ray, of
Abilene, Texas, have been working for a number of
years in stream and terrace deposits along the forks
of the Brazos River near Abilene, where even earlier
evidence for man in America may be satisfactorily
proved upon the completion of further studies of
that whole region.”
The construction of Howard’s statement would
imply that Mr. Sayles discovered the deeply buried
stratified campsites of the Abilene region, and that
“C. N. Ray” assisted in “working” them, whereas
the reverse of that is the truth. Reference to
December, 1929, Science Service publications, and
May Scientific American reports of the year 1929,
will disprove that implication.

87

Sayles then left Abilene in 1931 and only returned
for a few months in 1934 to work in this reviewer’s
discovery deeply buried stratified sites, and he has
not since then been “working” in these sites. On
the contrary this reviewer has worked and carefully
watched these deeply buried sites since he
discovered them in 1929-30.
Despite a few errors, this book contains much
valuable textual information concerning the Folsom
artifacts and also many beautiful illustrations of
them, and in the main is a valuable contribution to
the literature on this subject.
*

*

*

*

Occasional Contributions From the Museum of
Anthropology, of The University of Michigan, No.
5. Perforated Indian Crania in Michigan, by W. B.
Hinsdale and Emerson F. Greenman. University of
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, Michigan, August 15,
1936. Pages of text 15, plates 5, text figures 2, map
1, price $ .50.
This very interesting pamphlet gives details
concerning a number of perforated skulls found in
Michigan and adjacent regions. A few of these
appear to be skulls where true trephination
operations have been performed. The major portion
however, show bones with smaller holes in them,
which probably were made with flint drills after
death. In the Michigan perforated bones the
perforations are not confined to the skulls as, is the
case, in other regions where trephination was
practiced by aboriginal tribes.
Plate IV, Fig. 1 shows two drilled femora. One
with one hole drilled in the proximal, and one in
the distal end. The other one has one hole in the
distal end. It shows two long bones with the
articular portions removed (probably tibiae) in
which one hole has been drilled in one end of each.
Fig. 2 shows a frontal bone with a larger perforation.

Mr. Sayles among several others, including Dr.
Plate V shows a cranium with two drilled
Otto O. Watts, Rev. J. Richard Spann and Ernest perforations in the vertex.
W. Wilson, assisted this reviewer in excavating some
Plate III shows two views of a cranium
of these sites in 1929-30, which research was
perforated near bregma, and also near the foramen
reported in Vol. 2, 1930 Bulletin of Texas
magnum.
Archeological and Paleontological Society. Mr.

88

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Plate II shows a cranium from which a large disk
However Sayles seems to have given new names
of bone has been removed in the posterior portion, to these artifacts at this late date. We do not believe
and a small drilled hole in the frontal bone.
that there is any warrant for the positive attachment
of historic tribal names to any of these artifacts with
Plate 1, Fig. 1, shows trephination near vertex
the exception of the four edged knife. There is only
of calvarium.
one large campsite of this type in the Abilene region,
Fig. 2, shows post-mortem, drilled perforation which is also described in Vol. 7, 1935 Bulletin,
in fragment of a cranium.
Ray, The Pottery Complex Artifacts of The Abilene
Region, as Site 17, and in and near this site the
The photographs are good and clear, and this
writer has found six channeled points of the Folsom
small book is the result of considerable painstaking
type, considered ancient by some writers.
research.
Also on Plate XI Sayles lists f, g, h, i, j, and k,
which are typical artifacts of The Sand Dune
SOME COMMENTS ON SAYLES SURVEY
Culture, which was also named, described and
An Archeological Survey of Texas, by E. B. pictured in Ray, A Differentiation of The Prehistoric
Sayles, printed by The Medallion, Gila Pueblo, Cultures of The Abilene Region, Vol. 1, 1929,
Bulletin of this Society. Sayles has overlooked this
Globe, Arizona, May, 1935.
description, also the first in the literature concerning
In 1929 and 1930 Sayles among others assisted
this type of artifacts, and in 1935 gave them new
in excavating some of this reviewer’s original type
names without reference to the original description.
or discovery sites in both the deeply buried
While Sand Dune artifacts of types f, g, h, i, j, k,
stratified, and boat-shaped mortar hole sites, and
pictures were then taken of these sites, which were as shown in Sayles “survey,” Plate XI, under some
used as illustrations in Ray, Cyrus N., “Report On other name, were found by this reviewer in the same
Some Recent Archeological Researches in the discovery campsites with the boat-shaped mortar
Abilene Section,” Vol. 2, 1930, Bulletin of Texas holes on the Douthit Ranch in 1929, to describe
Archeological and Paleontological Society, in Plate these boat-shaped mortar holes as “Brazos in type”
11, No. 4, and Plate 13, No. 4. These two pictures creates an erroneous impression, as boat-shaped
were republished in “Sayles Survey” without the mortar holes are very rarely found on any branch
usual by line mentioning their previous publication of the Brazos River, but are found in collections of
in the 1930 Bulletin of this Society. These are listed hundreds in many sites on the Colorado River and
in Sayles Survey as Plate VII B, and Plate XI B. its branches. While the Sand Dune Serrated Points
Plate VII A was also taken at that time.
(first described and pictured on Plate 2, upper two
panels, Ray, Vol. 1, 1929, Bulletin of Texas Arch.
On Plate XI are shown artifacts a, b, c, d, and e,
and Pal. Society) shown, are found on the Colorado
which are Small Scraper Culture beveled, dart
River and its branches with boat-shaped mortar
points; and on Plate 22 a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, and i.
holes, the greatest distribution of these Sand Dune
The latter consists of four edged beveled knives,
Serrated Points is along the sand dunes of the
triangular notched arrow points and Small ScraperBrazos River and its branches, where the boatgravers. This flint complex was first described in
shaped mortar holes are not found, but instead there
the literature by this reviewer in Ray, Cyrus N., A
is a complete substitution of oval pecked manos
Differentiation of The Prehistoric Cultures of The
and shallow sandstone metates. To term these
Abilene Section, Vol. 1, 1929, Bulletin of Texas
typical Colorado River boat-shaped mortar holes
Archeological and Paleontological Society. These
“Brazos Mortar Holes” I believe is incorrect. These
artifacts types were then described and named The
boat-shaped holes were used by a long headed
Small Scraper Culture on pages 16 and 17, pictured
people, but are too rare in most of the Brazos River
on the lower two panels of Plate 2 of that Bulletin.
area to be termed “Brazos Mortar Holes.” There is

Reviews, Reports and Editorials
much evidence which indicates that the boat-shaped
mortar hole sites were occupied at different times
back into very remote periods, and also down into
the historic period, and probably by different human
types. Certainly some of the burials contain artifacts
of very different types.
The giving of new and meaningless designations
to artifacts already described fully in the Bulletins
of this Society published during the years of 1929,
1930, 1931, 1932, 1933, 1934 and 1935 only makes
the study of Texas archeology unnecessarily
difficult, and the mixing of several different period
cultures, which have been previously properly
described, and which have no real relation to each
other, further confuses the matter.
Apparently the Sayles “Survey” pictures our
Clear Fork Culture Complex Points as “Folsom or
Yuma Points” with which we cannot agree, although
they evidently are quite old, and are sometimes
found on the same eroded surfaces, as we previously
stated in Flint Cultures of Ancient Man in Texas,
published in Vol. 6, 1934, of the Bulletin of this
Society. This type of dart point and also the Clear
Fork Culture gouges, which Sayles has renamed as
“Abilene core scrapers” and shows on Plate X of
his “Survey,” were first described by this reviewer
on the lower half of page 18, Vol. 1, September,
1929. Bulletin of this Society, and four of the Clear
Fork Culture Gouges were pictured as Figs. 8, 9,
10 and 11 of the lower panel of Plate 1 of the same
1929 Bulletin. We also pictured and described one
of these Clear Fork Culture gouges as Fig. 2, Plate
10 of Vol. 2, 1930. Bulletin of the Society in an
article in which we then stated that we had found it
on the same eroded surface with Folsom points,
which we also pictured on the same plate. In Ray,
Cyrus N., “Flint Cultures of Ancient Man,” Vol. 6,
1934, we again described, pictured, and named
Plate 18, Nos. 88 to 111 the “Clear Fork Culture
Complex.”

89

We do not agree with that statement. No Folsom
points of either type have ever been found in so far
as we know, in the Sand Dune Culture Complex
which Sayles has renamed “Brazos River.”*
However Yuma points have been found in the clay
stratum beneath these Sand Dune sites, which is
quite different. In the case of the beveled dart points
which Sayles erroneously lists as of “Brazos River”
type, but which belong to the Small Scraper Culture
of the Pottery Complex, several generalized Folsom
points were found. (See Ray, Cyrus N., The Pottery
Complex Artifacts of The Abilene Region, Vol. 7,
1935, Bulletin of Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society).
The Editor has nearly all of the Folsom points
of either type ever found in this region, and none
of the typical finer type Folsom points have ever
been found in sites with small arrowheads, pottery
or beveled darts, but these finer Folsom points have
been found in eroded gullies with the Clear Fork
Complex, which contains no fine, small arrowheads,
but its points are thick, roughly fractured, with
twisted, not beveled, blades.
The photographs and drawings are good, clear,
and well done. Mr. Sayles is an excellent
photographer.
He probably has done as well with this large
order, as any other one archeologist of Texas could
have, but the subject is too complex for any one
person to do well.
Texas is physically too large, its cultures too
diversified, and too widely separated in both time
and space, to make it possible for one individual
without the close collaboration of all the workers
in the field, the assistance of all of the staff of Texas
University Anthropology Department, and many
long years of patient research by experts, to produce
a reasonably accurate survey of Texas archeology.
It is no one man’s job, even though he may have
had the best professional training possible.

A statement concerning Folsom Points on page
118 of the Sayles Survey states: “Small projectile
Too little is yet known of the subject to make it
points, which may have been used with the arrow, safe to take in so much territory.
are lacking in the lower levels of the Texas cultures.
When enough is definitely known to justify such
However, they are typical of the Brazos River level,
an undertaking, it should be done by Texas
with which Folsom points are also associated.”

90

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

University, since their staff has had more experience,
There are eight of these sites which have been
and it is the best equipped institution in Texas to named and several Others have been located. The
do the work.
individual sites are located in basins surrounded by
dunes. These blown out places are circular in shape.
When or if it becomes necessary to change the
The floor of a basin is seldom more than two acres
names of Texas artifacts and cultures from the
in extent, while the dunes rise to a height of thirty
terminology used by the writers who originally
or forty feet. Hard soil, packed and burned to a
described them, it should be done by a State wide
depth of from six to twelve inches, forms the floor
representative committee of Texas archeologists,
of a basin where a camp existed. A steady, prevailing
and not by any individual’s fiat. Such a committee
wind tends to carry the sand into a basin, while an
would give citations of the original descriptions and
unusually strong wind tends to sweep out the site.
names, beside the new ones if or where changes
The air currents set up by a violent wind removes
are made, so that future students of archeology
the sand from the floor, exposing the artifacts left
would not become hopelessly confused by the
by the former inhabitants. The process of exposing
changes.
and covering is continually going on.
C. N. R.
This same shifting eliminates stratigraphy as a
key to determining the relative ages of the artifacts
found. Fortunately, there is an abundant supply of
decorated pottery remnants which give us some
*W. J. Van London did find a number of knowledge of the people who occupied the sand
microliths of exceedingly small size, in a sand blow- hills.
out near Amarillo with a true Folsom point, but
Several collections of potsherds and flint artifacts
they were all entirely too small for arrow points,
were made before souvenir hunters, picnickers, and
are not similar to Sand Dune Culture points, and
passersby invaded the locations and removed a great
nothing like them has been found in the region of
deal of the material. A study was made of a
the Sand Dune Culture Complex sites.
collection of potsherds owned by Mr. C. H. Park,
of Lubbock, Texas. The collection, picked at
random, contained specimens representative of the
types found in the area described. Two hundred and
A SURVEY OF THE SAND-HILL CAMP
twenty-six pieces made up the group, and the
SITES OF LAMB AND BAILEY COUNTIES
classification was based on the groupings set forth
Extending eastward from New Mexico into the
by the Laboratory of Anthropology at Santa Fe,
Panhandle of Texas through Bailey and into Lamb
New Mexico. Only twenty sherds in the collection
County is a peculiar sand-hill formation. The eastern
fell outside the Pueblo group. In a letter to the
extremity of the area covered by the sand dunes
writer, Dr. H. P. Mera of the Laboratory of
lies about fifteen miles south of the town of Olton,
Anthropology gave a list of the types noted in the
in the northeast portion of Lamb County. Geologists
Park collection. These were Chupadero Black-onestimate the origin of this formation as being in the
White, Lincoln Black-on-Red, El Paso Polychrome,
Ice Age or shortly thereafter. An extremely loose
Corona Rubbed-Ribbed, Puaray Glazetop-soil, combined with sand brought by winds from
Polychrome, and Cicuye Glaze-Polychrome. The
the Pecos Valley in New Mexico, has made this
makers of these types lived in the southern and
region what it is today. Vegetation is limited to sage,
eastern parts of what is now New Mexico. The
yucca, and a few hackberry trees. Near the water
Chupadero Black-on-White sherds constituted over
holes, willow sprouts and cottonwood trees grow.
fifty per cent of the pottery types studied. The
The water holes lie along the bed of Sod House
makers of this type lived in that part of the Pueblo
Draw, and the camp sites are seldom more than a
area closest to the sand-hills, and this is typical of
quarter of a mile from this shallow canyon.

Reviews, Reports and Editorials

91

the Fourth Pueblo Period, as are the other types
No signs of shelters can be found today. At one
named. It is thus safe to say that the sand hills were time or another, people to the north, south, and
occupied for a time between 1300 A. D. and 1700 west of the sand-hills had shelters of stone, mud,
A. D.
or a mixture of the two; but no trace of rock or
crumbled walls can be found here.
There are at least two acceptable explanations
for the appearance of these wares in West Texas.
Future investigations in the sand-hills, and
The first of these lies in the possibility that the particularly in the surrounding region, should
pueblo people used the sand-hill locations merely answer the questions concerning the place from
for seasonal camp grounds, occupying the region which the inhabitants of the dune sites came, and
only when they came to the plains to hunt. A number where they went.
of vessels could have been brought along, broken
—Wm. M. PEARCE,
and left.
Texas Technological College,
The second explanation is based on the
Lubbock, TX
hypothesis that the sand hills were occupied by
people who resided there permanently. These
EDITORIALS
people could have traded for the pottery, giving to
Destructive Diggers
the pueblo people in exchange flint, meat, and hides.
We read papers and hear lectures on the sins of
No sherds of the distinctive Panhandle Culture
commission and omission of the unlettered diggers
pottery have been found.
who destroy valuable evidence in their search for
The estimate made of the age of occupation does arrowheads, and in some regions for pottery, and
not exclude the possibility that this region has been all that has been said or written is true, and it is
occupied at other times. Although no writer has really much worse than has ever been told.
mentioned any Indian tribe as inhabiting the sandSomething should be done to stop it, but how
hills, it has been proved that the area has been
to do it effectively is a problem. Many of the articles
invaded in historic times. Mr. Park and Mr. W. G.
bewailing the condition dwell on “the great value
McMillan uncovered a buffalo hide shield near a
to science of the destroyed bones and evidence.”
trail in the dunes. With the shield were several
Such articles succeed in leaving an impression
hundred glass beads and a Civil War model bayonet.
Whether transients or permanent inhabitants were on the minds of a large section of ignorant
newspaper readers, that if they can only obtain these
responsible for this is not known.
“valuable” bones or artifacts, that they then can sell
Flint objects form a large portion of the artifacts
them for fabulous prices to museums. So the net
found. Arrowheads, knives, scrapers, and drills have
result of many such articles is to set a host of
been found. Most of the flint is from the Alabates
ignorant commercially minded diggers to work
quarries on the Canadian River, while gray chert
destroying interesting archeological and
and obsidian are also found. Several points of the
paleontological sites. If such articles are given to
Folsom type have been found. The knives range in
newspapers at all, the fact should be dwelt on that
length from four to ten inches, and many of them
the “value” of such things is purely educational and
are of the four-edged type.
cultural, and that their “value” is wholly dependent
If bone implements existed, they have decayed on the reliability of the excavator, and that no
for none have been found. Ornaments, with the museum will pay them anything for such materials.
exception of bone and glass beads, are lacking.
Gold Digging Pests
Since caliche is the only rock native to the region,
The worst pests are the gasoline filling station
the manos and metates were evidently imported.
and curio store proprietors who want to exhibit
These can be found at all of the various sites.

92

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and were stained and soiled like the work of time.
The arrowheads were broken by the archeologist
and this revealed that they had a thick coating of
patina, covering the original blue flint centers. Of
course Indians could have picked up patinated
In some manner severe penalties should be
points and again hafted them, but the writer has
enforced against such people before it is too late.
not heard of the use of flint points by Indians in
Then there are a large number of persons who are
Texas within the memory of any living person.
victims of the ancient chart selling swindle, which
is said to have long flourished in Mexico, and in
Archeologists cannot be too careful in examining
southern Texas. Seemingly ancient charts are artifacts held by dealers. Some of them will go to
prepared and aged in acid fumes or other chemicals, any kind of pains to hoax a scientist, and in many
and sold to the gullible portion of the public as cases this is made easier by the fact that the scientist
“ancient treasure charts.” Apparently most of these being himself free from any desire to deceive, gives
must describe the site of the supposed “treasure” the other fellow credit for the same ethics, and
as under the limb of a large live oak tree, since these sometimes does so to his sorrow.
foolish diggers have nearly dug up by the roots
several giant live oak trees in this region. Some of
Teeth of Hipparion, of
these holes made by moronic treasure hunters are
Trilophodon and Rhinoceros
so big and deep that one could bury a large
We have received from Mr. H. J. Bradshaw of
automobile in one of them.
Abilene, one trilophodon tooth, (a four tusked
Perpetrators of such digging would be elephas species), two rhinoceros teeth, and two
interesting cases for the study of abnormal teeth of a three-toed horse (Hipparion). These teeth
psychology, but it is usually done at night and the were found by Mr. Bradshaw in the Nueces River
diggers are always unknown to the landowners.
gravels.
curios to sell to tourists possessed of more money
than discretion. These dim-wits furnish the income
for the destroyers of scientific data, and material
culture.

Hafted Flints

Glyptodon Species

There was a dealer in artifacts in a small Texas
town several years ago, who collected arrowheads
and other flints from the farmers of the surrounding
region, and sold them by mail. In this fellow’s
collection were some hafted flint arrowheads which
he sold at rather high prices. A tale was told about
them having been found on an Indian battlefield in
Texas sixty years before. An amateur archeologist
bought several of these arrows. These flints
apparently were patinated (a chemical process
which probably takes thousands of years to
produce). The wood had an appearance of age, and
the tangs were fastened to the shafts with sinews.
But when the archeologist removed the flints from
the shafts he then saw that the person who hafted
them had neglected to use the brown stain on the
ends of the shafts covered by the sinew wrapping
like he had on the unwrapped parts, and the wood
was as white and fresh as though whittled out the
day before. The unwrapped parts had been painted

On a trip to Knox County with W. A. Riney we
collected plates of two species of glyptodon,
mammoth and mastodon teeth fragments, and
extinct horse bones. Some old cremated burials
which had been excavated by treasure hunters were
examined, and some snail shell beads overlooked
by them, were found.
New Prehistoric Burials Excavated
Four prehistoric burials have recently been
excavated in the Abilene region. Two of these are
of a type different from any previously found in the
region, in that they are extended burials. The work
will not be finished until after this Bulletin has been
printed. A full report will be printed next year.
New Data On Deeply Buried Sites
The Editor has continued his inspections of the
results of stream erosion of the deeply buried sites

Reviews, Reports and Editorials
of the Abilene region and has done some additional
excavations, in the stratum which is buried 8 feet
deep, during the past year. In a total of eight hours
digging on two days, he has dug out of this clay
bank stratum 29 bone fragments, 170 man made
flint flakes, 3 knife edge fragments, 1 flint dart head
expanded tang, 1 rough percussion flint blade, 1
flint knife point, and 1 beautifully chipped straight
edged flint spear head from which the tang and one
barb have been broken, but with one barb intact,
which is ½ inch long. This blade is 3 1/8 inches
long from the point to the end of the barb. The
finding of this artifact proves that fine barbed spear
heads were used in this region long enough to
become buried in a stratified campsite eight feet
deep. Some have supposed that all older points are
similar to the Folsom points and that barbs are a
comparatively recent development. Much of the
Editor’s observation does not confirm that idea.
We believe that it will eventually be proved that
tanged and barbed spears antedated the Folsom
points, and were also used during the same period
when that culture trait was developing, and that
their use was continuous in varied shapes, and
culture types, throughout a long period of time.
This eight feet deep stratified site probably
extends through the earth a considerable distance
from the high bank of a small creek branch of the
Clear Fork of the Brazos, to another outcrop on
the high bank of the Brazos River where the latest
digging was done. In 1929 when the writer
discovered this site, (See Science Service
publications for December, 1929), he excavated the
small creek branch outcrop, and found quantities
of charcoal, flint chips, bones, mussel shells, a horn
core, teeth and a square based knife. These bones
and teeth, mainly excavated by the Editor and Dr.
Otto O. Watts, were loaned to a representative of
an institution located in a far southwestern State
early in 1934, on a promise of a report when they
were identified. At the present time, more than two
years later, no report of any kind has been received
here.

93

Abilene Section,” plates 11 and 14. Plate 15 of the
same volume pictures another stratified site on
another stream where the 24 1/2 and 27 feet buried
levels outcrop. In the latter site also erosion has
very recently exposed a fine broken blade point and
several more man made flint flakes. Here also a
great number of flint flakes, and several complete
projectile points have been found embedded in place
in the stratum of charcoal.
Poor Co-operation and Public Relations
A great deal has been truly written about the
sins of omission and commission of some of the
amateurs, and all are to the point.
Many professionals deplore the bad relations
some times existing between local amateur
researchers, and the representatives of some of the
larger institutions. There are many reasons for such
conditions. In some cases due credit is not given to
the man in the field, when publication is made on
the results of his discoveries, and years of patient
research.
One of the most irritating of all the things
sometimes done to the local research man is the
obtaining of excavated materials on the promise of
their complete identification, then keeping these
materials for years without submitting any report
to their finders. We once had materials held six years
and then returned on our insistence without a report.
And then such persons sometimes complain about
poor co-operation. What can they expect?
We may be wrong, but we believe that anyone
who knows his subject can identify, or have
identified, prehistoric bones within a year’s time. If
he cannot, he should not stand in the way of those
who can, and do so. Science would advance much
faster if those of us who work at it for recreational
reasons could obtain better co-operation.

If the members of The Society will report to
this Editor instances of failure to return either
archeological or paleontological materials, and of
failure to make reports, after a reasonable time
That excavation was described and the artifacts
period has elapsed, we can then use the information
pictured in Vol. 2, 1930, Ray, Cyrus N., “A Report
for the benefit of our members.
On Some Recent Archeological Researches in the

94

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Rio Grande Glaze Paint Sherds
Found in Taylor County
Those who read volume seven of this Bulletin
may remember that two sherds from a campsite in
Taylor County were identified by Dr. H. P. Mera of
The Laboratory of Anthropology of Santa Fe, New
Mexico, as sherds of Rio Grande Glaze Paint ware
and that the various flakes of obsidian found in
Taylor County, Texas, were identified as from the
Jemez Mountains in New Mexico. (Pages 83 and
84, description site 15, Vol. 7, 1935, of the Bulletin
of this Society).
Since last year the Editor has found three more
western sherds in a different site, the one listed as
Site 1, page 80, Vol. 7, 1935, Bulletin of this Society.
More flakes of New Mexican obsidian have also
been found in Pottery Site 1 than in any other local
site. See Dr. Mera’s report page 79, Vol. 7, 1935
Bulletin. The last three sherds found have also been
sent to Dr. Mera for examination and identification,
and his report follows:

Large Piece of Obsidian Found in Taylor County
Since the last report, a farmer who lives 30 miles
south of Abilene, showed the Editor a large piece
of New Mexican obsidian which he had plowed up
in a field. This weighed 61/4 pounds. Prehistoric
Indians must have valued this material highly, to
have carried an object of that weight six hundred
or more miles by foot, when flint of such good
quality was so abundant in the region to which they
carried it.
* * * *
The Editor asked Dr. J. Alden Mason, Curator,
Section of American Archeology and Ethnology,
University Museum, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, to write an editorial for
this bulletin on some subject of archeological
interest, and he has submitted the following notes
on his 1929 trip to Texas.
Notes On the Archeology of Southwestern Texas

In 1929 I had the pleasure of spending several
months in Texas, New Mexico and Arizona, on an
expedition from the University Museum,
Philadelphia. In the first part of this work I was
accompanied by Mr. Charles Bache and Mr. Linton
Satterthwaite, Jr. A brief account of this work was
published in our Museum Journal for September“Number 3 is from a form that does not seem to
December, 1929, under the title “The Texas
represent a standard technique in the region in which
Expedition.” This related briefly the work around
it is sparingly found, i. e., eastern New Mexico. It
Abilene, Mora in New Mexico, and on the Canadian
appears to be an effort to imitate indented coil ware
River. It is possible that a fuller report may some
by means of treating a smoothed surface with some
day be published on the Canadian River work.
sort of tool. It occurs in sites peripheral to true
Subsequently, alone, I did some more extensive
Pueblo territory. Outside of recognizing the type
work around Navaho Mountain in Arizona which I
and its provenience I can tell you nothing further
hope will eventually be published in extenso. In the
as practically no work has been attempted in that
interim I spent from September 20 until October
particular area.
30 visiting sites in southern and western Texas.
“It is indeed surprising what distances were Most of the time was spent in travel, visiting sites
covered in the course of trade. While conducting and studying collections under the guidance of wellsome archaeological work in the Petrified Forest known Texas archeologists, whom I am delighted
in Arizona, I found an artifact made of silicified to call my friends and whose kind hospitality I
dolomite of the sort quarried at Amarillo, Texas. remember with pleasure. A few odd pieces of
investigation were, however, carried out, which are
H. P. Mera, Staff Archeologist.”
briefly detailed in the following notes.
“Both numbers 1 and 2 are fragments of typical
Rio Grande glaze paint ware. Although neither gives
a clue to rim form the general character indicates a
period not earlier than the latter part of the fifteenth
century.

Reviews, Reports and Editorials
Early in October, 1929, I had the pleasure of
spending a few days on the lower Devil’s River, a
short distance northwest of Del Rio. While in the
latter city I had made the acquaintance of Mr. John
Carruthers and had been kindly invited to visit his
ranch on the Devil’s River and to investigate the
archeology there; four days were spent in these
researches.

95

feet. It slopes at the back so that the floor measures
about 35 by 20 feet, but the peripheral parts are
low. The roof, where not fallen, is very black from
smoke, and the floor is covered with fine material
and larger spalls from the roof. On some of the
surrounding rocks are striated lines such as are often
found throughout this region. The cave showed
evidences of occupation, with charcoal and some
flint chips, but no artifacts; the floor deposit was
The lower Devil’s River is a beautiful little valley
very thin.
and a surprising spot to be found in arid West Texas.
The river is rather broad and still, and for a short
The most interesting cave examined is in a little
distance on either side of its banks are lush green side canyon or crevice. This is of greater extent
grass and trees before one reaches the low cliffs than the others, but the exterior rock-shelter is not
bounding the valley; beyond these is the usual arid large. The detritus slope resembles in nature the
country. Fish, quail, pigeons and deer are abundant. “burnt-rock” mounds, containing a few arrowheads
If the valley was in this condition in aboriginal days and other artifacts. Further back, the cave has a
it must have been a favorite spot for permanent or low dim interior which had to be entered on hands
temporary habitation but, although I neglected to and knees. Here an interment was found, the head
inquire, it may be that this oasis is the result of recent about 8 inches beneath the surface. It lay on its
engineering work.
right side facing north with the head toward the
back of the cave, the legs to the front. The lower
No open habitation sites were noted, but in the
leg bones were doubled against the thigh, not folded
cliffs near the river are frequent habitable caves and
against the torso but at right angles to the latter. It
rock-shelters, and several groups of pictographs
appeared to be the body of a young woman or child.
were noted; these were the subjects of the
Although the body lay on its side, the head lay in
archeological investigations. As the results were of
vertical position with the jaw at the bottom; the
slight importance, I take this opportunity of noting
lower jaw was missing or decayed. The head lay
them here, though without the photographs and
against a rock on which were two layers of twilled
drawings of the caves and petroglyphs.
matting which probably originally covered the head.
One group of caves is in the low cliffs about At the rear of the cave were found several other
two miles south of the Carruthers ranch. One of skeletal fragments which probably had been
these caves extends far back, with crevices and excavated before; these consisted of a fragmentary
niches; it is about fifty yards from the river bank. child’s cranium and a few vertebrae of an adult.
The floor is high with much dirt and fallen rock
On the site of Mr. Carruthers ranch is a campand the roof, where not fallen, is smoke-blackened.
site on which I picked up some complete and
There is much detritus at the mouth of the cave,
numerous fragmentary arrowheads, scrapers, and
with some flaked artifacts resembling those of the
other flaked artifacts. It is said that the last band of
neighboring “burnt-rock” mounds, and many chips
Indians in this region camped here for some time.
of the same material, suggesting an identity of the
two cultures.
Painted pictographs are numerous in this region.
One group, excellently made and well preserved,
Another neighboring cave was partly excavated
about 150 feet long and 30 feet high, was found on
by trenching and making other test-pits. This is
a nearby cliff, and at Cedar Canyon, a few miles
about 75 feet above the river and 300 feet from it,
north of the ranch, a large group of petroglyphs
and, like all the places investigated, is on the east
was found on an overhanging cliff. The colors
side of the river. Its maximum habitable length is
employed seemed to be various shades of black or
27 feet, width 15 feet, the average height about 6
dark blue, sepia, buff, yellow and red. Most of the

96

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

characters are drawn in outline, but a few are in a few Indian camp-sites were seen, evidenced by a
solid color. Figures of human beings, animals and thin accumulation of shell, far less than in sites near
many of difficult identification were noted.
Rockport and Corpus Christi. At San Vicente a
number of arrowheads and several potsherds were
On the same trip a few days were spent on the
collected, all large and crude. Very large projectile
ranch of Mr. David Rose, not far from Brackettville.
points are said to have been found there. At Soto la
The kind hospitality of Mr. Rose is a pleasant
Marina accumulations of shell are very common
memory. A cave was investigated there, in which
along the high banks of the river, and many
only a short time before Dr. Ronald L. Olson had
arrowheads are found in these, mainly large and
also worked. No artifacts were found by me, and
not very well made. Some potsherds were also
no unequivocal proof of human habitation below
found, but recent Spanish pottery is so common on
the surface, but in one stratum at some depth
these sites that it was impossible on the spot to
considerable charcoal was found. Several typical
select the aboriginal ones; possibly all are recent.
burnt-rock mounds were also observed on this
The arrowheads showed no small fine points, no
ranch.
serrated edges, and no pronounced barbs. Many
A few enjoyable days were spent around Austin broken stones were seen, often in small heaps, and
with Dr. Pearce, Rockport with Mr. George C. somewhat resembling, except in size, the burnt-rock
Martin, and Brownsville with Mr. A. E. Anderson, mounds of Texas. At Loreto we were told that there
but no excavations were attempted and no were quantities of potsherds and flints to be found
observations made that are not well known to the between there and the coast. South of Soto la
readers of this Bulletin, mainly through the Marina the culture apparently is higher. Between
publications of the above-mentioned authorities.
there and Aldama there are said to be high walls
and terraces, and near Eslabones, about 15 leagues
As briefly mentioned in the last number of the
to the southwest, we were told of round buildings
Bulletin, p. 34, I took advantage of my presence in
made of stone without mortar, twenty feet or more
Brownsville to motor south to Soto la Marina in
high, with vaults or “bovedas” on the top, of
Tamaulipas. Except for the Huaxtec melon olla
obsidian daggers and other evidences of a much
mentioned in the aforesaid article very few
higher culture.
evidences of aboriginal occupation were noted, and
the general culture must have been of a low type. J. ALDEN MASON.
In the lagoon area immediately south of Brownsville

