Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

55

TEXAS PALEONTOLOGICAL NOTES
BY C. A. HOWARD
(It is part of the writer’s hopes that this brief
sketch will stimulate among the people of Texas an
interest in the great wealth of Paleontological
material that lies within the boundary of our State.)
Texas soil has given up remains of forms of
prehistoric life of types that have been found at no
other place in America. I have in mind the skeleton
of the finback reptile “Dimetrodon gigas,” found
near the town of Seymour, Baylor County.l This
great amphibian was probably the dominant type
in the American Permian, reaching a length of from
6 to 7 feet and a height of about 5 feet. It crawled
along the ground much as modern reptiles do, and
in all likelihood lived along the borders of pools
and swamps, feeding upon the smaller reptiles and
amphibians. The striking spines which formed a
crest along the back were elongations of the
vertebrae (From the Permian of Texas photo page
601).2 Dr. R. T. Hill in describing the fauna of the
Glen Rose beds says, “In the typical Comanche
peak section the lower 30 feet is marked by
numerous mollusks, forming a massive agglomerate,
above which is a single stratum, from which one
exceedingly rare fish, the only specimen of its genus
hitherto found in America “Macrepistius Arenatus”
Cope, has been procured. Prof. E. D. Cope3, says
abundant remains of vertebrata were found in the
Loup Fork bed North of the South fork of Red River,
East of the eastern escarpment of the staked plains.
Prof. Cope in commenting on the extinct mamalia
‘Diplarthra’ says: the genus is like Hippidium in
dentition and like the Hippotherium in the structure
of the feet. Its principal distribution is North
America, where it is confined, so far as yet known
to the Loup Fork beds. Prof. Cope also describes a
megalonyx Leptostomus from the Blanco beds and
states that the discovery is of much interest, as
carrying back our knowledge of the presence of
this genus of Sloths in North America to an older
terrain than that in which it has been hitherto known
to occur.
4

Dr. R. S. Lull of Yale describes specimens found
by Dr. E. W. Shuler of S. M. U. in the Dallas sand

pits. Among a number of mammoth skulls, bearing
splendid tusks, were bones of Equus Scotti the Texas
horse, an ancient bison, species undetermined; bony
scutes from the skin of the giant sloth, a finely
preserved occiput of a large sabre-tooth cat (the
Sabre-tooth tiger), a species of Pleistocene Camel
and part of the skull and teeth of a four pronged
antelope (Tetrameryx Shuleri). Remains of this
species of antelope have been found at no other
place in the entire world.
5

It is interesting to note that Dr. R. T. Hill in
1886 found Dinosaur bones near the town of
Lambert, in Parker County. The location where the
sands were exposed is south of the railroad just
east of Grindstone Creek, a little to the north of the
town.
6

Mr. W. E. Wrather has described in a very
interesting manner the Dinosaur tracks found in
Somervell and Hamilton Counties. Mr. C. W.
Gilmore of the Smithsonian Institution replies to
Mr. C. B. James of Hamilton, concerning these
tracks as follows:
“These are in all probability the foot prints of
one of the large three-toed Dinosaurs. Similar
footprints have been reported to the authorities of
the Institution from near Glen Rose, Texas. (Plate
26, Figures 1 and 2). The fossil remains of an
animal known as Trachodon, have been found in
Cretaceous rocks of Texas, which are of sufficient
size to have made such tracks as those depicted.”
Mr. F. F. Sturgis, Engineer and Naturalist of
Dallas, reports a location in Mills County, about 2
to 5 miles south of the town of Star on Bennett Creek,
where there are Dinosaur tracks leading in two
directions. There is also a large groove associated
with these tracks that is thought to be an impression
of the tail. Other marks or impressions are said to
be where the reptile sat down, leaving an impression
of his haunches. One foot print measures 22 inches
from heel to tip of toe. Another track shows a claw
missing. The tracks all show to be three-toed.

56

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

7

“The Localities and Horizons of
Permian Vertebrate Fossils in Texas”
shows a wide variety of vertebrate
forms to have lived in the North Central
part of the state, in either one or three
of the sub-divisions of Permian time.
Prof. Cummins outlines the general
section as follows: The earliest and
most easterly being the Wichita
followed successively by the Clear Fork
and Double Mountain.

Vertebrate Localities of Wichita
Division
Onion Creek–A few miles east of
Archer City there is a small tributary
on the south side of the Little Wichita
River called Onion Creek. Near the
mouth of this stream, the first fossil
vertebrate of the Texas Permian was
found by Prof. Jacob Boll.
Cottonwood Creek–This creek is
about ten miles south of Archer city and
is a tributary of the South Fork of Little
Wichita.
Fire Place–This is on the west side
of the South Little Wichita, about six
miles south of Archer City. It is one of
Boll’s localities.
Elm Creek–A tributary of the South
Fork of the Little Wichita, about 12
miles southwest of Archer City.
Collections were made on east side of
creek.
Fossils: Dimetrodon gigas, D.
dollovianus

Plate 26
1. and 2. Tracks of Dinosaur Trachodon.
Fig. 1. Length of impression 14 ½ inches;
width 13 ¼ inches.
3. Tooth of Mammoth. (Extreme length 8 ½
inches.)
4. Tooth of Mastodon (Extreme length 6 ½ inches.)

Post Oak Pens–This locality is south
of the head of Kickapoo Creek, on the
head of the South Fork of the Little
Wichita River, about 15 miles southwest
of Archer City. From here, quotes Prof. Cummins,
Fossils: Empedias alatus, Dimetrodon incisivus,
“I took quite a collection of the teeth of fishes.”
Naosaurus cruciger.
Long Creek–This creek runs into the Little Wichita
Slippery Creek–This is a small creek that runs
on the north side, just a little west of the Copper mines. into the North Fork of the Little Wichita from the
This locality is four miles west of Archer City.
north side almost directly south of the town of

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

57

Dundee, and a little above the mouth of Briar Creek This slab was procured from a gulch a few miles
on the south side.
south of Kiowa Peak in Stonewall County.”
Fossils: Trimerorhachis sp., Eryops sp.,
The writer having lived in Dallas County for
Dimetrodon incisivus, D. giganhomogenes, the past 15 years has naturally kept on the watch
Ctenosaurus sp.
for any remains of prehistoric life that could be
found or that which might be brought to light in the
The Eryops mentioned above represents a very
various sand and gravel excavations.
interesting gigantic amphibious reptile, the remains
of which are now in the Field Museum in Chicago
From the above I have taken out from the Lagow
and elsewhere.
Sand beds a fine lower jaw bone of the Mammoth
(Plate 26, Fig. 3), containing a splendid tooth. A
number of other odd bones belonging to the same
Vertebrate Localities of Clear Fork Division
animal, also a fragment of wood belonging to a tree
that grew in Pleistocene times. The structure of the
Coffee Creek–In the Northeastern corner of
wood fiber resembling that of the modern Post Oak.
Baylor County, about 4 miles west of Military
Crossing, a small stream, generally dry, runs into
At Chalk Hill, on the Fort Worth Pike, I have
the big Wichita River from the north. An old cattle found many “sharks teeth”; although popularly
trail crossed the Big Wichita River about three called sharks teeth, it is possible that some of these
miles above the mouth of Coffee Creek. As will be belonged to some other form of fish. At this same
seen, this was a very prolific locality for collectors. locality there are invertebrates by the hundreds. All
these fossils occur in the Eagle Ford Shales of
Fossils: Diplocaulus Magincarnis, D. limbatus,
Upper Cretaceous Age.
D. sp., Trimerorhachis mesops, Zatrachys
microphalmus, Eryops sp. Acheloma Cumminsi,
At Records crossing on the Trinity River I have
Anisodexis imbrocarius, Diadectes phaseolinus, D. taken out portions of the ribs of a giant water reptile
sp., Pariotichus aguti, Captorhinus anguaticeps, somewhat resembling the Mosasaur. It has been
Pantylus trypychus, P. coicodus, Labradosaurus estimated by the fragments of the whole skeleton
hamatus, L. sp., Demetrodon gigas, D. dollovianus, that was at one time exposed to view that the reptile
Naosaurus claviger, N. Cruciger, N. Macrodus, measured about thirty-five feet in length.
Edaphosaurus pagonias.
On a creek northwest of the City there was also
Brushy Creek–Six miles northwest of Seymour found a fine jaw bone fragment of some marine
in the head of Brushy Creek, which runs into the reptile, containing two fine teeth.
Big Wichita River on the south side.
As a final description of the various fossil
Fossils: Eryops sp., Diadectes sp.
vertebrates and their location in Texas perhaps I
should not fail to mention the so-called petrified
Stamford–While connected with the Texas
snake found by Mr. W. E Shoopman of Vera, Texas,
Geological Survey, Prof. Cummins states that he
near Truscott. Mr. Shoopman brought the specimen
collected some vertebrates from the Clear Fork beds
to Dallas a few years ago.8 Dr. E. W. Shuler and
in Haskell County, near Oteys Creek, not far from
Dr. F. N. Duncan were in doubt as to what the fossil
the present town of Stamford.
was, though they both incline toward the belief that
it belongs to the amphibian family. It has
Vertebrate Localities of the Double Mountain
characteristics of both reptiles and amphibians, but
Division
it is not believed that any fossil identical with it
has ever been found before. Referring to the
Kiowa Peak–A few years ago, states Prof. specimen, Dr. Shuler said, “It is probably new to
Cummins, “I procured a sandstone slab with science both as to species and genera. It has many
impressions of tracks of a reptile, but no attempt amphibian characteristics, but resembles the modern
has been made to identify the animal making them. snake in general appearance. Perhaps the closest

58

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

modern group is that of the (gymnophiona) or legless
amphibia, which are snake-like in appearance. The
fossil is a remarkable one.
Texas, as a whole, is rich in fossil remains—so
rich, in fact, that Yale University, Chicago
University, American Museum of Natural History,
Field Museum, National Museum, Los Angeles
Museum, and even the British Museum and many
other institutions of the sort have sent expeditions
down here to recover such fragments and take them
back to the respective museums of those
establishments of learning.
These institutions and perhaps others send
expeditions regularly into our State and remove its
paleontological treasures while Texans permit it,
not realizing the historical and educational value
of the fossils.
Below are listed a few Texas Counties and the
fossil vertebrate fauna found therein:

Bibliography
(This bibliography covers those publications
which either deal entirely or touch upon the
Paleontology of Texas).
1. Cope, E. D. — Vertebrate Paleontology of the
Llano Estacado; 4th annual Report Geological
Survey of Texas, 1892.
2. Cope, E. D. — Paleontology of the Vertebrata;
Geological Survey of Texas, 1891.
3. Cope, E. D.— Contribution to the knowledge
of the Blanco beds of Texas; Philadelphia
Academy of Science Proc. Part 2; 1892.
4. Cope, E. D. — Paleozoic Fishes; U. S. National
Museum Proceedings, Vol. 14. 1892.

Baylor, Dinosauri; Dallas, Mammoth, Mastodon, 5. Cragin, F. W. — Invertebrate Paleontology of
(Plate 26, Fig. 4), Camel, Smilodon, Antelope,
the Texas Cretaceous; 4 th Annual Report
Equus, Reptilian; Denton, Mammoth; Hamilton,
Geological Survey of Texas, 1892.
Dinosauri (Tracks); Mills, Dinosauri (Tracks);
Navarro, Mammoth; Parker, Dinosauri; Palo Pinto, 6. Cummins, W. F. — Geology of Northwest
Mammoth; Somervell, Dinosauri (Tracks);
Texas; (Contains list of Pleistocene and fresh
Stonewall, Dinosauri (Tracks); Taylor, Mammoth;
water shells). 4th Annual Report Geological
Tarrant, Dinosauri, Mammoth, Mastodon; Wichita,
Survey of Texas. 1892.
Dinosauri; Wilbarger, Mastodon.

1. A. W. Grabau in A Comprehensive Geology.
2. R. T. Hill, Geography and Geology of the Black and
Grand Praires of Texas, page 159.
3. Vertebrate Paleontology of the Llano Estacado; pages
18-20-49-51.
4. “Fauna of the Dallas Sand Pits.” American Journal of
Science; Vol. 2, 1921.
5. 21st Annual Report, U. S. G. S., Part 7, p. 192.
6. Dinosaur tracks in Hamilton County, Texas; The Journal
of Geology, Vol. 30, 1922.
7. By Prof. W. F. Cummins in the Journal of Geology, Vol.
16, 1908.

7. Singley, J. A. — Natural History of Texas; (Part
1, Texas Mollusca. Part 2, Texas Birds). 4th
Annual Report Geological Survey of Texas.
1892.
8. Hyatt Alpheus. — Carboniferous Cephalopods;
4th Annual Report Geological Survey of Texas.
1892.
9. Drake, N. F., & Thompson, R. A. — The
Colorado Coal Field of Texas; (Contains fine
list of Invertebrate fossils and their locations).
4th Annual Report Geological Survey of Texas.
1892.

8. Professors of Geology and Biology in S. M. U.

10. Marcou, Jules. — The Cretaceous and
Carboniferous Rocks of Texas; Proceedings of
the Boston Society of Natural History, Vol. 8. 1861.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

59

11. Knowlton, F. H. — Fossil Plants from Texas; 23. Paleontology of Malone Jurassic Formation of
American Geologist, Vol. 16. 1895.
Texas, with Notes on Malone Mountain Near
Sierra-Blanco, Texas. U. S. G. S. Bulletin No.
12. Fontaine, W. M. — Fossil Plants from the
226.
Comanche Series of Texas; U. S. National
Museum Proceedings, Vol. 15. 1893.
24. Flora of Woodbine Sand at Arthurs-Bluff, Texas;
U. S. G. S. Prof. Paper No. 129-G.
13. Merrill, J. A. — Fossil Sponges from the
Cretaceous of Texas. Harvard Collections, 25. Berry, E. W. — Paleontology; McGraw Hill
Museum of Comparative Zoology, Vol. 28.
Book Company. 1929.
1896.
26. Grabau, A. W. — A Comprehensive Geology;
14. Hill, R. T. & Vaughan, T. W. — The Lower
D. C Heath & Company. 1921.
Cretaceous Gryphaeas of Texas; U. S. G. S.
Bulletin No. 151.
27. Williston, S. W. — Water Reptiles, Past and
Present; University of Chicago Press.
15. Harris, G. D. — Neocene Mollusca of Texas;
American Paleontologist, Vol. 1, No. 3. 1895. 28. Hill, R. T. — Geography and Geology of the
Black and Grand Prairies of Texas. U. S.
16. Hill, R. T. — Paleontology of the Cretaceous
Geological Survey, Part 7, 1900.
Formation of Texas; Washington Biological
Society Proc., Vol. 8. 1893.
29. Cummins, W. F. — The Localities and Horizons
of Permian Vertebrate Fossils in Texas. Journal
17. White, I. C. — Fossil Plants of the Permian
of Geology, Vol. 16. 1908.
Beds of Texas; Bulletin Geological Society of
America, Vol. 3. 1892.
30. The Cenozoic Deposits of Texas; (Tells of many
Fossils and their localities).
18. Gidley, J. W. — A New Species of Pleistocene
Horse from the Staked Plains of Texas; Bulletin 31. Lull, R S. — Fauna of the Dallas Sand Pits.
American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 13.
American Journal of Science, Vol. 2. September,
1900.
1921.
19. Bose, Emil. — The Permo-Carboniferous 32. Berry, E. W. — Fruits of a Date Palm in the
Ammonoids of the Glass Mountains of Texas;
Tertiary Deposits of East Texas. American
University of Texas Bulletin No. 1762. 1917.
Journal of Science, Vol. 37. 1914.
20. Case, E. C. — The Permo-Carboniferous Red 33. Prof. Angelo Heilprin. — The Eocene Mollusca
Beds of North America and Their Vertebrate
of the State of Texas. Prof. of Acad. Natural
Fauna; Carnegie Institution of Washington No.
Sciences; Philadelphia, October, 1890.
207. 1915.
34. Emory, W. H. — Report on the U. S. and Mexico
21. Lucas, F. A. — Animals of the Past; Handbook
Boundary Survey, Vol. 1. House of
American Museum of Natural History No. 4.
Representatives Document No. 135. 1857.
1922.
22. Wrather, W. E. — Dinosaur Tracks in Hamilton
County, Texas; Journal of Geology, Vol. 30. 1922.

