Buried Middens in the Floodplain of the Little Wichita

103

BURIED MIDDENS IN THE FLOODPLAIN OF
THE LITTLE WICHITA RIVER
BY ADOLPH HENRY WITTE
The following report describes investigations
made by the writer in a portion of the floodplain of
the Little Wichita River that lies approximately
twenty miles from its mouth. In this area the
floodplain averages one mile in width, and the
stratified silts and gravels are known to be fifty feet
in thickness in certain stations. Necessarily, the data
presented shall be brief since no excavations have
been undertaken, and identifications of certain
paleontological specimens from the middens have
not been completed.
The writer and others have been collecting Indian
artifacts in the channel of the Little Wichita River
for a number of years. No special importance was
attached to these river-bed specimens as rather
similar artifacts could be picked up on nearly every
farm and ranch within this locality. It was merely
presumed that these articles had been lost by the
aborigines on the floodplain and old stream terraces,
and by erosion and flood had found their way into
the river’s channel. In 1930, Dr. Cyrus N. Ray of
Abilene, Texas, published an account of the deeply
buried middens discovered by him in Central Texas.
(Note 1). The possibility of there being similar
stratified hearths in this area was considered by the
writer, but several years passed before an actual
discovery was made.
Stratified Sites on The H. Body Estate
Site No. 1. A thick stratum of pleistocene gravel
is exposed in the bottom of the Little Wichita River’s
channel at this spot. Almost a complete artifact of
the type usually classified as Folsomoid, was found
here. Fragments of the teeth of an extinct horse
and one of the pleistocene elephants were found
when the writer recently examined this location.
Site No. 2. Faint midden exposure 8 feet below
the present surface of the Little Wichita floodplain.
Worked flakes were found in situ. Additional
artifacts found were a crude axe with sinuous edge,
several oval manos, similar to those in use up to

fairly recent times and a segment from the middle
of a large knife or spear. Many broken hearth stones
of local sandstone were observed.
Site No. 3. The midden horizon averages twelve
feet below the present surface of the floodplain and
contains a considerable amount of ash, charcoal and
shell. Hearth stones and a broken mano were
observed in situ. A few bones, apparently completely
mineralized, were noticed. These have not been
identified at this date. A leaf-shaped knife of local
quartzite was found in the channel here.
Site No. 4. The migration of the Little Wichita
River channel is eastward at this particular spot.
The bank is 20 feet high and almost perpendicular.
This site is exceptionally rich in finished artifacts
of stone. A battered quartzite hammerstone was first
observed in situ 15 feet below the surface of the
floodplain. Various types of artifacts are
represented. Part of the materials are not found
locally. The tools from this deeply stratified site
prove without question that tanged and barbed
weapons have been in use for a vast length of time
in this area. The few animal bones from this site
have not been identified. One bone, apparently the
ulna from a large bison, shows usage as a tool.
Burial Midden, Four Miles
Southwest of Henrietta, Texas
The migrating channel of the Little Wichita River
exposed this midden. The dark stratum of camp
rubbish averages four feet below the present surface
of the floodplain except in one small area recent
surface erosion has exposed the horizon. Chipped
and burned stones, ash and charcoal, are plentiful.
Only a sparse number of animal bones were
observed and these were mostly from the smaller
fauna. A small cache below the main stratum
contained a mass of small seeds, possibly from the
hackberry tree. During the early spring of this year
(1937), three local youths noticed that a human skull
had become exposed just below the midden stratum

104

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

and near the south edge of the deposit. The youths
hurriedly excavated the burial, but were
disappointed when no mortuary articles were found.
Several weeks later, two of the youths who had
excavated the burial, accompanied the writer to the
site. Since a few of the bones remained in situ, it
was possible to determine the original position of
the burial. The skeleton was closely flexed, lying
on the left side with the head toward the west, and
had been buried in a slight depression below the
level of the midden stratum. The fill around the
burial was the dark midden soil. An undisturbed
stratum of light colored silt, four feet in thickness
lay above the burial area. Two hundred feet down
the channel from Burial No. 1, a depression filled
with dark midden soil was observed. This proved
to be a second human burial. Only a few long bone
fragments and most of the pelvis were saved. The
skull from burial No. 1 was sent to Dr. Cyrus N.
Ray, for comparison with the ancient crania in his
collection from Central Texas. (See Editor’s note
**, also Plate (42) Nos. 1 and 2).
Several additional stratified sites containing
hearths and camp rubbish have been recently
discovered in this area. Two of these sites are
approximately twenty feet below the surface of the
floodplain.

Conclusion
It is obvious that man occupied certain areas in
the Little Wichita River floodplain during a
geological period when the surface of the plain was
at a much lower altitude. The evidence also shows
that climatic changes followed the initial
occupation, in some instances, many feet of
slackwater silts were deposited upon the midden
sites. Subsequent occupations of the floodplain
were followed by reoccurring excessive humid
conditions and additional strata of silts were
deposited upon the midden sites. It is usually
conceded that the climatic changes mentioned here
occurred a number of thousands of years ago in
the late pleistocene.
Henrietta, Texas.
Reference
Note 1. Ray, Cyrus N., Report on Some Recent
Archeological Researches in The Abilene Section,
Texas A. & P. Society’s Bulletin, Vol. 2, 1930.
**The skull sent here for comparison is not near
so long headed as the typical Abilene skulls, but
the bones, have an appearance of age, and may be
rather old.

PLATE 42.
No. 1. Side view of skull found by Adolph Witte buried below alluvial deposit.
No. 2. Front view of the same skull.

C. N. R.

