60

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

FIELD WORK OF MEMBERS
Mrs. R. B. Alves, of El Paso, reports that the
activities of herself and some other members of
the El Paso Archeological Society have been
mainly devoted, during the past year, to the
gathering and recording of potsherds in her district.
Archeological evidence in many of the sites in that
area is rapidly disappearing through present use of
the land. Approximately forty sites have been
located which contain pottery.

his investigations along the Texas Coast in the
vicinity of Corpus Christi.

Sam Chamberlain, of Refugio, is carrying on a
survey of the Coast from the mouth of the Colorado
River to the Rio Grande.

Mrs. Annie Moran, of Weatherford, reports that
many sites are to be found in Parker and adjoining
counties, but little research has been made in this
part of the State. Metates and manos, and mortars
and pestles are found; the projectiles are finely
made. One stone object, highly polished, was
found, drilled with two holes, one from each side.
The positions of these holes does not suggest that
the artifact was an ornament, and Mrs. Moran
believes it was part of a fire-making implement.

Colonel M. L. Crimmins, of El Paso, has devoted
most of his time during the past year, to giving
lectures on archeological and historical subjects.
Pictographs of the Hueco Tanks, Chronicles of the
Aztecs, Zuni Folk Tales, and History of the Messila
Valley are some of the topics covered by Colonel
Crimmins in lectures, and talks over the radio.

Dr. J. E. Pearce and A. T. Jackson, of the
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas,
have had an expedition in east Texas throughout
the summer. It is hoped that the results of Dr.
Pearce’s investigations will be made public at an
early date as he has been carrying on researches in
different parts of the State for a number of years.

Henry E. Elrod, of Houston, reports a survey
made in Uvalde County. Between thirty and forty
middens were examined, without excavation. No
pottery or bone was found. The middens consisted
of burnt stone, ashes, and charcoal and many were
quite extensive. One covered an area between three
and four acres and was about 6 feet high. Curiosity
seekers had hunted for arrow heads, but had left
the principal artifacts, consisting of scrapers,
knives, hammer-stones, etc.

During 1931 Dr. Cyrus N. Ray has made one
trip to San Saba County and three trips to Colorado,
Texas, for the study of mortar hole sites.

The common type of artifact found was a type
of scraper made from a thin flake of flint and
roughly shaped with the cutting edge retouched in
a symmetrical arc.
The territory covered extended over both
branches of the Frio River from Concan up Frio
Canyon to the head waters thereof.
George C. Martin, of Rockport, and Mr. S. W.
Woolford, of San Antonio, have headed a small
expedition to the Big Bend, section for the Witte
Museum at San Antonio. Mr. Martin has continued

In Taylor County, a covered site has been found
in the highest and oldest terrace of a stream. Far
above the present flood water level of the adjoining
stream, and five feet below the present ground level
is a hearth of burned rock, charcoal and ashes,
overlaid with horizontally deposited beds of clay
and gravel. A new stream bed and terrace have been
formed below the terrace in which the hearth is
located.
Two additional sites in which mammoth bones
occur have been found.
Many additional surface archeological sites have
been located, three of which contained pottery
sherds.
On a trip to Sagerton, Texas, some campsites
located by Mr. P. L. Summers were visited. On the
Clark farm near an old spring is a surface pottery

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

61

site containing unpatinated flint artifacts
and bone.
Remains of several much older sites on
the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos
River at different levels from the surface
down to a depth of about eight feet were
found. There seems to be little flint in this
area and many artifacts have been made
from quartzite. Manos and metates are
found.
E. B. Sayles, of Abilene, reports that
during the past year his work has been
largely exploratory. He has located and
plotted thirteen new sites in this section.
The principal of these are: A large campsite
occupied by pottery users, covering
approximately fifteen acres, and showing
evidence of longer occupation than other
similar sites recorded by this observer.
Two small rock shelters have been found,
and a dual burial in a rock mound grave
located on a high point. One of the burials
had been almost entirely destroyed by
cremation, and many of the bones of the
other likewise charred. A new site at which
numerous mammoth bones are eroding out,
has been located, and from the condition
of these bones it appears that this is an
original deposit and not a redeposit as is
frequently the case with similar bones found
in gravel.
Field trips have been made in the
Abilene section with Dr. Cyrus N. Ray for
the purpose of photographing several of his
sites.
An exploratory trip was made to the sand
dune area to the northwest of Odessa where
a number of sites discovered by T. J. Kellis
of Wickett were visited. Here black on white
pottery was found.
Several days were spent at Amarillo
looking over some of the numerous sites
located in that section by Floyd V. Studer.

Plate 17
1. Burned rock midden on Frio River in Uvalde
County. Located on survey by Henry E. Elrod.
2. Hematite objects. Small polished hematite of iron
celts are occasionally found in Jones, Taylor, and
Shackelford Counties. The double bitted hematite
celt on the right is an unusual form. The three
artifacts on the left are chipped and unpolished
hematite; the lower one is a scraper.
The three middle artifacts are the usual form of
polished hematite celts.
3. Double bitted stone axe from Castron County,
New Mexico. Collection of El Paso Archeological
Society.
Length 6 21-32 inches; width 2 1-8 inches;
greatest thickness, 5-8 inch.
Polished with irregularly beveled corners.

62

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

Victor J. Smith, of Alpine, reports that during
the past year additional notes, photographs,
specimens from representative sites, occupied by
Indians, in the whole Big Bend area have been
added to the Museum collections at Alpine as a
result of the work in the field.
Eight new locations have been discovered,
making a total of 165 now plotted in this area. On
some of the old sites, intensive work has been
carried on, including the recording of pictographs.

teeth and caudal vertebrae of a small dinosaur in
the Triassic beds were found; also two new turtle
beds.
At a site found by Mr. Studer, Dr. Case of the
University of Michigan excavated the armor plate
and vertebrae in place of a phytosaur.

Hundreds of specimens represented by teeth and
individual bones of horse, camel, rhinoceros, dog,
and other forms of mammals of the Pleistocene
and Pliocene were collected during the past year
Floyd V. Studer, of Amarillo, reports that a total from local sites.
of 115 archeological sites have now been located
Mrs. Maud D. Sullivan, of El Paso, reporting
and platted by him in the Panhandle area.
for the El Paso Archeological Society, writes that
At some of the Post Basket Maker sites circular during the past year members of this organization
rooms have been observed for a number of years, have made field trips in the vicinity of El Paso and
but only recently has it appeared that these have have collected a number of specimens. These have
any special significance. Only proper and complete been added to the Society’s Museum.
excavation will determine, however, if such circular
Of unusual interest among the finds made by
rooms are akin to the Kiva.
members, is a double bitted axe found by Mr.
Significant among the finds made during the Ellwood C. Erdis. Such specimens are not
past year were charred corn cobs and pieces of commonly found.
compressed clay showing impressions of corn cobs
A number of village sites have been located in
found at two widely separated Post Basket sites.
the El Paso district. These occupy either the Rio
Work is now being done at three sites with the Grande bottom lands, the edges of low mesas, the
view of completely excavating them as quickly as high mesa, or the prairie. Mimbres, Pueblo, Black
time and proper work will warrant.
and Brown Hueco Tanks, and Chihuahua pottery
are the common types found on the sites.
In paleontology, three new Triassic reptile beds
have been located together with several Pleistocene
Metates, manos, mortar holes, and obsidian
deposits. The skull containing the tusks of a artifacts are all characteristic. Kitchen middens
mastodon was found a short distance from have not been located in this section, the artifacts
Amarillo, and this was excavated for the Panhandle and camp debris being scattered. Hearth stones
Plains Historical Society museum at Canyon, have been observed, as well as the adobe
where it will be mounted for exhibit. A number of foundations of houses.

