AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
CITY OF MONTGOMERY 1097 SEWER PLANT RELOCATION PROJECT
IN MONTGOMERY COUNTY, TEXAS

Project Number: BVRA 06-17

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
LEFCO Environmental Technology, Inc.
15001 Walden Road, Suite 203
Montgomery, Texas 77356

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey was conducted at an eight acre site in
Montgomery County, Texas by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) on
August 10, 2006 for LEFCO Environmental Technology, Inc. (LEFCO). The area
was investigated through shovel testing, and no archaeological sites were
identified. One primary cortex flake was recovered in a shovel test, and the area is
defined in the report as an isolated find. It is recommended that construction of the
sewer treatment plant be allowed to proceed as planned. No artifacts were
collected.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are appreciative of those who participated in this project. Maps
and logistical support were provided by Philip LeFevre of LEFCO. Jean Hughes at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) checked the site records for
previously recorded archaeological sites in the project area and vicinity. Jennifer
McMillan provided technical support, and Nora Rogers assisted in the editing and
proofreading of this report.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................5
METHODS ..........................................................................................................10
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................12
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................14
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................15
Appendix I. Shovel Test Log

FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location .............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map ................................................................. 3
Figure 3. Shovel Test Locations ................................................................................... 11
Figure 4. View of Project Area ..................................................................................... 13

iv

INTRODUCTION
BVRA was retained by LEFCO of Montgomery, Texas to conduct an
archaeological investigation at an eight acre tract of land adjacent to Town Creek in
west-central Montgomery County, Texas (Figure 1). The proposed construction is
associated with an 800 to 1000 acre Planned Community known as Buffalo
Springs. When completed, the eight-acre tract within this development may be
deeded by LEFCO to the City of Montgomery to be used as a site for a sewer
treatment plant. This is a privately funded project with the money for construction of
the subdivision and this study provided by LEFCO. In 2005, a similar study was
performed at a three acre tract on the south bank of Town Creek. Since that time,
a permit has been issued by the Texas Commission for Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) for this project. The location of the proposed sewer treatment plan has
been moved to the opposite side of the creek necessitating a second visit by a
professional archaeologist.
The area examined is depicted on the USGS 7.5' topographic map
Montgomery, Texas dated 1976 (Figure 2). The project area is located on the north
side of Town Creek about 1.2 kilometers northeast of the corporate limits of
Montgomery, Texas. It is approximately 1.1 kilometer south of F.M 1097 where this
road turns to the northeast and 540 meters east of Montgomery Cemetery.
Montgomery County is located in Southeast Texas, an area known to
contain significant archaeological sites.
A summary of previous work by
professional archaeologists in the county is summarized in the Archaeological
Background section below. Because of the potential of the project area to contain
significant prehistoric and/or historic sites, a cultural resource study by a
professional archaeologist was required by the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division. At the time of this study, the land was privately owned.
Therefore, an Antiquities Permit was not required.
The project number assigned by BVRA is 06-17. The field survey was
conducted on August 10, 2006. William E. Moore was the Principal Investigator,
and Edward P. Baxter was the Project Archaeologist.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The following statements were summarized from the Handbook of Texas
(Webb 1952) and the Soil Survey of Montgomery County (McClintock et al.
1972:1). Montgomery County, in the East Texas Timberlands Region, is bounded
on the north by Walker and San Jacinto counties, on the east by Liberty County, on
the south by Harris County, and on the west by Waller and Grimes counties.
Montgomery County covers 1047 square miles of flat to gently rolling terrain. The
county's principal water source is the San Jacinto River basin drainage system,
which includes Peach, Caney, Spring, and Bushy creeks. Montgomery County is in
the southeastern part of Texas in the land resource area of the East Texas
Timberlands, Blackland Prairie, and the Gulf Coast Prairies. The northern and
western parts of the county are undulating and the south and southeastern parts
are level to gently sloping. Elevation varies between 79 feet in the southern part of
the county to 330 feet in the northwestern part.
Vegetation is typical of the Piney Woods area with thick stands of longleaf,
shortleaf, and loblolly pines; hickory; maple, sweet gum and black gum; oak, and
magnolia trees. Grasses include Virginia Wildrye, blackseed needle grass, and
purpletop.
Wildlife in the county includes eastern gray and fox squirrels, various
species of bats and skunks, and small herbivores such as gophers, mice, rabbits,
and armadillos, as well as raccoons, white-tailed deer, opossum, bobcat, coyote,
and red and gray fox. Alligators, frogs, toads, and numerous species of snake,
including the poisonous copperhead, cottonmouth, coral snake, and rattlesnake,
are found in abundance. A wide variety of birds such as mockingbirds, cardinals,
doves, quail, blue jays, and roadrunners, to name a few, are also native to the area.
The climate is subtropical humid with warm summers and mild winters. The
average annual relative humidity is 73%, and the average rainfall is 47.44 inches.
The average annual temperature is 68° Fahrenheit. Temperatures in January
range from an average low of 39° to an average high of 61° and in July range from
72° to 95°. The growing season averages 270 days per year with the last freeze in
early March and the first freeze in late November (Webb 1952).
The entire three acres is located within one soil type, Oktibbeha soils, 2 to 5
percent slopes, eroded (ObC2) as defined below by McClintock et al. (1972:23-24).
These gently sloping soils are in irregular areas that range from 10 to 50 acres in
size. The texture of the surface layer is variable. It is a mixture of the original
loamy surface layer and the underlying clayey layer. In some places it is clay loam,
and in other places it is fine sandy loam. Most areas of Oktibbeha soils were
formerly cultivated, but now they are used for pasture.

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
General
Montgomery County is located in the Southeast Texas Archeological Study
Region of the Eastern Planning Region as defined by the Department of Antiquities
Protection in Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993). It is located in the Southeast Texas
cultural-geographical region (Region 6) as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:88-90) in
a statistical overview. At the time the overview was published, Montgomery County
was 14th in the region with 62 recorded archeological sites. The 62 sites
comprised 3.81% of the region and .31% of the state. As of August 11, 2006 there
were approximately 205 recorded prehistoric and historic sites in Montgomery
County (TARL site files). No prehistoric sites are listed in the National Register of
Historic Places, but one prehistoric site (41MQ73) has been determined to be
eligible (TARL files). The Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region
of Texas (Moore 1989) cites 87 references for the county. Although many of these
investigations have been small area surveys, often resulting in no sites being
recorded, several projects involving larger areas have been conducted. The
following is a discussion of previous work in Montgomery County.
Prehistoric Overview
A detailed discussion of the culture sequence of the project area is beyond
the scope of this negative report. An excellent summary of some of the major
efforts to describe and synthesize Montgomery County prehistory is presented in
the Lake Creek Reservoir report (Bement et al. 1987). Although brief discussions
of Montgomery County prehistory are presented in the various contract reports for
the area, only two deal with major excavations of prehistoric sites. These are the
Scott’s Ridge site (41MQ41) by Shafer and Stearns (1975) and sites 41MQ4 –
41MQ6 in the San Jacinto River Basin, Lake Conroe (Shafer 1968).
Shafer and Stearns (1975:8-11) divide the prehistoric past of this area into
two temporal periods. These are the Lithic Period (8000 B.C. to 200 B.C.) and the
Ceramic Period (200 B.C. to A.D. 1700). The Lithic Period is that time prior to the
invention and use of the bow and arrow and pottery. Very little is known regarding
the early sites of this period except sites are found on the crests of high ridges
overlooking stream valleys or old geomorphic features where original surfaces are
reasonably intact. Later in the period, sites are found on recent geomorphic
features such as sandy ridges, knolls, and low bluffs along permanent streams of
all sizes. In general, subsistence data for this period is lacking.

5

The Ceramic Period began with the introduction of pottery in Southeast
Texas. The Early Ceramic Period is characterized by the same kinds of lithic
artifacts used during the previous period, and sites are found on the same
landforms. The only discernible difference is the use of pottery. Site locations were
the same during the Late Ceramic Period, and the bow and arrow was now being
utilized.
Prehistoric Investigations
The first site to be recorded in the county is a Late Prehistoric site (41MQ1)
on the West Fork of the San Jacinto River documented by E. Mott Davis of the
Anthropology Department, The University of Texas at Austin, during a field trip to
Montgomery County in 1956. Following this visit by E. Mott Davis, the county
remained virtually unexplored until 1965 when archaeologists working for the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project (TASP) surveyed an area to be affected by the
proposed Conroe Reservoir (Shafer 1966). As a result of this survey, 32 sites
(41MQ4-41MQ36) were recorded and three were recommended for testing. In the
spring of 1967, three sites (41MQ4 - 41MQ6) recorded during the Lake Conroe
survey were tested by TASP (Shafer 1968). These excavations provided the first
substantial body of data for Montgomery County and made it possible for the first
time to discuss the archaeology of the area based on artifacts excavated under
controlled conditions.
In 1975, eight years after the Lake Conroe excavations, an archaeological
survey was conducted in the Sam Houston National Forest adjacent to Lake
Conroe (Shafer and Baxter 1975). Three sites (41MQ41 - 41MQ43) were recorded
in Montgomery County, and two sites (41WA81 - 41WA82) were recorded in
Walker County.
During the summer of 1975, site 41MQ41 was tested by archaeologists from
Texas A&M University (Shafer and Stearns 1975). This site is located in the area
to be affected by construction of the Scott's Ridge Recreational Area. This effort
was very significant at the time as it provided an opportunity for archaeologists to
test and confirm the hypothesis that "prehistoric sites having considerable antiquity
do occur on older landforms in the area" (Shafer and Stearns 1975:37).
The work conducted at Lake Conroe only sampled sites on recent
geomorphic features. The Scott's Ridge site, however, represents the first site
investigated in the area that could be "tentatively placed in the Early and Middle
Lithic Periods" (Shafer and Stearns 1975:37).

6

Probably the largest area to be investigated in the county was the site of the
proposed Woodlands Development, a tract of 23,000 acres in the southern part of
the county along Spring Creek. The project was initiated by the Coastal Zone
Resources Division of Ocean Data Systems, Inc. under subcontract with Greiner
Engineering Sciences, Inc. (1980) of Tampa, Florida in 1979. In all, this project
recorded 12 prehistoric sites (41MQ63 - 41MQ74). Six of the sites are associated
with the Neo-American or Late Prehistoric (corresponds to the Ceramic Period as
defined by Shafer and Stearns); 2 sites contained both Neo-American (Ceramic
Period) and Archaic (Lithic Period) components, and 4 sites were classified by the
authors as "undifferentiated" prehistoric.
No historic sites or standing structures were encountered. Not one of the 12
sites was eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. Except
for sites 41MQ70 and 41MQ73, no further work was recommended. The majority
of sites are described as "small and unproductive, possibly short-term or transitory
habitation localities."
In 1981, sites 41MQ70 and 41MQ73 were tested by Greiner Engineering
Sciences, Inc. (1981) in order to determine their eligibility for the National Register
of Historic Places. Site 41MQ70 was found to be not eligible, and site 41MQ73 was
found to be potentially eligible.
In 2002, an archaeological survey of approximately 262 acres in central
Montgomery County was conducted by Moore Archeological Consulting (Schubert
et al. 2002). The entire development consists of approximately 11,000 acres;
however, the Corps of Engineers only required that a smaller sample be examined.
A two-stage investigation was conducted; Stage 1 consisted of shovel testing, site
delineation, and excavation of test units, while Stage 2 completed site testing and
conducted backhoe trenching. The investigation was limited to areas along Fish
Creek, one of its tributaries, and the location of two smaller water control structures.
Five prehistoric sites (41MQ175 - 41MQ179) were recorded during the Stage I
survey, all of them along Fish Creek. Each of the five sites was in settings with
deep sandy soil. The sites were not recommended for further work.
The most recent investigation in the immediate area was an archaeological
survey for the proposed Montgomery Plaza Ltd. Project (3.176 acres) in the city
limits of Montgomery by BVRA (Moore 1993). This study recorded one site
(41MQ125) containing sparse amounts of prehistoric and historic components. No
additional work was recommended.

7

Historic Overview
The Historic Period is marked by the introduction of European artifacts and
materials into the prehistoric lifestyle. Although no well defined Historic Indian sites
have been found in the immediate area, examples are present in the Wallisville
area where evidence of French and Spanish interaction is believed to be present
(Gilmore 1974; Dillehay 1975) and Lake Livingston where at least two sites
containing materials believed to represent Alabama or Koasati Indian settlements
have been examined (Hsu 1969). Two historic sites are listed on the National
Register of Historic Places. They are the Arnold-Simonton House (possible
plantation) and the Kirbee Kiln (a 19th century pottery). Kirbee Kiln is also listed as
a State Archeological Landmark.
According to Newcomb (1961), the main indigenous Indian groups in
Southeast Texas south of the Caddo were the Bidais, Deadose, Patiri, and
Akokisa. These groups were closely related and spoke the Atakapan language. A
written document by an early resident of Harris County mentions a group of Bidais
or Akokisa in the area in 1918 (Moore 1992).
Montgomery County is located in an area that was divided into colonization
contracts eventually administered by Stephen F. Austin. Anglo-American settlers
began moving into the area in the 1820s. One of the first pioneers was Andrew
Montgomery who established a trading post at the crossing of two historic trails,
Loma del Toro and the Lower Coushatta Trace about three miles west of the
project area. Other settlers joined him, and the area became known as
Montgomery Prairie. Montgomery County was created in 1837 with the town of
Montgomery as the first seat of government.
The early economy was based on agriculture consisting mainly of
subsistence farming and plantations. The Arnold-Simonton home in Montgomery
was constructed in 1845 and may have functioned as a plantation. Although cotton
was the major crop, corn and tobacco were widely grown. In the early days, the
lumber industry provided fuel and building materials.
Following the Civil War, the railroad brought major changes to the area.
Railroads not only allowed for the creation of new settlements, but they also
allowed for a more efficient means of harvesting and marketing the vast amounts of
timber in the area. In the latter part of the 19th century and the early part of the 20th
century, lumber was a booming industry in Montgomery County. Shipping points
along the railroad became communities as the area prospered. In the 1950s, this
industry declined due to lack of conservation of timber resources and increased
competition in other areas of Texas.

8

In the 1930s, the discovery of oil created a new era of prosperity with the
creation of the Conroe Oil Field. An oil field near Lake Creek eventually became
the 6th largest in the country. Evidence of this industry is still found in the form of oil
field roads, abandoned oil derrick sites, and wooden structures. Oil is still a major
form of revenue for the county. The last major change is the growth associated
with the proximity of Montgomery County to the Greater Houston Area.
Historic Investigations
In general, few projects designed to investigate historic sites have been
carried out in Montgomery County. Most historic sites have been recorded during
archaeological surveys in which prehistoric and historic sites were identified and
recorded. Only two sites in the county are listed in the National Register of Historic
Places. These are the Arnold-Simonton House on Rankin Street and the Kirbee
Kiln archaeological site (41MQ38). One site (41MQ73) has been determined to be
eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.
Kirbee Kiln is a 19th century stoneware pottery that operated near the town
of Montgomery between 1850 and 1860. It produced utilitarian stoneware pottery
used in the preparation and storage of food. This unique historic site is described
as a “groundhog kiln” and is the first to be excavated in Texas (Malone et al. 1979).
More information regarding the history of Montgomery County can be found
in county histories by William Hardy Gandy (1952), Robin Montgomery (1975), the
Montgomery County Genealogical Society (1981), as well as the Handbook of
Texas (published book and online).

9

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, a records check for previously recorded sites in or
near the project area was conducted by Jean Hughes at TARL. The Project
Archaeologist visited the project area on August 10, 2006. Overall, the area was
covered in various grasses and trees making a surface inspection impossible.
Therefore, the investigation relied on shovel testing. The shovel tests (ST) were
excavated at regular intervals when possible with an emphasis on testing those
areas with sandy soil. When a flake was found in Shovel Test 6, three additional
tests were dug in the vicinity of the find. Since the discovery test was at the
western edge of the project area, no tests were dug in this direction. The discovery
test was also very close to the creek, which is the southern boundary of the project
area. Therefore, only one test (ST 7) was dug in this direction. Two tests (ST 8
and ST 17) were dug to the northeast and southeast. They were negative; so no
additional tests in the area were considered necessary. In all, 17 tests were
excavated by arbitrary 10 cm levels, and all sandy soil was passed through ¼”
hardware cloth. All tests were dug to clay. The soils in the project area vary in
depth from 10 cm to 95 cm. A shovel test log was kept and is part of the field notes
(Appendix I). The approximate location of the 17 tests is shown on Figure 3. A
digital camera was used to document the field conditions present during the survey,
and control was achieved by the use of a hand-held GPS.

10

Figure 3. Shovel Test Locations

11

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
This survey did not identify any prehistoric or historic archaeological sites
within the boundary of the eight acre project area. One primary cortex flake was
found at approximately 60 cm in Shovel Test 6. This single flake is defined in this
report as an isolated find. Additional shovel tests may produce more flakes, but
there is no evidence that a significant site is present. The project area was found to
be situated on a gentle slope and low-lying areas adjacent to Town Creek and an
unnamed tributary (Figure 4). At the time of this survey, most of the eight acres
was in pasture, and the soils were predominantly sandy loam and clay loam over
clay. In addition to the short grass associated with the pasture, stands of elm, oak,
and hackberry were present as well as a thick, thorny brush paralleling the creek.
At the time of this survey the area was being used as pasture.

12

Figure 4. View of Project Area

13

RECOMMENDATIONS

No archaeological sites were found to be present within the boundaries of
the eight acre project area. The presence of a single flake is not considered to be
significant. It is, therefore, recommended that construction of the sewer treatment
plant be allowed to proceed as planned without further consultation with the Texas
Historical Commission. This survey was conducted according to the Minimum
Survey Standards as outlined by the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology
Division.

14

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28.
Bement, Leland C., Rolfe D. Mandel, Jesus F. de la Teja, Dan K. Utley, and
Solveig A. Turpin
1987 Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir,
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research
Report Number 97.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1975 Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity River Delta,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report Number 51.
Gandy, William Hardy
1952 History of Montgomery County, Texas. (publisher not cited)
Gilmore, Kathleen
1974 Cultural Variation on the Texas Coast: Analysis of an Aboriginal Shell
Midden, Wallisville Reservoir, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report Number 44.
Greiner Engineering Sciences, Inc.
1980 Cultural Resources Survey of the Woodlands, Texas. Greiner
Engineering Sciences, Inc.
1981 Archeological Testing at Sites 41MQ70 and 41MQ73 at the
Woodlands, Montgomery, Texas. Greiner Engineering Sciences, Inc.
Hsu, Dick Ping
1969 The Arthur Patterson Site: A Mid-Nineteenth Century Site, San
Jacinto County, Texas. Texas State Building Commission and Texas
Water Development Board, Archeological Report Number 5.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission, Cultural Resource Management Report Number 3.
McClintock, W. R., Jr., T. L. Galloway, B. R. Stringer, L. E. Andrew
1972 Soil Survey of Montgomery County, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Forest
Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.

15

Malone, James M., G. H. Greer, and Helen Simons
1979 Kirby Kiln: A Mid-19th Century Texas Stoneware Pottery. Texas
Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Report 31.
Montgomery County Genealogical Society, Inc.
1981 Montgomery County History. Hunter Publishing Company. Conroe,
Texas.
Montgomery, Robin
1975 The History of Montgomery County. Jenkins Publishing Company.
Moore, William E.
1989 Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 31.
1993 An Archaeological Survey of the Proposed Montgomery Plaza, Ltd.
Project (3.1765 Acres) Montgomery County, Texas. Brazos Valley
Research Associates, Contract Report Number 24.
Moore, William E., and Roger G. Moore
1992 An Archeological Survey of the Site of the Proposed Montgomery
County Municipal Utility District Number 15, Sewage Treatment Plant
in Montgomery County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting,
Report of Investigations Number 68.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press.
Schubert, Darren K., Douglas G. Mangum, and Roger G. Moore
2002 An Archeological Survey and Backhoe Trenching of Four Sites in
the Bluegreen Southwest Ridgelake Shores Development in
Montgomery County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting,
Report of Investigations Number 312.
Shafer, Harry J.
1968 Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin,
Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Number 13.
Shafer, Harry J., and Thomas B. Stearns
1975 Archeological Investigations at the Scott’s Ridge Site (41MQ41),
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas A&M University, Anthropology
Laboratory, Report Number 17.

16

Shafer, Harry J., and Edward P. Baxter
1975 An Archeological Survey of Scott’s Ridge and Kaygall Recreation
Sites, Sam Houston National Forest, Texas. Texas A&M University,
Anthropology Laboratory, Report Number 15.
Webb, Walter Prescott
1952 The Handbook of Texas (Volume I). Texas State Historical
Association. Austin.

17

Appendix I. Shovel Test Log

Shovel
Test

Depth
(cm)

Result

1

30

Negative

sandy clay loam over clay

2

30

Negative

sandy loam over clay

3

20

Negative

clay loam over clay

4

40

Negative

sandy loam over clay

5

90

Negative

sandy loam over clay

6

95

Positive

sandy loam over clay

7

40

Negative

sandy loam over clay

8

40

Negative

sandy loam over clay

9

30

Negative

clay loam over clay

10

30

Negative

clay loam over clay

11

40

Negative

sandy loam over clay

12

20

Negative

clay loam over clay

13

30

Negative

clay loam over clay

14

10

Negative

clay

15

10

Negative

clay

16

10

Negative

clay

17

90

Negative

sandy loam over clay

Soils

