Reviews

105

REVIEWS

Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections From
Louisiana and Mississippi, by James A. Ford,
School of Geology, Louisiana State University;
Anthropological Study No. 2, published by the
Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological
Survey, New Orleans, Louisiana, November 1,
1936. It contains 285 pages which include besides
the text fifty illustrations and graphs, a glossary, an
index, and a bibliography.
The title of this treatise is somewhat misleading
as one might think that the book concerned every
type of archeological material obtained from a
campsite since its author does not state what kind
of artifacts or remains his collections consist of.
The book is devoted primarily to ceramics both
historic and prehistoric, and is a supplementary
study to Mr. Ford’s previous papers, Outline of
Louisiana and Mississippi Pottery Horizons and
Ceramic Decoration Sequence at an Old Village
Site Near Sicily Island, Louisiana.
The author after having made both intensive and
extensive studies of pottery throughout Louisiana
and Mississippi has divided the material into seven
decoration complexes: Choctaw, Caddo, Tunica,
and Natchez which of course have historic
affiliations; and the Deasonville, Coles Creek, and
Marksville which apparently were entirely
prehistoric in that area. He further subdivides these
types. For example, the Coles Creek complex
according to his studies consists of thirty-six
subdivisions.
Fortunately, Mr. Ford has not been content with
mere classification, but uses it as a means toward
an end: the establishment of a chronology for the
Lower Mississippi Valley. Herein lies the chief value
of his work, and distinguishes it from any previous
study made of aboriginal ceramics of this region.
Until Mr. Ford began his work the publications
which dealt with the ceramics of the Lower
Mississippi Valley had been primarily descriptive,
with apparently no aim in view other than to show

what had been excavated. Naturally, while that
attitude reigned sherds were of little importance,
for they do not often make good illustrations and
besides descriptions of sherds sometimes seem
ridiculously insignificant when potsherds are
considered separately.
By studying the horizontal and vertical
distribution of sherds with their varying types of
decoration, Mr. Ford has not only given the
archaeological work of Louisiana and Mississippi
a method, but he has also given the archaeologists
of the Lower Mississippi region an aim. Whether
future researches will confirm his conclusions (and
the reviewer believes that his major ones will stand)
or not, we must credit the Analysis of Indian Village
Site Collections from Louisiana and Mississippi
with being the first thoroughly scientific study of
ceramic complexes in the Mississippi delta. By not
contenting himself with descriptions the author has
shown an intellectual maturity which has not been
demonstrated by writers of the past who have dealt
with the archaeological remains in the same region.
Throughout his treatise Mr. Ford distinguishes
between the elements and the motif of decoration.
By referring to the glossary the reader can
understand what the author means by his use of
those terms, but it is evident, nevertheless, that Mr.
Ford has either created a terminology of his own
or else has a confused idea of what a motif is. This
terminology seems to be warranted neither by the
terms of designers nor by the definition of the words
in the Oxford and Webster dictionaries which define
a motif as “a salient feature or element of a
composition.” The reviewer believes that Mr. Ford
has used “motif” when he refers to the predominant
element of decoration and “element” when he
speaks of the subordinate ones. In the science of
archaeology where there is generally a confusion
of terms it seems advisable to avoid further
complication, especially where the subject is related
to another field such as design which already has a
standard terminology.

106

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

The chronologic value of motifs which is stressed
throughout this publication seems lessened when
one realizes that the range of motifs both in primitive
and modern art is decidedly limited. According to
the designer, Best-Maugard, there are only seven
motifs. A casual glance at the designs of ceramic
collections in any museum will show that these same
motifs have been used over and over again by
various peoples, and that it is not the motif which
is especially important in the differentiation of a
decoration group, but rather the way in which the
motifs are arranged to create a pattern, and the
adjustment of the latter to a vessel or other object.
Furthermore, rhythm, repetition, subordination, and
balance should be considered when a pattern is
studied, for they will constitute an integral part of
every decoration. Unfortunately, sherds are
frequently too small to show more than a part of a
decoration, and the research worker has to content
himself with the study of one or more isolated
motifs, and is unable to get a proper conception of
the rhythm, balance and repetition of the entire
decoration. If, for example, oppositional balance
should have been employed in the arrangement of
motifs, as was done on several vessels of pre-Caddo
ware from the Crenshaw Site, Arkansas, and the
researcher found unrelated in the field a potsherd
from different sides of the same vessel, he might
easily drink he had specimens of several types of
decoration. It is possible that Mr. Ford, because of
having to confine his studies chiefly to sherds, has
created too many subdivisions for his Coles Creek
decoration complex.

Minneapolis, 1936. Price $7.50. It contains 197
pages, including 183 drawings, and photographs,
of which over fifty are photographs. It contains a
bibliography, and an index.
When one observes the results of the finely
detailed technical study which has been devoted to
this skull of disputed antiquity, he is moved to a
sad contemplation of the fact that in Texas he has
found close to fifty, extremely dolichocephalic, and
evidently otherwise more primitive type skeletons,
buried on high bluffs, either immediately above, or
not far from the deepest buried ancient floor
middens, thus far found in America, and that on no
one of these has there been lavished such detailed
attention by any physical anthropologist so far as
he knows.
Dr. Jenks has certainly gone minutely into every
detail concerning this find. His industrious research
is to be commended. The writer being a physician,
and not a physical anthropologist, will necessarily
confine his comment’s to general observations
concerning the skull as shown in the illustrations,
and will make comparisons with Abilene skulls.

The skull as shown in the photographs in norma
lateralis, or from the side, has a considerable
resemblance to the numerous skulls of the
excessively dolichocephalic race discovered by this
writer near Abilene (Abilene Man), in two respects:
first, it has the occipital bun or protrusion of the
posterior portion of the skull characteristic of
Abilene Man, and it also has nearly as much
prognathism. However, its frontal region is not near
Mr. Ford’s book is not only a worthy so low and flattened. The lower maxillary appears
contribution to American archaeology, but also it to be shaped somewhat similarly. The chin of
can well serve as a model for future publications in Minnesota Man seems more prominent than those
the field of prehistoric ceramics.
of most of the local skulls.
S. D. Dickinson,
State A. and M. College
Magnolia, Arkansas.

The difference between Minnesota Man and
Abilene Man is much more apparent in a vertical
view of the Minnesota skull, which shows it to be a
much broader skull, a cephalic index of 77.09 is
****
quite broad-headed by comparison with Abilene
Pleistocene Man in Minnesota, by Albert Ernest Man, where one sometimes finds cephalic indices
Jenks, Ph. D., Sc. D., Chairman of The Department so low as 60.71. (Hooten, E. A., Five Texas Crania,
of Anthropology, of The University of Minnesota, This Bulletin, Vol. 5, 1933).
printed by The University of Minnesota Press,

Reviews
Minnesota Man
Left
Right
Antero-postero diameter
L. M. 1
12.09 mm.
12.0 mm.
L. M. 2
12.0 mm.
12.0 mm.
L. M. 3
12.8 mm.
13.1 mm.
Labio-lingual diameter
L. M. 1
12.3 mm.
12.3 mm.
L. M. 2
12.1 mm.
12.1 mm.
L. M. 3
11.8 mm.
11.6 mm.

The lower molar teeth of W. Myatt 2 (Abilene
skull) were measured by Otto O. Watts, Ph. D.,
Professor of chemistry and physics in HardinSimmons University, and the following table was
prepared of these measurements, and those of
Minnesota Man. Only crown widths are shown.

107
Will Myatt 2, Abilene Skull
Left
Right
13.3 mm.
Partly decayed
15.0 mm.

12.7 mm.
13.5 mm.
12.7 mm.

12.3 mm.
Decayed 13.2 mm.
13.0 mm.

12.4 mm.
12.1 mm.
11.7 mm.

Man’s molar teeth are much larger than those of
the Minnesota Man’s teeth. Insofar as the long
bones of Minnesota Man are shown, there appear
to be no remarkable features in them, such as the
unusual antero-postero curvatures of femora, and
the very platycnemic tibiae (shafts markedly
flattened from side to side) to be found in Abilene
From the above table it will be seen that the Man skeletons.
diameters of the crowns of most of this Abilene
Cyrus N. Ray.

