60

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

FIELD WORK OF MEMBERS
Mrs. Eileen E. Alves of El Paso reports that a
museum building is projected for El Paso. During the
spring several burials have been found connected with
what seems to be a pit house culture, located within
thirty miles of El Paso. These were accompanied by
potsherds but no other artifacts.
Frank Bryan of Waco has made extensive
studies of patination, form and geological
distribution of local artifacts, a paper on some of
his finds appears in this number of the Bulletin.
Col. M. L. Crimmins of San Antonio is now at
El Paso and will continue his study of pictographs and
petroglyphs in that section. During the past year he
has given lectures on pictographs and petroglyphs at
San Antonio, Abilene, College Station, El Paso, and
Austin, Texas. Photographs and other records were
made of pictographs and petroglyphs at Sierra Alta,
Ojo del Alamo and Cornudas del Alamo (Northeast
of El Paso), Texas and Three Rivers and Taos, New
Mexico.
With Roscoe Conkling of El Paso an inspection of
the excavations of Bishop Cap Peak, north of El Paso
was made. Here human bones associated with those
of the ground sloth, American camel, etc., were
found. And with Clyde T. Reed, President of the
Texas Academy of Science, inspection trips were
made to Hueco Tanks, Cornudas and Ojo del
Alamo, all north of El Paso, and to Three Rivers,
New Mexico.
During June, Col. Crimmins was in the east doing
research in the American Museum of Natural History,
and in conference with N. C. Nelson, Curator of
Prehistoric Archaeology of that institution and with
George C. Valliant, Assistant Curator of Mexican
Archaeology.
Henry E. Elrod of Houston is making a comparative
study of the patina of Texas stone artifacts with the
eoliths and paleoliths of Europe. A large part of his
researches have been done along the Coast of Texas
in the vicinity of Rockport, where he has recently found
42 beads made from human bones which still retain
their coat of red paint.

Dr. W. C. Holden of Lubbock is continuing his
investigations of the Texas Panhandle area.
C. A. Howard of Dallas reports carrying on
researches in California Museums during the past
summer on certain Quatenary animals, remains of
which frequently occur in his section.
A. T. Jackson of Mineola has completed a
voluminous preliminary study of Texas pottery and has
carried on investigations in the vicinity of Llano. He
spent two weeks in Wood County and considerable
time in Camp County with Dr. J. E. Pearce of the
University of Texas, where numerous vessels of
apparently Caddoan origin were excavated.
Geo. C. Martin, Wendell H. Potter, and E. H.
Sellers, of Rockport, and Alexander Cox and John
B. Dunn of Corpus Christi are continuing their
investigations of the Coastal region. Mr. Martin reports
many new sites have been recorded and one shell heap
excavated. During the past year Messrs. Martin and
Potter have published the second part of their
Preliminary Survey of that section, and report the third
part will soon be ready for publication.
During the past summer, Dr. J. E. Pearce, of the
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas, has
investigated a shell mound containing a burial, located
by Messrs. Martin and Potter, and Dr. E. H.
Sellards, head of the Texas Geological Survey has
made a reconnaissance and press report on a site,
fully described by Mr. Martin in this issue of the
Bulletin, and which was identified by Mr. Martin
some time ago as a site of greater age than the other
Coastal sites in that vicinity.
Mrs. Annie Moran, of Weatherford, has spent
several months at Deming, New Mexico, gathering
local material. Mrs. Moran has accumulated a fine
collection of pottery and flints.
Dr. Cyrus N. Ray of Abilene reports the
discovery of many deeply buried hearth sites, some
of which are described in this issue of the Bulletin.

Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society

61

In addition many new surface and near surface
Prof. Victor J. Smith, of Alpine, has carried on
sites have been found and collections made additional rock shelter investigations in his area.
therefrom.
Floyd V. Studer, of Amarillo reports that most
Mortar hole groups have been examined near of his work is reconnaissance, but some field work
Christoval, San Saba, and Paint Rock, and others have was done during the year.
been reported in Jones, Taylor and Stephens Counties.
Four new pueblo sites were located, and one
Comparative studies of patina and mineral room was investigated, showing the masonry to be
incrustations of artifacts have been made. Also enough typical of all other similar sites; pottery sherds also
human skeletal material from the Abilene and Coast typical. Few artifacts found.
sections has now accumulated so that comparisons of
Eight new Plains type sites were found,
both structure and mineralization of bones may be
accompanied by typical artifacts.
made.
Through Mr. Studer’s arrangements, Dr. W. C.
Three previously unreported human burials have
Holden and party excavated a site that is reported in
been found; two of sand dune type.
this Bulletin.
Teeth and bones of mammoth at one place, of
Sixty trips were made during the year to various
mastodon at another, and unidentified elephas bones
sites.
were found at a third site.
Field exploration parties from the University of
Potsherds have been found in seven local sites and
Michigan and University of California visited the
reported in others. Most of this is thick, having several
territory and were shown numerous fossil sites by Mr.
types of incised and finger nail decorations, some of it
Studer, where many specimens were collected. Mr.
appears to show brush marks or scratches and some
Studer also collected numerous specimens from the
is entirely plain. The color is light brown outside and
Triassic, Pliocene, Pleistocene and Miocene beds in
black inside. Sand appears to have been used in
his section, chiefly Buettneria, phytosaur, horse, camel,
tempering some of this type. Another type of pottery
rhinoceros, teleocerous, mastodon, elephant and dog.
not so commonly found is of light reddish brown color
on both sides and is quite thin, and appears to have
Other field trips were made by Mr. Studer in the
been tempered with crushed limestone.
vicinity of Tahoka, Muleshoe, through New Mexico
and Arizona, and around Abilene, San Antonio, Austin,
E. B. Sayles of Abilene reports the recording of
and Temple.
46 sites in this vicinity, including 9 sites at which pottery
occurs. A small rock shelter and sand dune burial (in
Mrs. Maud D. Sullivan of El Paso reports that
addition to that described in this number of the Bulletin) the El Paso Archaeological Society is planning an active
have been excavated. A flint quarry with adjacent work program for the coming winter. During the spring
shops extending for nearly three miles, has been lectures were given.
identified and investigated; in connection with this
Prof. Otto O. Watts of Abilene has made a
quarry were a number of works similar to rock cairns
preliminary investigation of a rock shelter in the western
in other localities. A series of rock shelters were
part of the State. A ledge nearby contained 184 boat
located, one with seven right and left hands outlined in
shaped mortar holes. Pottery sherds, similar to those
oxide of iron.
of the Plains region, and of the decorated wares of
Three unreported sites containing remains of New Mexico were secured. Also a good collection of
Pleistocene animals recorded.
flint artifacts was made.

