AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE BASTILLE PIPELINE
AND GULAG WELL SITE IN FORT BEND COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 06-25

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Wayne J. Crouch Environmental Services
11907 Park Meadow Court, Suite 100
Houston Texas 77089

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of a proposed natural gas pipeline (2500 feet) and well
site (three acres) on the Central Unit of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice in Fort
Bend County, Texas was performed by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) on
December 22, 2006 and February 5, 2007 under antiquities permit 4364. The area was
investigated through a 100% Pedestrian Survey, shovel testing, and backhoe trenching.
The area was found to be disturbed through agricultural practices, particularly due to sugar
cane production, and recent crops grown by the prison. No archaeological sites were
found, and no artifacts were collected. Further work is not warranted.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to those who made the successful completion of this
project possible. Wayne J. Crouch was our initial contact. He provided names and phone
numbers of other persons involved with this project. Project area maps were provided by
Allen Rogers at Louisiana Gas Development Corporation and Jacki Schimdt of OGM Land
Company. Prison personnel who provided assistance were Mike Corley, Larry Kent, and
Alton Clark. The permit application was signed by Mike Corley and Larry Kent for the
prison and Robert Hatter for the General Land Office. We are grateful to Bob Skiles,
archaeologist at the General Land Office, for discussing previous work in the area. The
field survey was performed by Edward P. Baxter who also prepared some of the maps and
co-authored the report. Jean Hughes, Records Conservator at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL), performed the records check for previously recorded sites
in the project area and vicinity. Technical support was provided by Jennifer McMillan,
and Nora Rogers served as editor and proofreader.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT................................................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................................................................................ iii
INTRODUCTION.......................................................................................................................... 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ................................................................................................... 4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND.................................................................................... 6
METHODS OF INVESTIGATION.............................................................................................. 8
RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................... 12
REFERENCES CITED .............................................................................................................. 13
Appendix I: Research Design
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log

FIGURES

Figure 1. General Location ......................................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area.................................................................................................................. 3
Figure 3. View of Area Along Bastille Pipeline ........................................................................ 5
Figure 4. View of Area at Gulag Well Site................................................................................ 5
Figure 5. Location of Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trenches.................................................. 9
Figure 6. Backhoe Trench Profiles Along the Bastille Pipeline........................................... 10
Figure 7. Backhoe Trench Profiles at the Gulag Well Site .................................................. 11

iv

INTRODUCTION
Louisiana Gas Development Corporation of Shreveport, Louisiana has plans
to construct a natural gas pipeline and two well sites on property owned by the
General Land Office and the Texas Department of Criminal Justice in Fort Bend
County, Texas (Figure 1). The length of the pipeline is 5937 feet, and the size of the
well site is three acres. A three-inch pipe will be placed in a trench two feet wide.
The pipe will be placed beneath 36 inches of cover. The easement for the pipeline
will be five feet. The pipeline will connect with another pipeline at the north end of
the project area at the Sugar Land airport and the Bastille well 5566 feet to the south
and west. A second pipeline is planned and will connect the Bastille well to the
Gulag well. The project area is in close proximity to Oyster Creek, a former channel
of the Brazos River. This is a very high probability area for the presence of
significant prehistoric sites. Therefore, an archaeological survey was recommended
by the Texas Historical Commission (THC) Archeology Division. A survey of the
Bastille well was not required by the THC. It was decided, based on a conversation
with Debra L. Beene of the THC, that the Gulag well and approximately 2500 feet of
the pipeline should be investigated. The need for a survey of the pipeline that will
eventually connect the Bastille well and the Gulag will be determined at a later date.
The project area is depicted on the USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangle Lake
Jackson (2995-312) (Figure 2).

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The project area is located within the West Gulf Coastal Plain section of the
Coastal Plain physiographic province as defined by Fenneman (1938:100-120).
Fenneman subdivides this province according to the age of the geological formations
(Gulf series) that roughly parallel the Texas coastline. The area is hilly and situated
within the East Texas timber belt. Gould (1969) describes it as an area characterized
by gently rolling to hilly topography with light colored soils that are acid sandy loams or
sands.
The climate is sub-humid to humid, and the weather is considered to be
predominately warm. Annual rainfall for Brazos County is 39.21 inches. A January
minimum temperature of 42 degrees Fahrenheit and a July maximum temperature of
95 degrees Fahrenheit combine to produce a growing season of 274 days (Kingston
and Harris 1983:180). The altitude varies from 200-400 feet.
The entire project area is located within soils belonging to the Norwood series
(Mowery et al. 1960). The map unit name for the specific soil type in the project area is
Norwood silt loam (Nc). Norwood series soils consist of very deep, well-drained,
moderately permeable soils on flood plains. They developed from reddish calcareous,
loamy alluvial sediments. Slopes are mainly 0 to 1 percent, but range to 8 percent.
Flooding ranges from rare to frequent except where protected by levees. A typical
profile of the Norwood silt loam is reddish-brown silt loam from 0 to 18 inches followed
by light reddish-brown silty loam from 18 to 44 inches. Some areas are underlain by
strata of clay at depths of 30 to 40 inches.
Norwood series soils are used mainly for cropland. Typical crops are cotton,
soybeans, alfalfa, sorghum, and oats. Some areas are in improved Bermuda grass
pasture. Native vegetation includes pecan, cottonwood, elm, oak and hackberry trees
and mid and tall grasses.
At the time of this survey the project area was devoid of all natural vegetation.
The ground cover along the pipeline consisted of pasture and plowed fields, while the
ground cover at the well site consisted of dense weeds and scattered small trees.
Figure 3 depicts the area along the pipeline, and Figure 4 depicts the area at the Gulag
Well site.

4

Figure 3. View of Area Along Bastille Pipeline

Figure 4. View of Area at Gulag Well Site

5

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
According to a published planning document for the Eastern Planning Region of
Texas (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:Figure 1.1.2), Fort Bend County is situated within
the Southeast Texas archeological study region. In 1985, according to a statistical
overview published by the Texas Historical Commission (Biesaart et al. 1985:114), Fort
Bend County contained 22 sites. The archaeological potential of Fort Bend County is
reflected in part by the increasing number of recorded sites found as a result of cultural
resource management studies. As a result of these investigations, the number of
recorded sites now stands at over 300 sites (Texas Archeological Sites Atlas).
Several investigations have been conducted in Southeast Texas that are
relevant to interpreting the archaeology of the project area. In fact, the project area is
in the center of a region that has been the recipient of several major reservoir
construction projects. Other, smaller projects have been conducted by private
archaeological contract firms, state agencies such as the Texas Department of
Transportation and the Texas Water Development Board, and amateur archaeologists.
Reservoirs in the area that have been examined by archaeologists include Addicks and
Barker (Wheat 1953), Lake Livingston (Nunley 1963), Wallisville (Shafer 1966; Ambler
1970), and Lake Creek (Boyd and Button 1985).
Works which have sought to synthesize prehistoric data relevant to the project
area include an early contribution by Sayles (1935) and the writings of Hole (1974),
Shafer (1975), Shafer and Stearns (1975), Shafer et al. (1975), Patterson (1979,
1983), Ambler (1973), Story (1981), Story et al. (1990), and Aten (1983). The latest
work, an expansion of Aten’s (1979) doctoral dissertation, is a particularly ambitious
and useful attempt to integrate ethno-historical, archaeological, and geo-morphological
data for the Upper Texas Coast.
The nearest recorded archaeological sites to the current project area were
identified during a survey of the proposed 750 acre Joseph S. and Lucie H. Cullinan
Park by Moore Archeological Consulting (Moore and Moore 1991) under the field
supervision of William E. Moore. This area is on the north side of Oyster Creek
opposite the current project area. This study found the project area to contain
numerous prehistoric and historic sites indicating intense utilization from the Archaic
period of Texas prehistory through the early twentieth century with limited use to the
present. In all, 23 sites were recorded. Of this number 7 were prehistoric, 12 were
historic, and 3 contained prehistoric and historic components. One site (41FB210)
produced only bone fragments and could not be assigned to either the prehistoric or
historic period. When added to sites 41FB196 and 41FB197, recorded during a
previous study (Moore 1991), 25 archaeological sites are known to exist in the project
area. Prehistoric occupation was found primarily on landforms containing sandy soils,
while historic sites were present in various topographic settings including areas of
clayey soils. The homestead of Alexander Hodge, an Austin “Old Three Hundred”
colonist, was believed to be in the area. No evidence of this site was found, but sites
41FB199 and 41FB200 yielded historic artifacts that may date to this period.

6

Moore Archeological Consulting conducted data recovery at sites 41FB199 and
41FB200 at Joseph S. and Lucie H. Cullinan Park in Fort Bend County in 1993 (Moore
et al. 1996). Both sites were dated to the Late Prehistoric period of Texas prehistory
based on the presence of ceramics and an arrow point at 41FB199 and ceramics at
41FB200. Both sites have received the designation of State Archeological Landmark
because of their significant research potential regarding prehistoric and historic
settlement patters of the area. The unexcavated portions of each site are to be
protected. Additional archaeological work will be required if future construction
becomes a threat to these important resources.

7

METHODS OF INVESTIGATION
Pre-Field Tasks
Prior to entering the field, the site records at TARL and the Texas Archeological
Sites Atlas were checked for the presence of previously recorded archaeological sites
in the project area and vicinity. Relevant archaeological reports documenting work in
Fort Bend County were reviewed in order to become familiar with the types of
prehistoric and historic sites found in the area. The project was discussed with two
archaeologists with intimate knowledge of this area – Bob Skiles, staff archaeologist at
the General Land Office and Roger G. Moore of Moore Archeological Consulting.
Field Survey
The Principal Investigator was William E. Moore, and the Project Archaeologist
was Edward P. Baxter. The entire project area was investigated by a 100% Pedestrian
Survey, shovel testing, and backhoe trenches. Although the proposed Bastille pipeline
consists of 5937 feet, this survey only investigated 2500 feet, which was defined as an
“Area of Interest” by the client based on instructions from the THC reviewer for this
project. The work performed followed the Research Design that was submitted to the
THC as part of the permit application process (Appendix I). The field survey was
divided into two phases. First, the area was walked and shovel tests were excavated.
This allowed the Project Archaeologist to better determine where the backhoe trenches
should be placed. Later, after a delay by bad weather, four backhoe trenches were
excavated.
All excavated earth from the shovel tests was screened through quarter-inch
hardware cloth. Data obtained these tests were recorded on a shovel test log
(Appendix II). All shovel tests were backfilled after evaluation and mapping, and the
location of each test was plotted on the topographic map (Figure 5). The depth of the
shovel tests along the pipeline varied from 10 cm in areas of clay soils to 100 cm
where deep sandy soils were present. The depth of the shovel tests at the well site
varied from 10 cm where water and mud was encountered to 100 cm where deep
sandy soils were present. Nine tests were excavated along the pipeline, and five tests
were excavated at the well site.
Four backhoe trenches were excavated – two along the pipeline route and two
at the well site. Each trench was 10 meters long and 24 inches wide. The depth of the
four trenches reached the bottom depth of the Area of Potential Effect (APE), which
was determined by the client to be four feet. Standing water was a problem in some of
the trenches, causing the walls to collapse. Profiles of each trench were drawn in the
field. Figure 6 depicts the two backhoe trenches excavated along the Bastille pipeline.
The two backhoe trenches excavated at the Gulag Well site are depicted in Figure 7.
Photographs of the project area were taken with a digital camera, and a handheld GPS was used to create waypoints to help locate project area boundaries.

8

Figure 5. Location of Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trenches

9

Figure 6. Backhoe Trench Profiles Along the Bastille Pipeline

10

Figure 7. Backhoe Trench Profiles at the Gulag Well Site

11

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Examination of the files at TARL in Austin, Texas revealed no sites have been
recorded in the project area, and a professional archaeologist had not previously
examined the tract. No archaeological sites were found as a result of this survey.
This survey was conducted in accordance with the Minimum Survey Standards as
outlined by the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division.
It is recommended that the client be allowed to proceed with construction as
planned. Should evidence of an archaeological site be encountered, all work must
stop until the THC can evaluate the situation. In the event the footprint of the project
area changes the THC must be notified as additional survey may be necessary.

12

REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. Richard
1970 Additional Archeological Survey of the Wallisville Reservoir Area,
Southeast Texas. Texas State Building Commission, Archeology
Program Report Number 8.
1973 Excavations in the Trinity River Delta: The Lost River Phase. Texas
Archeological Survey, unnumbered report. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1979 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast: Ethnohistoric and Archeological
Frameworks. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas at Austin.
1983

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press.

Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office of
the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical Commission.
Boyd, Douglas K., and Van Tries Button
1985 Overview of Ethnohistorical and Archeological Resources of the
Proposed Reservoir Locations for the San Jacinto Project, Montgomery
and San Jacinto Counties, Texas. United States Department of the
Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Southwest Region, Amarillo.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern United States. McGraw Hill. New York.
Gould, F. W.
1969 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. The Agricultural and
Mechanical College of Texas, Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
College Station.
Hole, Frank (editor)
1974 Archeological Investigations Along Armand Bayou, Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Report Number 2.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

13

Moore, Roger G.
1991 A Preliminary Cultural Resources Assessment of the Proposed 750 Acre
Cullinan Park, City of Houston, Fort Bend County, Texas. Moore
Archeological Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 34.
Moore, Roger G., and William E. Moore
1991 An Archeological Survey of the Proposed 750 Acre Joseph S. and Lucie
H. Cullinan Park Fort Bend County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 50.
Moore, Roger G., Linda Wootan Ellis, G. Lain Ellis, Laurie S. Zimmerman, William L.
McClure, and Saul Arnow
1996 Data Recovery Excavations at Sites 41FB199 and 41FB200 in Joseph S.
and Lucie H. Cullinan Park Fort Bend County, Texas. Moore
Archeological Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 153.
Mowery, Irvin C., Gordon S. McKee, Francisco Mantazo, and Everett Francis
1960 Soil Survey of Fort Bend County. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Nunley, John P.
1963 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Livingston Reservoir, Polk,
San Jacinto, Trinity, and Walker Counties, Texas. Report submitted to
the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Patterson, Leland W.
1979 A Review of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 50:103-123.
1983 Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in Southeast Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:253-270.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers Number 17.
Shafer, Harry J.
1966 An Archeological Survey of the Wallisville Reservoir, Chambers
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Survey Report
Number 2. The University of Texas at Austin.
1975 Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 46:249-254.

14

Shafer, Harry J., and Thomas B. Stearns
1975 Archeological Investigations at the Scott’s Ridge Site (41MQ41),
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas A&M University, Anthropology
Laboratory Report Number 17.
Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, Thomas B. Stearns, and J. Phil Dering
1975 An Archeological Assessment of the Big Thicket Preserve. Texas A&M
University, Anthropology Laboratory Report Number 19.
Story, Dee Ann
1981 An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist
26(92):139-156.
Story, Dee Ann, Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman, Jerome
C. Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl G. Reinhard
1990 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Research Series Number 38.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 154:143-252.

15

APPENDIX I: RESEARCH DESIGN
BASTILLE PIPELINE AND GULAG WELL SITE
FORT BEND COUNTY, TEXAS
Records Check
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) has contacted the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the state repository for site records, to
determine if previously recorded sites are present in the project area, and no sites
were found. In addition, a review of relevant archaeological reports will be
conducted, and local informants and professional archaeologists with knowledge of
this area will be interviewed when possible concerning known sites and artifact
types in the area.
Project Description
Louisiana Gas Development Corporation of Shreveport, Louisiana plans to
construct two three-acre well sites (Bastille and Gulag) and 5937 feet of natural gas
pipeline. Most of the pipeline is on property owned by the State of Texas. A
portion of the pipeline is on the Central Unit of the Texas Department of Criminal
Justice, and one of the well sites (Gulag) is on property owned by the General Land
Office. The project area is depicted on the Sugar Land topographic quadrangle
(2995-312). The Louisiana Gas Development Company of Shreveport, Louisiana is
providing the funding for this project. No federal agency is involved.
The Texas Historical Commission reviewed the Bastille and Gulag well
projects and recommended an archaeological investigation of the Gulag well site,
its associated pipeline, and a portion of the pipeline associated with the Bastille
prospect. The Bastille well and a portion of its pipeline are located in a low
probability area and do not require any further review. Additionally, the Gulag
pipeline route has yet to be identified and will require an archaeological
investigation at a later date. This proposed archeological survey will investigate the
Gulag well site and the portion of the Bastille pipeline located in areas with a high
probability for containing significant cultural resources.
The proposed impacts consist of the Gulag well which be scraped and
leveled to accommodate a 400’ x 400’ pad. There will be a center hole and a slush
pit. The slush pit will be between three and four feet deep and will be within the
three acres. The three inch Bastille pipeline will be placed in a five-foot easement.
There will be 36” of cover above the pipe.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE TWO)
SURVEY METHODS
The Principal Investigator for this project is William E. Moore, and the Project
Archaeologist is Edward P. Baxter. No fieldwork will commence until an Antiquities
Permit has been issued for this project. The subsurface at the three-acre well site
will be examined by one backhoe trench that will be excavated well below the depth
of impact (four feet) to insure there are no buried zones below the pit or pipeline
that may be impacted b the construction. Shovel testing will supplement the
backhoe trenching. BVRA has been contracted by the client to examine that
portion of the pipeline that is nearest the creek (2500 feet), which is referred to by
the client as the “Area of Interest.” BVRA will concentrate this investigation on
extant terraces. The entire area will be walked to identify any surface evidence of
a site. According to Bob Skiles (archaeologist at the General Land Office) much of
the land in the general area was contoured to accommodate sugar cane. This
statement is based on his previous work in the vicinity. As a result, many of the
terraces are no longer present. Also, the prison system has disturbed the area
through building construction and agricultural activities.
The number of backhoe trenches will be determined in the field. Based on a
conversation with Mark H. Denton, one backhoe trench per each 1000 feet will be
adequate. Because of the high probability of this area (if terraces are present),
three trenches will be excavated. The number may be greater if cultural materials
are found in several areas where additional trenches are warranted. Each backhoe
trench will be dug to the APE. Profiles of each trench will be drawn in the field and
reproduced in the report. The various soil types will be identified using a Munsell
Soil Chart.
The number of shovel tests will be based on the recommendation by the
Texas Historical Commission that 16 tests per mile in high probability areas be
excavated. Each shovel test will be dug to one meter unless clay or water is
encountered at a lesser depth. Shovel tests will be dug in arbitrary 10 cm levels.
All excavated earth will be passed through ¼ inch hardware cloth. Artifacts found
in shovel tests will be collected and analyzed in the laboratory prior to curation if
necessary.
When a site is found, an attempt to determine its boundaries within the
project area will be conducted. A site map will be made that depicts the location of
the backhoe trenches and all shovel tests. GPS plottings will be taken to more
accurately plot these areas on the proper USGS topographic map. All
archaeological sites will be assigned a field number. Later, an official trinomial will
be assigned by TARL. Future references to these sites will use the TARL number.
The entire project will be documented through digital photography, a hand-held
GPS, forms, and field notes.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE THREE)
Artifact Analysis
All artifacts will be collected for analysis in the laboratory. They will be
described and measured. Those specimens deemed worthy of permanent curation
will be processed and turned over to TARL. All artifacts not viewed as containing
research potential for future researchers will be discarded following a written
document authorizing this action from the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division.
Report Preparation
A report documenting this project will be prepared following the guidelines
established by the CTA and THC. The style of this report will generally follow
that adopted by American Antiquity. Two paper copies of the draft report will be
submitted to the THC for review. A discussion of the project and
recommendations for future work will be included. Once approved by the THC,
twenty copies of the final report will be submitted for placement in the THC library
and distribution to regional libraries. No specific site information will be included
in the copies provided for the general public. One copy of the report will be
copied on a computer disk and included with the hard copies.

