108

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society

EDITORIALS

The Amateur in Archaeology
Any discussion of amateurs and professionals
in archaeology becomes intelligent only after these
two classes are defined. Simply stated, the amateur
differs from the professional in that the latter is paid
for his services, whereas the former is motivated
by interest only. Both categories fall under the
general head of “students”; otherwise, use of the
term “archaeologist” is hardly permissible. A
collector of archaeological materials may or may
not be a student, depending upon the purposes
underlying his collecting activities and the use he
makes of the valuable data so acquired.
Use of the term “amateur” sometimes carries a
different significance. According to Funk and
Wagnall’s Standard Dictionary, 1933, a second
definition is: “Often, one who amuses himself with
an art, but is not a master of it; one who makes
more or less pretense to practicing an art without
having undergone professional preparation.” In this
article I am less interested in such a definition, since
it does not describe the student type of amateur
with whom I am solely concerned. Moreover, I
doubt if any of us can more than presume to be
“masters” of our subject, regardless of “professional
preparation.” Personally, I should much rather be
called a student than an authority, since a student is
capable of learning whereas an authority presumably
already knows it all. A student may uncover new
facts, but one who is merely an authority can only
cite previously established facts.
American archaeology is destined to progress
only if it is kept alive through the activities of
students, whether they be professional or amateur.
In fact, leaving out of consideration the matter of
financial remuneration, which has nothing directly
to do with the subject of archaeology, we are all in
the same boat and headed in the same direction.
Granting that some are more experienced sailors
than others, it does not necessarily follow that the
professional in every instance is the better sailor.
Nor does it follow that an amateur cannot equip

himself with training sufficient to render his potential
services inferior to none.
The question, therefore, is not: what can the
amateur do, but rather: what can any student do
toward advancing American archaeology. The
answer to the question, regardless of how it may
be stated, is always the same: the service that any
student can render is in direct ratio to the sum of
his archaeological training and his supply of “horse
sense.” Regardless of the salary he may or may not
receive for his work, the student’s usefulness
depends upon his ability to define problems, and to
employ technical methods tending toward the
solution of those problems.
It should be apparent to all that one should not
attempt the impossible by engaging in phases of
the work for which he has received no adequate
preparation. A man without surgical training would
hardly attempt a major operation; if he did, the
results would: probably be fatal to the patient.
Similarly, one without sound training both in
archaeological theory and practice should not
attempt a major archaeological excavation; to do
so would without doubt result (as in thousands of
instances it has resulted) in the destruction and
permanent loss of archaeological information, the
securing and preservation of which would comprise
the only legitimate purpose of the excavation. A
knowledge of facts and methods, and thorough
experience in practice, are just as necessary for
successful work in archaeology as in any other
highly technical profession.
It follows that a student of archaeology should
properly confine his research activities to a field
well within the limitations of his acquired ability.
At the outset, the major portion of his task is that
of learning facts and theories, relating to his and
related fields, that have accumulated from previous
work. Collecting surface materials and studying
materials existing in available collections should
work in well with this initial study period. The
saving of accidentally disturbed artifacts, for

Editorials
example: stone points unearthed by the plow, and
any associated information that otherwise might
never be recorded, resulting in a permanent loss of
the scientific value of the specimens, is a service of
no small importance that can be rendered by
relatively inexperienced collector-students.

109

Amateur students in other scientific subjects,
geology and astronomy for example, have in
instances achieved marked success and well-earned
renown in their selected fields of endeavor, as,
indeed, they have in archaeology, but only after long
years of specialization, involving plenty of hard
work. It is to be hoped that all amateur students of
American archaeology will meet honestly and
without illusion the issue of study and training
required for any worthwhile participation in
research. It is entirely worth the effort, if one is
interested.

Some students will become interested in
archaeological survey work. The crudest map
showing surface features in a certain area is of some
value, and the value is augmented proportionately
with increased care and precision, and the adoption
of improved technique by the surveyor. Copies of
maps and charts, and written reports on observed
phenomena should in all instances be sent to local
W. C. McKern,
societies or institutions of a nature to be interested
Editor American Antiquity,
in their study and preservation. The man who
Public Museum, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
secretively withholds such important information
from sincere fellow students may be the finest
More Pueblo Pottery Found Near Abilene
gentleman in the world, but he is defeating the
essential interests of the archaeology of his district.
Three more local potsherds which resembled
The advance of knowledge is never promoted Pueblo sherds were sent to Dr. H. P. Mera for
through the hoarding of information.
identification during the past year. No. (1) was
found thirteen miles south of Abilene, on Elm Creek.
As a student gains in his store of facts, methods
No. (2) was found by Mr. Jeff Davis of Sterling
and experience, through training acquired directly
City, Texas, near that place, which is about eighty
or indirectly under more advanced students, his
miles southwest of Abilene, on a branch of the
potential usefulness and range of research activities
Colorado River. No. (3) was found by Dr. Raymond
is increased. The ultimate degree of his ability to
H. Tull, sixty miles south of Abilene, near Ballinger,
serve depends entirely upon his aptitude and
on the Colorado River. The Mera report follows:
application. It should be remembered that scholastic
training supplies the essential background more
“Sherd No. 1—This sherd is from an olla
quickly than it can be acquired by any other method. representing a type in use in the Rio Grande area
There is no short-cut substitute for a university roughly between the first part and middle of the
course in anthropology, of which archaeology is 18th Century.
one of three closely interdependent major divisions.
“Sherd No. 2—Also a Rio Grande type very
Students who cannot take advantage of regular
similar to that in use today. It first appears about
courses of instruction cannot reasonably expect to
the same time as the type represented by Sherd No.
advance in their ability to serve as rapidly as those
1 but continued in use nearly up to the present.
who are more fortunate in this respect.
There is not enough of the design visible to judge
In any case, the training in background, however the pueblo or period at which it was made.
acquired, can serve only as a basic foundation upon
“Sherd No. 3—Chupadero Black-on-white. This
which the student, so long as he remains a student—
type is thought to have continued in existence from
that is, so long as he remains useful in archaeology,
about the middle or latter part of the 13th Century
builds a constantly strengthened and perfected
up to a time at least after the middle of the 16th
superstructure of facts and conclusions.
Century.”

110

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
Dr. Walter Hough’s Visit

Texas Should Retain Its Scientific Finds

In May, 1929, Dr. Walter Hough of The National
Museum visited Abilene, and was shown various
sites here. Among others visited he was conducted
to the huge Indian Red Paint Mine described in the
Vol. 1, 1929, Bulletin of The Society. While
returning from that site, one of the party, E. B.
Sayles, photographed those present. It so happened
that most of the officers of the Society then, and
since, were in the party. Only three of the then
resident directors were absent, the absent ones being
Dr. R. N. Richardson, Dr. W. C. Holden, and Mr.
H. G. Payne.

In the week of March 17-20, 1937, the Editor
attended The International Symposium on Early
Man, held by The Philadelphia Academy of Natural
Sciences, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. A museum
case full of the skulls and long bones of Abilene
Man were put on exhibition there. This meeting
was composed of several hundred delegates from
all parts of the world, which included many of the
leading anthropologists of the world. The exhibits
afforded a wonderful opportunity to those attending
to see the skeletal material of the most ancient
human types known.

From left to right: 1. Dr. Cyrus N. Ray, President;
2. Prof. Leroy C. Glass; 3. Dr. Walter Hough; 4.
Dr. Julius Olsen, Vice President; 5. Dr. Otto O.
Watts, present Secretary-Treasurer; 6. E. B. Sayles,
Secretary-Treasurer at that time; 7. Dr. Olsen’s son,
Julian C. Olsen.

The lectures were by the world’s leading experts
in such fields, and were equally instructive.
Afterwards the Editor visited five museums while
away, in Philadelphia, New York, Washington, and
St. Louis, three of which were among the world’s
largest. Texas .has the money, and should build one
real first-class museum. Rare fossil skeletons of

PLATE 43.
Picture made in May, 1929, during a visit of Dr. Walter Hough of the National Museum to Abilene
sites. The above picture was taken at the Indian Paint Mine south of Abilene. Left to right: 1. Dr.
Cyrus N. Ray, 2. Prof. Leroy C. Glass, 3. Dr. Walter Hough, 4. Dr. Julius Olsen, 5. Dr. Otto O.
Watts, 6. E. B. Sayles, 7. Dr. Olsen’s son, Julian C. Olsen.

Editorials
prehistoric animals from Texas occupy prominent
places in these museums. A place should be made
in Texas for such fossils. The Editor at that time
gave to the National Museum, in Washington, three
of his rare Abilene Man skulls. According to one of
the staff, there were about twenty thousand’ skulls
in the Museum’s collection, but previously no
examples of this Texas type had been placed there.
He hopes that it will not be necessary to place all
of these Abilene Man skulls in museums outside of
the State of Texas, because of a lack of interest in
the State in providing proper places for them.
Millions of Texas money is going into grandstand
sports, and carnivalistic exhibitions of doubtful, if
not harmful values, and into other such trivial things,
while practically no provision is being made for
visual education. Some one has said that one picture
is worth five thousand words, which is doubtless
true, but it is also true that one good look at an
object by an observant person is worth more to
him than is a book on that subject. The schools of
Texas will never be what they should be until they
provide museums so that the minority who really

111

desire an education in something aside from
football, will be enabled to get the exact knowledge
to which they are entitled. Properly educate these
few, and the mass of those who throng our
educational institutions can well be left to their own
devices, because from these few alone will proceed
all of the future culture, progress and development
of Texas. The world is already doing too much for
the never-do-wells, the misfits, the lazy louts, and
the enemies of Democracy. It needs to seek out
and comb the population for the worthy,
industrious, and talented few, and really give them
the opportunity to fully capitalize their talents. As
it is now whenever an unusually brilliant person
develops in Texas we have provided an environment
which usually causes him to leave for New England
or other eastern States, where he finds both the
encouragement and the physical equipment with
which to carry forward his research. As a State we
need something to awaken us to the fact that daily
our mental resources slip away from us.
C. N. R.

