AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
CITY OF MERKEL WATER ADDITIONS PROJECT
IN TAYLOR COUNTY TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 07-19

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
The City of Merkel
100 Kent Street
Merkel, Texas 79536

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) conducted an archaeological
survey of three areas in Taylor County, Texas on September 6, 2007 for the City of
Merkel under antiquities permit 4661. The areas investigated by BVRA were the
crossing of Bull Wagon Creek by Interstate Highway 20, the site of a proposed
pump station, and an existing pump station where a single pump will be installed.
Prehistoric site 41TA79 has been recorded in the vicinity of the crossing of Bull
Wagon Creek by the interstate, and prehistoric site 41TA254 has been recorded in
the vicinity of the existing pump station. No evidence of these sites was found
within the Area of Potential Effect (APE) for this project. It is, therefore,
recommended that construction of the water line and pump station and
improvements to the existing pump station be allowed to proceed as planned
without further consultation from the Texas Historical Commission. No artifacts
were collected. The size of the project is 0.53 acre.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
BVRA is grateful to those individuals who assisted in this project. At the City
of Merkel, Donnie Edwards (City Manager) provided landowner permission for
access to the city easement and accompanied the Principal Investigator to make
sure the proper areas were investigated. Project area maps were provided by the
engineering firm Jacob & Martin, Ltd. by Kelly Rosenbaum and Kirt Harle. Special
thanks to landowners Jack Moore and Massey Cleber who shared their knowledge
of Indian sites in the area and to Brandon S. Young of Blanton & Associates for
discussing their previous work near the proposed pump station. Edward P. Baxter
prepared the cover, and Lili Lyddon prepared the figures. Nora Rogers edited the
manuscript.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................................ ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ................................................................................................. iii
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ........................................................................................ 4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND .......................................................................... 7
METHODS ......................................................................................................................... 9
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 11
RECOMMENDATIONS.................................................................................................. 12
REFERENCES CITED..................................................................................................... 13

APPENDIX I – Project Area Photographs

FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location ............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map................................................................ 3
Figure 3. Project Area Soils............................................................................................ 5

iv

INTRODUCTION
The City of Merkel has made an application for federal financial assistance
to Rural Development for the construction of Water Distribution System and
Wastewater Treatment and Collection System improvements. This project begins
at the old Merkel pump station site in Abilene, Texas and ends at several points in
the distribution system in downtown Merkel. Figure 1 depicts the project area in
relation to Taylor County and the State of Texas. The project area is depicted on
two USGS 7.5’ topographic maps. They are Abilene West (3299-234) and Merkel
East (3299-233). Figure 2 depicts the project area on these topographic maps.
The 12-inch water line will be placed in a trench 36 inches wide and four feet
deep. According to the Texas Historical Commission (THC), the only area along
United States Interstate Highway 20 requiring survey is the north side of the
interstate at the crossing at Bull Wagon Creek. In addition to the water line, a pump
station will be constructed on the east bank of the creek, also adjacent to Interstate
20. The footprint for the new pump station will be 100 feet x 120 feet. Within this
area, a ground storage tank 38 feet in diameter and a metal building will be
constructed. The footprint for the metal building will be 25 feet x 34 feet. The
building pad for the ground storage tank and metal building will penetrate the
subsurface to a depth of 12 inches to 24 inches. To the east, there is an existing
pump station owned and operated by the City of Abilene. This facility is enclosed
with a chain link fence and locked gate. The only improvement for this area is the
addition of a single pump, which will be placed adjacent to the existing pump station
within the fenced area.
When possible, the water line will be placed on private property within an
easement purchased by the City of Merkel, but some segments will be placed in
existing highway rights-of-way. No water line will be routed through a cemetery,
marked graves, or burial plots. When necessary, the water line will be routed
through the highway right-of-way if adjacent to a cemetery or on the side of the
highway opposite a cemetery.
An archaeological survey was requested in a letter from the State Historic
Preservation Officer to Kelly Rosenbaum of the engineering firm Jacob and Martin,
Ltd. dated July 11, 2007. A review of the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas revealed
the presence of one previously recorded site (41TA79) within the path of the
proposed water line. This site is plotted on both sides of Bull Wagon Creek where
United States Interstate Highway 20 crosses it. Another site (41TA254) is in the
vicinity of the existing pump station south of Indian Creek. The City of Merkel
retained BVRA to investigate the creek crossing for evidence of previously recorded
site 41TA79 within the APE and to visit the existing pump station for evidence of
previously recorded site 41TA254.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Taylor County is located in west-central Texas. The following discussion was
taken from the published soil survey for Taylor County (Conner 1976) and The
Handbook of Texas (Webb 1952). About 75% of the acreage of Taylor County lies
in the Central Rolling Red Plains Resource Area, and about 25% is in the Edwards
Plateau Resource Area. The Central Rolling Red Plains area consists of smooth
plains that are dissected by numerous streams and creeks. Soils in this area
formed in outwash sediment and Permian sandstone, clay, and shale. The streams
and creeks have narrow, alluvial soils that were deposited by water. The most
conspicuous feature of the surface terrain in the area is the Edwards Plateau, which
rises 200 to 700 feet above the general level of the Central Rolling Red Plains. The
plateau extends from east to west across the central part of Taylor County and is
outlined in most areas by steep escarpments. The Edwards Plateau also serves as
a divide between the Clear Fork of the Brazos River and the Colorado River.
Plateau soils are mostly shallow or moderately deep over limestone or marl. Near
the project area is the Callahan Divide, which is the topographic boundary line
between the Brazos and Colorado River basins. To the east of the project area is
Cedar Gap, a natural passage way through the divide. The headwaters of the Clear
Fork of the Brazos River and tributaries of the Colorado River are found in the
county. Native timber consists of live oak, post oak, mesquite, and cedar. Coal, oil,
sandstone, and limestone are present.
Relevant to the project area is Bull Wagon Creek, a major north-south
running stream that crosses United States Interstate Highway 20 about three miles
east of the town of Merkel. This stream has several tributaries and flows through or
near four soil types. According to Donnie Edwards, City Manager for the City of
Merkel, this stream rarely contains water except following heavy rains. The soils in
the project area are Colorado soils, frequently flooded (Cr); Rowena clay loam, 0 to
1 percent slopes (RoA); Sagerton clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (SaB); Vernon
clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (VeB); and Weymoujth clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes
(WeB). They are discussed below and depicted in Figure 3.
Colorado soils frequently flooded (Cr) are nearly level soils on smooth
benches above creek channels. Areas are narrow and long in shape and extend
for several miles. Slopes are 0 to 1 percent. They flood one or more times a year
in a ten-year period. The A horizon of soils of the Colorado Series ranges from 4 to
10 inches in thickness and is a clay loam. The C horizon is a clay loam and sandy
loam and extends to 60 inches. This discussion was taken from the soil survey for
Taylor County (Conner 1976:7).
Rowena clay loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (RoA) is a nearly level soil on
broad uplands. Areas are irregular in shape and range from 100 to 500 acres. A
typical profile is a clay loam from 0 to 6 inches. From 6 to 14 inches is clay, which
continues to 64 inches. This discussion was taken from the soil survey for Taylor
County (Conner 1976:18).

4

Figure 3. Project Area Soils

5

Sagerton clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (SaB) is a gently sloping soil on
convex uplands. Areas are irregular in shape and range from 75 to 200 acres in
size. This soil has a surface layer of reddish-brown clay loam about 11 inches
thick. The next layer is firm clay loam about 31 inches thick. The underlying soil,
which extends to a depth of about 80 inches, is a firm clay loam that contains about
17 percent soft masses of calcium carbonate. This discussion was taken from the
soil survey for Taylor County (Conner 1976:19).
Vernon clay, 3 to 12 percent slopes (VeE) is a gently sloping to strongly
sloping soil on uplands, knolls, and ridges. Areas are irregular in shape and range
from 20 to 200 acres. Slopes are complex and average about 10 percent. A typical
profile is clay from 0 to 6 inches, silty clay from 6 to 30 inches, shale and shale
fragments from 30 to 60 inches. This discussion was taken from the soil survey for
Taylor County (Conner 1976:27).
Weymouth clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes is a gently sloping soil on
convex upland ridges and knobs. Areas are irregular in shape and range from 10
to 50 acres in size. A typical profile is a reddish-brown silty clay loam from 0 to 6
inches. From 6 to 14 inches is a clay loam that is dark reddish-brown in color.
From 14 to 23 inches is a reddish-brown clay loam. From 23 to 36 inches is clay
loam with 20 to 25 percent concentrations of calcium carbonate. From 36 to 42
inches is clayey shale. This discussion was taken from the soil survey for Taylor
County (Conner 1976:27-28).

6

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The project area is located in a region referred to by Biesaart et al. (1985)
as the Lower Plains Cultural Geographical Region, by Powell and Creel (1989)
as part of the North Central Texas Archeological Region, and by Brown et al.
(1982) as on the border between the two. According to Krieger (1946), the
cultural patterns in this region tend to mirror those found to the east more than
those identified farther west in the high plains of the Llano Estacado. Since no
defined culture sequence has been established for the Lower Plains cultural unit,
researchers are forced to borrow the sequences defined in nearby regions such
as Central Texas or North Central Texas.
Cultural chronologies for the North Central Texas area have been
presented by Brown (1987), Krieger (1946), Prikryl (1987), and Skinner and
Gallagher (1974). Chronologies for Central Texas have been prepared by
Prewitt (1981, 1985) and Carlson et al. (1986). Although there is some
difference in the terminology used by these researchers, they all agree that the
last 10,000 to 12,000 years of prehistory and history for the area can be divided
into four major temporal periods. These are Paleo-Indian (12,000 Before Present
[B.P.] to 8000 B.P.), Archaic (8000 B.P. to 1250 B.P.), Late Prehistoric (1250
B.P. to 300 B.P.), and Historic (300 B.P. to Present).
Even though few sites in the three counties have been subjected to more
than survey level investigation, it is apparent that the area was occupied from
circa 11,500 B.P. through the Historic Indian and Anglo-American periods
(Powell and Creel 1989:10). Possibly the oldest remains in the area have been
found at the Gibson site (41TA1) in Taylor County. This is a deeply stratified site
along Elm Creek containing artifacts dating to the Paleo-Indian period (Leighton
1936; Ray 1940, 1941, 1945; Sayles 1935). Another early site is McLean
(41TA29), a stratified site with archaeological remains dating from Paleo-Indian
through the Historic period (Bryan and Ray 1938; Ray 1930, 1935).
The majority of known prehistoric sites in the area date to the Archaic
period. They usually consist of burned rock middens, hearths, or lithic scatters
near intermittent and permanent streams. In some cases, sites have been found
beneath alluvial sediments that underlie the modern surface. Other sites in the
area are lithic workshops, quarry sites, and isolated burials in rock crevices or
beneath cairns.

7

Powell and Creel (1989:10) state that comparatively “few sites with
Historic Indian remains are recorded in the region, although many might exist.” It
is their opinion that most of the known Historic Indian sites are individual burials
probable attributable to Apache, Comanche, or Kiowa Indians. Two known
Historic Indian sites in the area are 41TA29 (iron arrow point) (Sayles 1935) and
41TA111 where a burial was found in a rock crevice with glass beads (Sayles
1935).
A review of Sayles’ Texas survey revealed the presence of additional
burials in the area. These are remains beneath a stone covered pit at 41TA32, a
possible cairn burial at 41TA45, and burials in campsites at 41TA61, 41TA80,
and 41TA81.
A major study for the area is a survey conducted at Camp Barkeley by
Texas A&M University (Thoms 2000). In all, 1050 acres were examined, and
three lithic scatters (41TA162, 41TA228, and 41TA229) were recorded. It was
learned that the Callahan Divide is best known archaeologically as a major
source area for Edwards chert. The upper mesa area was found to contain
hundreds of concentrations of lithic debitage that resulted from reduction of
tabular and nodular chert that erode from the limestone bedrock and alluvium
below it (Thoms 2000:iii). Projectile points found on the mesa top indicate that
the area has been utilized for at least 9000 years.
The Historic period is represented by a wide variety of sites. Fort
Phantom Hill was established in 1851 about 15 miles north of present-day
Abilene to protect the advancing American frontier. In 1858, the ruins of the
abandoned fort were used as a way station on the Butterfield Trail Overland Mail
Route (Richardson et al. 1988:169; Conklin and Conklin 1947). This trail
extended southwest from Fort Phantom Hill about two miles northwest of what is
now Dyess Air Force Base. Fort Griffin was established in 1867 to the northeast
of Abilene and was active during the Indian Wars of 1871 to 1874 (Rister 1969).
Anglo-American settlement in the Abilene area was not well established until the
late 1870s (Fox 1983). With the beginning of permanent settlement, towns were
created, and the Indians were forced to move. Many historic sites in rural areas
are reminders of ranching activities in an area where cattle were the major
industry.

8

METHODS
Pre-Field Tasks
Prior to entering the field, the Archeological Sites Atlas was checked for the
presence of previously recorded archaeological sites and surveys in the project
area and vicinity. In addition, a thorough review of the existing literature for Taylor
County was conducted. After discussing the project with the THC, it was decided
that the investigation would focus on the high probability areas within the APE
associated with Bull Wagon Creek and a field check of the area near the existing
pump station.
Field Survey
The reason for our visit to the crossing of Bull Wagon Creek is the plotting of
a previously recorded prehistoric site in the area. According to the Atlas, 41TA79 is
very large site that occupies land on both sides of the creek and both sides of the
Interstate. It was recorded in 1929 by E. B. Sayles, an early archaeologist from
Abilene who traveled about the state locating sites and making collections for the
Gila Pueblo Archaeological Foundation in Arizona. Unfortunately, he did not have
the luxury of plotting sites on USGS topographic quadrangles. Therefore, his sites
were depicted on sketch maps drawn in the field. Later, workers at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) attempted to plot his sites on Texas
Highway maps and USGS topographic maps when they became widely available.
Unfortunately, many of these map plottings are not very accurate.
The Principal Investigator visited the project area with Donnie Edwards, City
Manager for the City of Merkel. The first area to be examined was the site of the
proposed pump station to the east of Bull Wagon Creek (Figure 3). This site and
part of the route of the proposed water line is on land owned by Jack Moore. At the
time of our visit, the pump station site and the segment of proposed water line on
his property was in pasture that had been recently plowed for a fall planting of
wheat, which normally occurs in September. This area was investigated by a 100%
Pedestrian Survey. Since ground surface visibility was 100%, shovel tests were not
necessary. A few rocks were observed, but no cobbles large enough for tool
manufacture. One shovel probe was excavated in the center of the pump station
footprint, and several probes were excavated along the route of the proposed water
line. These probes encountered silty or loamy clay overlying firm clay at a depth of
about 50 cm. According to the soil survey, this area is in Rowena clay loam, 0 to 1
percent slopes (RoA). This area is not viewed by BVRA as a high probability area
for the presence of an archaeological site because of its distance from the creek
and lack of natural resources. See Appendix I (Figure 1) for a view of this area.

9

Next, we entered a lower area that took us to the east bank of Bull Wagon
Creek. This section of proposed water line was very thickly vegetated with
Mesquite (Prosopis sp.), Prickly Pear cactus (Opuntia sp.), Broomweed (Gutierreza
texana), and various native grasses. Walking a straight line was impossible, so we
maneuvered throughout the thick brush, examined exposed areas, and dug several
shovel probes. The soil in this area was reddish in color and contained firm clay at
or near the surface. From east to west this section of the project area is in
Weymouth clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (WeB); Vernon clay, 3 to 12 percent
slopes (VeE); and Sagerton clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (SaB). The creek is
within Colorado soils, frequently flooded (Cr). This area is not viewed by BVRA as
a high probability area for the presence of an archaeological site because of its
lower elevation and shallow soils. A higher landform was visible a short distance to
the north, and this appears to be a better location for a prehistoric site. This area is
owned by Massey Cleber.
Next, we investigated the west side of Buffalo Wagon Creek. This is the
high side of the creek and is viewed by BVRA as the most likely area for a
prehistoric site. The entire area investigated was in pasture that had been recently
plowed for a fall planting of wheat, which normally occurs in September. This area
was investigated by a 100% Pedestrian Survey and several shovel probes. Since
ground surface visibility was 100%, shovel tests were not necessary. The probes
revealed silty or loamy clay with the soil turning to firm clay at about 50 cm.
According to the soil survey, this section of the project area is in Sagerton clay
loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (SaB). We walked approximately 300 meters from the
edge of the hill overlooking the creek to the west and saw few rocks, none large
enough for tool manufacture. See Appendix I (Figure 2) for a view of this area. At
the time of our visit, Bull Wagon Creek contained standing water that was brackish,
and that portion of the creek where it is crossed by the Interstate was choked with
cattails and algae. See Appendix I (Figure 3) for a view of the creek. This land is
owned by Jack Moore is owned by Massey Cleber.
The final area visited was the existing pump station. It is situated on a pad
that has been disturbed through construction of this facility. A prehistoric site
(41TA254) had been recorded by archaeologists from Blanton and Associates
(Ringstaff 2004; Young and Willis 2006) on this landform during a survey along the
highway. Site 41TA254 is described on the site form as a lithic procurement area
located on a low rise on the east-bound access road of Interstate 20 about 480
meters south of Indian Creek. No cultural features were identified, and the site is
described as a surface scatter on a gravel-covered hill. Artifacts observed included
tested cobbles, cores, biface fragments, and debitage. According to the recorders,
this site has little to no research potential, and no further investigations were
recommended. Since the site form states that 41TA254 extends an unknown
distance to the south, BVRA examined the ground surface in the vicinity of the
pump station. Ground surface visibility in the area investigated was virtually 100%.
No formal tools or debitage were observed. See Appendix I (Figure 4) for a view of
the pump station. It is owned by the City of Abilene.

10

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The site records at TARL and the Archeological Sites Atlas indicated the
presence of a previously recorded archaeological site (41TA79) along Bull Wagon
Creek and a lithic procurement area (41TA254) to the north of an existing pump
station where a single pump is to be installed. No evidence of either of these sites
was found during this survey.
It is hypothesized that site 41TA79 may have been incorrectly plotted, or the
area where Sayles found artifacts is outside the APE. An absence of raw materials
suitable for stone tool manufacture and the fact that Bull Wagon Creek is viewed by
the locals as a “wet weather” creek may be sufficient reasons for an absence of an
archaeological site in this area. One of the landowners, Jack Moore, has collected
Indian artifacts in the past and has lived on the property for 50 years. He claims to
have found a few arrowheads in the general area, but he has never found anything
within the APE. According to the landowner, no artifacts have been found on the
west side of the creek within the APE, but he has heard of a site on the hill just to
the north of the low area on the east side of the creek. This hill is well outside the
APE and is the same hill that was visible from the low area.
Site 41TA254 is most likely restricted to the “low rise” north of the existing
station where artifacts were found by Blanton & Associates since nothing was seen
in the area near the existing pump station.

11

RECOMMENDATIONS
It is recommended that the City of Merkel be allowed to proceed with the
construction of their water line as planned without further consultation with the THC.
If an archaeological site or features not discussed in this report is found during
construction of the water line all work must cease until the find is further assessed.
If the APE changes to include the construction of water line in areas not examined
during this project or reviewed by the THC, further survey may be required. This
project was conducted following the Minimum Survey Standards defined by the
Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division.

12

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Brown, David O.
1987 Archeology at Aquilla Lake, 1978-1987 Investigations. Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report 81. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Brown, Theodore M., Kay L. Killen, Helen Simons, and Virginia Wulfkuhle
1982 The Resource Protection Process Plan for Texas. Texas Historical
Commission.
Bryan, Kirk, and Cyrus N. Ray
1938 Long Channeled Point Found in Alluvium Beside Bones of Elephas
Columbi. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 10:263-268.
Carlson, David L., Shawn B. Carlson, Frederick L. Briuer, Erwin Roemer, Jr., and
William E. Moore
1986 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1983, the
Eastern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
Number 11.
Conklin, Roscoe, and Margaret Conklin
1947 The Butterfield Overland Mail, 1857-1869. Arthur Clark Company.
Glendale, California.
Conner, Nathaniel R.
1976 Soil Survey of Taylor County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Fox, Daniel E.
1983 Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450
Years. Corona Publishing Company. San Antonio.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946 Cultural Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The
University of Texas at Austin Publication 4640.

13

Leighton, M. M.
1936 Geological Aspects of the Findings of Primitive Man near Abilene,
Texas. Medallion Papers 24. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
Powell, Joseph F., and Darrel G. Creel
1989 Cultural Resources in the Proposed Peacekeeper Rail Garrison
Facilities,, Dyess Air Force Base, Taylor County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Technical Series 5.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas
Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201238.
Prikryl, Daniel J.
1987 A Synthesis of the Prehistory of the Lower Elm Fork of the Trinity
River. Unpublished master’s thesis, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1930 Report on Some Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene
Section. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Soceity 2:45-58.
1935 Folsom Sites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 7:127-129.
1940 New Type of Painted Pebble Found Near Abilene. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. 12:242-247.
1941 Another Type of Gibson Site Point. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 132:177.
1945 Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 16:117-147.
Richardson, Rupert N., Ernest Wallace, and Adrian Anderson
1988 Texas: The Lone Star State. Prentice-Hall. Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey.

14

Ringstaff, Chris W.
2004 Cultural Resources Survey: IH20 and US 83/277 at FM 3438
between the Cities of Tye and Abilene, Taylor County, Texas.
Blanton & Associates, Inc.
Rister, Carl C.
1969 Fort Griffin on the Texas Frontier. University of Oklahoma Press.
Norman.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers Number 17.
Gila Pueblo, Gila, Arizona.
Skinner, S. Alan, and J. Gallagher
1974 An Evaluation of Cultural Resources at Lake Whitney, Texas.
Southern Methodist University, Research Report 17.
Thoms, Alston V.
2000 Tool-Stone Procurement Areas on Callahan Divide: A Survey of
Camp Barkeley, Taylor County, Texas. Center for Ecological
Archaeology, Technical Report Number 2. Texas A&M University.
Webb, Walter Prescott
1952 Taylor County. In The Handbook of Texas: A Dictionary of
Essential Information (Volume II). The Texas State Historical
Association.
Young, Brandon S., and Mark D. Willis
2006 Cultural Resources Survey of Twelve Proposed Ramp Locations on
IH 20 and US 83/US 277 at FM 3438 in the Cities of Tye and
Abilene, Taylor County, Texas. Blanton & Associates, Inc.

15

APENDIX I
PROJECT AREA PHOTOGRAPHS

Figure 1. Proposed Plant Site (Looking West)

Figure 2. West Bank of Bull Wagon Creek (Looking East)

Figure 3. Bull Wagon Creek (Looking North)

Figure 4. Existing Pump Station (looking south)

