AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE WESTERN CASS
WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION WATER IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
IN CASS AND MORRIS COUNTIES TEXAS

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Project Number
BVRA 07-21

Prepared for
Western Cass Water Supply Corporation
Post Office Box 150
Linden, Texas 75563

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) conducted an archaeological
survey of seven areas in Cass and Morris counties on September 27, 2007 under
antiquities permit 4680. The proposed project is a water line by Western Cass
Water Supply Corporation (WSC) of Linden, Texas. Included within or in close
proximity to these areas are previously recorded sites 41CS1, 41CS3, 41CS7,
41CS186, 41CS299, and 41MX29. No evidence of these sites was found within
the Area of Potential Effect (APE). One previously unrecorded site (41CS338)
was found overlooking a tributary of the Sulphur River at the confluence of these
two streams. This site yielded 10 undecorated ceramic body sherds, 1 biface
made of silicified wood, 2 utilized flakes, and 4 non-utilized flakes. Site 41CS338
has research potential and is described in this report as a Caddoan habitation
site of unknown age. It is recommended that this site be tested for significance if
avoidance is not possible. The artifacts collected at 41CS338 are not considered
significant, and they have been discarded. In all, this study examined 9.16 acres.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) is grateful to those who
helped make this project successful. Project area maps and information
regarding the construction plans were provided by Hollie Nowlin of J. F. Fontaine
& Associates, Inc. and Malcolm Murray of the Western Cass WSC who also
visited the project area with the Principal Investigator and answered questions
regarding the methods of installing the water line. Edward P. Baxter and Lili
Lyddon prepared the cover and figures that appear in this report. The artifacts
were analyzed by William A. Dickens, and Nora Rogers edited the report. I am
grateful to Bo Nelson and Timothy K. Perttula for sharing their knowledge of
Caddoan archaeology as well as their comments concerning 41CS338. Mr.
Nelson is a member of the Texas Archeological Steward Network (TASN)
sponsored by the Texas Historical Commission (THC), and he is the Steward for
Northeast Texas.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................3
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................5
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................8
AREAS SURVEYED .............................................................................................9
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................16
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................19
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................20

Appendix I: Areas Surveyed
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log
Appendix III: Site 41CS338 on Topographic Map
Appendix IV: Artifact Analysis

iv

FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location ............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Private Road in Area 3 ................................................................................. 11
Figure 3. Mound in Area 5 ............................................................................................ 13
Figure 4. Area 6.............................................................................................................. 14
Figure 5. Area 7.............................................................................................................. 15
Figure 6. 41CS338 (looking north) .............................................................................. 17
Figure 7. Site Map (41CS338) ..................................................................................... 18

v

INTRODUCTION
BVRA was retained by Western Cass Water Supply Corporation (WSC)
through J. F. Fontaine & Associates, Inc. of Palestine, Texas to conduct an
intensive archaeological survey of a proposed water line that will service the
residents of rural Cass and Morris counties (Figure 1). As currently planned, the
proposed water line is 150 miles in length and will be placed in the highway rightof-way. The APE consists of a 15-foot permanent easement with a trench depth
of 36 inches and a trench width of 24 inches. The water line is divided into
various sections scattered throughout the two counties. Funding for this project
is to be provided by the United States Department of Agriculture, Rural
Development with Paco Valentin serving as the agency representative. Following
a review of the project area maps and other documents, the THC, Archeology
Division, requested an archaeological survey be conducted, and eight areas
were selected for survey. Some of these areas were investigated by BVRA in
2001; therefore, they were not visited a second time. Other areas will be avoided
by the proposed water line. In all, seven areas were investigated. BVRA was
selected by Western Cass WSC to perform this service. The seven areas
surveyed are depicted on four USGS topographic maps (Appendix I). They are
Atlanta North (3394-113), Bassett (3394-241), Cookville (3394-224), and Naples
(3394-213).
A Cultural Resources Evaluation by AR Consultants in the same general
area in 2000 identified 32 high probability areas for archaeological sites (Kent
and Skinner 2001). BVRA visited these areas and conducted an Intensive
Survey that resulted in the recording of one historic site (41CS25), a 20th century
well. The area visited by BVRA in 2001 varies from very hilly to low-lying areas
and contains shallow soils overlying firm clay in most areas (Moore 2001). The
absence of sites in the 2001 project area is best explained in terms of the terrain
encountered within the APE by BVRA. Most of the areas examined were found
to be in settings containing shallow sands and sandy clay soils overlying firm red
and yellow clays. In fact, the deepest that clay was encountered through shovel
testing was 40 cm below the existing ground surface, and this only occurred at
one location. Many of the tests were terminated at 20-30 cm or less. In some
areas, clay was found at the surface and was often mixed with ironstone
fragments. Sometimes, ironstone or sandstone formed a solid layer beneath
which shovel tests could not penetrate. Since the waterline was to be placed in
the highway right-of-way, it was well below the tops of the hills where sites are
most likely to be present. In most cases, firm clay was observed in the road cut
that extended virtually to the top of the hill. The shallow soils at the top of the hill
are composed primarily of recent humus.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Cass and Morris counties are located within the Gulf Coastal Plain of the
Gulf Coastal Plain province (Fenneman 1938; Story 1990). The West Gulf
Coastal Plain is part pf a Mesozoic-Cenozoic regional geosyncline of a young
geological age (Murray 1960; Story 1990). Subsurface geology in the region of
Wright Patman Lake is characterized by Tertiary and Quaternary strata (Bureau
of Economic Geology 1979:Texarkana Sheet). Principal exposures of rocks that
date to the Cretaceous age are located to the northwest of the lake in Red River
County, Southeast Oklahoma, and Southwest Arkansas. The Wilcox Group and
the Reklaw Formation crop out in upland settings around Wright Patman Lake.
The undivided Wilcox Group is the dominant formation on the northern side and
much of the southern side of the reservoir.
The Wilcox Group consists primarily of gray thinly bedded to massive
silty, sandy clays. Calcareous siltstone and ironstone concretions are common.
Isolated beds of clay, lignite, silt, and quartz sand are present. Silicified wood
and other plant fossils are abundant. The Reklaw Formation is composed mainly
of quartz sand and clay. The upper portion consists of a brownish black to a
brownish gray laminated silty clay that is partly muscovitic and carbonaceous
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1979:Texarkana Sheet). Beyond the Reklaw
Formation to the south is the Queen City Formation. This formation consists of
beds of quartz sand, clay, and sandy clay with ironstone concretions. These
formations, along with the Weches Formation, contain lithic raw materials that
were widely used prehistorically for the manufacture of a variety of ground and
pecked stone tools such as manos, metates, anvil stones, abraders, nutting
stones, and chopping tools (Hunt and Cliff 1998). According to Banks (1990:52),
other sources of knappable materials in the region include Uvalde Gravels,
Buzzard Bluff in Arkansas, and petrified wood and palm wood from the Wilcox
Group. According to William A. Dickens (personal communication), the term
Uvalde Gravels is a regional term for a lithic source in South Texas and should
not be used elsewhere. Banks (1990:56-57) considers Uvalde Gravels as one of
the more significant sources of lithic material for this area. Deposits of these
gravels are found on lag gravel deposits on Tertiary Pleistocene terraces and
upland interfluves. Similar materials have been reported along the divides
between the Sulphur River and White Oak Bayou (Banks 1990:56-57).
Pleistocene and recent alluvial deposits are known to contain a variety of chert
that were secondarily deposited such as novaculite, quartzite, flint, and jasper
from the Uvalde Gravels and Bowie gravel source (Dockall and Fields 2006:6).

3

Story (1990:10); Hunter and Cliff (1998), and Fisher (1965) present a
detailed discussion of regional climate for the Western Gulf Coastal Plain and
Northeast Texas. According to Fisher (1965:7), the climate is characterized as
humid and mesothermal with continental influences dominant. Portions of Cass
County are located within Post Oak Savannah and the Pine Belt of the Forested
Coastal Plain (Fisher 1965:10), but the reservoir area is entirely within the PineHardwood Forest. Based on the variety of faunal species present in the area,
Dockall and Fields (2006:7) state that a very diverse array of resources would
have been available to prehistoric groups in the area. There is no published soil
survey for Cass County, and information is not available online. The only data
for Cass County is the General Soil Map, Cass and Marion counties, Texas.

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Cass County is located in Northeast Texas within the Eastern Planning
Region as defined by Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993). The following comments
are taken from their comprehensive document for this area, and the interested
reader is referred to this volume for more detailed information. Although
significant archaeological sites have been recorded in the county, the total
number of sites (n=258) is not high. As of 1993, for example, Cass County had
less than .037 recorded sites per kilometer, ranking it last in this area. The
county is described as rural with less than 14.9 people per square kilometer and
a population growth of less than 5%. Environmentally, it is situated within the
Piney Woods, Mixed Pine-Hardwood Forest area of East Texas. Artificial
disturbance in the county consists mainly of lignite mines from the near surface
Wilcox formation and the deep basin Jackson-Yegua formation and lakes Wright
Patman and Texarkana. As of August 27, 2007, the county had 337 recorded
archaeological sites. No sites are listed in the National Register of Historic
Places. The archaeological chronology for the area includes sites dating from
Paleoindian times (9500 B.C. - 7000 B.C.) through Historic Caddoan (A.D. 1680 A.D. 1860).
One of the major problems regarding our understanding of the
archaeology of Northeast Texas lies in the lack of data for sites with isolable
Paleoindian or Archaic components. "Despite the existence of a potentially rich
data base, the body of useful information on these time periods is small"
(Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:70). The authors credit this to the fact that most
early materials have been found mixed with later components. When found, they
are difficult to interpret because of limited absolute dating; poorly defined artifact
chronologies; limited preservation of economic data such as faunal and botanical
remains, and the typically low-density nature of the cultural remains. No sites
with isolable Paleoindian or Archaic components have been reported for Cass
County as recently as 1993. Evidence of Paleoindian occupation is typically the
presence of surface finds of projectile points. During the survey for the proposed
Texarkana Reservoir in the 1940s (Stephenson 1950:5), archaeologists found
lanceolate points at non-pottery sites, and these may date to Paleoindian times.
Sites attributed to the Hunter-Gatherer period (prior to sedentism) have been
identified in Cass County at 41CS34, 41CS94, 41CS116, and 41CS119). One of
the problems with these early sites is that they usually contain only lithic artifacts;
rarely, some sites have yielded hardwood nutshells and burned rock
concentrations. "The scarcity of remains other than lithic artifacts is due mostly
to the relatively great age of these deposits and the poor preservation of organic
remains and nondurable features" (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:75). The
minimum criterion for significance of these sites is the presence of non-artifactual
data such as cultural features, faunal and botanical remains, and diagnostic
projectile points that allow confident chronological assessments.

5

Following the hunter gatherer period (circa 500 B.C.), the emergence of
sedentism arrived in Northeast Texas and lasted until A.D. 1000. Sedentism is
defined by Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993:97) as "cultural systems where all or
part of the population resides at the same location for all or most of the year."
Until recently, very little research had been directed toward the emergence of
sedentism in Northeast Texas. Factors that are believed to have been causal in
terms of this change include population growth, territorial constriction,
environmental changes, technological innovation, modifications in social
organization, and/or changes in subsistence strategies (Kenmotsu and Perttula
1993:97). During this time a major technological innovation, the emergence of
pottery and the bow and arrow, appeared. Sites dating to this period are often
referred to as Early Ceramic. One Early Ceramic period site in Cass County
(41CS8) has been tested (Jelks 1961).
The next period is referred to as the development of agriculture in
Northeast Texas before A.D. 1600. Study questions for this period should focus
on the processes that influenced the development of agriculture in Northeast
Texas among prehistoric Caddoan populations with agriculture defined here as a
maize-based economy as described in Fritz (1990). Major sites of this period
include Caddoan archaeological sites, particularly habitation locales with
associated burials and burial furniture (usually pottery). More than 4700
prehistoric archaeological sites have been recorded in both the Northeast Texas
region and adjoining counties where associations exist with the Caddoan
archaeological tradition (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:124).
Approximately 80% of the significant sites in this region are prehistoric
Caddoan sites that were occupied sometime between A.D. 800 and A.D. 1600.
These sites include multiple and single mound centers; cemeteries; habitation
sites such as villages, hamlets, and farmsteads; and possible extractive and/or
processing locations. Most of these sites, unfortunately, are on private land and
are not protected from vandalism. Less than five important Formative-Middle
Caddoan sites were known to exist in Cass County as of 1993 (Kenmotsu and
Perttula 1993:Figure 2.5.1). The number of important Late Caddoan Period sites
as of 1993 for Cass County is, however, greater at 15 (Kenmotsu and Perttula
1993:Figure 2.5.2). In 1993, 39 Caddoan Period archaeological sites with
excellent faunal and floral preservation were known to exist in Northeast Texas.
Not one is in Cass County (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:Figure 2.5.3).
Cemeteries and burial mounds are common throughout Northeast Texas, and
these archeological phenomena are viewed as extremely significant research
data sets because of the bio-archaeological, cultural, and sociopolitical
information relevant to the development of agriculture encoded in the mortuary
practices, associated grave goods, and pathologies/infections preserved in the
skeletal remains (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:127). In 1993, 11 archaeological
sites in Cass County had produced human remains (Kenmotsu and Perttula
1993:Figure 2.5.5), and two single mound sites are recorded in the county
(Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:Figure 2.5.6).

6

Fifty-three Critical Resource Zones have been defined in the Northeast
Texas region for sites that are relevant to the research on the development of
agriculture prior to A.D. 1600. One of these zones, just above Wright-Patman
Lake, is in Cass County (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:Figure 2.5.7). Black
Bayou and Black Cypress Bayou in Cass County are identified as areas of
potential importance for the presence of significant archaeological sites of this
period. Twenty-six sites in Cass County along the shoreline of Lake WrightPatman are considered significant and worthy of further study (Kenmotsu and
Perttula 1993:143). One of these, 41CS4, is a habitation site that occurs in
association with a cemetery area.
The final archaeological period is that of European contact with native
Indian groups, especially the historic Caddo (circa A.D. 1685 - A.D. 1859). The
infusion of material goods and cultural traits brought to the area by the
Europeans changed forever the lifeways of the native Caddoan peoples. At least
89-90 Caddoan sites of this period are known in Northeast Texas. In Cass
County, five sites have produced historic materials in association with native
Indian artifacts (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:152). These include sheet metal
with a burial (41CS23), glass beads (41CS25), and a gunflint and cut iron rod
(41SC124). No Critical Resource Zones have been identified for Historic Contact
Period sites in Cass County. The major historic Indian group in Cass County in
the early 18th Century was the Kadohadacho or Caddo (Kenmotsu and Perttula
1993:Figure 2.6.6).

7

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
The first investigation in the area by professional archaeologists was the
survey for the proposed Texarkana Reservoir (now Wright Patman Lake) in the
1940s under the leadership of Robert L. Stephenson (1950). In all, 50 sites were
visited or recorded. He described his sites as “non-pottery sites,” “mound sites,”
“large village areas,” and “small camp areas.” Two sites near the current project
area were recorded by Stephenson. They are 41CS1 and 41CS2. Later, test
excavations were conducted by Edward B. Jelks (1961) at sites 41CS8, 41CS14,
and 41CS26. This represents the earliest systematic excavation of a site in Cass
County. Alton K. Briggs and James M. Malone (1970) conducted a survey at the
eastern edge of the proposed reservoir in 1969. They recorded 140 sites dating
to the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods of Texas prehistory. Most of the work
conducted in the area around Wright Patman Lake has been precipitated by the
timber industry. Between 1995 and 2004, many surveys of land adjacent to the
lake were surveyed in areas slated for timber cutting and logging roads.
Archaeological firms that have worked extensively in the area include GeoMarine, Inc., L&L Consultants, and Ecological Communications Corporation.
Several studies have been conducted at nearby White Oak Creek Wildlife
Management Area in Cass, Bowie, Morris, and Titus counties. One of the sites
found during this investigation (41MX299) is near Area 1 in the current project
area. This study included about 25,000 acres of bottomland and uplands along
White Oak and other creeks and the Sulphur River to help mitigate the loss of
wildlife habitat associated with Cooper Lake. In the report by Dockall and Fields
(2006), Table 3 is a summary of previous cultural resource investigations at
Wright Patman Lake. Archeological Steward Bo Nelson is very active in the area
and has considerable knowledge of archaeological sites and artifact collections.
The interested reader is advised to consult the references cited in this report for
additional information. A major source for Northeast Texas is the planning
document for the Eastern Planning Region prepared by Nancy Adele Kenmotsu
and Timothy K. Perttula. The most recent source is a book edited by Perttula
(2004) entitled The Prehistory of Texas. Perttula’s chapter on the Caddos of
Northeast Texas is a scholarly review of the area.

8

AREAS SURVEYED
Seven areas were examined during this project (Appendix I). The survey
team consisted of the Principal Investigator and Malcom Murray, President of
Western Cass WSC. They utilized a Global Positioning System (GPS) installed
in a computer in Mr. Murray’s truck, USGS topographic maps, Western Cass
WSC project maps, and site forms to find the areas selected by the THC for
survey. At each area, the surface was inspected for cultural materials, and
photographs were taken with a digital camera. Unfortunately, some photographs
were not on the camera when the Principal Investigator attempted to transfer
them to his computer. The survey team interviewed one landowner who provided
information about archaeological sites in the area and showed us his collection of
artifacts. The subsurface was investigated through shovel probes and tests.
Shovel probes were used to determine the presence and depth of the local red
and orange clay that predates human occupation. Probes are not counted, given
numbers, or plotted on maps. Shovel tests were used in areas where a site was
considered likely and randomly in the project area. All excavated dirt was
screened using ¼ inch hardware cloth. The depth of each test was measured,
and this information was documented with a shovel test log (Appendix II). All
artifacts found in the shovel tests were collected for analysis and eventual
curation at TARL. Field notes were maintained, and they will be part of the
records that will be curated. Discussions of each area surveyed are presented
below. Three of the areas selected for survey by the THC had been surveyed by
BVRA in 2001, and one area already have the water line in place.
Area 1
This area is located on the north side of County Road 3556 on a hill
overlooking the upper reaches of an unnamed tributary 2500 feet to the west.
According to the site records at TARL, historic site 41CS299 is located very close
to the county road right-of-way where the water line will be placed. This site was
recorded in 2004 by archaeologists from Ecological Communications Corporation
(Bonine, et al. 2004). According to the site form, it is a historic site containing
artifacts dating to the 19th and 20th centuries and a rock cairn. They state on the
site form that the artifacts are probably trash discarded by “passers-by” along the
two-track roads. A field check revealed that this site is to the north of the county
road, well away from the APE, and it was viewed as a low probability area for a
prehistoric site due to shallow clay as determined through shovel probes.
Therefore, no shovel tests were excavated. Two photographs were taken at the
APE, but they did not survive. This area is 2200 feet in length and is depicted on
the Atlanta North topographic quadrangle. A second area to the south of Area 1
was also selected for survey by the THC. This area was examined in 2001 by
BVRA, and no sites were found (Moore 2001).

9

Area 2
This area is located on the east and west sides of County Road 3771 on a
hill overlooking an unnamed tributary 245 meters to the east. According to the
site records at TARL, prehistoric site 41CS7 is located on both sides of the road.
According to the site form, this site was recorded by Dee Ann Story in 1977 when
she observed Caddoan sherds and flakes in the borrow ditch. She estimated the
depth of this site to be shallow (about one foot) of sand over clay. The site form
is very brief and contains no information regarding the types of pottery found and
the presumed age of this site. Under “Type of Site” it is referred to as an upland
site at an elevation of 350 feet. The entire APE was walked and examined for
artifacts on the surface and within the road cut. No evidence of a site was found.
The water line will be placed in the existing right-of-way that is located within a
stratum of red clay that predates human occupation. Therefore, no shovel tests
or probes were excavated. Two photographs of this area were taken, but they did
not survive. Area 2 is 1300 feet in length. This area is depicted on the Atlanta
North topographic quadrangle.
Area 3
This area is located on the west side of County Road 2584 and a private
road that continues to the Sulphur River. This road follows an upland ridge that
parallels a tributary of the river and ends on a high upland landform overlooking
the river. According to the site records at TARL, prehistoric site 41CS186 is
about 308 meters east of the northern end of Area 3 on a high upland ridge
overlooking the river. This site dates to the Archaic Stage, Caddoan period, and
historic times. Prehistoric artifacts found include ceramics, dart points, debitage,
shell, and teeth fragments. Historic artifacts are the result of a trash dump
associated with a 19th century homestead. According to one of the landowners
who live at the end of the private road overlooking the river, artifacts have been
found along the county road and in the private road in front of his residence. He
allowed us to view his collection that consisted of Gary points, side-notched
points, corner-notched points, and various contracting stemmed points. When
asked where he found these specimens, he said that they came from the general
area. He was only able to identify one as definitely being found near his
residence. We conducted a 100% Pedestrian Survey of that section of the road
where he claimed to have found the artifact and found nothing. This is a private
road that has 100% surface visibility. One photograph was taken of the dirt road
where the landowner claimed he found the point (Figure 2). We saw a clay loam
on the surface mixed with ironstone. In an intersecting road next to his residence
we observed firm red clay that predates human occupation less than 20 cm from
the surface. We dug four shovel tests and several probes in the area and
encountered this same clay between 10 and 25 cm (Appendix II). Area 3 is 4600
feet in length.

10

Figure 2. Private Road in Area 3

BVRA viewed part of the private road south of the area overlooking the
river to be a high probability area because of its proximity to the tributary below
that upland ridge. We checked the entire length of this road until it bends away
from the tributary and found red clay at or near the surface. Three photographs
were taken along the private road and county road south of the area where the
shovel tests were excavated, but not one survived. This area is depicted on the
Bassett topographic quadrangle. The water line will be placed in the existing
right-of-way that is located within the stratum of red clay that predates human
occupation. Three shovel tests and numerous shovel probes were excavated
along the road, and they revealed shallow clay. This area is on the Bassett
topographic quadrangle.

11

Area 4
This area is located on the east side of County Road 2585 on an upland
ridge that overlooks tributaries of the Sulphur River in each side. According to the
site records at TARL, prehistoric site 41CS2 is located at the terminus of this
ridge overlooking the river to the north and a floodplain of the river to the south.
Robert L. Stephenson (1950) recorded this site in 1949 during a survey of the
proposed Texarkana Reservoir. This early survey did not perform shovel testing.
Instead, they relied on surface visibility to locate sites. They examined the area
to be flooded and located and examined 50 archaeological sites. Site 41CS2 is
described in Stephenson’s (1950:7) report as a large village site that occupies an
area approximately 5-10 acres in size. The waterline stops before reaching this
site. Therefore, it was not examined. At the northern end of the proposed
waterline, a small rise was observed that appeared to contain sandy soil. This
area was shovel tested, and a prehistoric site (41CS338) was discovered (See
Results and Conclusions below). This site is depicted in a digital photograph and
a site map. Its location was plotted on the USGS 7.5’ topographic map Bassett
(Appendix III). Three photographs of other segments of this area were taken, but
not one survived. Area 4 is 2500 feet in length.
Area 5
This area is located on the south side of County Road 3334 in the
floodplain of Village Creek. According to the site records at TARL, prehistoric site
41MX29 is a mound located on the south side of the road in the floodplain. GeoMarine, Inc. recorded this site in 1990 as part of the White Oak Creek Mitigation
Area survey in Bowie, Cass, and Morris counties (Cliff 1994). We observed a
small mound on private property in the general area where it is depicted on the
topographic map. However, the location of this mound does not match the
sketch map that accompanies the site form. When we checked the latitude and
longitude using the GPS system, we found that the site should be on the west
side of Village Creek. The mound we observed is very close to the road on the
north side of a tributary of Village Creek. On the sketch map, it is depicted as
being on the south side of this tributary. While in the area, Mr. Murray decided
that the water line would not be placed along this portion of the road due to a lack
of residences requiring service. Therefore, no shovel tests or probes were
excavated. One photograph of the mound was taken (Figure 3). This area is
depicted on the Naples topographic quadrangle. Area 5 is 5000 feet in length.

12

Figure 3. Mound in Area 5

Area 6
This area is located on the north side of State Highway 77 along an
upland ridge. There are two high probability areas, the uplands on the east and
west sides of Village Creek along this 5000-foot segment. According to the site
records at TARL, no prehistoric or historic sites have been recorded in this area.
This was not one of the areas selected for survey by the THC. A decision to
install the water line in this area was made in the field when Mr. Murray decided
to cancel service to Area 5 near site 41MX29. The survey team checked the cut
banks on each side of the creek for artifacts and found no evidence of a site. The
water line will be placed in the existing right-of-way that is located within a
stratum of red clay that predates human occupation. Therefore, no shovel tests
or probes were excavated. Two photographs of this area were taken, but only
one survived (Figure 4). This area is depicted on the Naples topographic
quadrangle.

13

Figure 4. Area 6

Area 7
This area is located on the south and west sides of Buck Florence Road
and south side of County Road 333 along an upland ridge. There are three high
probability areas along this 6000-foot segment. No previously recorded sites are
known to be in this area. The water line will be placed in the existing right-of-way
that is located within a stratum of reddish-orange clay that predates human
occupation. Therefore, no shovel tests or probes were excavated. Three
photographs of this area were taken, but only one survived (Figure 5). Figure 5
illustrates clay at the surface and is typical of the rest of this area. Area 7 is
depicted on the Cookville topographic quadrangle.

14

Figure 5. Area 7

15

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
This investigation located one previously unrecorded prehistoric site
(41CS338) on the east bank of a tributary of the Sulphur River at the confluence
of the two streams (Appendix III). This site is located on a small rise that has
been cut through by a private road and is about 130 meters from the river. Four
shovel tests were excavated at the interface between the road and the cut bank.
Three tests were dug through an orange clay loam and firm orange clay was
encountered between 30 cm and 50 cm below the ground surface. Shovel Test
11, dug at the southern end of the site, contained an ashy colored soil that may
be associated with an event related to burning. According to Timothy K. Perttula
(personal communication), the ashy soil (if cultural) probably represents a burned
house or a hearth. The artifacts recovered from shovel testing include 10 pottery
fragments, 2 utilized flakes, 1 silicified wood biface, and 4 non-utilized flakes.
The artifacts are discussed in Appendix IV. The size of this site is not known, but
the north-south axis was estimated at 26 meters based on the shovel tests and
the slope of the landform. The east-west axis from the road to the edge of the
slope was not examined because it is on private property outside the APE. Due
to time constraints, no shovel tests were dug in the road, across the road, or
away from the rise along the north-south axis. Delineation of the site for
avoidance was to be performed at a later date. Therefore, it is not known if there
are undisturbed deposits in the road or if the site extends to the north or south
away from the rise. The height of this rise or mound above the surrounding area
is also not known. It is depicted on the Bassett topographic quadrangle.
This site appears to be on a natural rise that could have been used by the
Caddo as a habitation site, possibly with one or more structures. The preliminary
investigation was not able to determine if the elevated area is an artificial mound.
In either case, this site may extend beyond the natural rise or mound that
appears to be the main occupation area. Several known mound sites are known
to occur in upland settings in Northeast Texas. One mound was documented to
the east of 41CS1. The nearest site to 41CS338 is a large Caddoan village site
(41CS2) that is 5-10 acres in size. This site is about 267 meters to the east on
the bluff overlooking the river. It is possible that 41CS338 is an outlier of this
village site. Although the age of site 41CS338 is not known at this time, it is
possible that it may have been occupied during the Middle Caddoan period (A.D.
1200 – A.D. 1400). This statement is based on the fact that nearby site 41CS1
has been found to date to this period (Middlebrook and Perttula 1997). Small
mounds in this area are sometimes associated with cemeteries and midden
deposits, and features may extend into the clay stratum underlying the loamy soil
(Bo Nelson, personal communication).

16

It is not known if 41CS338 has been cultivated in the past. At the time of
our visit, the site area was covered with a native grass that is common in
Northeast Texas (Bo Nelson, personal communication). Figure 6 is a digital
photograph of the site, and a site map depicting the location of the four shovel
tests is presented as Figure 7.

Figure 6. 41CS338 (looking north)

17

Figure 7. Site Map (41CS338)

18

RECOMMENDATIONS
One prehistoric site (41CS338) was located and recorded as a result of
this survey. This site is considered to have significant research potential, and it
is recommended that it be avoided by the proposed water line. Based on the
preliminary findings of this survey, Western Cass WSC has decided to terminate
service by stopping construction of the water line south of this site; thus,
protecting it. In the remainder of the project area, it is recommended that the
water line be constructed as planned by Western Cass WSC with no further
consultation with the THC. Should the client change the route of the water line to
include areas not previously surveyed, the THC should be consulted, as
additional survey may be necessary. If an archaeological site other than
41CS338 is found during construction, all work in the area of the find must cease
until the THC can evaluate the situation. If the client changes its plans and
decides to construct the water line through this site, it is recommended that it be
avoided by boring beneath the site or selecting an alternate route to the east
away from the creek. This survey was conducted in accordance with the
Minimum Survey Standards adopted by the THC.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Banks, Larry D.
1990 From Mountain Peaks to Alligator Stomachs: A Review of Lithic
Sources in the Trans-Mississippi South, the Southern Plains, and
Adjacent Southwest. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Memoir
Number 4.
Bonine, Mindy L., Richard S. Jones, and W. Nicolas Trierweiler
2004 A Cultural Resource Inventory of 1,612 Acres at Lake Wright
Patman and Lake Sam Rayburn, Texas. Ecological
Communications Corporation.
Briggs, Alton K., and James M. Malone
1970 An Archeological Survey of the Texarkana Reservoir Enlargement
Area: Report on the First Season. Archeological Survey Report
Number 7, Texas Historical Survey Committee and Texas Water
Development Board.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1979 Geological Atlas of Texas, Texarkana Sheet. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Cliff, Maynard B. (editor)
1994 Cultural Resources Survey of a Portion of the White Oak Creek
Mitigation Area (WOCMA), Bowie, Cass, and Morris Counties,
Texas: 1990-1992. White Oak Creek Mitigation Area Archeological
Technical Series, Report of Investigations Number 2. Geo-Marine,
Inc.
Dockall, John E., and Ross C. Fields
2006 Reconnaissance Survey to Assess the Impacts on Archeological
Resources of the Proposed Conservation Pool Level Raise at
Wright Patman Lake, Bowie and Cass Counties, Texas. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations Number 146.
Fenneman, N. M.
1938 Physiography of the Eastern United States. McGraw-Hill Book
Company, Inc. New York.
Fisher, W. L.
1965 Rock and Mineral Resources of East Texas. Reports of
Investigations Number 54, Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

20

Fritz, G. J.
1990 Multiple Pathways to Farming in Pre-contact Eastern North
America. Journal of World Prehistory 4:387-435.
Hunt, Steven M., and Maynard B. Cliff
1998 Intensive Pedestrian Survey of 1,260 Acres at Lake of the Pines
and Wright Patman Lake, Bowie and Marion Counties, Texas:
1997. Miscellaneous Report of Investigations Number 173. GeoMarine, Inc.
Jelks, Edward B.
1961 Excavations at Texarkana Reservoir, Sulphur River, Northeastern
Texas. Bulletin of American Ethnology, Bulletin Number 179, River
Basin Survey Papers Number 21. United States Government
Printing Office. Washington, D.C.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
Kent, Floyd D., and S. Alan Skinner
2001 Cultural Resources Evaluation of System Improvements, Western
Cass Water Supply Corporation. AR Consultants, Report 2001-3.
Moore, William E.
2001 An Archaeological Survey of Proposed System Improvements for
the Western Cass Water Supply Corporation, Cass County, Texas.
Brazos Valley Research Associates, Contract Report Number 84.
Murray, G. E.
1960 Geologic Framework of the Gulf Coastal Province of the United
States. Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa.
Perttula, Timothy K.
2004 The Prehistory of Texas. Texas A&M University Press.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1950 Archeological Survey of Texarkana Reservoir, Bowie and Cass
Counties, Texas. Report prepared by the Smithsonian Institution.
Story, Dee Ann
1990 Environmental Setting. In The Archaeology and Bioarchaeology of
the Gulf Coastal Plain, Volume 2, by Dee Ann Story, Janice A. Guy,
Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D.
Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Research Series Number 38.

21

APPENDIX I
AREAS SURVEYED

Area 1 on Atlanta North Topographic Quadrangle

Area 2 on Atlanta North Topographic Quadrangle

Areas 3 and 4 on Bassett Topographic Quadrangle

Areas 5 and 6 on Naples Topographic Quadrangle

Area 7 on Cookville Topographic Quadrangle

APPENDIX II
SHOVEL TEST LOG

Shovel
Test

Area

Depth
(cm)

Site

Soil

1

3

25

None

sandy clay*

no artifacts

2

3

15

None

sandy clay

no artifacts

3

3

10

None

clay

no artifacts

4

3

10

None

clay

no artifacts

5

3

15

None

sandy clay

no artifacts

6

3

15

None

sandy clay

no artifacts

7

4

10

None

clay

no artifacts

8

4

50

41CS338

sandy clay

6 sherds

9

4

60

41CS338

sandy clay

4 sherds and 1 flake

10

4

50

41CS338

sandy clay

1 biface and 3 flakes

11

4

40

41CS338

sandy clay
ashy color

2 flakes

*all shovel test dug in clay were terminated at clay

Results

APPENDIX III
SITE 41CS338 ON TOPOGRAPHIC MAP

APPENDIX IV

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS

By
William A. Dickens, PhD.

Western Cass Water Supply Corporation
Water Improvement Project
BVRA Project Number 07-21

Introduction
The testing of a proposed water line project for Western Cass WSC
resulted in the discovery of a prehistoric occupation site (41CS338). Shovel
testing along a private dirt road resulted in four positive shovel tests. The
artifacts recovered include 10 ceramic sherds, 1 biface, 2 utilized flakes, and 4
non-utilized flakes. The artifact sample is discussed below according to shovel
test.
Shovel Test 8
Six ceramic sherds were recovered from this test. These sherds appear
to be from the same ceramic vessel, and they range in size from 17.2 mm and
33.8 mm in length, 11.6 mm and 22.0 mm in width, and they are approximately
9.6 mm in thickness. The condition of these specimens is poor, as they were not
very well fired and are of sandy paste construction. The surfaces are smooth
and plain, and the exterior color is a very dark grayish-brown (2.5Y 3/2) on one
side and a mottled strong brown color (7.5YR 3/6) on the other side.
Shovel Test 9
One flake and four ceramic sherds were recovered from this test. The
flake is complete and small. It was size graded at 6 (less than 12.5 mm and
greater than 9.5 mm). It is made from quartzite and has not been subjected to
heating. This is a secondary flake as a portion of the original cortical surface is
present. The platform is dihedral and has been ground. There is an obvious lip
on the ventral edge. A light bulb of percussion is present on the ventral surface
adjacent to the platform edge. These attributes suggest it was removed by the
soft hammer percussion method.
The sherds appear to be from four different vessels. Sherd 1 is 43.9 mm
long, 40.3 mm wide, and 6.5 mm thick. It is a plain body sherd of sandy paste
construction and has a rough exterior surface. Its color is a mottled strong brown
(7.5YR 5/6) on both surfaces. Sherd 2 is 33.7 mm long, 27.7 mm wide, and 8.8
mm thick. It is a plain body sherd of sandy paste construction and has a smooth
surface. One side is brown (7.5YR 5/2), and the other is a very dark gray (7.5YR
3/1). Sherd 3 is 21.5 mm long, 19.4 mm wide, and 5.7 mm thick. It is a plain
body sherd of sandy paste construction and has a smooth surface. The exterior
surface is yellowish-red (5YR 5/8), and the interior surface is dark gray (5YR
4/1). Sherd 4 is 19.7 mm long, 15.8 mm wide, and 7.9 mm thick. It is a plain
body sherd of sandy paste construction with a rough exterior and interior surface.
The exterior color is very dark gray (10YR 3/1), and the interior surface is brown
(10YR 4/3).

2

Shovel Test 10
One biface, a utilized flake, and two pieces of debitage were recovered
from this shovel test. The biface is small and measures 35.1 mm in long, 23.4
mm wide, and 4.1 mm thick. It is made of silicified wood and is a crude, early
stage type with most of the flaking on its dorsal surface. The flake scars are
strongly concave, an indicator of hard hammer removal. Silicified wood is often
difficult to reduce successfully, and the poor quality of this specimen may be the
reason it was discarded and not finished. The utilized flake is made of a finegrained chert that is a mottled brownish-yellow in color (10YR 7/8) and a very
dark gray color (10YR 3/1). It is made on a thin biface thinning flake that is 35.1
mm long, 23.4 mm wide, and 4.1 mm thick. The platform is plain and lipped with
a diffuse ventral surface. One edge has been modified unifacially along the
ventral surface and consists of small flake scars that could have been created by
hard hammer or soft hammer percussion. The two non-utilized flakes are small,
being a size grade 7 (less than 9.5 mm and greater than 6.3 mm). One is an
interior flake with no cortex. It is a distal fragment and is made from a piece of
dark red (10R ¾) quartzite. The other flake is also an interior flake that is made
from a piece of dark reddish-brown (5YR ¾) jasper. It is complete, has a plain
platform, and a strong bulb of percussion on its ventral surface.
Shovel Test 11
Two small flakes were recovered from this shovel test, and one has been
utilized. The utilized flake is 19.5 mm long, 14.0 mm wide, and 3.1 mm thick. It
is made on a complete interior biface thinning flake with a multi-faceted platform
that has been ground. No platform lipping is present, and there is a strong bulb
of percussion on the ventral surface that is an indicator of hard hammer removal.
The material is chert that has patinated to a light gray (10YR 6/1). There are
several pot-lids on the dorsal surface that resulted from exposure to fire. Both
lateral edges have been unifacially modified on the dorsal surface with flaking on
one edge very abrupt or steeply angled. The other flake small, size grade 6. It is
a complete secondary flake made from a piece of dark reddish-brown (5YR ¾)
jasper. The platform is crushed, and there is a slight bulb of percussion present
on the ventral surface, an indication of hard hammer removal.

3

Discussion
Although the total number of lithic artifacts recovered in this survey is few,
they do consist of a range of materials (i.e., jasper, chert, quartzite, and silicified
wood). This variation in raw materials utilized is typical of lithics found in gravels
that occur throughout East Texas and Northeast Texas. They are usually found
as small to medium cobbles, which restrict the size of lithic tools that can be
made from them. Larger tools are often found in the region and they are usually
made from raw material types that have been traded from Arkansas or Central
Texas. The lithics in this sample appear to have been obtained locally.
The ceramics recovered represent a number of vessels used at the site.
The sherds are small, undecorated body sherds. Therefore, they can’t be
assigned to known types. They are, however, typical of pottery types known to
occur throughout East Texas and Northeast Texas that are attributed to some of
the Caddo groups that inhabited the area. Therefore, it is assumed that the
occupants of this site were one or more of the Caddoan groups known to have
occupied this region.

4

