TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1958
President: RicHARD E. JoHNSON (Fort Worth)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAcK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. ScHUETz (San Antonio )
Editor of Publications: E. MoTT D AVIS
Directors (in addition to the above): T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W . C. HoLDEN (Lubbock)
Trustees: RoBERT E. BELL (Norman, Okla.) , WILSON W. CRooK, JR. (Dallas), 0. L.
SIMS (San Angelo), CHARLIE STEEN (Sante Fe, N . Mex.), FLoYD V. STUDER
(Amarillo ), FRANK H. WATT (Waco), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.),
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: C. E. BisSELL (Midland) , JoHN CoRLEY (Hobbs, N.Mex.) ,
W. L. EvERETT (Conroe), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), RoBERT L.
STEPHENSON (Lincoln, Neb.) , HENRY F. STURGIS (Austin), JoE BEN WHEAT
(Boulder, Colo. ), SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fellows: CYRus N . RAY (Abilene), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5 .00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum, Brackenridge Park,
San Antonio 9, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 29, for 1958
Editor: T . N. Campbell
Assistan t Editors:
E. Mott D avis
Edward B. Jelks

P ublish ed by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VOLUME

29,

FOR

1958

A Review of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
PART l
Edited by Edward B. Jelks, E. Mott Davis, and Henry F. Sturgis

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

Table of Contents
Foreword

.

Indian Tribes of Texas
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

vn

1

A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology
By Clarence H. Webb

35

A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
By Dee Ann Suhm

63

A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas Archeology
By Donald J. Lehmer

109

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas
Coast
By T. N. Campbell

145

Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature
Compiled and edited by T. N. Campbell

177

Foreword
THIS IS THE first of two volumes designed to serve as a review of the
current status of Texas archeology. The second volume will appear as
a later issue of the Bulletin. The review is in the form of a series of
papers, each dealing with a different area within Texas. In addition,
the presentation is made complete by the inclusion in the present
volume of W. W. Newcomb's paper on the historic Indians of Texas
and T . N . Campbell's revision , brought up to date, of his exhaustive
guide to the literature on Texas archeology, first published in 1952.
These papers are primarily aimed at a specific audience-the membership of the Texas Archeological Society. In other words, our desire
has been to present material which will be of maximum u se to persons
who are studying Texas archeology on the ground , primarily in their
spare time. Fulfilling this requirement fortunately also provides a
general review which should be of benefit to archeological specialists.
Accordingly, these reviews are designed to clarify the current status
of archeology in each of the several archeological areas within Texas,
and also to orient investigators-both amateur and professionaltoward the many urgent problems that need to be solved. In each
paper previous field work, classifications, and interpretations are reviewed, the major unsolved problems are outlined, and field techniques especially applicable to each area are discussed.
In the present volume, four areas are treated: East Texas, Central
Texas, Trans-Pecos Texas, and the central and southern parts of the
Texas Gulf Coast. A later volume will present papers on the Panhandle, the South Plains, North Central Texas, Southwest Texas, and
the Southeastern Coastal Plain.
A word of explanation is in order for the many members of the
Society who have long awaited the 1958 issue of the Bulletin, published here two years late, and who have anticipated eagerly the
reissuing of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology, by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, which was published in 1954 as Volume 25
of the Bulletin and which has been out of print for several years.
It was originally planned that the Handbook would be reissued in
essentially its original form, and that in addition a series of papers on
special problems in the different parts of Texas would be published.
Also, a volume on field techniques was to be prepared. Most of these
plans went awry because of pressure on the editors' time and slowness

Office of the State Archeologist

Ubrary

on the part of authors in submitting manuscripts, and therefore a
different order of events is now contemplated. The first part of the
Handbook-the part dealing with areas and complexes-is not to be
reissued; its place is to be taken in part by A Review of Texas
Archeology, of which the present volume is the first part. Part II of
the Handbook-consisting of descriptions and illustrations of pottery
and projectile point types-is to be reissued separately as a special
publication of the Society. In addition to the type descriptions , this
volume will also include the trait lists for the various foci and aspects
that appeared in Part I of the original Handbook. The manual of field
techniques is in preparation and will appear as a special publication or
a Bulletin, whichever seems most practical.
This, then, is the long-awaited 1958 issue of the Bulletin, and the
beginning of the revision of An Introductory Handbook of Texas
Archeology. It is our hope and belief that the members of the Society
will find the papers of general interest, and that those members engaged in active research will find them of particular value.

EowARD B. JELKS
E. MoTT DAvis
HENRY F. STURGIS
February, 1960

A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas
Archeology
DONALD J. LEHMER*

Introduction
FoR THE PURPOSES of this paper, Trans-Pecos Texas is taken to be the
rough parallelogram bounded by and including the valleys of the Rio
Grande and Pecos Rivers south of the New Mexico border (Fig. 1) .
The 30,000 square miles of the region offer a variety of environmental
situations. The Guadalupe, Davis, and Chisos ranges form a disconnected mountain spine through the center of the area. A lower series
of ranges runs southeast from El Paso parallel to the Rio Grande.
Inter-mountain areas consist of a series of high basins and valleys
which are drained by small tributaries of the two major rivers. The
river valleys themselves constitute a third province. In some places
both the Pecos and the Rio Grande have carved deep canyons; in others
the valleys open out to include floodplain s several miles wide.
Native vegetation of the Trans-Pecos divides into a series of zones
which correspond to the physiographic divisions. The valleys of the
rivers and the larger tributary creeks have a cover of mesquite, willow,
cottonwood, and a fairly luxuriant growth of grasses and shrubs. The
lower interior basins and the terraces bordering the major valleys are
clothed with a scant growth of greasewood, ocotillo, prickly pear, and
other desert plants; in the higher valleys a variety of grasses, yucca,
and sotol flourishes. Pine, pinon, and oak are found in the higher mountains where there is enough rain to support a fairly heavy forest
growth.
* Donald J. Lehmer is associated with the University of Omaha and lectures at the
Strategic Air Command Headquarters in Omaha. He has done extensive field work
in M exico, the Plains, and the Southwest, including Trans-Pecos T exas. His monograph, The l ornada Branch of the Mogollon, is one of the primary sou rces on the
arch eology of Trans-Pecos Texas. He is also co-author, with J. Charles Kelley and
T. N. Campbell, of The Association of A rcheological Materials with Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas.

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Trans-Pecos was outside the main buffalo range, but some of
the animals did penetrate west of the Pecos. Other native game animals include antelope, deer, a few bear, and small mammals. Several
varieties of fish are caught in the Pecos and the Rio Grande. Snakes,
lizards and other reptiles are common, and there is a fair variety of
bird life in the region.

Historic Tribes
A number of Indian groups are reported to have lived in the TransPecos area during the period since it was first visited by Europeans.

Fig . 1 . Map showing limits of the Trans-Pecos area and its archeological subdivisions :
(1 I Southeastern district, (2) El Paso district, (3) La Junta disirict, and (4) Northeastern district (tentative).

TRANS-PECOS

111

The first contact may have come as early as 1535 when Cabeza de
Vaca apparently crossed the district on his epic journey from the Texas
coast to Sinaloa. Subsequently a host of explorers, traders, missionaries,
military men, and settlers have left a mass of historical data on the
Trans-Pecos tribes. On the basis of these data it appears that there was
a marked difference between two Indian ways of life in the area. The
groups occupying the Rio Grande valley were mainly farmers who
lived in permanent villages and did a little hunting in the uplands.
The upland tribes, who also ranged through the mountains, were primarily hunters and gatherers, although some of them seem to have
cultivated small gardens in places where water was available from
springs and seeps.
The Mescalero Apache were the most important of the upland
tribes during the time of the American occupation, with the Comanches
raiding into and across the Trans-Pecos, and the Lipan occupying the
southeastern margins of the area. Three additional groups can be identified in the El Paso district-the semi-nomadic Suma; the Mansos,
who are reported to have shared a number of traits of social and political organization with the Pueblo peoples of New Mexico; and finally a handful of Pueblo Indians who settled there after the Pueblo
revolt against the Spanish settlers in New Mexico in 1680.
The La Junta district, the area around the junction of the Conchos
and the Rio Grande, presents a complex situation when it comes to
identifying historic tribal entities. The Spanish accounts contain literally dozens of different names for local Indian groups. Some of these
are obviously different renditions of the same name. Others appear
to be different names applied to the same group by different writers.
However, even when all the discernible synonyms have been eliminated, an impressive roster remains. Many of the names used by the
Spanish for the La Junta Indians appear to refer to small groups such
as the occupants of a single village. Other names, particularly those
which are Spanish words for various animals, such as conejo, may possibly designate totemic bands. Still others, such as lumano, almost certainly refer to inclusive socio-political entities which were recognized
as 'tribes' by the Indians themselves. Much work still remains to be
done with the ethnohistory of the La Junta district, work which in
time should produce a definitive list of the various tribes which occupied the villages there and of the others who came to trade with the
settled farmers.

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

T rans-Pecos Archeological Sites
The archeological sites of the Trans-Pecos area vary greatly both as
to type and artifact content. However, the individual sites tend to fall
into several categories, categories which are important both from the
point of view of archeological techniques and in the reconstruction of
the prehistory of the area. In general, differences between the several
categories reflect both geography and time. Certain classes of sites tend
to be localized in particular sections of the area; other groups of sites
are characteristic of particular periods in the prehistory of the area .
Village sites are characterized by the remains of permanent houses
and usually by a fairly heavy accumulation of refuse which indicates
a reasonably permanent occupation. Within the Trans-Pecos area,
village sites occur around old playas in the basins to the east of El
Paso, at various places along the Rio Grande from El Paso through the
La Junta district, and along the lower reaches of the larger tributary
creeks which run into the Rio Grande in the La Junta district. The villages in the vicinity of El Paso seem to date from the period between
A.D. 900 and 1400. The La Junta villages are later, dating from after
A.D. 1200.
Rock shelters (Fig. 3-6) , recesses in cliffs or steep hillsides, occur
throughout much of the Trans-Pecos. Some are barely large enough
to have sheltered a single family; others could have provided a home
for a fairly sizable group and have floors covered with refuse deposits
several feet in thickness. Since the overhang of the shelters has usually
protected the fill from rainfall, perishable materials are frequently
found in these sites. These artifacts of wood and fibre give a much
more complete picture of the occupants' culture than can be reconstructed from excavations in open sites.
Specimens from the shelter sites indicate that different ones were
occupied by people with distinctive cultural traditions, and that the
occupations lasted from well before A.D. 900 until early historic times.
Open camps are found throughout much of the highland area of the
Trans-Pecos and in sheltered canyons in the mountains. The campsites are recognizable by the presence of a thin layer of occupational
debris, often scattered over a considerable area. Much of the debris
consists of hearthstones, small angular fragments of rock whose color
and structure indicate repeated heating by fire. In some of the camps
the hearthstones are found in small clumps with ash and charcoal
intermixed between the rock fragments. In others there are large
doughnut-shaped circles-the so-called sotol pits or midden circles.

113

TRANS-PECOS

Like the rock shelters, the open camps of the Trans-Pecos represent
occupations by different Indian groups at different periods of time.
Buried sites have been located in some parts of the Trans-Pecos,
particularly the Alpine district, where modern arroyo cutting has
sliced through the alluvial fills of the valleys and exposed the different
layers or strata. In some places hearthstone and artifacts are found
eroding from the arroyo walls, the remains of camps similar to those
found on the present ground surface. However, these camp have been
buried by the gradually accumulating valley fills. The buried camps
occur at various depths and in different strata in the alluvium, sure
indication that they represent occupations widely separated in time.
Caches, pictographs and petrogly phs, cairns, and isolated burials
make up a final miscellaneous group of archeological remains which is
a part of the story of the Indian occupation of the Trans-Pecos area.
Caches of artifacts sometimes occur within villages or rock shelters,
and they are also sometimes found divorced from any habitation area.
By far the best known of this latter type is the cache of over 1200
arrow points found in the 1890's on the highest point of Mt. Livermore
in the Davis Mountains (Janes, 1930 ). Pictographs and petroglyphs
occur frequently in the Trans-Pecos area (Fig. 7-8). They may be
painted or carved on rock surfaces adjacent to old habitation areas, or
they may be found away from any other archeological remains. Cairns
of piled rocks are found in the area. However, it is difficult to know
which, if any, of the cairns are the result of Indian handiwork and
which ones relate to the White occupation of the area. Burials made
away from any habitation site occur infrequently in the Trans-Pecos.

Archeological Investigations
Our knowledge of Trans-Pecos archeology has been accumulating
since 1854 when J. Russell Bartlett published a description of the pictographs near Hueco Tanks in his " Personal Narrative," a book which
grew out of his activities in connection with the boundary between
the newly expanded United States and Mexico. However, most of the
information which can be used by the contemporary archeologist has
been collected since the end of the first quarter of the 20th Century.
Some of these data have been gathered by professional archeologists
working with all the paraphernalia of their trade, the rest by a number of remarkably gifted amateurs who have contributed enormously
to our knowledge of the archeology of the region. Amateurs and pro-

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fessionals together have built up a fund of factual data which today can
be used in making a good generalized reconstruction of the Indian occupation of the Trans-Pecos.
Victor J. Smith of Sul Ross College in Alpine deserves great credit
for his work in Trans-Pecos archeology during the 1920's and 30's. His
investigations were mainly concerned with the rock shelters in the
Alpine district, and they showed the wealth of material which could
be obtained from sites of this type. Smith's researches, together with his
unfailing courtesy to those who followed the trail he blazed, make
him one of the real pioneers in the field . Following Smith's lead, much
of the work done in the Trans-Pecos during the first third of the 20th
Century was concerned with the cave sites, with incidental attention
to the Pueblo remains in the El Paso district. The efforts of Smith, Mrs.
Eileen E. Alves, Mr. and Mrs. C. B. Cosgrove, Col. M. L. Crimmins,
G. C. Martin, Frank M . Setzler, W. S. Stallings, Jr., and many others
(see bibliography) provided the basis for the first assessments of TransPecos archeology.
Those assessments were made in the light of the ideas of Southwestern prehistory which were codified at the first Pecos Conference
in 1929. The Pecos classification was based primarily on information
from the Four Corners area and the upper Rio Grande. The classification recognized a sequence of developmental stages which began
with a hypothetical Basket Maker I and ranged through Basket Maker
II and III and a later series of cultural horizons designated as Pueblo
I through V. The Basket Maker complex included the early dry cave
sites and pit house villages of the Southwest; the Pueblo horizon the
later multi-roomed surface structures down through the contemporary
pueblos. It was assumed at the time that this sequence was more or
less valid for the entire Southwest. As a result, there was a natural
tendency to regard the villages of the El Paso district as a development comparable to the northern pueblos and to equate the dry
cave remains of the Trans-Pecos with the Basket Maker of the San Juan
area. Because of this, designations such as 'Big Bend Basket Maker' are
common in the early reports on Trans-Pecos sites.
Largely because of the work of the Gladwins and their associates at
Gila Pueblo, the realization grew duric'lg the early 1930's that Southwestern archeology was far more complicated than it had seemed in
the past. New cultural complexes were recognized, and a new taxonomic system was devised by the Glad wins (Gladwin, 1934) to classify them. Also, in their search for the origins of the newly recognized
complexes, the Gila Pueblo group pushed archeological surveys farther

TRANS-PECOS

and farther afield. One of these, conducted by E. B. Sayles, covered the
state of Texas. Sayles' report of the results of his survey (Sayles, 1935)
was a significant milestone in the interpretation of Trans-Pecos archeology. Instead of working in the terms of a "Basket Maker' and a
'Pueblo' horizon, Sayles defined a series of phases (equivalent to the
foci of the Midwestern taxonomic system) which distinguished three
separate cultural complexes within the material from the Trans-Pecos
rock shelters-the Pecos River, Big Bend, and Hueco Cave Dwellers.
He also set up an El Paso phase which included both the villages of the
El Paso district and a series of camps farther east, sites in which some
sherds of the characteristic El Paso pottery types were found. Sayles'
Jumano Phase included what later came to be recognized as the village
sites of the La Junta district, and a Lipan Phase included the late
upland camps of the Big Bend. Later, on the basis of reconnaissance
work in Chihuahua (Sayles, 1936), Sayles proposed a Conchos Phase
which is also represented in the La Junta villages. Sayles' classification
shows a remarkable appreciation of the differences between various
Trans-Pecos archeological complexes, and it provided a framework
which was invaluable in planning subsequent research in the TransPecos area.
Since the publication of Sayles' paper, the most important contributions to our knowledge of Trans-Pecos archeology have been made
by J. Charles Kelley. For over twenty years Kelley, who worked with
Sayles during the course of his survey, has been engaged in a comprehensive long-range research program in the Trans-Pecos. His investigations, carried out under the sponsorship of a number of institutions,
have dealt with such varied problems as the identification and excavation of some of the earliest sites known in the area and a meticulous
combing of documentary sources for ethnohistorical data.
One of Kelley's most significant projects was the organization of a
research program jointly sponsored by the Peabody Museum of Harvard and Sul Ross College. In 1938, the geologists and archeologists of
the Peabody-Sul Ross Expedition collaborated in the investigation of a
series of sites buried in the alluvial fills of valleys in the Alpine area.
The geologists, Claude C. Albritton and Kirk Bryan, found that there
were characteristically three formations present in the valley fills,
formations separated from each other by marked erosional disconformities (Albritton and Bryan, 1939). Kelley and the archeologists
working with him recovered archeological materials from sites buried
at different levels in the alluvia. This association of archeological speci-

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mens with the stratified valley fills provides the best available evidence
for the time sequence in Trans-Pecos archeology.
The expedition's findings did much to amplify the earlier knowledge
of Trans-Pecos prehistory. Two new and early stonework 'complexes',
the Maravillas and Santiago, were recognized, and there were indications of the existence of a third, the Red Bluff. Data gathered by the
expedition also contributed to the recognition of the Livermore Focus,
a late non-pottery assemblage which is characterized by highly distinctive projectile points and by other chipped stone artifac·t types.
Also some exploratory work was done with the village remains of the
La Junta district (Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940 ) .
On the basis of these and other data, Kelley has classified the archeological remains of the Big Bend region in terms of the McKem or
Midwestern taxonomic system (Fig. 2 ) . Kelley's Big Bend Aspect includes Say les' Pecos River Cave Dweller as the Pecos River Focus and
Sayles' Big Bend Cave Dweller as the Chisos Focus. Kelley's Bravo
Valley Aspect encompasses three foci : La Junta, Conchos, and Concepcion, which include the village materials found in the general area
of the junction of the Conchos River with the Rio Grande. The Big
Bend and Bravo Valley Aspects, together with the Livermore Focus
and the Maravillas and Santiago complexes, include most of the archeological remains of the Big Bend area .

EI P oso Dist r ict

I

L a Jun ta Distr i ct

I

A l luvia l
Sequence

So ut heastern D i strict

co nte mp. eros ion

Ko kern o t

Depos i t i on

14 00 -

El Paso
12 0 0 -

Do no Ana

~
~

L iverm ore
0

Mes ill a

"c
0

Chisos}i

Post-Ca lam ity
Eros i on

.s;

900 -

Hue co

Santi ego

Pec os

comol e ~

Riv er

co
.9'
<D

Mc ro villos

Compl e~

Ca lamity
Cr eek
Deposition

Post-Nev ill e
Eros ion

Nev ille
Fol som

Fig . 2 . Cultura l a nd alluvia l seq uences of Tran s-Pecos lexa s.

Depos i tion

TRANS-PECOS

117

Other work in the Trans-Pecos since the publication of Sayles' Texas
Survey report includes Mrs. Glen E. Moore's study of the pueblo sites
in the vicinity of El Paso (Moore, 1947) , the publication of the report
on the Cosgroves' work in the western Trans-Pecos cave sites (Cosgrove, 1947 ) , and the definition by the writer of the Jornada Branch,
a series of archeological complexes which range in time from early
rock shelter materials through pit house villages to the later Dona
Ana and El Paso Phase pueblos (Lehmer, 1948 ) .
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology, published in 1954
by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, is presented as "a general summary of
what is fairly well known in Texas archeology" (p . 24) . The Handbook includes 35 pages on the Trans-Pecos. Much of that space is devoted to a series of detailed trait lists of the archeological complexes
which Kelley and others have defined. Compiled from various published sources, those trait lists provide an invaluable and essential
reference for anyone interested in the area. In addition, the Handbook
authors have presented their own ideas of the ebb and flow of native
cultures in the Trans-Pecos. Much of this interpretation seems to be
completely in accord with the known facts. However, two major
points of the summary may well be susceptible of a different interpretation than the one given in the Handbook.
One concerns the sub-areas recognized within the Trans-Pecos. The
Handbook discusses only two sections within the area, a 'western' and
a 'southeastern.' The southeastern district includes the Big Bend region
and the lower Pecos River drainage. It appears to be a valid subculture area on the basis of the archeological remains found there.
However, there are good arguments for breaking down the Handbook's
'western' portion into two parts so that the Trans-Pecos would be subdivided into at least three sub-areas-the Southeastern district, an El
Paso district, and a La Junta district (Fig. 1).
The El Paso district is the part of the area in which remains of the
Hueco Phase and village sites assignable to the Jornada Branch consistently occur. These villages, which stand in sharp contrast to the
Bravo Valley Aspect villages of the La Junta district, occur eastward
from El Paso almost to the Guadalupe Mountains and down the Rio
Grande some 145 miles to the head of El Cajon. Isolated colonies of
Jornada people seem to have occasionally lived outside this area.
However, the El Paso district was certainly the heartland of the Jornada Branch development in Texas. In contrast, the La Junta district
was the center of the cultural sequence which has been called the
Bravo Valley Aspect (Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940) . The La

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 3 . A typical small cave of the Trans-Pecos area (Site 41 VV 148 in Val Verde County!.
A large talus of firecrac ~< ed limestone fragments extends down the slope from the mouth
of the cave , a sure sign that the cave was occupied . In the lefl bac :<ground is the Rio
~rancie.

Junta district includes the area along the Rio Grande from below El
Cajon to the head of Santa Helena Canyon, with an extension up the
Conchas River into Mexico. Its distinctive Bravo Valley Aspect is
mainly later in time than the Jornada Branch, although the final
J ornada phase and the earliest Bravo Valley focus seem to have been
contemporaries. A comparison of the Jornada and Bravo Valley trait
lists shows marked differences between them in material culture.
There also seem to have been differences in what might be termed the
'cultural orientation' of the two complexes. Chipped stone tools such
as scrapers and arrow points are common in the Bravo Valley sites,
but they are relatively rare in the Jornada villages. This may well
indicate that the Bravo Valley people leaned towards a Plains-village
type of economy with a dependence on both hunting and farming,
whereas the Jornada villagers followed the Southwestern pattern of a
primarily horticultural economy.
These points would seem to offer a strong argument for recognizing
two districts within the western Trans-Pecos. Also, as more information becomes available, it seems likely that it will be possible to recognize a fourth, Northeastern, district of Trans-Pecos Texas (Fig. 1).

TRANS-PECOS

119

The Handbook is also open to question with regard to the discussion
of the Livermore Focus. Although a trait list is given, the authors
characterize the complex as "nebulous" (p. 60), state that there is only
one excavated Livermore component (p . 60 ), and suggest that the
complex dates from between A.D. 1200 and 1400 (p. 62 ). However,
as Kelley (1957) has subsequently pointed out, there is good evidence
that the Livermore Focus is a valid cultural entity. Livermore components have been recognized in five excavated habitation sites in the
southeastern Trans-Pecos, and a cache of over 1200 Livermore Focus
points was found on Mount Livermore in the Davis Mountains. Kelley
has previously suggested that the Livermore Focus lasted from approximately A.D. 900-1300 (Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940 ),
and this dating seems to fit the known facts much better than the
1200-1400 date suggested by the Handbook. Arrow points of the distinctive type which are diagnostic for the Livermore Focus have been
found outside the Trans-Pecos as intrusives at the Mogollon Village
in southwestern New Mexico (Haury, 1936 ), and at Los Tules near

Fig. 4 . Fa~e Bell shelter, Val Verde County, one of the larger shelters of Trans-Pecos
Texao and also the type site of the Pecos River Focus. This shelter is in the west wall of
Seminole Canyon, a tributary to the nearby Rio Grande . It has a length of over 500 feet
and a depth in some places of more than 1 00 feet; its ceiling is as much as 40 feet high in
some par:·s of the sheller. In the foreground are small agave plants that grow abundantly
in this locality and whose fibers were used by the shelter inhabitants.

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Las Cruces, New Mexico (Lehmer, 1948 ) . The Mogollon village has
a terminal date establish ed by tree rings as about A.D. 900, and the
Los Tules site is dated on the basis of intrusive pottery as falling within the period A.D. 900-1100. These two instances certainly substantiate the initial date which Kelley ha s suggested for Livermore. At the
other end of the time scale, there is no good evidence that the Livermore Focus survived after the beginnings of the Bravo Valley Aspect.
The available evidence strongly suggests that the La Junta Focus.
earliest of the Bravo Valley sequence, could not have come into exist ence before A.D. 1200. Thus, Kelley's original dating of Liver more
as lasting from A.D. 900-1300 seem s to be fully justified.

Current Interpretations
Some sort of time scale is essential for any comprehensive scheme
of archeological interpretation. In Trans-Pecos Texas, the relative ages
of many of the archelogical complexes have been established by demonstrating their association with the different layers of the stratified
valley fills. According to Albritton and Bryan ( 1939), the geologists
who first studied those alluvial fills, it is possible to recognize three
periods of deposition and three periods of erosion in the southeastem
Trans-Pecos. These cycles of deposition and erosion appear to reflect
climatic changes, with deposition occurring under relatively humid
conditions and erosion during times of relative aridity. The sequence
of geological events indicated is as follows :
1. The Neville Deposition: a long and relatively moist period during

2.

3.

4.

5.

which the earliest of the alluvial formations was built up, a p eriod
during which local fauna included such forms as the mammoth and
the American horse.
The post-Neville Erosion: a long and r ela tively dry p eriod during
which the Neville form a tion was h eavily eroded and the m ammoth
and horse disappeared .
The Calamity Deposition: a moist period during which the middle
alluvial form ation was built up, a period during which the loca l fauna
was essentially modern.
The post-Calamity Erosion : a second dry p eriod during which the top
of the Calamity formation was eroded and there was some arroyo
cutting.
The Kokernot Deposition : a short, relatively humid period during
which the thin upper layer of the valley fills was laid down, a deposition which lasted into historic times.

TRANS-PECOS

121

6. The post-Kokernot Erosion: the current cycle of arroyo cutting and
sheet erosion, probably resulting in part from a decrease in rainfall
and in part from overgrazing.

This local sequence can be at least tentatively correlated with climatic changes which are evidenced over much wider areas than the
Trans-Pecos. It is known that much of the northern hemisphere was
covered with continent-wide ice sheets during the Pleistocene per~od,
and that these glaciers advanced and retreated several times. With
each glacial advance, there was a corresponding southward displacement of climatic zones which resulted in heavier rainfall in southern
regions which are now semi-arid. As the ice retreated for the last time,
the climate of the Southwest was cool and moist, a period which
geologists call the Anathermal. Subsequently temperatures rose and
rainfall probably decreased during a hot dry epoch known as the Altithermal. Finally there was a shift to essentially modern climates of
the Medithermal period.
It seems probable that the Neville deposition took place during the
moist Anathermal, over 10,000 years ago. The post-Neville erosion
may well have taken place during the hot Altithermal period, with
the Calamity and Kokernot depositions coming in Medithermal times.
The erosional interval which separated the deposition of the Calamity
and the Kokernot formations is not certainly placed in time, but there

Fig . 5 . In the dry caves and rock shelters of Trans-Pecos Texas dust boils up in clouds
during excavation and industrial respirators must be worn by fiel d workers. This picture
was taken during excavation of the Fate Bell shelter.

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

is a good probability that the post-Calamity erosion is a local reflection
of a severe drought which is known to have affected large parts of the
Southwest. This dry period has been dated by tree ring specimens
from the Four Corners area as having lasted from A.D. 1276-1299. In
the middle and upper Rio Grande valley of New Mexico, there was
also a dry period during the latter half of the 13th Century.
"The so-called 'great drought' period of 1276 to 1299 is not so severe
in the Rio Grande area as in that of Mesa Verde and of Flagstaff . ..
In the Rio Grande area the entire period from 1251 to 1299 was relatively dry, with the worst part being in the 1250's" (Smiley, Stubbs,
and Bannister, 1953: 53 ).
A late erosional disconformity in the Jeddito Valley in northeastern
Arizona almost certainly correlates with the late 13th Century drought
there (Hack, 1939 ) , and Antevs has suggested that a comparable erosion in southern Arizona may also date from this period (Sayles and
Antevs, 1941). Since both of these erosional disconformities correspond to the post-Calamity erosion in underlying the uppermost silt
formation in the valley fills, and since there is evidence of a late-13th
Century drought in the Rio Grande valley in New Mexico, it seems
likely that the post-Calamity erosion of the Trans-Pecos area also dates
from the latter half of the 13th Century.
The geologic time scale provided by the sequence of erosions and
depositions of the valley fills of the Trans-Pecos, together with other
dating techniques, makes it possible to arrange most of the local
archeological complexes in terms of a relative chronology which gives
a good outline of the procession of native cultures which followed one
another through time.
The earliest archeological materials now known for the Trans-Pecos
relate to the Folsom complex, one of the earliest in western North
America. Folsom materials have only recently been found in the
Trans-Pecos, and Dr. Joe Ben Wheat of the University of Colorado
was kind enough to supply the details regarding the site and the artifacts found. According to Dr. Wheat, the Folsom artifacts were located
in a terrace of Van Horn Creek in the vicinity of the town of Van
Horn. The terrace is a geological formation which appears to equate
in time with the Anathermal Neville silts. Specimen material from
the site includes some 50 Folsom points, gravers, heavy crude blades,
channel flakes from the Folsom points, and about 150 snub-nosed
scrapers. Parts of a burned and heavily mineralized human cranium
and long bones were found some distance from the main artifact concentration. This newly discovered site is an extremely important one.

TRANS- PECOS

123

Fig. 6 . Two views of Caldwell No. 1, a sink site in Culberson County t hat was occupied
during the Hueco Phase . Top v ie w shows the s in k (cen ter! and surrounding terrain , Bottom
view is f rom the rim of the sin k, showing the overhang on the opposite side that provided
shelt er for the occ upants .

It demonstrates human occupat:on of the T rans-Pecos area at an
earlier time than had been evidenced in the past, and it also demonstrates the extension into the area of the P aleo-eastern big game
hunters of late Pleistocene times.

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

After the Folsom occupation a new population seems to have come
into the Trans-Pecos, the people who were responsible for the archeological remains known as the Maravillas Complex. Maravillas
artifacts were first found by the Peabody-Sui Ross expedition at the
Calamity Creek site south of Alpine. They occurred there along the
contact zone between the top of the Neville and the bottom of the
Calamity Creek silts, a good indication that the Maravillas complex
appeared in the Trans-Pecos during the period of the post-Neville
erosion. So few Maravillas artifacts have been found that it is impossible to characterize the complex in detail. However, the few projectile
points show no resemblance to the Folsom points from the Van Horn
site, and the relatively large numbers of grinding stones indicate that,
in contrast to the Folsom hunters, the Maravillas people depended
heavily on wild plants for their livelihood.
The Santiago Complex was also represented at the Calamity Creek
site, and was definitely later than the Maravillas material there.
Occurring in the middle levels of the Calamity Creek silts, the Santiago
materials were also too sparse to permit a detailed description of the
full range of characteristic artifacts. Grinding tools were present, as in
the Maravillas levels, and a few unique projectile points were also
found.
The Pecos River Focus is another relatively early Trans-Pecos complex. It is known from a number of sites in the area. Many of the sites
are rock shelters (Fig. 3-4) which have yielded quantities of perishable materials in addition to stone artifacts, specimens which indicate
a people with a hunting and gathering economy. Characteristic Pecos
River projectile points and other artifacts have been found in buried
sites in the general Alpine area. The position of these artifacts within
the valley silts indicates that the Pecos River Focus appeared sometime a bout the middle of the Calamity deposition period and lasted on
through at least part of the erosional epoch which produced the disconformity between the Calamity and the overlying Kokernot formation.
The second focus of the Big Bend Aspect, the Chisos, is also represented by both cave and buried sites. Most of the buried Chisos artifacts
seem to come from the disconformity produced by the post-Calamity
Erosion, an indication that the Chisos people come into the area during the dry period which marked the end of the deposition of the
Calamity Creek silts. Although much of the Chisos Focus artifact inventory is generally similar to that of the Pecos River sites, one Chisos
trait marks an important innovation in southeastern Trans-Pecos culure. Chisos sites are the earliest known in the district to yield definite

TRANS - PECOS

125

Fig . 7. A complex set of pictog raphs near Langtry, Val Verde County. This picture
illustrates some of the problems involved in pictographic study and analysis. In the lower
pa rt of the picture the paintings have faded and it is now difficult to determine the ir
original form. In the uppe r part of t he picture the small white patches indicate places
whe re the rock has sca led away from the bluff. At upper left is a modern p ictograph, rep resente d by the initials HD. Many pictographs are being destroyed by individuals who
carve or paint their names on prehis toric pa intings. Some hunters use pictographs as targets

for rifle practice , and each shot causes a ci rcular patch to fall away from the bluff. Thes e
pa int ings , many of which seem to por tray men in ceremon ia l d ress , may rep resen t hun tin g

ri tuals of t he Pecos River Focu s people .

evidence of agriculture. Many of the Chisos caves contained cobs of
10- and 12-row corn, together with squash and beans. These remains
of cultivated plants are a sure indication that the Chisos people depended at least in part on garden crops for their food supply.
The Livermore Focus differs in a number of ways from the other
archeological complexes of the southeastern Trans-Pecos. Maravillas,
Santiago; Pecos River, and Chisos sites yield relatively few projectile
points and those points are characteristically lar ge and heavy, indicating probable use as dart rather than arrow points. The highly distinctive points of the Livermore Focus are small, light, finely chipped
pieces which were almost certainly attached to arrows. Hence, the
Livermore Focus may well represent the first appearance of the bow
and arrow in the southeastern Trans-Pecos. Other Livermore artifacts
which are new to the district include small, finely-made snub-nosed
scrapers and diamond-beveled knives-skin dressing tools which are
characteristic of the bison-hunting Plains cultures to the east and

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

north, and which may well indicate that the Livermore complex
originated in the southwestern Plains.
In the Trans-Pecos, Livermore artifacts are most generally found at
the level of the post-Calamity erosional disconformity, a good indication that the Livermore people moved into the area during the dry
years when that erosion was taking place. This erosion probably dates
from the latter half of the 13th Century. However, the Livermore
points found at the Mogollon Village and at the Los Tules site indicate
that the Focus itself was in existence at a much earlier time. The
Livermore artifacts found in the Pecos drainage of southeastern New
Mexico and western Texas may indicate an original home of the focus
before it was forced into the Trans-Pecos highlands by a severe drought.
In the Pecos country the Livermore Focus may well have been a
Plains hunting complex similar to those encountered farther north
by the Coronado expedition in 1541 and described by Castaneda as:
" . .. people [who] follow the cows, hunting them and tanning the
skins to take to the settlements in the winter to sell, since they go
there to pass the winter, each company going to those which are
nearest" (Winship, 1896: 52,7). An annual cycle of this sort would
provide a good explanation for the Livermore points found at Los
Tules and the Mogollon Village.
Two things stand out regarding the southeastern Trans-Pecos. First.
it appears to have been a refuge area into which people moved during
drought periods. Much of the section is relatively high, and has more
rainfall than adjoining areas of lower elevation. Hence it was presumably more livable for both men and animals during dry cycles. Artifacts of the Maravillas Complex, the Livermore Focus, and the Chisos
Focus are all associated with erosional disconformities in the valley
alluvia. This association provides a good indication that each of these
cultural complexes appeared in the area during dry times, and it seems
reasonable to assume that they entered the area under pressure
of a lack of water and game elsewhere. Second, the southeastern
Trans-Pecos was definitely marginal, in terms of cultural developments, to the more sophisticated complexes which existed in adjacent
areas. Agriculture is known to have been present only in the Chisos
complex. Pottery, permanent houses, and all the other adjuncts of the
village cultures of the Southwest and the southern Plains were absent,
leaving the southeastern Trans-Pecos lagging definitely behind these
other areas in terms of total cultural development.
The cultural sequence from Maravillas through Santiago and Pecos
River to Chisos and Livermore is limited to the southeastern part of

TRA N S-PECOS

127

Fig. 8. Faded pictographs in Painted Canyon, Val Verde County. Here men with weapons
(note bow and arrow held by man at right center) are associated with animals. A rabbit
and a bird, presumably a wild turkey, may be seen at extreme right. This pictographic
record is of special interest because it is in a distinctive style and shows men using the
bow and arrow, which was not used by Pecos River Focus people. These pictures were evidently made by a later group who occupied the area.

the Trans-Pecos area. A very different situation existed in both the El
Paso and the La Junta districts.
TheEl Paso district, lying as it does on the margin of the Southwest,
reflects many of the cultural developments which took place in the
prehistoric Southwestern culture centers. The earliest remains known
from the El Paso district are those which have been assigned to the
Hueco Phase. Represented mainly by cave sites (Fig. 6) , the Hueco
complex shares many traits with the Big Bend Aspect. The Hueco
people lived in both rock shelters and open camps, and they derived
their subsistence from a combination of gardening, hunting, and
gathering. Grinding tools are common, and a considerable variety of
other implements has been found in some of the richer Hueco sites.
The Hueco occupation in the El Paso district was followed by a
series of phases characterized by permanent villages and a primarily
horticultural economy. The Mesilla Phase, earliest of the village
horizons, is distinguished by both round and rectangular pit houses
and by the first developed pottery complex in the area. The individual
traits of the Mesilla Phase indicate that it is a cultural hybrid, derived
partly from the Mogollon and partly from the Anasazi traditions of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Southwest. The Mesilla Phase seems to have come into existence
some time about A.D. 900 and to have lasted until about 1100.
The Mesilla Phase was followed by a short-lived transitional complex known as the Dona Ana Phase, a complex which is distinguished
mainly by the replacement of the earlier pit houses by multi-roomed
surface pueblos built of adobe. Dona Ana pottery represents an elaboration of the Mesilla Phase types, and there are other trait carry-overs
which indicate that Dona Ana was a development out of the earlier
Mesilla complex.
In turn, the Dona Ana Phase evolved into the final manifestation of
the village horizon in the El Paso district-the El Paso Phase. Characterized by larger pueblos and a more elaborate pottery complex, the
El Paso Phase seems to have spread over a larger area than its predecessors, with isolated colonies occurring as far away as the La Junta
district. In the area east of the El Paso villages there are a number of
camps with no remains of any sort of permanent habitation, but which
do yield El Paso Polychrome pottery, the diagnostic type for the El
Paso Phase. These sites may represent hunting camps of the El Paso
people themselves. However, they may equally well be the remains
of some group of Plains hunters who were in contact with the El Paso
Phase people and obtained pottery from them by trade. The El Paso
Phase itself died out about A.D. 1400, and was later replaced by the
Manso and Suma groups who were present in the El Paso district in
early historic times.
The cultural development in the La Junta area was quite distinct
from those of the El Paso district and the southeastern Trans-Pecos.
Known La Junta archeological complexes are relatively late, and represent people who were sedentary farmers. Three foci, La Junta, Conchas, and Concepcion, have been recognized and they have been
grouped together into the Bravo Valley Aspect (Kelley, Campbell, and
Lehmer, 1940 ) . The earliest, the La Junta Focus, was at least partly
contemporary with the El Paso Phase. The Millington site at Presidio,
excavated by J. Charles Kelley and the writer, contained remains of
all three Bravo Valley foci, and also the ruins of a small adobe-walled
pueblo which seemed to represent a colony of El Paso Phase people at
the site. El Paso Polychrome pottery was found in the pueblo and in
the La Junta Focus houses , a good indication of contemporaneity.
The La Junta Focus itself differs in many ways from the El Paso
Phase. La Junta houses are single-room structures rather than pueblos.
Some are rectangular and built in deep pits. They are not, however,
pit houses in the strict sense of the term, as the house wall was built

Fig . 9 . Hueco Phase burial uncovered in a rock crevice at rear of Brooks shelter, Culberson
County. This burial contained two individuals , a woman and a child . The ch ild lies beneath
the woman , its feet showing at lower right. Organic materials in this burial are fairly
well preserved, and some can be seen in the p icture-a d igg ing stick !beneath skull o f
woman at left) , a net wrapped around four sticks llower center, to right of di!'lging stick) ,
and a yucca mat encasing the body of the child I right center).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

up directly from the pit floor and the side of the pit did not form part
of the house wall. Other La Junta structures were pit houses with
circular floors and pole superstructures which may have been covered
with grass thatch. Well-made arrow points, scrapers, and other skin
dressing tools are common in La Junta Focus sites and indicate a strong
dependence on hunting.
It may be that the complex known as the La Junta Focus actually
represents two d:stinct groups of people who shared the same villages
for at least part of the year. Ethnohistorical sources describe the La
Junta area as being occupied by sedentary farmers. They also mention
groups such as the elusive Jumano who spent part of the year with the
villagers and the rest of their time trading and hunting through the
Plains area to the north and east of the Trans-Pecos. The solid rectangular houses of the La Junta focus, the stone grinding tools, and the
pottery found in the sites may well have been products of the prehistoric farmers in the area. On the other hand, the flimsy circular
houses together with many of the arrow points and skin dressing tools
may derive from a seasonal occupation of the La Junta Focus villages
by early hunters and traders like the Jumano of historic times.
The Concepcion Focus shares a number of traits with the La Junta
Focus which it succeeded in the area. However, there are marked differences in house type, the Concepcion structures being rectangular pit
houses large enough that they may well have been occupied by some
form of extended family in contrast to the nuclear family-sized La
Junta Focus houses. The Concepcion Focus also differs from its predecessor in showing a number of traits borrowed from outposts of the
Spanish frontier settlements which were established in the area during the t:me it was in existence.
The Conchas Focus followed Concepcion in time, and in its turn it
represents the native Indian pattern even more strongly influenced by
contacts with the Spanish colonists.
Present evidence, then, seems to indicate the following cultural sequence in the whole Trans-Pecos area. The earliest known occupation
was by the big game-hunting Folsom people represented at the site
near Van Horn. This complex represents an extension into the area of
the Paleo-eastern cultures which existed throughout much of the High
Plains country during terminal Pleistocene times.
There is no evidence that the Folsom occupation lasted into the time
of the post-Neville erosion. Instead a new people represented by the
Maravillas Complex materials seem to have used the high country of
the southeastern Trans-Pecos as a refuge during a prolonged drought.

TRANS-PECOS

The manos and metates which are characteristic Maravillas artifacts
indicate a sharp break with the earlier Folsom pattern. Instead, it
seems likely that the Maravillas Complex is some sort of offshoot of
the early grinding tool cultures of southern Arizona and New Mexico
such as the Cochise ( cf. Warmington, 195 7: 169 ££. ) . This early grinding tool tradition lasted on in the area for many centuries. The Santiago Complex and the Pecos River Focus both seem to represent local
carry-overs of a Maravillas-type culture. Significantly, there was little
modification of the basic cultural pattern during the long period following the first arrival of the Maravillas people. Specific artifact types
changed, but this was a matter of style change rather than any modification of what appears to have been an ultra-conservative basic
pattern.
This situation in the Trans-Pecos stands in sharp contrast to contemporary developments within the Puebloan cultures of Arizona and
New Mexico. There, new basic traits were added to an original base
which is broadly comparable to the Trans-Pecos Maravillas Complex.
Traits such as agriculture, architecture, pottery making, and a host of
others were part of an accumulative elaboration of Southwestern culture which left the Trans-Pecos a definitely retarded marginal area.
Agriculture, one of the new Southwestern traits, was eventually
added to the late Trans-Pecos grinding tool cultures. It seems to have
appeared first in the Hueco Phase of the El Paso district, a complex
which shares many basic traits with the Maravillas and its successors. Later, cultivated plants spread to the southeastern Trans-Pecos
with the arrival of the Chisos Focus during the period of the postCalamity erosion.
The final prehistoric culture to appear in the southeastern TransPecos is the Livermore Focus. This complex, which contrasts sharply
with others in the district, appears to represent a group of late Plains
hunters who were driven to take refuge in the mountain country by a
severe drought .
While the southeastern Trans-Pecos remained a cultural backwater,
the El Paso district was being invaded by a host of new ideas derived
from the nuclear Southwest. The Jornada Branch sequence from the
Mesilla through the El Paso Phases is a local manifestation of the
spectacular Puebloan developments to the west and north. During the
time these local complexes were in existence, the El Paso district was
culturally a part of the Southwest. Changes in the local cultures during this period were mainly reflections of developments in the northern Rio Grande and in southwestern New Mexico.

Fig . 10. Child burial from Kelly shelter, a Pecos River Focus site near Comstock in Val
Verde County. The child was wrapped in a yucca mat, which is rather well preserved.
Resting on the skull is a small basket. Three shell ornaments, two of them shaped like
projectile points, may readily be seen. At the center are four sections of cane wrapped
with thongs, possibly a musical instrument similar to Pan's pipes.

TRANS-PECOS

133

The La Junta district, the third in the Trans-Pecos, is far more
difficult to place in terms of broader cultural configurations. Known
developments there seem to date from beginnings sometime after the
opening of the 14th Century.
One of the earliest complexes known in the La Junta district is
represented by the scattered El Paso Phase colonies which have been
recognized in the area. This El Paso Phase expansion may well be
some sort of reflection of the major population shifts which occurred
throughout much of the Southwest after the severe droughts of the
latter half of the 13th Century.
The other known complexes in the area have been grouped into the
Bravo Valley Aspect. These foci differ in many ways from the El Paso
Phase settlements, particularly in architecture. However, some Bravo
Valley traits were probably borrowed from the El Paso people. Others
may represent carry-overs from the Livermore Focus, and still others,
including the distinctive house types, may represent either local developments or borrowing from an unidentified source. There are also
good indications, both in artifacts dug from the sites and in ethnohistorical data dug from the archives, that there were close contacts between the Bravo Valley people and late Plains hunting groups. Finally,
the Bravo Valley Aspect shows an ever increasing modification of the
native way of life by contacts with the advancing frontier of Spanish
settlement in the New World.

Excavation Techniques for Trans-Pecos Sites
Archeological sites in the Trans-Pecos differ greatly both in form
and context, and the excavator must necessarily adapt his techniques
to the type of site in which he is working. If the work is to be anything
more than mere relic collecting, a system of digging must be followed
which will provide the greatest possible amount of information about
the site. The information recovered must also be recorded accurately
and in detail, particularly as regards the association of the various
artifacts found . A cataloging system which includes numbering each
specimen and recording both the site and the location within the site
where the piece was found is also essential. Sketches, ground plans,
maps, and diagrams are all indispensable to proper recording, and
numerous clear photographs should be taken of every stage of the
work.
Basic digging techniques which should be borne in mind at all times

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

include the following: The composition and layering in any sort of
midden can be seen best in cross section, and digging should be done
so that a clean vertical face is exposed. Screening with hand or standing screens will often recover small artifacts which would otherwise
be missed. Care should be taken in planning any extensive digging so
that back-dirt from the excavation is kept out of the way of future
work-there is nothing less rewarding than moving several cubic yards
of earth for a second or third time. Above all, the excavator must learn
to recognize the differences in color and texture which distinguish undisturbed native soil from midden deposit. In many cases it is necessary to work along the contact lines between midden and native soil
in order to preserve the form of prehistoric house pits and the like.
This ability to recognize soil differences is certainly one of the most
important possessed by any competent field man.
Village sites of the J ornada Branch and of the Bravo Valley Aspect
require particular types of excavation if information is to be obtained
about the houses themselves. The Dona Ana and El Paso Phase houses
are multi-roomed structures with adobe walls. The walls themselves
are usually eroded down so they are only a foot or so in height, and the
location of the pueblo itself is usually marked by a low mound. The
best general approach to the excavation of one of these structures is to
begin with an exploratory trench two or three feet wide which is started
back from the edge of the mound and carried down to undisturbed soil.
The trench should then be extended into the mound, keeping a vertical
face down to sterile soil as the trench is dug. Eventually this trench
will reach the outer wall of the pueblo. The exposed section of the wall
can then be cleaned off, and the orientation of the wall determined.
Even if the entire structure is not going to be excavated, the size and
shape of the pueblo should be determined by turning the first exploratory trench and extending it along the outside wall until the entire
structure has been outlined. If the walls do stand more than a foot or
so in height, care should be taken not to make the outlining trench so
deep that the pressure of the fill inside the rooms can collapse the
wall outward into the trench.
The individual rooms can be excavated in much the same way. A
narrow trench dug around the four walls will serve to outline the
room. Tests can then be made to determine the depth of the floor, and
the room fill removed to within three or four inches of the floor with
the specimens from the room fill being placed in carefully marked
field bags. The floor itself can then be cleaned with shovels and trowels.
Care must be taken to locate and trowel out all floor features such as

TRANS-PECOS

135

post holes, cache pits, fire pits, etc. The completely excavated room
should then be swept, photographed, and a detailed floor plan drawn
to scale. Specimens from the room fill just above the floor should be
sacked separately from those in the upper levels of the fill, and specimens from each floor pit or other special feature kept separate from
those in other parts of the room.
It is usually difficult for small field crews to excavate an entire
pueblo in such a way that all of the rooms are left clear at the end of
the project. Therefore, it is often advisable to begin work at one end of
the structure, clear a single room completely, and then, when that
room has been fully recorded, back-fill it with the fill from an adjoining room. This method has the obvious disadvantage that the entire
structure is never exposed at one time. However, this is usually offset
by the fact that the disposal of the back dirt does not become a problem
as the work progresses, and also by the fact that back-filling the rooms
and outlining trench serves to preserve the structure itself.
In most cases the floors of the Jornada pueblos are built directly on
native soil. However, after a room has been cleared, mapped, and
photographed, this fact should be verified. This can be done by sinking
a test pit through the room floor to make sure there is no older structure or refuse accumulation below. House superposition is one of the
most reliable means of determining chronology within a site, and every
care must be taken to establish it if the condition exists.
Mesilla Phase houses and those of the Bravo Valley Aspect's earlier
foci are pit houses rather than surface pueblos, and they require a
different excavation technique. There is rarely any surface indication
of the location of these structures within a site, and they must be discovered by exploratory excavations. The house pits are usually fairly
deep and filled with midden material which differs in both color and
texture from the native soil into which the pit was dug. Test pits made
at regular intervals serve to locate the house pits by revealing a greater
depth of midden material than that which is found over the area between the houses. Once a test has indicated an unusual depth of midden, it should be carefully deepened until native soil or an adobe floor
is encountered. With the depth of the house pit determined, the excavator can then work back one side of his test, keeping a vertical face,
until the native soil which marks the edge of the house pit is encountered. The test should then be turned and extended along the pit
wall so as to outline the entire pit. The remaining pit fill can then be
taken out to within a few inches of the floor, the fill in contact with the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

floor removed separately. the floor features cleared, and the floor
mapped and photographed.
Particular care should be taken during the final stages of the excavation of a pit house to locate the entrance passage if one exists. This
can often be done before the final sweeping of the floor by shaving
back the lower parts of the pit walls and noting any differences in
color and/ or texture which may indicate a passage leading out from
the pit itself.
Other features of the Jornada and Bravo Valley villages require
their own special excavation techniques. Hearths of heat-fractured
stone should be cleaned off with trowel and brush, photographed,
measured, and located on the general site map in relation to the houses
and other features. Storage pits sometimes occur outside the houses.
When these are encountered, the pit fill should be dug out, included
specimen material sacked, a scale plan and cross-section prepared, and
the feature located on the site map. The sheet refuse which spreads
between houses often yields quantities of artifact material, and testing
will indicate whether or not this refuse is rich enough to warrant extensive digging and screening. Trash mounds sometimes occur in the
Bravo Valley villages, and low mounds of trash are frequently associated with the Jornada pueblos. Features of this sort should be trenched,
the trenches being dug a block at a time, and the blocks removed in
levels if the deposit is more than a foot or so in depth.
Care should be taken at all times when working in village sites to
see that burials which may be encountered are not damaged. Once a
burial is located, it should be excavated by acceptable techniques,
photographed, and recorded in detail.
Rock shelters of the Trans-Pecos country require somewhat different
excavation techniques than the villages. The shelter sites usually include both the shelter itself and a talus slope in front of the shelter
(Fig. 3). This is often blanketed with a heavy accumulation of midden material. Since the shelter sites were often occupied by different
groups at different times, particular care must be taken in working
both the cave and the talus deposits to segregate specimens from
different levels in the deposits so that a stratigraphic sequence can be
established. If there are apparent natural layers, materials from each
one should be kept separate. If the natural layers have any considerable depth, they should be worked in arbitrary levels four to six
inches to a foot thick, depending on the depth of the stratum itself.
If there are no visible layers within the deposits themselves, the
entire deposit must be worked in arbitrary levels.

TRANS-PECOS

137

It is usually advisable to establish a horizontal control grid of numbered squares which covers the entire area to be excavated. These
squares, usually three or four feet to a side, are then dug out in levels
of a predetermined thickness. The specimen material from each level,
natural or arbitrary, in each square should be sacked separately so
that it can be catalogued according to square and level. Controlled
excavation of this sort is essential in sites which were occupied by more
than one group of people, since it is the only way of determining which
types of artifacts are found in which levels of the deposits.
Here too, the importance of keeping clean vertical faces on all excavations must be stressed. A careful examination of these faces will
generally show some sort of natural layering in the deposits which
may be of great significance.
Excavation within the rock shelters themselves presents a number of
special problems. The matrix of the cave fill is usually an extremely
fine dust, a dry powdery substance which boils up in clouds during
excavation (Fig. 5). Extreme caution must be exercised to avoid prolonged breathing of the dust, and industrial respirators should be worn
by all members of the field party working in the cave for more than
a few minutes. The dust is also very irritating to the eyes, and they
should be bathed at least twice a day with boric acid.
Apart from keeping the excavator in good health, cave work also
presents other problems. The fact that the overhang keeps moisture
out of the cave usually results in the presence of quantities of perishable materials in the fill. This, plus the powdery nature of the matrix,
makes excavation slow and also makes it very difficult to keep any
sort of vertical face on the excavation itself. In addition to the vegetable fibers, the presence of large rocks which have fallen from the
cave roof also interferes with the neat geometric squares which are
dear to the heart of most archeologists.
Each individual cave is a situation unto itself, and general methods
have to be adapted to the particular situation. Often it is advisable to
establish a number of "profile lines" across the cave, and to remove the
deposits between them a layer at a time. As each level is worked back
to one of these lines, it is faced up as well as possible along the line.
A scaled drawing should then be made of the profile at that point, and
the excavation then carried back to the next line. When the entire
layer has been taken out in this fashion, a second can be removed in
the same way. As this is done, the profile drawings should be extended
down another step as each profile line is reached.
Back dirt from the shelter can often be disposed of by shoveling it

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

into a wood or metal chute which will carry the dirt down and away
from the cave mouth.
Special preparations must be made for the care of perishable specimens found in cave work. Ryker mounts, shallow cotton-filled cardboard boxes with glass tops, are ideal for keeping smaller specimens
such as sandals and basketry fragments which are too fragile to pack
otherwise. The larger and more substantial pieces must be carefully
packed for transportation from the field to the laboratory, and a good
supply of packing materials should be on hand at all times when cave
sites are being worked.
Open camps usually offer little scope for actual excavation since the
refuse deposits are generally too thin and scattered to justify digging.
Surface collections can be made, and a program of mapping the
relationship of the various surface features such as hearths and midden
circles might well provide information on camp arrangement, etc.
Buried sites present the greatest challenge of all to the excavator.
Fundamentally, most of them are open camps covered with feet or
yards of valley alluvium. Usually they can be located only after they
have been partly exposed by erosion, generally arroyo cutting. Once
such a site has been located in an arroyo wall, the problems really
begin.
The extent of the site can only be seen along the single axis of the
arroyo cut. Where the rest of the site is, how large it is, and how rich
it is in artifacts are all mysteries buried deep under the valley fill.
Once the excavator has taken the inevitable deep breath and decided to
suffer the blisters, backaches, and frustrations of working the site,
there are certain preliminaries which are essential for any proper
excavation.
One of these essential steps is the establishment of a system of horizontal and vertical control to be used during the digging. This will be
the reference system which will permit the accurate recording of the
locations of artifacts and site feaures. Such a system should be established with a transit and rod. It should include one or more bench
marks which can be used as points from which to take elevations.
Some sort of grid system which will permit the horizontal location of
finds with reference to a series of numbered squares is also necessary.
The actual excavation of the site should be carried out in terms of the
grid squares and of levels established within the square.
Before excavation is begun, the geology of the site must be studied
with considerable care. The association between cultural materials and
geologic features is extremely important, and that association must bP

139

TRANS-PECOS

recorded with complete accuracy. This is no task for an untrained
individual. Amateur and professional archeologists alike must have
either a first-rate geological background or call in a competent geologist who is thoroughly familiar with the study of alluvial deposits.
The geological study must include the identification of the major
alluvial formations which are present in the area. At the site itself,
these formations must be defined and carefully distinguished from any
localized formations which may be present. As the excavation progresses, it is necessary to keep a continuous check on the trend of the various strata and the erosional disconformities which separate them. All
specimens and site features must be located in terms of the formation
in which they are found and of their position within the formation
itself.
Excavation of the site itself is largely a matter of moving dirt and
of recovering all specimens. One special problem has to do with water.
Many excavation units will extend below the floor of the arroyo. After
every rain these have to be bailed out and allowed to dry before work
can goon.
In summary, archeological excavation in the Trans-Pecos is largely
a matter of using standard techniques which are employed by most
archeologists wherever they are working. Learning these techniques
requires an apprenticeship in the field under competent workers. Applying them requires attention to detail, an ability to adapt to particular problems which are encountered, and a considerable insight to
recognize those problems and work out the right solution.

Current Problems
Today we know far more about Trans-Pecos archeology than we did
twenty-five years ago. However, we are still faced with a number of
blank spots which should be filled.
We need far more factual data on the early occupations of the area,
data which can only be obtained by extensive excavation. For example,
is the Van Horn Folsom site unique, or are there others in the TransPecos? We also need far more information about the Maravillas, Santiago, and Red Bluff complexes, particularly larger collections of artifacts which will provide the basis on which comprehensive trait lists
can be made. In turn, these trait lists will provide the basis for the
assessment of the complexes themselves. Do Maravillas, Santiago, and
Red Bluff represent valid cultural entities, or are the complexes as we
know them simply random associations of artifacts?

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Information is badly needed on the northeastern part of the TransPecos. Today that area is almost unknown archeologically. The sorts
of sites and artifacts found there, the archeological complexes which
are present, and their relation to others in the Trans-Pecos and adjoining regions are all items of information which should be gathered.
More data are needed on the Livermore Focus. Sites with strong
Livermore components should be excavated and the information from
those excavations used to settle the validity of the focus itself and to
throw light on the origins of the complex.
The collection of key samples for radiocarbon dating is also a matter
of great importance. Such samples will serve both to date the various
epochs of the geologic history of the valley fills, and to provide absolute
dates for the individual cultural complexes found in the Trans-Pecos.
Our knowledge of Trans-Pecos archeology will also be broadened by
publication of the results of excavations made in the past, particularly
in the Bravo Valley Aspect sites. The writer himself must plead guilty
to being at fault in this respect.
Trans-Pecos archeology also needs study as well as additional data.
Various Trans-Pecos complexes should be compared trait by trait with
others both within and outside the area. For example, material is available for a detailed comparison of the Hueco cave materials with artifacts of the Chisos and Pecos River foci. A similar comparison might
profitably be made between the Trans-Pecos cave materials and those
from Coahuila and from parts of the Southwest.
Another problem which awaits solution concerns the origins of the
Bravo Valley Aspect. There are indications that this complex may
have derived in part from the El Paso Phase, and in a small part from
the Livermore Focus. However, the source of many of the distinctive
Bravo Valley traits still remains to be determined.
The whole field of ethno-history offers another very promising area
of investigation. It should be possible to make a remarkably complete
reconstruction of the life-way of the historic Bravo Valley villagers
from the mass of documents which is available. Beyond that, those
same documents probably contain valuable information on the various
culture contact situations in the La Junta region. There are certainly
clues to the relations between the native villagers and semi-nomadic
groups such as the Jumano who spent part of the year in the villages.
There must also be information on the contacts between the Indians
and the Spanish settlers in the region, and of the effects of those contacts on both groups.
These are only a few of the problems which still await investigation.

TRANS-PECOS

Some of them have been touched on in the past by various workers.
Some aspects of the problems listed here are currently under investigation. However, Trans-Pecos anthropology is a big field, and there
is more than enough room for the interested scholar to make his
contribution.

Bibliography
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
AA-American Anthropologist.
A An- American Antiquity.
B-TAPS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
B-T AS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society.
EP-El Palacio.
MP- Medallion Papers. Gila Pueblo.
PMP-Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University.
P-WTHSS-vVest Texas Historical and Scientific Society Publications.
DAB-University of Arizona .B ulletin.
WMMB-Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin.
Albritton, Claude C. , Jr. , and Kirk Bryan
1939. Quaternary Stratigraphy in the Davis Mountains, Trans-Pecos Texas.
Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, Vol. 50, pp. 14Z3-1474.
Alves, Eileen E.
1930. Shelter Caves of the El Paso District. B-TAPS, Vol. Z, pp. 64-68.
1931. Pottery of the El Paso Region . .B-TAPS, Vol. 3, pp. 57-59.
193Z. Perishable Artifacts of the Hueco Caves. P-WTHSS, No. 4, pp. ZO-Z3.
Ayer, Mary Youngman
1936. The Archaeological and Faunal Material from Williams Cave, Guadalupe
Mountains, Texas. Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia, Vol. 88, pp. 599-618.
Bartlett, John Russell
1854. Personal Narrative of Explorations and Incidents of Travel in Texas, New
Mexico, California, Sonora, and Chihuahua, Connected with the United
States and Mexican Boundary Commission During the Years 1850, '51, '5Z,
'53. Z Vols. London and New York.
Coffin, Edwin F.
193Z. Archaeological Exploration of a Rock Shelter in Brewster County, Texas.
Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum of the American Indian, Heye
Foundation, Vol. 48.
Cosgrove, C. B.
1947. Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in New Mexico and Texas. PMP,
Vol. Z4, No. Z.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Crimmins, M. L.
1929. An Archaeological Survey of the El Paso District. B-TAPS, Vol. 1, pp.
36-42.
1931. The Pictographs at the Hueco Tanks. B-TAPS, Vol. 3, pp. 24-30.
Davenport, J. Walker
1938. Archaeological Exploration of Eagle Cave. WMMB, No.4.
Davenport, J. Walker, and Carl Chelf
1941. Painted Pebbles of the Lower Pecos and Big Bend Regions of Texas.
WMMB, No.5.
Ferdon, Edwin N. , Jr.
1946. An Excavation of Hermit's Cave, New Mexico. Monographs of the School
of American Research, No. 10.
Gladwin, Winifred and Harold S.
1934. A Method for Designation of Cultures and Their Variations. MP, No. 15 .
Gould, Lois
1929. A Grooved Club and Other Artifacts from a Cave Seventy Miles Northeast
of El Paso, Texas. Proceedings of the Oklahoma Academy of Science, Vol.
9, pp. 155-159.
Hack, John T.
1939. The Late Quaternary History of Several Valleys of Northern Arizona, A
Preliminary Announcement. Museum Notes, Museum of Northern Arizona, Vol.11, pp. 67-73.
Haury, Emil W .
1936. The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico. MP, No. 20.
Holden, W . C.
1937. Excavation at Murrah Cave. B-TAPS, Vol. 9, pp. 48-73 .
Jackson, A. T.
1937. Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 9,
pp. 146-192.
Janes, Susan M.
1930. Seven Trips to Mount Livermore. P-WTHSS, No.3, pp. 8-9.
Kelley, J. Charles
1939. Archaeological Notes on the Excavation of a Pit-house near Presidio, Texas.
EP, Vol. 46, No. 10, pp. 221-234.
1949. Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures in Western
Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 20, pp. 89-114.
1950. Atlatls, Bows and Arrows, Pictographs, and the Pecos River Focus. A An,
Vol. 16, No.1 , pp. 71-74.
1951. A Bravo Valley Aspect Component of the Lower Rio Conchas Valley, Chihuahua, Mexico. A An, Vol. 17, No.2, pp. 114-119.
1952. Factors Involved in the Abandonment of Certain Peripheral Southwestern
Settlements. AA, Vol. 54, No.3, pp. 356-387.
1952-53. The Historic Indian Pueblos of La Junta de los Rios. New Mexico Historical Review, Vol. 27, No.4, pp. 257-295; Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 21-51.

TRANS- PECOS

143

1955. Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. AA, Vol. 57, No. 5, pp.
981-995.
1957. The Livermore Focus: A Clarification. EP, Vol. 64, Nos. 1-2, pp. 42-52.
1959. The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. A An, Vol. 24, No.3 , pp. 276-288.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits in
the Big Bend Region of Texas. P-WTHSS, No. 10, pp. 9-173.
Kirkland, Forrest
1939. Indian Pict ures in the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County, Texas. B-TAPS,
Vol. 11 , pp. 47-76.
1940. Pictographs of Indian Masks at Hueco Tanks. B-TAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 9- 29.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1948. The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. UAB, Vol. 19, No.2.
Martin, George C.
1933. Archaeological Exploration of the Shumla Caves. WMMB, No.3.
Mera, H. P.
1938. Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern New Mexico. Memoirs of
the American Anthropological Association, No. 51.
1943. An Outline of Ceramic Developments in Southern and Southeastern New
Mexico. Laboratory of Anthropology Technical Series Bulletin, No. 11.
Moore, Mrs. Glen E.
1947. Twelve Room House Ruin. B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 94-114.
Pearce, J. E., and A. T. Jackson
1933. A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas. The University of
Texas Bulletin, No. 3327.
Roberts, Fran~ H. H ., Jr.
1929. Recent Archaeological Developments in the Vicinity of El Paso, T exas.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 91 , No.7.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas. MP, No. 17.
1936. An Archaeological Survey of Chihuahua, Mexico. MP, No. 22.
Sayles, E. B., and Ernst Antevs
1941. The Cochise Culture. MP, No. 29.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1957. A Carbon-14 Date from Trans-Pecos Texas. B-TAS, Vol. 28, pp. 288-289.
Setzler, Frank M.
1935. A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern Texas. AA, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp.
104-110.
Smiley, Terah L., Stanley A. Stubbs, and Bryant Bannister
1953. A Foundation for the Dating of Some Late Archaeological Sites in the Rio
Grande Area, N ew Mexico: Based on Studies in Tree-ring Methods and
Pottery Analyses. UAB, Vol. 24, No.3.
Smith, Victor J .
1932. The Relation of the Southwestern Basket Maker to the Dry Shelter Culture

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the Big Bend . B-TAPS, Vol. 4, pp. 55-62.
1934. Hard Rock Shelter. B-TAPS, Vol. 9, pp. 97-106.
1938. Carved Rock Shelter. B-TAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 222-233.
Stallings, W. S., Jr.
1932. Notes on the Pueblo Culture in South-central New Mexico and in the
Vicinity of El Paso, Texas. AA, Vol. 34, No.1, pp. 67- 78.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks.
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-TAS, Vol. 25.
Taylor, Herbert C., Jr.
1949. A Tentative Cultural Sequence for the Area About the Mouth of the Pecos.
B-TAPS, Vol. 20, pp. 73-88.
Taylor, Walter VV.
1956. Some Implications of the Carbon-14 Dates from a Cave in Coahuila, Mexico. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 215-234.
Winship, G. P.
1896. The Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542. Fourteenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part 1. Washington, D. C.
Wormington, H. M.
1957. Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series, No. 4 (4th edition ).

