TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1958
President: RicHARD E. JoHNSON (Fort Worth)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAcK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. ScHUETz (San Antonio )
Editor of Publications: E. MoTT D AVIS
Directors (in addition to the above): T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W . C. HoLDEN (Lubbock)
Trustees: RoBERT E. BELL (Norman, Okla.) , WILSON W. CRooK, JR. (Dallas), 0. L.
SIMS (San Angelo), CHARLIE STEEN (Sante Fe, N . Mex.), FLoYD V. STUDER
(Amarillo ), FRANK H. WATT (Waco), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.),
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: C. E. BisSELL (Midland) , JoHN CoRLEY (Hobbs, N.Mex.) ,
W. L. EvERETT (Conroe), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), RoBERT L.
STEPHENSON (Lincoln, Neb.) , HENRY F. STURGIS (Austin), JoE BEN WHEAT
(Boulder, Colo. ), SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fellows: CYRus N . RAY (Abilene), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5 .00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum, Brackenridge Park,
San Antonio 9, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 29, for 1958
Editor: T . N. Campbell
Assistan t Editors:
E. Mott D avis
Edward B. Jelks

P ublish ed by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VOLUME

29,

FOR

1958

A Review of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
PART l
Edited by Edward B. Jelks, E. Mott Davis, and Henry F. Sturgis

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

Table of Contents
Foreword

.

Indian Tribes of Texas
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

vn

1

A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology
By Clarence H. Webb

35

A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
By Dee Ann Suhm

63

A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas Archeology
By Donald J. Lehmer

109

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas
Coast
By T. N. Campbell

145

Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature
Compiled and edited by T. N. Campbell

177

Foreword
THIS IS THE first of two volumes designed to serve as a review of the
current status of Texas archeology. The second volume will appear as
a later issue of the Bulletin. The review is in the form of a series of
papers, each dealing with a different area within Texas. In addition,
the presentation is made complete by the inclusion in the present
volume of W. W. Newcomb's paper on the historic Indians of Texas
and T . N . Campbell's revision , brought up to date, of his exhaustive
guide to the literature on Texas archeology, first published in 1952.
These papers are primarily aimed at a specific audience-the membership of the Texas Archeological Society. In other words, our desire
has been to present material which will be of maximum u se to persons
who are studying Texas archeology on the ground , primarily in their
spare time. Fulfilling this requirement fortunately also provides a
general review which should be of benefit to archeological specialists.
Accordingly, these reviews are designed to clarify the current status
of archeology in each of the several archeological areas within Texas,
and also to orient investigators-both amateur and professionaltoward the many urgent problems that need to be solved. In each
paper previous field work, classifications, and interpretations are reviewed, the major unsolved problems are outlined, and field techniques especially applicable to each area are discussed.
In the present volume, four areas are treated: East Texas, Central
Texas, Trans-Pecos Texas, and the central and southern parts of the
Texas Gulf Coast. A later volume will present papers on the Panhandle, the South Plains, North Central Texas, Southwest Texas, and
the Southeastern Coastal Plain.
A word of explanation is in order for the many members of the
Society who have long awaited the 1958 issue of the Bulletin, published here two years late, and who have anticipated eagerly the
reissuing of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology, by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, which was published in 1954 as Volume 25
of the Bulletin and which has been out of print for several years.
It was originally planned that the Handbook would be reissued in
essentially its original form, and that in addition a series of papers on
special problems in the different parts of Texas would be published.
Also, a volume on field techniques was to be prepared. Most of these
plans went awry because of pressure on the editors' time and slowness

Office of the State Archeologist

Ubrary

on the part of authors in submitting manuscripts, and therefore a
different order of events is now contemplated. The first part of the
Handbook-the part dealing with areas and complexes-is not to be
reissued; its place is to be taken in part by A Review of Texas
Archeology, of which the present volume is the first part. Part II of
the Handbook-consisting of descriptions and illustrations of pottery
and projectile point types-is to be reissued separately as a special
publication of the Society. In addition to the type descriptions , this
volume will also include the trait lists for the various foci and aspects
that appeared in Part I of the original Handbook. The manual of field
techniques is in preparation and will appear as a special publication or
a Bulletin, whichever seems most practical.
This, then, is the long-awaited 1958 issue of the Bulletin, and the
beginning of the revision of An Introductory Handbook of Texas
Archeology. It is our hope and belief that the members of the Society
will find the papers of general interest, and that those members engaged in active research will find them of particular value.

EowARD B. JELKS
E. MoTT DAvis
HENRY F. STURGIS
February, 1960

Archeology of the Central and Southern
Sections of the Texas Coast
T. N . CAMPBELL*

Area
CoASTAL TExAs is part of the elongated low-lying area bordering the
Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico that is known to physiographers
as the Coastal Plain Province (Fennemen, 1938 ). Our principal interest
here is in the section west of the Mississippi River called the West
Gulf Coastal Plain, and even more specifically in the narrow strip
known as the Coastal Lowland, a belt extending along the coast that
varies in width from 50 to 75 miles. Furthermore, because of an editorial decision, we are concerned only with that part of the Coastal
Lowland ly ing between the Brazos and the Rio Grande rivers, or what
is here termed the central and southern sections of the Texas coast
(Fig. 1) . The eastern part, which lies between the Brazos and Sabine
rivers, is assigned to another contributor. This dual division of the
Texas coast is in part arbitrary and in part based on a vaguely defined
cultural boundary zone in late prehistoric and early historic times.
The Coastal Lowland is a .low, slightly tilted, almost featureless
plain. From sea level at the coast line it gently rises to an altitude
ranging from 100 to 175 feet along its inner edge. Geologically it is
divisible into an inner and an outer belt, the inner belt being controlled
by the Lissie sand formation and the outer by the Oberlin and Eunice
formations (these replace the single formation previously known as
Beaumont ) . All three formations are of Quaternary age (Doering,
1957: 1822; Sellardsetal. , 1932: 780- 795 ) .
Across the Coastal Lowland a number of streams meander broadly
• T. N. Campbell, currently Chairman of the Department of Anthropology a t The
University of T exas, has worked in several Texas areas, including central Texas
and the T rans-Pecos, but his special interest has been in the Texas Gulf coast. He has
published reports on investigations at a number of coastal sites, among th em Johnson, Kent-Crane, Live Oak Point, Webb Island, Indian Island, and Caplen.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

toward the Gulf of Mexico in roughly parallel southeasterly courses.
Most of these streams are in the central section of the coast, the important ones being the Brazos, Colorado, Guadalupe, San Antonio, and
Nueces rivers. The southern section of the Texas coast is much drier,
and there are no important drainages between the Nueces and the Rio
Grande. Nearly all of th ese rivers flow into the shallow segmented
bays that form so large a part of th e Texas coast line. These baysMatagorda, San Antonio, Aransas, Corpus Christi, and the Laguna
Madre-are almost completely closed off from the Gulf by long, narrow, sand-reef barrier islands and peninsulas that parallel the mainland. The longest of these is Padre Island, which extends from Corpus
Christi southward to the mou th of the Rio Grande, a distance of some
120 m iles.

Fig . 1. Map showing sections of the Texas coast under consideration: (1) central section ,
(2) southern section .

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

147

Otherwise the Texas coast is physiographically rather monotonous.
Marshes, lagoons, ponds, and oxbow lakes are common. Near the mainland shore in some localities are remnants of beach ridges or lines of
sand dunes, and fairly common near the beach are low wave-cut bluffs.
In the central section are many small " mounds" or elevations that
have sometimes been mistaken for archeological features. These are
usually circular in outline, range in height from one to five feet, and
most of them have diameters of 30 to 50 feet. These have been referred
to as " pimple mounds" or " mima mounds," and some areas thickly
strewn with them have been called " pimpled plains." Their origin is in
dispute, but Price ( 1949 ) has presented evidence which indicates that
they are the work of pocket gophers.
Along the coast from Corpus Christi southward are topographic features known as clay dunes (Huffman and Price, 1949). Except for the
constituent materials, these dunes are similar to some sand dunes . They
are elongated ridges of compact, stratified, wind-blown clay derived
from the dry, mud-cracked surfaces of nearby saline lake basins and
coastal lagoons. They lie along the lee shores of these saline flats . The
dunes range in height from a few feet to 35 feet and constitute the
major elevational features of the flat coastal terrain in that area.
Occupational refuse occurs in many of these clay dunes, indicating
that they were intermittently used as camping stations by man while
the dunes were accumulating.
The climate of the eastern part of the Texas coast is mild and
humid to sub-humid for the most part, but there are significant
gradations in both temperature and precipitation as one moves westward and southward (Thornthwaite, 1948). In the central and southern sections the temperature is prevailingly macrothermal. Unlike
the eastern section of the Texas coast, where precipitation is adequate
at all seasons, precipitation in the central and southern sections is less
reliable, and some years may be dry or even desert in character,
especially in the southern portion, which is classifiable as semi-arid.
The winters on the Texas coast are notably mild, but there are occasional sudden drops in temperature when cold air masses succeed
in penetrating as far south as the Gulf. The summer temperatures are
somewhat lower than farther inland. In late summer and early
autumn the whole coast is subject to violent hurricanes from the
Gulf, and these produce wind tides that damage or destroy archeological sites along the shore.
Biologists assign the central part of the Texas coast to the Texan
biotic province and the southern part to the Tamaulipan biotic prov-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ince (Blair, 1950). Prairies are characteristic of the coastal portion of
the Texan province, although the alluvial soils of river valleys and the
sandy soils farther inland locally support a forest vegetation. A thorny
brush vegetation is characteristic of the Tamaulipan biotic province,
reflecting the greater aridity and higher temperatures of southern
Texas. The boundary line between these two biotic provinces seems to
have fluctuated within the past hundred years, for Price and Gunter
( 1942) have cited historical records which show that the thorny brush
vegetation has spread northward (probably from local sources) along
the Texas coast. They explain this in terms of a slight change toward
greater aridity, complicated by over-grazing and clearing of the
vegetative cover for farming. If similar climatic shifts also occurred in
prehistoric times, human occupation and exploitation of the area must
have been affected. These and other dynamic aspects of the natural environment merit close attention by archeologists working in the
coastal area.
The marine enivronment of the Texas coast is not considered here,
but archeologists can locate useful information by consulting Geyer
( 1950 ) and Galtsoff ( 1954) , particularly the latter.

Historic Indian Groups
Nearly all of the historic Indian groups of the central and southern
sections of the Texas coast can be classified as either Karankawan or
Coahuiltecan. The linguistic researches of Swanton ( 1940: 144) have
shown that the Karankawan and Coahuiltecan languages are related.
All of these peoples were nomadic and made their living by hunting,
fishing, and food-gathering (Newcomb, 1956 ) , and the archeological
evidence indicates that this was also true of the coastal peoples throughout the prehistoric period. Some of the Coahuiltecans were taught agricultural techniques by Spanish missionaries, but this seems to have had
little effect on the cultures of bands not closely associated with
miSSIOnS.

The principal Indians of the central section were the Karankawa, a
group of five related tribes who occupied most of the territory lying
between Galveston Bay and Corpus Christi Bay (Swanton, 1952: Map
5 ). Listed roughly in the order of their distribution from east to west,
these were the Cocos or Caoque, the Cujane, the Karankawa proper,
the Coapite, and the Copano. The best sources on the culture of the
Karankawa Indians are Gatschet ( 1891 ) and Schaedel ( 1949 ) . East of

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

149

the Karankawan tribes, and outside of the area here under consideration, were the Akokisa, one of several Atakapan groups living between Galveston Bay and Calcasieu Lake in southwestern Louisiana.
Associated with the southern section of the Texas coast were numerous small nomadic bands that are usually referred to as Coahuiltecans.
The Coahuiltecan Indians were widely distributed over southern Texas
and northeastern Mexico, and several hundred band names have been
recorded. The little that is known about the culture of these Indians
has recently been synthesized by Ruecking ( 1953, 1954a, b, 1955).
Along the Texas coast Ruecking ( 1954a ) recognizes three clusters of
Coahuiltecan bands. In the lower Rio Grande valley, on both sides of
the river, was the Carrizo cluster, for which 51 different band names
are on record. On the lower Nueces River was the Orejon cluster, for
which 15 different band names are known. Between the Carrizo and
Orejon clusters there seems to have been little or no occupation in historic times. This vacant section, which lies between Baffin Bay and the
delta of the Rio Grande, is the driest part of the coastal area. A third
and somewhat controversial cluster was the Aranama, consisting of six
bands that ranged over the area lying between the lower San Antonio
and Guadalupe rivers. This area is immediately north of that of the
Karankawa, and it has not been definitely established that these bands
were of Coahuiltecan affiliation (Swanton , 1952: 308 ) .
By the middle of the eighteenth century the Lipan Apache had been
pushed by the Comanche down into central and southern Texas, and
between 1770 and 1850 small bands of Lipan Apache are reported at
various localities on the Coastal Plain of Texas ( Sjoberg, 1953a: 7680). The documented localities are scattered along the coastal strip
lying between Houston and Brownsville. By 1850, however, these
Lipan Apache had withdrawn to southwestern Texas.
The Tonkawa were primarily central Texas Indians, but one group
of Tonkawa, the Mayeye, moved southward to the coast in the 1770's
and became associated with the Cocos, the easternmost Karankawan
tribe (Sjoberg, 1953b: 282-283). In 1805 some of the May eye were
reported farther west on the coast, particularly near the mouth of the
Guadalupe River. Presumably these various Mayeye were eventually
absorbed by the Karankawa. Between 1820 and 1850 the Tonkawa
were frequently mentioned as being associated with the Lipan Apache
bands who lived near the coast (Sjoberg, 1953b: 283).
The principal coastal tribes , the Karankawans and the Coahuiltecans, were destroyed by forces set in motion by Europeans. They were
early decimated by European diseases and by tribal wars stimulated

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

by Europeans. As a result of the northward advance of the Spanish
frontier into northeastern Mexico and southern Texas, the westward
advance of the Anglo-American frontier along the Gulf coast, and pressures from the Apaches and Comanches, their numbers were further
reduced. By 1850 the Texas coast was cleared of its aboriginal inhabitants.
Thus far little progress has been made in linking archeological sites
with specific historic Indian groups of the Texas coast. There is acceptable evidence that the Rockport Focus is attributable. at least in part,
to the late prehistoric and historic Karankawan groups (Campbell,
195 Sa ) . It is possible, however, that some of the coastal Coahuiltecans
had the same material culture as the Karankawa. For example, Rockport Focus sites occur south of Corpus Christi Bay (Campbell, 1956 ),
which is south of the historic range of the Karankawan tribes and well
within the range of the Orejon cluster of Coahuiltecan bands. Thus it
is somewhat premature to link the Rockport Focus exclusively with the
Karankawans.
Although the Brownsville Focus of the Rio Grande delta area is
known only from surface collections, some sites yield historic materials
such as glass arrowpoints and wheel-made pottery (MacNeish, 1958:
186 ) . If these historic materials are integral parts of a late phase of the
Brownsville Focus, then this focus may be safely attributed to some of
the Coahuiltecan bands of that area. Confirmation of this assignment
must await further field investigations.

Archeological Sites
The recent rapid economic development of the Texas coast and the
attendant increase in population have seriously affected archeological
prospects in that area. Sites are constantly being destroyed as cities
and towns expand their limits, as industrial plants are constructed, as
canals and ship channels are dug, as highways, airfields, and dams
are built, and as the offshore barrier islands are closed for bombing and
gunnery ranges or opened for recreational use. On ranches trees and
large shrubs are bulldozed from the soil and special machinery digs
deep into the earth in order to destroy their root systems. When all this
is considered, along with normal erosion and the effects of hurricanes
on the coast line, it is clear that the destruction of archeological sites
is proceeding at a very fast pace. It is just a matter of time until the
limited archeological resources of the area will be destroyed except in

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

protected areas. For this reason, and also because so little is now
kn own about the area, it is essential that all individuals interested in
coastal archeology collect and publish as much information as possible
while it is still available.
Thus far all sites in the central and southern parts of the Texas coast
appear to be campsites or small village sites attributable to peoples
who lived by hunting, fishing, and food-gathering. In the early literature on the Texas coast there are occasional misleading references to
mounds (Otis T. Mason, 1880: 442; Gatschet, 1891: 55, 59; Thomas,
1891: 217, and 1894: map ; Martin, n . d.: 7), but these are obviously
not intentional constructions. Pearce (1932c: 54-55, 57, and 1932b:
54) later described the test excavation of a "large earthen mound" on
the Guadalupe River some 25 miles inland from the northern shore of
Espiritu Santo Bay, which is in the central section of the coast. This
he characterized as "of typical Mound Builder type," and cited it as
evidence of the passage of Mesoamerican influence along the Texas
coast. This is the Morhiss site, but later excavations have revealed that
it is not an artificial mound but a midden covering a gravel bar associated with an earlier channel of the Guadalupe River (Duffen, 1940:
17; Krieger, 1945: 42-43 ) . Thus far neither burial nor platform
mounds have been found anywhere on the Texas coast.
In the central section of the Texas coast the best known type of site
is the shell midden (Fig. 2), a compact accumulation of marine shells
and soil that also includes animal bones, artifacts, and other occupational refuse. In most middens oyster shell predominates, but clam,
conch, and other kinds of shell are usually included. These shell middens are circular or oval in outline and vary widely in thickness and
size of area covered. They range from a small area of thinly scattered
refuse to large accumulations five or six feet thick and covering an area
having a maximum diameter of 2,000 feet. The larger middens, which
are not numerous, seem to indicate favored areas where groups camped
longer and more frequently. The shell middens are usually located on
the crests or slopes of knolls, old beach ridges, and other low elevations near the shores of bays or on the higher parts of small islands
near the bay shores. In areas that have been carefully surveyed (Martin, n. d.) it has been found that nearly every location suitable for
human habitation exhibits shell midden materials. This does not necessarily signify a dense population at any one time; more likely it means
full exploitation of the shore line environment over a considerable
period of time.
In the coastal bays from Corpus Christi eastward are extensive

A

B
Fig . 2 . A. Test pits in a shell midden at the Mustang Lake site, Calhoun County, Texas .
This Rockport Focus site is situated on the shore of Mustang Lake, an almost landlocked
arm of San Antonio Bay. The midden covers a sandy knoll near a grove of wind-sculptured
live oak trees. B. This shows the structure of the Mustang Lake shell midden. Oyster shells
are embedded in a matrix of dark sandy soil.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

15 3

shell reefs that provide shell for industrial use (Arbingast, 1952: 38 ) .
These appear to be natural accumulations of shell and are not to be
confused with the relatively small shell m:.ddens along the bay shores.
No traces of houses have been found in shell middens, but some sites
in the central section of the coast have a number of small, flat, circular
areas of marine shell, and it has been suggested that these represent the
floors of temporary houses (Martin, n. d.: 10; Campbell, 1947: 44, 62,
64 ) . The shell may be an accumulation of debris within the house or,
more likely, it may have been deliberately placed to anchor sand or
give better footing on wet clay soil. This explanation appears reasonable because these circular shell areas are sometimes scattered around
a shell midden or arranged in irregular rows along a beach ridge . More
information on these features is needed. If it can be established that
they represent house floors , useful data on settlement patterns can be
accumulated.
Because of their location near beaches, many shell middens are
slowly destroyed by wave action, especially at times of exceptionally
high tide or during hurricanes. The middens are undercut and debris
falls into the water below. In such situations it is not uncommon to
find artifacts in the shallow water along the beach.
Excavation of shell middens, particularly the larger ones, poses
special problems. They rarely show stratification, although there are
sometimes gradations in soil color. The densely packed shell makes
for difficult digging, and the individual shells have to be dislodged with
a light pick or trowel. Since many artifacts are made of shell, one has
to inspect all shells and shell fragments in order to avoid overlooking
specimens. This is facilitated by passing all materials across or through
a screen. Slow, painstaking excavation yields much information that
would otherwise be lost. Shell middens often yield great quantities of
fish , bird, reptile, and mammal bone, and large faunal lists can be obtained if one collects all identifiable specimens from each level.
In these shell middens artifacts from the Aransas, Rockport, and
other as yet undefined foci may be expected. Nearly all of the artifacts
in this area are made of shell, bone, stone, and clay. Shell, especially
conch shell, was used for hammers , axes or adzes, gouges, awls, net
weights (see Campbell, 1958b ), scrapers, pendants, and beads. Bone
was used for awls, flaking tools, and beads. Flint was used for projectile points, knives, drills, gravers, and scrapers. Milling stones and
tubular stone pipes occur in the shell middens but are rare. Middens or
midden levels with pottery are clear indicators of a relatively late
date, and later still if also accompanied by European artifacts. Lumps

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of asphalt are common, and all specimens should be saved becau se some
of them bear impressions of basketry.
In the southern section of the coast shell midden s are rare, and the
most common sites are what have come to be called clay dune sites.
These clay dunes , referred to earlier, occur from St. Charles Bay southward to the Rio Grande and extend along the coast of Tamaulipas as
far as 25 miles south of the Rio Soto la Marina. Shells, bones of both
land and sea animals, artifacts, and other occupational debris are
found at various levels in the dunes and are commonly exposed by
sh eet wash and gully formation during periods when the dune surface
is not protected by vegetation. Very little excavation has been done in
clay dune sites, but many su ch sites in various stages of erosion have
been visited. All of the evidence thus far indicates that the occupational debris is rarely concentrated at any particular level. It is thinly
distributed both vertically and horizontally. Apparently the dunes
were not occupied very long at any one time, which is in accord with
the inferred nomadic habits of the prehistoric inhabitants.
A combination of geological and archeological studies would almost
certainly clarify the prehistory of this section of the Texas coast.
Incidentally, anyone who contemplates work in the southern section
of the Texas coast should become familiar with the publications of W.
Armstrong Price and his associates (Price, 1933, 1947a, b, 1949, 1954,
1958 ; Price and Gunter, 1942; Huffman and Price, 1949). This literature is essential for understanding the ecological factors affecting past
human occupation of the area.
Excavation of clay dune sites is likely to be discouraging. The cultures represented are meager in their artifact inventories, occupations
were of short duration, and few artifacts occur at any particular level
in the dunes. Furthermore, the dune material resists excavation; when
w et the clay is very adhesive and when dry very hard. Possibly there
are optimum moisture conditions for excavation, but no one has yet had
sufficient experience in clay dune excavation to recommend the best
digging procedures.
The clay dune sites between Corpus Christi and Baffin bays yield
artifacts similar to those of the shell middens described above. Concentrations of land snails frequently occur in these sites, presumably evide:Jce of use for food. Another common characteristic of many clay
dune sites in this same area is the occurrence of numerous irregular
pieces of hard clay. These appear to have been baked, for they resist
weathering and some show direct evidence of haYing b een in fire . No

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

155

agreement has been reached on the activity or activities reflected by
these objects.
In the clay dunes of the Rio Grande delta most of the artifacts are
from the Brownsville Focus and are made of shell-projectile points,
gouges, scrapers, fish hooks, pendants, and beads. Bone wa s u sed principally for awls , occasionally_for projectile points, and flint was used
mainly for projectile points and scrapers. Tubular stone pipes are occasionally found. Pottery is very rare and thus far seem s to be intrusive from the Huastecan area of Mexico or from the central part of
the T exas coast.
Other types of sites are known to exist on the coast, but they have
not received much attention. These include campsites buried in valley
alluvium, campsites located on or in natural levees of abandoned
stream channels, and sand dune campsites on the offshore barrier
islands and peninsulas.
Although numerous burials have been reported from the Texas
coast, very few have been described. In shell middens and in clay dune
sites both flexed and extended burials have been found. As most of
these y ield no burial furniture, cultural assignment of skeletal material is especially difficult. In the vicinity of Corpus Christi burial
ar eas have been found that y ielded scores of skeletons, but these have
not yet been linked with specific cultural units.

Archeological Investigations
A close reading of the archeological literature of the Texas coast reveal that investigators have been concerned with finding answers to
a number of general questions. These are so frequently stated or implied that they are almost thematic. The principal questions may be
stated as follows:
( 1 ) Was the Texas coastal belt involved in the presumed movem ent of
culture elem ents from M esoa m erica to the eastern United Sta tes? This
question was raised very early, even b efore there had been any significant
reconnaissance or excavation, and it is still being asked, although to date
most of the archeological eviden ce indicates a negative answer.
(2) What archeological m aterials from the coast are attributable to the
various historic Indian groups ? In the initial period of investigation there
was a tend ency to identify a ll arch eological remains in a given section
with the historic Indians who occupied that particular section. Later,
as more eviden ce accumulated, and as more cultures were defined, it

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

became obvious that a valid linkage of a prehistoric and a hi storic culture
of the sa me area is not easily achi eved. Thus far these linkages have had
to be phrased largely in terms of probability.
(3) What are the cultural units of the coastal area and wh at are their
relative chronological positions? This question beca me important when
enough factual data had been collected to make it clear tha t a number of
cultures existed in the area at various times in the past. This is still one
of the major questions. Thus far only a few cultures have been defin ed in
the coastal area, and it is expected that others will be defined as investigation continues.
( 4) What relationships exist between the various coastal cultures themselves and also between them and cultures of adjacent areas, such as
southern Louisiana, northeastern Mexico, and the interior of Texas.
Answers to this general question have come slowly and not mu ch progress
ha s been made. However, one outstanding difficulty is that much of the
coast h as not been investigated, and the same is true for most of the
surrounding areas.
Nearly all that is known about the archeology of the central and
southern sections of the T exas coast is the result of work that has been
done during the past thirty years . Before 1929 there were only casual
or indirect references to archeological remains in this area (Fewkes,
190 7: 272-273; Gatschet, 1891 : 55; Kuy kendall, 1872; Otis T. Mason,
1880: 442; Pearce, 1919: 227-228, 234; Roessler. 1882; Thomas, 1891:
2 17, and 1894: map ). After 1929 the literature became more complex,
and we will review it in two parts, one part dealing with the central
section, the other with the southern section. The city of Corpus Christi
will serve as a rough point of division between the two sections.
Central Section. In the central section of the coast the first real contributions were made by Martin and Potter, two nonprofessional
archeologists from the town of Rockport. During the latter half of the
1920's they jointly investigated a large number of sites along the coast
from Matagorda Bay to Baffin Bay. Their method involved the location
of sites by reconnaissance; surface inspection, especially the examination of erosional exposures; collection of artifacts from the surface ; removal of any burials exposed by erosion; and brief test exca vations at
a few sites. The results of their work were published in six papers, five
of them by Martin and one by Potter, during the years 1929- 1931.
The first paper (Martin, n. d. ) was the report of an archeological
survey of a portion of the Ara n sas Bay area made during the years
1927- 1929 by Martin and P otter. Ninety-two sites were found on the
mainland shores of Copano, St. Charles, and Aransas bays. In this r eport site locations were shown on maps, one paragraph was devoted to

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

157

each site, and four plates illustrated 136 stone artifacts from the area.
This paper was important because it presented for the first time a body
of factual information on the archeology of a part of the Texas coast.
In 1929 Martin published a short paper that repeated and to a certain extent supplemented the survey report. In 1930 Martin published
two additional articles, both dealing with specific sites and finds. One
of these (Martin, 193Gb) described two sites on Oso Creek just south
of Corpus Christi, and the other (Martin, 1930a) described a locally
unique pottery vessel and some incised pebbles from the Corpus Christi
area. In this same year came Potter's brief but very useful description
of pottery from the central section of the coast. Finally, in 1931, Martin also published a brief paper on coastal pottery, supplementing but
not duplicating that of Potter.
The publications of Martin and Potter constitute the starting point
for systematic archeology in the central section of the Texas coast.
Some of the salient features of the area became discernible for the first
time. They found sites to be consistently associated with minor elevations along the mainland shore line and revealing occupation by groups
who lived by hunting, fishing, and gathering. Shellfish collecting was
shown to be an important source of food, and many sites could be characterized as shell middens. The cultural inventory they found to be
rather meager, principally tools and ornaments made of bone, shell,
and siliceous stones. Many sites yielded pottery, chiefly plain, incised,
and painted varieties, the last being a highly distinctive black-on-gray
ware. In Martin and Potter's publications it is possible to detect evidences of at least two successive occupational stages, but of this they
seem to have been unaware. They thought that all of their materials
belonged to a single cultural complex, and this they attributed to the
historic Karankawa Indians.
In 1932 Pearce published three papers in which he expressed a few
ideas about coastal prehistory. One of these was a general paper on
Texas archeology (Pearce, 1932b), and the others dealt specifically
with the archeology of eastern Texas (Pearce, 1932a, c). Pearce was
interested in the Texas coast as a possible route by which human
groups migrated or culture diffused from central Mexico to the Mississippi Valley. He emphasized the Morhiss "mound" and the continuous distribution of pottery along the Texas coast, suggesting that they
reflected passage of at least one group of people from Mexico to the
Mississippi Valley; in fact, he hazarded the guess that a group of
Huastecs may have been the original bearers of complex culture to the
eastern United States. To account for the general low level of culture

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

along the Texas coast, as indicated by the "surface and top layers," he
postulated degeneration from a higher cultural state to a lower one. No
evidence was cited in support of his implication that the "lower layers"
in coastal sites contain remains of an earlier and more complex culture. Pearce's general conclusion was that the Texas coast did not
show evidence of a large migration from Mexico to the Mississippi
Valley, but he believed that "a slow trickle of Mexican influence passed
in early times up the coast" into the lower Mississippi Valley. Thus
far little has been found to substantiate the latter part of this statement.
In 1935 E. B. Sayles published the results of an extended archeological survey of Texas. This was a by-product of interest in the
origins of the Hohokam and Mogollon cultures of the Southwest (Gladwin, 1934: 34; Sayles, 1935: iii ). Sayles spent two years in reconnaissance, test excavation, and study of museum collections in Texas.
On the basis of this work he named and defined a number of cultural
units in Texas. The Gila Pueblo system of culture classification was
used as a framework for presenting data on, and showing relationships
between, the various units defined. Actually his data were presented
in generalized form by means of maps, photographs, and trait lists arranged in parallel columns, with very little quantification or discussion.
The chief contribution which Sayles made to the archeology of the
Texas coast was the structure which he gave to it. He named and defined cultures and arranged them in rough chronological sequence.
Instead of continuing to speak about a heterogeneous mass of archeological materials from the coast, it now became possible to speak of
the area in terms of several units of culture, each having a name, a
geographic range, and a placement in time relative to the others. Another contribution which Sayles made was his demonstration, largely
on the basis of similarities in artifact typology, of relationships between
cultures of the Texas coast and those in the interior of Texas, particularly in central and southern Texas.
In the central section of the coast Sayles recognized a single culture
which he called the Karankawan, but this was divided into an earlier,
pre-ceramic Oso Phase and a later Rockport Phase with pottery. The
Oso Phase he showed to be more localized, extending only from the
western end of Matagorda Bay to a point just below Baffin Bay, whereas the Rockport Phase was shown as covering all of the Texas coast
except the delta of the Rio Grande. Of these two cultural units only
one, the Rockport, has withstood the test of time; but its trait list has

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

159

been revised and its geographic range greatly reduced. Subsequent
field investigations have not confirmed Sayles' Oso Phase, but this may
be due to inadequate sampling of the area.
In 1935 came the first information on the physical character~stics
of the prehistoric inhabitants of the central section of the T exas coast.
In that year George and Edna Woodbury published an osteometric
study of 16 fragmentary skeletons from a site on Oso Creek near the
southern shore of Corpus Christi Bay. This site was excavated by
Sayles during his archeological survey of Texas, but the burials have
never been described and the cultural unit represented has not been
identified. This population group was characterized as tall (males
only ) and excessively long-headed, and the Woodburys pointed out
that tallness in males was typical of the historic Karankawa Indians.
In 1937 Woodbury also published a brief comparative study of three
series of Texas crania, two from the Texas coast and one from southwestern Texas. One series from the coast consisted of seven new crania
from the Oso site, and the other was made up of eight crania from the
Caplen site in the eastern section of the Texas coast (see Campbell,
195 7) . The series of southwestem Texas crania consisted of specimens
from sites near the mouth of the Pecos River. This study indicated that
the Oso crania, which Woodbury considered to be Karankawa, differed
markedly from the Caplen crania, believed by Woodbury to be Atakapan. However, the Oso crania showed many similarities to the crania
from the Pecos River. Woodbury's ethnic identifications may be correct, but they have yet to be validated.
In 1935, after having spent some time on the Texas and Tamaulipas
coasts, J. Alden Mason devoted a special paper to the place of Texas in
prehistoric relationships between Mexico and the United States. He
considered that the Texas coast was the most likely route by which
influences from Mexico reached the southeastern United States.
Searching for traces of these influences, he reviewed the ceramic evidence from the Gulf coast, beginning with the Huastec area of eastern
Mexico and moving northward to the central part of the Texas coast.
In doing this he presented new and important data on the pottery of
Tamaulipas and of the Brownsville area of Texas, which will be considered later in this paper.
In his discussion of the pottery of the central part of the Texas coast,
Mason noted 'striking differences from Huastec pottery-vessel size
and shape, design elements, and particularly such decorative techniques as incising and lip notching. Nevertheless he thought he detected Huastec influence in the "fine, thin creamy ware decorated in

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

black pigment derived from asphalt. " He further stated that the " identification of this fine pottery with the Karankawa seems incredible. "
His conclusion was that the painted pottery of this area was made by
Coahuiltecans and that Huastecan influences had passed through the
Coahuiltecans as far north as the central part of the Texas coast. For
lack of data from the eastern section of the Texas coast, Mason turned
from the coast to a consideration of other areas. Whatever Mason's
reason for denying painted pottery to the Karankawa , his idea that the
Coahuiltecans introduced painted pottery to the Texas coast has merit.
They were in contact with the Huastecan area , where painted pottery
was made; but the difficulty is that, except for certain intrusive Huastecan and Rockport wares in northern Tamaulipas and extreme southern Texas, painted pottery has not been reported from the area occupied by the Coahuiltecan Indians during the historic period.
In 1937, Clyde T. Reed described two tubular stone pipes with bone
mouthpieces that he had excavated from a site on Baffin Bay. Each of
these was associated with a burial, both skeletons being female, according to Reed. Of interest was Reed's statement that the site showed
no evidence of pottery, suggesting that tubular stone pipes, which Sayles assigned to his Rockport Phase, probably occurred in the preceramic horizon only, a conclusion that has been strengthened by excavation of a shell midden site on Aransas Bay (Campbell, 1947: 59 ) .
In 1938 Erik K. Reed initiated historic site archeology on the Texas
coast by describing historic Indian burials from the Espiritu Santo
Mission at Goliad. These burials will probably have more significance
when other Spanish mission sites are excavated, for they contained no
objects to aid in linking them with protohistoric and historic cultures
on the coast. As the Aranama were the principal Indians associated
with this mission, Reed assumed that most of the burials contained
Ar<milma individunls.
In 1940 Duffen published a brief preliminary account of his excavations at the Morhiss site in Victoria County. The materials from this
important site have never been completely analyzed and published,
but references have appeared in later literature to a Morhiss Focus
(Kelley, 1947: 104; 1959: 282 ) .
Of much more significance was Sellards' report, also published in
1940, of artifacts in association with extinct animals at the Buckner
Ranch site near Beeville in Bee County. The most important finds occurred in the Berclair terrace of the Mission River, a terrace assigned
by Sellards to the Late Pleistocene. Along with bones of mammoth,
mastodon, horse, bison, camel, dire-wolf, peccary, armadillo, glypto-

.-\RCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

don, and ground sloth were a number of chipped stone implementsprojectile points, knives, hand axes, gouges , and scrapers. In the lower
part of the terrace were projectile point forms that are now recognizable as Clovis, Midland (unfluted Folsom), Scottsbluff, and Angostura,
as well as side-notched and stemmed forms not ordinarily found in
association with extinct animals. It is still difficult to evaluate this particular assemblage, but the site is important because it presented the
first indisputable evidence of the contemporaneity of man and extinct
animals on the Texas coastal plain.
In 1943 the Third Round Table Conference of the Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia devoted its whole session to a consideration of
anthropological problems involving northern Mexico and the southern
part of the United States. One section considered the problem of cultural relations between northern Mexico and the southeastern United
States, and at this section meeting various papers were presented.
While none of these added anything significantly new to Texas coast
archeology, the summary paper by J. Alden Mason (1943) reflected
current opin~on on the status of the Texas coast with respect to the
problem. It was believed that the transfer of certain elements was
most likely effected by small groups who at various times moved from
the Huastec area along the Gulf coast of Tamaulipas and Texas to the
Mississippi Valley. This movement was probably too rapid to leave
e:·wugh material objects along the way to permit tracing the various
passages. It was agreed that more archeological work was urgently
needed in Tamaulipas and on the Texas coast, but "no spectacular discoveries and little elucidating data" could be expected from this
approach.
In 1946 the First Symposium on the Caddoan Archaeological Area
was held in Norman, Oklahoma. The preliminary report (Krieger,
1947) indicated a new trend in archeological opinion that affected the
status of the Texas coast in connection with the problem of contact between Mexico and the southeastem United States. With the recognition of Mesoamerican culture elements in the Caddoan area, particularly at the Davis site in eastern Texas and the Spiro site in eastern
Oklahoma, it seemed more reasonable to think in terms of movement
from the Huastecan area northward across the interior of Texas rather
than eastward along the Texas coast. This meant that only the southern section of the Texas coast would be involved, not the central and
eastern sections. This view was later elaborated by Krieger ( 1948) ,
who referred to the inland route as the Gilmore Corridor.
The first definition of a cultural unit based on excavation was

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

presented in 1947 by Campbell, who recognized an Aransas Focus in
the central section of the coast. This pre-ceramic culture was found at
three sites, all located on a peninsula separating the Copano and Aransas bays. Materials from the Johnson site, designated as the type site,
were presented first . The Kent-Crane and Live Oak Point components
were described later (Campbell, 1952, 1958a ) , and a probable fourth
component near Corpus Christi was also later identified (Campbell,
1956), extending the geographic range of the Aransas Focus farther
south on the coast. On the basis of stratigraphic evidence it was shown
that the Aransas Focus preceded the Rockport Focus. No estimate of an
inception date for the Aransas Focus was given, but the terminal date
was placed at about A.D. 1500, making the Rockport Focus almost entirely historic. It was also shown that the Aransas Focus did not duplicate Sayles' Oso Phase of the same area and thus constituted a new cultural unit for the Texas coast.
In 1954 Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks proposed a series of developmental
stages for Texas as a whole-a Paleo-American Stage for the earliest
occupation by big game hunting groups; an Archaic Stage for later
hunting and gathering peoples; a Neo-American Stage for groups who
had agriculture and/ or pottery and the bow; and a Historic Stage for
the late cultures postdating the entry of Europeans. They also described
a series of projectile point and pottery types that have become indispensable for describing cultural units and demonstrating their relationships. In their review of the central section of the coast, Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks placed the Buckner Ranch site and several surface
finds of early projectile points in the Paleo-American Stage. The Aransas Focus was placed in the Archaic Stage, and the Rockport Focus
was placed in the Neo-American Stage, surviving into the Historic
Stage and probably identifiable with the historic Karankawa Indians.
No date range for the Aransas Focus was given, but the beginning
date for the Rockport Focus was placed at A.D. 1000, some 500 years
earlier than Campbell's previous estimate for the end of the Aransas
Focus. For the Rockport Focus they defined three pottery types that
had been previously named by Campbell. Their maps showed the
Rockport Focus as extending from the mouth of the Brazos River to
Baffin Bay, greatly reducing the area previously shown by Sayles. In
1954 no excavated components of the Rockport Focus had been published, but several components have recently been described (Campbell, 1956, 1958a ), including one that is attributable to the Historic
Stage.
Southern Section. In the southern section of the Texas coast there

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

has been very little archeological investigation, and most of this is confined to the extreme south, especially the delta of the Rio Grande.
Most of what is known stems from the work of A. E. Anderson, a civil
engineer of Brownsville, who began in 1908 to collect and record specimens from sites on both sides of the Rio Grande near its mouth. Over
the years he collected thousands of specimens from several hundred
sites in that area, and in 1945 his collection was deposited with the
University of Texas.
In 1932 Anderson published a brief paper describing artifacts from
sites in the Texas portion of the Rio Grande delta. He reported sites
associated with clay dunes on the coast and with abandoned distributary channels of the Rio Grande farther inland. The artifacts from
these sites were not so much described as merely listed according to
the materials used in their manufacture. However, Anderson's paper
provided the first glimpse of what occurs in the coastal area lying
between Corpus Christi, Texas, and the Tampico region of southern
Tamaulipas in northeastern Mexico. His work called attention to the
extensive use of shell for tools, weapon parts, and especially for ornaments, as well as to the presence of some pottery in the area. Anderson
attributed all of his artifacts to a single culture. He mentioned a few
projectile points made of glass, but no attempt was made to link the
archeological remains with any specific Indian group.
Using Anderson's data, and following Anderson in attributing all
of the remains to a single culture, Sayles in 1935 defined a Brownsville
phase for the area extending from a short distance south of Baffin Bay
to the Rio Grande. He called attention to the absence of agriculture in
the area, and he cited intrusive Rockport ware as evidence of contemporaneity with his Rockport Phase. As Sayles diagrammed the Brownsville Phase as growing out of a Tamaulipecan root, it would appear
that he regarded the Brownsville culture as identifiable with the historic Tamaulipecan Indians, regarded by Swanton ( 1940: 44) as
probably Coahuiltecan in language.
In 1935 J. Alden Mason illustrated and described five pottery vessels found by Anderson in the vicinity of Brownsville. He compared
these with Huastecan pottery of eastern Mexico as known at the time,
concluding that they were not Huasteca but showed "Huasteca influence to a moderate degree." Later the excavations of Ekholm ( 1944:
433) made it possible to identify certain of these vessels as Tancol
Polychrome and Huasteca Black-on-white of Period VI in the Tampico-Panuco sequence.
In 1947 MacNeish published the first report on his work in Tamaul-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ipas and southern Texas. Using materials collected from the surface
at 82 sites in the Rio Grande delta area (most of these were Anderson's
sites ), MacNeish described the principal classes and types of artifacts
and assigned them to a Brownsville complex. Intrusive Huastecan
potsherds in some sites were recognized as belonging to types characteristic of Periods V and VI in Ekholm's sequence. These intrusives,
as well as the presence of a few arrowpoints made of glass, led MacNeish to place the Brownsville complex after A. D. 1000 and continuing into early historic times. His distribution map showed the Brownsville complex as extending along the coast from the Rio San Fernando
in northern Tamaulipas to the Arroyo Colorado on the Texas side of
the Rio Grande. He also pointed to certain "trade" items, mainly projectile points, from various sites in northern Tamaulipas and in central
and southern Texas which he interpreted as evidence of late prehistoric contacts between the Huastecan and Caddoan areas. His Mesaamerican-Southeast route thus followed that postulated by Krieger,
that is, along the southern section of the Texas coast and northeastward along the Gilmore Corridor of interior Texas.
In 1958 MacNeish revised his concept of the Brownsville Focus.
After re-examining materials from some of Anderson's key sites, he
recognized two local complexes (MacNeish, 1958: 173-174, 186192 ). The materials from sites south of the Rio Grande he placed in a
Barril complex, but he retained the name Brownsville for the complex
represented in sites north of the Rio Grande. He regarded both complexes as roughly contemporaneous, flourishing between A. D. 1000
and about 1780. However, by noting particular associations with
European artifacts or intrusive Huastecan potsherds of Periods V and
VI, he found evidence for placing a number of Barril sites earlier than
some of the Brownsville sites. This appears to have been the basis for
placing Barril earlier than Brownsville in his correlation chart. The
net effect of MacNeish's revision is to confine the Brownsville complex
entirely to the Texas portion of the Rio Grande delta.
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 130- 133 ) assigned the Brownsville
Focus to their Neo-American stage, using MacNeish's dates for its
time range. They emphasized the fact that current definition of the
culture was based entirely on surface collections and needed validation
by excavation.
The question of a pre-Brownsville or Archaic occupation did not
arise until quite late. Sayles ( 1935: 41 ) briefly described a Coahuiltecan Branch for the Rio Grande valley between Eagle Pass and McAllen
but not extending to the coast. MacNeish ( 1947: 1-3 ) later described

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

an Aba solo complex for the inland part of northern Tamaulipas and
adjoining southern Texas and considered it very closely related to
Sayles' Coahuiltecan Branch, perhaps even identical with it. He preferred to avoid the name "Coahuiltecan," which implies identification
with the historic Coahuiltecan Indians, because all of his data indicated that the Abasolo was prehistoric in age. MacNeish ( 1947: 8)
also reported the Abasolo as present in the Rio Grande delta area of
the coast, which was partially substantiated by the work of Campbell
and Frizzell (1949 ) at the Ayala site near McAllen. Still later Suhm
and associates ( 1954: 134- 143 ) set up two new foci in the Falcon
Reservoir area on the Rio Grande. The earlier of the two was designated as the Falcon Focus and the later as the Mier Focus, the two
constituting a cultural continuum. One radiocarbon date of about
2700 B. C. was reported for the Falcon Focus. No attempt was made
to relate these new foci to either Sayles' Coahuiltecan Branch or to
MacNeish's Abasolo complex, so that we now have a number of names
for cultural units that appear to be either identical or else quite similar.

Current Interpretations and Unsolved Problems
One striking fact about the Texas coast is that very few excavated
sites have been published, and nearly all of these are sites near two
adjacent bays in the central section . Publications reporting survey
work or describing surface collections are linked with the same area
but also include the Rio Grande delta. The significant point is that
large areas along the central and southern sections of the Texas coast
are still very poorly known. One important gap is the area lying between the Brazos River and San Antonio Bay, where som e excavation
has been done, such as at the Morhiss site, but has yet to be reported.
Another important gap is in the arid stretch between Baffin Bay and
the Rio Grande delta. H ere nothing has been done and the area is
strictly terra incognita.
Thus far attention seems to have been focussed on sites along the
mainland shores of the coast, and very little is known about occupation
farther inland or on the offshore barrier islands. At present we can
only speculate about the island occupations. Perhaps these were seasonal only, for the quieter waters of the mainland shores offered more
attractions-easier fishing, ready access to shellfish, more abundant
fresh water. and convenience for inland hunting and plant food collecting.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

It is thus evident that current interpretations of coastal prehistory
are severely limited by a scarcity of factual data and that the picture
will change as more becomes known. In the following paragraphs current interpretations will be summarized within the framework of the
four developmental stages proposed by Suhm, Krieger , and Jelks
( 1954) , and at appropriate places comments will be made on some of
the more important unsolved problems.
Paleo-American Stage. Of this initial hunting stage we know very
little. That the area was occupied quite early is clearly indicated by
the Buckner Ranch site excavated by Sellards, but unfortunately the
situation at this site is somewhat confused by the association of extinct
faunal remains with artifacts from two different stages, Paleo-American and Archaic. No strictly Paleo-American site has y et been reported anywhere on the Texas coast.
However, scattered finds of Paleo-American projectile points seem
to indicate a thin occupation along the coast in very early prehistoric
times. In the central section a few points, mostly surface-collected,
indicate such an occupation. These include a Clovis point from Calhoun County ( Suhm et al. , 1954: Plate 85 , Q), a Plainview point excavated from the Morhiss site (ibid.: Plate 116, E ) ; and seven points
reported from Refugio County (Enlow and Campbell, 1955 ), of which
five are Plainview (ibid. : Plate 1, F-H, J , K ) , one is Meserve (Plate
1, M ), and one is a lanceolate point resembling the Agate Basin type
( Plate 2, G ) .
Evidences of Paleo-American occupation in the southern section of
the coast are even more rare. The base of a Clovis point was found by
Anderson at a locality near the mouth of the Rio Grande where mammoth bones were later noted (Suhm et al., 1954: 121 ). As Clovis,
Scottsbluff, Plainview, Meserve, and lanceolate points resembling the
Agate Basin type have been found on the surface at sites on both sides
of the Rio Grande in the Falcon Reservoir area ( Arguedas R. de la
Borbolla and Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda , 1953; Weir, 1957: 71-72 ),
more intensive search of the southern coast will doubtless produce additional evidence of Paleo-American occupations.
Archaic. Thus far only one Archaic culture has been defined on
the basis of excavation. This is the Aransas Focus, which is known
from only a few sites and these are restricted to a relatively small area
in the central section, principally near Aransas Bay. Its full geographic range remains to be determined, and the same may be said
about the time range. No radiocarbon dates have been obtained, and
most of the estimated dates are terminal dates, which turn out to be

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

based primarily on inception dates for the succeeding Rockport Focus.
However, Stephenson ( 1950: 154) has assigned the Aransas Focus to
the period of A. D. 800-1500. Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks' date of about
A. D. 1000 for the beginning of the Rockport Focus is still an acceptable date for the end of the Aransas Focus, although most archeologists would not be disturbed if the date were pushed either backward
or forward a few hundred years.
The Aransas Focus shares many projectile point types with the
Edwards Plateau Aspect of central Texas and is presumably of the
same general age. It also shares a few projectile point types with the
Falcon Focus, for which one radiocarbon date of 2700 B. C. has been
obtained. Furthermore, the Aransas Focus also shares a number of
projectile point types with various phases in MacNeish 's radiocarbonsupported sequence for the Sierra de Tamaulipas. It is probably significant that the Kent point, the most common type in the Aransas
Focus (Campbell, 1956: 23 ), occurs as a minor type in only one
Tamaulipas phase, the Almagre, which is placed by MacNeish (1958:
198 ) between 2500 and 1500 B. C. However, other points associated
with the Aransas Focus are not so neatly segregated in the Tamaulipas sequence. Some, like the Tortugas point, began earlier in Tamaulipas but also survived into the historic period. Others, like Matamoros
and Catan points, appeared first after 1500 B. C. and also survived into
the historic period. None of this is very helpful in arriving at a terminal date for the Aransas Focus, but it does suggest a time span of
several thousand years.
At present it can be said that the Aransas Focus is a unique Archaic
culture because it is heavily oriented toward the utilization of marine
resources for food and materials for the manufacture of tools. Its
chipped stone work indicates some relationships with other Archaic
cultures of Texas and northeastern Mexico, but the shell work sets it
apart. Campbell ( 1947: 69-71 ) and Rouse ( 1949: 128 ) have called
attention to similarities in shell tool forms in cultures along the Gulf
coast from northeastern Mexico to Florida and Cuba, but the significance of this cannot be determined at present.
The status of other Archaic cultures in the area is much less clear.
Kelley ( 1959: 282) has referred to a Morhiss Focus in the central
section of the coast as probably being related to the Edwards Plateau
Aspect of interior Texas, but this focus has not yet been defined.
The situation in the southern section of the coast is confused at
present. Reference has been made to several Archaic cultures in or
near the area- the Coahuiltecan Branch of Sayles, the Abasolo com-

t68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

plex of MacNeish, actd the Falcon and Mier foci of Suhm and associates. This situation calls for clarification, but little progress is likely to
be made unless more detailed information is presented on all of these
cultures, but particularly the Coahuiltecan Branch and the Falcon and
Mier foci. This was made clear by MacNeish's recent summary of the
Abasolo complex (MacNeish, 1958: 179-183 ) . Kelley (1959: 283 )
recently pointed out that he had once suggested (ibid., 1947: 104, footnotes 26, 27 ) the name of Monte Aspect for the various Archaic cultures of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico. This would serve
as a very useful term for referring to a widespread and distinctive
cultural tradition in Tamaulipas and adjoining southern Texas ( cf.
MacNeish, 1958: 193, who refers to this tradition but suggests no
name for it ) .
Neo-American Stage. From data thus far accumulated it appears
that Neo-American sites are far more numerous than Archiac sites
on the Texas coast. For this stage we have two cultural units, the Rockport Focus and the Brownsville Focus, neither of which is adequately
supported by carefully controlled excavation in undisturbed sites. Both
had the bow and arrow, but the Brownsville Focus seems not to have
had pottery, and both cultures lacked agriculture.
The Rockport Focus probably began about A. D. 1000 (Stephenson,
1950: 154, places it at A.D. 1500) , is at least partially attributable to
the Karankawa Indians, and survived into the early 19th century.
The distinguishing feature of the Rockport Focus is its pottery, particularly the painted type known as Rockport Black-on-gray. The
source of the painted pottery tradition on the Texas coast has not been
determined, but the most likely source is the Huastecan area, where
black-on-white pottery occurs. A Southwestern origin does not seem
likely, although one sherd of Carretas Polychrome from Chihuahua
was found at a Rockport site south of Corpus Christi (Campbell, 1956:
41). Incised pottery, which appears to be relatively rare in the Rockport Focus, may be derived from the eastern section of the Texas coast,
where at least one type of incised pottery has been described for the
Galveston Bay Focus.
The Rockport Focus stratigraphically overlies the Aransas Focus
in several sites, but the relationships between these two cultures have
not been determined. As the Rockport Focus is not yet well documented, it is not clear as to just what Aransas artifact types survived
into the later Rockport culture. Relationships have been noted between
the Rockport Focus and other surrounding Neo-American cultures.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

16g

A number of Brownsville Focus traits occur in some of the southern
components of the Rockport Focus (Campbell, 1956: 45 ), and Rockport painted pottery is said to occur in the Brownsville area ( Sayles,
1935: Table 5) . The Rockport Focus and the various foci of the Central
Texas Aspect share essentially the same arrowpoint types, and it appears likely that the bow and arrow complex reached the coast from
central Texas. Rockport pottery is also occasionally found in components of the Galveston Bay Focus of the eastern section of the Texas
coast (Wheat, 1953 : 190, 195; Campbell, 1957: 467 ) .
In general. what is badly needed for the Rockport Focus is intensive
excavation and thorough descriptive reporting. The geographic range
of the focus needs to be more precisely determined, especially to the
east and to the south along the coast, and it would be of interest to
know its maximum extension inland. It is probable that there are local
variations within the Rockport Focus, as well as changes through time
prior to the advent of Europeans.
The Brownsville Focus is based entirely on surface collections, and
MacNeish is correct in referring to it as a "complex." MacNeish has
dated the Brownsville Focus at A. D. 1000-1780 (Stephenson, 1950:
154, placed the beginning of Brownsville at A. D. 1300 ) . The basic
need is for excavation in Brownsville Focus sites, and it would help if
the large collection of A. E. Anderson could be completely analyzed
and described. MacNeish and others have related the Brownsville
Focus to cultures in the Sierra de Tamaulipas and Huastecan areas ,
and reference has been made above to ties with the Rockport Focus.
Until the Brownsville Focus has been validated by a series of excavations, all statements a bout relationships with other cultures are open to
question.
Among the mortuary materials from the Cueva de la Candelaria of
Coahuila are a number of marine shell ornaments (beads, pendants,
and gorgets ) which also occur in Brownsville Focus sites (Aveleyra
et al. , 1956: 118-128, 147-151 ). These shell objects suggest inland
trade relations with the Brownsville area and also, because of the
fortunate conditions of preservation in the cave, indicate how some of
the Brownsville Focus ornaments may have been used.
Historic Stage. Although some field work has been done, there is
relatively little publication on historic sites along the Texas coast. Of
particular interest are the various early European establishments in
the central section of the coast, such as La Salle's Fort St. Louis near
Lwaca Bay and the Spanish mission and presidio sites of Victoria,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Goliad, and Refugio counties. Excavations at these sites offer excellent
opportunities to identify the archeological remains of certain Indian
groups and to document the early stages of Indian acculturation. Historic site archeology is just beginning in the coastal area.
As for the identification of archeological sites with historic Indian
groups, the only significant accomplishment thus far is the linkage of
the Karankawa with the Rockport Focus. Some Coahuiltecan groups
may also be represented by Rockport archeological materials, but this
has not yet been established. One important limitation is the general
lack of detailed ethnohistorical studies of specific Indian groups on the
Texas coast.
In conclusion, some statement should perhaps be made about the
probable role of the Texas coast in Mesoamerican-Southeast contacts.
As has been pointed out, interest has recently shifted from a strictly
coastal route to a more feasible inland route leading to the Caddoan
area. Only the southern section of the coast is involved in current discussions, and it is of interest to note two finds in this section that
may have a bearing on the problem. One is a bird effigy vessel of
polished brown potterysimilar to ware from Tlatilco in central Mexico
(Krieger, 1935: 516 ). This was found eroding from the soil at a
locality south of Corpus Christi (Martin, 1930a ). The other is a small
human figurine of green serpentine whose bent-knee stance is similar
to that in figurines from the La Venta region of eastern Mexico
(Krieger, 1953: 505, 515 ) . This was collected at a clay dune site on
Baffin Bay, also south of Corpus Christi. As these objects were not
clearly associated with other archeological materials, they merely suggest the possibility of trade or travel in prehistoric times. Otherwise
the evidence of passage of either men or objects along the Texas coast
is negative.
The archeology of the Texas coast is still in a rather rudimentary
condition. In a few localities cultures have been defined and short sequences established. Enough is known about the area as a whole to
suggest the main outlines of cultural development over a considerable
span of time. But the prime need today is additional primary archelogical data. We need systematic archeological surveys in the more
poorly known areas, and we need extensive excavation at a large number of sites, followed by detailed publications. The current rapid industrial development of the coastal area makes it imperative that a
program of research be carried out before the best archeological sites
are destroyed.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

171

Acknowledgment is made to the editors of this volume, as well as to W. S. Fitzpatrick, W. Armstrong Price, and Andree F. Sjoberg, for criticism and helpful suggestions.

References Cited
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
AA-American Anthropologist
A An-American Antiquity
B-AAPG-Bulletin of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists.
B-BAE-Bureau of American Ethnology, .B ulletin
B- TAPS- Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
B-TAS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
MP-Medallion Papers. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona
SJ A-Southwestern Journal of Anthropology
TJS-The Texas Journal of Science
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. B-TAPS, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Arbingast, Stanley A.
1952. Shell, A Marine Resource of the Texas Coast. The Southwestern Social
Science Quarterly, Vol. 33, No.1, pp. 38-43.
Arguedas R. de la Borbolla, Sol, and Luis Avelcyra Arroyo de Anda
1953. A Plainview Point from Northern Tamaulipas. A An, Vol. 18, No. 4,
pp. 392-393.
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis, Manuel Maldonado-Koerdell, and Pablo Martinez
del Rio
1956. Cueva de la Candelaria. Vol. I. Memorias del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia , V. Mexico, D. F.
Blair, W. Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. TJS, Vol. 2, No.1 , pp. 93-117.
Campbell, T. N.
1947. The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the Texas Coast. BTAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 40-75.
1952. The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. B-TAPS, Vol.
23, pp. 39-77.
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1957. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
TJS, Vol. 9, No.4, pp. 448-471.
1958a. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. TJS, Vol. 10, No.4, pp. 423-442.
1958b. Probable Function of Perforated Oyster Shells Found in Aransas Focus
Sites. Texas Archeology, Vol. 2, No.2, p. 7.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Campbell, T. N., and Jack Q. Frizzell
1949. Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. B-TAPS, Vol.
zo, pp. 63- ?Z.
Doering, J. A.
1957. Review of Quaternary Surface Formations of Gulf Coast Region. B-AAPG,
Vol. 40, No. 8, pp . 1816-1862.
Duffen, William A.
1940. Morhiss Site. Texas Archaeological News, No. Z, pp. 16-18.
Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944. Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico. American
Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 38, Part 5.
Enlow, Donald H., and T. N. Campbell
1955. Some Paleo-Indian Projectile Points from the Southeastern Periphery of
the Great Plains. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 29-37.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938. Physiography of Eastern United States. New York.
Fewkes, Jesse Walter
1907. Certain Antiquities of Eastern Mexico. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Z5th Annual Report, pp. ZZ1 - Z84.
Galtsoff, Paul S. (co-ordinator)
1954. Gulf of Mexico: Its Origin, Waters, and Marine Life. Fish and VVildlife
Service, Fishery Bulletin 89.
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891. The Karankawa Indians, the Coastal People of Texas. Archaeological and
Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Vol. L No.2.
Geyer, Richard A.
1950. A Bibliography on the Gulf of Mexico. TJS, Vol. Z, No. 1, pp. 44- 93.
Gladwin, Harold S.
1934. The Archaeology of the Southwest and Its Relation to the Cultures of Texas.
B-TAPS, Vol. 6, pp. 19-37.
Huffman, George W. , and W. Armstrong Price
1949. Clay Dune Formation near Corpus Christi, Texas. Journal of Sedimentary
Petrology, Vol. 19, No.3 , pp. 118- 127.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork
Focus. A An, Vol. 13, No. Z, pp. 97-109.
195Z. Some Geographic and Cultural Factors Involv ed in Mexican-Southeastern
Contacts. In: Tax, Sol, Indian Tribes of Aboriginal Ameri ca, Vol. III,
Proceedings of the 29th Congress of Americanists. pp. 139-144.
1959. The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. A An , Vol. 24, No.3 , pp. Z76-Z88.
Krieger, Alex D.
1945. Some Suggestions on Archaeological Terms. B-TAPS, Vol. 16, pp. 41-51.
1947. The First Symposium on the Caddoan Archa eological Area. A An , Vol.
12, No. 3, pp. 198- 207.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

173

1948. Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor" in Culture Contacts between Middle
America and the Eastern United States. B-TAPS, Vol. 19, pp. 155- 178.
1953. Recent Developmen ts in the Problem of Relationships between the Mexican
Gulf Coast and the Eastern United States. Huastecos y Totonacos y Sus
Vecinos. Revista Mexicana de Estudios Antropologicos. Vol. 13, No. 2-3,
pp. 497-518.
1956. Some Mexican Figurine Heads in T e xas. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 258- 265.
Kuykendall, J. H.
1872. Aboriginal Antiquities of Texas. The T exas Almanac for 1872, and Emigrants Guide to T exas, pp. 175-178.
MacNeish, Ri chard S.
1947. A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. A An, Vol. 13, No.
1, pp. 1- 15.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigatious in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n. s., Vol. 48,
Part 6.
Martin, George C.
n. d. Preliminary Archaeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast Made
by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927- 1928- 1929. Privately
printed.
1929. Notes on Some Texas Coast Campsites and Other Remain s. B-TAPS, Vol. 1,
pp. 50-57.
1930a. A Vase and Some Carved Stones and Pebbles from Nueces County. Texas.
B-TAPS, Vol. 2, pp. 18- 20.
1930b. Two Sites on the Callo del Oso, Nw~ces \.ounty, Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 2,
pp. 7-17.
1931. T exas Coastal Pottery. B-TAPS, Vol. 3, pp. 53-56.
Mason, J. Ald en
1935. The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships between the United
States and Mexico. B-TAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 29-46.
1943. Summary of Section on Cultural Relations between Northern Mexico and
the Southeastern United States. In: El Norte de Mexi co y el Sur de Estados
Unidos. Tercera Re union de Mesa Redonda de la Sociedad Mexicana de
Antropologia, pp. 348-351.
Mason, Otis T.
1880. Summary of Correspondence of the Smithsonian Institution Previous to
January 1, 1880, in Answer to Circular No. 316. Smithsonian Institution,
Annual Report for the Year 1879, pp. 428-448.
Newcomb, VVilliam W. , Jr.
1956. A Reappraisal of the "Cultural Sink" of Texas. SJA, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp.
145- 153.
Pearce, J. E.
191 9. Indi an Mounds and Other Relics of Indian Life in Texas. AA, Vol. 21 , No.
3, pp . 223-234.
1932a . The Archaeology of East T exas. AA, Vol. 34, No.4, pp. 670- 687.
1932b. The Present Statm of Texas Archeology. B-TAPS, Vol. 4, pp. 44--54.
1932c. Significa nce of tre East T exas Arch aeological Field. In: Conferen ce on

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Southern Prehistory, Birmingham, Alabama, D ecember 18-20, 1932. National Research Council, Washington, D. C., pp. 53-58 .
P otter, Wendell H .
1930. Ornamentation on Pottery of the Texas Coastal Tribes. B-TAPS, Vol. 2,
pp. 41-44.
Price, W. Armstrong
1933. Role of Diastrophism in Topography of Corpus Christi Area, South Texas.
B-AAPG, Vol. 17, No.8, pp. 907-962. Reprinted with revisions in Barton,
Donald, and George Sawtelle (editors) , Gulf Coast Oil Fields, Tulsa, Oklahoma, 1936, pp. 205-250.
1947a. Equilibrium of Form and Forces in Tidal Basins of Coast of Texas and
Louisiana. B-AAPG, Vol. 31 , No. 9, pp. 1619-1663. Corrections in Vol. 31,
N o. 10, p. 1893.
1947b. Geomorphology of D epositi onal Surfaces. B-AAPG, Vol. 31, No. 10, pp.
1784-1800.
1949. Pocket Gophers as Architects of Mirna (Pimple ) Mounds of the Western
United States. TJS, VoLt , No.1 , pp. 1- 17.
1954. Shorelines and Coasts of the Gulf of Mexico. In: Galtsoff, Paul S. (coordinator), Gulf of M exico: Its Origin, Waters, and Marine Life. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Fishery Bulletin 89, pp. 39-65.
1958. Sedimentology and Quaternary Geomorphology of South T exas. Transactions, Gulf Coa st A ssociation of Geological Societies, Vol. 8, pp. 41-75.
Price, W . Armstrong, and Gordon Gunter
1942. Certain Recent Geological and Biological Changes in South Texas, with
Consideration of Probable Causes. Proceedings and Transactions of The
T exas Academy of Science for 1942, pp. 3-21.
Reed, Clyde T.
1937. A Carankawa Fire Implement. B-TAPS, Vol. 9, pp. 218-221.
Reed, Erik K.
1938. Burials at Mission Espi ritu Santo. Central Texas Arch eologist, No. 4, pp.
85-95.
Roessler, A. R.
1882. Antiquities and Aborigines of T exas. Annual Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution for 1881. In: Sen ate Miscellaneous
Document No. 109, 1881-82, 47th Congress, 1st Session (Series No. 1994) ,
pp. 613-616.
Rouse, Irving
1949. The Southeast and the W est Indies. In: Griffin, John W . (editor ) , The
Florida Indian and His Neighbors, pp. 117- 137 . Rollins College, Winter
Park, Florida.
Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
1953. The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern T exas and
Northeastern M exico. TJS, Vol. 5, No.4, pp. 480-497.
1954a. Bands and Band-clusters of the Coahuiltecan Indians. Student Papers in
Anthropology, Department of Anthropology, The University of T exas,
Vol. 1, No.2, pp. 1-24.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

175

1954b. Ceremonies of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. TJS, Vol. 6, No.3, pp. 330-339.
1955. The Social Organization of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. TJS, Vol. 7, No.4, pp. 357-388.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of T exas. MP, No. 17.
Schaedel, Richard P.
1949. The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast. SJA, Vol. 5, No.2, pp. 117-137.
Sellards, E. H.
1940. Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, Vol. 51 , pp. 1627-1658.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932. The Geology of Texas, Vol. I. Stratigraphy. The University of Texas Bulletin, No. 3232.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1953a. Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. SJA, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp.
76-98.
1953b. The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. TJS, Vol. 5, No. 3,
pp. 280-304.
Stephenson, Robert L .
1950. Culture Chronology in Texas. A An, Vol. 16, No.2, pp. 151- 157.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-TAS, Vol. 25 .
Swanton, John R.
1940. Linguistic Material from the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. B-BAE 127.
1952. The Indian Tribes of North America. B-BAE 145.
Thomas, Cyrus
1891. Catalogue of Prehistoric Works East of the Rocky Mountains. B-BAE 12.
1894. Report on Mound Exploration of the Bureau of Ethnology. Bureau of
American Ethnology, 12th Annual Report, pp. 3-742.
Thornthwaite, C. W.
1948. An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate. The Geographical Review, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 55-9~,.
VV eir, Frank Al
1956. Surface Artifacts from La Perdida, Starr County, Texas. B-TAS, Vol. 27,
pp. 59-78.

Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. The Addicks Dam Site. I. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam
Basin, Southeast Texas. B-BAE 154, pp. 143-252.
Woodbury, George
1937. Notes on Some Skeletal Remains of Texas. University of Texas, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 5, pp. 7- 16.
Woodbury, George and Edna
1935. Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the Texas Coast. MP, No. 18.

