TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1958
President: RicHARD E. JoHNSON (Fort Worth)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAcK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. ScHUETz (San Antonio )
Editor of Publications: E. MoTT D AVIS
Directors (in addition to the above): T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W . C. HoLDEN (Lubbock)
Trustees: RoBERT E. BELL (Norman, Okla.) , WILSON W. CRooK, JR. (Dallas), 0. L.
SIMS (San Angelo), CHARLIE STEEN (Sante Fe, N . Mex.), FLoYD V. STUDER
(Amarillo ), FRANK H. WATT (Waco), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.),
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: C. E. BisSELL (Midland) , JoHN CoRLEY (Hobbs, N.Mex.) ,
W. L. EvERETT (Conroe), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), RoBERT L.
STEPHENSON (Lincoln, Neb.) , HENRY F. STURGIS (Austin), JoE BEN WHEAT
(Boulder, Colo. ), SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fellows: CYRus N . RAY (Abilene), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5 .00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum, Brackenridge Park,
San Antonio 9, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 29, for 1958
Editor: T . N. Campbell
Assistan t Editors:
E. Mott D avis
Edward B. Jelks

P ublish ed by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VOLUME

29,

FOR

1958

A Review of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
PART l
Edited by Edward B. Jelks, E. Mott Davis, and Henry F. Sturgis

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

Table of Contents
Foreword

.

Indian Tribes of Texas
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

vn

1

A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology
By Clarence H. Webb

35

A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
By Dee Ann Suhm

63

A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas Archeology
By Donald J. Lehmer

109

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas
Coast
By T. N. Campbell

145

Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature
Compiled and edited by T. N. Campbell

177

Foreword
THIS IS THE first of two volumes designed to serve as a review of the
current status of Texas archeology. The second volume will appear as
a later issue of the Bulletin. The review is in the form of a series of
papers, each dealing with a different area within Texas. In addition,
the presentation is made complete by the inclusion in the present
volume of W. W. Newcomb's paper on the historic Indians of Texas
and T . N . Campbell's revision , brought up to date, of his exhaustive
guide to the literature on Texas archeology, first published in 1952.
These papers are primarily aimed at a specific audience-the membership of the Texas Archeological Society. In other words, our desire
has been to present material which will be of maximum u se to persons
who are studying Texas archeology on the ground , primarily in their
spare time. Fulfilling this requirement fortunately also provides a
general review which should be of benefit to archeological specialists.
Accordingly, these reviews are designed to clarify the current status
of archeology in each of the several archeological areas within Texas,
and also to orient investigators-both amateur and professionaltoward the many urgent problems that need to be solved. In each
paper previous field work, classifications, and interpretations are reviewed, the major unsolved problems are outlined, and field techniques especially applicable to each area are discussed.
In the present volume, four areas are treated: East Texas, Central
Texas, Trans-Pecos Texas, and the central and southern parts of the
Texas Gulf Coast. A later volume will present papers on the Panhandle, the South Plains, North Central Texas, Southwest Texas, and
the Southeastern Coastal Plain.
A word of explanation is in order for the many members of the
Society who have long awaited the 1958 issue of the Bulletin, published here two years late, and who have anticipated eagerly the
reissuing of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology, by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, which was published in 1954 as Volume 25
of the Bulletin and which has been out of print for several years.
It was originally planned that the Handbook would be reissued in
essentially its original form, and that in addition a series of papers on
special problems in the different parts of Texas would be published.
Also, a volume on field techniques was to be prepared. Most of these
plans went awry because of pressure on the editors' time and slowness

Office of the State Archeologist

Ubrary

on the part of authors in submitting manuscripts, and therefore a
different order of events is now contemplated. The first part of the
Handbook-the part dealing with areas and complexes-is not to be
reissued; its place is to be taken in part by A Review of Texas
Archeology, of which the present volume is the first part. Part II of
the Handbook-consisting of descriptions and illustrations of pottery
and projectile point types-is to be reissued separately as a special
publication of the Society. In addition to the type descriptions , this
volume will also include the trait lists for the various foci and aspects
that appeared in Part I of the original Handbook. The manual of field
techniques is in preparation and will appear as a special publication or
a Bulletin, whichever seems most practical.
This, then, is the long-awaited 1958 issue of the Bulletin, and the
beginning of the revision of An Introductory Handbook of Texas
Archeology. It is our hope and belief that the members of the Society
will find the papers of general interest, and that those members engaged in active research will find them of particular value.

EowARD B. JELKS
E. MoTT DAvis
HENRY F. STURGIS
February, 1960

Indian Tribes of Texas
W. W. NEWCOMB, JR. *

Introduction
CoNTRARY TO popular belief, the Texas Indians were not all cut from
the same piece of cultural cloth. They varied in their cultures-in
their customary ways of living-about as much as the French, Chinese,
and Zulus do in theirs. They ranged all the way from some of the
most primitive and crudely equipped savages on the North American
continent to some of the most advanced, sophisticated, and civilized of
United States Indians. Such diversity is not surpri sing, considering
the size of the state, its rambling borders, and its wide range of natural
environments.
At the beginning of historic times Texas was also a meeting ground
and area of transition between peoples of diverse cultural ties. The
Coahuiltecan and Karankawan Indians of the W estern Gulf area were
close cultural relatives of groups south of the border, and in TransPecos Texas the Jumano had affiliations with the Pueblo cultures of
the Southwest culture area. The indigenous Tonkawa and Lipan
Apache, as well as the eighteenth century immigrants, the Comanche,
were members of the Plains culture area. The Wichita peoples, like
the Comanche, were historic immigrants, and their cultural affiliations
lay to the north and east. And lastly, the Caddo of eastern Texas and
the Atakapans of the southeast part of the State, faced east and south
in a cultural sense, being members of the Southeast culture area.
These are the tribes to be discussed here, but it should be clear that
while these were the principal Texas Indians, there were others who
for reasons of space cannot be discu ssed. In a brief paper such as this
it should also be clear that only the barest of outlines-:-the framework
*William W. Newcomb, Jr., Director of the Texas Memorial Museum, The
University of Texas, is an ethnologist with special interest in the Ameri can Indians.
His monograph, Th e Culture and Acculturation of the Delaware Indians, was
recently published by th e University of Michigan. Newcomb·s book, The In dians of
Texas, is sched ul ed for early publication by th e U niversity of Texas Press.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

2

-of the various tribal cultures can be described. But in doing this a
special attempt has been made to mention items or artifacts which
might be found or reflected in archeological studies.

The Gatherers of the Western Gulf
The Texas Indians who dwelled south of a line drawn roughly from
Del Rio through San Antonio to Galveston (Map 1) were members of
what has been called the Western Gulf culture area (Newcomb,
1956: 145-153). This tremendous area, of which southern Texas was
only a small part, extended from the vicinity of the Panuco River in
Mexico northward along the coast to Galveston Bay. Inland it took
in the Mexican states of Tamaulipas, Nuevo Leon, the eastern and
northern part of Coahuila, northern San Luis Potosi, and northeastern
Zacatecas, as well as the southern extremity of Texas. The Indians in
the Texas portion of the Western Gulf were the coastal Karankawa
and a number of inland bands and tribes of Coahuiltecans. Both groups
were similar in many respects and much of what can be said of one
OUERECHO

TEXAS

I NDIANS

17th CENTURY
MAP

APACHE

I

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

3

group applies to the other. The littoral environment of the Karankawa
made possible a somewhat different culture than that of more inland
peoples, but so far as is known it wa s not sufficiently distinct to set it
apart as a separate culture area.
Along the coast, from the mouth of the Brazos south to Baffin Bay,
an archeological complex known as the Rockport Focus represents the
archeological remains of the Karankawa (Suhm et al., 1954: 125-133 ;
Campbell, 1956, 1958 ) . Glass arrowpoints, the remains of metal tools,
and pipes of European manufacture have been recovered from Rockport Focus sites, and since the Karankawa were the only Indians in the
area in early historic times, the association of Rockport Focus with the
Karankawa seems certain. The prehistory of South Texas is not well
known, although from excavations carried out in the Falcon Reservoir region on the Rio Grande it appears that the area was occupied
for a very long period of time by nearly static cultures. Dart points,
characteristic of the area in Archaic times, were also found lying
on the floors of Spanish houses built in the eighteenth century, and
possibly were made and u sed by the people who then occupied them
(Suhmetal. , 1954: 138 ) .
South of the San Antonio River agriculture is practicable oniy
where the land can be irrigated: northeastward the coastal prairies are
increasingly well watered and verdant, but the heavy soils and the low
marshy topography would discourage even the most ambitious Indian
farmer. Today much of the region is ranch land, but a livelihood
based on stock-raising was of course denied to Indians. There were not
even enough game animals to sustain a hunting people. These facts
would seem to add up to a totally inhospitable land for a stone-age
people, yet this was not the case. For men who had a wise knowledge
of their land , particularly its thorny, prickly flora , and who were
willing to utilize things which to u s would seem to be nauseating or
trifl'. ng, this was a livable, occasionally even a gen erous land. The
story of the Coahuiltecans, and to a lesser extent that of the Karankawa, is essentially a tale of their utilization of desert plants-the tuna
or fruit of the prickly pear, the mesquite bean, the agaves, and others.
The typical Karankawa band (such as the Capoque and Han whom
Cabeza de Vaca wa s acquainted with in the Galveston area ) led a
wandering existence, determined by the availability of various wild
foods. In the fall they camped on the offshore islands catching fish in
cane weirs and eating the roots of certain underwater plants. In February the roots became useless as food and the bands were forced to
move. Until April they subsisted mainly on oysters that were found

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in abundance along the mainland shores. As summer approached the
coastal dwellers moved inland to harvest the fruits of various cacti,
principally tunas of the prickly pear. Oddly, the Karankawa never
seem to have become the seafaring people they could have been. Their
canoes were adequate for short journeys in bays in sight of land, but
they lacked sails, fishhooks and especially a viewpoint which would
have allowed them to reap the rich harvest of the teeming Gulf
waters.
The many inland groups, lumped together under the generic heading of Coahuiltecans, lived probably an even harsher, less abundant
life than did the Karankawa. They were forced to utilize almost every
edible food that a less than lavish nature provided. Summer was a
season of relative plenty, winter a time of starvation. Few living
creatures were overlooked as a source of sustenance, from the occasional bison that strayed into the region, to deer, javelinas (collared
peccary), birds, and lesser animals such as spiders, worms, lizards,
snakes, and ant eggs. Deer dung, rotten wood, and less likely materials
were eaten, and even the bones of animals were ground to a powder
and consumed. But the principal foods of the Coahuiltecans came from
plants. The fruit or tuna of the various species of prickly pear was one
of the most important foods. These ripened in early summer and
scattered bands made long journeys to the best tuna grounds. Some
Texas Coahuiltecans were able to preserve the tunas by squeezing out
their juice and sun-drying the fruit. The dried skins were pounded
into palatability and the juice was frequently squeezed into pits in the
earth, the earth-flavored juice being drunk with apparent relish. If
their campsites are ever located and excavated, these pits should be
found.
The many species of agaves were also an important food source for
Coahuiltecans. They supplied food the entire year and their fibers
were used in weaving. The agaves are widely distributed in the southwestern United States and Mexico, and in these areas the native
peoples, including Coahuiltecans, used the agaves extensively and in
similar ways. A fire was built in a pit and stones thrown into the fire.
When the stones had become thoroughly heated, the bulbs or crowns
of a number of agave plants were placed in the pit. The pit was then
covered with grass and earth and the bulbs left to cook for several
days. The roasted bulbs are said to taste sweet and are very nutritious.
Nor is it necessary to eat the fibrous mass immediately; it can be kept
for a long time without spoilage. Again, these cooking pits and perhaps

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

5

the chewed "quids" of agave should be sought by archeologists in the
brush country.
Mesquite beans were also a staple food of the Coahuiltecans. The
beans are not easily removed from their pods so that in keeping with
Coahuiltecan custom the entire pod was ground into a coarse sort of
flour. Some Coahuiltecans also prepared these beans by placing a
quantity in a hole dug in the earth and energetically used a wooden
club or pestle to reduce the beans to flour. Dirt, of course, became
mixed with the flour, and sometimes a special, sweet-tasting earth was
added. The earthy flour was thrown into a container, water added, and
the concoction eaten. Many other seeds, roots, fruits, berries, and nuts
were eaten by Coahuiltecans, their importance varying with the particular locale of the bands.
The tools and other material equipment needed by foragers of the
Western Gulf were simple. It does not take complicated tools or
machines to dig up agave bulbs or to catch lizards, nor can burdensome
gear be easily transported. But it should be mentioned that Karankawa
sites show a considerable use of shells for digging, scraping, and drilling. The principal weapon of the men throughout the area was the
bow, utilizing a deer sinew or lechuguilla (a species of agave) fiber
bowstring, and flint-tipped cane arrows. Cabeza de Vaca described
many of the south Texas natives as being superb archers. Curved
wooden rabbit sticks were used as all-purpose tools. Net cargo carriers
and net containers were manufactured for all sorts of articles, and
gourds and even fleshy but tough-skinned leaves of prickly pears were
also fashioned into containers.
The nomadic people of the Western Gulf were restricted to simple,
small and easily built dwellings. Their huts were constructed by the
women who placed a number of saplings in a circle, bending and
tying them together over the center, and throwing mats or skins on
this framework.
The south Texas Indians, and notably the Karankawa, had tall,
well-built, muscular physiques. The men wore no clothing; the
women, however, wore skirts of deerskin or Spanish moss. Although
naked, the men were not unadorned. Their lower lips, as well as the
nipples of their breasts, were pierced and sections of cane thrust
through these apertures. Both the Karankawa and the other Coahuiltecans also painted and tattooed their bodies in a variety of styles.
These appear to have symbolized band affiliations and also perhaps
served as marks of distinction.

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In keeping with their crude means of exploiting their niggardly
·world, the people of south Texas had a relatively simple and unsegmented social organization. The largest social unit was the band made
up of related kinsmen. Some bands may have been large and included
several hundred persons; others may have been counted at most in the
dozens . There was no political entity which could be called a tribe,
and even the bands were not strong, cohesive groups. For most of the
year small family groups, perhaps even a single family of parents and
offspring, were the only social unit. It was only in seasons of plenty
that an entire band, and occasionally several bands, could congregate
for a few days. Family groups followed a seasonal rhythm, in winter
foraging through their territory as best they could, in summer coming
together with others for the harvest of wild plant foods. Both sexes
labored diligently to contribute to the survival of the family. Women
and old men carried the burdens on their seasonal migrations; women
hauled the firewood, obtained the water, collected a considerable portion of the vegetable foods, and of course performed an assortment of
other household chores. The men hunted and fished or gathered shell
fish, if Karankawan, and protected their families.
Little is known about the child-bearing practices of the peoples of
the Western Gulf, partly no doubt because of their informal nature.
Infanticide, particularly of girls, or one member of a set of twins, and
of deformed babies was practiced. Despite infanticide and the occasional killing of children because of certain dream omens, early explorers noted that the south Texans were very fond of their offspring
and like many primitive peoples were indulgent parents.
Some Texas Coahuiltecans, at least, held puberty ceremonies in
which children were formally ushered across the threshold from youth
to adulthood. Tattooing was one of the prominent features of these
rites. Premarital chastity was not particularly important to Coahuiltecans, although virgins were somewhat more attractive as potential
wives. Marriages were arranged by a man with his prospective bride's
parents. The groom presented game, tools, or other things to the bride's
parents, acceptance of which signified their acquiescence to the match.
There was no formal marriage ceremony. For a time after marriage a
Karankawa man gave all the proceeds of his hunting and foraging to
his parents-in-law. Neither he nor his bride touched this food, depending instead upon the largesse of the girl's parents. An in-law taboo
prevailed among the Karankawa in which a man could not enter his
parents-in-laws' dwelling, nor could they enter his or those of his
children. The medico-religious practitioners, the shamans, often had

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

7

several wives; ordinary men normally had but one. Divorce was
frequent among childless couples, but was rare for those with children.
Quarrels over women led to fights between men and sometimes to
feuds between bands.
Of all the stages in the cycle of life, the final one, death, was attended with as much or more ceremony than any other throughout
the Western Gulf. Young men and boys were mourned for an entire
year, the period closing by the mourners undergoing a ritual of purification. Only the aged were not mourned, since it was felt that they had
lived a full life and were better off dead. Relatives of a youth declined
to obtain food for themselves for three months after his death. Other
relatives kept these mourners supplied with what food they could
during this period. Bereaved women mourned by pulling hair
from their heads and by slashing their bodies with knives. Shamans
were cremated and their ashes mixed with water to be drunk by relatives; other people were buried. The manner of interment of ordinary
people, and whether or not various artifacts were included with
burials, is unknown.
Little is known about the religious beliefs and practices of the
peoples of the Western Gulf. Summertime, when the members of a
band could congregate in one place, was the season for religious
festiva ls and ceremonies . Their ceremonies are usually termed
mitotes, although this term covers an assortment of varied activities.
Mitotes were held to give thanks for the harvest, for victory in their
brief wars, to celebrate puberty rites, and some served to consolidate
ties between separate bands. Dancing and feasting was an important
part of most mitotes, and sometimes shamans addressed the participants. The usual Coahuiletecan mitote was an all-night dance and
feast which included the consumption of the vision-producing cactus,
peyote, by both men and women. Many were drinking ceremonies,
and some or all of these were held solely by the men.
The chief activity of shamans seems to have been the curing of the
sick and ailing. Wounds were successfully treated by cauterization, by
sucking wounds and sores, and by blowing upon the affected parts.
Shamans also relieved pain, or attempted to, by sleight of hand tricks.

Nomads of the Plains
The tremendous sweep of the great plains of North America is
halted on the south by the mountains of Trans-Pecos Texas and the
scrub forests and deserts of south Texas. The flat eastward sloping

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

expanse of the Llano Estacada and the adjoining Edwards Plateau
were the southernmost sections of the plains in which vast herds of
buffalo were to be found. And here too were the southernmost Indians
who based their subsistence upon the bison herds.
In summer the entire bison range shifted northward a few hundred
miles and in winter it moved back south. But the presence or absence
of bison in any particular locality could not be predicted. Places which
for years were overrun with bison might suddenly be abandoned, and
areas which had had no bison might as suddenly find the landscape
black with them. For native pedestrian people the erratic movements
of the herds meant that a livelihood based on these beasts was at best
precarious. Perhaps a single hunter could have kept up with the herds,
but an entire group-women, children, babies, old folk, with their
gear-would be hard pressed to do so. As a result, there were few
if any pre-horse, pedestrian tribes that depended upon the bison as
much as many historic equestrian tribes were able to do. On the
Llano Estacada at the beginning of the sixteenth century were anumber of Apache bands and tribes (Map 1). Many if not most of them
farmed in small scattered communities, and those that did not bother
to farm seem to have carried on extensive intercourse-both trading
and raiding-with the Puebloan farming people in nearby New
Mexico. The hunting of bison was a major activity, but the failure
of the herds to appear did not doom them to starvation. In central
Texas the Tonkawa did not have a farming tradition to fall back on
and neither was the Edwards Plateau as favored by bison. While the
Tonkawa are here considered to be a Plains people, they can only be
viewed as poor relations-leading a life somewhere between that of
the proud Plains warriors and the Coahuiltecan foragers.
The introduction of the horse by the Spaniards in the seventeenth
century wrought a revolution in the life of the Indians on the plains.
At last a life built around and dependent upon the bison became easy
and rewarding. Indians already in the plains took it up enthusiastically, and many tribes from other regions fought their way onto the
plains to partake in the new life. In Texas these newcomers were the
Comanche, the Kiowa , and Kiowa Apache.

Tonkawa. Atop the Edwards Plateau and spilling over onto the
coastal plain to the south and the Brazos bottoms on the east and
northeast was the sixteenth century homeland of a number of independent bands of Indians who became known in the nineteenth
century as the Tonkawa. The principal Tonkawa bands were the

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

9

Mayeye (or perhaps Meghey ), Yojaune, Ervipiame and a number of
smaller, more obscure groups, the Cavas, Emet, Sana, Toho, and
Tohaha. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries these peoples were scattered and probably much reduced in numbers, but by
the beginning of the nineteenth century the remnants had united as
a single tribe, henceforth known as the Tonkawa. It is only after these
groups became the Tonkawa tribe that a description of their culture is
possible, and at this time they were fairly typical southern Plains
people, with some rather close similarities to the Lipan Apache.
Considerable linguistic data have been collected on the Tonkawa
(Hoijer, 1949 ), but it has been difficult to relate their language to any
other. Swanton has suggested that the Tonkawa were members of the
Coahuiltecan linguistic stock, but this hypothesis is difficult to substantiate since there are no longer any speakers of Coahuiltecan
(Swanton, 1915; 1940 ).
The most recent prehistoric archeological complex in central Texas,
the Central Texas Aspect, has been tentatively associated with Tonkawau peoples (Krieger, 1946: 165-168; Suhm, 1957: 54-56; but also
see Kelley, 1947). But since sites of the Central Texas Aspect intermixed with identifiable historic material are lacking, the association remains somewhat speculative. Nonetheless, since there is no evidence
that the Tonkawan peoples recently came from anywhere else, it is
assumed that their ancestors were the people whose remains are
known, or at least partly known, to archeologists as the Central Texas
Aspect.
Even well into the nineteenth century, when bison were no longer
numerous in central Texas, the Tonkawa continued to depend upon
this animal as the principal source of their food. Deer were also
valued, particularly for their hides, which could be traded to T exans.
Turkeys, rabbits, skunks, rats, rattlesnakes, tortoises , and many other
animals were also hunted. Apparently the only mammals the Tonkawa barred from their iron-lined stomachs were wolves and their
coyote kin, but only because of theological proscriptions. Dogs,
probably horses, and no doubt European cattle were eaten. Carrion
was consumed. Unlike typical Plains Indians, they ate fish and other
aquatic foods. Like their neighbors in the Western Gulf the Tonkawa
utilized many plant foods. Cactus fruit, acorns, and pecans were
among the most important.
The Tonkawa used the Plains bison-hide tipi until the herds in
central Texas had dwindled so drastically that they were forced to
turn to other materials. However, tipis never seem to h ave been the

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tall, imposing lodges which were typical of northern plains tribes;
instead they were apt to be squat and crude. The Tonkawa also used
brush arbors and windscreens as isolation huts for menstruating women, for parturition lodges, and for ceremonial purposes.
There are no data on the type of bow used, although it was probably
a simple one-piece bow. Arrows were poisoned, or so the Tonkawa
thought, by squeezing juice from the mistletoe on their points. The
Tonkawa also used lances, bison hide shields, and helmets of tough
hide. Much of their equipment came from the bison: glue for hafting
arrows and other purposes was obtained from the hoofs; its sinews
were used for thread and for bowstrings; the hair V\as fashioned into
ropes and belts and the horns into cups and spoons. Some sort of crude
cloth was made from the inner bark of mulberry trees (perhaps a
diffusion from the Caddo area to the east); baskets and mats were
woven of grass and other fibers, and at least in later times some pottery
was manufactured.
Each of the Tonkawa bands was directed by a chief and in time of
war there may have been special war leaders. After consolidation,
bands continued to have chiefs, but a titular tribal chief was added.
Band chiefs and the later tribal chiefs seem to have been selected by
the mature men. Clans may have existed before the consolidation of
the tribe, or they may have been remnants of autonomous bands.
Whichever the case, clans were the basic units of Tonkawa society.
The clans were matrilineal; children belonged to the clan of their
mother, and of course, marriage within the clan was considered incestuous. Clans, as elsewhere, joined a group of relatives into a cohesive, cooperative unit. The kinship system, which is of the "Crow"
type, cannot be described here. The Tonkawa practiced the levirate
(in which a woman married her deceased husband's brother) and the
sororate (in which a man married his deceased wife's sister), and
probably sororal polygyny (in which a man married several sisters).
Women bore their children alone in brush huts and bathed soon
after birth. Children were named when they were several years old,
but whether or not this was done in a formal ceremony is unknown.
There is not much knowledge of the facts of growing up and getting
married, perhaps indicative of the informal nature of learning to
become a Tonkawa. Death rites are better known. When a person was
thought to be on the verge of death his friends and relatives entered
the tipi where he lay, forming a circle around him and resting their
hands on his body. Others formed another larger circle around the
first one, placing their hands upon the shoulders of the others. If the

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

11

tipi was a large one, there might be several additional circles around
the pallet of the dying; swaying and chanting they hovered around
throughout the night. Most of the dead were buried immediately,
although chiefs and other important people lay in state for a time.
Treasured possessions such as guns and scalps were buried with the
carefully painted and adorned corpses. Like many other Plains
Indians a favorite horse was shot over the grave and occasionally a
pet dog was also put to death at the grave. The band of a deceased
person mourned for three days, but close relatives mourned for a
longer period. One of the better known customs associated with death
was the taboo on using a dead person's name, or even one which was
similar to that of some dead person.
Scattered data suggest that the Tonkawa believed there was an
omnipotent god or gods . The spirits of the dead were by far their most
important supernatural concern, however. These spirits were thought
to journey to a home in the west after death. But the souls of men
were apt to hang around watching their living relatives and calling
to them; many precautions were taken to minimize the evil they
could do. The ritual cannibalism the Tonkawa practiced may be
associated with these beliefs. They may have thought that they could
acquire some of the enemy's spirit power, or perhaps permanently
destroy his soul, by consuming his body.
Tonkawa shamans seem to have functioned mainly in the curing of
illness. They held many different kinds of dances, but little more is
known a bout their religious beliefs and practices.

Lipan Apache. In 1541 Coronado met Querecho Apache on the
Llano Estacada of eastern New Mexico or the Texas Panhandle and
the Teya Apache somewhere near the headwaters of the Brazos. The
Spaniards continued to encounter bison-hunting Apache on the
southern plains in the next century (Map 1) . In a very real sense they
may be regarded as the original Plains Indians.
All Apache peoples speak Athapaskan languages, but most
Athapaskan-speaking Indians are concentrated in Canada and Alaska.
There has been considerable speculation about how and when the
southern group became detached, and most investigators at least pay
lip service to the theory that there was a relatively late prehistoric
migration southward along the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains.
At whatever age the Apache arrived in the southwest and on the
southern plains, no archeological complexes have as yet been definitely attributed to them. The historic Apache peoples of the south-

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

western United States have been divided into an eastern and a western
division on the basis of linguistic and cultural differences. Of the
western Apache-Navaho, San Carlos, Chiricahua and Mescalero-only the Mescalero in early times ventured into Texas. The modern
eastern group-Jicarilla, Lipan, and Kiowa Apache-are the principal
remnants of the people who once dominated the southem plains.
By the beginning of the eighteenth century several things had happened which were to doom these Plains Apache. Having acquired and
mastered horses, they were raiding the Spanish settlements in New
Mexico more frequently than ever, and throughout the first half of
the century the Spaniards undertook numerous campaigns in retaliation. Also by the beginning of the eighteenth century the Comanche
and Ute had debouched into the plains to begin the battle for their
mastery. To make matters worse, the Comanche were able to obtain
guns from the French while the Spanish denied them to the Apache.
The end result was the defeat of the Plains Apache. Many bands were
wiped out; others, such as the Jicarilla, took refuge among the Pueblos,
and some, like the Kiowa Apache, affiliated with stronger tribes. Some
were driven to the margins of the plains-into Trans-Pecos Texas,
into Mexico, and even to south Texas. These became the Lipan
(Map 2).
Throughout their known history the Lipan lived primarily from
the bison. The principal hunting seasons were fall and spring, at which
times the bison were concentrated in huge herds on the southern
plains. Bison-hunting was ordinarily a cooperative, group effort, and
the "surround" was the favorite form of hunting. Many other animals
were hunted in addition to bison, particularly in the nineteenth
century when the bison were fast approaching extinction. Deer and
antelope had always been valued for their skins, and smaller animals
such as javelinas, rats, and the like were also taken. Wild turkeys
were eaten, but other birds, particularly water birds, were not regarded as fit for human consumption. While the Lipan always seem to
have depended more upon the bison than the women's gardens, the
raising of maize, beans, squash, and pumpkins was an important, if
secondary, subsistence activity. But after the Lipan adopted horses,
they became increasingly embroiled in wars, were driven from their
ancestral homes, and as a result the importance of agriculture
dwindled. In the drier regions of Texas and northern Mexico wild
plant foods came to play an important role. The agaves were one of
the most important of these, and their preparation was similar to that
described for the peoples of the Western Gulf. Tunas of prickly pears,

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

13

KIOWA
KIOWA

AND
APACHE

I
I

I

I
I
I

I
I
I

I

• o o,

"' "(!> ,.'
~

LIPAN

APACHE

\

0

\

u
\

\

(UPPER)

\

TEXAS

',

--

INDIANS·~

1840
MAP

2

mesquite beans, datil (Yucca baccata), nuts, and many fruits and
berries were also utilized by the Lipan.
Lipan tipis had a framework of light poles, often sotol flowering
stalks, the heavier ends being arranged in a circle on the ground, the
lighter ends being tied together at the top. Hides were thrown over
this framework leaving a smoke hole at the top and a small entry hole
which could also be covered with a hide. The larger tipis housed a
dozen persons, the smaller only three or four.
The Lipan bow and arrow was an extremely effective weapon for
hunting bison, even more so than muzzle-loaders, since several arrows
could be discharged for every shot fired. The bow and arrow had the
added virtue of being almost silent. Their bows were about four feet
long and were made of "mountain mulberry." Bow strings were of
split deer or bison sinews, twisted together. The arrows were of hard
wood, with three feathers tied on with sinew, and in historic times
tipped with iron points. Like the Tonkawa, warriors carried lances, and

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

for protection, oval shields made from thick, bull bison hides. In the
arid country the Lipan increasingly came to inhabit, containers for
water were necessary. Warriors often carried a canteen made from the
stomach of a beef or bison, and for camp use the Southwestern pitchcovered basketry water jug was utilized.
In summer men wore a breechclout, moccasins, and leggings. In
winter a buckskin shirt and a blanket were added. The women wore a
knee-length deerskin skirt, snug-fitting leggings fastened to a belt
around the waist, and high moccasins. The feminine costume by the
nineteenth century was topped by a Mother Hubbard style of blouse
fashioned from a complete doeskin. Warriors cut off their hair on the
left side of the head even with the top of the ear, while the hair on the
right side was allowed to grow long, sometimes reaching the ground
when allowed to fall free. Feathers and trinkets adorned the hair,
and earrings decorated pierced ear lobes. The men spent spare
moments plucking out their beard and eyebrows, the ideal masculine
face being completely devoid of hair. The face and body were smeared
with several colors of paint. The women also wore earrings, bracelets,
and anklets made of copper wire and beads. Their hair was worn in
one long plait dangling down the back, but for special occasions was
allowed to fall free.
Childbirth took place within the tipi, male members of the household being barred. A few days after birth the father named the infant
after some natural object. Babies were placed in a beaded buckskin
cradleboard in which they spent most of their time until old enough
to walk.
When a young man desired to wed a particular girl, he was expected to obtain permission from her father, her brother, or some
other male relative. If the union was agreeable to the father, the
bridegroom made a gift of horses, firearms, and hides to the girl's
parents. Marriage obligated a man to his wife's family, and as the
young men of a household married and moved away, the support of
the family increasingly fell to the husbands of the family's daughters.
Even when a man's wife died he was not released from her family,
and if possible he was supplied by them with another wife. The Lipan
also practiced sororal polygyny, although it was normally restricted
to chiefs and outstanding warriors.
The Lipan felt a great terror of the ghosts of the dead. This feeling
led to quick burial of the deceased, destruction of his property, and
relocation of the tipi in which a person had died. Care of the corpse
fell to elderly persons who were better able than younger persons to

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

15

deal with the contamination of death. The body was bathed and
adorned, tied to a horse, and led to a shallow grave. The head of the
corpse was placed to the east, and before closing the grave the corpse
was admonished to leave for the afterworld and not return to bother
his relatives.
The basic social unit among the Lipan was the extended family,
composed of parents, unmarried sons, daughters, sons-in-law, and
their offspring. A number of these extended families camped together,
and at least in early times remained within a given territory, after
which they were often named. The most important man of a local
group functioned as a leader to the extent that he was a chief adviser
and director of local group affairs. The largest grouping the Lipan
attained was the band, a confederation of these local groups. These
dwelled near enough together so that they could unite for defensive
or offensive purposes and could also meet on social and ceremonial
occasions. The most prominent and respected of the local group
leaders was the band chief. The Lipan were a tribe only in the sense
that they were a distinct cultural body-a politically unorganized
group of bands sharing a common life. In later times, as war and the
threat of war became chronic, bands came to have war chiefs in addition to the civil chiefs. Men became chiefs through acknowledged
bravery and experience. There was some tendency for chieftainship
to become hereditary; but as poor leaders were quickly deposed and
band membership was not necessarily permanent, it could never
develop further.
Surprise attacks were favored, and if they were not able to surprise
an enemy their attack was apt to be called off altogether. Scalps were
taken and portions of enemy bodies, particularly if Comanche, were
eaten by victorious warriors. This custom, however, may have been
borrowed from the Tonkawa. Captives were often tortured and killed,
but they were sometimes adopted. Scalp and victory dances were held
for successful war parties.
The important supernatural personages as far as the ordinary Lipan
was concerned were a number of deities whom individuals could
approach intimately and personally. But they did maintain beliefs in
a vague supreme power. Persons became shamans through supernatural experiences. Theoretically anybody could have these mystical
or visionary experiences, but they seem not to have been common.
Power thus obtained could be transferred, but was not ordinarily
passed on until the holder was aged. Shamanistic rites were conducted
to cure the sick, to help obtain game, to bring misfortune upon

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

enemies, to foretell an enemy's approach, to control weather, and
other things. Most shamanistic performances had only a few participants, but there were occasionally larger gatherings when the welfare
of all was at stake and in which all participated.

Comanche. Until the last quarter of the nineteenth century, years
after most other Texas Indians had been wiped out or otherwise
pacified, the Comanche raided throughout Texas and down into
Mexico. No wonder the Comanche are Texas' best known Indians!
The Comanche speak Shoshonean, a language belonging to the UtaAztecan family, one of the major language stocks of Indian America.
The Shoshonean-speaking peoples were centered in the Great Basin
country of western United States and are further subdivided into
three mutually unintelligible language families. One of these is called
Shoshone and this is the language the Comanche speak. Comanche
speech is, in fact, virtually identical with that of the Northern
Shoshone.
Sometime during the second half of the seventeenth century some of
the Northern Shoshone became familiar with horses. Like their relatives in the Great Basin area they were crude, primitively equipped
hunters and gatherers. By 1700, however, some had abandoned their
homes and had appeared on the plains of eastern Colorado and western
Kansas, apparently having moved down the Arkansas River Valley. By
1705 they had appeared in New Mexico, and before the century was
half over they were in control of much of the southern plains (Map 2).
From a scrounging, poor, militarily weak rabble, they became in less
than a century a mounted, wealthy, and powerful people.
While there was desultory hunting throughout the year, in summer
when the herds were fat, and also in the fall when the hides reached
their prime, the Comanche embarked upon large-scale communal
hunts. Like the Tonkawa and Lipan, and departing from normal
Plains custom, the Comanche had no military societies to direct or
police their communal hunts. A hunt leader was chosen, but he
functioned merely as a coordinator. After locating a suitable herd the
hunting party approached from down wind and slowly encircled the
herd, closing the gap on the up wind side last. The mounted hunters
circled the herd and compressed it into as small an area as possible.
If the herd could be made to mill a bout, its slaughter was that much
easier to accomplish. When a herd could not be surrounded, a line of
hunters might form down wind and charge the beasts at one time.
Bison were also stampeded over cliffs, often with the aid of an agile

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

17

boy who lured the animals on, disguised in a bison robe to which were
attached horns and ears.
Besides bison the Comanche hunted elk, black bear, antelope, and
deer. They did not normally eat fish, wild fowl , dogs, or coyotes, but
when starving would eat almost anything-rats, skunks, lizards,
grasshoppers, and decayed meat. They also collected many fruits and
berries to supplement their diet of meat. Corn and tobacco were never
grown but were acquired by theft or trade. As among other Plains
Indians, pemmican was a great favorite, providing a nutritious ration
for war parties and other travelers.
Boys wore no clothing in warm weather but when about eight or
nine donned the breechclout, leggings, and moccasins. Girls always
wore some sort of covering. Skin shirts, buffalo robes , and hide overshoes equipped the Comanche to withstand the coldest gales of the
plains. Feathered war bonnets were adopted late in the nineteenth
century, apparently at the expense of the horn headdress, but never
attained the vogue they did in the northern plains. Painting of the
face and body in a number of styles and colors was an important part
of preparing for special occasions.
The tipi was an ideal home for a nomadic people such as the
Comanche. The women could put one up in a few moments and as
rapidly dismantle it. Comanche camps were usually located near
running water and a large one might extend along a stream for several
miles. Within a camp tipis were not arranged according to any prescribed plan, although they were apt to cluster around a chief's lodge.
Babies who were in any way defective or abnormal were abandoned
to die, and one or both twins, especially if they were girls, were also
abandoned. While children of both sexes were welcomed and loved, it
was boys-the future warriors-who brought the greatest joy to a
family. Names were given children by prominent persons on request
of their fathers . Children were not usually punished physically for
misdeeds; instead they were taught correct behavior by persuasion
and object lessons. An older sister was normally the disciplinarian;
and if particularly harsh measures were called for, someone outside
the immediate family was called in.
As soon as a boy had demonstrated his ability as a hunter and obtained a supernatural guardian, he was ready to take his place in a
war party. His return signalled a celebration dance and marked the
beginning of adulthood. He was now eligible to marry, although he
usually postponed it for a few years. He wanted to gain a reputation
as a hunter and warrior, and by doing so he would be in a favorable

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

position to acquire the wife of his choice. Horses and other plunder
were also needed to marry such a girl, and acquiring these articles by
raiding was more respectable and desirable than wheedling them out
of a doting father.
When a man had decided he wanted to marry a certain girl, the
ordinary procedure was to give the girl's father, her brother, or other
close relatives a present, preferably a horse. A suitor's campaign was
climaxed when he sent an uncle, some other old relative, or perhaps a
friend to the lodge of the girl's parents with further gifts. If the suit
was rejected, the horses and gifts loaded upon them were simply turned
loose; if the suitor was accepted, the horses were driven into the herd of
the father or brother. The successful suitor then took his bride to his
tipi.
A man was obligated to provide meat for his parents-in-law, and
for this reason a family tried to arrange their daughter's marriage to
a man of their own band. Inter-band marriage did occur, however,
and in such cases n girl jo:ned her husband's group. Normally a man
inherited his wife's younger sisters as additional wives , and he might
take other women, especially captives, as wives too. The sororate was
in vogue as was the levirate.
When young and valuable warriors died, their mourning was intense and long lasting; for the aged it was brief. Women in their anguish mutilated their bodies in various ways, perhaps a survival of an
old Shoshonean custom of putting women to death at the graves of their
husbands. Burial was, if possible, in inaccessible caves or crevices, usually in high places and west of the tipi of the dead person. Corpses were
dressed and ornamented, and personal tools, such as guns, were also
included with the buriaL Favorite horses of the deceased were frequently shot over the grave.
The Comanche, like the Lipan, were never a tribe in a political
sense. There were at one time something more than a dozen bands,
differing in size, territory occupied, and in some minor cultural respects. Each band had a headman or chief who was not formally
recognized or given a title, but who spoke with the authority of the
consensus of the eminent men. Any headman could call a meeting of
his own band, and joint councils of several bands sometimes met. Each
band also recognized an eminent warrior as a paramount war chief.
Few peoples oriented their lives around warfare more thoroughly
and completely than did the Comanche. Comanche culture came into
being through military prowess and blossomed through raiding and

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

19

brawling. Almost every aspect of life became intertwined in one way
or another with war. The Comanche "counted coup" like other Plains
people. The highest coup was awarded for the act of greatest bravery,
and the most courageous deed was to touch or strike an enemy. Killing
an enemy with a bullet or arrow from a distance was not such a great
feat . Scalping a dead enemy hardly counted, although scalping enemies
(alive or dead) under perilous circumstances was appropriately rewarded. Stealing horses staked in an enemy camp, or under other
dangerous circumstances, also rated high on the list of war honors.
For a coup to count it had to be recognized by other warriors, and after
a battle the war chief gathered the participants together so that the
war honors claimed could be judged and accepted or rejected. The Comanche counted coup on a victim but twice, contrary to some of the
other Plains tribes who counted three or four times. Comanche war
parties struck swiftly, looted, and killed, and as rapidly withdrew.
When enemies could not be surprised they might be ambushed and
only if very inferior in numbers and fire power would they be charged.
If pursued, a war party dispersed, and the Comanche were noted for
their ability to withdraw more rapidly than any enemy could follow .
Religious practices were primarily a matter of individual concern ;
there were relatively few group religious observances. To live a successful life, to become a successful warrior, it was necessary to have supernatural assistance, however. Such aid was normally gained in mystical,
visionary experiences. Young men in lonely ordeals sought power, and
usually, it appears, were successful in such quests. Men also sought
visions on many occasions when help or guidance was needed. While
power was essentially an individual possession, those who had great
power were often called on to pass it to others. The power itself could
not be transferred, but the possessor could prepare others so that they
could receive it.
Comanche ideas about important deities were always vague. The
sun, moon, and earth were considered to be supernatural beings; and
in later times, if not earlier, there was a hazy belief in an omnipotent
power. This supernatural was the creator of the universe and of the
Comanche, and was always the first one addressed in prayers. By
many he was associated with the sun. Some Comanche also believed
in an evil counterpart to this benevolent figure . Other supernatural
powers could take any shape and reside in any object. They frequented
natural phenomena such as rivers , springs, and odd or outstanding
topographic features.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Gardeners
Jumano. Among the least known of Texas Indians are the Jumano.
Their land stretched from the vicinity of El Paso down the Rio Grande
Valley as far as the Big Bend region, and a short way up the Rio Conchas in Chihuahua. While their permanent villages were in these river
valleys, all of Texas south and west of the Pecos may be considered
as territory utilized by the Jumano or their nomadic relatives (Map 1).
The Spanish traversed Jumano territory repeatedly in the sixteenth
century, but despite their early and continued acquaintance with these
Indians, they never described-or perhaps knew-the Jumano intimately. Jumano culture disintegrated during the eighteenth century,
so that it cannot now be adequately described. Even the linguistic
affiliations of the Jumano are not known with certainty, although indirect evidence seems to favor their having been speakers of a UtaAztecan tongue (Sauer, 1934). To compound a difficult problem, the
Spanish applied the word Jumano and its variants at various times to
the Wichita (Taovayas) Indians, to a Pueblo group in eastern New
Mexico, and even to some Indians in Arizona (Scholes and Mer a,
1940: 269). To some Spaniards the word Jumano appears to have
been used for any Indians who painted or tattooed their bodies, probably in a certain way (ibid., 275). Jumano is, then, an unfortunate
term, but it has come to be commonly applied to the Indians of southwestern Texas and parts of northern Chihuahua, and for want of a
better term it is used here.
One of the more bothersome of Jumano anomalies has been the fact
that there were two geographically distinct groups in Trans-Pecos
Texas, each pursuing a different mode of subsistence, who have been
called Jumano. One group consisted of settled gardeners of the Puebloan tradition, wresting their living from garden plots in the valleys
of the Rio Grande and the lower Rio Conchos. The other Jumano lived,
or at least hunted, beyond the Chisos and Davis mountains on the
southernmost plains. It is presumed that they hunted throughout the
summer months in this region, but in the fall trekked to the valley
villages to trade, visit, and await the return of the hunting season.
Whether these two groups constituted an essentially single people,
sharing a common language and origins, is unknown. The nomadic
group is virtually unknown ethnographically, and it is assumed here
that there were few if any cultural distinctions separating the two
groups (seeKelley, 1955,foranotherviewpoint).

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

21

Archeological excavations have revealed that in relatively late prehistoric times the natives of this region were peripheral members of
the Puebloan civilization of the Southwest. The towns of the sedentary
Puebloans were scattered over a wide area in the southwest, through
northern Arizona and New Mexico, into Colorado and Utah, and it is
n ot surprising that this cultural pattern extended down the Rio Grande
into Texas.
Sometime around 1000 A.D. there was a rapid expansion of this
Puebloan culture, technically called the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon (and Mogollon for our purposes may be called Puebloan ), southward down the Rio Grande (Lehmer, 1948; Kelley, 1949, 89-114;
Suhm et al., 1954: 27-51 ) . By 1200 A.D. farming villages had spread
at least as far as El Ca;on, a canyon barrier about 125 miles downstream from El Paso (Kelley, 1952: 361-362) . These river valley
farms apparently depended upon the water from very small watersheds which today do not support any sort of farming. Between 1200
and 1400 this farming culture spread on down the Rio Grande as far
as Canon Colorado, below modern Redford, and up the Rio Conchas in
Mexico some forty miles. Soon after this period most of these villages
disappeared, and whether the historic sites in the area represent survivors or new immigrants is unknown. At any rate, it was these people
extending from La Junta (the vicinity of the junction of the Rio Conchas with the Rio Grande ) upstream almost to El Paso who became
the main Jumano body of historic times.
As the Puebloan culture spread down the Rio Grande and into
Trans-Pecos Texas, it did not enter a virgin, uninhabited land. There
were local cultures in the area , and the culture of the historic Jumano
and their immediate archeological forerunners suggests a mixture of
the imported Puebloan and an indigenous hunting and gathering culture. With such a mixture it is difficult to be confident whether the
local folk learned of the cultural advances made upstream, borrowed
some material items and techniques from them, and in time became
for all intents and purposes Puebloan, or whether they represented a
distinct migration. Whichever the case, what little is known of the
early historic Jumano culture suggests a provincial, watered-down,
poor and struggling Puebloan culture.
Physically the Jumano were as large and muscular as the robust
Karankawa . The women and old men wore skins, while young men
went naked. The men sported intricate feathered coiffures, and both
men and women painted their bodies with elaborate designs.
Those Jumano who lived at the choice locations along the Rio

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Grande and Rio Conchos in good years raised fairly ample crops of
corn, beans, and squash. But in dry years , and in the less favorable
locations, their farming endeavors were often unsuccessful. They had
access to many wild plant foods, however, the most important being
mesquite beans and the beans of its near relative, the screw bean or
tornillo ( Prosopis pubescens). Agaves also seem to have been used, as
were prickly pear tunas, and probably other cactus fruits. It is doubtful
whether buffalo meat figured very prominently in their diet before
the acquisition of horses. Few buffalo wandered into this area, and deer
and antelope were perhaps more important in their economy.
The Jumano lived in small villages. Their houses were singlestoried, flat roofed, adobe and thatch structures grouped together
around central plazas on ridges overlooking streams. Archeological researches have added considerably to our knowledge of their houses
(Kelley, in Kelley et al. , 1940: 35; Kelley, 1951 : 118 ) . Each village or
pueblo had one or two caciques (chiefs) and, at least at La Junta ,
there was a paramount chief over several villages. The existence of
such leaders suggests a well organized political system, but its specific
nature is unknown. The same mystery surrounds other aspects of
Jumano life. One house which has been excavated, and which has
been assigned to an entirely prehistoric period, contained a sealed pit
which is similar to the sipapu or ceremonial spirit entrance present in
southwestemkivas (Kelley, 1951: 118 ) .

Wichita. The Wichita, like the Comanche, were historic immigrants
to Texas. In the sixteenth century Coronado encountered them in central Kansas, and other related peoples lived to the southward, perhaps
extending into Oklahoma . All the Wichita peoples-Waco, Tawakoni
(Tahuacano) , Taovayas, Iscanis, and Wichita proper-are closely related linguistically. Their essentially common language, termed
Wichita, is one of the four distinct languages of the Caddoan stock, the
others being Pawnee, Caddo, and Kichai. If there were ever other
cultural differences which distinguished the various Wichita subgroups, they have long since been forgotten. During the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries the Wichita peoples moved southward, and
by the second half of the eighteenth century they had become a cohesive tribe (or tribes ) politically. The Waco and Tawakoni were in
the forefront of the southem migration. By 1772 they had settled on
the Brazos at Waco, and on the Trinity upstream from Palestine
(Hodge, 1907, 1910 : 702-704 ) . By 1779 the village on the Trinity had

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

23

been abandoned, its populace joining those on the Brazos. The Waco
tribe was, it seems, one of these Brazos River villages, and thus actually
a subdivision of the Tawakoni (Map 2).
Culturally the Wichita have been associated with the Caddo and the
Southeast culture area in general, and also with the Plains culture area
(Kroeber, 1939: 74-76 ) . Linguistically and in other cultural respects
they had much in common with the Caddo, particularly in early times.
But, during the eighteenth century, following their adoption of horses
and their many migrations, their culture became increasingly Plainslike. But even after the Wichita had become a mounted, equestrian
people, bison and other wild game remained supplementary to the
produce of their gardens. They cultivated extensive field s of corn,
pumpkins, beans, tobacco, and squash. Almost without exception the
earlier Europeans who visited them commented upon their bountiful
crops and the abundant supply of bison.
The Wichita lived in villages of grass houses similar to those used
by the Caddo. Wichita houses were not flimsy or temporary; they were
sturdy structures up to thirty feet in diameter and were used for many
years. Their interior supports were vertically placed, forked cedar
posts, connected with horizontal cedar logs. Long cedar poles were laid
against this framework , and their upper ends tied securely together.
Willow poles were tied to these horizontally, and coarse grass was
spread over and fastened to the exterior. Each house had two low, narrow doors, one facing east, and the other west. Open-sided, grasscovered arbors were built near the houses for family use during the hot
summers. Other arbors were constructed for storage and drying of
garden produce and meat.
The villages were inhabited from spring until fall while the women
were planting, tending, and harvesting their crops. After the harvest,
villages were abandoned for a winter hunt. Hunting parties lived in
tipis, and in other respects behaved like Plains Indians. By spring they
had returned to their villages for planting. Besides doing most of the
farming, women fenced the fields, tanned skins, cut and hauled firewood, and performed many other household tasks. Men devoted themselves chiefly to hunting and warfare, although they also did some of
the more strenuous tasks, such as installing heavy timbers in new
houses.
New fathers were excluded from their wives' lodges for four days
after the birth of a child. It was felt that their presence might sicken
mother and child. Children were often named before birth from aus-

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

picious dreams of the mother or other relatives. This led to some ridiculous names because many dreams did not conform to the subsequent
sex or character of the child.
Ordinarily the family of a marriageable boy initiated negotiations
with a girl's family by sending a middle-aged member of their group.
If a favorable reply was obtained, the prospective groom went to their
lodge the following evening and remained that night if the match was
still favored. Gifts and a feast solemnized the marriage. Residence of
the newly married couple was with the family of the bride, and the
groom was expected to perform a number of duties for his wife's family. Divorce was easy and common for childless couples. A woman
simply ejected her husband from her lodge, and a man could divorce
his wife by moving out. Sororal polygyny was practiced as was the
sororate.
Wichita cemeteries were located on hills, and bodies were buried
with the head toward the east. A warrior's effects were placed with
him, except for his shield, which was given to one of his friends who
understood the magical rites associated with it; or it was placed by the
grave, or hung on the limbs of a distant tree. For four days relatives
mourned their loss, and four times a day they purified themselves by
bathing in a stream. Surviving spouses continued to mourn for some
months.
Each village had a chief and a sub-chief elected by eminent warriors , an informal but powerful group, who could and did restrict any
autocratic tendencies on the part of the chief. Other village officials
were shamans, some of whom were in charge of particular ceremonies.
One of their number was the village crier. There were also a number
of lesser officials whose duties were primarily ceremonial. Officials of
various kinds were not necessary for maintaining internal order, since
harmony and cooperation were obtained through the extended matrilineal families. A woman , her husband, unmarried children, daughters
and their husbands, and grandchildren made up this family group.
The oldest competent woman was the director and dominant person
in family affairs, and the grass lodges were feminine property. While
on the hunt this matriarchal family was broken up to some extent,
since married women ordinarily had their own tipis, but the closeknit family camped together.
Throughout historic times the Wichita were involved in countless
raids and wars, both with other Indians and with Europeans. The
Osage may have been ancient enemies, enmity for the Plains Apache
was traditional, and until the French negotiated a treaty the Comanche

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

were bitter foes. When the Wichita peoples entered Texas they incurred the wrath of the Tonkawa and Lipan Apache. No vvonder the
principal activity of the men was war. The customs of war were typical of Plains Indians, at least in later times, and in Plains tradition
they "counted coup."
The Wichita believed in a pantheon of gods and goddesses, arranged
in a vaguely graded hierarchy. They were divided into sky and earth.
masculine and feminine dieties. But everything-animate and inanimate-possessed a soul or spirit. Some things had more power than
others, and some had power which could more readily be influenced
by men. Knowledge of these forces and beings was personally acquired
and, in fact, all spiritual knowledge was thought to come through individual revelation. The more important deities-those who controlled
tribal welfare-were worshipped by semi-secret religious societies.
The ceremonies and dances performed by these societies were intended
to enlist supernatural assistance in matters of general concern, such as
success in war, bountiful crops, and a plentiful supply of bison.

Caddo. Of all the Texas Indians the Caddo possessed the richest and
most highly developed culture. At the dawn of historic times there
were about twenty-five Caddo tribes joined together into three confederacies, plus some small independenl tribes. They occupied east
and northeast Texas, and adjacent portions of Louisiana, Arkansas,
and Oklahoma. Despite their numbers. and they must have been much
more numerous than any other group of native Texans, they passed
into oblivion as silently and with as little fanfare as any other Indian
people in the state. To many Texans the only significance of the Caddo
lies in the fact that the state's name was derived from the Hasinai confederation. The tribes in this confederation called each other allies or
friends, and the Spaniards to whom it was also applied, soon came to
use the word for these and other friendly Indians. Probably the pronunciation of the word was originally closer to " Tayshas" or " Taychas" than to the modern " Texas" (Swanton, 1942: 3) .
The Hasinai (variously called Asenai, Assoni, Asenay, Cenis, etc. )
was the largest Caddo confederacy. Originally the Hasinai appear to
have been composed of nine tribes and occupied the upper reaches of
the Neches and Angelina river valleys (Map 1) . The second group,
the Kadohadacho, or Caddo proper, occupied the great bend of the
Red River in northeastern Texas and southwestern Arkansas. In 1687
when visited by Europeans there were four tribes in this confederacy.
The third group was known as the Natchitoches, their location being

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the vicinity of the modern namesake town, Natchitoches, Louisiana.
Between the Natchitoches and the Kadohadacho was an independent
tribe, the Yatasi, which split in the early historic period, one segment
joining the Natchitoches, the other the Kadohadacho. Other independent Caddo tribes were the Adai, above the Natchitoches on the Red
River, and the Eyeish (or Hais) near the present town of San Augustine, T exas (Map 1).
These tribes and confederacies shared a common language, Caddo,
with but minor dialect differences separating them. Despite their linguistic affiliations with Wichita , Pawnee, and others to the north and
west, the Caddo faced east in a cultural sense, sharing a distinctive
cultural tradition with other Indians of the Southeast culture area, and
particularly with the Natchez.
The immediate archeological forerunners of the historic Caddo are
better known than those of other Texas Indians. The Allen Focus is
considered to be the remains of the Hasinai Confederacy, and the Glendora Focus to represent the Kadohadacho Confederacy. Both foci are
part of the more inclusive Fulton Aspect, which may be regarded as
the late prehistoric-early historic archeological remains of the Caddo
( Suhm et al., 1954: 156-157).
Almost all Europeans, when they first encountered the Caddo, were
startled by their appearance and behavior. The Cahinnio (and probably other Kadohadacho ) practiced cranial deformation, and this
custom turns up archeologically in the area (Krieger, 1946: Plate 21 ,
323). They also tattooed and painted their bodies, but the most disquieting aspect of meeting Caddo for the first time was their habit of
shedding copious tears.
The Caddo were expert gardeners who raised an abundance of corn,
beans, squash , sunflower seed, and tobacco. Two varieties of corn were
grown, one an early maturing, the other a late maturing variety, and
five or six varieties of beans were also raised. Both men and women
worked in the gardens, the men doing the heavier tasks. The cultivation of the fields was a communal enterprise. The first garden prepared was that of the highest politico-religious leader, then the next
most important, and so on until the planting and cultivating had been
done for all. Groups of men worked together but apart from similar
groups of women. The planting was done with surprisingly crude tools
considering the excellent results obtained. The principal tool was a hoe,
its blade being fashioned from the scapula of a bison or a piece of wood.
Animals never supplied more than a subsidiary part of the food
supply, and the only domesticated animal was the dog. Deer were prob-

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

ably the most important game animals hunted in early times, although
after the Caddo obtained horses bison were more frequently hunted.
Bears were sought primarily for their fat. Besides these a variety of
small birds, mammals, and fish were eaten. The Caddo environment
also supplied a wide and welcome variety of nuts , fruits, and berries.
In winter months moccasins, leggings, breechclouts, and shirts of
deer skin or buffalo hide were worn. In summer men often stripped
down to the comfortable breechclout. Dress-up clothing was richly
painted and ornamented. Cloth woven from nettles, turkey feathers ,
and the inner bark of mulberries was, as with other Indians of the
Southeast , used for the skirts of the more socially prominent women.
There were many styles of cutting, arranging, and adorning the hair,
perhaps associated with tribal and social distinctions.
The houses of the Caddo were similar to those of their Wichita relatives. Their grass lodges varied considerably in size depending upon
the number of occupants and their position in the social hierarchy.
Some of the Kadohadacho also seem to have plastered their grass houses
with mud, a common custom among Southeasterners. Temples were
like ordinary dwellings, although larger, and in early historic times at
least a few of them were still built on mounds laboriously constructed
by their ancestors.
The Caddo are well known in archeological circles for their varied
and beautifully made pottery. They also manufactured all sorts of reed
and basketry containers and mats whose esthetic qualities equaled if
they did not surpass those of their pottery. The Caddo were also well
known for excellent Osage orange bows, and these were an important
article of export.
Each of the Caddo confederacies was headed by a man titled xinesi
(pronounced "chenesi" or "shenesi"). At least in the Hasinai confederacy this office was hereditary in the male line. Under the xinesi were
caddi, tribal heads, who also attained their posts through inheritance,
and under them was a corps of lesser officials. Much of the power and
authority of a xinesi or a caddi derived from his role as a priest and a
voice of the gods.
The fact that the Caddo were grouped into confederacies of tribes
suggests that these originated as defensive measures. Preparations for
war were ritually elaborate, and in the defense of their homes the
Caddo were as courageous as any people, but the status of warriors and
the role war played was distinctly subsidiary in their culture. They
scalped enemies; captives were normally slain after ingenious torture,
and their bodies ritually eaten.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Like other Southeastern Indians the Caddo believed in an omnipotent heavenly deity. This deity was masculine, but he had a number of important and powerful female relatives. The Caddo also believed that there was a large number of lesser gods and spirits. Some
individuals had supernatural partners or helpers who were acquired
without a guardian spirit quest. The religious practices of the Caddo
centered around their temples and their guardians, the xinesi. These
priest kings kept perpetual fires burning in the temples, and utilized
fictitious boys as oracles and intermediaries between the supernatural
world and the world of man. These boys spoke to the xinesi (in his
own disguised voice) and told him what was expected of his people.
Besides priest kings there were medicine men or shamans. Primarily
devoted to the curing of illness, they also predicted the future course
of events, blessed new houses, named new-born children, and consecrated new crops. Shamans were organized into societies or guilds,
each of which dressed in their own regalia and publicly initiated new
members. Treatment of the sick generally consisted of sucking affected
parts of the body, sweating of patients, and sleight of hand tricks in
which various objects were " extracted" from a patient's body. Each
shaman had his own particular cures, probably differing but slightly
from others of his own shamanistic fraternity.
All in all, the imperfectly known cultures of the Caddo tribes come
to us as efficiently organized, mostly peaceful, productive, barbaric
theocracies.
Atakapa. Between the Caddo and the coast, occupying a stretch of
territory extending from southeastern Louisiana across the Sabine as
far as the Trinity River valley, were the little known Atakapan-speaking Indians (Map 1) . The Coastal Prairies were not as favorable for
native agriculture as Lhose lands farther inland; and at least partly
as a consequence, the Atakapan tribes, while belonging to the Southeast culture area, were peripheral, provincial reflections of the Caddo
grandeur. The Atakapa proper occupied southwestern Louisiana, but
extended across the Sabine in the vicinity of Sabine Lake. The Akokisa
dwelled on the lower Trinity River and probably to the eastward. To
their north in the San Jacinto River Valley lived another A taka pan
people, the Patiri. The Akokisa were allied to the Bidai who lived upstream in the Trinity valley; and north of the Bidai were the Deadose,
apparently a subdivision of the Bidai.
The archeology of this section of Texas is poorly known, but the sites
so far examined indicate that historic as well as prehistoric cultural

29

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

affiliations were with the Southeast culture area. A Galveston Bay
Focus has been defined by Suhm et al. ( 1954: 128-130 ) on the basis of
Wheat's work in the Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1947: 143-145; 1953:
143-252) . This focus is said to stretch along the coast from the Brazos
to the Sabine River, but no historic materials have been found in it,
and the focus seems to extend too far west for a positive affiliatio.:1 with
Atakapan tribes. Campbell ( 195 7: 448-471) has reported on the Caplen site, located on Bolivar Peninsula which juts into Galveston Bay.
Some European objects were found in this midden, but the cultural
affiliations of the materials found here are uncertain.
Most if not all of the Atakapan tribes appear to have been agricultural, and some even to have raised a surplus of maize. The gardens
were solely the concern of the women, and dependence upon game
and wild plant foods was significantly greater than for the Caddo.
Bison, deer, and bear, as well as many smaller mammals and fish, were
shot with bow and arrow or trapped. Considerable use was made of
wild fruits, nuts, roots, and berries.
Little is known of Atakapan dwellings, there being but one reference to bearskin tents among the Bidai (Sjoberg, 1951: 396-397 ) . Besides bows and arrows, spears, sometimes tipped with antler, were
used. Pottery was manufactured as was basketry.
Practically nothing is known about the social and political organization of any Atakapan tribe. The tribes do not seem to have been political units in early times, bands being the largest political groupings.
There was a belief in an omnipotent supernatural power, but other
religious practices and beliefs are unknown.

Conclusion
Unfortunately for the indigenous Texas Indians, their lands lay
on the northern margins of the Spanish Colonial Empire. As a result
they were exposed to the excesses of white man's civilization almost
two centuries earlier than were many tribes in the West. Before the
sixteenth century was over some natives had felt the steel of the Spanish conquistador. By the end of the seventeenth century much of Texas
had become a bone of contention between the Spanish and French to
the detriment of the native peoples. During the eighteenth century
immigrant Indians, particularly the Comanche, contributed heavily
to the downfall of the remaining native tribes. The advent of AngloAmericans early in the nineteenth century and the subsequent birth
of the Republic of Texas foreshadowed the expulsion or extinction of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

all the remaining Texas Indians. As a result, a state which once supported a striking diversity of Indians, has, unlike a majority of our
states, no descendants of its natives within its borders and very few
elsewhere.
Documentary researches, even when they have been relatively
thorough, can never provide a completely satisfactory picture of longextinct Texas tribes. But archeological analysis of late prehistoric and
early historic sites can add to and improve our frequently defective
knowledge of these extinct cultures.
ETHNOGRAPHIC GUIDE TO REFERENCES
Gatherers of the Western Gulf:
Campbell, 1956, 1958
Ga tschet, 1891
Hodge, 1907
M artin, 1936
Newcomb, 1956
Ruecking, 1953, 1954, 1955
Suhm et al., 1954
Nomads of the Plains :
Tonkawa: Hoijer, 1949, 1952
Kelley, 1947
Krieger, 1946
Sjoberg, 1953a
Suhm, 1957
Swanton, 1915, 1940
Lipan Apache: Dennis and Dennis, 1925
Opler, 1940
Sjoberg, 1953b
Comanche: vVall ace and Hoebel, 1952
The Gardeners:
Jumano: Bolton, 1916
Hammond and Rey, 1927, 1929
Kelley, 1949, 1951, 1952, 1955
Kelley et al., 1940
Lehmer, 1948
Sauer, 1934
Scholes and Mera , 1940
Suhm el al., 1954
Wichita: Curtis, 1930
Dorsey, 1904
Harper, 1953a-c
Hodge, 1910
Kroeber, 1939
Schmitt and Schmitt, n. d.

31

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

Caddo: Krieger, 1946
Parsons, 1941
Swanton, 1942
Suhm et al., 1954
Atakapa: Campbell, 1957
Flodge, 1907, 1910
Sjoberg, 1951
Swanton, 1911
Wheat, 1947, 1953

References Cited
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
AA-American Anthropologist
A An-American Antiquity
B-BAE-Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
B-TAPS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
E-TAS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
SJA-Southwestern Journal of Anthropology
TJS-The Texas Journal of Science
Bolton, Fl. E. (editor)
1916. The Espejo Expedition; The Mendoza-Lopez Expedition to the J umanos.
In: Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542- 1706, pp. 161-195, 311340. Original Narratives of Early American Flistory. New York.
Campbell, T. N .
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. E-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1957. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
TJS, Vol. 9, No.4, pp. 448-471.
1958. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. TJS, Vol. 10, No.4, pp. 423-442.
Curtis, Edward S.
1930. The Wichita. In: The North American Indian, Vol. 19, pp. 35- 104.
Dennis, T. S., and Mrs. T. D. Dennis
1925. Life of F . M. Buckelew, the Indian Captive, as Related by Flimself. Bandera, Texas.
Dorsey, G. A.
1904. The Mythology of the Wichita. Washington.
Gatschet, A . S.
1891. The Karankawa Indians, the Coast People of Texas. Archeological and
Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Vol. 1, No. 2.
Hammond, George P., and Agapito Rey
1927. The Rodriguez Expedition to New Mexico, 1581- 1582. N ew M exi co Flistorical Review, Vol. 2, pp. 239-269.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1929. Expedition into New Mexico Made by Antonio de Espejo, 1582--1583, as
Revealed in the Journal of Diego Perez de Luxan. Quivira Society Publications, Vol. 1. Los Angeles.
Harper, Elizabeth Ann
1953a . The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1719- 1768. The
Chronicles of Oklahoma, Vol. 31, No.3, pp. 268-289.
1953b. The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1769-1779. The
Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. 57, No.2, pp. 181-201.
1953c. The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1779-1835. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 23, pp. 1-32.
Hodge, F. W. (editor)
1907. The Narrative of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca. In: Spanish Explorers in
the Southern United States, 1528- 1543. New York.
1907, 1910. Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico. B-BAE, 30, Part 1
( 1907 ) and Part 2 ( 1910 ) .
Hoijer, Harry
1949. Analytical Dictionary of the Tonkawa Language. University of California
Publications in Linguistics, Vol. 5, pp. 1-74.
1952. Tonkawa Indians. In: Walter P. Webb (editor), The Handbook of Texas,
Vol. 2, pp. 788-789. Austin.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.
1949. Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated Structures in Western Texas.
B-TAPS, Vol. 20, pp. 89-114.
1951. A Bravo Valley Aspect Component of the Lower Rio Conchas Valley, Chihuahua, Mexico. A An, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 114-119.
1952. Factors Involved in the Abandonment of Certain Peripheral Southwestern
Settlements. AA, Vol. 54, No.3, pp. 356-387.
1955. Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. AA, Vol. 57, No. 5, pp.
981-995.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits in
the Big Bend Region of Texas. Sul Ross State Teachers College Bulletin,
Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 9- 173.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University
of Texas Publication, No. 4640. Austin.
Kroeber, A. L.
1939. Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 38.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1948. The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. University of Arizona Bulletin, Vol.
19, No.2.

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

33

Martin, George C.
1936. The Indian Tribes of the Mission Nuestra Senora del Refugio. San Antonio.
Newcomb, W . ·vv., Jr.
1956. A Reappraisal of the "Cultural Sink" of Texas. SJA, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp.
145-153.
Opler , M. E.
1940. Myths and Legends of the Lipan Apache Indians. Memoirs of the American Folklore Society, Vol. 36, pp. 1-296.
Parsons, Elsie C.
1941. Notes on the Caddo. Memoirs of the American Anthropological Associa tion, No. 57.
Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
1953. The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico. TJS, Vol. 5, No.4, pp. 470- 489.
1954. Ceremonies of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. TJS, Vol. 6, No.3, pp. 330-339.
1955. The Social Organization of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. T.TS, Vol. 7, No.4. pp. 357-388.
Sauer, Carl
1934. The Distribution of Aboriginal Tribes and Languages in Northwestern
Mexico. !hero-Americana, Vol. 5, pp. 65-74.
Schmitt, Karl, and Iva Osanai Schmitt
n. d. Wichita Kinship Past and Present. Norman
Scholes, France V., and H . P. Mera
1940. Some Aspects of the Jumano Probl em. Carnegie Institution Contributions
to American Anthropology and History, Vol. 6, pp. 265-299.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1951. The Bidai Indians of Southeastern Texas. SJA, Vol. 7, No.4, pp. 391 - 400.
1953a. The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. TJS, Vol. 5, No. 3,
pp. 280-304.
1953b. Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. SJA, Vol. 9, pp. 280- 304.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1957. Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter. TJS, Vol. 9, No.1 , pp. 26-58.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-TAS, Vol. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1911. Indian Tribes of th e Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the
Gulf of Mexico. B-BAE 43.
1915. Linguistic Position of the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. AA, Vol. 17, No.1 , pp. 17-40.
1940. Linguistic Material from the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. B-BAE 127.
1942. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
B-BAE 132.

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Wallace, Ernest, and E. A. Hoebel
195Z. The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. Norman.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1947. Archaeological Survey of the Addicks Basin: A Preliminary Report.
B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 143-145.
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southwest T exas.
In: River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4, The Addicks Dam Site. River Basin
Surveys Papers, Inter-Agency Arch eological Salvage Program. B-BAE
154, pp. 143-Z5Z.

A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology
CLARENCE H. WEBB*

Area
NoRTHEAST TExAs, for the purposes of our discussion , consists of 37
counties which are bounded on the east by the Louisiana line, on the
west by the middle course of the Trinity River, on the north by the
Red River forming the Oklahoma line, and southward to the coastal
plains below Polk and Tyler Counties (Fig. 1) . Archeologically it is
included in the Caddoan Area, with northwestern Louisiana, southwestern Arkansas, and eastern Oklahoma. Geographically, this 4-state
area is fairly uniform. It is pleasant country of rolling hills interspersed with comparatively level prairies. Numerous streams cut across
it, most of them meandering in a southeasterly direction through valleys of varying widths. The Ozark and Arbuckle Mountains of southern Arkansas and Oklahoma afford the only major break in the topography, separating the Arkansas River Valley from the remainder of
the Caddoan province.
This is "the beautiful country" lovingly spoken of by the Caddo, a
country ideally adapted to their farming-hunting-fishing way of life.
The rainfall, 40 to 60 inches annually, resulted in abundant forests
of oak and pine on the hills, hardwoods in the lowlands, willows and
cypress along the streams and in the swampy areas. The rolling
prairie country formed good grasslands. The remnants of Pleistocene
terraces bordering streams, and even the higher hill country, were
reasonably satisfactory for agriculture of the less intensive type as
• Clarence H. Webb, a physician (pediatrics) who lives in Shreveport, Louisiana,
is well known for his contributions to Caddoan area archeology. His investigations
in northwestern Louisiana have made it possible to define several important phases
of culture in the Caddoan area, particularly the Gahagan, Belcher, Bossier, and
Glendora foci. His recent monograph, The Belcher Mound: A St ratified Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana, published by the Society for American Archaeology, is
recognized as an outstanding contribution to North American archeology.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

practiced by these Indians for the growing of Indian corn, beans,
squash, and tobacco in small patches. The fertile river valleys were
more productive but more hazardous because of insects, reptiles, and
periodic overflows. They were used, however, with increasing frequency as population pressures and :improved agricultural methods
developed, hence have numerous late pottery-bearing village sites.

OKLA.

I
I

''
\

''
\
\

,''
•'
'',,...,
I

......

...... ..... _

Fig . 1 . Map of northeastern Texas showing app roximate bounda ries of the Northeast
Texas archeolog ical a rea.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

37

There are six major streams in northeast Texas. ( 1) The Red River
flows along the northern border, is joined by major tributaries from
the Oklahoma side and by local streams from the hill country to the
south. It has a flat flood plain several miles in width. (2 ) The Sulphur
River is formed by tributaries from the high hills of the northern tier
of Texas counties and flows eastward entering the Red in southern
Arkansas. (3) Cypress Creek with several smaller streams forms the
headwaters of Caddo Lake. ( 4 ) The Sabine River cuts obliquely across
the central part of northeast Texas and then forms the southern part
of the Texas-Louisiana boundary line. (5) The Angelina and Neches
Rivers parallel the oblique course of the Sabine, receive tributaries
from the area south of this river , and unite at the southern end of the
area. (6 ) The Trinity River, in its middle course, forms the western
boundary of this area. All of these have valleys which are several miles
in width. although their flood plains tend to be narrow, ranging from 1
to 3 miles ·w ide, before they reach the coastal plains.
The topsoil through much of northeast Texas is sandy, with numerous deposits of red clay. In the central and northern parts, the heavy
iron content of the soil produces a preponderantly red color. A belt of
the famous " black lands" extends southward from Red River County .
Common native rocks are ferruginous sandstones , brown and light
tan sandstones, chert, jasper, hematite, limonite, and petrified woods
(Stephenson , 1950 ) .
Native flora is varied and abundant, especially in the valleys and
swamplands. Nut-bearing trees and shrubs- hickory, walnut, p ecan,
chinquapin (dwarf chestnut ) -and native fruits such as persimmon.
plum, hawthorn , wild grape, crab-apple, mulberry, and blcckberry are
present today and must have been important in the Indian diet from
Archaic to Historic times. Various grasses, bulbs, roots, and barks were
available as food, fiber, or medicinal sources.
The fauna is still abundant. Opossums, moles, shrews, bats, bears,
racoons, civet cats, minks, otters, skunks, foxes, wildcats, squirrels,
gophers, mice, rats, rabbits, deer , and armadillos (in the last 30 years
only ) have been mentioned as the main kinds of animals in this area
(Stephenson, 1950 ). Hunting of bison is recorded in the Historic period, although bison bones are generally missing in village refuse excavations. Migratory waterfowl are especially abundant in the lakes
and swampy areas, and along the major streams. These, as well as
other native and migratory birds, such as pigeons, dove, quail, turkey,
and woodcock, undoubtedly were prized as food by the Indians. Excavations in mound and village sites show that deer, squirrel, rabbit,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

turtle, and fish of various kinds were the chief meats consumed. The
larger varieties of fish, such as catfish, "gaspergou," buffalo-fish and
gar-fish were preferred. Mussels and snails formed secondary food
items and moderate deposits of shells occur in village middens. No
large shell middens comparable to those in coastal areas or the Tennessee River shoals, however, are to be found.

Historic Tribes
The Indians of east Texas are known chiefly through the narratives
of early Spanish and French explorers and from records of the Spanish
missions established among the Hasinai and related tribes. Probably
the first mention is by Cabeza de Vaca ( 1542) , who was marooned
on the Texas coast. He spent a number of years (1528-33 ) among the
coastal tribes and left an excellent description of their customs. Among
inland tribes he mentions the Atayos, probably the Caddoan Adai who
later had villages on each side of the Sabine between Natchitoches and
Nacogdoches. De Soto's expedition under Moscoso traversed northeast Texas in 1542, recrossing it after failing to reach Mexico (Elvas,
1907 ) . Moscoso is thought to have crossed the Angelina River near the
Attoyac junction and to have reached the Trinity River. Tribes mentioned in the Journals are the Nondacao (Anadarko ) , Nasoni,
Nacanish, Aays (Eyeish ), Nacacahoz and Naquiscoca ; the provinces
of Soacatino and Guasco were visited ( Swanton, 1939, 1942, 1946 ).
In 1685 La Salle stayed in an Indian village, probably Hasinai near
Nacogdoches, for a month due to illness. Two years later, after his
murder, seven survivors from his expedit:on, as detailed by J outel
( 1714) and Douay ( 1908 ), traveled from the Hasinai country northeastward to cross the Red River near Texarkana or Fulton, on their
way to the French post on the lower Arkansas River. Joutel mention s
the Cenis (Hasinai ) , Nahoudikhe, Assony (Nasoni ), Natsohsos, Nachitos and Cadodaquio. The last four groups were on the Red River,
probably near its great bend. Joutel's descriptions of the villages,
houses, foods, customs, and ceremonies of the Hasinai are extremely
valuable.
In 1690 the first Spanish mission was established in the Nebedache
village, west of the Neches near Arroyo San Pedro, followed by a second mission for the Neches nearby. These were abandoned in 1693
and reestablished in 1716. By the latter year four other missions had
been founded among the Hasinai: for the Anadarko in southern Rusk

39

NORTHEAST TEXAS

county, the Eyeish on upper Ayish Bayou, the Nacogdoche at the site
of present Nacogdoches, and for the Hainai nearby (Stephenson,
1950 ) . At the same time a mission was established among the Adai, on
the Louisiana side of the Sabine (Fletcher, 1912a ) . It was destroyed
by the French in 1719, but was reestablished with the Presidio de las
Adaes in 1721. The Sabine River was known as Rio de las Adaes
throughout this century. There were Adai in the Mission San Francisco de los Tejas that was established for the Hainai. The Adai were
divided in allegiance between the Spanish and French at a later date,
and the road from Natchitoches to San Antonio, famous as El Camino
Real, passed through their villages.
It seems clear that the southern group of Caddoans, known as Hasinai or Tejas, was well established in this area from earliest contact
times until the 1830's, when many members moved to the Brazos
River, then in 1859 to Oklahoma. They had been joined in 1835 by the
Caddo from Louisiana, after sale of their lands to the United States.
During the late period, Cherokee are reported to have been in this area
between 1828-1839; other groups may also have been here. The Alabama-Coushatta Reservation in Polk County, containing some 250
people, is the only Indian reservation in Texas today ( Stephenson,
1950 ) .
Much less information is available about historic tribes in the northern portion of northeast Texas. The Cadohadacho and allied groups
contacted by Joutel ( 1714) lived on both sides of Red River above the
Big Bend, probably extending into present Texas and Oklahoma. In
later times they moved downstream into Louisiana. Further upstream,
in 1 701 the Kichai were on the Red and southward to the upper Trinity (Fletcher, 1912b) . In 1712 they were at war with the Hainai, who
lived farther down the Trinity. In 1772 the main Kichai village was
east of this river, not far from Palestine. They moved to the Brazos
about 1840 and were placed on the Brazos reservation in 1855 . Shortly
thereafter they joined the Wichita. In the late period the Choctaw
moved westward across Louisiana and were at war intermittently
with the Caddo. By 1820 (Thomas and Swanton, 1912) there were
1200 Choctaws on the Sabine and Neches Rivers. It is likely that other
migrating tribes stopped in east Texas for varying periods.

Archeological Sites
A considerable variety of archeological sites is to be found in east
Texas. The major concentration of village sites can be expected along

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the larger streams and up their tributaries. Junctions of streams are
favorable places. The sites of pottery-making peoples are likely to
occur on the higher ground of natural levees or knolls in the river
valleys, on terraces or spurs of hills which flank or project into valleys
near present streams or older cut-offs, around the shores of lakes, and
along the banks of smaller tributaries. Sites which lie near old cut-off
channels tend to be older than those along present stream courses.
Most of these pottery sites are small, not over 1 to 2 acres in extent.
Major sites, however, are larger, up to 25 or more acres in size. Midden
deposits may be shallow and scattered, but in major sit es dark middens
two to three feet in thickness may occur. A deeper, pre-pottery, level
of Archaic occupation may be revealed by search around areas of wash
at these pottery sites, or by careful excavation.
Mounds (Fig. 2, 3, 4 ) may be more frequent in east Texas than was
once thou ght, although they diminish in number as one leaves the
Red River Valley. Some have been found along all of the major river
systems except the Trinity. They are likely to occur in the overflow
valleys and in connection with village sites, but some are situated on
terraces overlooking the valleys. Most of the east Texas mounds are
single and small, 2 to 10 feet in height and 40 to 100 feet in diameter

Fig. 2 . Mound a t Hatche l site near Texarkana in Bowie County . This is one of the large r
Caddoan mounds, b eing a li1:le over 30 feet high , with a max imum d iameter of 1 95 fee L
Excavations in 1938-39 reve aled that a small fla t-topped mound was built f irst and that
th is was late r covered by a larger flat-topp a d mound . Bo: h mounds belong to the Haley
Focus, G ibson Aspect. Covering the second mound was a th ick mantle of occupational
debris of the Te xa rkana Focu s, Fulton Aspe ct, that yielded ev idence of at least 1 6 house s.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

41

Fig. 3 . Mound at the Jonas Short site, San Augustine County . Th is small, circular,
platform mound is about 1 00 feet in diameter at the base and stands 7 feet high lfor
scale, note the man stand ing on the mound) . When partially excavated in 1956, it was found
to consist of a sandy sub-structure capped w ith a mantle of clay . It contained several
burials , including a cremation at the base of the mound, and several caches of ceremonial
artifacts . The test trench in the fo reground was one of several which were dug to determine
if there was a village area near the mound . No village was found . The cultural affiliation
of the Jonas Short mound has not been determined b ecause as ye t the arche ology of this
part of easlern Texas is imperfe ctly known .

(Fig. 3, 4 ) . Truncated temple mounds like those of the Mississippi
Valley are rare and no massive mounds or large mound groups arranged around a plaza are known. Mound sites of respectable size are
found at the Davis site, Cherokee County (Newell and Krieger, 1949 ) ,
where there were 3 mounds, the largest 250 feet in length and 16 feet
in height; the McDonald Site, Anderson County; Keith Site, Titus
County; T. M . Sanders Site, Lamar County; and the Hatchel Mound,
Bowie County, which was 30 feet in height (Fig. 2, 5) . A ll of the explored mounds of east Texas have been associated with pottery-bearing Caddoan sites, and this is probably true of most of the others. They
may show evidences of structures at varying levels or on the premound surface (Fig. 6) , and burials may or may not be associated

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with them (Fig. 7) . One should be on the lookout for small conical
mounds which may be burial mounds of earlier cultures and may
contain flexed burials or cremations. Such mounds have been found ,
usually situated on terraces overlooking valleys, in northwestern
Louisiana in the Bellevue Focus ( Fulton and Webb, 1953 ) on a Marksville time level.
Slight elevations on village sites may be produced by the accumulated refuse of many years; these are middens, not constructed mounds.
One must also be careful not to interpret as true mounds the outriders
or erosional remnants of surrounding hills which may occur on the
edges of valleys and were sometimes lived on by Indians. Moreover,
the thousands of natural "pimple" mounds which occur throughout
the Ark-La-Tex area must not be confused with aboriginal structures,
even though they were used for substructures occasionally.
Numerous non-pottery sites, often small, are found in the hill areas,
frequently on minor tributaries or " spring branches ." Search should
be made near well-known springs, as small Archaic occupations often
occur nearby. Non-pottery sites also can be found along major streams,
especially on terraces or high knolls. The river flood plains may contain Archaic sites which are buried by silts. Such sites may be exposed
by caving action of present streams, by ditching on farms , by pipeline excavations, by highway or bridge construction, or by any similar activity which removes river valley topsoil.
Caves and rock shelters are infrequent in east T exas, compared with
more rugged areas, but should be watched for and checked for evidences of occupation. The infrequency of caves and rock shelters in the
area makes it imperative that excavations in them should have professional advice or supervision.
Petroglyphs have been reported from only one site, in Henderson
County (Jackson, 1938b ). From this same county, at the Malakoff
site, three large stones carved into semblances of human heads were
found in gravel pits in a terrace on Cedar Creek (Sellards, 1941, 1952).
Skeletal remains of mammoth, horse, sloth, and a number of other
Pleistocene mammals were found in the gravels above the stone heads.
Any site where bones of extinct animals are uncovered should be
searched for tools or projectiles of early man.

Archeological Studies
Organized study of the archeology of east Texas was initiated by
Professor J. E. Pearce, long-time head of the Department of Anthro

NORTHEAST TEXAS

43

pology at the University of Texas. During the 1930's, the Department
sponsored a number of excavations in east Texas under the direction
of A. T. Jackson, and large collections were accumulated. In a series
of articles in the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Jackson described types of pipes ( 1933), pottery ( 1934) ,
ornaments (1935), fire-temples (1936 ), fire evidences in burial rites
( 1938a), tubular pipes and stone tubes ( 1940), pendants and gorgets
(1941 ). He delineated four culture areas of east Texas in the four
river systems-Red, Sulphur, Sabine, and Neches-with corresponding variations in pottery and other artifact types. Goldschmidt ( 1935 )
reported on the archeology of Titus County. He first demonstrated pottery temporal sequence, with two culture complexes in the same area ,
and challenged the concept of consistent pottery or culture association
with river systems.
In the later 30's, extensive excavations of sites in east Texas were
made by W. P. A. crews, supervised by professional archeologists. The
most important of these projects were the Davis Site in Cherokee
County (Fig. 6) and the Hatchel Site (Fig. 2, 5 ) in Bowie County.
Alex D. Krieger (1944, 1946, 1947; Newell and Krieger, 1949 ) made
a comparative analysis on the basis of these controlled excavations and
the available information from other excavated sites, which included
Sanders and Keith mounds in East Texas, Spiro in Oklahoma, Crenshaw in Arkansas, and the Belcher Mound in Louisiana, together with
m:scellaneous collections from the 4-state area. He evolved the classification of Caddoan cultures, based on the McKern system of aspects,
foci, and components, which has been the basis of all subsequent study
in the 4-state area. His publications have clearly delineated the older
Gibson Aspect, of which the Alto, Sanders, Spiro, and Haley Foci are
represented in east Texas. Relationships and possible contacts with the
Southwest, Mesoamerica, the Plains and the Mississippi cultures were
also traced. He gave the basic outline of the later Fulton Aspect cultures, of which Texarkana, Titus, Frankston and Allen Foci are located in east Texas. He also identified in east Texas a few sites of other
Fulton cultures, including Bossier, Belcher, Glendora and McCurtain,
which center in adjoining portions of Louisiana and Oklahoma. An
outline of these cultures, in addition to a review of available information about the Paleo-Indian and Archaic periods in east Texas,
as well as numerous projectile point and pottery types pertinent to
this area, appears in the Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954).
During the past ten years, River Basin Surveys, under direction of

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 4 . A late stage in the excavation of a mound at the Whelan site on Cyp ress Creek in
Marion County . The mound was five fee t high and sixty feel in diame ter, a little larger
than most mounds in this immediate areo . The excovotion techniqu e being used is o modification of " Approoch 131" described in the text . The mound was dug in 10 x 10ft. squares
15 x 5 ft . might have served better, however!, eoch squore being stripped in six-inch
levels . The oppeoronce of the wolls ond floor of eoch squore wos recorded os soon os eoch
six-inch leve l wos cleored . A few thick eorth strips were left stonding as wolls between
e xcavation squares, as shown he re, in order that a cross section of the mound structu re
migh t be observed. In these walls the modern sod, mound fill , ond originol sod line may
be seen . The curved shelf in the foreground represents port of the floor of o circular pole
structure ; the floor wos detected ot the originol sod line underneoth the mound. The re were
no buriols in this mound. The work wos done in 1957 by the University of Texos ond
the Notionol Pork Service. This site has since gone under the woter of the Loke 0 ' The
Pine s.

NORTHEAST T EXAS

45

the Smithsonian Institution and the National Park Service, have
added information on the basis of site surveys and excavations in the
McGee Bend Reservoir (Jasper, Sabine, San Augustine, Angelina, and
Nacogdoches counties); Cooper Reservoir (Delta and Hopkins
counties); T exarkana Reservoir (Bowie, Cass, Titus, and Red River
counties), Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir (Marion, Harrison , Upshur, and
Camp counties ) , Rockland Reservoir (Angelina, Tyler, Polk, and
Trinity counties), and Blackburn Crossing Reservoir (Anderson,
Cherokee, H enderson, and Smith counties ) . Stephenson, Jelks, D avis,
Miller, Moorman, and Johnson have worked in these reservoir areas
at various times.
Numerous amateurs have contributed to the knowledge of the area,
especially the members of th e East Texas Archeological Society in
the middle counties and the Dallas Archeological Society in the northeastern segment. Harris and Crook in Dallas, Hooks in Sulphur
Springs, Miroir in Texarkana, Price in Atlanta , Nicholas in Daingerfield, Hayner in Karnack, Jones in Longview, Turbyfill in Palestine,
Procter and Whiteside in T y ler, and many others, have been active
and helpful in their localities.

Fig . 5 . House outlines a t Hatchel si te nea r Texa rkana. A round house w ith entrance
passag eway intersects an earlier house at left.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Archeological Complexes and Materials in East Texas
It should be understood that many of the material remains of prehistoric Indians in east Texas are imperfectly classified. Complexes or
cultures represented by these materials are only partially ordered, and
many gaps remain to be filled. We have adopted, as a tentative framework, the outline listed in the Handbook ( Suhm, Krieger and Jelks ,
1954).

Paleo-Indian or Paleo-American. This represents occupation from
the earliest times to approximately 3,000 B.C., a period of roving
hunters of big game, u sing lanceolate points. The Malakoff Site, dated
before the end of Pleistocene times by Sellards ( 1941, 1952) and by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) has been mentioned. Unfortunately,
no tools or projectile points were found at this site. Elsewhere there
are scattered finds of lanceolate points, rarely fluted. Most of these
points are of the Scottsbluff, Plainview, Meserve, and Angostura
types; one Eden has been reported recently. In the northern tier of
counties, Scottsbluff points are more numerous than other Paleo types,
judging from the collections of I. B. Price, Jr. , in Atlanta and R. R.
Nicholas in Daingerfield. A similar situation prevails in adjoining
northwestern Louisiana. Further south. Jones (p ersonal communication ) reports for the central 7 counties (Gregg, Harrison, Panola,
Upshur, Rusk, Smith, and Wood) that Meserve, Plainview, and
Scottsbluff are nearly equal in numbers, with Meserve more frequent.
A few fluted points or fluted basal fragments, probably Clovis and
Folsom, occur. In the counties bordering on the Central Texas area,
collections of Turbyfill and others in Palestine (Anderson county)
show the presence of Scottsbluff, Meserve, Plainview, and Angostura
types, in this order of frequency, but no fluted points. \'Vith three
exceptio::1s, these points have been found on the surface of sites where
Archaic points are much more numerous and pottery is often present.
Paleo points are usually scarce, seldom more than 3 from a given site.
Sites such as the Will Lacey Place near Palestine, where larger numbers of Paleo points have been found, should be investigated carefully
for a Paleo occupation level.
Jones (personal communications) reports the finding of Paleo
points in the basal red clay of 4 sites in Gregg County. These sites
were on high terraces overlooking the Sabine at distances up to a mile

NORTHEAST TEXAS

47

from the stream. The sites were covered by 12---15 inches of topsoil
which contained Archaic projectile points. He has also found 9
Meserve points and 3 each of Angostura, Plainview, and Scottsbluff
types at the Grace Creek 1 site (Jones, 1957 ) . Some of these were
found in the red clay level beneath pottery and Archaic zones, others
in graded areas as surface finds . The location of this site in overflow
bottom lands of the Sabine River is unusual for Paleo-Indian material. It covers 6 acres, in comparison with the terrace sites which
are usually 1 to 3 acres in extent. Jones' excavations at the Spencer
site, in Upshur County, yielded 2 Scottsbluff points. They were
found in the lowest level, 16 to 17 inches below the surface, and were
thought to be associated with the Archaic manifestation which underlay the pottery zone.
It is hoped that accurate information may become available about
the Cary Lake Cave site, where 18 to 19 Plainview points, early bison
bones and several hearths are reported to have been found by members
of the East Texas Archeological Society.

Archaic. The first tentative description of this stage was given in
the Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954),
where it is listed as "East Texas Aspect." Since it seems to differ from
the Central Texas Archaic, and bears many resemblances to findings
in the adjoining areas of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma, we propose the name "Red River Aspect," avoiding present geographic limits.
This aspect is estimated to have lasted from perhaps 3000 B.C. to A.D.
500-1000 and is characterized largely by non-pottery sites, most of
which are fairly small, up to 1-4 acres in size. Sometimes the sites
were later occupied by pottery-making people, and the original nature
of the site may be obscured by a veneer of debris containing potsherds.
The Handbook quotes amateur collectors to the effect that they find
more sites without pottery than with it. However, surveys show considerable variation. In the Cooper Reservoir survey, Delta and Hopkins
counties, 12 of the 24 sites were non-pottery (Moorman and Jelks,
1952) . In Gregg County, Jones (personal communication) has found
20 non-pottery sites and 80 containing pottery. In the McGee Bend
Reservoir, in the southern part of northeast Texas, only 8 definite and
6 possible non-pottery sites were found in a total of 80 sites (Stephenson, 195 0) . Limitation of most reservoir surveys to the expected
flooded areas increases the percentage of pottery sites, which are near
the streams. Davis, for example, reports (personal communication)

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

very few non-pottery and numerous Fulton Aspect pottery sites in the
Cypress Creek Valley, but states that there are a number of Archaic
sites on the uplands outside of the valley survey.
Artifacts found on these Archaic sites include projectile points, of
which Gary, Ellis, Yarbrough, Kent , and Wells types seem to be most
frequent. However, many other types listed in the Handbook are
found. There are also pitted stones ; hammerstones; hand-size manos;
milling stones with shallow oval basins; full-grooved axes of sandstone, quartzite, or hematite; fist-axes; drills; large and small end
scrapers; end scrapers made by reworking projectile points ("bunts" ) ;
small side scrapers. Compared with the southeastern and eastern
United States, polished objects are rare, only a few bannerstones,
boatstones, beads, and stone tubes having been described.
Apparently the northeast Texas Archaic overlaps the terminal
Paleo-Indian period, since so many reports indicate the presence of
lanceolate projectile points in predominantly Archaic sites. This situation may account for the number of Archaic types described in the
Handbook which have carried over the traits of basal concavity and
smoothing of bases or stems. This Paleo-Archaic overlap may also
explain why types like Meserve and San Patrice (Webb, 1946) are
not infrequent in the Archaic of northeast Texas and northwest
Louisiana.
At the recent end of the Archaic, small projectile (arrow) points
appear in some sites before pottery times. Jones (personal communication) has noted that these are more likely to be found at small sites
situated on low terraces or "rises" near small tributaries, rather than
on higher terraces.
Much work needs to be done on the Archaic period in this area in
order to distinguish cultural changes, variations in the different parts
of northeast Texas, and relationships to the antecedent Paleo-Indian
and subsequent pottery-making periods. It is likely that cultural
changes will become evident, such as those described from north
central Texas in the Carrollton and Elam Foci (Crook and Harris,
1952). The earlier Carrollton Focus contains larger projectile points
and scraping tools made of materials brought from some distance. The
later Elam Focus has smaller artifacts, often made of local materials,
which were more difficult to work and resulted in crude objects.

Neo-American Stage. This stage relates to the pottery-making,
sometimes mound-building, agricultural peoples, generally believed to
be prehistoric Caddo Indians of northeast Texas. They replaced the

NORTHEAST TEXAS

49

Archaic peoples somewhere between A.D. 500 and 1000, absorbing in
the process much of the Archaic culture and many of the Archaic
artifact types.
A possible exception, and a possible ceramic island in the Archaic
sea, is represented by the makers of sand-tempered pottery in the
southern portions of the area. Jelks (personal communication) reports
sand-tempered wares with Woodland conoidal-base shapes, in the
McGee Bend area, similar to the Goose Creek series. More significant
is the Jonas Short Mound in San Augustine County (Fig. 3 ), where
sherds of this type were associated with Adena-like objects-a reelshaped copper gorget, copper bracelets, quartz crystal pendants, boatstones, elk-teeth necklaces and large stemmed blades.
Non-Caddoan pottery (Marksville and Coles Creek types from the
central Louisiana area ) has been found in small amounts at the Davis
site in Cherokee County and at several sites around Caddo Lake in
Harrison County. The status of these as trade sherds is not established.
Several Coles Creek sherds are illustrated by Jones ( 195 7, Fig. 51,
G, H, N , Q) from the Grace Creek site near Longview. Search should
be made for Marksville or Bellevue Focus sites in those parts of northeast Texas which border on Louisiana. Trade sherds from the Louisiana sequence of cultures should be watched for. The pottery types
which characterize these Louisiana cultures are described in publications of Ford ( 1951 ), Ford and Willey ( 1940 ) , and Quimby ( 1951 ).
Krieger has separated the earlier Caddoan cultures, called Gibson
Aspect, and the later, called Fulton Aspect. In northeast Texas, the
Gibson Aspect is represented by the following.
(1) The Alto Focus is well established in the southern counties.
Additionally the Handbook lists the Keith and Hale sites in Titus
County and Hayner reports one Alto site on Caddo Lake. Jones ( 195 7)
also describes the pottery level at the Grace Creek sites, Gregg County.
as almost exclusively Alto, hence this focus seems to be widespread.
Such mound sites as Davis, McDonald, Keith, and Hale are large, but
in some areas smaller village sites have been identified. It is reasonable
to expect that the large ceremonial centers would have smaller satellite villages to support them. There is increasing evidence of this
arrangement throughout the Caddoan area.
(2.) Sanders Focus is represented by the T. M. Sanders site in
Lamar County, components at the Yarbrough and Joslin sites in Van
Zandt County, and smaller sites in Lamar, Fannin, Wood, and Hopkins counties ( Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954). Jones (personal communication ) reports Sanders sites in Upshur County. Krieger's (1946 )

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

preliminary description of Sanders Focu s should be rounded out by
studies of other sites, in order to clarify Sanders Focus content, origins,
and effects on later cultures. For example, it would be desirable to
know whether other sites exhibit the combination of Plains traits
(bison huntin g, bison scapula hoes, 4-edged beveled knives, stone

Fig . 6 . Ten overlapping round house outlines at the Davis site, an Alto Focus site in
Chero !<ee County . A portion of the flat-lopped mound may be seen at upper left. Detailed
stratigraphic study showed that these houses were built before the mound was constructed.

Fig . 7 . Mu lti ple burial at th e Sanders site , type site of the Sanders Focus . Thi s burial conta ined we ll-pr2se rve d

s ~< ele t ons

of six indiv iduals . Th a poll ery ve sse ls a re clustered at the

head end of the g rave. In Tex a s mu li iple burial s li ke th is ore to be expec ted in G ib son Aspe ct
s ites , bu l no t in the late r f u lton Aspect.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

elbow pipes ) , Caddoan traits, and southern cult objects described for
the Sanders site.
( 3) Haley Focus is found in the northeast corner along Red River,
specifically in the lower levels of the Hatchel Mound. Other Haley
sites or deeper Haley components of later pottery sites should be found
in this area.
( 4 ) Suhm, Krieger and Jelks ( 1954) list the Jaggers Site in Franklin
County and the Mustang Creek Mound in Red River County as Spiro
in affiliation , without Sanders pottery.
Careful checking of sites in the northern tier of counties should be
made to clarify (a ) similarities and differences of Sanders and Spiro
cultures, (b ) a comparison of their manifestations in Texas and
Oklahoma, and (c ) transitions to later cultures like those of Titus,
McCurtain, Texarkana, and Wylie foci.
Space does not permit a review of traits found in the several Gibson
Aspect Foci. The interested reader must be referred to the publications
of Krieger ( 1946 ) . Newell and Krieger ( 1949 ), Suhm, Krieger and
Jelks ( 1954), and the Oklahoma group-Orr ( 1946, 1952), Bell
(1953 ), Bell and Baerreis ( 1951 ) . A few notable characteristics of
this general period compared with the later Fulton Aspect, are:
( 1)
(2)
(3)
(4 )
( 5)
(6 )
( 7)
(8 )
(9)
( 10)
( 11 )
( 12)
( 13 )
( 14)

tendency to larger sites,
mounds more often present and larger,
ceremonial burials often in large or deep pits,
richer ornamentation,
" Cult" material, especially engraved shell gorgets and cups,
stone and other ear ornaments, often copper-plated,
white Catahoula sandstone hones,
long and spatulate celts, often of greenstone,
large projectile points of late Archaic types,
small projectile points with expanded or rectangular stems,
long-stemmed pottery pipes,
stone effigy or T-shaped pipes,
fine line engraving· on pottery,
domestic wares, tending to be thick and decor a ted with incising and
punctating rather than brushing,
( 15) tapered spout bottles.

The predominant Fulton Aspect or later Caddoan cultures of northeast Texas are:
( 1) Frankston Focus in the southern counties (especially Cherokee, Anderson, Henderson, VanZandt, Smith, Harrison, and southward to Na cogdoch es, Angelina, and San Augustine in the McGee Bend area) .

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(2) Titus Focus, centering in Titus, Camp, Upshur, Morris, and Franklin Counties, extending westward to Wood and Hopkins, southeast to
Marion and the northern portions of Harrison and Gregg Counties.
(3 ) Texarkana Focus sites are known in the northeast corner, in Red
River, Bowie, and Cass Counties, with the type site at the Hatchel Mound
in Bowie County. Davis (personal communication) reports some overlap
with Titus Focus sites on Cypress Creek above Caddo Lake in Marion, Harrison, Upshur, and Camp Counties. There is evidence of a hybridization of
these two cultures, also found by Jelks a long the Sulphur River.
( 4 ) Sites of the McCurtain Focus, which centers in southeastern Oklahoma, are reported in Red River and possibly in Bowie and Lamar Counties
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954 ).
(5) Belcher Focus (which centers along Red River in southern Arkansas
and extends into Louisiana) sites or materials are found in Texas in Harrison County and possibly in other fringe counties.
( 6 ) Bossier Focus projects into East Texas from its widespread manifestation in north Louisiana (Webb, 1948). It is found around Caddo Lake
in Harrison and Marion Counties, southward in the border counties of
Panola, Shelby, and Sabine, and into the McGee Bend Reservoir area of
San Augustine, Angelina, and Nacogdoches Counties. It overlaps Frankston Focus in the McGee Bend Area.
An example of the kind of work which needs to be done throughout
east Texas is Jelks' present study in the McGee Bend Area . H ere one or
more new foci may be developed related t o, but differing from, Alto, Bossier, and Frankston. Also noteworthy is the possibility of a n ew focus along
the Sabine River in Panola, Rusk, Smith, and Gregg counties, where

Fig. 8. Texarkana Focus burial at the Mitchell sile near Texarkana . Extended burials
with pottery vessels, ornaments, and other artifacts are common in the Caddoan area .

In this picture the vessels are shown placed along one side of the grave . Associated with
the ankle region are fragmen~s of several to rt oise shell rattles. A group of arrowpo !nts

may be

"e~n

at the left shoulder.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

53

Whiteside and Jones are finding sites with pottery which seem to represent a transition from late Alto to something resembling Bossier, but
showing sufficient differen ces to suggest a new focu s. These sites lie in the
zone between the Frankston and Titus Focus sites.
(7) The Allen Focus is represented by late sites, showing European trade
materials, probably representing the H asinai Caddoan group.
(8) The t enta tive Little River Focus is represented by several sites in the
northeastern corn er of the state-Womack site in Lamar County, Hunt
and Clements sites in Cass County, and Kaufman site in Red River County
-and probably relates to the Red River Kadohad acho and allied tribes.
The n am e Little River Focus was suggested for this group of sites by Williams ( 1958 ) . Much work needs to b e done to relate these sites to hi storic
tribes, or to find archeological sites at documented hi storic locations.
Descriptions of the Fulton Aspec t foci discu ssed above are to b e
found in the Handbook (Suhm , Krieger, and J elks, 1954) and the
publications of Krieger ( 1946 ), Bell and Baerreis ( 195 1), Dickinson
(1941), Webb (1945, 1948, 1959 ), and Webb and Dodd (1941).

Suggestions for Future Studies in East Texas
Some of the current problems in this nrcn have been mentioned or
intimated, but it may b e of value to assemble them and pose other
questions which seem important in clarifyi ng the prehistory of East
Texas.
A. Paleo-Indian :
( 1) Studies of distribution of Paleo-Indian projectile points.
(2) Identification of P aleo-Indian campsites or slau ghter sites, with
identification of tools other than proj ectile points.
(3 ) Does the occurrence of Paleo points on so man y Archaic sites indica te a late survival of P aleo in this area, an early origin of Archaic, or an
expected normal transition ?
( 4 ) Do M eserve and San Patrice types represent la te survivals of P al eoIndian techniques? What is their distributional and associational sta tus?
B. Archaic:
(1) Excavations and reports of Archaic sites are b adly needed.
(2) The tentative trai t list of "East T exa s Arch aic"-the Red River
Aspect of the present p aper-published in the Handbook (Suhm et al.,
1954) n eeds confirmation or corr ection.
(3) How does thi s Archaic relate to (a) Eastern Archaic, (b ) Central
Texas Archaic?

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

( 4 ) Since proj ectile point typ es afford the major indica tors for comparative studies in this period, just as pottery types do for the l a ter cultures, the
tentative typology publish ed in the Handbook should be worked over and
agree m ent r eached about the m a jor types; distributional studies would
then be more valuable. Studies of ch a nges in proj ectile point sizes among
the m a jor types, as w ell as sources of material from which they were
m a de, might be fruitful in view of findings elsewher e. Sear ch should be
m a de for local quarries.
(5 ) Since it appears tha t the Arch aic period m ay have l asted until
A .D . 1000 or later in east T exas, C-1 4 datings from late Archaic sites or
Arch a ic l evels of potter y sites, should be secured.
( 6 ) Did Archaic p eoples in east T exas acqui re agricultu re, pottery,
and a llied traits by diffusion and trade, or did p eoples m ove into this area
br inging these traits and displacing or absorbing the Arch ai c hunter s and
gath er er s?
C. Neo-American:

( 1 ) Is there an undiscovered Woodland horizon in east T exa s prior to
ea rly Caddoan? Search for sm all sites of Adena, Hopew ell, M arksville, or
Bellevue cultures is indica ted.
( Z) I s the sand-tempered potter y of east T exas rel a ted to tha t found in
Alaba m a, Florida, and T ch efun cte of the Louisiana coast, and ther efor e
ea rly ; or is it rel at ed to the presumably late sand-temper ed ware of
the T exa s coa st ?
(3 ) Bone tempering centers in east and central T exas; wha t are the
temporal and geogra phic ran ges?
(4 ) Knowledge of Alto Focu s should be expanded to include its burial
complex and small village p atterns.
( 5 ) Ca ddoan origins a re still a n intriguing topic for conj ecture. Alto in
east T exas, Gahagan in Louisiana, and early Spiro in Okla homa r epresent
the earliest known Caddoan manifestations. Yet Alto and the closely
rel ated Gahagan Foci ar e w ell developed cultures as presently known.
Where a re their anteced ents? Tf th ey developed out of loca l cultures, the
tran sitions should be discover able. If they resulted from an influx of n ew
p eople with full y develop ed culture, their sources must be sought:
( a ) Did those traits a nd i nfluen ces which are admittedly M esoam erican
enter the Caddoan Area through east T exa s along the Gilmore Corridor or
directly up from the T exas coa st ?
( b ) Did they and other traits enter via the Mississippi-Red River
cou rses? Sears consider s ea st T exas Caddo to be a p art of the Gulf Coast
tra dition and Ford sees much of the Caddoan developm ent a s derived
fr om th e central Louisiana culture sequen ce in its l a t er ( Pla quemine)
stages, with certain pottery t raits sw eeping westward from the Florida
w est coast through Louisian a into the Caddoan a r ea . Other s (including the
author of this section ) see eviden ces of p arallel cultura l developments in

NORTHEAST TEXAS

55

the lower Mississippi and the Caddoan areas in post-Marksville times,
which would equate early Caddo with Troyville-Coles Creek culture. W e
think that traits and influences moved in both directions. Krieger suggests
an even earlier time for Caddoan origins, coeval with Marksville at
A.D . 500-800. These chronological problems will only be answered by
more information about internal developments, trade and trait r elationships, and more C-14 datings or other time markers.
( c) Close ties are also in evidence between the Caddoan and Mississippian cultures. Extensive research is needed to establish the nature and priority of exchanges between these areas.
( 6 ) Internal development of Caddoan cultures in east Texas needs
closer scrutiny and further research:
(a ) Sanders and Haley foci are thought to be later than Alto; furth er
evidences are needed to establish this. Did Sanders Focus develop from a
fusion of Spiro (or Alto) with a Plains culture? Are there other marginal
foci with a mixture of Caddoan and Plains traits?
(b) Phases of transition from late Gibson (Sanders, Haley, late Spiro )
to Fulton (Titus, McCurtain, Texarkana, Wylie ) should be sought in the
northern part of east Texas.
( c) Is there a transitional period or focus interposed between Alto and
Frankston foci in lower east Texas?
(d) How nearly are the Spiro-like sites in east Texas (Jaggers site in
Franklin County, Mustang Creek in Red River County) identified with
Spiro in Oklahoma; what is their cultural and temporal relationship with
Sanders Focus?
(e ) Historic Caddoan sites should be located. These and unattached sites
which show European trade goods should be related to antecedent protohistoric cultures if possible.
( 7 ) There are numerous evidences of a strong tradition of overland
travel and trade throughout the Caddoan area and at all time levels.
This could have a bearing on Caddoan origins as well as the four-state
distribution of Caddoan cultures. Studies of site locations, trait distributions, and sources of trade objects might be made with the objective of
comparing overland versus riverine migration and travel.

Exploration and Excavation Problems in
Northeast Texas
Suggestions concerning location of sites in northeast Texas have
been mentioned in prior portions of this section. The archeology of
east Texas, however, differs in many respects from other parts of the
state, since it shares with the remainder of the Caddoan area the
manifestations of organized agricultural village life, mound construe-

s6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tion, and ceremonial customs more closely related to southeastern
archeology. Some details of village and mound study may therefore
be appropriate. In searching for sites of the pottery-making peoples,
relationship to adequate water supply and waterways for travel must
be kept in mind. Aerial photography is occasionally of help, especially
in the cultivated river valleys. Location of former river channels and
relating of sites to these channels (especially on old natural levees )
may be accomplished with these photographs more readily than from
topographical maps. Maps are of considerable value in checking
higher terrace country and forested areas where photographs are of
little help. Occas:.onally village features may be recognized by study
of aerial photographs with a good magnifying glass and in a few
instances we have located the sites of levelled mounds. County agricultural offices are good sources for these photos.
Certain features of village construction may be located best under
particular circumstances of season and weather, especially in plowed
fields. Everyone knows that artifacts may be found more readily after
plowing and a good rain. Habitation areas and house circles may at
times be recognized during the late winter and early spring, before
they are obscured by crops. Dark soil coloration usually means heavy
midden debris; potsherds, animal bones, and shell often mark these
areas. Heavy ash accumulations and fire-hardened soil may indicate
the centers of house circles. Caddoans usually had their firebeds in
the center of structures, and burning in the same area for long periods
resulted in heavy ash deposits. If this combination is found, careful
trenching or stripping may demonstrate an outline of post molds and
enable the house structure to be determined. Archeology of this area
would profit from more knowledge of house patterns, especially those
on village sites as contrasted with ceremonial structures on mounds.
Fired clay daub, which bears impressions of grass or poles, and "dirtdauber" nests may also mark the ruins of a house structure.
Digging in a village site should be done in an organized way, by
controlled trenches wide enough ( 5 ft. ) to give a good indication of
structures, refuse pits, post molds and other features. Haphazard
digging in the hopes of finding burials or pottery is destructive and
yields a minimum of information. Unless one is willing to devote
enough time to properly study a village site by trenching, he should
limit himself to surface collecting. Controlled trenching, studying and
diagramming the side walls as well as the advancing face of the cut,
and saving materials by zones, will give a maximum of informationand artifacts-in the long run. If soil coloration indicates definite

NORTHEAST TEXAS

57

zoning, it may be preferable to work by zones (i.e., surface and plowdisturbed soil, darker top zone, lighter sand, basal clay ) rather than by
depth in inches. Caddoan houses seldom had posts placed further apart
than 2 feet, hence a five foot trench which cuts across a house pattern
will show at least 2 or 3 post molds. These usually are about 2 feet in
depth, 4 to 10 inches in diameter, and may have looser or darker soil
filling them. Often a few sherds may be in the bottom of the post
mold, possibly a Caddoan ceremonial custom. If a house structure is
suspected, the trench should be carried to either side and the entire
pattern of molds demonstrated. Post molds can generally be differentiated from refuse pits because the pits are usually larger, narrowing
toward the bottom. Rodent burrows and tree roots or stump holes may
also be confusing, but a check of direction, size, and content will
usually clear the question.
Trenches should be dug down to undisturbed soil, especially to the
basal clay if this lies at a depth not exceeding 2 to 4 feet from the
surface. Sands below the pottery zone should be examined for
Archaic artifacts, and the basal clay surface should be checked for
Paleo-Indian artifacts. Many Caddoan villages had the custom of
placing burials below the habitation zone. Burial pits are at times
difficult to recognize in the dark sand-humus layer, but a trench
carried to basal clay will pick up the burials or burial pits intersecting
the clay.
Since many sites in this area cover more than one culture periodArchaic, early pottery and late pottery-a careful check should be
made of the kinds of artifacts, evidences of middens, house patterns,
etc., in various parts of the site. Do not forget to check the margins of
the site. Even in a small village, different kinds 'of artifacts may be
found in different areas. One may find pottery sherds, projectile
points, animal bones, or scrapers concentrated in one area, with
hammerstones, flakes, and rejects indicating a knapping area elsewhere. Larger and heavier objects such as pitted stones, grinding
stones or manos may be well away from the areas of denser occupation
debris. Remember also that larger stone objects struck during cultivation in recent years may be carried or thrown by the farmer into
gullies or fence rows or down stream banks.
Constructed mounds in the Caddoan area are likely to be (a) small,
rounded burial mounds, (b ) small (single house ) or large (multiple
house ) substructures on which houses or temples were placed, or
(c) combined mounds used for edifice substructures and also for
burials. Ceremonial burial mounds occur in the "Woodland" period

ss

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of Marksville and Bellevue in Louisiana and one of Adena-like context
has been found in east Texas. These are simple mounds heaped over
one or more burials, usually flexed or cremated, which may be on the
submound surface or on a small primary platform. Mounds in the
Gibson (early Caddoan ) period often were completed, then burial pits
were sunk from the surface to vary~ng depths, very often to submound levels. Sometimes, as in the Woodland period, a burial of one
or more individuals was placed on the original surface and the mound
built over these, then other pits sunk from the surface. Temple or
house substructure mounds may be just large enough for a single
temple, the house being 20 to 40 feet in diameter, the mound 50 to 75
feet. If this kind of mound is more than 5 to 6 feet in height, there may
be two or more house platforms at varying heights within the mound,
and sometimes a house floor is found on the original surface. The
Caddo frequently destroyed a house (often they burned it ) , built the
mound higher, levelled it, and then constructed another house. Very
large mounds, as at the Davis site, sometimes had more than one
structure on a single level.
Combined house and burial mounds probably were ceremonial
temple mounds originally. Later, burials of important people were
made in pits dug through the temple floors, or less often in pits outside
the temple. Occasionally it seemed that death occurred while the
mound was under construction and the body was incorporated in a
shallow pit, or without pit, in the mound fill . In the Belcher Mound,
houses were burned and covered over with a foot or two of dirt.
Burial pits were then dug through the debris, filled, and the mound
was levelled for a new house or temple.
With this multiplicity of mound purposes and expected findings,
mound excavation should be done carefully, slowly, and as a major
cooperative project. Unfortunately, many mounds have been " pitted"
with holes sunk from the top. This method is seldom productive of
artifacts and always destructive of important information.
Proper excavation of a mound includes clearing of its surface,
measurement of its size in all dimensions, relating it to the village
and natural topography, surveying and staking, then organized digging. Three approaches are possible. ( 1) If complete removal is
planned, trenches are cut from the village across the edge of the
mound to sub-mound levels, successively slicing across the mound as
one slices a loaf of bread. (2 ) To test a mound, one may carry a
5- to 10-foot trench from the village toward the mound center, watching
for levels or feature s, then enlarging the cut if more extensive excava-

NORTHEAST TEXAS

59

tion is desired. ( 3 ) Combined slicing and peeling (see Fig. 4 ), using
method 1 or Z to establish levels of habitation, if these exist, then peeling from the top down to each successive level to expose it completely.
Method 1 has the advantage of giving good profiles; Method 3, the advantage of exposing a house or temple floor at one time, for measurements and photography. In my experience method 3 has been the
preferable one for temple or house mounds, with or without burials.
It also eliminates danger of slumping or cave-in, always possible with
the trenching method. To avoid this danger, narrow trenches should
not be carried into a mound nor high vertical walls cut. The slices of
method 1 can be stair-stepped, with a vertical bank never more than
5 feet in height. Undercutting or tunneling should be strictly avoided
and care must especially be taken if the mound is waterlogged by
heavy rains or is composed of very dry sand. Dirt coloration and
features can always be seen better if the mound fill is just moist; and
at times, especially in very dry weather, troweling is assisted by
dampening the soil.
The floors and side walls of trenches and slices across a mound must
be cleared and shaved with trowel or square-blade shovel in order to
see soil color differences which indicate levels or features. These
should be marked or recorded and photographed while still moist, as
drying obliterates many of the color differences.
As one peels a mound by habitation layers, walls or pillars which
include the survey stakes should be maintained from one horizontal
level to the next, to keep control on the survey and to establish profiles.
As lower habitation levels are cleared, and if desired for photography,
the walls or pillars may be removed after vertical measurements are
taken, transferring the survey stakes to the lower cleared floor.
If burial pit fills are recognized in the upper levels, they should be
plotted, but patience should be exerted to work out the burials only
when the general mound stripping reaches them; otherwise, mound
structures and details may be damaged. Moreover, burials can never
be cleared, measured, and photographed as well in a pit as they can
when the surrounding mound fill is removed to, or just below, the
burial level.
Needless to say, careful recording, measurements, scale diagrams,
photographs and preserving of all features and artifacts should be
observed, as in all excavations. Only then does the amateur reach the
level of responsibility which entitles him to self-respect and the respect
of his professional colleagues.

6o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

References Cited
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
A An- American Antiquity
B-BAE- Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
B-OAS- Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society
B-TAPS- Bulletin of the T exas Arch eological and Paleontologi cal Society
E-TAS- Bulletin of the T exas Arch eological Society
UTP-The University of T exas Publications
Bell, Robert E.
1953. Pottery Vessels from the Spiro Mound, Cr-1, Leflore County, Oklahoma.
B-OAS, Vol. 1, pp. 25-38.
Bell, Robert E., and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Arch aeology. B-TAPS, Vol. 22, pp. 7-100.
Cabeza de Va ca, Alvar Nunez
1542. Relacion (translation by Buckingham Smith) . In : Frederick W. Hodge,
editor, Spanish Explorers in the Southern United States. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, 1907.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr. , and R. K. Harris
1952. T rinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
B-TAPS. Vol. 23. pp. 7-38.
Dickinson, S. D.
1941. Certain Vessels from the Clements Place, An Historic Caddo Site. B-TAPS,
Vol. 13, pp. 117- 132.
Douay, Father
1908. Narrative of La Salle's Attempt to Ascend the Mississippi in 1687. Edited
by I. J. Cox. N ew York.
Elvas, The Gentleman of
1907. InT. H. Lewis (editor ), The Narrative of the Expedition of H ernando de
Soto. In: Spanish Explorers in the Southern United States. Charles Scribn er's Sons. New York.
Fletcher, Alice C.
1912a. Adai. In: Frederick V\T. Hodge (editor), Handbook of American Indians
North of Mexico. B-BAE, 30, P art 1. pp. 12.--13.
1912b. Kichai. In: Frederick W. Hodge (editor ) . Handbook of American Indians
North of M exico. B-BAE, 30. Part 1, pp. 682-683.
Ford, James A.
1951. Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site in A voyelles Parish,
Louisiana. Anthropologi cal Papers of the Am erica n Muse um of Natural
History, Vol. 44, Part 1.
Ford , James A., and Gordon R. Willey
1940. Crooks Site, A Marksville Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish. Loui siana . Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Study No. 3.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

61

Fulton, Robert L., and C. H. \iVebb
1953. The Bellevue Mound: A Pre-Caddoan Site. Bossier Parish, Louisiann .
B-TAPS, Vol. 24, pp. 18-42.
Goldschmidt, Walter R.
1935. A Report on the Archeology of Titus County m East Texas. B-TAPS,
Vol. 7, pp. 89- 99.
Jackson, A. T.
1933. Some Pipes of East Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 5, pp. 69- 86.
1934. Types of East Texas Pottery. B-TAPS, Vol. 6, pp. 38-57.
1935. Ornaments of East Texas Indians. B-TAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 11 -28.
1936. A "Perpetual Fire" Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 8, pp. 134-173.
1938a. Fire in East Texas Burial Rites. B-TAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 77- 11 3.
1938b. Picture Writing of the Texas Indians. UTP, No. 3809.
1940. Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 99-137.
1941. Pendants and Their Uses. B-TAPS, Vol. 13, pp. 9-45.
Jones, Buddy C.
1957. The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas. B-TAS. Vol. 28, pp. 198- 231.
Joutel, Henri
1714. Journal of La Salle's Last Voyage, 1684--1687. Reprinted by: H. R. Stiles,
1906. Joseph McDonough, Albany, New York.
Krieger, Alex D.
1944. Archeological Horizons in the Caddo Area. In: El Norte de Mexico y el
Sur de Estados Unidos. Tercera Reunion de Mesa Redonda de Ia Sociedad
Mexicana de Antropologia, pp. 154--156. Mexico, D. F.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern T exas. UTP, No. 4640.
1947. The Eastward Extension of Puebloan Datings Toward Cultures of the
Mississippi Valley. A An, Vol. 12, No.3, pp. 141-148.
Moorman, Edward H., and Edward B. J elks
1952. Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of the Cooper Reservoir, Delta
and Hopkins Counties, Texas . River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C. Mimeographed.
Newell, H. P erry, and Alex D . Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archaeology_ No. 5.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1946. The Archeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma : A Preliminary Report.
A An, Vol. 11. No. 4, pp. 228- 256 .
1952. Survey of Caddoan Archeology. In: James B. Griffin (editor ), Archeology
of Eastern United States. pp. 239- 255 . University of Chicago Press.
Quimby, George I.
1951. The Medora Site, West Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. Anthropologi cal
Series, Field Museum of Natural History, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 79- 135.
Sellards, E. H.
1941. Stone Images from H enderson County, Texas. A An _ Vol. 7, No. 1, pp.
29-38.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of T exas Press.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stephenson, Robert L.
1950. Archeologi cal Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir, Jasper, Sabine, San
Augustine, Angelina, and Nacogdoches Counties, Texas. A Preliminary
Report. River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.
Mimeographed.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-TAS, Vol. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1939. Final Report of the United States D e Soto Expedition Commission. 76th
Congress, 1st Session, House Document No. 71. Washington.
1942. Source M ate rial on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
B-BAE, 132.
1946. The Indians of the Southeastern United States. B-BAE, 137.
Thomas, Cyrus, and John R. Swanton
1912. Choctaw. In: Frederick W. Hodge (editor), Handbook of American Indians
North of M exico. B-BAE, 30, Part 1, p. 288.
Webb, Clarence H.
1945. A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana. B-TAPS, Vol.
16, pp. 52---83.
1946. Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts from Northwest Louisiana. B-TAPS, Vol. 17, pp. 9-17.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory : The Bossier Focus. B-TAPS, Vol. 19, pp. 100-147.
1959. The Belcher Mound: A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 16.
Webb, Claren ce H., and Monroe E. Dodd, Jr.
1941. Pottery Types from the Belcher Mound Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 13, pp. 88-116.
Williams, Stephen
1958. A Proposal for the Revision of Terminology of the Historic Phases (Foci )
in the Caddoan Area. Paper presented at the Caddoan Conference, Norman,
Oklahoma.

A Review of Central Texas Archeology
DEE ANN SUHM*

Introduction
AREA

As AN archeological unit, central Texas may be defined generally as
embracing the middle stretches of the Colorado and Brazos rivers and
their tributaries. More specifically, it is customarily extended westward to include Tom Green and Edwards counties, northward to a
line reaching from Jones to Kaufman counties, eastward to the middle
Trinity River, and southward to approximately the central section of
the Gulf Coastal Plain (Fig. 1). Actually, precise boundaries have
not been established and one can anticipate that they will always
remain somewhat fuzzy. To be sure, additional excavations and
distributional studies will refine the present archeological definition of
central Texas, but boundary lines fluctuate through time and, more
importantly, it is difficult, even under the most ideal conditions, to
sharply distinguish one culture area from another.
Physiographically, the central Texas region is diverse, ranging
from fairly rugged landscapes to flat plains. The uplifted Edwards
Plateau, occupying the bulk of the area, is by far the most striking
geographic feature. The plateau rises abruptly above the coastal plains
to the south and southeast, but merges more gradually into the Great
Plains to the north and the gently rolling prairies and woodlands to
the northeast. On the west the plateau is technically extended across
the southern portion of the Pecos River valley to the Mexican Highlands which cut through the Trans-Pecos region. The rainfall gradu• Dee Ann Suhm, at present associated with the Department of Anthropology at
the University of Utah, is returning to Texas this year to join the staff of the Texas
Memorial Museum at The University of Texas. She is best known as senior author
and originator of An Introductory H andbook of Texas Archeology. Her excavations
at the Collins, Smith, and Williams sites have helped to clarify the archeology of
central Texas. This review paper was written in 1958.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ally decreases as one proceeds from the moderately well-watered
eastern portion to the semi-arid western parts. Changes in the vegetation and, to a lesser extent, fauna are closely correlated with the variations in rainfall. This environmental diversity within central Texas is
significant for the archeologist because it must have had important
effects on the types of economy, settlement patterns, and population
densities of the Indian groups.

Historic Indians
Most important of the aboriginal Indian tribes inhabiting central
Texas was the Tonkawa, who roamed over the grasslands in the
eastern and southern parts of the area. The Tonkawa, when first encountered, consisted of a number of politically and economically independent groups (including the Tonkawa proper, the Mayeye, the
Yojuane, the Ervipiame, and possibly the Emet, Cavas, Sana, Toho,
and Tohaha ) , who spoke a common language (Tonkawa ) and who
shared many cultural traits (Sjoberg, 1953a ) . It was not until the
18th century, with an increase in European expansion and a related
decline in Indian population, that these various groups formed a more
or less united tribe.
The Tonkawa as a whole may be described as semi-nomadic within
a defined territory, and as living primarily off game animals, wild
plant products and fish. Bison and deer were the most important
animals hunted. Other sources of livelihood included a wide variety
of small game and such vegetal foods as tunas (fruit of the prickly
pear ), pawpaws, acorns, pecans, herbs, and various edible roots.
Agriculture was probably not practiced until after European occupation, although the historic sources are not clear on this matter. Certainly agriculture was never very important to the Tonkawa.
Since many elements of their culture reflect adaptations to a grassland environment, the Tonkawa may be classified as nascent Plains
Indians (Newcomb, 1956 ) . Full development of the horse-using,
bison-subsisting complex was thwarted by the 18th century intrusions
of Comanche, Apache, and Wichita-speaking Indians, who pushed the
Tonkawa into marginal grasslands lacking the rich game resources of
the Great Plains. As marginal Plains dwellers, the Tonkawa were
unable to compete successfully with the more mobile and more
formidable tribes from the north and west, and never had the opportunity to become full-fledged bison-hunting peoples.

CENTRAL TEXAS

1

0

30

60

~

MILES

N

Fig . 1. Approxi mate boundaries of central Texas as an archeological unit.

Tonkawa history, as recorded by European explorers, missionaries,
and settlers, depicts a much-displaced tribe being rapidly decimated
by diseases and by hostile conflicts with Whites and other Indian
tribes. Thus, in 1885, when the Tonkawa were permanently settled
at the Oakland agency in the northeastern part of Oklahoma, they
numbered less than 50 persons. Today the descendants of these Indians
are living near the town of Tonkawa, Oklahoma.
Although there is no reason to believe that the Tonkawa did not
inhabit parts of central Texas prior to European exploration, archeological sites indisputably identifiable as Tonkawa have not been reported. Moreover, in view of recent stratigraphic evidence (Jelks,
1953; Suhm, 1957), the direct linkage of the Tonkawa with the Austin
Focus of the Central Texas Aspect (Krieger, 1946; Kelley, 1947a ) no

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

longer appears to be tenable. This apparent gap in the archeological
sequence has long been a puzzle to researchers working in the area,
and certainly remains as a major problem.
The Jumano Indians were a second and a much less-known group
who frequented parts of central Texas in historic times. A rather
confusing group to identify in the historical documents, the Jumano
evidently engaged in widespread trading activities which extended
from Trans-Pecos Texas to the Caddo region in east Texas. It is difficult, because of their far-flung movements, to indicate a focal area for
the Jumano, although some, if not all, seem to have wintered with the
Patarabueye Indians of the La Junta region on the Rio Grande
(Kelley, 1955).
During the early part of the 18th century, the Jumano became
closely associated with the southern Apache, and were probably absorbed by them. At least the Jumano are not mentioned in historical
accounts after the early 1700's. In view of the early disappearance of
the Jumano, it is not surprising that little is known of them, apart
from their extensive trading enterprises and their apparent reliance
upon the bison. The linguistic affiliations of the Jumano are likewise
uncertain, although workers have variously classified them as Athabascan, Uta-Aztecan or Caddoan speakers (Kelley, 1955: 982 ) .
Kelley ( 1947a, 1955) has suggested that the Jumano are to be
associated with archeological remains he named the Toyah Focus of
the Central Texas Aspect. However, sites containing historic material
which would link the Toyah Focus to the Jumano Indians are unreported. Consequently, the prehistoric origins of the J umano, like
that of the Tonkawa, have not been resolved to the satisfaction of all
researchers.
Apart from the Tonkawa and the Jumano, almost all of the historic
central Texas Indians are known to have arrived in the region after
the latter part of the 17th century. Most important of these intrusive
Indians were the Wichita peoples, the Apache, and the Comanche. The
Wichita group-including the Wichita proper, the Kichai, the Iscanis,
the Waco, the Taovayas and the Tawakoni-in the late 17th and early
18th centuries were driven south from the central Plains and by the
early 1700's several of their villages were reported in the Red
River Valley. Although the main body of the Wichita settled in northcentral Texas and adjacent parts of Oklahoma, three groups, theW aco,
the Kichai, and the Tawakoni, penetrated well into central Texas.
Their former presence in central Texas is attested by historic accounts and by a probable Tawakoni village (the Stansbury Site)

CENTRAL TEXAS

excavated in the Whitney Reservoir basin by the River Basin Surveys
(Suhm et al., 1954: 95 ) . Much of the material recovered from the
Stansbury Site bears striking resemblances to the objects from Spanish
Fort, a historic Taovayas village on the Red River (Witte, 1938 ). Both
sites are large and seem to contain fairly substantial house remains,
probably a reflection of the partial dependency upon agricultural
crops which could support semi-permanent villages.
The Comanche were among the most powerful and the most feared
tribes in the southern Plains. Linguistically, the Comanche are
closely affiliated with the Shoshone-speaking Indians of the Great
Basin. Their southward movements in the 18th century are well recorded in historical documents . The many Comanche bands ranged
over an enormous area, extending from the headwaters of the
Arkansas River in Colorado to the middle reaches of the Colorado
River in central Texas (Wallace and Hoe bel, 1954) . With the horse
and European guns, the Comanche became skilled bison-hunters and
notorious raiders and warriors. As such, they were a constant source
of terror to European settlers and were able to push other Indians,
particularly the Apache and the Tonkawa, into southern Texas.
There is little archeological evidence of the Comanche, but this is
not unexpected, in view of their late entry into Texas and their frequent camp movements which did not permit appreciable concentrations of artifacts and other refuse. To date, the most probable Comanche
remains reported have been isolated burials, such as the crevice
burial found in Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County (Newcomb,
1955). However, no definitely Comanche site or burial has been reported in central Texas.
Of the many Apache groups who inhabited parts of the American
Southwest, only the Lipan frequented the central T exas region to any
extent. Their initial entry into the area cannot be dated precisely,
although in 1732 the Lipan were reported as having recently arrived
in the vicinity of the San Saba River (Sjoberg, 1953b ) . The Lipan
moved about frequently, partly in search of food and partly because
of pressure from the Comanche Indians. Like the Comanche, they often
raided European settlements, kept large herds of horses and hunted
bison. Their basic cultural orientation, however, more closely resembled that of the Athabascan nomads in the Southwest than that of
the Plains Indians ( ibid .) . Although the Lipan are known to have
inhabited the San Saba and other missions, there are no archeological
remains in central Texas which can be attributed to them with
certainty.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In spite of the many documentary references to Indians in central
Texas, post-European contact sites are extremely rare and, aside from
the Stansbury (Towash ) Site in Hill County, none have been systematically excavated. Remains of some former missions are known,
but they have not been scientifically investigated by archeologists.
Even though archeological complexes belonging to the Historic
Stage ( Suhm, et al. , 1954: 20-21 ) remain undefined for central Texas,
there is no reason to believe that they do not exist. The notable absence
of historic sites is best explained by the semi-nomadic character of the
Indians and, more importantly, by the lack of archeological
investigation.

Archeological Sites
Throughout all parts of central Texas there are abundant evidences
of pre-European occupations. Former habitation sites, marked by concentrations of refuse, are by far the most common type of remains
bearing witness to the aboriginal occupations. The habitation sites,
which typically occur near all reasonably reliable water sources, are
either open campsites or rockshelters; sedentary village sites are, as
yet, unreported for the pre-European period.
Many of the open campsites (burnt rock middens ) are distinguished
by sizable accumulations of burned and cracked limestone mixed
with charcoal and ash-stained soil, as well as cultural debris (Fig. 2 ) .
Burnt rock middens are an unusual kind of site, having been reported
to date only in the Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos regions of Texas.
They vary greatly in size, sometimes reaching over an acre in extent
and six or more feet in thickness. In cross section the middens appear
as low knolls, while in outline they are circular or oval. Since it is
uniformly agreed that the burnt rock middens grew by accretions
incidental to occupation, they are not usually referred to as mounds,
the latter term being reserved for intentional structures such as burial
or temple mounds.
The discoloration and angularity of the rock fragments comprising
the midden deposits are a result of contact with fire and thermal
fracturing , and indicate that the burnt rock middens are largely
accumulations of hearthstones. WPA-University of Texas excavations
on the Colorado River near Austin (Kelley and Campbell, 1942: 320 )
provide data on the types of hearths making up the middens. The
most complex variety was made by lining a small oval or circular depression with stone slabs. Simpler types of hearths were made by

A

8
Fig . 2 . A, View of a burnt rock midden on Gillen Rench, Uvalde County. B, Cross section
of a burnt rock m idden deposit, Dies Rench Site, Travis County.

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

placing stones in a circle or oval on an undisturbed surface, or by
scooping out a shallow concavity and placing large stones around it.
The hearths were apparently used primarily for roasting and baking.
Repeated occupation of a site disturbed earlier hearths, creating a
more or less homogeneous deposit. In addition, there is some evidence
(Kelley and Campbell, 1942: 321; I elks, 1951) to indicate that burnt
rock middens consist of several independent accretions which gradually merged into a seemingly uniform accumulation. The complex
and disturbed nature of a burnt rock midden-resulting from the
mode of accumulation and from re-occupation of the site-have obvious and important bearings on the archeological analysis and
interpretation.
Other open sites in central Texas consist almost exclusively of refuse
buried in alluvial terraces (Fig. 3, A ) , or of thinly scattered refuse
deposits found on the surface of uplands. Although the terrace sites
may contain numerous hearthstones, the relatively rapid rate of alluvial deposition did not permit appreciable concentrations of rock fragments. These sites occur along all the major rivers and creeks, and vary
greatly in extent and in depth. Like the burnt rock middens, the terrace sites were temporary camping spots which were visited repeatedly.
Upland sites are usually found on bluffs or rolling hills some distance away from streams so that occupational refuse has had little opportunity to be buried by alluvium. While these sites may yield a
large number of artifacts from the surface, they rarely merit excavation. Most of them appear to have been occupied less intensively and
less frequently than either burnt rock middens or sites buried in terrace deposits. None of the campsites have yielded any indications of
dwellings, but it is reasonable to assume that some type of simple
brush and/ or hide-covered structure was erected.
Burnt rock middens and other open campsites can be related
through the artifacts obtained from them. Both kinds of sites yield predominantly stone objects. Chipped stone projectile points, knives, and
scrapers are the most common types of artifacts found, although grinding implements ( manos and m:Iling slabs ), choppers, and heavy hifacial blades are usually well represented in the inventories. Less frequent, but consistently present, are objects fashioned from bone, scored
pebbles, polished stone artifacts, chipped stone drills, worn pieces of
ochre and side-notched pebbles. Pottery is often found, but is usually
limited to the upper levels. Site features are simple, consisting largely
of hearths and burials.

A

B
Fig . 3. A, Cross section of occupation zones buried in a terrace d 2posit of lh e Colorado
Rive r, Site No. CT-1, Rob Roy Ranch , Travis County . 8, View of Smith Roc !<Shelter (52C5-20),
Trav is Coun ty.

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Much the same type of material is found in rockshelter sites (Fig.
3, B) which occur throughout the central Texas limestone region.
Rockshelters were apparently occupied whenever possible, while some
of the uninhabitable ones were occasionally used as burial areas
(Watt, 1936 ). Because of the central Texas climate and the character
of the shelters, perishable artifacts are very rarely found, but they are
not entirely unknown . Walls of shelters occasionally have pictographs,
most of which appear to belong to the Central Texas Aspect (see below ) .
On the basis of what is now known, none of the habitation sites can
be considered as entirely distinctive to any one cultural compl~x, although burnt rock middens are characteristic of the Archaic Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Later Central Texas Aspect materials are frequently
found at burnt rock midden sites, but usually as a thin veneer overlying Edwards Plateau Aspect material. Open sites may contain early
types of projectile points, but definite Paleo-Indian campsites are unreported. However, Kincaid Shelter in Uvalde County has yielded evidence of a late Pleistocene occupation. All other rockshelters investigated to date contain in situ materials belonging to post-Pleistocene
complexes. Village sites are not kno·wn for the pre-European period,
but it may be anticipated that sites approaching villages are likely to
be encountered on the margins of the Caddo region as that area becomes better known. For the historic period, villages which can be
identified with the southern Wichita group occur along the middle
reaches of the Brazos River.
Archeological remains in central Texas are by no means restricted
to habitation sites, although these constitute the most important type.
Other sites include quarry stations, isolated burials, pictographs, and
mortar holes. Quarries- areas where chipping materials were obtained from flint concentrations embedded in limestone, or from flint
nodules eroded out of limestone formations-are common and may be
located some distance away from former camping spots. Chipping
waste and unfinished or broken flint artifacts are frequently recovered
from quarry sites and often aid in establishing cultural affiliations.
Isolated burials are sometimes found in crevices or in small rockshelters not suitable for occupation. Burials of this sort are not frequent in central Texas, but have been reported for both prehistoric
and historic periods (for example, Field, 1956). Since burials antedating the European period rarely contain funerary offerings, it is
usually difficult to relate isolated ones to any cultural complex. The
same problem applies to pictographs and mortar holes found apart

CENTRAL TEXAS

73

from midden refuse. Pictographs are not common, perhaps partly because conditions of preservation are unfavorable. Those recorded so
far have been found on shelter walls and appear to be affiliated largely
with the Central Texas Aspect. They are usually simple geometric
lines with an occasional crudely executed human figure . Red is the
predominant color. Mortar holes, of more frequent occurrence, are
scattered throughout the central part of the State. Most distinctive of
these, but nevertheless of uncertain cultural affiliation, are the elliptical mortar holes which occur in the Abilene area (Sayles, 1935, Map
B) . The more common type of mortar hole has a circular or oval openmg.
In addition to the kinds of sites already known to occur in central
Texas, one would also expect to find ancient " kill" sites, as PaleoIndian projectile points appear regularly in collections. Kill sites, as
distinct from habitation sites, are localities where animals were
slaughtered, and the only artifacts recovered are the hunting and
butchering tools associated with the bones of the slain animals. Although not limited to the Paleo-Indian period, kill localities are the
most characteristic late Pleistocene and early post-Pleistocene sites.
Paleo-Indian projectile points, such as Clovis, Folsom, Plainview, and
Angostura, have been found in kill sites on the High Plains, and it is
reasonable-since Lhese po.inls occur in collections made in central
Texas-to assume that they will eventually be found in similar contexts in central Texas.
By and large the archeological sites found in the central part of the
State are characteristic of hunting and gathering peoples. The objects
recovered at these sites are relatively simple tools, and likewise suggest a hunting and gathering economy. While the typological problems are by no means easily resolved, the diversity of the artifacts and
the number of classes found are quite limited when compared with
archeological remains from sedentary societies. The basic tool kits of
hunting and gathering peoples have a number of features in common,
largely the result of similar subsistence and technological levels. These
factors-limited variation in artifact types and the far-flung similarities of the basic tools-present knotty archeological problems and often
make interpretations difficult. In view of the problems inherent in the
archeological remains of hunting and gathering complexes and the
ever-pressing need for additional excavations and reports, it is not
surprising that the prehistory of central Texas is viewed somewhat
differently by various archeologists.

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Syntheses and Interpretations
Although it is beyond the intended scope of this paper to present a
history of archeological investigations in central Texas, a resume of
the more important classification schemes and interpretations seems
essential. To credit properly all persons who have contributed to these
reconstructions is not feasible, for they are the result of years of work
by a number of amateur and professional archeologists. It is obvious
that only the major researchers and the highlights of their schemes
can be mentioned (Fig. 4).
In spite of the number of prehistoric sites, systematic investigations
into the archeology of central Texas did not take significant form until
after about 1930. The absence of spectacular remains and elaborate
artifacts did not afford much incentive to the institutions and foundations who were financing most of the archeological expeditions in the
late 19th and early 20th centuries. No doubt, the growth of scientific
interests and inquiries into the archeology of the area are correlated,
to a considerable extent, with the expansion of the activities of the Department of Anthropology of the University of Texas, and the founding of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society ( 1928 ).
J. E. Pearce, working out of the University of Texas, was one of the
first archeologists to direct appreciable energies toward excavation
and, to a lesser extent, interpretation of central Texas sites. He was
particularly interested in the "kitchen middens" (burnt rock middens ) and, in 1932, briefly distinguished and characterized three levels
of midden "culture." These levels, termed "upper," "middle" and
"lower," were essentially stratigraphic units marked by changes in
projectile point sizes and styles. The lower level was described as representing a crude and pure hunting type of culture; the middle level
as a higher hunter type, with little or no horticulture and lacking the
bow; and, finally, the upper level as a " finer" type of culture with the
bow and considerable horticulture, but still having basically a hunting
economy. Pearce further recognized some similarities between the
upper burnt rock midden level and the archeological remains of east
Texas. He even suggested that the upper level culture was derived
from east Texas, and that it became modified in adapting to the environment of central Texas.
More recent studies (Miller and Jelks, 1952; Suhm, 1955 ) have
borne out, in part, Pearce's stratigraphic sequence of projectile point
types, but his brief cultural characterizations and his hypothecated

(")

t"rJ

MAJOR

r--

CLASS! FICATION

(
RAY and SAYLES

;=r

Small Scraper
Culture
Mound

Culture

::0

I

RAY

PEARCE

Upper

I

Valley

Large

Sera

I

Culture

SAYLES

I
~w~~~:~
I I

Mound

Culture

Sand

Dune

Brazos

Culture

I

Lower Mound

Clear

-

Culture

Guadalupe

T/

Phase

Rover Phaoo

I

Fork~
Folsom

'"""''

I

Rock

Brozo1

:

'

Tonkawa

Jumono

Indians

Indians

INTERPRETATIONS

Tonka wa Indians

+

I

(from Coddoon
Root)

Culture

Fork

Culture

Phose

CURRENT

Central Texa[
Aspect {

'

Te~as

Central

>
t"'
>-l
t"rJ
~

>

(f)

I

(Remnants)

Aspect

r'r

Toyah Focus

Toyah

\ Austin Focus

t Focus

Austin Focus

Edwards
Plateau

Clear

Tonkawa

I

Creek

Culture

KELLEY

Aronome
Phose

Round

Middle

z>-l

SCHEMES

Culture

I

coastal Branch

I
""" \

(not
represente~
central
Texas

10

Branch

Edwards Plateau
Aspect
Uvalde

Edwards Plateau

Aspect

Focus

Round Rock Focus
Clear Fork Focus

Central

Texas

Srm
Gibson

Site

Artifacts

I
~

Abilene-Ours!
Types

"solut~eon" Root

Kincaid
Central

Texas Root

Shelter and surface finds

of~,~,~,

Angostura

and Plainview Points

Fig . 4 . Chart showing the major classificalion schemes which ha ·1e boen proposed for archeological remains found in central Texas .
'I
()1.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

migration to explain the origin of the upper level culture are now disregarded. Perhaps Pearce's major contribution was in stimulating
interest in the archeology of Texas, although his interpretations, which
often lacked the support of properly presented evidence, are of more
than historical importance.
During the 1920's and 1930's, while Pearce was excavating burnt
rock middens in the central part of the State, Cyrus N . Ray was concentrating on archeological remains in the Abilene area. In a number
of articles, most of which have appeared in the Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Ray has described and interpreted the finds he
has made over a period of more than 25 years. According to Ray
( 1940a, 1948 ), one of the earliest occupations in the Abilene region
is found in Taylor County, at the Gibson Site, which he considers as
dating back to the late Pleistocene. The disputed antiquity of the artifacts from the Gibson site hinges upon their tenuous association with
Pleistocene fauna and Folsom-"Yuma" points, upon their deeply
buried position in the silt deposits, and upon the chronological placement of these deposits. The Gibson site artifacts, which do not constitute a recognized culture complex, include the "Abilene," " Jones" and
" Gibson" points, stone scrapers, knives, and manos. Since Sayles had
labelled similar remains as " Durst Silt Eoliths," Ray and Sayles
( 1941 ) agreed that the name " Durst-Abilene Types" should supersede
their previous designations.
The " Clear Fork Culture," occupying a higher stratigraphic position in the alluvial silts, is thought to have evolved out of the vaguely
defined Durst-Abilene Types (Ray, 1948). Although initially recognized by Ray (1929, 1938 ) , it was later re-defined by Kelley (1947b)
as the Clear Fork Focus. Ray ( 1948), in the midst of lively controversy , has maintained that early Clear Fork artifacts are found in late
Pleistocene context. but that they are more recent than the DurstAbilene Types. Kelley , on the other hand, in 1947 suggested a beginning date for the Clear Fork Focus of about 4,000 or 2,000 B.C. , based
upon an analysis of terrace deposits on the Colorado River near Austin.
More recently, the problem of dating both the Durst-Abilene remains
and the Clear Fork Focus material has been reviewed by Crook ( 1955 ) ,
who suggests that their dates probably fall between the two extremes
proposed by Ray and by Kelley.
As a culture complex, both Ray ( 1938) and Kelley ( 1947b) generally agree that the Clear Fork is distinguished principally by dart point
styles: Ray's "Clear Fork Dart 1 and 2" ( same as Kelley's " Nolan
Beveled Stem"), Ray 's " Clear Fork Dart 3" (same as Kelley's " Baird

CENTRAL TEXAS

77

Beveled Blade") and Ray's " Clear Fork Dart 4" (same as Kelley's
" Taylor Thinned Base") . In addition, Kelley lists gouges as another
diagnostic, while Ray assigns the gouge, flint side scrapers, spokeshaves, gravers, awls, hand axes, discs, and abrading stones to the Clear
Fork. However, even the distinctiveness of the Clear Fork Focus has
been recently questioned (see discussion below ) .
To include more recent archeological remains in the Abilene region,
Ray ( 1929 ) distinguished the pre-ceramic " Sand Dune Culture" and ,
for later pottery-bearing complexes, the "Large Scraper Culture" and
the " Small Scraper Culture." Ray and Sayles ( 1941 ) , because they
had used overlapping terminology, recognized a "Valley Creek Culture," a combination of Ray's Large Scraper Culture and his Small
Scraper Culture and Sayles' "Wichita Phase" (see below ) . As diagnostic traits for the Valley Creek Culture they list: ( 1) pottery, (2 )
four-edged beveled knives, ( 3) double-pointed plain knives, (4) beveled dart points, (5 ) oval keel-backed scrapers, (6) "pine tree" shaped
arrow points, ( 7) side-notched triangular arrow points and (8) flake
drills. For the earlier "Brazos Culture," a combination of Ray's Sand
Dune Culture and Sayles' "Brazos Phase" (see below ), they list the
following as distinguishing traits : ( 1) serrated arrow points, (2) long
slender "pine tree" shaped arrow points, (3 ) long slender side notched
arrow points, (4 ) double pointed knives, (5 ) square based knives, ( 6)
recessed based knives and ( 7) side scrapers.
Krieger ( 1946: 132-137) , in reviewing the archeology of northcentral Texas, pointed out that neither the Valley Creek nor the Brazos
Culture is a consistent culture complex, as the supposedly diagnostic
traits for each appear in different combinations at various sites. In addition, the pottery, which is presumably the major characteristic of
the Valley Creek Culture, seems to consist largely of trade pieces. These
include a few Puebloan sherds, an appreciable amount of Caddoan
pottery (principally Frankston Focus types) and, frequently, shelltempered sherds probably from the Henrietta Focus (Krieger, 1946:
123 ) . The evidence at hand, then, suggests that both the Valley Creek
and the Brazos Cultures, as defined by Ray and Sayles, are to a considerable extent admixtures.
It is difficult to obtain a coherent picture of the archeology of the
Abilene area from the published literature. The definitions of the cultural complexes are vague and depend, to an undesirable degree, upon
surface collections. The importance and the uniqueness of the area
have probably been over-emphasized, although the early researchers
in the area w ere severely handicapped by a paucity of comparative

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

data. The present status of the Brazos Culture and the Valley Creek
Culture has not been made clear, and the dating of the Durst-Abilene
types is still unresolved. The ultimate solution to these problems rests
not upon a critical review of literature, but rather upon a number of
careful excavations and a thorough analysis of the material recovered.
Although at an early date both Pearce and Ray proposed classificatory schemes, the first real integration and detailed classification of
central Texas archeology (as well as for remains in all other parts of
the state) did not appear until 1935, when E. B. Sayles' "An Archaeological Survey of Texas" was published. This survey of Texas archeology, conducted under the auspices of Gila Pueblo, was intended to
bring together existing information, and to seek traces of the origin of
the Hohokam, one of the major prehistoric culture traditions in the
American Southwest. The survey failed to uncover the origin of the
Hohokam, but did lead to an important synthesis of Texas archeology.
Sayles, working within the framework of the Gladwin classification
system', defined in considerable detail a number of post-Pleistocene
hunting and gathering complexes for the central part of the State. Using projectile point styles, types of sites and other criteria (Tables 4
and 7) , Sayles distinguished the "Abilene" and "Brazos Branches,"
the "Edwards Plateau Culture," and the "Guadalupe River," " Round
Rock," "Wichita," "Araname," and " Tonkawa" phases. In a complicated, but highly tentative reconstruction (Table 13 ), two roots, the
"Solutrean" and the "Central Texas," were h ypothecated as the major
antecedents of the later complexes. The Solutrean Root was envisioned
as developing into the Brazos River Branch (renamed in 1941 by Ray
and Sayles as the Brazos Culture), which is listed as containing both
Folsom points and "Yuma" (most of which would now be classified as
Angostura, Plainview or Meserve ) points, as well as arrow points. The
Central Texas Root, at an early date, developed into the Abilene
Branch renamed by Ray and Sayles in 1941 as the Clear Fork Culture ) , which was followed by the Edwards Plateau Culture. Roughly
contemporaneous regional specializations following the Edwards Plateau Culture are referred to as the Guadalupe River and Round Rock
phases. The Round Rock Phase is indicated as having developed out of
the Edwards Plateau Culture, while the Guadalupe River Phase is
1 A classification system (Gladwin, 1934) which designates a broad cultural tradition as a root, the subdivisions of which are referred to as stems. Stems, in turn,
differentiate into branches, and variations within a branch are referred to as phases
(the latter term is roughly equivalent to the focus of the McKern or Mid-western
system).

CENTRAL TEXAS

79

thought to have been derived from the Coastal Branch of the Central
Texas Stem.
For the protohistoric and historic periods, three phases, the vVichita
(renamed in 1941 by Ray and Sayles as the Valley Creek Culture ) ,
Araname and the Tonkawa, are distinguished. Sayles recognized that
evidence linking the Tonkawa and the Araname 2 Indians with specific
archeological remains was lacking, but, none the less, suggested that
they represent the "remnants of once more numerous tribes living in
central Texas, who made the large middens and burnt rock mounds
found throughout the Edwards Plateau region" (p. 59). By contrast,
the Wichita Phase, a hunting complex with secondary dependency
upon domesticated crops, is defined as an archeological unit. It is indicated as an offshoot from the "Caddoan Root" and presumably represents a fairly late intrusion into central Texas.
Both Sayles and Ray were confronted with the problems of setting
up a classification scheme for the archeological remains they recovered, dating these remains, and determining their possible relationships. Since they, along with Pearce, were pioneers in the archeology
of central Texas, they did not have access to many site reports and
were forced to base their interpretations on extremely limited data.
As a result, many aspects of their interpretations have not been borne
out by subsequent research. Most of Sayles' reconstruction of central
Texas is not applicable to what is known today of the archeological
remains in that region. To a very large extent, his cultural complexes
were based upon surface collections, and have not been validated by
more recent work. However, in spite of its limitations, Sayles' survey
remains as one of the most basic references to Texas archeology.
J. Charles Kelley, re-examining the data presented by Ray and
Sayles, and analyzing materials excavated by the WPA-University of
Texas, published in 1947 two articles which present the classification
scheme currently used- although usually somewhat modified- by
most archeologists working in central Texas. For the early, pre-ceramic
horizon, Kelley recognized the Edwards Plateau Aspect, which he divided into three foci: Clear Fork, Round Rock and Uvalde. On the
basis of the remains found at the Lehmann Rock Shelter in Gillespie
County, he characterized the Edwards Plateau Aspect as having: ( 1)
large and irregularly shaped blades, (Z) fairly well chipped triangular
2 A group of poorly known Indians who, in historic times, lived on the lower
reaches of the Guadalupe River. They are sometimes classified as one of the many
Coahuiltecan groups (Ruecking, 1954) , formerly widely distributed in southwestern
Texas and northeastern Mexico.

8o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

blades, ( 3 ) heavy flake side scrapers, ( 4 ) small percussion-chipped
choppers made from cores, ( 5) one-hand unshaped manos either single
or double faced, (6 ) oval bowl "metates," ( 7) large gravers, ( 8) heavy
pick-like blades and (9 ) stemmed knives. These traits are considered
to have been shared by the three foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
For the Round Rock Focus, Kelley (1947a, 1947b) listed the following as diagnostic traits: ( 1) flat, side-notched pebbles, (2 ) numerous
" spike-like" blades and (3 ) dart point types " Pedernales Indented
Base," "Strawn Stemmed," and "Castroville Convex Base." Largely
following Ray ( 1938 ), Kelley defined the Clear Fork Focus as distinguished by: (1 ) gouges and (2 ) dart point type "Nolan Beveled
Stem" and, to a lesser extent, dart point types "Baird Beveled Blade"
and "Taylor Thinned Base." The Uvalde Focus is indicated (Kelley,
1947a, 1948) as being characterized by: (1) shaft straighteners and
(2 ) dart point types "Smithwick Small Stem," "Frio Flared Stem,"
and "Mantell Split Stem. " Kelley implies that these definitions are not
complete, but, lacking any indications to the contrary, it is assumed
that they embrace the traits which he considered to be the most distinctive.
The Round Rock Focus, which probably includes Sayles' Round
Rock and Guadalupe River phases, is indicated as, by and large, contemporaneous with the Clear Fork Focus. The distinctions between
the Clear Fork and Round Rock foci are far from clear or consistent,
for, as Kelley points out: "over much of central Texas components of
either focus are almost invariably mixed in varying (legrees; 'pure'
components of either focus are almost entirely lacking" (1947b: 100 ) .
The Uvalde Focus, which includes Sayles' late "Edwards Plateau Culture" and Huskey's ( 1935 ) "upper level" and "middle level" of
"Mound A Culture," is considered a later manifestation than the Clear
Fork and Round Rock foci , although in certain areas the three foci appear to have been co-existent.
By relating terrace deposits containing archeological remains to climatic cycles, Kelley suggested a beginning date of about 4000 or 2000
B.C. for the Round Rock and Clear Fork foci. For the Uvalde Focus, a
beginning date of approximately A.D. 1000 is suggested (Kelley, 1948:
78 ) . All three foci were thought to have survived until quite late, possibly up to about A.D. 1500, when they were replaced by the Central
Texas Aspect. More recent evidence (Miller and Jelks, 1952) , however, presents a strong argument for placing the close of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect at about A.D. 1200, at the very latest. The beginning

CENTRAL TEXAS

81

date for the Edwards Plateau Aspect remains uncertain, although
Kelley's lowest estimate still stands as a reasonable one.
The concept of the Edwards Plateau Aspect, which has recently
been amplified (Suhm et al. , 1954: 107- 112), has been useful and is
widely employed by almost all archeologists now working in central
Texas. It seems reasonably clear that the Edwards Plateau Aspect represents a cultural unit in a broad sense. However, regional and temporal variations within this long-persisting tradition are not well documented. The focal divisions are not as often used, and their validity
has been questioned (Suhm et al. , 1954: 103 ) on the basis that sufficient evidence demonstrating the existence of the foci has not been
presented, and that the supposed diagnostics for each of the foci frequently occur in associatio~. For these reasons, the above authors favor
using only the Edwards Plateau Aspect, leaving the problem of the
focal distinctions unresolved.
Kelley ( 1947b: 99) regards the Edwards Plateau Aspect as one of
several manifestations of a larger cultural horizon, which he termed
the "Balcones Phase". 3 Also included in this horizon are the preceramic materials along the central Texas coast (now classified as the
Aransas Focus ) and the Big Bend Aspect (Kelley et al., 1940 ). Although Kelley has not characterized the Balcones Phase, he does indicate that it has much in common with the Archaic complexes of the
southeastern United States and the "desert cultures" of the Southwest.
Presumably, it is approximated by the Archaic Stage which was defined to embrace post-Pleistocene hunting and gathering complexes in
Texas (Suhmetal., 1954: 18-20 ).
A distinction between the Archaic Edwards Plateau Aspect and
later complexes marked by the presence of pottery and arrow points
has long been made in central Texas archeology. The relatively late
arrival of the bow and pottery has been amply documented by stratigraphic sequences from excavated sites. Pearce ( 1932 ) labelled this
late horizon in central Texas as the upper level burnt rock mound culture; Sayles ( 1935) termed it, in part, as the Wichita Phase; and, more
recently, Kelley designated it as the Central Texas Aspect. Within the
Central Texas Aspect (which has superseded the previous designations), two foci-Austin and Toyah-are usually recognized. The
Nueces Focus, a third subdivision listed by Stephenson (1950) in his
3 The use of "phase" here is as defined by the McKern or Mid-western Taxonomic System (McKern, 1939) and is not to be confused or equated with the usage
of " phase" in the Gladwin System or the Willey·Phillips scheme ( 1958 ) .

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

summary paper on archeological sequences in Texas, has never been
defined.
The focal divisions of the Central Texas Aspect were originally recognized by Kelley (1947a, 1947b). The Austin Focus, however, was
first defined by Krieger (1946: 165-168), who listed as its most characteristic artifacts pottery type Leon Plain, Perdiz type arrow points,
Scallorn type arrow points, beveled knives, crude snub-nosed scrapers,
crude side scrapers, flint drills with unshaped bases, edged manos showing back-and-forth grinding, notched bison ribs, flexed burials in crude,
stone-lined pits, Oliva shell beads, triangular conch shell pendants,
Frankston Focus trade pottery, and, occasionally, European trade
articles. More recent work has shown that his characterization by and
large defines the Central Texas Aspect, and that Scallorn arrow points,
more than any other trait, differentiate the Austin Focus from the
Toyah Focus. Krieger, following Kelley, suggested that the Austin
Focus be identified as the archeological remains of the Tonkawa Indians.
For the Toyah Focus, Kelley (1947a) considered the followmg as
distinctive traits: arrow point types "Perdiz Pointed Stem," "Clinton
[should read "Cliffton"] Contracting Stem," "Form 63," and "Fresno
Triangular Blade;" and "Doss Red Ware" pottery. Kelley ( 1947 a;
1955) proposed that the Toyah Focus be linked with the Jumano Indians and that the widespread distribution of Perdiz arrow points be
attributed largely to the trading activities of the Jumano.
The Austin and Toyah foci were defined as contemporaneous manifestations, occupying more or less distinct territories: the Austin
Focus in the Colorado River drainage, and the Toyah Focus in the
central and western portion of the State (ibid.). The possible or: gins of
these foci are not made explicit, although Kelley suggested that the
bow and pottery diffused from either eastern or western parts of the
State, where they were present at an earlier date. Kelley seems to
have regarded the Edwards Plateau Aspect, at least in part, as representing groups quite distinct from those of the Central Texas Aspect
foci, for he states that the terminal phases of the Clear Fork and Round
Rock foci were contemporaneous and showed evidences of contact with
the Austin and Toyah foci .
Within the past six years, the concept of the Central Texas Aspect
has undergone considerable revision. Miller and Jelks ( 1952) , as a
result of their analysis of sites in the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County,
found that a distinction between the Austin and Toyah foci (as defined by Kelley) was not consistent with their data. The supposed

CENTRAL TEXAS

diagnostic traits for each of the foci-namely Perdiz, Scallorn, and
Cliffton arrow point types-were regularly associated with one another in the Belton sites. Following Krieger, they lumped the whole of
the Central Texas Aspect under the Austin Focus. In addition to reviewing the focal divisions, Miller and Jelks suggested that the initial
appearance of the Austin Focus (i.e., the Central Texas Aspect) be
dated, at the latest, at A.D. 1200, in place of Krieger and Kelley's previous estimate of circa A.D. 1500.
Along much the same lines as Miller and Jelks, the authors of the
Handbook of Texas archeology ( Suhm et al., 1954) did not make a
distinction between the Austin and Toyah foci. Instead, they published
a detailed trait list for the Central Texas Aspect, pointing out that differences in the distributions of arrow point types exist, but that these
had not yet been sufficiently documented to justify focal distinctions.
The excavation of several sites near Austin ( Suhm, 195 7), together
with materials from the Blum Rockshelter in Hill County (Jelks.
1953 ), however, provide a significant body of stratigraphic data to
support a two-fold division of the Central Texas Aspect. The earlier
division is marked by the appearance of Scallorn and Eddy arrow
points (Suhm, 1957; Jelks, 1953 ), and the later by Perdiz and Cliffton
arrow points and pottery, usually type Leon Plain (the definition of
Leon Plain follows that of the Handbook, which includes Kelley's
"Doss Red Ware"). The present author has suggested ( 1957) that the
term Austin Focus be applied to the earlier division and Toyah Focus
to the later. Apart from the arrow point types represented and the
presence or absence of pottery, there appear to be few traits which
differentiate the Austin Focus from the Toyah Focus.
While the Blum (Jelks, 1953) and Smith (Suhm, 1957) sites clearly
indicate a sequence from Austin Focus to Toyah Focus, there are sites
(Miller and Jelks, 1952; Suhm, 1955 ) where the diagnostic arrow
points for each focus are apparently in direct association with one another. This association would seem entirely reasonable if the Toyah
Focus developed out of the Austin Focus. Thus there may have been
a period when Scallorn and Perdiz points were simultaneously in use
by the same group. The evidence, however, is still too limited to attempt detailed reconstructions; and, certainly, even the validity of
these suggested divisions of the Central Texas Aspect must be tested
more thoroughly.
Regardless of the status of the Austin Focus and the Toyah Focus, it
seems quite evident that the Central Texas Aspect is not a homogeneous
tradition which appeared just prior to the arrival of Europeans in cen-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tral Texas. The direct linkage of the Austin Focus with the Tonkawa
Indians and the Toyah Focus with the Jumano Indians-which was
never amply supported by associations with historic objects-now
seems entirely out of the question. This does not, of course, exclude the
possibility of identifying either the Tonkawa or the I umano Indians
(or both) with the terminal phases of the Central Texas Aspect (i.e.,
the Toyah Focus).

Current Interpretations
Throughout this section there have been frequent, but scattered,
references to currently acceptable interpretations of central Texas
archeology. It now seems appropriate that these be briefly restated and
listed:
(1) The earliest occupations in central Texas are referable generally to
the late Pleistocene, with the best in situ manifestation at the Kincaid
Site, Uvalde County. The bulk of the evidence for the Early Man habitation, however, is based on more flimsy finds: surface collections of a few
Clovis, Folsom, and Scottsbluff points, and of numerous Angostura and
Plainview points. The Pleistocene dating of Ray and Sayles' DurstAbilene types remains undemonstrated, but not necessarily untenable.
Typologically, however, the Durst-Abilene types seem to share many attributes with Archaic assemblages.
( 2) From the numerous post-Pleistocene complexes defined for the
area, the Edwards Plateau Aspect and the Central Texas Aspect ( consisting
of the Austin Focus and Toyah Focus) emerge as the most useful, and
presumably the most valid, cultural units.
(3) The Edwards Plateau Aspect, most fully defined by Suhm et al.
( 1954), embraces pre-ceramic materials dating from about 5,000 or 4,000
B.C. to A.D. 500 or 1,000. Attempts to recognize consistent and significant
subdivisions within the Edwards Plateau Aspect have been, to date, unsuccessful. The focal divisions-Clear Fork, Round Rock, and Uvaldehave almost completely disappeared from recent classification schemes.
( 4 ) The Central Texas Aspect, consistently found overlying Edwards
Plateau Aspect material, is distinguished chiefly by the appearance of the
bow and, apparently somewhat later, of pottery. In contrast to the Edwards Plateau Aspect, there has been a recent revival of terms for two
Central Texas Aspect foci, namely Austin and Toyah. Although these two
foci seem to share many traits ( see list in Suhm et al., 1954: 112-117),
there has been observed in several stratified sites an early manifestation
(termed by the present author Austin Focus) marked primarily by the
occurrence of arrow point type Scallorn, and a later component ( termed

CENTRAL TEXAS

by the present author Toyah Focus ) distinguished by arrow point type
Perdiz and by the indigen eous pottery type L eon Plain. At present fuller
focal definitions are not possible. Mixed Austin and Toyah Focus sites
(such as those reported by Miller and Jelks, 1952) may represent an intermediate stage.
(5) Both the Edwards Plateau Aspect and the Central T exas Aspect
occur throughout central T exas, although the Abilene area on the northwestern margin poses a problem. Most of the Archaic remains in that
area seem closely affiliated with- in fact, are usually considered as a part
of-the Edwards Plateau Aspect. The later materials ( Ray and Sayles'
Brazos and Valley Creek cultures), however , cannot be satisfactorily included in the present definition of the Central Texas Aspect. The Brazos
and Valley Creek cultures, like the Durst-Abilene types, remain dangling
and largely ignored.
(6) Although the intra-areal relationships have not been well explored,
it seems plausible, but not yet fully demonstrated, that the post-Pleistocene
complexes represent by and large a gradual in situ development. The Edwards Plateau Aspect provid es a likely base, both typologically and
chronologically, from which the Central T exas Aspect might h ave sprung.
The Austin Focus, because it appears to represent the earliest yet r ecognized m anifestation of the Central T exas Aspect, may have, in turn,
developed into the Toyah Focus. Th e Toyah Focus, although not definitely
known from historic contexts in central Texas, may be, in part, the
archeological remnants of the Tonkawa-a nd even, perhaps, th e Jumano
Indians.

The association of archeological remains with historic Indians is
only one of the many problem s which still confront archeologists working in central Texas. Research of the past several decades has done
much to clarify the prehistory of the area, but it has also opened up
avenues for new lines of investigation.

Statement of Problems
To solve the problems of the prehistory of central Texas, the archeologist has only fragmentary material remains , and the contexts in
which these remains are found. From these limited data he must attempt to reconstruct the culture represented and its history as fully as
possible. In turn, the problems fundamental to all reconstructions are
the collection of data from archeological sites and the techniques for
analyzing the materials recovered.
Obtaining data from an archeological site almost invariably means
the excavation of that site. Methods of excavation are varied, depend-

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ing upon-among other things-the type of site involved and the facilities available. It is not appropriate to dwell at length on the excavation of central Texas sites, but only to make a few comments specifically directed to the more pertinent problems likely to be encountered.
Characteristically, central Texas sites are refuse accumulations and
contain few complex features. The problems of excavating these sites
are essentially those of obtaining an adequate sample, recognizing site
features, and detecting stratigraphic changes.
The only site features likely to be found are hearths , burials, and
simple pits. The recognition of these features is primarily a matter of
careful observation and excavation. These features may occur at any
occupation site. On the other hand, cultural and geological stratigraphy
are most often encountered in refuse accumulations buried in rockshelter or terrace deposits. Since cultural and geological breaks form
natural units, which may be of historical significance, it is often desirable to excavate a site in terms of such units. By doing this, the artifacts can easily be related to the most meaningful contexts in which
they occur. The existence of breaks in a deposit, which are detectable
by changes in the soil color and composition, may be uncovered by
means of test pits or by use of an auger. Should the breaks be widely
separated, as often happens in terrace sites, it may be necessary to use
smaller arbitrary levels (such as six-inch ones ) in excavation. If the
latter be the case, the artifacts should, nevertheless, be related to the
strata represented at the site. This can be accomplished by making
notations in the field records, which relate artifacts and stratigraphic
layers.
Stratigraphic breaks in burnt rock midden deposits are usually more
difficult to recognize, so that it is more often necessary to excavate
them in terms of arbitrary levels. However, before beginning to dig,
it is particularly important to make a detailed contour map of the site.
Thus, variations in surface elevations can be recorded and the relative
depth of any artifact can be established.
Burnt rock middens are difficult sites to dig, because of the many
rock fragments constituting the refuse deposit, and require the expenditure of a great deal of labor. It is, therefore, best not to tackle such
a site unless one is prepared to devote considerable time to it, or has
several crew members. A few pits sunk into a midden will not yield a
sufficient sample to be of much scientific value, and will serve only to
damage the site. Attempts to "peel" the entire midden down by layers,
or to dislodge large sections from vertical cuts do not yield nearly as
satisfactory results as the use of a grid system of five-foot squares. Be-

CENTRAL TEXAS

sides working the midden proper (i.e., the region of concentrated rock
fragments ), the areas a bout the midden should at least be tested, for
they may also contain evidences of occupation. The excavation should
sample various parts of the site, especially since there is evidence to
indicate that middens were accumulated, in part, by horizontal accretions.
Artifacts are probably more easily overlooked in a burnt rock midden than in any other type of site. It is often especially difficult to recognize pieces of grinding implements and scored stones among the
many rock fragments . A quick examination of the rock fragments ,
while time-consuming, will prevent many such artifacts from being
discarded. For the same reason it is useful to have a bucket of water at
the site. Objects can then be washed, making it easier to determine
whether or not they have been worked.
Excavations in central Texas have generally concentrated on sites
along the middle Colorado and Brazos drainages. As a result, the archeological boundaries of central Texas are not precisely defined and
regional variations in cultural complexes are poorly known. A better
knowledge of the remains in all parts of central Texas will undoubtedly clarify these problems, as well as yield important information on
relationships with adjoining areas. It is known, for example, that there
was some interaction between central Texas groups and people living
in east Texas. The nature and extent of this contact, however, are difficult to determine, partly because so few sites have been excavated
in the belt marginal to both areas. The spread of traits from and into
the central part of the State must have repeatedly occurred, but they
cannot be fully discerned until more detailed comparisons with archeological materials in adjacent regions are possible. Thus, there is every
reason to believe that central Texas Indians were never completely
isolated from neighboring peoples, although the direction, the nature,
and the intensity of contact must have varied from time to time. The
most obvious areas in which to seek the clearest evidences of interareal relationships are along the peripheries, which to date have been
little investigated.
Equally as important are the intra-areal relationships, for a critical
examination of all possible connections between the cultural complexes defined within central Texas is imperative for an understanding
of the prehistory. Did, for instance, the Toyah Focus develop out of the
Austin Focus? Did the Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects
exist side by side for a brief period of time? The dimensions of these,
and all other intra-areal problems, are expressions of relationships

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

through time and space. Their resolution is dependent upon data
which order, within this two-dimensional framevvork, each cultural
complex relative to other complexes; and which, through an analysis
of artifacts, indicate the nature of the relations.
Many of the present problems in intra-areal relationships stem from
poor and incomplete definitions of focal complexes, and from the general absence of good dates. Clearer definitions of foci, and the probable
recognition of new foci, rest upon additional excavations, detailed analysis of artifacts, and careful reporting. To be valid, focal distinctions
must be based on large samples accompanied by reliable distributional
data. The many controversies regarding the cultural units represented
in central Texas clearly call attention to the urgency of this problem.
Although recent work has done much to help clarify the relative
temporal arrangement of cultural complexes, precise chronological
placements are sorely lacking. Thus far, only one radiocarbon date has
been obtained from a central Texas site-a somewhat questionable
date of A.D. 742 ± 300, from the upper layer (No. 6) at Kincaid,
Uvalde Co. (Libby, 1955: 109). The radiocarbon method holds promise
of solving most dating problems, but other techniques, especially terrace correlations and the search for cross-ties with complexes of more
certain age, should be employed whenever possible-even if just to
check C-14 dates. While the general stratigraphic picture is beginning
to emerge more clearly, many questions about the sequence of specific
artifact forms remain unanswered. Certainly, much useful information is yet to be obtained from stratified sites, and from the seriation of
sites and specific artifact types.
The recognition and definition of artifact types, essential conceptual tools for analyzing collections, is still a major problem. The Handbook ( Suhm et al., 1954) attempted to present detailed descriptions of
pottery and projectile point types, but these must be regarded as preliminary and tentative definitions. Undoubtedly, many of the point
type descriptions will have to be refined and modified, and new ones
added, as more material is analyzed. There is a real need for studies
dealing with areal and temporal variations within types. Such studies,
however, require particularly good distributional data, largely unavailable at the present. Perhaps even more pressing is the need for a
re-examination of the pottery typology and the definition of types for
classes of artifacts other than projectile points. Almost all of the indigeneous pottery has been grouped into one type, Leon Plain, which
is certainly an over-simplification. A much needed ceramic study will
probably reveal a far more complex situation and will likely necessitate

8g

CENTRAL TEXAS

the definition of other pottery types. Whether or not types for classes
of artifacts other than pottery and projectile points can be successfully
defined has yet to be determined. There are, however, suggestions that,
at least, knives, drills, scrapers, and gouges can be profitably classified
into types. Typology, in general, is a troublesome archeological problem, but it is fundamental to archeological analyses.
Few of the problems mentioned here are unique to central Texas
archeology. For this reason, an emphasis has been placed on the statement of problems. An awareness of the gaps in our knowledge of the
prehistory of central Texas is as important as a good understanding of
the reconstructions and interpretations presented to date. It serves to
give direction to research and helps to complete more quickly the reconstruction of an accurate and detailed picture-insofar as it is possible-of the aboriginal cultures of central Texas.

Inventory of Excavated Sites in Central Texas
Listed and briefly described below are sites excavated in central
Texas and reported prior to the fall of 1958. For practical reasons, the
inventory includes only those sites which have been recorded in some
detail. The cultural affiliations have been assessed by the present
author from the published site descriptions , and are based upon the
criteria discussed in a preceding section (see Syntheses and Interpretations ) .
AMENT

Location: Coryell County.
Excavation: By D. B. Hill.
Description: Occupational debris and burials in a rockshelter.
Cultural affiliations: Predominantly Central Texas Aspect, • both Austin and Toyah foci (Scallorn and Perdiz points reported as offerings
in one grave ) . Scant traces of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Trade
items apparently found with the Central Texas Aspect include pottery pipe, Copena knives and arrow point type Alba from east Texas,
and 3 obsidian flakes, possibly from the Southwestern United States.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
*Miller and Jelks in 1952 did not distinguish between the Austin and Toyah
Foci. Rather, they grouped all late materials into the Austin Focus, following
Krieger's broad definition of 1946. The Austin Focus, as used by Krieger in 1946 and
by Miller and Jelks in 1952, can be equated with the current definition of the Central Texas Aspect.

go

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
AYcocK ( ALso KNowN As KELL BRANCH SHELTER No.1)

Location: On Kell Branch approximately 9 miles north of Belton, Bell
County.
Excavation: By members of the Central Texas Archeological Society
in late 1935 and early 1936.
Description: Shelter containing shallow midden refuse and 32 burials.
Cultural affiliations: Both late Edwards Plateau Aspect and Central
Texas Aspect (Toyah Focus only ) represented. The bulk of the midden deposit, however, appears to belong to the Edwards Plateau
Aspect. Only a few of the burials were associated with artifactsprojectile points in all cases. Some of the points were very likely the
cause of death. The cultural affiliations of the burials are difficult to
determine, but presumably represent individuals of both aspects.
References: Aynesworth, 1936; Lux, 1936; Turner, 1936; Watt, 1936.
BLUM

Location: Within the Whitney Reservoir, on the west bank of Nolands
River near the town of Blum, Hill County.
Excavation: In the early fall of 1952 by the River Basin Surveys, National Park Service, Austin.
Description: Rockshelter-open terrace site containing evidence of occupation buried as much as 1 7 or 18 feet beneath the surface.
Cultural affiliations: Attributed entirely to the Central Texas Aspect,
with Toyah Focus artifacts generally overlying those of the Austin
Focus.
Reference: Jelks, 1953.
E ucHA ' AN LAKE SITE No. 1

Location: In San Saba County, on the west bank of the Colorado River
about 1 mile upstream from the mouth of Fall Creek. Now covered
by Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: In 1937 by the WPA-The University of Texas.
Description: A refuse accumulation, consisting of a burnt-rock midden
overlain and underlain by shallow non-burnt rock midden debris,
on the crest of a knoll.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect, overlain by Central
Texas Aspect (Austin Focus only? ). The late component was found
only in the northwestern part of the site, in the upper non-burnt
rock midden.
Reference: Woolsey, 1938.

91

CENTRAL TEXAS
BucHANAN LAKE SITE No.

9

Location: On the west bank of the Colorado River, 17 miles northeast of
Llano, Llano County. Now covered by Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: By the WPA-The University of Texas in the late summer
of 1937.
Description: A shallow midden accumulation.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect overlain by the Central
Texas Aspect.
Reference: Woolsey, 1938.
BucHANAN LAKE SITE No.

57

Location: In Burnet County, on the east bank of the Colorado River,
one-half mile south of Fall Creek. Now covered by Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: By the WPA-The University of Texas in 1937.
Description: A long, narrow shelter with occupational debris extending
to a maximum depth of 87 inches. The south end of the shelter wall
contained faint traces of red horizontal, vertical, and cross-hatched
lines.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects.
Reference: Woolsey, 1938.
CEDAR PARK

Location: On the north side of South Brushy Creek, near the community of Cedar Park, Williamson County.
Excavation: The University of Texas; various collectors, especially
Erich Pohl.
Description: A large burnt rock midden, originally over an acre in extent and 7 feet in height.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects.
Points typologically similar or identical to Angostura, Plainview,
and Meserve were recorded.
Reference: Schuetz, 195 7 (only the Erich Pohl collection, housed in
the Witte Memorial Museum, has been reported).
CoLLINs

Location: Travis County, on the south bank of Onion Creek, approximately 6 miles south of Austin.
Excavation: In 1953-54 by students from The University of Texas.
Description: Occupational debris buried in the upper terrace of Onion

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Creek. Evidence of habitation extended to a depth of approximately
9 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect in the lower levels, with
mixture of Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects (largely
Austin Focus ) in the uppermost 18 inches of the terrace deposit.
Reference: Suhm, 1955.
FALL CREEK SITE

No.2

Location: In San Saba County at the junction of Fall Creek and the
Colorado River, on the opposite side of the creek from Fall Creek
Site No. 3 (see below). Site now covered by Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: Extensively by the WPA-The University of Texas, from
April to July, 1937.
Description and cultural affiliations: Not a single site, but 2 middens,
2 caves and 3 small rockshelters (only one of the shelters, however,
was excavated).
Midden No. 1: An extensive midden deposit with considerable
burned rock accumulation. Occupation refuse extended to a maximum depth of 72 inches. One flexed burial (BC-1 ) , placed beneath a number of stones, was recovered. Within or near the chest
cavity of the skeleton were found 2 arrow points, an Eddy and a
Scallorn. The lower levels of the midden yielded Edwards Plateau
Aspect artifacts, the upper ones, Central Texas Aspect artifacts.
Midden No. 2: A refuse deposit on top of a natural knoll. Artifacts extended to a depth of 52 inches in one part of the site; however, depths of 10 to 36 inches were more typical. Seven infant
burials (BD-1 to BD-7 ) were excavated. Associated with one of
the infant burials (BD-5 ) was a projectile point (type? ) . A second
burial (BD-7) had 6 unworked mussel shells resting, convex side
up, immediately above the skull. The eastern and northeastern
portions of the site were concentrated burnt rock midden accumulations. Both Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects were
represented at the site.
Cave No . 1: A small cave with a shallow refuse deposit. Cultural affiliations uncertain, although the presence of " large" projectile
points and a tanged knife suggests an Edwards Plateau Aspect occupation. Also found were a perforated mussel shell and a conch
shell bead.
Cave No. 2: Measured 36 feet long by 20 feet wide and contained
evidence of occupation to a depth of 50 inches below the surface.

93

CENTRAL TEXAS

Few artifacts were recovered and the cultural affiliations are uncertain.
Shelter No. 2: A small rockshelter with occupational refuse extending to a maximum depth of 30 inches. Apparently occupied only
by the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Jackson, 1938.
FALL CREEK SrTE

No.3

Location: On the Colorado River, 21 miles northeast of Llano, Llano
County. Now covered by waters of Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: Extensively by the WPA-The University of Texas in
1937.
Description and cultural affiliations: Not a single site, but a series of
refuse areas designated as Mound 1, 2 and 3; as Midden 1, 2 and 3;
and rockshelters labelled 1, 2 and 3.
Mound No.1: A burnt rock midden accumulation, consisting of the
southeast portion of the site, which yielded Edwards Plateau Aspect artifacts. The adjacent non-burnt rock area contained Central
Texas Aspect materials.
Mound No.2: A shallow refuse accumulation located on top of a natural knoll. The southern edge of the knoll contained a small burntrock midden affiliated primarily, or perhaps exclusively, with the
Edwards Plateau Aspect. The upper levels of the nearby ( ?) nonburnt rock refuse yielded Central Texas Aspect artifacts.
Mound No.3: A refuse deposit of the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Midden No.1: A small refuse accumulation of the Edwards Plateau
and Central Texas aspects.
Midden No . 2: An extensive midden , largely burnt rock, in front of,
and adjacent to Rockshelter No. 1 (see below ). The midden refuse extended to a maximum depth of about 6 feet. Edwards Plateau Aspect was found in the lower levels, Central Texas Aspect in
the upper ones. Also found in the upper portion of the midden
were 3 items of European origin: a fragment of brass stamped
" Anheuser Busch, St. Louis," a large, lustrous blue glass bead, and
a United States quarter dated 1876. The nature of these materials
is such that they may be intrusives left by recent European visitors to the area , rather than trade pieces associated with the
Indian occupation.
Midden No. 3: A midden adjacent to Shelter No. 3, Site 3. Maximum
depth of refuse was 36 inches. Edwards Plateau occupation overlain by a thin veneer of Central Texas Aspect refuse.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

94

Rockshelter No. 1: Maximum dimensions of 27 feet in length, 16
feet deep and deposit of about 6 feet. One burial (BB-1) was
found in a test trench dug in 1932. Artifacts, and very probably
the burial, belong to the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Rockshelter No. 2: A small shelter with a shallow refuse accumulation. Site yielded a possible cremated burial. Cultural affiliations
unknown.
Rockshelter No.3: A small shelter occupied primarily by the Central
Texas Aspect.
Reference: Jackson, 1938.
FIELDS

Location: Approximately 14.5 miles north of Barksdale in the eastern
part of Edwards County.
Ex cavation: In April 1934 by a small crew from The University of
Texas.
Description: The easternmost dry rockshelter as yet reported in Central Texas. It measures 25 feet long and has an overhang of 20 feet .
Cultural deposit in shelter was thin, varying from 4 to 20 inches in
depth.
Cultural affiliations: The lithic artifacts show, as might be expected in
view of the shelter's westerly geographic location, a blending of the
Edwards Plateau Aspect and the Pecos River Focus. A second component, possibly referable to an as yet undefined focus of the Central
Texas Aspect, was found at the site. This latter occupation shares
many traits with the late occupations reported by Huskey in the
nearby Nueces Canyon.
Reference: Camp bell, 195 7.
GIBSON

Location: On Elm Creek, in the Abilene vicinity.
Excavation: Only small cuts have been made in the high, vertically exposed stream bank by Cyrus N. Ray and others. Most of the in situ
artifacts from the site were removed from the bank after they had
been partially exposed by erosion.
Description: Occupational refuse, consisting largely of stone artifacts,
chipping waste and hearths, deeply buried under alluvial sediments.
The site is being exposed and destroyed by lateral cutting of Elm
Creek. At the base of the 30-foot vertical bank is a partially exposed
purplish marl or clay formation-the local bedrock. Lying on top of

95

CENTRAL TEXAS

the bedrock, and separated from it by a disconformity, is a 5-foot formation of reddish clay with small gravel lenses near the upper portion. (This layer is referred to by Cyrus N. Ray as the Lower and the
Upper-the topmost part with the gravel lenses-Clear Fork Silts;
and by M. M. Leighton and E. B. Sayles as the Durst Silts.) Immediately above the reddish clay lie 25 feet of horizontally bedded
pinkish-tan sands. These sands are lithologically homogenous, but
are separated by about 7 minor unconformities or layers (minor
erosional surfaces?) . The pinkish-tan sands are referred to by Ray
as the Nugent Silts, 1 through 5; and by Leighton and Sayles as
the Elm Creek Silts. All, or almost all (there is some confusion on
this point), of the in situ artifacts and oi:her evidences of occupation
are from the Durst-Elm Creek Silts (Clear Fork Silts), especially
the upper part, and from the Durst-Elm Creek (Upper Clear ForkNugent) contact. The age of the Durst and Elm Creek silts has
aroused considerable interest and controversy. Leighton, as Ray and
others have pointed out, erroneously thought both formations contained extinct fauna and, consequently, assigned them to the Pleistocene. There is, however, every reason to think that the Elm Creek
Silts belong to the Recent period. The dating of the Durst Silts has not
yet been resolved, but they too may be post-Pleistocene in age.
Cultural affiliations: In terms of the framework used herein, the material is classified as Edwards Plateau Aspect. Ray and Kelley, however, consider it as a manifestation of the Clear Fork Complex (Ray)
or Focus (Kelley).
References: Bryan, 1938; Crook, 1955; Kelley, 1947b; Leighton, 1936;
Ray, 1930,1939, 1940a, 1941,1945,1955.
GoAT BLUFF

Location: Southwestern part of Kerr County.
Excavation: By J. B. Sollberger, about 1945.
Description: Rockshelter about 40 feet in length and having a maximum overhang of a bout 10 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect and Central Texas Aspect (the latter component cannot be identified as either Toyah or
Austin Focus, and may constitute a distinct focus).
Reference: Sollberger, 1949.
GooDRICH

Location: On the east bank of the Colorado River, approximately 22
miles southwest of Lampasas, Burnet County.

g6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Excavation: Sporadically from 1952 to 1956 by Albert Field and associates.
Description: Rockshelter having a maximum overhang of 10 feet and
maximum length of 150 feet . Occupational debris abundantly represented in the sh elter fill and extends to a depth of at least 4 feet
below the surface. The shelter also contained an infant burial. In
the grave pit, above the burial, was an overturned milling slab, various rocks, and a waterworn limestone slab painted on both face s with
red parallel lines. Immediately below the burial was another painted
slab. The second slab had red lines running lengthwise on one end
of the slab and red lines running downward at about a 75 ° angle to
the parallel ones on the other end.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects. The
burial appears to belong to the Central Texas occupation.
Reference: Field, 1956.
GmMEs-HouY BuRNT RocK MIDDEN

Location: In the Belton Reservoir area, Coryell County, on the canyon
rim about 200 feet northwest of the Grimes-Houy Shelter (see
below ) .
Excavation: In November, 1951 , by the Smithsonian Institution. River
Basin Surveys, Austin Office.
Description: An oval-shaped burnt rock midden, approximately 50 feet
long by 30 feet wide, and having a maximum depth of about 2 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Predominantly Edwards Plateau Aspect, but with
Central Texas Aspect material in the upper levels. Sherds found in
the upper levels most probably represent trade vessels obtained from
the Caddo region.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
GRIMEs-HouY SHELTER

Location: In the Belton Reservoir area, Coryell County, near the junction of Horse Creek and the Leon River.
Excavation: In January, 1951, by the Smithsonian Institution, River
Basin Surveys, Austin Office; and somewhat later by D . B. Hill.
Description: Rockshelter with a shallow deposit (about 24 inches )
containing occupational debris and 12 burials.
Cultural affiliations: Principally the Central Texas Aspect , with Austin and Toyah Focus components present. In the lower levels a few
dart points were found, apparently mixed with the Central Texas

97

CENTRAL TEXAS

Aspect material. The ceramic assemblage, as well as the occurrence
of Copena knives , suggest relationships with peoples of east Texas.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
HoDGES

Location: In Jones County, on the west bank of the Clear Fork of the
Brazos River, about midway between the community of Nugent and
the confluence of Elm Creek with the Clear Fork.
Excavation: WPA-Texas Technological College in early 1940.
Description: Intermittent orcupation zones of thinly distributed debris
deeply buried in river alluvium. Five zones were recognized
(Wheat, 1940 ) . They varied in depth below the surface from 6 feet
(level 1) to 22.5 feet (level 5). Level 1 yielded 3 slightly basinshaped stone hearths (average diameter 25 inches ), level 2 yielded
a similar-sized hearth composed of small angular rock fragments,
and level 4 yielded a very large hearth ( 15 feet in diameter and
maximum thickness of 11 inches ) composed of angular rock fra gments, charcoal, mussel shells, and burnt earth.
Cultural affiliations: Because of the paucity of artifacts, it is difficult
to assign the material to any specific complex. In general, however,
the artifacts fall into an Archaic tradition.
References: Crook, 1955; Ray, 1940b; Wheat. 1940.
HoRsE CREEK

Location: In the Belton Reservoir area , Coryell County, a bout 1 00
yards west of the Grimes-Houy Shelter.
Excavation: By the Smithsonian Institution, River Basin Surveys,
Austin Office, in November, 1951.
Description: A burnt rock midden with a vertical cross section exposed
by lateral cutting of Horse Creek. Midden debris visible from 12
inches below the surface to a maximum depth of about 66 inches.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
HuGHES

Location: Williamson County, approximately midway between Leander and Georgetown on the South Branch of the San Gabriel
River.
Excavation: Largely by Erich Pohl.
Description: Burnt rock midden.

g8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Cultural affiliations: Early points recovered include Meserve, Plainview, and the base of a questionable Clovis point. Most of the artifacts found, however, are identified with the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Schuetz, 195 7.
INDIAN BLUFF

Location: Four miles west of Lampasas, Lampasas County.
Excavation: About 1927, by C. B. Taliferro; several years ago by Eric
Matthews and a group of Boy Scouts; and, most recently, by Albert
Field and others from the Lampasas area.
Description: Several small crevices at the base of a limestone-slate
bluff.
Cultural affiliations: The crevice excavated by Taliferro contained a
burial with associated offerings of glass beads and elk teeth. The
ethnic identity of the burial has not been determined. Areas excavated by Field and his associates have yielded evidences of both Edwards Plateau and Central Texas (apparently both Toyah and Austin components) aspects.
Reference: Field, 1956.
JoHNsoN HoLE

Location: In the Belton Reservoir area, Coryell County, along both
banks of Stockton Branch.
Excavation: By the Smithsonian Institution, River Basin Surveys,
A us tin Office, in November, 1951.
Description: A rather deep and extensive burnt rock midden. Site bisected after initial accumulation by lateral migration of Stockton
Branch.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect, overlain by Central
Texas Aspect. Trade sherds and intrusive projectile point types from
east Texas.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
KINCAID

Location: Four miles north of Sabinal, Uvalde County.
Excavation: In 1948 by the Texas Memorial Museum and, in 1953, by
The University of Texas Summer Field School in collaboration with
the Texas Memorial Museum.

99

CENTRAL TEXAS

Description: A cave-river terrace site containing occupational material
extending to a depth of more than 12 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Cultural debris , including a crude cobblestone
pavement, which dates from the late Pleistocene, but which has not
yet been assigned to any specific complex. None of the 5 Folsom
points from Kincaid was found in situ; all were from the back dirt
left by looters. In the upper layers in the cave and terrace deposits
in front of the cave were recovered Edwards Plateau Aspect artifacts, overlain by material of the Central Texas Aspect.
Reference: Sellards, 1952; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954 (an extensive report by T. N. Campbell and Glen Evans is in preparation).
LAKE LocKE

Location: Near Jarrell, Williamson County.
Excavation: Erich Pohl.
Description: Burnt rock midden.
Cultural affiliations: Early points of types Angostura, Meserve , and
Plainview. Bulk of artifacts, however, clearly affiliated with the
Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Schuetz, 195 7.
LEHMANN

Location: Three miles northeast of Doss, Gillespie County.
Excavation: In January, 1936, by the Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas.
Description: A crescent-shaped rockshelter, approximately 240 feet in
length, and having a maximum depth of 85 inches in the area excavated.
Cultural affiliations: Central Texas Aspect, particularly the Toyah
Focus and the Edwards Plateau Aspect. The one burial obtained
from the site probably belonged to the Toyah Focus occupation.
Refere nce: Kelley, 1947a.
LS-58

Location: Lampasas County, on the east bank of the Colorado River,
approximately 300 yards from the mouth of Lynch's Creek.
Excavation: By Albert Field and others from the Lampasas area, about
1956.
Description: A small shelter with a narrow overhang. Deposit shallow
and contained only slight evidence of occupation. A tightly flexed

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

crevice burial and a painted pebble, apparently associated with the
burial, were excavated. The rear wall of the shelter contained red
and black pictographs composed of horizontal and vertical lines.
Cultural affiliations: Undetermined. The painted pebble, however, is
remarkably like those obtained from near the mouth of the Pecos
River.
Reference: Field, 1956.
MAss BuRIAL

Location: On the west bank of the Brazos River, near Waco, McLennan
County.
Excavation: After the discovery by workmen in 1936, students from
Baylor University and, later, m embers of the Central T exas Archeological Society performed salvage excavations.
Description: At least 22 burials placed in an area about 12 feet x 14
feet and at depths varying from 48 to 60 inches. As the burials seem
to have been interred at the sam e time, they may represent a single
mass burial. The only artifacts recovered were 3 arrow points of
type Perdiz (all found in one skeleton and undoubtedly the cause
of death ) and a single earspool.
Cultural affiliations: The absence of burial offerings makes it impossible to assess the cultural affiliations ; however, the presence of the
Perdiz points suggests a late date for the interments. The earspool,
probably worn as an ornament by one of the individuals, was very
likely traded from the Caddo area.
References: Meroney, 1936; Lux, 1937; Turner, 1937; Watt and
Meroney, 1937.
MERRELL

Location: On the north side of Brushy Creek, one-quarter of a mile
northeast of Round Rock, Williamson County.
Excavation: In 1934 by The University of Texas. Additional testing
by J. Charles Kelley in June, 1940.
Description: Intermittent midden debris (in part, burnt rock midden
accumulation ) buried in a 20-foot terrace of Brushy Creek. Maximum depth of unquestionable occupation was 14 feet below the
surfa ce.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Campbell, 1948.

101

CENTRAL TEXAS
MaNTELL

Location: Uvalde County, near the Edwards County line.
Excavation: In 1947 by the Texas Memorial Museum.
Description: A small rockshelter.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect underlain by an unidentified occupation contemporaneous with extinct fauna , especially
tapir.
References: Sellards, 1952; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954.
W. A .

MYATT

Location: East-central Jones County, approximately 20 miles east of
Anson.
Excavation: Limited testing by Cyrus N . Ray in 1929 and later. More
extensive excavations in the summer of 1940 by WPA-Texas Technological College.
Description: Occupational refuse deeply buried in alluvium.
Cultural affiliations: The earliest occupation has been assigned tentatively to the Brazos Culture (Wheat, 1947 ). There was not a sufficient amount of material recovered from the upper portion of the
site to determine the cultural affiliations of the late component.
Reference: Wheat, 1947.
N UECES

CANYON SITES

Location: In the Nueces River canyon, Edwards, Real, and Uvalde
counties.
Excavation: By Vane Huskey, prior to 1935.
Descriptions: Seven burnt rock middens ( 4 classified by Huskey as
" T y pe A." and 3 as " Type B"); 3 sites described as ... "mounds . . .
so situated as to be near small caves or deep fi ssures in the faces of
cliffs" (Huskey, 1935: 110 ); and 1 small rockshelter.
Cultural affiliations: (Assigned on the basis of Huskey's illustrations. )
All levels of " T ype A," according to the criteria u sed herein, are
identified with the Edwards Plateau Aspect. J. Charles Kelley, however, has suggested that the lower level of " Mound A Culture" be
identified with the Round Rock Focus, and that the upper and middle
levels be associated with the Uvalde Focus. The "Mound B Culture"
seem s to belong to the Central Texas Aspect, perhaps to an undefined local variant. The remainder of the sites excavated by Huskey

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

102

appear to have manifestations of both the Edwards Plateau and
Central Texas aspects.
Reference: Huskey, 1935.
PANORAMA

Location: Along the south shore of Lake Austin, a bout 18 miles west of
Austin, Travis County.
Excavation: By H. F. Sturgis on weekends throughout the summer and
fall of 1955.
Description: Several burnt rock middens and chipping areas on a high
terrace above present Lake Austin. Only two of the middens (No.
1 and No. 2 ) were excavated.
Cultural affiliations: Both middens excavated belonged to the Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Midden No. 1 yielded an Angostura point.
Reference: Sturgis, 1956.
RoB RoY

Location: On the south bank of the Colorado River, 10 miles above
Austin, Travis County.
Excavation: WPA-The University of Texas, in late 1938 and early
1939.
Description: Occupational debris, including numerous hearths, deeply
buried (up to a bout 30 feet ) in a terrace deposit of the Colorado
River. One flexed burial, placed beneath 11 limestone slabs, was recovered. Only artifact associated with the burial was an engraved
turkey bone.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect overlain by the Central
Texas Aspect.
Reference: Jackson, 1939.
SA N GABRIEL

Location: In Williamson County, 3 miles northwest of Leander on the
South Fork of the San Gabriel River.
Excavation: By Erich Pohl, about 1937.
Description: Burnt rock midden.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect, with some suggestions
of a light Central Texas Aspect occupation. Projectile points of probable Plainview, Angostura, Meserve, and (less certain ) Scottsbluff
types were found .
Reference: Schuetz, 1957.

CENTRAL TEXAS

103

SMITH

Location: Travis County, approximately 6 miles southeast of Austin.
Excavation: Sporadically from October, 1954, to mid-August, 1955, by
students from The University of Texas.
Description: A rockshelter approximately 130 feet long and having a
maximum overhang of 18 feet. The deposit contained 6 distinct occupation zones, extending from the surface to a depth of 8 or 9 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Predominantly Central Texas Aspect, with Toyah
Focus stratigraphically above the Austin Focus. The deepest occupation zone has been identified as late Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Suhm, 1957.
OAK CREEK

Location: On Oak Creek, Coke County.
Excavation: Partially destroyed by looters; the undisturbed portion
excavated by E. B. Sayles and Carl Chelf, apparently in the late
19ZO's.
Description: A small sandstone shelter containing 4 occupation zones,
each separated by a layer of sterile clay and silt. The ceiling, the
rear wall, and several large slabs or boulders contained numerous
petroglyphs. The petroglyphs consisted largely of narrow and broad
incised lines, generally oriented vertically.
Cultural affiliations: The artifact yield was scanty and consisted primarily of non-diagnostic scrapers and utilized flakes. A bottle glass
fragment found in the uppermost occupation layer, and which may
date about 1867, suggests that the site may be, in part, historic.
Reference: Sayles, 1930.
URBANKTE

Location: vVithin the Belton Reservoir area, in southeastern corner
of Coryell County, on Leon River immediately above its confluence
with Horse Creek.
Excavation: Rather extensive testing in December, 1950, by personnel
from Smithsonian Institution, River Basin Surveys, Austin Office.
Description: Shallow occupational debris covering an area 3 to 4 acres
in extent.
Cultural affiliations: Largely Central Texas Aspect with Austin and
Toyah foci both represented. Minor occupation by the Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Contact with the Caddoan area indicated by the
presence of trade sherds, including type Holly Fine Engraved.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 195Z.

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

References Cited
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
A An- American Antiquity
B-CTAS-Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological Society
B-TAPS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
E-TAS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
MP- Medallion Papers. Gila Pueblo.
SJA- Southwestern Journal of Anthropology
TJS-The Texas Journal of Science
UTP-The University of Texas Publications
Aynesworth, K. H.
1936. Biographic Studies of Twenty-one Skulls of the Central T exas Indians.
B-CTAS, No.2, pp. 30-34.
Bryan, Kirk
1938. Deep Sites Near Abilene Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 273-274.
Campbell, T. N.
1948. The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 19, pp. 7-35 .
1957. The Fields Shelter: An Archeological Site in Edwards County, Texas.
TJS, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 7-25.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr.
1955. Reconsideration and Geologic Revaluation of the Famous Abilene, Texas,
Sites. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 38-62.
Field, Albert
1956. Archeological Investigations in Lampasas, Burnet, Llano, and San Saba
Counties, Texas. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 161-184.
Gladwin, Winifred and Harold S.
1934. A Method for Designation of Cultures and Their Variations. MP, No. 15.
Huskey, Vane
1935. An Archeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon. B-TAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 105114.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. The Fall Creek Sites. In: Annual Report of WPA and The University of
Texas Archaeological Research. Lake Buchanan, 1936-1937. UTP, No.
3802, pp. 11- 118.
1939. A Deep Archeological Site in Travis County, Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 11 , pp.
203-225.
Jelks, Edward B.
1951. Relationships between Foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect: A Distributional Analysis of Diagnostic Projectile Point Types from Archaeological
Sites in the Marshall Ford Dam Reservoir, Travis County, Texas. M. A.
Thesis on file at The University of Texas Library, Austin.
1953. Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. B-TAS, Vol. 24, pp. 189-207.

CENTRAL TEXAS

105

Kelley, J. Charles
1947a. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.
1947b. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clea r Fork
Focus. A An, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 97- 109.
1948. Arrow or Dart Shaft Tools and Problematical Incised Stones from Central
and \IV estern Texas. El Palacio, Vol. 55, No. 3, pp. 73-85.
1955. Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. American Anthropologist,
Vol. 57, No. 5, pp. 981-995.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. The Association of Archa eological Materials with Geologi c Deposits in the
Big Bend Region of Texas. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society
Publication, No. 10, pp. 9- 173.
Kelley, J. Charles, and T. N. Campbell
1942. What Are the Burnt Rock Mounds of T exas? A An, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp.
319-322.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern T exas. UTP, No. 4640.
Leighton, M. M.
1936. Geological Aspects of the Finding of Primitive Man Near Abilene, Texas.
MP, No. 24.
Libby, Willard F.
1955. Radiocarbon Dating. University of Chicago Press.
Lux, Konrad
1936. A Detailed Report of the Teeth and Supporting Structures as Found in
Crania of Aycock Shelter. B-CT AS, No. 2, pp. 39-42.
1937. A Detailed Report of Teeth and Supporting Structures as Found in Crania
of Mass Burial. B-CT AS, No. 3, pp. 34--40.
McKern, W. C.
1939. The Midwestern Taxonomic M ethod as an Aid t o Archaeological Culture
Study. A An, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 301-313.
M eroney, VV. P.
1936. A Mass Burial near Wa co. B-CTAS, No. 2, pp. 59- 60.
Miller, E. 0 ., and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archeological Excavations at th e Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
B-TAPS, Vol. 23, pp. 168- 217.
N ewcomb, Willi am W. , Jr.
1955. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County. B-TAS,
Vol. 26, pp. 186- 199.
1956. A Reappraisal of the "Cultural Sink" of Texas. SJA, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp.
145-153.
Pearce, J . E.
1932. The Present Status of T exas Arch eology. B-TAPS, Vol. 4, pp. 44--54.

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Ray, Cyrus N.
1929. A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Region. BTAPS, Vol. 1, pp. 7-22.
1930. Report on Some Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene Section .
B-TAPS, Vol. 2, pp. 45-58.
1938. The Clear Fork Complex. B-TAPS, Vol. 11, pp. 226-250.
1939. Inaccuracies in Fischel's Folsom Article. AAn, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 58-64.
1940a. The Deeply Buried Gibson Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 223-237.
1940b. Untitled editorial note in: Joe Ben Wheat, Preliminary Report on Excavation of the Hodges Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 211-212.
1941. Another Type of Gibson Site Point. B-TAPS, Vol. 13, p. 177.
1945. Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. B-TAPS, Vol. 16, pp. 117-147.
1948. The Facts Concerning the Clear Fork Culture. A An, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp.
320-322.
1955. Stone-lined Basin with Charcoal in Lower Clear Fork Silt. B-TAS, Vol.
26, pp. 101-108.
Ray, Cyrus N., and E. B. Sayles
1941. An Agreement on Abilene Region Terminology. B-TAPS, Vol. 13, p. 175.
Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
1954. Bands and Band-clusters of the Coahuiltecan Indians. Student Papers in
Anthropology, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas,
Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 1-24.
Sayles, E. B.
1930. A Rock Shelter in Coke County. B-TAPS, Vol. 2, pp. 33-40.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas. MP, No. 27.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1957. A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. B-TAS, Vol. 28, pp.
135-168.
Sellards, E. H.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of Texas Press.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1953a. The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. TJS, Vol. 5, No. 3,
pp. 280-304.
1953b. Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. SJA, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp.
76-98.
Sollberger, J. B.
1949. A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Kerr County, Texas. The Record, Vol. 8,
No. 3, pp. 9-14.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1950. Culture Chronology in Texas. A An, Vol. 16, No.2, pp. 151-157.
Sturgis, H. F.
1956. A Burnt-rock Midden Site in Travis County. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 111-128.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955. Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County. B-TAS, Vol. 26, pp. 7-54.
1957. Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. TJS, Vol. 9,
No. 1, pp. 26- 58.

CENTRAL TEXAS

107

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-T AS, Vol. 25.
Turner, Fred A.
1936. Chronic Arthritis in the Early American Indian in Central Texas. BCTAS, No.2, pp. 35-38.
1937. Review of Skeletons from Mass Burial. B-CTAS, No.3, pp. 29-33.
Wallace, Ernest, and E. Adamson Hoebel
1954. The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma Press.
Watt, Frank H.
1936. A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County, Texas. B-CT AS, No. 2, pp.
4-27.
Watt, Frank H., and W . P. Meroney
1937. Supplementary Report on Mass Burial near Waco. B-CTAS, No. 3, pp.
27-28.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1940. Preliminary Report on the Excavation of the Hodges Site. B-TAPS, Vol.
12, pp. 195-216.
1947. Notes on the VV. A. Myatt Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 87-93.
Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1958. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago
Press.
Witte, Adoph H.
1938. Spanish Fort, an Historic Wichita Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 234-244.
Woolsey, A.M.
1938. Additional Buchanan Lake Sites. In: Annual Report of WPA and The
University of Texas Archaeological Research, Lake Buchanan, 1936-1937.
UTP, No. 3802, pp. 119- 145.

A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas
Archeology
DONALD J. LEHMER*

Introduction
FoR THE PURPOSES of this paper, Trans-Pecos Texas is taken to be the
rough parallelogram bounded by and including the valleys of the Rio
Grande and Pecos Rivers south of the New Mexico border (Fig. 1) .
The 30,000 square miles of the region offer a variety of environmental
situations. The Guadalupe, Davis, and Chisos ranges form a disconnected mountain spine through the center of the area. A lower series
of ranges runs southeast from El Paso parallel to the Rio Grande.
Inter-mountain areas consist of a series of high basins and valleys
which are drained by small tributaries of the two major rivers. The
river valleys themselves constitute a third province. In some places
both the Pecos and the Rio Grande have carved deep canyons; in others
the valleys open out to include floodplain s several miles wide.
Native vegetation of the Trans-Pecos divides into a series of zones
which correspond to the physiographic divisions. The valleys of the
rivers and the larger tributary creeks have a cover of mesquite, willow,
cottonwood, and a fairly luxuriant growth of grasses and shrubs. The
lower interior basins and the terraces bordering the major valleys are
clothed with a scant growth of greasewood, ocotillo, prickly pear, and
other desert plants; in the higher valleys a variety of grasses, yucca,
and sotol flourishes. Pine, pinon, and oak are found in the higher mountains where there is enough rain to support a fairly heavy forest
growth.
* Donald J. Lehmer is associated with the University of Omaha and lectures at the
Strategic Air Command Headquarters in Omaha. He has done extensive field work
in M exico, the Plains, and the Southwest, including Trans-Pecos T exas. His monograph, The l ornada Branch of the Mogollon, is one of the primary sou rces on the
arch eology of Trans-Pecos Texas. He is also co-author, with J. Charles Kelley and
T. N. Campbell, of The Association of A rcheological Materials with Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas.

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Trans-Pecos was outside the main buffalo range, but some of
the animals did penetrate west of the Pecos. Other native game animals include antelope, deer, a few bear, and small mammals. Several
varieties of fish are caught in the Pecos and the Rio Grande. Snakes,
lizards and other reptiles are common, and there is a fair variety of
bird life in the region.

Historic Tribes
A number of Indian groups are reported to have lived in the TransPecos area during the period since it was first visited by Europeans.

Fig . 1 . Map showing limits of the Trans-Pecos area and its archeological subdivisions :
(1 I Southeastern district, (2) El Paso district, (3) La Junta disirict, and (4) Northeastern district (tentative).

TRANS-PECOS

111

The first contact may have come as early as 1535 when Cabeza de
Vaca apparently crossed the district on his epic journey from the Texas
coast to Sinaloa. Subsequently a host of explorers, traders, missionaries,
military men, and settlers have left a mass of historical data on the
Trans-Pecos tribes. On the basis of these data it appears that there was
a marked difference between two Indian ways of life in the area. The
groups occupying the Rio Grande valley were mainly farmers who
lived in permanent villages and did a little hunting in the uplands.
The upland tribes, who also ranged through the mountains, were primarily hunters and gatherers, although some of them seem to have
cultivated small gardens in places where water was available from
springs and seeps.
The Mescalero Apache were the most important of the upland
tribes during the time of the American occupation, with the Comanches
raiding into and across the Trans-Pecos, and the Lipan occupying the
southeastern margins of the area. Three additional groups can be identified in the El Paso district-the semi-nomadic Suma; the Mansos,
who are reported to have shared a number of traits of social and political organization with the Pueblo peoples of New Mexico; and finally a handful of Pueblo Indians who settled there after the Pueblo
revolt against the Spanish settlers in New Mexico in 1680.
The La Junta district, the area around the junction of the Conchos
and the Rio Grande, presents a complex situation when it comes to
identifying historic tribal entities. The Spanish accounts contain literally dozens of different names for local Indian groups. Some of these
are obviously different renditions of the same name. Others appear
to be different names applied to the same group by different writers.
However, even when all the discernible synonyms have been eliminated, an impressive roster remains. Many of the names used by the
Spanish for the La Junta Indians appear to refer to small groups such
as the occupants of a single village. Other names, particularly those
which are Spanish words for various animals, such as conejo, may possibly designate totemic bands. Still others, such as lumano, almost certainly refer to inclusive socio-political entities which were recognized
as 'tribes' by the Indians themselves. Much work still remains to be
done with the ethnohistory of the La Junta district, work which in
time should produce a definitive list of the various tribes which occupied the villages there and of the others who came to trade with the
settled farmers.

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

T rans-Pecos Archeological Sites
The archeological sites of the Trans-Pecos area vary greatly both as
to type and artifact content. However, the individual sites tend to fall
into several categories, categories which are important both from the
point of view of archeological techniques and in the reconstruction of
the prehistory of the area. In general, differences between the several
categories reflect both geography and time. Certain classes of sites tend
to be localized in particular sections of the area; other groups of sites
are characteristic of particular periods in the prehistory of the area .
Village sites are characterized by the remains of permanent houses
and usually by a fairly heavy accumulation of refuse which indicates
a reasonably permanent occupation. Within the Trans-Pecos area,
village sites occur around old playas in the basins to the east of El
Paso, at various places along the Rio Grande from El Paso through the
La Junta district, and along the lower reaches of the larger tributary
creeks which run into the Rio Grande in the La Junta district. The villages in the vicinity of El Paso seem to date from the period between
A.D. 900 and 1400. The La Junta villages are later, dating from after
A.D. 1200.
Rock shelters (Fig. 3-6) , recesses in cliffs or steep hillsides, occur
throughout much of the Trans-Pecos. Some are barely large enough
to have sheltered a single family; others could have provided a home
for a fairly sizable group and have floors covered with refuse deposits
several feet in thickness. Since the overhang of the shelters has usually
protected the fill from rainfall, perishable materials are frequently
found in these sites. These artifacts of wood and fibre give a much
more complete picture of the occupants' culture than can be reconstructed from excavations in open sites.
Specimens from the shelter sites indicate that different ones were
occupied by people with distinctive cultural traditions, and that the
occupations lasted from well before A.D. 900 until early historic times.
Open camps are found throughout much of the highland area of the
Trans-Pecos and in sheltered canyons in the mountains. The campsites are recognizable by the presence of a thin layer of occupational
debris, often scattered over a considerable area. Much of the debris
consists of hearthstones, small angular fragments of rock whose color
and structure indicate repeated heating by fire. In some of the camps
the hearthstones are found in small clumps with ash and charcoal
intermixed between the rock fragments. In others there are large
doughnut-shaped circles-the so-called sotol pits or midden circles.

113

TRANS-PECOS

Like the rock shelters, the open camps of the Trans-Pecos represent
occupations by different Indian groups at different periods of time.
Buried sites have been located in some parts of the Trans-Pecos,
particularly the Alpine district, where modern arroyo cutting has
sliced through the alluvial fills of the valleys and exposed the different
layers or strata. In some places hearthstone and artifacts are found
eroding from the arroyo walls, the remains of camps similar to those
found on the present ground surface. However, these camp have been
buried by the gradually accumulating valley fills. The buried camps
occur at various depths and in different strata in the alluvium, sure
indication that they represent occupations widely separated in time.
Caches, pictographs and petrogly phs, cairns, and isolated burials
make up a final miscellaneous group of archeological remains which is
a part of the story of the Indian occupation of the Trans-Pecos area.
Caches of artifacts sometimes occur within villages or rock shelters,
and they are also sometimes found divorced from any habitation area.
By far the best known of this latter type is the cache of over 1200
arrow points found in the 1890's on the highest point of Mt. Livermore
in the Davis Mountains (Janes, 1930 ). Pictographs and petroglyphs
occur frequently in the Trans-Pecos area (Fig. 7-8). They may be
painted or carved on rock surfaces adjacent to old habitation areas, or
they may be found away from any other archeological remains. Cairns
of piled rocks are found in the area. However, it is difficult to know
which, if any, of the cairns are the result of Indian handiwork and
which ones relate to the White occupation of the area. Burials made
away from any habitation site occur infrequently in the Trans-Pecos.

Archeological Investigations
Our knowledge of Trans-Pecos archeology has been accumulating
since 1854 when J. Russell Bartlett published a description of the pictographs near Hueco Tanks in his " Personal Narrative," a book which
grew out of his activities in connection with the boundary between
the newly expanded United States and Mexico. However, most of the
information which can be used by the contemporary archeologist has
been collected since the end of the first quarter of the 20th Century.
Some of these data have been gathered by professional archeologists
working with all the paraphernalia of their trade, the rest by a number of remarkably gifted amateurs who have contributed enormously
to our knowledge of the archeology of the region. Amateurs and pro-

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fessionals together have built up a fund of factual data which today can
be used in making a good generalized reconstruction of the Indian occupation of the Trans-Pecos.
Victor J. Smith of Sul Ross College in Alpine deserves great credit
for his work in Trans-Pecos archeology during the 1920's and 30's. His
investigations were mainly concerned with the rock shelters in the
Alpine district, and they showed the wealth of material which could
be obtained from sites of this type. Smith's researches, together with his
unfailing courtesy to those who followed the trail he blazed, make
him one of the real pioneers in the field . Following Smith's lead, much
of the work done in the Trans-Pecos during the first third of the 20th
Century was concerned with the cave sites, with incidental attention
to the Pueblo remains in the El Paso district. The efforts of Smith, Mrs.
Eileen E. Alves, Mr. and Mrs. C. B. Cosgrove, Col. M. L. Crimmins,
G. C. Martin, Frank M . Setzler, W. S. Stallings, Jr., and many others
(see bibliography) provided the basis for the first assessments of TransPecos archeology.
Those assessments were made in the light of the ideas of Southwestern prehistory which were codified at the first Pecos Conference
in 1929. The Pecos classification was based primarily on information
from the Four Corners area and the upper Rio Grande. The classification recognized a sequence of developmental stages which began
with a hypothetical Basket Maker I and ranged through Basket Maker
II and III and a later series of cultural horizons designated as Pueblo
I through V. The Basket Maker complex included the early dry cave
sites and pit house villages of the Southwest; the Pueblo horizon the
later multi-roomed surface structures down through the contemporary
pueblos. It was assumed at the time that this sequence was more or
less valid for the entire Southwest. As a result, there was a natural
tendency to regard the villages of the El Paso district as a development comparable to the northern pueblos and to equate the dry
cave remains of the Trans-Pecos with the Basket Maker of the San Juan
area. Because of this, designations such as 'Big Bend Basket Maker' are
common in the early reports on Trans-Pecos sites.
Largely because of the work of the Gladwins and their associates at
Gila Pueblo, the realization grew duric'lg the early 1930's that Southwestern archeology was far more complicated than it had seemed in
the past. New cultural complexes were recognized, and a new taxonomic system was devised by the Glad wins (Gladwin, 1934) to classify them. Also, in their search for the origins of the newly recognized
complexes, the Gila Pueblo group pushed archeological surveys farther

TRANS-PECOS

and farther afield. One of these, conducted by E. B. Sayles, covered the
state of Texas. Sayles' report of the results of his survey (Sayles, 1935)
was a significant milestone in the interpretation of Trans-Pecos archeology. Instead of working in the terms of a "Basket Maker' and a
'Pueblo' horizon, Sayles defined a series of phases (equivalent to the
foci of the Midwestern taxonomic system) which distinguished three
separate cultural complexes within the material from the Trans-Pecos
rock shelters-the Pecos River, Big Bend, and Hueco Cave Dwellers.
He also set up an El Paso phase which included both the villages of the
El Paso district and a series of camps farther east, sites in which some
sherds of the characteristic El Paso pottery types were found. Sayles'
Jumano Phase included what later came to be recognized as the village
sites of the La Junta district, and a Lipan Phase included the late
upland camps of the Big Bend. Later, on the basis of reconnaissance
work in Chihuahua (Sayles, 1936), Sayles proposed a Conchos Phase
which is also represented in the La Junta villages. Sayles' classification
shows a remarkable appreciation of the differences between various
Trans-Pecos archeological complexes, and it provided a framework
which was invaluable in planning subsequent research in the TransPecos area.
Since the publication of Sayles' paper, the most important contributions to our knowledge of Trans-Pecos archeology have been made
by J. Charles Kelley. For over twenty years Kelley, who worked with
Sayles during the course of his survey, has been engaged in a comprehensive long-range research program in the Trans-Pecos. His investigations, carried out under the sponsorship of a number of institutions,
have dealt with such varied problems as the identification and excavation of some of the earliest sites known in the area and a meticulous
combing of documentary sources for ethnohistorical data.
One of Kelley's most significant projects was the organization of a
research program jointly sponsored by the Peabody Museum of Harvard and Sul Ross College. In 1938, the geologists and archeologists of
the Peabody-Sul Ross Expedition collaborated in the investigation of a
series of sites buried in the alluvial fills of valleys in the Alpine area.
The geologists, Claude C. Albritton and Kirk Bryan, found that there
were characteristically three formations present in the valley fills,
formations separated from each other by marked erosional disconformities (Albritton and Bryan, 1939). Kelley and the archeologists
working with him recovered archeological materials from sites buried
at different levels in the alluvia. This association of archeological speci-

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mens with the stratified valley fills provides the best available evidence
for the time sequence in Trans-Pecos archeology.
The expedition's findings did much to amplify the earlier knowledge
of Trans-Pecos prehistory. Two new and early stonework 'complexes',
the Maravillas and Santiago, were recognized, and there were indications of the existence of a third, the Red Bluff. Data gathered by the
expedition also contributed to the recognition of the Livermore Focus,
a late non-pottery assemblage which is characterized by highly distinctive projectile points and by other chipped stone artifac·t types.
Also some exploratory work was done with the village remains of the
La Junta district (Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940 ) .
On the basis of these and other data, Kelley has classified the archeological remains of the Big Bend region in terms of the McKem or
Midwestern taxonomic system (Fig. 2 ) . Kelley's Big Bend Aspect includes Say les' Pecos River Cave Dweller as the Pecos River Focus and
Sayles' Big Bend Cave Dweller as the Chisos Focus. Kelley's Bravo
Valley Aspect encompasses three foci : La Junta, Conchos, and Concepcion, which include the village materials found in the general area
of the junction of the Conchos River with the Rio Grande. The Big
Bend and Bravo Valley Aspects, together with the Livermore Focus
and the Maravillas and Santiago complexes, include most of the archeological remains of the Big Bend area .

EI P oso Dist r ict

I

L a Jun ta Distr i ct

I

A l luvia l
Sequence

So ut heastern D i strict

co nte mp. eros ion

Ko kern o t

Depos i t i on

14 00 -

El Paso
12 0 0 -

Do no Ana

~
~

L iverm ore
0

Mes ill a

"c
0

Chisos}i

Post-Ca lam ity
Eros i on

.s;

900 -

Hue co

Santi ego

Pec os

comol e ~

Riv er

co
.9'
<D

Mc ro villos

Compl e~

Ca lamity
Cr eek
Deposition

Post-Nev ill e
Eros ion

Nev ille
Fol som

Fig . 2 . Cultura l a nd alluvia l seq uences of Tran s-Pecos lexa s.

Depos i tion

TRANS-PECOS

117

Other work in the Trans-Pecos since the publication of Sayles' Texas
Survey report includes Mrs. Glen E. Moore's study of the pueblo sites
in the vicinity of El Paso (Moore, 1947) , the publication of the report
on the Cosgroves' work in the western Trans-Pecos cave sites (Cosgrove, 1947 ) , and the definition by the writer of the Jornada Branch,
a series of archeological complexes which range in time from early
rock shelter materials through pit house villages to the later Dona
Ana and El Paso Phase pueblos (Lehmer, 1948 ) .
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology, published in 1954
by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, is presented as "a general summary of
what is fairly well known in Texas archeology" (p . 24) . The Handbook includes 35 pages on the Trans-Pecos. Much of that space is devoted to a series of detailed trait lists of the archeological complexes
which Kelley and others have defined. Compiled from various published sources, those trait lists provide an invaluable and essential
reference for anyone interested in the area. In addition, the Handbook
authors have presented their own ideas of the ebb and flow of native
cultures in the Trans-Pecos. Much of this interpretation seems to be
completely in accord with the known facts. However, two major
points of the summary may well be susceptible of a different interpretation than the one given in the Handbook.
One concerns the sub-areas recognized within the Trans-Pecos. The
Handbook discusses only two sections within the area, a 'western' and
a 'southeastern.' The southeastern district includes the Big Bend region
and the lower Pecos River drainage. It appears to be a valid subculture area on the basis of the archeological remains found there.
However, there are good arguments for breaking down the Handbook's
'western' portion into two parts so that the Trans-Pecos would be subdivided into at least three sub-areas-the Southeastern district, an El
Paso district, and a La Junta district (Fig. 1).
The El Paso district is the part of the area in which remains of the
Hueco Phase and village sites assignable to the Jornada Branch consistently occur. These villages, which stand in sharp contrast to the
Bravo Valley Aspect villages of the La Junta district, occur eastward
from El Paso almost to the Guadalupe Mountains and down the Rio
Grande some 145 miles to the head of El Cajon. Isolated colonies of
Jornada people seem to have occasionally lived outside this area.
However, the El Paso district was certainly the heartland of the Jornada Branch development in Texas. In contrast, the La Junta district
was the center of the cultural sequence which has been called the
Bravo Valley Aspect (Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940) . The La

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 3 . A typical small cave of the Trans-Pecos area (Site 41 VV 148 in Val Verde County!.
A large talus of firecrac ~< ed limestone fragments extends down the slope from the mouth
of the cave , a sure sign that the cave was occupied . In the lefl bac :<ground is the Rio
~rancie.

Junta district includes the area along the Rio Grande from below El
Cajon to the head of Santa Helena Canyon, with an extension up the
Conchas River into Mexico. Its distinctive Bravo Valley Aspect is
mainly later in time than the Jornada Branch, although the final
J ornada phase and the earliest Bravo Valley focus seem to have been
contemporaries. A comparison of the Jornada and Bravo Valley trait
lists shows marked differences between them in material culture.
There also seem to have been differences in what might be termed the
'cultural orientation' of the two complexes. Chipped stone tools such
as scrapers and arrow points are common in the Bravo Valley sites,
but they are relatively rare in the Jornada villages. This may well
indicate that the Bravo Valley people leaned towards a Plains-village
type of economy with a dependence on both hunting and farming,
whereas the Jornada villagers followed the Southwestern pattern of a
primarily horticultural economy.
These points would seem to offer a strong argument for recognizing
two districts within the western Trans-Pecos. Also, as more information becomes available, it seems likely that it will be possible to recognize a fourth, Northeastern, district of Trans-Pecos Texas (Fig. 1).

TRANS-PECOS

119

The Handbook is also open to question with regard to the discussion
of the Livermore Focus. Although a trait list is given, the authors
characterize the complex as "nebulous" (p. 60), state that there is only
one excavated Livermore component (p . 60 ), and suggest that the
complex dates from between A.D. 1200 and 1400 (p. 62 ). However,
as Kelley (1957) has subsequently pointed out, there is good evidence
that the Livermore Focus is a valid cultural entity. Livermore components have been recognized in five excavated habitation sites in the
southeastern Trans-Pecos, and a cache of over 1200 Livermore Focus
points was found on Mount Livermore in the Davis Mountains. Kelley
has previously suggested that the Livermore Focus lasted from approximately A.D. 900-1300 (Kelley, Campbell, and Lehmer, 1940 ),
and this dating seems to fit the known facts much better than the
1200-1400 date suggested by the Handbook. Arrow points of the distinctive type which are diagnostic for the Livermore Focus have been
found outside the Trans-Pecos as intrusives at the Mogollon Village
in southwestern New Mexico (Haury, 1936 ), and at Los Tules near

Fig. 4 . Fa~e Bell shelter, Val Verde County, one of the larger shelters of Trans-Pecos
Texao and also the type site of the Pecos River Focus. This shelter is in the west wall of
Seminole Canyon, a tributary to the nearby Rio Grande . It has a length of over 500 feet
and a depth in some places of more than 1 00 feet; its ceiling is as much as 40 feet high in
some par:·s of the sheller. In the foreground are small agave plants that grow abundantly
in this locality and whose fibers were used by the shelter inhabitants.

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Las Cruces, New Mexico (Lehmer, 1948 ) . The Mogollon village has
a terminal date establish ed by tree rings as about A.D. 900, and the
Los Tules site is dated on the basis of intrusive pottery as falling within the period A.D. 900-1100. These two instances certainly substantiate the initial date which Kelley ha s suggested for Livermore. At the
other end of the time scale, there is no good evidence that the Livermore Focus survived after the beginnings of the Bravo Valley Aspect.
The available evidence strongly suggests that the La Junta Focus.
earliest of the Bravo Valley sequence, could not have come into exist ence before A.D. 1200. Thus, Kelley's original dating of Liver more
as lasting from A.D. 900-1300 seem s to be fully justified.

Current Interpretations
Some sort of time scale is essential for any comprehensive scheme
of archeological interpretation. In Trans-Pecos Texas, the relative ages
of many of the archelogical complexes have been established by demonstrating their association with the different layers of the stratified
valley fills. According to Albritton and Bryan ( 1939), the geologists
who first studied those alluvial fills, it is possible to recognize three
periods of deposition and three periods of erosion in the southeastem
Trans-Pecos. These cycles of deposition and erosion appear to reflect
climatic changes, with deposition occurring under relatively humid
conditions and erosion during times of relative aridity. The sequence
of geological events indicated is as follows :
1. The Neville Deposition: a long and relatively moist period during

2.

3.

4.

5.

which the earliest of the alluvial formations was built up, a p eriod
during which local fauna included such forms as the mammoth and
the American horse.
The post-Neville Erosion: a long and r ela tively dry p eriod during
which the Neville form a tion was h eavily eroded and the m ammoth
and horse disappeared .
The Calamity Deposition: a moist period during which the middle
alluvial form ation was built up, a period during which the loca l fauna
was essentially modern.
The post-Calamity Erosion : a second dry p eriod during which the top
of the Calamity formation was eroded and there was some arroyo
cutting.
The Kokernot Deposition : a short, relatively humid period during
which the thin upper layer of the valley fills was laid down, a deposition which lasted into historic times.

TRANS-PECOS

121

6. The post-Kokernot Erosion: the current cycle of arroyo cutting and
sheet erosion, probably resulting in part from a decrease in rainfall
and in part from overgrazing.

This local sequence can be at least tentatively correlated with climatic changes which are evidenced over much wider areas than the
Trans-Pecos. It is known that much of the northern hemisphere was
covered with continent-wide ice sheets during the Pleistocene per~od,
and that these glaciers advanced and retreated several times. With
each glacial advance, there was a corresponding southward displacement of climatic zones which resulted in heavier rainfall in southern
regions which are now semi-arid. As the ice retreated for the last time,
the climate of the Southwest was cool and moist, a period which
geologists call the Anathermal. Subsequently temperatures rose and
rainfall probably decreased during a hot dry epoch known as the Altithermal. Finally there was a shift to essentially modern climates of
the Medithermal period.
It seems probable that the Neville deposition took place during the
moist Anathermal, over 10,000 years ago. The post-Neville erosion
may well have taken place during the hot Altithermal period, with
the Calamity and Kokernot depositions coming in Medithermal times.
The erosional interval which separated the deposition of the Calamity
and the Kokernot formations is not certainly placed in time, but there

Fig . 5 . In the dry caves and rock shelters of Trans-Pecos Texas dust boils up in clouds
during excavation and industrial respirators must be worn by fiel d workers. This picture
was taken during excavation of the Fate Bell shelter.

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

is a good probability that the post-Calamity erosion is a local reflection
of a severe drought which is known to have affected large parts of the
Southwest. This dry period has been dated by tree ring specimens
from the Four Corners area as having lasted from A.D. 1276-1299. In
the middle and upper Rio Grande valley of New Mexico, there was
also a dry period during the latter half of the 13th Century.
"The so-called 'great drought' period of 1276 to 1299 is not so severe
in the Rio Grande area as in that of Mesa Verde and of Flagstaff . ..
In the Rio Grande area the entire period from 1251 to 1299 was relatively dry, with the worst part being in the 1250's" (Smiley, Stubbs,
and Bannister, 1953: 53 ).
A late erosional disconformity in the Jeddito Valley in northeastern
Arizona almost certainly correlates with the late 13th Century drought
there (Hack, 1939 ) , and Antevs has suggested that a comparable erosion in southern Arizona may also date from this period (Sayles and
Antevs, 1941). Since both of these erosional disconformities correspond to the post-Calamity erosion in underlying the uppermost silt
formation in the valley fills, and since there is evidence of a late-13th
Century drought in the Rio Grande valley in New Mexico, it seems
likely that the post-Calamity erosion of the Trans-Pecos area also dates
from the latter half of the 13th Century.
The geologic time scale provided by the sequence of erosions and
depositions of the valley fills of the Trans-Pecos, together with other
dating techniques, makes it possible to arrange most of the local
archeological complexes in terms of a relative chronology which gives
a good outline of the procession of native cultures which followed one
another through time.
The earliest archeological materials now known for the Trans-Pecos
relate to the Folsom complex, one of the earliest in western North
America. Folsom materials have only recently been found in the
Trans-Pecos, and Dr. Joe Ben Wheat of the University of Colorado
was kind enough to supply the details regarding the site and the artifacts found. According to Dr. Wheat, the Folsom artifacts were located
in a terrace of Van Horn Creek in the vicinity of the town of Van
Horn. The terrace is a geological formation which appears to equate
in time with the Anathermal Neville silts. Specimen material from
the site includes some 50 Folsom points, gravers, heavy crude blades,
channel flakes from the Folsom points, and about 150 snub-nosed
scrapers. Parts of a burned and heavily mineralized human cranium
and long bones were found some distance from the main artifact concentration. This newly discovered site is an extremely important one.

TRANS- PECOS

123

Fig. 6 . Two views of Caldwell No. 1, a sink site in Culberson County t hat was occupied
during the Hueco Phase . Top v ie w shows the s in k (cen ter! and surrounding terrain , Bottom
view is f rom the rim of the sin k, showing the overhang on the opposite side that provided
shelt er for the occ upants .

It demonstrates human occupat:on of the T rans-Pecos area at an
earlier time than had been evidenced in the past, and it also demonstrates the extension into the area of the P aleo-eastern big game
hunters of late Pleistocene times.

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

After the Folsom occupation a new population seems to have come
into the Trans-Pecos, the people who were responsible for the archeological remains known as the Maravillas Complex. Maravillas
artifacts were first found by the Peabody-Sui Ross expedition at the
Calamity Creek site south of Alpine. They occurred there along the
contact zone between the top of the Neville and the bottom of the
Calamity Creek silts, a good indication that the Maravillas complex
appeared in the Trans-Pecos during the period of the post-Neville
erosion. So few Maravillas artifacts have been found that it is impossible to characterize the complex in detail. However, the few projectile
points show no resemblance to the Folsom points from the Van Horn
site, and the relatively large numbers of grinding stones indicate that,
in contrast to the Folsom hunters, the Maravillas people depended
heavily on wild plants for their livelihood.
The Santiago Complex was also represented at the Calamity Creek
site, and was definitely later than the Maravillas material there.
Occurring in the middle levels of the Calamity Creek silts, the Santiago
materials were also too sparse to permit a detailed description of the
full range of characteristic artifacts. Grinding tools were present, as in
the Maravillas levels, and a few unique projectile points were also
found.
The Pecos River Focus is another relatively early Trans-Pecos complex. It is known from a number of sites in the area. Many of the sites
are rock shelters (Fig. 3-4) which have yielded quantities of perishable materials in addition to stone artifacts, specimens which indicate
a people with a hunting and gathering economy. Characteristic Pecos
River projectile points and other artifacts have been found in buried
sites in the general Alpine area. The position of these artifacts within
the valley silts indicates that the Pecos River Focus appeared sometime a bout the middle of the Calamity deposition period and lasted on
through at least part of the erosional epoch which produced the disconformity between the Calamity and the overlying Kokernot formation.
The second focus of the Big Bend Aspect, the Chisos, is also represented by both cave and buried sites. Most of the buried Chisos artifacts
seem to come from the disconformity produced by the post-Calamity
Erosion, an indication that the Chisos people come into the area during the dry period which marked the end of the deposition of the
Calamity Creek silts. Although much of the Chisos Focus artifact inventory is generally similar to that of the Pecos River sites, one Chisos
trait marks an important innovation in southeastern Trans-Pecos culure. Chisos sites are the earliest known in the district to yield definite

TRANS - PECOS

125

Fig . 7. A complex set of pictog raphs near Langtry, Val Verde County. This picture
illustrates some of the problems involved in pictographic study and analysis. In the lower
pa rt of the picture the paintings have faded and it is now difficult to determine the ir
original form. In the uppe r part of t he picture the small white patches indicate places
whe re the rock has sca led away from the bluff. At upper left is a modern p ictograph, rep resente d by the initials HD. Many pictographs are being destroyed by individuals who
carve or paint their names on prehis toric pa intings. Some hunters use pictographs as targets

for rifle practice , and each shot causes a ci rcular patch to fall away from the bluff. Thes e
pa int ings , many of which seem to por tray men in ceremon ia l d ress , may rep resen t hun tin g

ri tuals of t he Pecos River Focu s people .

evidence of agriculture. Many of the Chisos caves contained cobs of
10- and 12-row corn, together with squash and beans. These remains
of cultivated plants are a sure indication that the Chisos people depended at least in part on garden crops for their food supply.
The Livermore Focus differs in a number of ways from the other
archeological complexes of the southeastern Trans-Pecos. Maravillas,
Santiago; Pecos River, and Chisos sites yield relatively few projectile
points and those points are characteristically lar ge and heavy, indicating probable use as dart rather than arrow points. The highly distinctive points of the Livermore Focus are small, light, finely chipped
pieces which were almost certainly attached to arrows. Hence, the
Livermore Focus may well represent the first appearance of the bow
and arrow in the southeastern Trans-Pecos. Other Livermore artifacts
which are new to the district include small, finely-made snub-nosed
scrapers and diamond-beveled knives-skin dressing tools which are
characteristic of the bison-hunting Plains cultures to the east and

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

north, and which may well indicate that the Livermore complex
originated in the southwestern Plains.
In the Trans-Pecos, Livermore artifacts are most generally found at
the level of the post-Calamity erosional disconformity, a good indication that the Livermore people moved into the area during the dry
years when that erosion was taking place. This erosion probably dates
from the latter half of the 13th Century. However, the Livermore
points found at the Mogollon Village and at the Los Tules site indicate
that the Focus itself was in existence at a much earlier time. The
Livermore artifacts found in the Pecos drainage of southeastern New
Mexico and western Texas may indicate an original home of the focus
before it was forced into the Trans-Pecos highlands by a severe drought.
In the Pecos country the Livermore Focus may well have been a
Plains hunting complex similar to those encountered farther north
by the Coronado expedition in 1541 and described by Castaneda as:
" . .. people [who] follow the cows, hunting them and tanning the
skins to take to the settlements in the winter to sell, since they go
there to pass the winter, each company going to those which are
nearest" (Winship, 1896: 52,7). An annual cycle of this sort would
provide a good explanation for the Livermore points found at Los
Tules and the Mogollon Village.
Two things stand out regarding the southeastern Trans-Pecos. First.
it appears to have been a refuge area into which people moved during
drought periods. Much of the section is relatively high, and has more
rainfall than adjoining areas of lower elevation. Hence it was presumably more livable for both men and animals during dry cycles. Artifacts of the Maravillas Complex, the Livermore Focus, and the Chisos
Focus are all associated with erosional disconformities in the valley
alluvia. This association provides a good indication that each of these
cultural complexes appeared in the area during dry times, and it seems
reasonable to assume that they entered the area under pressure
of a lack of water and game elsewhere. Second, the southeastern
Trans-Pecos was definitely marginal, in terms of cultural developments, to the more sophisticated complexes which existed in adjacent
areas. Agriculture is known to have been present only in the Chisos
complex. Pottery, permanent houses, and all the other adjuncts of the
village cultures of the Southwest and the southern Plains were absent,
leaving the southeastern Trans-Pecos lagging definitely behind these
other areas in terms of total cultural development.
The cultural sequence from Maravillas through Santiago and Pecos
River to Chisos and Livermore is limited to the southeastern part of

TRA N S-PECOS

127

Fig. 8. Faded pictographs in Painted Canyon, Val Verde County. Here men with weapons
(note bow and arrow held by man at right center) are associated with animals. A rabbit
and a bird, presumably a wild turkey, may be seen at extreme right. This pictographic
record is of special interest because it is in a distinctive style and shows men using the
bow and arrow, which was not used by Pecos River Focus people. These pictures were evidently made by a later group who occupied the area.

the Trans-Pecos area. A very different situation existed in both the El
Paso and the La Junta districts.
TheEl Paso district, lying as it does on the margin of the Southwest,
reflects many of the cultural developments which took place in the
prehistoric Southwestern culture centers. The earliest remains known
from the El Paso district are those which have been assigned to the
Hueco Phase. Represented mainly by cave sites (Fig. 6) , the Hueco
complex shares many traits with the Big Bend Aspect. The Hueco
people lived in both rock shelters and open camps, and they derived
their subsistence from a combination of gardening, hunting, and
gathering. Grinding tools are common, and a considerable variety of
other implements has been found in some of the richer Hueco sites.
The Hueco occupation in the El Paso district was followed by a
series of phases characterized by permanent villages and a primarily
horticultural economy. The Mesilla Phase, earliest of the village
horizons, is distinguished by both round and rectangular pit houses
and by the first developed pottery complex in the area. The individual
traits of the Mesilla Phase indicate that it is a cultural hybrid, derived
partly from the Mogollon and partly from the Anasazi traditions of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Southwest. The Mesilla Phase seems to have come into existence
some time about A.D. 900 and to have lasted until about 1100.
The Mesilla Phase was followed by a short-lived transitional complex known as the Dona Ana Phase, a complex which is distinguished
mainly by the replacement of the earlier pit houses by multi-roomed
surface pueblos built of adobe. Dona Ana pottery represents an elaboration of the Mesilla Phase types, and there are other trait carry-overs
which indicate that Dona Ana was a development out of the earlier
Mesilla complex.
In turn, the Dona Ana Phase evolved into the final manifestation of
the village horizon in the El Paso district-the El Paso Phase. Characterized by larger pueblos and a more elaborate pottery complex, the
El Paso Phase seems to have spread over a larger area than its predecessors, with isolated colonies occurring as far away as the La Junta
district. In the area east of the El Paso villages there are a number of
camps with no remains of any sort of permanent habitation, but which
do yield El Paso Polychrome pottery, the diagnostic type for the El
Paso Phase. These sites may represent hunting camps of the El Paso
people themselves. However, they may equally well be the remains
of some group of Plains hunters who were in contact with the El Paso
Phase people and obtained pottery from them by trade. The El Paso
Phase itself died out about A.D. 1400, and was later replaced by the
Manso and Suma groups who were present in the El Paso district in
early historic times.
The cultural development in the La Junta area was quite distinct
from those of the El Paso district and the southeastern Trans-Pecos.
Known La Junta archeological complexes are relatively late, and represent people who were sedentary farmers. Three foci, La Junta, Conchas, and Concepcion, have been recognized and they have been
grouped together into the Bravo Valley Aspect (Kelley, Campbell, and
Lehmer, 1940 ) . The earliest, the La Junta Focus, was at least partly
contemporary with the El Paso Phase. The Millington site at Presidio,
excavated by J. Charles Kelley and the writer, contained remains of
all three Bravo Valley foci, and also the ruins of a small adobe-walled
pueblo which seemed to represent a colony of El Paso Phase people at
the site. El Paso Polychrome pottery was found in the pueblo and in
the La Junta Focus houses , a good indication of contemporaneity.
The La Junta Focus itself differs in many ways from the El Paso
Phase. La Junta houses are single-room structures rather than pueblos.
Some are rectangular and built in deep pits. They are not, however,
pit houses in the strict sense of the term, as the house wall was built

Fig . 9 . Hueco Phase burial uncovered in a rock crevice at rear of Brooks shelter, Culberson
County. This burial contained two individuals , a woman and a child . The ch ild lies beneath
the woman , its feet showing at lower right. Organic materials in this burial are fairly
well preserved, and some can be seen in the p icture-a d igg ing stick !beneath skull o f
woman at left) , a net wrapped around four sticks llower center, to right of di!'lging stick) ,
and a yucca mat encasing the body of the child I right center).

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

up directly from the pit floor and the side of the pit did not form part
of the house wall. Other La Junta structures were pit houses with
circular floors and pole superstructures which may have been covered
with grass thatch. Well-made arrow points, scrapers, and other skin
dressing tools are common in La Junta Focus sites and indicate a strong
dependence on hunting.
It may be that the complex known as the La Junta Focus actually
represents two d:stinct groups of people who shared the same villages
for at least part of the year. Ethnohistorical sources describe the La
Junta area as being occupied by sedentary farmers. They also mention
groups such as the elusive Jumano who spent part of the year with the
villagers and the rest of their time trading and hunting through the
Plains area to the north and east of the Trans-Pecos. The solid rectangular houses of the La Junta focus, the stone grinding tools, and the
pottery found in the sites may well have been products of the prehistoric farmers in the area. On the other hand, the flimsy circular
houses together with many of the arrow points and skin dressing tools
may derive from a seasonal occupation of the La Junta Focus villages
by early hunters and traders like the Jumano of historic times.
The Concepcion Focus shares a number of traits with the La Junta
Focus which it succeeded in the area. However, there are marked differences in house type, the Concepcion structures being rectangular pit
houses large enough that they may well have been occupied by some
form of extended family in contrast to the nuclear family-sized La
Junta Focus houses. The Concepcion Focus also differs from its predecessor in showing a number of traits borrowed from outposts of the
Spanish frontier settlements which were established in the area during the t:me it was in existence.
The Conchas Focus followed Concepcion in time, and in its turn it
represents the native Indian pattern even more strongly influenced by
contacts with the Spanish colonists.
Present evidence, then, seems to indicate the following cultural sequence in the whole Trans-Pecos area. The earliest known occupation
was by the big game-hunting Folsom people represented at the site
near Van Horn. This complex represents an extension into the area of
the Paleo-eastern cultures which existed throughout much of the High
Plains country during terminal Pleistocene times.
There is no evidence that the Folsom occupation lasted into the time
of the post-Neville erosion. Instead a new people represented by the
Maravillas Complex materials seem to have used the high country of
the southeastern Trans-Pecos as a refuge during a prolonged drought.

TRANS-PECOS

The manos and metates which are characteristic Maravillas artifacts
indicate a sharp break with the earlier Folsom pattern. Instead, it
seems likely that the Maravillas Complex is some sort of offshoot of
the early grinding tool cultures of southern Arizona and New Mexico
such as the Cochise ( cf. Warmington, 195 7: 169 ££. ) . This early grinding tool tradition lasted on in the area for many centuries. The Santiago Complex and the Pecos River Focus both seem to represent local
carry-overs of a Maravillas-type culture. Significantly, there was little
modification of the basic cultural pattern during the long period following the first arrival of the Maravillas people. Specific artifact types
changed, but this was a matter of style change rather than any modification of what appears to have been an ultra-conservative basic
pattern.
This situation in the Trans-Pecos stands in sharp contrast to contemporary developments within the Puebloan cultures of Arizona and
New Mexico. There, new basic traits were added to an original base
which is broadly comparable to the Trans-Pecos Maravillas Complex.
Traits such as agriculture, architecture, pottery making, and a host of
others were part of an accumulative elaboration of Southwestern culture which left the Trans-Pecos a definitely retarded marginal area.
Agriculture, one of the new Southwestern traits, was eventually
added to the late Trans-Pecos grinding tool cultures. It seems to have
appeared first in the Hueco Phase of the El Paso district, a complex
which shares many basic traits with the Maravillas and its successors. Later, cultivated plants spread to the southeastern Trans-Pecos
with the arrival of the Chisos Focus during the period of the postCalamity erosion.
The final prehistoric culture to appear in the southeastern TransPecos is the Livermore Focus. This complex, which contrasts sharply
with others in the district, appears to represent a group of late Plains
hunters who were driven to take refuge in the mountain country by a
severe drought .
While the southeastern Trans-Pecos remained a cultural backwater,
the El Paso district was being invaded by a host of new ideas derived
from the nuclear Southwest. The Jornada Branch sequence from the
Mesilla through the El Paso Phases is a local manifestation of the
spectacular Puebloan developments to the west and north. During the
time these local complexes were in existence, the El Paso district was
culturally a part of the Southwest. Changes in the local cultures during this period were mainly reflections of developments in the northern Rio Grande and in southwestern New Mexico.

Fig . 10. Child burial from Kelly shelter, a Pecos River Focus site near Comstock in Val
Verde County. The child was wrapped in a yucca mat, which is rather well preserved.
Resting on the skull is a small basket. Three shell ornaments, two of them shaped like
projectile points, may readily be seen. At the center are four sections of cane wrapped
with thongs, possibly a musical instrument similar to Pan's pipes.

TRANS-PECOS

133

The La Junta district, the third in the Trans-Pecos, is far more
difficult to place in terms of broader cultural configurations. Known
developments there seem to date from beginnings sometime after the
opening of the 14th Century.
One of the earliest complexes known in the La Junta district is
represented by the scattered El Paso Phase colonies which have been
recognized in the area. This El Paso Phase expansion may well be
some sort of reflection of the major population shifts which occurred
throughout much of the Southwest after the severe droughts of the
latter half of the 13th Century.
The other known complexes in the area have been grouped into the
Bravo Valley Aspect. These foci differ in many ways from the El Paso
Phase settlements, particularly in architecture. However, some Bravo
Valley traits were probably borrowed from the El Paso people. Others
may represent carry-overs from the Livermore Focus, and still others,
including the distinctive house types, may represent either local developments or borrowing from an unidentified source. There are also
good indications, both in artifacts dug from the sites and in ethnohistorical data dug from the archives, that there were close contacts between the Bravo Valley people and late Plains hunting groups. Finally,
the Bravo Valley Aspect shows an ever increasing modification of the
native way of life by contacts with the advancing frontier of Spanish
settlement in the New World.

Excavation Techniques for Trans-Pecos Sites
Archeological sites in the Trans-Pecos differ greatly both in form
and context, and the excavator must necessarily adapt his techniques
to the type of site in which he is working. If the work is to be anything
more than mere relic collecting, a system of digging must be followed
which will provide the greatest possible amount of information about
the site. The information recovered must also be recorded accurately
and in detail, particularly as regards the association of the various
artifacts found . A cataloging system which includes numbering each
specimen and recording both the site and the location within the site
where the piece was found is also essential. Sketches, ground plans,
maps, and diagrams are all indispensable to proper recording, and
numerous clear photographs should be taken of every stage of the
work.
Basic digging techniques which should be borne in mind at all times

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

include the following: The composition and layering in any sort of
midden can be seen best in cross section, and digging should be done
so that a clean vertical face is exposed. Screening with hand or standing screens will often recover small artifacts which would otherwise
be missed. Care should be taken in planning any extensive digging so
that back-dirt from the excavation is kept out of the way of future
work-there is nothing less rewarding than moving several cubic yards
of earth for a second or third time. Above all, the excavator must learn
to recognize the differences in color and texture which distinguish undisturbed native soil from midden deposit. In many cases it is necessary to work along the contact lines between midden and native soil
in order to preserve the form of prehistoric house pits and the like.
This ability to recognize soil differences is certainly one of the most
important possessed by any competent field man.
Village sites of the J ornada Branch and of the Bravo Valley Aspect
require particular types of excavation if information is to be obtained
about the houses themselves. The Dona Ana and El Paso Phase houses
are multi-roomed structures with adobe walls. The walls themselves
are usually eroded down so they are only a foot or so in height, and the
location of the pueblo itself is usually marked by a low mound. The
best general approach to the excavation of one of these structures is to
begin with an exploratory trench two or three feet wide which is started
back from the edge of the mound and carried down to undisturbed soil.
The trench should then be extended into the mound, keeping a vertical
face down to sterile soil as the trench is dug. Eventually this trench
will reach the outer wall of the pueblo. The exposed section of the wall
can then be cleaned off, and the orientation of the wall determined.
Even if the entire structure is not going to be excavated, the size and
shape of the pueblo should be determined by turning the first exploratory trench and extending it along the outside wall until the entire
structure has been outlined. If the walls do stand more than a foot or
so in height, care should be taken not to make the outlining trench so
deep that the pressure of the fill inside the rooms can collapse the
wall outward into the trench.
The individual rooms can be excavated in much the same way. A
narrow trench dug around the four walls will serve to outline the
room. Tests can then be made to determine the depth of the floor, and
the room fill removed to within three or four inches of the floor with
the specimens from the room fill being placed in carefully marked
field bags. The floor itself can then be cleaned with shovels and trowels.
Care must be taken to locate and trowel out all floor features such as

TRANS-PECOS

135

post holes, cache pits, fire pits, etc. The completely excavated room
should then be swept, photographed, and a detailed floor plan drawn
to scale. Specimens from the room fill just above the floor should be
sacked separately from those in the upper levels of the fill, and specimens from each floor pit or other special feature kept separate from
those in other parts of the room.
It is usually difficult for small field crews to excavate an entire
pueblo in such a way that all of the rooms are left clear at the end of
the project. Therefore, it is often advisable to begin work at one end of
the structure, clear a single room completely, and then, when that
room has been fully recorded, back-fill it with the fill from an adjoining room. This method has the obvious disadvantage that the entire
structure is never exposed at one time. However, this is usually offset
by the fact that the disposal of the back dirt does not become a problem
as the work progresses, and also by the fact that back-filling the rooms
and outlining trench serves to preserve the structure itself.
In most cases the floors of the Jornada pueblos are built directly on
native soil. However, after a room has been cleared, mapped, and
photographed, this fact should be verified. This can be done by sinking
a test pit through the room floor to make sure there is no older structure or refuse accumulation below. House superposition is one of the
most reliable means of determining chronology within a site, and every
care must be taken to establish it if the condition exists.
Mesilla Phase houses and those of the Bravo Valley Aspect's earlier
foci are pit houses rather than surface pueblos, and they require a
different excavation technique. There is rarely any surface indication
of the location of these structures within a site, and they must be discovered by exploratory excavations. The house pits are usually fairly
deep and filled with midden material which differs in both color and
texture from the native soil into which the pit was dug. Test pits made
at regular intervals serve to locate the house pits by revealing a greater
depth of midden material than that which is found over the area between the houses. Once a test has indicated an unusual depth of midden, it should be carefully deepened until native soil or an adobe floor
is encountered. With the depth of the house pit determined, the excavator can then work back one side of his test, keeping a vertical face,
until the native soil which marks the edge of the house pit is encountered. The test should then be turned and extended along the pit
wall so as to outline the entire pit. The remaining pit fill can then be
taken out to within a few inches of the floor, the fill in contact with the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

floor removed separately. the floor features cleared, and the floor
mapped and photographed.
Particular care should be taken during the final stages of the excavation of a pit house to locate the entrance passage if one exists. This
can often be done before the final sweeping of the floor by shaving
back the lower parts of the pit walls and noting any differences in
color and/ or texture which may indicate a passage leading out from
the pit itself.
Other features of the Jornada and Bravo Valley villages require
their own special excavation techniques. Hearths of heat-fractured
stone should be cleaned off with trowel and brush, photographed,
measured, and located on the general site map in relation to the houses
and other features. Storage pits sometimes occur outside the houses.
When these are encountered, the pit fill should be dug out, included
specimen material sacked, a scale plan and cross-section prepared, and
the feature located on the site map. The sheet refuse which spreads
between houses often yields quantities of artifact material, and testing
will indicate whether or not this refuse is rich enough to warrant extensive digging and screening. Trash mounds sometimes occur in the
Bravo Valley villages, and low mounds of trash are frequently associated with the Jornada pueblos. Features of this sort should be trenched,
the trenches being dug a block at a time, and the blocks removed in
levels if the deposit is more than a foot or so in depth.
Care should be taken at all times when working in village sites to
see that burials which may be encountered are not damaged. Once a
burial is located, it should be excavated by acceptable techniques,
photographed, and recorded in detail.
Rock shelters of the Trans-Pecos country require somewhat different
excavation techniques than the villages. The shelter sites usually include both the shelter itself and a talus slope in front of the shelter
(Fig. 3). This is often blanketed with a heavy accumulation of midden material. Since the shelter sites were often occupied by different
groups at different times, particular care must be taken in working
both the cave and the talus deposits to segregate specimens from
different levels in the deposits so that a stratigraphic sequence can be
established. If there are apparent natural layers, materials from each
one should be kept separate. If the natural layers have any considerable depth, they should be worked in arbitrary levels four to six
inches to a foot thick, depending on the depth of the stratum itself.
If there are no visible layers within the deposits themselves, the
entire deposit must be worked in arbitrary levels.

TRANS-PECOS

137

It is usually advisable to establish a horizontal control grid of numbered squares which covers the entire area to be excavated. These
squares, usually three or four feet to a side, are then dug out in levels
of a predetermined thickness. The specimen material from each level,
natural or arbitrary, in each square should be sacked separately so
that it can be catalogued according to square and level. Controlled
excavation of this sort is essential in sites which were occupied by more
than one group of people, since it is the only way of determining which
types of artifacts are found in which levels of the deposits.
Here too, the importance of keeping clean vertical faces on all excavations must be stressed. A careful examination of these faces will
generally show some sort of natural layering in the deposits which
may be of great significance.
Excavation within the rock shelters themselves presents a number of
special problems. The matrix of the cave fill is usually an extremely
fine dust, a dry powdery substance which boils up in clouds during
excavation (Fig. 5). Extreme caution must be exercised to avoid prolonged breathing of the dust, and industrial respirators should be worn
by all members of the field party working in the cave for more than
a few minutes. The dust is also very irritating to the eyes, and they
should be bathed at least twice a day with boric acid.
Apart from keeping the excavator in good health, cave work also
presents other problems. The fact that the overhang keeps moisture
out of the cave usually results in the presence of quantities of perishable materials in the fill. This, plus the powdery nature of the matrix,
makes excavation slow and also makes it very difficult to keep any
sort of vertical face on the excavation itself. In addition to the vegetable fibers, the presence of large rocks which have fallen from the
cave roof also interferes with the neat geometric squares which are
dear to the heart of most archeologists.
Each individual cave is a situation unto itself, and general methods
have to be adapted to the particular situation. Often it is advisable to
establish a number of "profile lines" across the cave, and to remove the
deposits between them a layer at a time. As each level is worked back
to one of these lines, it is faced up as well as possible along the line.
A scaled drawing should then be made of the profile at that point, and
the excavation then carried back to the next line. When the entire
layer has been taken out in this fashion, a second can be removed in
the same way. As this is done, the profile drawings should be extended
down another step as each profile line is reached.
Back dirt from the shelter can often be disposed of by shoveling it

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

into a wood or metal chute which will carry the dirt down and away
from the cave mouth.
Special preparations must be made for the care of perishable specimens found in cave work. Ryker mounts, shallow cotton-filled cardboard boxes with glass tops, are ideal for keeping smaller specimens
such as sandals and basketry fragments which are too fragile to pack
otherwise. The larger and more substantial pieces must be carefully
packed for transportation from the field to the laboratory, and a good
supply of packing materials should be on hand at all times when cave
sites are being worked.
Open camps usually offer little scope for actual excavation since the
refuse deposits are generally too thin and scattered to justify digging.
Surface collections can be made, and a program of mapping the
relationship of the various surface features such as hearths and midden
circles might well provide information on camp arrangement, etc.
Buried sites present the greatest challenge of all to the excavator.
Fundamentally, most of them are open camps covered with feet or
yards of valley alluvium. Usually they can be located only after they
have been partly exposed by erosion, generally arroyo cutting. Once
such a site has been located in an arroyo wall, the problems really
begin.
The extent of the site can only be seen along the single axis of the
arroyo cut. Where the rest of the site is, how large it is, and how rich
it is in artifacts are all mysteries buried deep under the valley fill.
Once the excavator has taken the inevitable deep breath and decided to
suffer the blisters, backaches, and frustrations of working the site,
there are certain preliminaries which are essential for any proper
excavation.
One of these essential steps is the establishment of a system of horizontal and vertical control to be used during the digging. This will be
the reference system which will permit the accurate recording of the
locations of artifacts and site feaures. Such a system should be established with a transit and rod. It should include one or more bench
marks which can be used as points from which to take elevations.
Some sort of grid system which will permit the horizontal location of
finds with reference to a series of numbered squares is also necessary.
The actual excavation of the site should be carried out in terms of the
grid squares and of levels established within the square.
Before excavation is begun, the geology of the site must be studied
with considerable care. The association between cultural materials and
geologic features is extremely important, and that association must bP

139

TRANS-PECOS

recorded with complete accuracy. This is no task for an untrained
individual. Amateur and professional archeologists alike must have
either a first-rate geological background or call in a competent geologist who is thoroughly familiar with the study of alluvial deposits.
The geological study must include the identification of the major
alluvial formations which are present in the area. At the site itself,
these formations must be defined and carefully distinguished from any
localized formations which may be present. As the excavation progresses, it is necessary to keep a continuous check on the trend of the various strata and the erosional disconformities which separate them. All
specimens and site features must be located in terms of the formation
in which they are found and of their position within the formation
itself.
Excavation of the site itself is largely a matter of moving dirt and
of recovering all specimens. One special problem has to do with water.
Many excavation units will extend below the floor of the arroyo. After
every rain these have to be bailed out and allowed to dry before work
can goon.
In summary, archeological excavation in the Trans-Pecos is largely
a matter of using standard techniques which are employed by most
archeologists wherever they are working. Learning these techniques
requires an apprenticeship in the field under competent workers. Applying them requires attention to detail, an ability to adapt to particular problems which are encountered, and a considerable insight to
recognize those problems and work out the right solution.

Current Problems
Today we know far more about Trans-Pecos archeology than we did
twenty-five years ago. However, we are still faced with a number of
blank spots which should be filled.
We need far more factual data on the early occupations of the area,
data which can only be obtained by extensive excavation. For example,
is the Van Horn Folsom site unique, or are there others in the TransPecos? We also need far more information about the Maravillas, Santiago, and Red Bluff complexes, particularly larger collections of artifacts which will provide the basis on which comprehensive trait lists
can be made. In turn, these trait lists will provide the basis for the
assessment of the complexes themselves. Do Maravillas, Santiago, and
Red Bluff represent valid cultural entities, or are the complexes as we
know them simply random associations of artifacts?

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Information is badly needed on the northeastern part of the TransPecos. Today that area is almost unknown archeologically. The sorts
of sites and artifacts found there, the archeological complexes which
are present, and their relation to others in the Trans-Pecos and adjoining regions are all items of information which should be gathered.
More data are needed on the Livermore Focus. Sites with strong
Livermore components should be excavated and the information from
those excavations used to settle the validity of the focus itself and to
throw light on the origins of the complex.
The collection of key samples for radiocarbon dating is also a matter
of great importance. Such samples will serve both to date the various
epochs of the geologic history of the valley fills, and to provide absolute
dates for the individual cultural complexes found in the Trans-Pecos.
Our knowledge of Trans-Pecos archeology will also be broadened by
publication of the results of excavations made in the past, particularly
in the Bravo Valley Aspect sites. The writer himself must plead guilty
to being at fault in this respect.
Trans-Pecos archeology also needs study as well as additional data.
Various Trans-Pecos complexes should be compared trait by trait with
others both within and outside the area. For example, material is available for a detailed comparison of the Hueco cave materials with artifacts of the Chisos and Pecos River foci. A similar comparison might
profitably be made between the Trans-Pecos cave materials and those
from Coahuila and from parts of the Southwest.
Another problem which awaits solution concerns the origins of the
Bravo Valley Aspect. There are indications that this complex may
have derived in part from the El Paso Phase, and in a small part from
the Livermore Focus. However, the source of many of the distinctive
Bravo Valley traits still remains to be determined.
The whole field of ethno-history offers another very promising area
of investigation. It should be possible to make a remarkably complete
reconstruction of the life-way of the historic Bravo Valley villagers
from the mass of documents which is available. Beyond that, those
same documents probably contain valuable information on the various
culture contact situations in the La Junta region. There are certainly
clues to the relations between the native villagers and semi-nomadic
groups such as the Jumano who spent part of the year in the villages.
There must also be information on the contacts between the Indians
and the Spanish settlers in the region, and of the effects of those contacts on both groups.
These are only a few of the problems which still await investigation.

TRANS-PECOS

Some of them have been touched on in the past by various workers.
Some aspects of the problems listed here are currently under investigation. However, Trans-Pecos anthropology is a big field, and there
is more than enough room for the interested scholar to make his
contribution.

Bibliography
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
AA-American Anthropologist.
A An- American Antiquity.
B-TAPS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society.
B-T AS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society.
EP-El Palacio.
MP- Medallion Papers. Gila Pueblo.
PMP-Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology,
Harvard University.
P-WTHSS-vVest Texas Historical and Scientific Society Publications.
DAB-University of Arizona .B ulletin.
WMMB-Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin.
Albritton, Claude C. , Jr. , and Kirk Bryan
1939. Quaternary Stratigraphy in the Davis Mountains, Trans-Pecos Texas.
Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, Vol. 50, pp. 14Z3-1474.
Alves, Eileen E.
1930. Shelter Caves of the El Paso District. B-TAPS, Vol. Z, pp. 64-68.
1931. Pottery of the El Paso Region . .B-TAPS, Vol. 3, pp. 57-59.
193Z. Perishable Artifacts of the Hueco Caves. P-WTHSS, No. 4, pp. ZO-Z3.
Ayer, Mary Youngman
1936. The Archaeological and Faunal Material from Williams Cave, Guadalupe
Mountains, Texas. Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of
Philadelphia, Vol. 88, pp. 599-618.
Bartlett, John Russell
1854. Personal Narrative of Explorations and Incidents of Travel in Texas, New
Mexico, California, Sonora, and Chihuahua, Connected with the United
States and Mexican Boundary Commission During the Years 1850, '51, '5Z,
'53. Z Vols. London and New York.
Coffin, Edwin F.
193Z. Archaeological Exploration of a Rock Shelter in Brewster County, Texas.
Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum of the American Indian, Heye
Foundation, Vol. 48.
Cosgrove, C. B.
1947. Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in New Mexico and Texas. PMP,
Vol. Z4, No. Z.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Crimmins, M. L.
1929. An Archaeological Survey of the El Paso District. B-TAPS, Vol. 1, pp.
36-42.
1931. The Pictographs at the Hueco Tanks. B-TAPS, Vol. 3, pp. 24-30.
Davenport, J. Walker
1938. Archaeological Exploration of Eagle Cave. WMMB, No.4.
Davenport, J. Walker, and Carl Chelf
1941. Painted Pebbles of the Lower Pecos and Big Bend Regions of Texas.
WMMB, No.5.
Ferdon, Edwin N. , Jr.
1946. An Excavation of Hermit's Cave, New Mexico. Monographs of the School
of American Research, No. 10.
Gladwin, Winifred and Harold S.
1934. A Method for Designation of Cultures and Their Variations. MP, No. 15 .
Gould, Lois
1929. A Grooved Club and Other Artifacts from a Cave Seventy Miles Northeast
of El Paso, Texas. Proceedings of the Oklahoma Academy of Science, Vol.
9, pp. 155-159.
Hack, John T.
1939. The Late Quaternary History of Several Valleys of Northern Arizona, A
Preliminary Announcement. Museum Notes, Museum of Northern Arizona, Vol.11, pp. 67-73.
Haury, Emil W .
1936. The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico. MP, No. 20.
Holden, W . C.
1937. Excavation at Murrah Cave. B-TAPS, Vol. 9, pp. 48-73 .
Jackson, A. T.
1937. Exploration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 9,
pp. 146-192.
Janes, Susan M.
1930. Seven Trips to Mount Livermore. P-WTHSS, No.3, pp. 8-9.
Kelley, J. Charles
1939. Archaeological Notes on the Excavation of a Pit-house near Presidio, Texas.
EP, Vol. 46, No. 10, pp. 221-234.
1949. Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House Structures in Western
Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 20, pp. 89-114.
1950. Atlatls, Bows and Arrows, Pictographs, and the Pecos River Focus. A An,
Vol. 16, No.1 , pp. 71-74.
1951. A Bravo Valley Aspect Component of the Lower Rio Conchas Valley, Chihuahua, Mexico. A An, Vol. 17, No.2, pp. 114-119.
1952. Factors Involved in the Abandonment of Certain Peripheral Southwestern
Settlements. AA, Vol. 54, No.3, pp. 356-387.
1952-53. The Historic Indian Pueblos of La Junta de los Rios. New Mexico Historical Review, Vol. 27, No.4, pp. 257-295; Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 21-51.

TRANS- PECOS

143

1955. Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. AA, Vol. 57, No. 5, pp.
981-995.
1957. The Livermore Focus: A Clarification. EP, Vol. 64, Nos. 1-2, pp. 42-52.
1959. The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. A An, Vol. 24, No.3 , pp. 276-288.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits in
the Big Bend Region of Texas. P-WTHSS, No. 10, pp. 9-173.
Kirkland, Forrest
1939. Indian Pict ures in the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County, Texas. B-TAPS,
Vol. 11 , pp. 47-76.
1940. Pictographs of Indian Masks at Hueco Tanks. B-TAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 9- 29.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1948. The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. UAB, Vol. 19, No.2.
Martin, George C.
1933. Archaeological Exploration of the Shumla Caves. WMMB, No.3.
Mera, H. P.
1938. Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern New Mexico. Memoirs of
the American Anthropological Association, No. 51.
1943. An Outline of Ceramic Developments in Southern and Southeastern New
Mexico. Laboratory of Anthropology Technical Series Bulletin, No. 11.
Moore, Mrs. Glen E.
1947. Twelve Room House Ruin. B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 94-114.
Pearce, J. E., and A. T. Jackson
1933. A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas. The University of
Texas Bulletin, No. 3327.
Roberts, Fran~ H. H ., Jr.
1929. Recent Archaeological Developments in the Vicinity of El Paso, T exas.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 91 , No.7.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas. MP, No. 17.
1936. An Archaeological Survey of Chihuahua, Mexico. MP, No. 22.
Sayles, E. B., and Ernst Antevs
1941. The Cochise Culture. MP, No. 29.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1957. A Carbon-14 Date from Trans-Pecos Texas. B-TAS, Vol. 28, pp. 288-289.
Setzler, Frank M.
1935. A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern Texas. AA, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp.
104-110.
Smiley, Terah L., Stanley A. Stubbs, and Bryant Bannister
1953. A Foundation for the Dating of Some Late Archaeological Sites in the Rio
Grande Area, N ew Mexico: Based on Studies in Tree-ring Methods and
Pottery Analyses. UAB, Vol. 24, No.3.
Smith, Victor J .
1932. The Relation of the Southwestern Basket Maker to the Dry Shelter Culture

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the Big Bend . B-TAPS, Vol. 4, pp. 55-62.
1934. Hard Rock Shelter. B-TAPS, Vol. 9, pp. 97-106.
1938. Carved Rock Shelter. B-TAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 222-233.
Stallings, W. S., Jr.
1932. Notes on the Pueblo Culture in South-central New Mexico and in the
Vicinity of El Paso, Texas. AA, Vol. 34, No.1, pp. 67- 78.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks.
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-TAS, Vol. 25.
Taylor, Herbert C., Jr.
1949. A Tentative Cultural Sequence for the Area About the Mouth of the Pecos.
B-TAPS, Vol. 20, pp. 73-88.
Taylor, Walter VV.
1956. Some Implications of the Carbon-14 Dates from a Cave in Coahuila, Mexico. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 215-234.
Winship, G. P.
1896. The Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542. Fourteenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology, Part 1. Washington, D. C.
Wormington, H. M.
1957. Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series, No. 4 (4th edition ).

Archeology of the Central and Southern
Sections of the Texas Coast
T. N . CAMPBELL*

Area
CoASTAL TExAs is part of the elongated low-lying area bordering the
Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico that is known to physiographers
as the Coastal Plain Province (Fennemen, 1938 ). Our principal interest
here is in the section west of the Mississippi River called the West
Gulf Coastal Plain, and even more specifically in the narrow strip
known as the Coastal Lowland, a belt extending along the coast that
varies in width from 50 to 75 miles. Furthermore, because of an editorial decision, we are concerned only with that part of the Coastal
Lowland ly ing between the Brazos and the Rio Grande rivers, or what
is here termed the central and southern sections of the Texas coast
(Fig. 1) . The eastern part, which lies between the Brazos and Sabine
rivers, is assigned to another contributor. This dual division of the
Texas coast is in part arbitrary and in part based on a vaguely defined
cultural boundary zone in late prehistoric and early historic times.
The Coastal Lowland is a .low, slightly tilted, almost featureless
plain. From sea level at the coast line it gently rises to an altitude
ranging from 100 to 175 feet along its inner edge. Geologically it is
divisible into an inner and an outer belt, the inner belt being controlled
by the Lissie sand formation and the outer by the Oberlin and Eunice
formations (these replace the single formation previously known as
Beaumont ) . All three formations are of Quaternary age (Doering,
1957: 1822; Sellardsetal. , 1932: 780- 795 ) .
Across the Coastal Lowland a number of streams meander broadly
• T. N. Campbell, currently Chairman of the Department of Anthropology a t The
University of T exas, has worked in several Texas areas, including central Texas
and the T rans-Pecos, but his special interest has been in the Texas Gulf coast. He has
published reports on investigations at a number of coastal sites, among th em Johnson, Kent-Crane, Live Oak Point, Webb Island, Indian Island, and Caplen.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

toward the Gulf of Mexico in roughly parallel southeasterly courses.
Most of these streams are in the central section of the coast, the important ones being the Brazos, Colorado, Guadalupe, San Antonio, and
Nueces rivers. The southern section of the Texas coast is much drier,
and there are no important drainages between the Nueces and the Rio
Grande. Nearly all of th ese rivers flow into the shallow segmented
bays that form so large a part of th e Texas coast line. These baysMatagorda, San Antonio, Aransas, Corpus Christi, and the Laguna
Madre-are almost completely closed off from the Gulf by long, narrow, sand-reef barrier islands and peninsulas that parallel the mainland. The longest of these is Padre Island, which extends from Corpus
Christi southward to the mou th of the Rio Grande, a distance of some
120 m iles.

Fig . 1. Map showing sections of the Texas coast under consideration: (1) central section ,
(2) southern section .

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

147

Otherwise the Texas coast is physiographically rather monotonous.
Marshes, lagoons, ponds, and oxbow lakes are common. Near the mainland shore in some localities are remnants of beach ridges or lines of
sand dunes, and fairly common near the beach are low wave-cut bluffs.
In the central section are many small " mounds" or elevations that
have sometimes been mistaken for archeological features. These are
usually circular in outline, range in height from one to five feet, and
most of them have diameters of 30 to 50 feet. These have been referred
to as " pimple mounds" or " mima mounds," and some areas thickly
strewn with them have been called " pimpled plains." Their origin is in
dispute, but Price ( 1949 ) has presented evidence which indicates that
they are the work of pocket gophers.
Along the coast from Corpus Christi southward are topographic features known as clay dunes (Huffman and Price, 1949). Except for the
constituent materials, these dunes are similar to some sand dunes . They
are elongated ridges of compact, stratified, wind-blown clay derived
from the dry, mud-cracked surfaces of nearby saline lake basins and
coastal lagoons. They lie along the lee shores of these saline flats . The
dunes range in height from a few feet to 35 feet and constitute the
major elevational features of the flat coastal terrain in that area.
Occupational refuse occurs in many of these clay dunes, indicating
that they were intermittently used as camping stations by man while
the dunes were accumulating.
The climate of the eastern part of the Texas coast is mild and
humid to sub-humid for the most part, but there are significant
gradations in both temperature and precipitation as one moves westward and southward (Thornthwaite, 1948). In the central and southern sections the temperature is prevailingly macrothermal. Unlike
the eastern section of the Texas coast, where precipitation is adequate
at all seasons, precipitation in the central and southern sections is less
reliable, and some years may be dry or even desert in character,
especially in the southern portion, which is classifiable as semi-arid.
The winters on the Texas coast are notably mild, but there are occasional sudden drops in temperature when cold air masses succeed
in penetrating as far south as the Gulf. The summer temperatures are
somewhat lower than farther inland. In late summer and early
autumn the whole coast is subject to violent hurricanes from the
Gulf, and these produce wind tides that damage or destroy archeological sites along the shore.
Biologists assign the central part of the Texas coast to the Texan
biotic province and the southern part to the Tamaulipan biotic prov-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ince (Blair, 1950). Prairies are characteristic of the coastal portion of
the Texan province, although the alluvial soils of river valleys and the
sandy soils farther inland locally support a forest vegetation. A thorny
brush vegetation is characteristic of the Tamaulipan biotic province,
reflecting the greater aridity and higher temperatures of southern
Texas. The boundary line between these two biotic provinces seems to
have fluctuated within the past hundred years, for Price and Gunter
( 1942) have cited historical records which show that the thorny brush
vegetation has spread northward (probably from local sources) along
the Texas coast. They explain this in terms of a slight change toward
greater aridity, complicated by over-grazing and clearing of the
vegetative cover for farming. If similar climatic shifts also occurred in
prehistoric times, human occupation and exploitation of the area must
have been affected. These and other dynamic aspects of the natural environment merit close attention by archeologists working in the
coastal area.
The marine enivronment of the Texas coast is not considered here,
but archeologists can locate useful information by consulting Geyer
( 1950 ) and Galtsoff ( 1954) , particularly the latter.

Historic Indian Groups
Nearly all of the historic Indian groups of the central and southern
sections of the Texas coast can be classified as either Karankawan or
Coahuiltecan. The linguistic researches of Swanton ( 1940: 144) have
shown that the Karankawan and Coahuiltecan languages are related.
All of these peoples were nomadic and made their living by hunting,
fishing, and food-gathering (Newcomb, 1956 ) , and the archeological
evidence indicates that this was also true of the coastal peoples throughout the prehistoric period. Some of the Coahuiltecans were taught agricultural techniques by Spanish missionaries, but this seems to have had
little effect on the cultures of bands not closely associated with
miSSIOnS.

The principal Indians of the central section were the Karankawa, a
group of five related tribes who occupied most of the territory lying
between Galveston Bay and Corpus Christi Bay (Swanton, 1952: Map
5 ). Listed roughly in the order of their distribution from east to west,
these were the Cocos or Caoque, the Cujane, the Karankawa proper,
the Coapite, and the Copano. The best sources on the culture of the
Karankawa Indians are Gatschet ( 1891 ) and Schaedel ( 1949 ) . East of

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

149

the Karankawan tribes, and outside of the area here under consideration, were the Akokisa, one of several Atakapan groups living between Galveston Bay and Calcasieu Lake in southwestern Louisiana.
Associated with the southern section of the Texas coast were numerous small nomadic bands that are usually referred to as Coahuiltecans.
The Coahuiltecan Indians were widely distributed over southern Texas
and northeastern Mexico, and several hundred band names have been
recorded. The little that is known about the culture of these Indians
has recently been synthesized by Ruecking ( 1953, 1954a, b, 1955).
Along the Texas coast Ruecking ( 1954a ) recognizes three clusters of
Coahuiltecan bands. In the lower Rio Grande valley, on both sides of
the river, was the Carrizo cluster, for which 51 different band names
are on record. On the lower Nueces River was the Orejon cluster, for
which 15 different band names are known. Between the Carrizo and
Orejon clusters there seems to have been little or no occupation in historic times. This vacant section, which lies between Baffin Bay and the
delta of the Rio Grande, is the driest part of the coastal area. A third
and somewhat controversial cluster was the Aranama, consisting of six
bands that ranged over the area lying between the lower San Antonio
and Guadalupe rivers. This area is immediately north of that of the
Karankawa, and it has not been definitely established that these bands
were of Coahuiltecan affiliation (Swanton , 1952: 308 ) .
By the middle of the eighteenth century the Lipan Apache had been
pushed by the Comanche down into central and southern Texas, and
between 1770 and 1850 small bands of Lipan Apache are reported at
various localities on the Coastal Plain of Texas ( Sjoberg, 1953a: 7680). The documented localities are scattered along the coastal strip
lying between Houston and Brownsville. By 1850, however, these
Lipan Apache had withdrawn to southwestern Texas.
The Tonkawa were primarily central Texas Indians, but one group
of Tonkawa, the Mayeye, moved southward to the coast in the 1770's
and became associated with the Cocos, the easternmost Karankawan
tribe (Sjoberg, 1953b: 282-283). In 1805 some of the May eye were
reported farther west on the coast, particularly near the mouth of the
Guadalupe River. Presumably these various Mayeye were eventually
absorbed by the Karankawa. Between 1820 and 1850 the Tonkawa
were frequently mentioned as being associated with the Lipan Apache
bands who lived near the coast (Sjoberg, 1953b: 283).
The principal coastal tribes , the Karankawans and the Coahuiltecans, were destroyed by forces set in motion by Europeans. They were
early decimated by European diseases and by tribal wars stimulated

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

by Europeans. As a result of the northward advance of the Spanish
frontier into northeastern Mexico and southern Texas, the westward
advance of the Anglo-American frontier along the Gulf coast, and pressures from the Apaches and Comanches, their numbers were further
reduced. By 1850 the Texas coast was cleared of its aboriginal inhabitants.
Thus far little progress has been made in linking archeological sites
with specific historic Indian groups of the Texas coast. There is acceptable evidence that the Rockport Focus is attributable. at least in part,
to the late prehistoric and historic Karankawan groups (Campbell,
195 Sa ) . It is possible, however, that some of the coastal Coahuiltecans
had the same material culture as the Karankawa. For example, Rockport Focus sites occur south of Corpus Christi Bay (Campbell, 1956 ),
which is south of the historic range of the Karankawan tribes and well
within the range of the Orejon cluster of Coahuiltecan bands. Thus it
is somewhat premature to link the Rockport Focus exclusively with the
Karankawans.
Although the Brownsville Focus of the Rio Grande delta area is
known only from surface collections, some sites yield historic materials
such as glass arrowpoints and wheel-made pottery (MacNeish, 1958:
186 ) . If these historic materials are integral parts of a late phase of the
Brownsville Focus, then this focus may be safely attributed to some of
the Coahuiltecan bands of that area. Confirmation of this assignment
must await further field investigations.

Archeological Sites
The recent rapid economic development of the Texas coast and the
attendant increase in population have seriously affected archeological
prospects in that area. Sites are constantly being destroyed as cities
and towns expand their limits, as industrial plants are constructed, as
canals and ship channels are dug, as highways, airfields, and dams
are built, and as the offshore barrier islands are closed for bombing and
gunnery ranges or opened for recreational use. On ranches trees and
large shrubs are bulldozed from the soil and special machinery digs
deep into the earth in order to destroy their root systems. When all this
is considered, along with normal erosion and the effects of hurricanes
on the coast line, it is clear that the destruction of archeological sites
is proceeding at a very fast pace. It is just a matter of time until the
limited archeological resources of the area will be destroyed except in

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

protected areas. For this reason, and also because so little is now
kn own about the area, it is essential that all individuals interested in
coastal archeology collect and publish as much information as possible
while it is still available.
Thus far all sites in the central and southern parts of the Texas coast
appear to be campsites or small village sites attributable to peoples
who lived by hunting, fishing, and food-gathering. In the early literature on the Texas coast there are occasional misleading references to
mounds (Otis T. Mason, 1880: 442; Gatschet, 1891: 55, 59; Thomas,
1891: 217, and 1894: map ; Martin, n . d.: 7), but these are obviously
not intentional constructions. Pearce (1932c: 54-55, 57, and 1932b:
54) later described the test excavation of a "large earthen mound" on
the Guadalupe River some 25 miles inland from the northern shore of
Espiritu Santo Bay, which is in the central section of the coast. This
he characterized as "of typical Mound Builder type," and cited it as
evidence of the passage of Mesoamerican influence along the Texas
coast. This is the Morhiss site, but later excavations have revealed that
it is not an artificial mound but a midden covering a gravel bar associated with an earlier channel of the Guadalupe River (Duffen, 1940:
17; Krieger, 1945: 42-43 ) . Thus far neither burial nor platform
mounds have been found anywhere on the Texas coast.
In the central section of the Texas coast the best known type of site
is the shell midden (Fig. 2), a compact accumulation of marine shells
and soil that also includes animal bones, artifacts, and other occupational refuse. In most middens oyster shell predominates, but clam,
conch, and other kinds of shell are usually included. These shell middens are circular or oval in outline and vary widely in thickness and
size of area covered. They range from a small area of thinly scattered
refuse to large accumulations five or six feet thick and covering an area
having a maximum diameter of 2,000 feet. The larger middens, which
are not numerous, seem to indicate favored areas where groups camped
longer and more frequently. The shell middens are usually located on
the crests or slopes of knolls, old beach ridges, and other low elevations near the shores of bays or on the higher parts of small islands
near the bay shores. In areas that have been carefully surveyed (Martin, n. d.) it has been found that nearly every location suitable for
human habitation exhibits shell midden materials. This does not necessarily signify a dense population at any one time; more likely it means
full exploitation of the shore line environment over a considerable
period of time.
In the coastal bays from Corpus Christi eastward are extensive

A

B
Fig . 2 . A. Test pits in a shell midden at the Mustang Lake site, Calhoun County, Texas .
This Rockport Focus site is situated on the shore of Mustang Lake, an almost landlocked
arm of San Antonio Bay. The midden covers a sandy knoll near a grove of wind-sculptured
live oak trees. B. This shows the structure of the Mustang Lake shell midden. Oyster shells
are embedded in a matrix of dark sandy soil.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

15 3

shell reefs that provide shell for industrial use (Arbingast, 1952: 38 ) .
These appear to be natural accumulations of shell and are not to be
confused with the relatively small shell m:.ddens along the bay shores.
No traces of houses have been found in shell middens, but some sites
in the central section of the coast have a number of small, flat, circular
areas of marine shell, and it has been suggested that these represent the
floors of temporary houses (Martin, n. d.: 10; Campbell, 1947: 44, 62,
64 ) . The shell may be an accumulation of debris within the house or,
more likely, it may have been deliberately placed to anchor sand or
give better footing on wet clay soil. This explanation appears reasonable because these circular shell areas are sometimes scattered around
a shell midden or arranged in irregular rows along a beach ridge . More
information on these features is needed. If it can be established that
they represent house floors , useful data on settlement patterns can be
accumulated.
Because of their location near beaches, many shell middens are
slowly destroyed by wave action, especially at times of exceptionally
high tide or during hurricanes. The middens are undercut and debris
falls into the water below. In such situations it is not uncommon to
find artifacts in the shallow water along the beach.
Excavation of shell middens, particularly the larger ones, poses
special problems. They rarely show stratification, although there are
sometimes gradations in soil color. The densely packed shell makes
for difficult digging, and the individual shells have to be dislodged with
a light pick or trowel. Since many artifacts are made of shell, one has
to inspect all shells and shell fragments in order to avoid overlooking
specimens. This is facilitated by passing all materials across or through
a screen. Slow, painstaking excavation yields much information that
would otherwise be lost. Shell middens often yield great quantities of
fish , bird, reptile, and mammal bone, and large faunal lists can be obtained if one collects all identifiable specimens from each level.
In these shell middens artifacts from the Aransas, Rockport, and
other as yet undefined foci may be expected. Nearly all of the artifacts
in this area are made of shell, bone, stone, and clay. Shell, especially
conch shell, was used for hammers , axes or adzes, gouges, awls, net
weights (see Campbell, 1958b ), scrapers, pendants, and beads. Bone
was used for awls, flaking tools, and beads. Flint was used for projectile points, knives, drills, gravers, and scrapers. Milling stones and
tubular stone pipes occur in the shell middens but are rare. Middens or
midden levels with pottery are clear indicators of a relatively late
date, and later still if also accompanied by European artifacts. Lumps

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of asphalt are common, and all specimens should be saved becau se some
of them bear impressions of basketry.
In the southern section of the coast shell midden s are rare, and the
most common sites are what have come to be called clay dune sites.
These clay dunes , referred to earlier, occur from St. Charles Bay southward to the Rio Grande and extend along the coast of Tamaulipas as
far as 25 miles south of the Rio Soto la Marina. Shells, bones of both
land and sea animals, artifacts, and other occupational debris are
found at various levels in the dunes and are commonly exposed by
sh eet wash and gully formation during periods when the dune surface
is not protected by vegetation. Very little excavation has been done in
clay dune sites, but many su ch sites in various stages of erosion have
been visited. All of the evidence thus far indicates that the occupational debris is rarely concentrated at any particular level. It is thinly
distributed both vertically and horizontally. Apparently the dunes
were not occupied very long at any one time, which is in accord with
the inferred nomadic habits of the prehistoric inhabitants.
A combination of geological and archeological studies would almost
certainly clarify the prehistory of this section of the Texas coast.
Incidentally, anyone who contemplates work in the southern section
of the Texas coast should become familiar with the publications of W.
Armstrong Price and his associates (Price, 1933, 1947a, b, 1949, 1954,
1958 ; Price and Gunter, 1942; Huffman and Price, 1949). This literature is essential for understanding the ecological factors affecting past
human occupation of the area.
Excavation of clay dune sites is likely to be discouraging. The cultures represented are meager in their artifact inventories, occupations
were of short duration, and few artifacts occur at any particular level
in the dunes. Furthermore, the dune material resists excavation; when
w et the clay is very adhesive and when dry very hard. Possibly there
are optimum moisture conditions for excavation, but no one has yet had
sufficient experience in clay dune excavation to recommend the best
digging procedures.
The clay dune sites between Corpus Christi and Baffin bays yield
artifacts similar to those of the shell middens described above. Concentrations of land snails frequently occur in these sites, presumably evide:Jce of use for food. Another common characteristic of many clay
dune sites in this same area is the occurrence of numerous irregular
pieces of hard clay. These appear to have been baked, for they resist
weathering and some show direct evidence of haYing b een in fire . No

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

155

agreement has been reached on the activity or activities reflected by
these objects.
In the clay dunes of the Rio Grande delta most of the artifacts are
from the Brownsville Focus and are made of shell-projectile points,
gouges, scrapers, fish hooks, pendants, and beads. Bone wa s u sed principally for awls , occasionally_for projectile points, and flint was used
mainly for projectile points and scrapers. Tubular stone pipes are occasionally found. Pottery is very rare and thus far seem s to be intrusive from the Huastecan area of Mexico or from the central part of
the T exas coast.
Other types of sites are known to exist on the coast, but they have
not received much attention. These include campsites buried in valley
alluvium, campsites located on or in natural levees of abandoned
stream channels, and sand dune campsites on the offshore barrier
islands and peninsulas.
Although numerous burials have been reported from the Texas
coast, very few have been described. In shell middens and in clay dune
sites both flexed and extended burials have been found. As most of
these y ield no burial furniture, cultural assignment of skeletal material is especially difficult. In the vicinity of Corpus Christi burial
ar eas have been found that y ielded scores of skeletons, but these have
not yet been linked with specific cultural units.

Archeological Investigations
A close reading of the archeological literature of the Texas coast reveal that investigators have been concerned with finding answers to
a number of general questions. These are so frequently stated or implied that they are almost thematic. The principal questions may be
stated as follows:
( 1 ) Was the Texas coastal belt involved in the presumed movem ent of
culture elem ents from M esoa m erica to the eastern United Sta tes? This
question was raised very early, even b efore there had been any significant
reconnaissance or excavation, and it is still being asked, although to date
most of the archeological eviden ce indicates a negative answer.
(2) What archeological m aterials from the coast are attributable to the
various historic Indian groups ? In the initial period of investigation there
was a tend ency to identify a ll arch eological remains in a given section
with the historic Indians who occupied that particular section. Later,
as more eviden ce accumulated, and as more cultures were defined, it

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

became obvious that a valid linkage of a prehistoric and a hi storic culture
of the sa me area is not easily achi eved. Thus far these linkages have had
to be phrased largely in terms of probability.
(3) What are the cultural units of the coastal area and wh at are their
relative chronological positions? This question beca me important when
enough factual data had been collected to make it clear tha t a number of
cultures existed in the area at various times in the past. This is still one
of the major questions. Thus far only a few cultures have been defin ed in
the coastal area, and it is expected that others will be defined as investigation continues.
( 4) What relationships exist between the various coastal cultures themselves and also between them and cultures of adjacent areas, such as
southern Louisiana, northeastern Mexico, and the interior of Texas.
Answers to this general question have come slowly and not mu ch progress
ha s been made. However, one outstanding difficulty is that much of the
coast h as not been investigated, and the same is true for most of the
surrounding areas.
Nearly all that is known about the archeology of the central and
southern sections of the T exas coast is the result of work that has been
done during the past thirty years . Before 1929 there were only casual
or indirect references to archeological remains in this area (Fewkes,
190 7: 272-273; Gatschet, 1891 : 55; Kuy kendall, 1872; Otis T. Mason,
1880: 442; Pearce, 1919: 227-228, 234; Roessler. 1882; Thomas, 1891:
2 17, and 1894: map ). After 1929 the literature became more complex,
and we will review it in two parts, one part dealing with the central
section, the other with the southern section. The city of Corpus Christi
will serve as a rough point of division between the two sections.
Central Section. In the central section of the coast the first real contributions were made by Martin and Potter, two nonprofessional
archeologists from the town of Rockport. During the latter half of the
1920's they jointly investigated a large number of sites along the coast
from Matagorda Bay to Baffin Bay. Their method involved the location
of sites by reconnaissance; surface inspection, especially the examination of erosional exposures; collection of artifacts from the surface ; removal of any burials exposed by erosion; and brief test exca vations at
a few sites. The results of their work were published in six papers, five
of them by Martin and one by Potter, during the years 1929- 1931.
The first paper (Martin, n. d. ) was the report of an archeological
survey of a portion of the Ara n sas Bay area made during the years
1927- 1929 by Martin and P otter. Ninety-two sites were found on the
mainland shores of Copano, St. Charles, and Aransas bays. In this r eport site locations were shown on maps, one paragraph was devoted to

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

157

each site, and four plates illustrated 136 stone artifacts from the area.
This paper was important because it presented for the first time a body
of factual information on the archeology of a part of the Texas coast.
In 1929 Martin published a short paper that repeated and to a certain extent supplemented the survey report. In 1930 Martin published
two additional articles, both dealing with specific sites and finds. One
of these (Martin, 193Gb) described two sites on Oso Creek just south
of Corpus Christi, and the other (Martin, 1930a) described a locally
unique pottery vessel and some incised pebbles from the Corpus Christi
area. In this same year came Potter's brief but very useful description
of pottery from the central section of the coast. Finally, in 1931, Martin also published a brief paper on coastal pottery, supplementing but
not duplicating that of Potter.
The publications of Martin and Potter constitute the starting point
for systematic archeology in the central section of the Texas coast.
Some of the salient features of the area became discernible for the first
time. They found sites to be consistently associated with minor elevations along the mainland shore line and revealing occupation by groups
who lived by hunting, fishing, and gathering. Shellfish collecting was
shown to be an important source of food, and many sites could be characterized as shell middens. The cultural inventory they found to be
rather meager, principally tools and ornaments made of bone, shell,
and siliceous stones. Many sites yielded pottery, chiefly plain, incised,
and painted varieties, the last being a highly distinctive black-on-gray
ware. In Martin and Potter's publications it is possible to detect evidences of at least two successive occupational stages, but of this they
seem to have been unaware. They thought that all of their materials
belonged to a single cultural complex, and this they attributed to the
historic Karankawa Indians.
In 1932 Pearce published three papers in which he expressed a few
ideas about coastal prehistory. One of these was a general paper on
Texas archeology (Pearce, 1932b), and the others dealt specifically
with the archeology of eastern Texas (Pearce, 1932a, c). Pearce was
interested in the Texas coast as a possible route by which human
groups migrated or culture diffused from central Mexico to the Mississippi Valley. He emphasized the Morhiss "mound" and the continuous distribution of pottery along the Texas coast, suggesting that they
reflected passage of at least one group of people from Mexico to the
Mississippi Valley; in fact, he hazarded the guess that a group of
Huastecs may have been the original bearers of complex culture to the
eastern United States. To account for the general low level of culture

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

along the Texas coast, as indicated by the "surface and top layers," he
postulated degeneration from a higher cultural state to a lower one. No
evidence was cited in support of his implication that the "lower layers"
in coastal sites contain remains of an earlier and more complex culture. Pearce's general conclusion was that the Texas coast did not
show evidence of a large migration from Mexico to the Mississippi
Valley, but he believed that "a slow trickle of Mexican influence passed
in early times up the coast" into the lower Mississippi Valley. Thus
far little has been found to substantiate the latter part of this statement.
In 1935 E. B. Sayles published the results of an extended archeological survey of Texas. This was a by-product of interest in the
origins of the Hohokam and Mogollon cultures of the Southwest (Gladwin, 1934: 34; Sayles, 1935: iii ). Sayles spent two years in reconnaissance, test excavation, and study of museum collections in Texas.
On the basis of this work he named and defined a number of cultural
units in Texas. The Gila Pueblo system of culture classification was
used as a framework for presenting data on, and showing relationships
between, the various units defined. Actually his data were presented
in generalized form by means of maps, photographs, and trait lists arranged in parallel columns, with very little quantification or discussion.
The chief contribution which Sayles made to the archeology of the
Texas coast was the structure which he gave to it. He named and defined cultures and arranged them in rough chronological sequence.
Instead of continuing to speak about a heterogeneous mass of archeological materials from the coast, it now became possible to speak of
the area in terms of several units of culture, each having a name, a
geographic range, and a placement in time relative to the others. Another contribution which Sayles made was his demonstration, largely
on the basis of similarities in artifact typology, of relationships between
cultures of the Texas coast and those in the interior of Texas, particularly in central and southern Texas.
In the central section of the coast Sayles recognized a single culture
which he called the Karankawan, but this was divided into an earlier,
pre-ceramic Oso Phase and a later Rockport Phase with pottery. The
Oso Phase he showed to be more localized, extending only from the
western end of Matagorda Bay to a point just below Baffin Bay, whereas the Rockport Phase was shown as covering all of the Texas coast
except the delta of the Rio Grande. Of these two cultural units only
one, the Rockport, has withstood the test of time; but its trait list has

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

159

been revised and its geographic range greatly reduced. Subsequent
field investigations have not confirmed Sayles' Oso Phase, but this may
be due to inadequate sampling of the area.
In 1935 came the first information on the physical character~stics
of the prehistoric inhabitants of the central section of the T exas coast.
In that year George and Edna Woodbury published an osteometric
study of 16 fragmentary skeletons from a site on Oso Creek near the
southern shore of Corpus Christi Bay. This site was excavated by
Sayles during his archeological survey of Texas, but the burials have
never been described and the cultural unit represented has not been
identified. This population group was characterized as tall (males
only ) and excessively long-headed, and the Woodburys pointed out
that tallness in males was typical of the historic Karankawa Indians.
In 1937 Woodbury also published a brief comparative study of three
series of Texas crania, two from the Texas coast and one from southwestern Texas. One series from the coast consisted of seven new crania
from the Oso site, and the other was made up of eight crania from the
Caplen site in the eastern section of the Texas coast (see Campbell,
195 7) . The series of southwestem Texas crania consisted of specimens
from sites near the mouth of the Pecos River. This study indicated that
the Oso crania, which Woodbury considered to be Karankawa, differed
markedly from the Caplen crania, believed by Woodbury to be Atakapan. However, the Oso crania showed many similarities to the crania
from the Pecos River. Woodbury's ethnic identifications may be correct, but they have yet to be validated.
In 1935, after having spent some time on the Texas and Tamaulipas
coasts, J. Alden Mason devoted a special paper to the place of Texas in
prehistoric relationships between Mexico and the United States. He
considered that the Texas coast was the most likely route by which
influences from Mexico reached the southeastern United States.
Searching for traces of these influences, he reviewed the ceramic evidence from the Gulf coast, beginning with the Huastec area of eastern
Mexico and moving northward to the central part of the Texas coast.
In doing this he presented new and important data on the pottery of
Tamaulipas and of the Brownsville area of Texas, which will be considered later in this paper.
In his discussion of the pottery of the central part of the Texas coast,
Mason noted 'striking differences from Huastec pottery-vessel size
and shape, design elements, and particularly such decorative techniques as incising and lip notching. Nevertheless he thought he detected Huastec influence in the "fine, thin creamy ware decorated in

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

black pigment derived from asphalt. " He further stated that the " identification of this fine pottery with the Karankawa seems incredible. "
His conclusion was that the painted pottery of this area was made by
Coahuiltecans and that Huastecan influences had passed through the
Coahuiltecans as far north as the central part of the Texas coast. For
lack of data from the eastern section of the Texas coast, Mason turned
from the coast to a consideration of other areas. Whatever Mason's
reason for denying painted pottery to the Karankawa , his idea that the
Coahuiltecans introduced painted pottery to the Texas coast has merit.
They were in contact with the Huastecan area , where painted pottery
was made; but the difficulty is that, except for certain intrusive Huastecan and Rockport wares in northern Tamaulipas and extreme southern Texas, painted pottery has not been reported from the area occupied by the Coahuiltecan Indians during the historic period.
In 1937, Clyde T. Reed described two tubular stone pipes with bone
mouthpieces that he had excavated from a site on Baffin Bay. Each of
these was associated with a burial, both skeletons being female, according to Reed. Of interest was Reed's statement that the site showed
no evidence of pottery, suggesting that tubular stone pipes, which Sayles assigned to his Rockport Phase, probably occurred in the preceramic horizon only, a conclusion that has been strengthened by excavation of a shell midden site on Aransas Bay (Campbell, 1947: 59 ) .
In 1938 Erik K. Reed initiated historic site archeology on the Texas
coast by describing historic Indian burials from the Espiritu Santo
Mission at Goliad. These burials will probably have more significance
when other Spanish mission sites are excavated, for they contained no
objects to aid in linking them with protohistoric and historic cultures
on the coast. As the Aranama were the principal Indians associated
with this mission, Reed assumed that most of the burials contained
Ar<milma individunls.
In 1940 Duffen published a brief preliminary account of his excavations at the Morhiss site in Victoria County. The materials from this
important site have never been completely analyzed and published,
but references have appeared in later literature to a Morhiss Focus
(Kelley, 1947: 104; 1959: 282 ) .
Of much more significance was Sellards' report, also published in
1940, of artifacts in association with extinct animals at the Buckner
Ranch site near Beeville in Bee County. The most important finds occurred in the Berclair terrace of the Mission River, a terrace assigned
by Sellards to the Late Pleistocene. Along with bones of mammoth,
mastodon, horse, bison, camel, dire-wolf, peccary, armadillo, glypto-

.-\RCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

don, and ground sloth were a number of chipped stone implementsprojectile points, knives, hand axes, gouges , and scrapers. In the lower
part of the terrace were projectile point forms that are now recognizable as Clovis, Midland (unfluted Folsom), Scottsbluff, and Angostura,
as well as side-notched and stemmed forms not ordinarily found in
association with extinct animals. It is still difficult to evaluate this particular assemblage, but the site is important because it presented the
first indisputable evidence of the contemporaneity of man and extinct
animals on the Texas coastal plain.
In 1943 the Third Round Table Conference of the Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia devoted its whole session to a consideration of
anthropological problems involving northern Mexico and the southern
part of the United States. One section considered the problem of cultural relations between northern Mexico and the southeastern United
States, and at this section meeting various papers were presented.
While none of these added anything significantly new to Texas coast
archeology, the summary paper by J. Alden Mason (1943) reflected
current opin~on on the status of the Texas coast with respect to the
problem. It was believed that the transfer of certain elements was
most likely effected by small groups who at various times moved from
the Huastec area along the Gulf coast of Tamaulipas and Texas to the
Mississippi Valley. This movement was probably too rapid to leave
e:·wugh material objects along the way to permit tracing the various
passages. It was agreed that more archeological work was urgently
needed in Tamaulipas and on the Texas coast, but "no spectacular discoveries and little elucidating data" could be expected from this
approach.
In 1946 the First Symposium on the Caddoan Archaeological Area
was held in Norman, Oklahoma. The preliminary report (Krieger,
1947) indicated a new trend in archeological opinion that affected the
status of the Texas coast in connection with the problem of contact between Mexico and the southeastem United States. With the recognition of Mesoamerican culture elements in the Caddoan area, particularly at the Davis site in eastern Texas and the Spiro site in eastern
Oklahoma, it seemed more reasonable to think in terms of movement
from the Huastecan area northward across the interior of Texas rather
than eastward along the Texas coast. This meant that only the southern section of the Texas coast would be involved, not the central and
eastern sections. This view was later elaborated by Krieger ( 1948) ,
who referred to the inland route as the Gilmore Corridor.
The first definition of a cultural unit based on excavation was

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

presented in 1947 by Campbell, who recognized an Aransas Focus in
the central section of the coast. This pre-ceramic culture was found at
three sites, all located on a peninsula separating the Copano and Aransas bays. Materials from the Johnson site, designated as the type site,
were presented first . The Kent-Crane and Live Oak Point components
were described later (Campbell, 1952, 1958a ) , and a probable fourth
component near Corpus Christi was also later identified (Campbell,
1956), extending the geographic range of the Aransas Focus farther
south on the coast. On the basis of stratigraphic evidence it was shown
that the Aransas Focus preceded the Rockport Focus. No estimate of an
inception date for the Aransas Focus was given, but the terminal date
was placed at about A.D. 1500, making the Rockport Focus almost entirely historic. It was also shown that the Aransas Focus did not duplicate Sayles' Oso Phase of the same area and thus constituted a new cultural unit for the Texas coast.
In 1954 Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks proposed a series of developmental
stages for Texas as a whole-a Paleo-American Stage for the earliest
occupation by big game hunting groups; an Archaic Stage for later
hunting and gathering peoples; a Neo-American Stage for groups who
had agriculture and/ or pottery and the bow; and a Historic Stage for
the late cultures postdating the entry of Europeans. They also described
a series of projectile point and pottery types that have become indispensable for describing cultural units and demonstrating their relationships. In their review of the central section of the coast, Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks placed the Buckner Ranch site and several surface
finds of early projectile points in the Paleo-American Stage. The Aransas Focus was placed in the Archaic Stage, and the Rockport Focus
was placed in the Neo-American Stage, surviving into the Historic
Stage and probably identifiable with the historic Karankawa Indians.
No date range for the Aransas Focus was given, but the beginning
date for the Rockport Focus was placed at A.D. 1000, some 500 years
earlier than Campbell's previous estimate for the end of the Aransas
Focus. For the Rockport Focus they defined three pottery types that
had been previously named by Campbell. Their maps showed the
Rockport Focus as extending from the mouth of the Brazos River to
Baffin Bay, greatly reducing the area previously shown by Sayles. In
1954 no excavated components of the Rockport Focus had been published, but several components have recently been described (Campbell, 1956, 1958a ), including one that is attributable to the Historic
Stage.
Southern Section. In the southern section of the Texas coast there

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

has been very little archeological investigation, and most of this is confined to the extreme south, especially the delta of the Rio Grande.
Most of what is known stems from the work of A. E. Anderson, a civil
engineer of Brownsville, who began in 1908 to collect and record specimens from sites on both sides of the Rio Grande near its mouth. Over
the years he collected thousands of specimens from several hundred
sites in that area, and in 1945 his collection was deposited with the
University of Texas.
In 1932 Anderson published a brief paper describing artifacts from
sites in the Texas portion of the Rio Grande delta. He reported sites
associated with clay dunes on the coast and with abandoned distributary channels of the Rio Grande farther inland. The artifacts from
these sites were not so much described as merely listed according to
the materials used in their manufacture. However, Anderson's paper
provided the first glimpse of what occurs in the coastal area lying
between Corpus Christi, Texas, and the Tampico region of southern
Tamaulipas in northeastern Mexico. His work called attention to the
extensive use of shell for tools, weapon parts, and especially for ornaments, as well as to the presence of some pottery in the area. Anderson
attributed all of his artifacts to a single culture. He mentioned a few
projectile points made of glass, but no attempt was made to link the
archeological remains with any specific Indian group.
Using Anderson's data, and following Anderson in attributing all
of the remains to a single culture, Sayles in 1935 defined a Brownsville
phase for the area extending from a short distance south of Baffin Bay
to the Rio Grande. He called attention to the absence of agriculture in
the area, and he cited intrusive Rockport ware as evidence of contemporaneity with his Rockport Phase. As Sayles diagrammed the Brownsville Phase as growing out of a Tamaulipecan root, it would appear
that he regarded the Brownsville culture as identifiable with the historic Tamaulipecan Indians, regarded by Swanton ( 1940: 44) as
probably Coahuiltecan in language.
In 1935 J. Alden Mason illustrated and described five pottery vessels found by Anderson in the vicinity of Brownsville. He compared
these with Huastecan pottery of eastern Mexico as known at the time,
concluding that they were not Huasteca but showed "Huasteca influence to a moderate degree." Later the excavations of Ekholm ( 1944:
433) made it possible to identify certain of these vessels as Tancol
Polychrome and Huasteca Black-on-white of Period VI in the Tampico-Panuco sequence.
In 1947 MacNeish published the first report on his work in Tamaul-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ipas and southern Texas. Using materials collected from the surface
at 82 sites in the Rio Grande delta area (most of these were Anderson's
sites ), MacNeish described the principal classes and types of artifacts
and assigned them to a Brownsville complex. Intrusive Huastecan
potsherds in some sites were recognized as belonging to types characteristic of Periods V and VI in Ekholm's sequence. These intrusives,
as well as the presence of a few arrowpoints made of glass, led MacNeish to place the Brownsville complex after A. D. 1000 and continuing into early historic times. His distribution map showed the Brownsville complex as extending along the coast from the Rio San Fernando
in northern Tamaulipas to the Arroyo Colorado on the Texas side of
the Rio Grande. He also pointed to certain "trade" items, mainly projectile points, from various sites in northern Tamaulipas and in central
and southern Texas which he interpreted as evidence of late prehistoric contacts between the Huastecan and Caddoan areas. His Mesaamerican-Southeast route thus followed that postulated by Krieger,
that is, along the southern section of the Texas coast and northeastward along the Gilmore Corridor of interior Texas.
In 1958 MacNeish revised his concept of the Brownsville Focus.
After re-examining materials from some of Anderson's key sites, he
recognized two local complexes (MacNeish, 1958: 173-174, 186192 ). The materials from sites south of the Rio Grande he placed in a
Barril complex, but he retained the name Brownsville for the complex
represented in sites north of the Rio Grande. He regarded both complexes as roughly contemporaneous, flourishing between A. D. 1000
and about 1780. However, by noting particular associations with
European artifacts or intrusive Huastecan potsherds of Periods V and
VI, he found evidence for placing a number of Barril sites earlier than
some of the Brownsville sites. This appears to have been the basis for
placing Barril earlier than Brownsville in his correlation chart. The
net effect of MacNeish's revision is to confine the Brownsville complex
entirely to the Texas portion of the Rio Grande delta.
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 130- 133 ) assigned the Brownsville
Focus to their Neo-American stage, using MacNeish's dates for its
time range. They emphasized the fact that current definition of the
culture was based entirely on surface collections and needed validation
by excavation.
The question of a pre-Brownsville or Archaic occupation did not
arise until quite late. Sayles ( 1935: 41 ) briefly described a Coahuiltecan Branch for the Rio Grande valley between Eagle Pass and McAllen
but not extending to the coast. MacNeish ( 1947: 1-3 ) later described

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

an Aba solo complex for the inland part of northern Tamaulipas and
adjoining southern Texas and considered it very closely related to
Sayles' Coahuiltecan Branch, perhaps even identical with it. He preferred to avoid the name "Coahuiltecan," which implies identification
with the historic Coahuiltecan Indians, because all of his data indicated that the Abasolo was prehistoric in age. MacNeish ( 1947: 8)
also reported the Abasolo as present in the Rio Grande delta area of
the coast, which was partially substantiated by the work of Campbell
and Frizzell (1949 ) at the Ayala site near McAllen. Still later Suhm
and associates ( 1954: 134- 143 ) set up two new foci in the Falcon
Reservoir area on the Rio Grande. The earlier of the two was designated as the Falcon Focus and the later as the Mier Focus, the two
constituting a cultural continuum. One radiocarbon date of about
2700 B. C. was reported for the Falcon Focus. No attempt was made
to relate these new foci to either Sayles' Coahuiltecan Branch or to
MacNeish's Abasolo complex, so that we now have a number of names
for cultural units that appear to be either identical or else quite similar.

Current Interpretations and Unsolved Problems
One striking fact about the Texas coast is that very few excavated
sites have been published, and nearly all of these are sites near two
adjacent bays in the central section . Publications reporting survey
work or describing surface collections are linked with the same area
but also include the Rio Grande delta. The significant point is that
large areas along the central and southern sections of the Texas coast
are still very poorly known. One important gap is the area lying between the Brazos River and San Antonio Bay, where som e excavation
has been done, such as at the Morhiss site, but has yet to be reported.
Another important gap is in the arid stretch between Baffin Bay and
the Rio Grande delta. H ere nothing has been done and the area is
strictly terra incognita.
Thus far attention seems to have been focussed on sites along the
mainland shores of the coast, and very little is known about occupation
farther inland or on the offshore barrier islands. At present we can
only speculate about the island occupations. Perhaps these were seasonal only, for the quieter waters of the mainland shores offered more
attractions-easier fishing, ready access to shellfish, more abundant
fresh water. and convenience for inland hunting and plant food collecting.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

It is thus evident that current interpretations of coastal prehistory
are severely limited by a scarcity of factual data and that the picture
will change as more becomes known. In the following paragraphs current interpretations will be summarized within the framework of the
four developmental stages proposed by Suhm, Krieger , and Jelks
( 1954) , and at appropriate places comments will be made on some of
the more important unsolved problems.
Paleo-American Stage. Of this initial hunting stage we know very
little. That the area was occupied quite early is clearly indicated by
the Buckner Ranch site excavated by Sellards, but unfortunately the
situation at this site is somewhat confused by the association of extinct
faunal remains with artifacts from two different stages, Paleo-American and Archaic. No strictly Paleo-American site has y et been reported anywhere on the Texas coast.
However, scattered finds of Paleo-American projectile points seem
to indicate a thin occupation along the coast in very early prehistoric
times. In the central section a few points, mostly surface-collected,
indicate such an occupation. These include a Clovis point from Calhoun County ( Suhm et al. , 1954: Plate 85 , Q), a Plainview point excavated from the Morhiss site (ibid.: Plate 116, E ) ; and seven points
reported from Refugio County (Enlow and Campbell, 1955 ), of which
five are Plainview (ibid. : Plate 1, F-H, J , K ) , one is Meserve (Plate
1, M ), and one is a lanceolate point resembling the Agate Basin type
( Plate 2, G ) .
Evidences of Paleo-American occupation in the southern section of
the coast are even more rare. The base of a Clovis point was found by
Anderson at a locality near the mouth of the Rio Grande where mammoth bones were later noted (Suhm et al., 1954: 121 ). As Clovis,
Scottsbluff, Plainview, Meserve, and lanceolate points resembling the
Agate Basin type have been found on the surface at sites on both sides
of the Rio Grande in the Falcon Reservoir area ( Arguedas R. de la
Borbolla and Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda , 1953; Weir, 1957: 71-72 ),
more intensive search of the southern coast will doubtless produce additional evidence of Paleo-American occupations.
Archaic. Thus far only one Archaic culture has been defined on
the basis of excavation. This is the Aransas Focus, which is known
from only a few sites and these are restricted to a relatively small area
in the central section, principally near Aransas Bay. Its full geographic range remains to be determined, and the same may be said
about the time range. No radiocarbon dates have been obtained, and
most of the estimated dates are terminal dates, which turn out to be

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

based primarily on inception dates for the succeeding Rockport Focus.
However, Stephenson ( 1950: 154) has assigned the Aransas Focus to
the period of A. D. 800-1500. Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks' date of about
A. D. 1000 for the beginning of the Rockport Focus is still an acceptable date for the end of the Aransas Focus, although most archeologists would not be disturbed if the date were pushed either backward
or forward a few hundred years.
The Aransas Focus shares many projectile point types with the
Edwards Plateau Aspect of central Texas and is presumably of the
same general age. It also shares a few projectile point types with the
Falcon Focus, for which one radiocarbon date of 2700 B. C. has been
obtained. Furthermore, the Aransas Focus also shares a number of
projectile point types with various phases in MacNeish 's radiocarbonsupported sequence for the Sierra de Tamaulipas. It is probably significant that the Kent point, the most common type in the Aransas
Focus (Campbell, 1956: 23 ), occurs as a minor type in only one
Tamaulipas phase, the Almagre, which is placed by MacNeish (1958:
198 ) between 2500 and 1500 B. C. However, other points associated
with the Aransas Focus are not so neatly segregated in the Tamaulipas sequence. Some, like the Tortugas point, began earlier in Tamaulipas but also survived into the historic period. Others, like Matamoros
and Catan points, appeared first after 1500 B. C. and also survived into
the historic period. None of this is very helpful in arriving at a terminal date for the Aransas Focus, but it does suggest a time span of
several thousand years.
At present it can be said that the Aransas Focus is a unique Archaic
culture because it is heavily oriented toward the utilization of marine
resources for food and materials for the manufacture of tools. Its
chipped stone work indicates some relationships with other Archaic
cultures of Texas and northeastern Mexico, but the shell work sets it
apart. Campbell ( 1947: 69-71 ) and Rouse ( 1949: 128 ) have called
attention to similarities in shell tool forms in cultures along the Gulf
coast from northeastern Mexico to Florida and Cuba, but the significance of this cannot be determined at present.
The status of other Archaic cultures in the area is much less clear.
Kelley ( 1959: 282) has referred to a Morhiss Focus in the central
section of the coast as probably being related to the Edwards Plateau
Aspect of interior Texas, but this focus has not yet been defined.
The situation in the southern section of the coast is confused at
present. Reference has been made to several Archaic cultures in or
near the area- the Coahuiltecan Branch of Sayles, the Abasolo com-

t68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

plex of MacNeish, actd the Falcon and Mier foci of Suhm and associates. This situation calls for clarification, but little progress is likely to
be made unless more detailed information is presented on all of these
cultures, but particularly the Coahuiltecan Branch and the Falcon and
Mier foci. This was made clear by MacNeish's recent summary of the
Abasolo complex (MacNeish, 1958: 179-183 ) . Kelley (1959: 283 )
recently pointed out that he had once suggested (ibid., 1947: 104, footnotes 26, 27 ) the name of Monte Aspect for the various Archaic cultures of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico. This would serve
as a very useful term for referring to a widespread and distinctive
cultural tradition in Tamaulipas and adjoining southern Texas ( cf.
MacNeish, 1958: 193, who refers to this tradition but suggests no
name for it ) .
Neo-American Stage. From data thus far accumulated it appears
that Neo-American sites are far more numerous than Archiac sites
on the Texas coast. For this stage we have two cultural units, the Rockport Focus and the Brownsville Focus, neither of which is adequately
supported by carefully controlled excavation in undisturbed sites. Both
had the bow and arrow, but the Brownsville Focus seems not to have
had pottery, and both cultures lacked agriculture.
The Rockport Focus probably began about A. D. 1000 (Stephenson,
1950: 154, places it at A.D. 1500) , is at least partially attributable to
the Karankawa Indians, and survived into the early 19th century.
The distinguishing feature of the Rockport Focus is its pottery, particularly the painted type known as Rockport Black-on-gray. The
source of the painted pottery tradition on the Texas coast has not been
determined, but the most likely source is the Huastecan area, where
black-on-white pottery occurs. A Southwestern origin does not seem
likely, although one sherd of Carretas Polychrome from Chihuahua
was found at a Rockport site south of Corpus Christi (Campbell, 1956:
41). Incised pottery, which appears to be relatively rare in the Rockport Focus, may be derived from the eastern section of the Texas coast,
where at least one type of incised pottery has been described for the
Galveston Bay Focus.
The Rockport Focus stratigraphically overlies the Aransas Focus
in several sites, but the relationships between these two cultures have
not been determined. As the Rockport Focus is not yet well documented, it is not clear as to just what Aransas artifact types survived
into the later Rockport culture. Relationships have been noted between
the Rockport Focus and other surrounding Neo-American cultures.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

16g

A number of Brownsville Focus traits occur in some of the southern
components of the Rockport Focus (Campbell, 1956: 45 ), and Rockport painted pottery is said to occur in the Brownsville area ( Sayles,
1935: Table 5) . The Rockport Focus and the various foci of the Central
Texas Aspect share essentially the same arrowpoint types, and it appears likely that the bow and arrow complex reached the coast from
central Texas. Rockport pottery is also occasionally found in components of the Galveston Bay Focus of the eastern section of the Texas
coast (Wheat, 1953 : 190, 195; Campbell, 1957: 467 ) .
In general. what is badly needed for the Rockport Focus is intensive
excavation and thorough descriptive reporting. The geographic range
of the focus needs to be more precisely determined, especially to the
east and to the south along the coast, and it would be of interest to
know its maximum extension inland. It is probable that there are local
variations within the Rockport Focus, as well as changes through time
prior to the advent of Europeans.
The Brownsville Focus is based entirely on surface collections, and
MacNeish is correct in referring to it as a "complex." MacNeish has
dated the Brownsville Focus at A. D. 1000-1780 (Stephenson, 1950:
154, placed the beginning of Brownsville at A. D. 1300 ) . The basic
need is for excavation in Brownsville Focus sites, and it would help if
the large collection of A. E. Anderson could be completely analyzed
and described. MacNeish and others have related the Brownsville
Focus to cultures in the Sierra de Tamaulipas and Huastecan areas ,
and reference has been made above to ties with the Rockport Focus.
Until the Brownsville Focus has been validated by a series of excavations, all statements a bout relationships with other cultures are open to
question.
Among the mortuary materials from the Cueva de la Candelaria of
Coahuila are a number of marine shell ornaments (beads, pendants,
and gorgets ) which also occur in Brownsville Focus sites (Aveleyra
et al. , 1956: 118-128, 147-151 ). These shell objects suggest inland
trade relations with the Brownsville area and also, because of the
fortunate conditions of preservation in the cave, indicate how some of
the Brownsville Focus ornaments may have been used.
Historic Stage. Although some field work has been done, there is
relatively little publication on historic sites along the Texas coast. Of
particular interest are the various early European establishments in
the central section of the coast, such as La Salle's Fort St. Louis near
Lwaca Bay and the Spanish mission and presidio sites of Victoria,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Goliad, and Refugio counties. Excavations at these sites offer excellent
opportunities to identify the archeological remains of certain Indian
groups and to document the early stages of Indian acculturation. Historic site archeology is just beginning in the coastal area.
As for the identification of archeological sites with historic Indian
groups, the only significant accomplishment thus far is the linkage of
the Karankawa with the Rockport Focus. Some Coahuiltecan groups
may also be represented by Rockport archeological materials, but this
has not yet been established. One important limitation is the general
lack of detailed ethnohistorical studies of specific Indian groups on the
Texas coast.
In conclusion, some statement should perhaps be made about the
probable role of the Texas coast in Mesoamerican-Southeast contacts.
As has been pointed out, interest has recently shifted from a strictly
coastal route to a more feasible inland route leading to the Caddoan
area. Only the southern section of the coast is involved in current discussions, and it is of interest to note two finds in this section that
may have a bearing on the problem. One is a bird effigy vessel of
polished brown potterysimilar to ware from Tlatilco in central Mexico
(Krieger, 1935: 516 ). This was found eroding from the soil at a
locality south of Corpus Christi (Martin, 1930a ). The other is a small
human figurine of green serpentine whose bent-knee stance is similar
to that in figurines from the La Venta region of eastern Mexico
(Krieger, 1953: 505, 515 ) . This was collected at a clay dune site on
Baffin Bay, also south of Corpus Christi. As these objects were not
clearly associated with other archeological materials, they merely suggest the possibility of trade or travel in prehistoric times. Otherwise
the evidence of passage of either men or objects along the Texas coast
is negative.
The archeology of the Texas coast is still in a rather rudimentary
condition. In a few localities cultures have been defined and short sequences established. Enough is known about the area as a whole to
suggest the main outlines of cultural development over a considerable
span of time. But the prime need today is additional primary archelogical data. We need systematic archeological surveys in the more
poorly known areas, and we need extensive excavation at a large number of sites, followed by detailed publications. The current rapid industrial development of the coastal area makes it imperative that a
program of research be carried out before the best archeological sites
are destroyed.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

171

Acknowledgment is made to the editors of this volume, as well as to W. S. Fitzpatrick, W. Armstrong Price, and Andree F. Sjoberg, for criticism and helpful suggestions.

References Cited
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
AA-American Anthropologist
A An-American Antiquity
B-AAPG-Bulletin of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists.
B-BAE-Bureau of American Ethnology, .B ulletin
B- TAPS- Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
B-TAS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
MP-Medallion Papers. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona
SJ A-Southwestern Journal of Anthropology
TJS-The Texas Journal of Science
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. B-TAPS, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Arbingast, Stanley A.
1952. Shell, A Marine Resource of the Texas Coast. The Southwestern Social
Science Quarterly, Vol. 33, No.1, pp. 38-43.
Arguedas R. de la Borbolla, Sol, and Luis Avelcyra Arroyo de Anda
1953. A Plainview Point from Northern Tamaulipas. A An, Vol. 18, No. 4,
pp. 392-393.
Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis, Manuel Maldonado-Koerdell, and Pablo Martinez
del Rio
1956. Cueva de la Candelaria. Vol. I. Memorias del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia , V. Mexico, D. F.
Blair, W. Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. TJS, Vol. 2, No.1 , pp. 93-117.
Campbell, T. N.
1947. The Johnson Site: Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the Texas Coast. BTAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 40-75.
1952. The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. B-TAPS, Vol.
23, pp. 39-77.
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1957. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
TJS, Vol. 9, No.4, pp. 448-471.
1958a. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. TJS, Vol. 10, No.4, pp. 423-442.
1958b. Probable Function of Perforated Oyster Shells Found in Aransas Focus
Sites. Texas Archeology, Vol. 2, No.2, p. 7.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Campbell, T. N., and Jack Q. Frizzell
1949. Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas. B-TAPS, Vol.
zo, pp. 63- ?Z.
Doering, J. A.
1957. Review of Quaternary Surface Formations of Gulf Coast Region. B-AAPG,
Vol. 40, No. 8, pp . 1816-1862.
Duffen, William A.
1940. Morhiss Site. Texas Archaeological News, No. Z, pp. 16-18.
Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944. Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico. American
Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 38, Part 5.
Enlow, Donald H., and T. N. Campbell
1955. Some Paleo-Indian Projectile Points from the Southeastern Periphery of
the Great Plains. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 29-37.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938. Physiography of Eastern United States. New York.
Fewkes, Jesse Walter
1907. Certain Antiquities of Eastern Mexico. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Z5th Annual Report, pp. ZZ1 - Z84.
Galtsoff, Paul S. (co-ordinator)
1954. Gulf of Mexico: Its Origin, Waters, and Marine Life. Fish and VVildlife
Service, Fishery Bulletin 89.
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891. The Karankawa Indians, the Coastal People of Texas. Archaeological and
Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Vol. L No.2.
Geyer, Richard A.
1950. A Bibliography on the Gulf of Mexico. TJS, Vol. Z, No. 1, pp. 44- 93.
Gladwin, Harold S.
1934. The Archaeology of the Southwest and Its Relation to the Cultures of Texas.
B-TAPS, Vol. 6, pp. 19-37.
Huffman, George W. , and W. Armstrong Price
1949. Clay Dune Formation near Corpus Christi, Texas. Journal of Sedimentary
Petrology, Vol. 19, No.3 , pp. 118- 127.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clear Fork
Focus. A An, Vol. 13, No. Z, pp. 97-109.
195Z. Some Geographic and Cultural Factors Involv ed in Mexican-Southeastern
Contacts. In: Tax, Sol, Indian Tribes of Aboriginal Ameri ca, Vol. III,
Proceedings of the 29th Congress of Americanists. pp. 139-144.
1959. The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in
the Southwest and Texas. A An , Vol. 24, No.3 , pp. Z76-Z88.
Krieger, Alex D.
1945. Some Suggestions on Archaeological Terms. B-TAPS, Vol. 16, pp. 41-51.
1947. The First Symposium on the Caddoan Archa eological Area. A An , Vol.
12, No. 3, pp. 198- 207.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

173

1948. Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor" in Culture Contacts between Middle
America and the Eastern United States. B-TAPS, Vol. 19, pp. 155- 178.
1953. Recent Developmen ts in the Problem of Relationships between the Mexican
Gulf Coast and the Eastern United States. Huastecos y Totonacos y Sus
Vecinos. Revista Mexicana de Estudios Antropologicos. Vol. 13, No. 2-3,
pp. 497-518.
1956. Some Mexican Figurine Heads in T e xas. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 258- 265.
Kuykendall, J. H.
1872. Aboriginal Antiquities of Texas. The T exas Almanac for 1872, and Emigrants Guide to T exas, pp. 175-178.
MacNeish, Ri chard S.
1947. A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexico. A An, Vol. 13, No.
1, pp. 1- 15.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigatious in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n. s., Vol. 48,
Part 6.
Martin, George C.
n. d. Preliminary Archaeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast Made
by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927- 1928- 1929. Privately
printed.
1929. Notes on Some Texas Coast Campsites and Other Remain s. B-TAPS, Vol. 1,
pp. 50-57.
1930a. A Vase and Some Carved Stones and Pebbles from Nueces County. Texas.
B-TAPS, Vol. 2, pp. 18- 20.
1930b. Two Sites on the Callo del Oso, Nw~ces \.ounty, Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 2,
pp. 7-17.
1931. T exas Coastal Pottery. B-TAPS, Vol. 3, pp. 53-56.
Mason, J. Ald en
1935. The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships between the United
States and Mexico. B-TAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 29-46.
1943. Summary of Section on Cultural Relations between Northern Mexico and
the Southeastern United States. In: El Norte de Mexi co y el Sur de Estados
Unidos. Tercera Re union de Mesa Redonda de la Sociedad Mexicana de
Antropologia, pp. 348-351.
Mason, Otis T.
1880. Summary of Correspondence of the Smithsonian Institution Previous to
January 1, 1880, in Answer to Circular No. 316. Smithsonian Institution,
Annual Report for the Year 1879, pp. 428-448.
Newcomb, VVilliam W. , Jr.
1956. A Reappraisal of the "Cultural Sink" of Texas. SJA, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp.
145- 153.
Pearce, J. E.
191 9. Indi an Mounds and Other Relics of Indian Life in Texas. AA, Vol. 21 , No.
3, pp . 223-234.
1932a . The Archaeology of East T exas. AA, Vol. 34, No.4, pp. 670- 687.
1932b. The Present Statm of Texas Archeology. B-TAPS, Vol. 4, pp. 44--54.
1932c. Significa nce of tre East T exas Arch aeological Field. In: Conferen ce on

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Southern Prehistory, Birmingham, Alabama, D ecember 18-20, 1932. National Research Council, Washington, D. C., pp. 53-58 .
P otter, Wendell H .
1930. Ornamentation on Pottery of the Texas Coastal Tribes. B-TAPS, Vol. 2,
pp. 41-44.
Price, W. Armstrong
1933. Role of Diastrophism in Topography of Corpus Christi Area, South Texas.
B-AAPG, Vol. 17, No.8, pp. 907-962. Reprinted with revisions in Barton,
Donald, and George Sawtelle (editors) , Gulf Coast Oil Fields, Tulsa, Oklahoma, 1936, pp. 205-250.
1947a. Equilibrium of Form and Forces in Tidal Basins of Coast of Texas and
Louisiana. B-AAPG, Vol. 31 , No. 9, pp. 1619-1663. Corrections in Vol. 31,
N o. 10, p. 1893.
1947b. Geomorphology of D epositi onal Surfaces. B-AAPG, Vol. 31, No. 10, pp.
1784-1800.
1949. Pocket Gophers as Architects of Mirna (Pimple ) Mounds of the Western
United States. TJS, VoLt , No.1 , pp. 1- 17.
1954. Shorelines and Coasts of the Gulf of Mexico. In: Galtsoff, Paul S. (coordinator), Gulf of M exico: Its Origin, Waters, and Marine Life. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Fishery Bulletin 89, pp. 39-65.
1958. Sedimentology and Quaternary Geomorphology of South T exas. Transactions, Gulf Coa st A ssociation of Geological Societies, Vol. 8, pp. 41-75.
Price, W . Armstrong, and Gordon Gunter
1942. Certain Recent Geological and Biological Changes in South Texas, with
Consideration of Probable Causes. Proceedings and Transactions of The
T exas Academy of Science for 1942, pp. 3-21.
Reed, Clyde T.
1937. A Carankawa Fire Implement. B-TAPS, Vol. 9, pp. 218-221.
Reed, Erik K.
1938. Burials at Mission Espi ritu Santo. Central Texas Arch eologist, No. 4, pp.
85-95.
Roessler, A. R.
1882. Antiquities and Aborigines of T exas. Annual Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution for 1881. In: Sen ate Miscellaneous
Document No. 109, 1881-82, 47th Congress, 1st Session (Series No. 1994) ,
pp. 613-616.
Rouse, Irving
1949. The Southeast and the W est Indies. In: Griffin, John W . (editor ) , The
Florida Indian and His Neighbors, pp. 117- 137 . Rollins College, Winter
Park, Florida.
Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
1953. The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern T exas and
Northeastern M exico. TJS, Vol. 5, No.4, pp. 480-497.
1954a. Bands and Band-clusters of the Coahuiltecan Indians. Student Papers in
Anthropology, Department of Anthropology, The University of T exas,
Vol. 1, No.2, pp. 1-24.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE TEXAS COAST

175

1954b. Ceremonies of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. TJS, Vol. 6, No.3, pp. 330-339.
1955. The Social Organization of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. TJS, Vol. 7, No.4, pp. 357-388.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of T exas. MP, No. 17.
Schaedel, Richard P.
1949. The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast. SJA, Vol. 5, No.2, pp. 117-137.
Sellards, E. H.
1940. Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, Vol. 51 , pp. 1627-1658.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932. The Geology of Texas, Vol. I. Stratigraphy. The University of Texas Bulletin, No. 3232.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1953a. Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. SJA, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp.
76-98.
1953b. The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. TJS, Vol. 5, No. 3,
pp. 280-304.
Stephenson, Robert L .
1950. Culture Chronology in Texas. A An, Vol. 16, No.2, pp. 151- 157.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-TAS, Vol. 25 .
Swanton, John R.
1940. Linguistic Material from the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. B-BAE 127.
1952. The Indian Tribes of North America. B-BAE 145.
Thomas, Cyrus
1891. Catalogue of Prehistoric Works East of the Rocky Mountains. B-BAE 12.
1894. Report on Mound Exploration of the Bureau of Ethnology. Bureau of
American Ethnology, 12th Annual Report, pp. 3-742.
Thornthwaite, C. W.
1948. An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate. The Geographical Review, Vol. 38, No. 1, pp. 55-9~,.
VV eir, Frank Al
1956. Surface Artifacts from La Perdida, Starr County, Texas. B-TAS, Vol. 27,
pp. 59-78.

Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. The Addicks Dam Site. I. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam
Basin, Southeast Texas. B-BAE 154, pp. 143-252.
Woodbury, George
1937. Notes on Some Skeletal Remains of Texas. University of Texas, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 5, pp. 7- 16.
Woodbury, George and Edna
1935. Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the Texas Coast. MP, No. 18.

Texas Archeology: A Guide to the
Literature
Compiled and edited by
T. N. CAMPBELL*

Introduction
THis COMPILATION revises and brings up to date (January 1, 1960 ) a
previous publication entitled A Bibliographic Guide to the Archaeology of Texas (Archaeology Series, I , Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas, Austin, 1952). The number of publications
listed in the earlier edition was 689. The list has now grown to 1287,
reflecting a rapidly growing interest in Texas archeology during the
past decade.
As stated in the previous edition, this guide is designed as an aid to
those who want to consult publications on the prehistoric and protohistoric Indian cultures of the Texas area. The list includes all publications that are specifically concerned with archeological sites and materials in Texas and also all that refer in some significant way to Texas
cultures. It is thought to be reasonably complete, but undoubtedly a
number of publications have been overlooked. It will be appreciated if
the editor's attention is called to such oversights.
Numbers in the guide section are the numbers that precede titles in
the list of publications, and an asterisk ( * ) preceding a number indicates that the publication is regarded as more important than others
not so marked. The culture index is designed as a guide to literature
on the various culture units that have been named and recognized at
one time or another. Not all of the culture units listed are commonly
accepted at present. It is our purpose to guide the reader to the litera• T. N. Campbell, Chairman of the Departme nt of Anthropology at The University of T exas, has long been interested in archeologica l bibliography. As stated
above, this bibliography brings up to elate a previous compilation entitled A Bibliog raphic Guide to the Archaeology of T exas, which appeared in 1952.

Office of the State Archeologi
Library

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ture on all units irrespective of their current status . Under many of the
units listed are given names that are considered to be synonymous.
The following table of contents indicates all of the analytical categories
used and will make it easier to locate the reference desired.

2

l

Fig. l.

loce1~ion

of regions.

Table of Contents
PAGE

REGION INDEX .
Trans-Pecos
Panhandle-Plains
North Texas .
Central Texas
Northeast Texas

181
181
181
182
182
183

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

179

Southeast Texas .
South Texas
COUNTY INDEX
CULTURE INDEX
Paleo-American Stage
Archaic Stage
Hueco Phase
Balcones Phase
Big Bend Aspect
Maravillas Complex
Santiago Complex
Red Bluff Complex
Pecos River Focus
Chisos Focus .
Edwards Plateau Aspect
Clear Fork Focus .
Round Rock Focus
Uvalde Focus
Trinity Aspect
Carrollton Focus
Elam Focus
Brazos Culture .
Monte Aspect .
Falcon Focus
Mier Focus .
Aransas Focus .
Oso Focus .
Morhiss Focus .
Red River Aspect
Neo-American Stage
J ornada Branch of the Mogollon
Mesilla Phase .
Dona Ana Phase
El Paso Phase
Livermore Focus
Bravo Valley Aspect .
La Junta Focus
Panhandle Aspect
Antelope Creek Focus
Central Texas Aspect
Austin Focus .

183
183
184
191
191
191
191
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
192
193
193
193
193
193
193
194
194
194
194
194
194
194
194
194
194
194
195
195
195
195
195
195
195
195
195

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Toyah Focus
Nueces Focus .
Tradinghouse Focus
Waco Focus
Henrietta Focus
Wylie Focus
Valley Creek Culture
Brownsville Focus
Barril Complex
Rockport Focus
Galveston Bay Focus
Orange Focus
Gibson Aspect
Alto Focus
Gahagan Focus
Haley Focus
Sanders Focus
Spiro Focus
Fulton Aspect
Belcher Focus
Bossier Focus
Fort Coffee Focus
Frankston Focus
McCurtain Focus
Mid-Ouachita Focus
Texarkana Focus
Titus Focus
Turkey Bluff Focus
Historic Stage
Sites Yielding European Artifacts
Bravo Valley Aspect
Concepcion Focus
Conchas Focus
Alamito Focus
Presidio Focus
Rockport Focus
Spanish Fort Focus
Fulton Aspect
Allen Focus
Glendora Focus
Little River Focus

195
196
196
196
196
196
196
196
196
196
196
196
197
197
197
197
197
197
197
198
198
198
198
198
198
198
198
198
199
199
199
199
199
199
199
199
199
199
199
199
199

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

181

TOPICAL INDEX .
Radiocarbon Dates
Relationships with Surrounding Culture Provinces
Central Plains
Mesoamerica
Southeast
Southwest
Typological and Distributional Studies
Pictographs and Petroglyphs .
Studies of Human Skeletal Remains
Useful Bibliographies and Checklists
General and Miscellaneous

199
199

200
200
200
200
200
200
201
201
201
201

Region Index
For loca tion of the various regions, see Fig. 1.

Trans- Pecos (Region 1): 3, 4, 6, 7, *8, 10, 11 , 12, 19, 20, 21 , 22, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30,
3 1, 32, 37, 55, 63, 66, 74, 78, *79, 97, 102, 11 3, 116, 120, *124, 125, 129, 137,148, 150,
152, 153, 156, 160, 171 , 179, 181 , 186, 187, 188, 189, 191 , 194, *199, 204, *213, 214,
216. 219, *220, 221, 222, 224, 234, 235, *237. 238, 239,240, 241, *242, 243, 252, 256,
258,259,260,268, 269,275, 276,282,293,294,295, 296,299,300,301,310,3 11 ,332,
335, 337, 338, 339, *341 , 350, 351, *353, 358, 364, 367, 368, 373, 385, 414, 429, 437,
439, 442, 443. 444, 449, 455, *464, *466, 480, 483, 485, 487, 489, *504, *506, 507 , 512,
515, 517, 518, 519, 520, 521 , 522, 523, 528, 537, 546, 547, 548, 549, 550, 551 , 552,
*553, 554, 555, 557, *558, *5.59, 560, 561 , *562, *563, 564, 565, *566, *567, 568, *570,
*571 , *573, 576, 578, *579, *580, *581, *583, *585, 588, 593, 595, 598, *602, 615, 626,
633, 637, 645, 650, *651, 652, 663, 668, 672, 674, 676, 677. 680, 681, 686, 687, *689,
*694, 695, 697, 699, 700, 704, 706, 708, 717, 720. 721 , 722, 723, 730, *736, *737, 744,
746, 751. • 760, 761 , 768, 772, 776, 779, 780, 782, 783, 786, 793, 795, 796, 800, • 801 ,
807,809,819,827, 832,914, 915, 916,917,918,919,920,926,939, *950, 951,952, 953,
954,957.958, *959, *960. 962,963, 964, 984, 990,991 , 992, *993, 994,996, *997, 1027,
1028, 1029, 1030, 1031, 1032, 1033, 1034, 1036, *1037, *1038, 1039, 1040, *1041 , 1042,
*1043, *1044, 1045, *1046, 1047, *1049, 1050, 1051, 1052, 1053, 1054, *1055, 1056,
1057, *1058. *1067, *1068, 1089, *1090, 1091 , 1095, 1096,1101, 1105, 1107, *1130,
11 32, 11 33, 11 34, *1135, 11 36, *11 37, 1138, 1143, 1144, 1147, 1154, 1158, 1170, 1206,
1207, 1209, 1210. 1213, 1214, 1216, 1224, 1231, 1235, 1236. 1238, 1247, 1250, 1259,
1269, 1270. 1271, 1274, 1275, 1276, 1278, 1286, 1287.
Panhandle-Plains (Region 2): 15, 20, 22, 23, 24, 31, 34, 42. 45, 48, 51 , 58, 62, 63,
64, 68, 76, 77, 93, 94, 95, *98, 116,121 , *124, 130, 131,132, *1 33, 146, *151, 155, 157,
173, 174, 178, 187, *210, *211, *212, 215, 216, 224. 236, 244, 246, 247, 255, 257,
258, 260, 285, *286, 287, 288, 289, 302, 303, 306, 312. 317, 319, 327, 328, 329, 334,
341. *343, 344, 354, 355, 358, 363, 364, 366, 367, 368. 382, 428, 430, 431, 432, 440,
441 , 444, 445, *448, 449, 450, 455, 456, *457, *458, 459, 460, 461 , *462, *463, *465,
468, 474, 481, 482, 488, 489, 490, *494, 496, 497, 499, *506, 512, 5 15, 517, 522, 523,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

535, 536, 537, *538, *541 , 546. 547, 548, 555, 557, 566, 568 , 570, 571 , *589, *602, *603.

*604-, 606, 607, *608, 609, 612, 616, 620, 621 , 624, 625 , 626, 631, 632, 635, 636. 637,
641 ' 642, 644, 64<6, 647, 657. *658, 660, 652, 668, 685 , *705 , 706, 707, 724, 727, 728.
731 , *741 , *742, *743, 751 , *752, 757, 759, 762, 772, 774, 778, 779, 780, 781 , 783. 788,
793, 794, *802, 809, 815, *824, 825, 827, 828, 829, 830, 831 , 840, 842, 851 , 852, 864.
868, 876, 881 , 883, 900, 903, 907, 908, 909, 910,913, 91'6, 919, 920,926, 927, *928, 929,
930, 932, 933, 934, 935,938.940, *950, 955, *964, 965 , *976, 978,983, 984, *986, *987,
988, *989, 993, *1003, 1005, 100.J, 1021 , 1024, 1047, 1052, 1065, 1069, 1073, 1083,
1087, 1089,1100, 1116, 1117.1118, 1119, *1120, 1121,1122, 1123, *1130, 11 39, 1144.
1145, 1148, *1164, *11 88, 1194, *1205, 1207, 1210, 1211 , *1212, *1213, 1214, 1218,
1223, 1224, 1231 , 1235, 1236, 1249, 1251, 1252, 1257, 1261, 1262, 1265, 1270.
1271 , 1274, 1275, 127~ 1278, 1280, *1281, 128~
North T exas ( Region 3) : 8, 9, 20, 22, 31, 35, 36, 38, 39, 50, 51, 53, *60, *61 , 70,
85, 107, 109, 11 3, 116, 120, 121, *124, 126, 130, 132, 147, 149, 151 , *154, 157, 160,
163, 171 , 173, 178, 207, 208, 210, 215, 216, *223, 224, *225, 226, 227, *228, *229,
*230, *231, *232, 234, 244, 245 , 248, 249, 254, 260, 272, 306, 307, 308, 315, 321 , 324,
325, 327, 333, 339, 340, *341 , 342, 350, 351 , *356, 358, 367, 371 , 377, 378, 379, 381 ,
386, *387, 388, 389, 390, 391 , *392, 394, 395, 396, *397, 398, 399, 400, 401 , 402, 403,
404, 405, 406, 407,408, 410, 411 , *41 3, 416, *417, *420, 421 , 427, 428, 445,446, 450.
468. 474, 47'6, 477, 478. 479, 482, 486, 487, *488, 489, 495, 496, *506, 510, 512, 515,
523, 525 , 528, 536, 538, 540, *555, 557, 568, *571 , 573, 575, *586, *587, 588, 590,
591 , 592, *602, *604, 606, 608, 615, 618, *622, 626, 632, *634, 635, '637, 641 , 642,
645, *654, 655, 6'64, 668, 669, 679, 681 , 702, 703, 705 , 706, 714, 715, 718, 728, 730,
732,738, 739, 745, 746,751 , 755, 769,770, 772, 773,774, 775, 783, 788, 809, *825, 826,
827, *828, 829, 830, 831, 832, 833, 835, 836, 837, 838, 839, 840, 841 , *843, 844, 845,
846, 847, 848, 849, 850, 852, 853, 854, 855, 856, *857, 858, 859, 860, 861 , 862, *863,
865, 866, *8'67, 868, *869, 870, 871 , 872, 873, 874, *875, 876, 878, 879, 880, 881, 882,
883, 885, 886, 887, *888, *889, 890, 891 , 892, *893, 894, 900, 919, 920, 921 , 923, 924,
925, 931, 933, 946, 947, 949, *950, 952, 955, 978, 984, 985, 987, 989, 995, 999, 1006,
1009, 1010, *1011, *1012, 1013, 1014, 1021 , 1023, 1025, 1047, 1052, 1063, 1064,
*1070, 1071 , 1073, 1074, *1079, *1080, 1082, 1083, *1086, 1089, 1091, *1093, 1098,
1100, 1114, *1130, 1143, 1145, 1170, 1171 , 1194, 1203, 1206, 1207, 1217, *1219,
*1221 , 1224, 1236, 1241 , 1242, 1244, 1251 , 1253, 1254, 1255, *1256, 1257, 1258, 1260,
1261 , 1263, 1264, 1270, 1271 , 1274, 1275, 1280, *1281 , 1286.
Central T exas (Region 4) : 1, 2, 4, 13, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 31 , 33, 46,
47, 54, 55 , 58, *60, *61 , 63, 64, 10, 76, 77, •so, s1 , 82, s5, 113, 116, 120, *124, 138,
*1 39, 140, 141 , 142, 143, 144, 147, 148, 156, 161 , *167, 169, 171, 173, 175, *179, 181,
187, 191, 192, *193, 194, *195, 202,209, 216, 224, 225, 234, *242, 251, 252, 260,265,
266, 270, 281, 282, 283, 296, 297, 298, 300, 301 , 306, 315, 321, 325 , 340, *341 , 342,
350, 351 , 352, 355, 358, 367, 439, 441, 444, 449, 469, 470, 471 , 472, 473, 481, 489,
497, *498, 500, 502, *506, *507, *508, 509, 510, 512, 515, 519, 524, 525, *526, 527,
528, 531, 533, 536, 537, *545, 548, *555, *556, 557, 561 ' *562, 564, 566, 568, *571 ,
*572, 573, 574, 578, 579, *580, *581 , 582, 584, *586, 598, *602, 604, *606, 609, 610,
612, 615, 620, 621 , 626, 629, *634, 637, 641 , 654, 659, 660, 661 , 665, 666, 667, 669,
672, 674, 678, 681 , 686, 693, 706, 708, 711, 71 3, 716, 717, 725, 727, 728, 729, *730,
745, 748, 751 , 753, 755, 762, 767, 771 , 772, 773, 774, 777, 778, 779, 780, 781 , 782,
783, 784, 785, 786, 787, 788, 791 , *792, 793, 794, 795 , 796, 797, 798, 799, 800, 803,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

807, 809, 811, 812, 813,821 , 825, 827, 828, 830. 834, 836, 852. 853, *857, *8'67, 876,
877, 878, 883, 884. 885, *889, 897, 898, 899, 900. 903. 905, 906, 918, 919, 920, 931,
934, 943, 945, 948, *950, 952, 959, *961, *975, 978. 981, 987, 999, 1015, 1016, 1017,
1018, 1019, 1021 , 1023, 1025, 1026, 1029, 1031 , 1041, 1052, *1055, 1060, 1061, *1075,
1076. 1081,1084, 1087, 1088, 1089, 1097, 1098, 1099, 1102. 1103, 1104, 1105, 1106,
1107, 1108, 1109, 1110, 1111 , 1112, *1125, '1126, 1127, *1128, *1129, *1130, 1142,
1144, 1145, 11 49, 1150,1155, 1157, 1165, *1166, 1167, 1168, 1169, 1170, 1172, 1173,
1174, 1175,1176, 1177,1178, 1179, 1180.1181 , 1182,1183, *1184, 1185,1186,1 187,
1191 , 1194, 1203. 1204, 1206, 1215, 1224, 1228, 1229, 1235, 1236, 1238, 1240. 1246,
1247, 1249, 1251 , 1272, *1273, 1274, 1275, 1278, *1281, 1286.

Northeast T exas (Region 5 ) : 16, 17, 20, 22, 23, 24, 38, 68, 69, 84, 100, 116, 119,
*121 , *124. 126, 128, 134, 136, 145, 159, 161, 164, 166, 196,202, 203, 216, 217, 225 ,
228, 229, 230, 234, 249, 25 1, 252, 254, 261, *263, 270, 274, 279. 280, 282, 291 , 292,
296,297, 298, 300, 305, *316, 318, 321, 323,326, 339, 345, *346, 347, 349, 351, 352,
357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 363, 364, 367, 368, 376, 380, 393, 409, *411, 412, 418, 419,
422, 423, 424, 425, 426, 433, 434, 435, *436, 438, 451, 475 , 486, 500, 501 , 502, *503,
505, *50~ 50~ 510,511 ,5 12,5 13, 51~ 515, 52~ 528, *530, 532, 533, 536,537, *538,
*539, 542, 555, 56·6, 568, 571, 574, 596, 597, 598, 599, 600, 601 , *602, *604, *605,
*606, *611, 615, 619, 622, 623, 626, 627, 628, *634, 636, 637, 641 , 648, *658, 660,
668, 669, 671 , 674, 700, 710, 718, 719, 730, 735 , 746, 751, 754. *755, 765, 766, 772,
773, 774, 777, 779, 780, 781 ' 782, 783, 788, 789, 790, 791' 792, 793, 794, 795 , 796,
800, 808, 809, 819, 820, 822, 897, 900, 903, 912, 936, 942, *950, 955, 967, 969, 970,
971 , 972, 974, 977, *980, 982, 984, 987, 993, 995, 999, 1000, 1004, 1007, 1008, 1025,
1026, 1047, 1052, 1073, 1077, *1078, 1083, 1084, 1087, 1088, 1089, 1092, 1097, 1098,
1099, 1100, 1107, *1130, 11 31, 1144, 1145, 1152, 1153, 1154, 11 59,1 162,1170. *1189,
1191 , 1192, *1193. 1194, 1195, *1196, 1198,1199,1200,1202, 1205,1206,1210,1214,
1231 , 1233,1234.1237, 1243, 1245,1266, 1267, *1 28 1, 1284, 1285, 1286.
Southeast T exas (Region 6) : 40, 44, 57, 58, 65, 71 , 72, 73, 116, *177, 249, 309, 350,
352, 358, 368, 415, 441, 447, 489, 501 , 502, 505, 510, 525, 528, 53·6, 537, 568, 626,
630, 637, 682, 683, 718, 750, 753, *756, 772, 773, 774, 779, 780, 782, 791, 792, 796,
800, 814, 821 , 823, 903, *950, 970, 972, 1020, 1047, 1052, 1059, 1077, *1078, 1089,
1094, 1097, 1099, 1107, 1113,1115, *1130, 1156, *1161. 1206, 1220, *1222, 1224,1235,
1247, *1269, *1281 , 1282, 1283, 1286.
South Texas (Regio n 7) : 5, *14, 20, 21 , 22, 23, 24, 31, *43, 65 , 67, 68, 74, *75, 76,
77, 78, 113.116.120,149, 161 , 164, *165. 168, *172, 173. *176, 178, '180, 182, *185,
188, *190, 196, *197, 203, '218, 224, 234, 261 , 269, 271, *277, 279, 282, '284, 285,
315. 334, *341, 342, 348, 35 1, 352, 366, 3•67, 368, 372, 482, 489, 491, 492, 502, *506,
507, 512, 515, 523, 525, 527, 533, 536, 537, 544, *555, 564. 566, 568, *571, 574, 577,
578, 598, 601. 602, *606, 613, 615, *622, 626, 629. 630, 633, 637' '638, 640, 643, 668,
'669, 670, 671, 673, 674, 687, *•688, *690, 691 , *692, *693, 696, 697, 698, 702, 706,
*707, 708, 710, 715, 717, 726, 750, 753, 756, 762, 772, 774, 778, 783, 788, 791 , 792,
793, 794, 798, 800, 806, 809, *810, 814, 816, 820, 827, 830, 832, 835, 895 , 896, 898,
901, 902, 903, 904, 919, 931, 937, 941, *950, 952, 973, 978, *979, 981, 984, 987, 990,
993, 1023, 1025, 1047, 1052, 1062, 1083, 1089, 1099, *11 30, 11 31, 1141 , 1142, 1143,
1144, 1146, 1151 , 1154, 1162, 1170, 1203, 1206, 1207, *1208, 1224, 1235, 1247, 1248,
*1269, *1270, 1274, 1278, *1281 , 1286.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

County Index
Omitted co unty names indica te lack of publica tions.

Anderson: 282, 346, 500, 501. 502, *503, 505, 507, 597, 601. '602. 627, '755, 782.
791 , 793, 796,809,936, 1047, *1130, 1191, 1273.
Andrews: 15, 328, • 329, *602. 772, 1286.
Angelina: 225,249.528.537,970.972,1077, *1078. 1097, *11 30, 1191 , 1206.
Aransas: 20, 164, *165 , 166, 168, *172. 176. *180. *341, 367, 512. 515 , 537, *688.
*11 30, 1207.
Archer: *•6 02, * 1130, 1253, 1261. 1286.
Armstrong: *506, *589, 706. 1261.
Atascosa: 512, 772, *1062, *J 130.
Austin: 309, 772.
Bailey: 146, *602, *802, 1261.
Bandera: 774,903, *11 30, 1286.
Bastrop: 507, 515, 772, 773, 809. *11 30.
Baylor: *1130, 1261.
Bee: 76. 77,149, 523,555,668, 762,978, *979, 984, 987, *11 30, 1278, 1281.
Bell: 26, ·so, 81 , 124, 142, 325, 352, 502, *506, 507, 515, 525. 527, 66·6, 772, 773, 788.
809,897,945,1025. 1026, 1084, 1098,1 126, *1130, 1149, 1165, '1166, 1167, 1170.
1173, 1176, 1179, 1180, 1183, 1229, 1238.
Bexar: 76, 77, 173, 282, *506. 507, 515, 557, 612, 615 , '621 , 693, 715, *762, 772, 782.
904,934,987, 1170, 1236, *1272, 1281.
Blanco: 76, 77,300,610, 715, 755, *762, 772, *1130, 1229.
Borden: *824, 1100.
Bosque: 26, 194,3 15. 502. *506, 507, 525, 527, 528, 582, 6 15, 755, 772. 788, 797, 809,
821,903,931 , 1023, *1075, 1076, 1081 , 1083, 1089, 1097, 1098, 1110, *1130, 1165,
1170, 1173, 1180, 1183. 1238.
Bowie: 134,305,326,345,347,411 , 500, 501,502, 505,511 , 512,527,596,601, *602,
*'604, 605,623,718. '735, 755, 779, 780, 791,809, 1084, 1098, 1100, *1130, 1191,
1194, 1199.
Brazoria: 44.
Brazos: 441, 718, *1130.
Brewster: 4, 7, *8. 19, 24, 28, 31, 66, 125, 129, 150, 152, 191, *199, 219, 222, *242,
243,282, *310, 311,335, 341,367, 373,385,439,442, 443,487, *506, 512, 515,520,
546, 549, 550, *573. *580, 588, 595, 663, 677, 680, *689, 694, 699, 700, 722, 744,
746, *760, 772, 776, 779, 780, 801 , 809, 954, 957, 962, 963, 990, 991, 992, *993.
996, 1028, 1029, *1030, 1035, *1037, *1038, 1042, *1043, *1044, 1045. 1047, *1049,
1051 , 1055, 1056, 1057, *1058, *1090, 1091 , 1095, *1130. 1132, 1147, 1209, 1216,
1231, 1238, 1250, 1259, 1269. 1271.
Briscoe: *506, 1003, 126 '1.
Brooks: 693.
Brown: *171 , 772, 782,809, 834.1108, *11 30.
Burleson: 772.
Burnet: 3 1,300.301 , *506, *507, 515,519,557,755, 772, 773. 799, 1025. 1099, *1130.
1204, 1229, 1238, *1273.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATU RE

Caldwell: 772, 1157.
Calhoun: 693, 809, *810, *11 30, 1151.
Callahan: 171 , 606,690. 772, *825, 830.835, 838, 852, 876,883, *892, 947.
Cameron: '1+, 269, '277. 279,367, 492,5 12, 574, 606, 622, '669, '674, 706, 708, 782,
788, 792, 793, 800, 990, 993, 1047' *11 30, 1143, 1286.
Camp: 20, 254, 292, 346, 434, 501 , 505, 528, 718, 751 , 773, 791, 796, 969, 972, 1025,
1099, *11 30, 1199.
Carson: • 602, • 741, • 742, 1118.
Cass: ' 263, 345, 346, 352,433, 434, 500, 501 , 502,505, '506, 507, 512, 515, 527, *602,
730, 773, 1025.1073, 1084, 1098, 1099,1100, '1130, 1191 , 1199, 1286.
Chambers: 71 , 73, 502, 791 , 792, '11 30.
Cherokee: 68, 84, 100, 116, 124, 128, 161, 164, 217 , 274, 279, 291, 297, *316, 318,359,
360, 361 , 364, 438, 501, 505, '506, 514. 515, 533, 536, *538, 542, *545 , 555, 597.
601 , *602, '604, 605, 606, '611 , 615, 619, 622, 623, '658, 660, 669, 730, 746, 754,
• 755, 766, 773, 779, 780, 781, 782, 793. 809, 903, 936, 942, 967' '11 30, "11 91 ' 1195,
11 99, 1235, 1286.
Childress: '602.
Clay: 31, 126, 151 , 306, 307, 308, 512, 515, *602, 746, 769, 919, '1130, 1170, 1253,
1254, 1255, 1257, 1258, 1260, 1263, 1286.
Cochran: *602, 1261.
Coke: '506, 515, *586, 827, 830, 876,877, 878, 883, *884, *948, 1100.
Coleman: 171 , 500, '506, 507, 536, 729, 772, 903, 1047, 1076, *11 30.
Collin: *225, *228, 315. 377, *387, *392, 394, 395, 477,478, 479, 515, 525, 528, 537,
'602, 615,773, 931, 1023, 1025, '1079, *1080, 1082, 1083, *1086, 1098, 1099, *1 130,
1206, 1207, 1240, 1242.
Collingswort h: '602, *742, 1118.
Colorado: 772, 809, *11 30.
Comal: 58,507,512, 515 , 557, 751 , 772,773, 777, 782, 1084, 1098,1247.
Comanche: 26, 31, 81 , 171 , 325, 441, 751 , 772, 782, 827, 897, 943, 1021 , 1102, 1165,
11 70, 1238, 1286.
Concho: 20, 24, 54, 296, *506, '579, '580, *581, 781, 782, 825 , 830, 852, 1029, 1031,
1055, 1103.
Cooke: 208, 225, 228, *404, *602, '11 30, 1263.
Coryell: 1, 26, 31, 124, 140, 297, 471 , 489, 502, '506, 507, 515 , 555 , 582, 584, '730,
755, 772, 773, 783, 788, 797, 101 5, 1016, 1017, 1018, 1019, 1021 , 1026, 1087, 1098,
1099,1 100, 1111 , 1126. '11 30. 1165, 1169, 1173. 1180, 1183, 1185, 1186.
Crane: '506, 520, 686.
Culberson: *79. 125, 189, 191 ,219, 221 , 276, *293, 367, 429,437,483,487,489. *504,
*506, 512, 519, 520. 523, 546, 550, 551 , '580, *581 , 595, 602, *651 , 677. 721 , 795 ,
800,952, ' 953, 958, 964, 1051 , *1090, 1091 , *11 30, 1147,1238.
Dallam: 94,306, 441 , 481 , 482, 774,809, 919, 1073, 1121 , 1286.
Dallas: 9, 35, 36, 116, 210, *223, 224. ' 225, 226, 227, *228, '229, 230, 231 , '232, 254.
272, 371, 378, *387, 389, 401 , 408, 416, 421, 427, 495, 496, 575, *587, 591, 592,
'602, '606, 618, '634, 635, 664, 669. 775, 783, 978, 987, 1010, '1011 , *1012, 1013,
101 4, 1063, 1086, *1130, 1170, 1281.
Dawson: • 824.
Dea f Smith: 354, 459, 546, *602, • 742, 1024, *11 30, 1261 , 1262.
Delta: 426, 751, 1100, '1130.

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D enton: 50, 51, 53, 116, '130, '225, 227, '228, '230, '231, 249,327, ' 387, 388,390,
405, '406, 407,428,5 15, 525,537 , '602, 632, 635, 715, 728, 739. 1009, 1025, '1080,
1083, 1098, 1099, '11 30, 1170, 1171,1236, 1253, 1281 , 1286.
De Witt: 772, 778, '11 30.
Dimmitt: 772.
Donley: 1148, 1261 , 1262.
Duval: 696, '1130, 1248.
Eastland: 359, 606, '634, 645, 669, 746, 772, '893 .
Ector: 22,490, '506, '602, 772, 1286.
Edwards: '179, 181 , '242, '498, *506, 507, 515, 557, 745, 772. '1130, 1240, 1286.
Ellis: 371, '506.
El Paso: 4, 10, 11 , 12, 19, 20, 22, 24, 29, 102, 125, 129,1 37, 152, 204, '213, 214,219,
'220, 221, 268, '295, 299, 311 , 332, 341, 367, 385, 439, 442, 489, '506, 515, 517,
519, 520, 545, '5'63, 573, 576, '580, '585, 602, '651. 652, 686, 720, *736, 737, 776,
793, 819, 915, 954, 95 8, 993, 1029, 1032, 1033, 1047, 1055, *1067, '1068. 1101 ,
*1130, 1238.
Erath: 772, 830.
Falls: 26, 140, 141 ,266, 441,472,507, 515. 712, 772, 773, 1109, 11 55, 1165, 1170,
1173, 1180, 1183, 1238.
Fannin: 39, 412, 476, '602, *11 30.
Fa yette: 507, 772, 778, 809.
Fisher: 15, 705, 862, 876, 880, 1286.
Floyd: 705, 706, 876.
Fort Bend: 44, *1161.
Franklin: 433, 500, 501 , 505, • 506, 507, *602, 791, 792, '11 30, 1199, 128'6.
Freestone: *506, 1173.
Frio: 67, 507, 762, 772, *1130.
Gaines: 131, *329, '657, 772.
Galveston: *177, 352, 368, 447, 502, 505, 756, 792, 796, 1020, 111 3, *1 269.
Gillespie: 169, '283, '506, 507,515, *556, *580, '581 , 772, 777, '11 30, 1229.
Goliad: 352, 366, 368, 501, 502, 602, *896, 898, 979, 984, '11 30, 1170, 1247, 1286.
Gonzales: 77 4, '1130.
Gray: 1073, 1261.
Grayson: 38, 207, '602, 773, '11 30.
Gregg: 17, 229, 434, 515, *542, 718, '11 30.
Grimes: 773.
Guadalupe: 772, 773.
Hale: 68, 76, 77, 95, 116, 124, '1 30, '1 33, 146, 244,257,364, 496, 497, 523,548, '602,
'603, 607, 635, 6•58, 757, 809, 927, 929, 933, 934, 983, 984, '987, 988, '989, 1021 ,
1086, *11 30, 1213,1235, 1236, 1277, 1278, 1280, 1281 , 1286.
Hall: 1148.
Hamilton: 26, 171 , 470. 582, 772, 905, 906, 1021, 1104, 1106, 11 65 , 1173, 1180, 1183,
1186.
Hansford: '589, 1286.
Harris: 40, 71 , 72, 73,177, 372, 525, 537, '756, 814,821,903, 1097, 1099, 1115, *1130.
1206, 1220, '1222, 1281 , 1282, 1283.
Harrison: 254, 292, 297, 346, 433, 434, 435, '436, 500, 501, 502, 505, ' 506, 515, 542,
751, 773, 782, 789, 791 , 792, 793, 796, 969, 972, 1025, 1099, '1130, 11 92, 1199.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERAT U RE

Hartley: 34, 441, 809, 1286.
Haskell: 22, 852, 1100.
Ha ys: 473, 772, 782, 783, 809.
H emphill: *742, 1118.
H enderson: 223, 225, 227, 228, 230, 292, 297, 367, *419, 500, 501, *506, 515, 668, 751,
773, 781 , 788, 974, 977,978, *980, 982,984, *987, '1130, 1170, 1236, 1281,1286.
Hidalgo: *185.
Hill: 25, *1 39, 143, '144, 225,252, 315, '506, 525, '526, 528,615, 751 , 772, 773, 821 ,
903,931 , 1023, '1075, 1076,1081 , 1083, 1089, 1097, 1008, 1128, '1 130, 1170,1 173,
1179, 1180, 1183, 1238.
Hockley: 286, *•6 02, 1261.
Hood: 1021 , 1263.
Hopkins: 229, 418, 422, 423, 424, 425 , 500, 501. 502, 505, '506, *602, 751, 809, '1130,
1170, 1191 , 1286.
Houston: *1130, 1266.
Howard: 286, *506, 523. 809, 827.
Hudspeth: 4, 6, 152, 186,219, 311, ' 353. 367, 480, '506, 520, 558, 560, *563, 573,
595, 602, '651, 652, 676, 721 , 768, 958, 1047, 1051 , 1055, *1068, 1158, 1207, 1238.
Hunt: 254, 386, 528, 751, 773.
Hutchinson: 24, 288, 354, *448, 449, *457, *458, 460, 461 , *462, 515, *541 , *589,
*602, '604, *741 , *742,809, 1116, 1118, '1130, 1286.
Jack: 151 , 489, 1257, 1263.
Jackson: 693, *810.
Jasper: 249, 528,537, 970,972, 1077, '1078, 1097, *1130, 1206.
Jeff Davis: 4. '8, 23, 31, 152,219, 311 , '506, 520, 521 ,551, *573, *579, '580, *581 ,
680, 700, 721 , 776, 963, 990, 996, 1033, 1034, 1035, 1047, 1051, 1055, 1056, 1057,
1095, 1105.
Jefferson: 489, 510.
Jim W ells: 688.
Johnson: 772.
Jones: 20, 22, 147, *468. '488, '506, 512, 515, 588, '602, '654, 668, 679, 772, 809,
*825, 828, 830, 833, 835, 836, *843, 846, 852, 856, *857, 859, 860, *861 , 862, 865,
*875, 87'6, 879,881,882,883,885, 947, 1091 , 1217, '1 ~ 19 , '1221 , 1270, 1286.
Karnes: 774.
Kaufman: 223, *225, 227, '228, ' 387, 391, '397, *403, 416, '417, '420, *506, '602,
628, 718, 931 , '1079, '1086, '11 30, 1170.
Kendall: 282, 772, 1215.
Kent: 15, 457, 706, 827, 876.
Kerr: *506, 515, 772, 773,809, *1060, '1061.
Kimble: ' 506, 557, 772, 1240.
Kinney: *242, 367, *498, '505, 515, 557,706, 708,772,809, *1130, 1251.
Kleberg:502,512, '622,688,690,693,698, 792,800, *810, 895, 1047.
Knox: 844.
Lamar: 38, 89, 134, 192, 225, 229, 346, 347, 349, 352, 361, 380, 393, 411 , 412, 433,
475,500, 501,502, 507, 51 3,5 15,539,596,597, 600, 601, '602, ' 604,605, 628,669,
'755 , 765, 773, 774, 789, 791 , 792, 793 , 796, 809, 1000, 1004, 1092, *1 130, 1162,
11 91, 1194, 1199, 1243, 1245, 1285, 1286.
Lamb: '602, '802, 809, 121 3, 1261.

t88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Lampasas: 26, 300, 301 , 772, 773, 1165.
La Salle: 67, 762, 772, *11 30.
Lavaca: 726.
L ee: *61 , 63, '64, 415, 507, 771 , 772, 811 , 812, 1238, 1286.
L eon: 510.
Limestone: 26, *139, 140, *143, *506, 515, 767, 897, 111 2, *11 30, 1165, 1170, 1173,
1180, 1183, 1238.
Lipscomb: 68, *98, 116, 151, 496, 523, 641 , *742, 920, 933, *964, 965 , 978, 984, 983,
989, 1073, 1118, '1130, 1278, 1281.
Live Oak: 282, *1130.
Llano: 4, 20, 31 , *242, 300, *506, *507, 512, 515, 772, 773, 799, 1025, 1099, *11 30,
1170, 1204, 1229, 1247, *1273.
Lo ving: *506.
Lubbock: 51. 68, 116, *1 33, 146, 173,23 1.285,3 12,3 17, 32.7, 334, 440, 496, 497,51 5,
523, 537, *538, 548, *602, 612, 616, 621, 632. *658, 660, 705, 706, *752, 762, 772,
*928, 929, 930,932, 933.978, *986, *987, 988, 1087, '11 30, 11 39, *1188, 1207,
*1212, 1213,1218, 1223,1235,1236, 1262, 12'65, 1280, 1281 , 12,86.
Lynn: *535, *602, 809, *1188.
McCulloch: 282, *506, .1130.
McLennan: 26, 70, 81 , 82, 138, '1 39, 140, 141 , 143, *144, 224, 225 , 265 , 341 , 367,
439, 469, *506, 507, 515, 528, 573, 602, 604, 667, 711 , *712, *713, 725, 730, 738,
751 , *755, 772, 773, 788, 794, 797, 798, 803, 897, 978, 1017, 1087, 1097, 1105,
*11 30, 1150, 1155, 1165, 1170, 1173, 1174, '1175, 1177, 1179, 1180, 1181, 1183,
*1184, 1187, 1191, 1238,1246, 1251.
McMullen: 67, 762, 772, '1 130.
Marion: 254,292,434, 435, *43'6, 528, 751, 969, 972, 1025, 1099, *1 130.
Mason: 4, • 506.
Matagorda: 693, *810. 1047.
Maverick: *506, 772,.
M edina: 774.
Menard: 18, 171, *506, 507, 1240.
Midland: 42,, 45, 48, 51, 64, 116, '1 33, 174, 230, 246, 247, 319, 440, 496, 625 , 631 ,
635, 644, 662, 731 , *759, 91 3, 935, 940, 1069, 1073, *11 30, *1139, 1157, *1212,
*1213, 1281.
Milam: 63, *195, *506, 772, 773, 81 3, 1170, 1173, 1179, 1180, 1183, 1228 .
Mills: 678, 772, 809, 825 , 836.
Mitchell: 22, 95, 116, *210, *211 , *212, 215, 302, 303, 306, 341. 344, 430, 431, 432,
*468, 481, *488, 496, 515. 555, 573, 642, 668, 751 , 778, 783, 794, 809, 825, 828,
830, 831, 840, 842, 851 , 852, 868, 876, 881 , 883, 907, 908, 910, 919, 938, 978, 987,
989, 1091 , *1130, 1251, 1270, 1274, 1275, 1277, 1278, 1280, 1281.
Montague: *602, 604, 1021 , *1070, 1071 , 1073, '1130, 1253, 1254, '1256, 1258, 1263.
Montgomery: 1247.
Moore: *343, *602, *742, 1118.
Morris: 254, 292,346, 434, 500, 501 , 528, 718, 751 , 773, 791, 793, 809, 969, 972, 1025,
1099, *1130, 1191,1286.
Motley: *506.
Nacogdoches: 128, 249, 501 , 51 2, 528, 537, 773, 782, 791 , 936, 970, 972, 1077, *1078,
1097, *11 30, 1152, 1153, 1191, 1206.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

t8g

Nava rro: 26, *139, 143, *144, 225,515,75 1, 773, 897, *1130, 1170,1173, 1180.
Nolan· *506, *586, *590,654, 809,833, 852, 860, 876, 878.881, 883,1286.
Nueces: *176, *197, 260, 339, *341 , 352, 368,482, 491, 502, 507, 512, 515, 544. *622,
674, 688, *690, 691 , *•692, 693, 698, 706, 750, 756, 772, 788, 791 , 792, *810, 814,
816, 835, 903,919, 973, 104~ *1130, *1269. *1270, 1286.
Ochiltree: 288, 289, 450, *457, 489, *602, *741 , *742, 743, 1116, 1118, 1119, 1122,
1123.
Oldham: 24, *462, *463, *506, 515, 546, *589, *602. *604, 685, 705, 706, *742, 743,
774, 1118.
Orange: 510, *1130.
Palo Pinto: 410, *506, 510, *602. 772, 773, 809. 843, *1130, 1263.
Panola: 434, 774.
Parker: 22, *602, 774, 827, 1021 , 1263.
Pecos: *275, *466, *506, 520, 573, 602, 772, 776.
Polk: 501 , 773, 1286.
Potter: 31, *151, *448, 449, *457, 474, *506, 512, 515, *589, *602, *604, 624, 705,
706, *741 , *742, 743, 809,827,876, *1003, 1073, 1116,1118. *1120, 1121 , 1251.
1252, 1257, 1261.
Presidio: 4, *8, 24, 28, 32, 189, 219, 269, 311, *506, 512, 515, 520, *553, 554, 557,
*558, 560, *563, *565, *566, *573, 602, 615, 650, 680, 700, 772, 776. 954, 990, 992.
*993, 996, *997, 1047, 1055, 1095, *11 30, 1170, 1207, 1209, 1247, 1286.
Rains: 254, 528, *539, 751.
Randall: 151, *494, *506, *602, 705, 706, *742, 774, 1021 , 1118, 1119, 1257, 1261.
Real: *498, *506, 507,515,557, 745, 772, *1130.
Red River: 126, 326, *376, 409, *411 , 433, 501, 502, 515, 601, *602, 718. 791, 897,
1047, *1130, 1191 , 1284.
Reeves: *506, 520, *551, 573, *579, 772,776, 795, 1055,1105, *1130.
Refugio: 282, 643, *688. 690, 693, 696, 698, *810, 814, 937, *1130.
Roberts: 51 , 68, 116, 155, 173, 230, 286, 306, 366, 428, *457, 481 , 482, 496, 497, 523,
*741, *742, 815, 919, 933,934, *976, 978, *987, 988,989,1073, 1118, 1121 , *1130,
1274, 1275, 1278, 1280, 1281.
Robertson: 472, 813, 1173, 1180, 1183, 1238.
Rockwall: *225, *228. 379, 381 , *387, *396, 398, 399, 400, 402, 450, 515, *602. 732,
770, 773,931 , 1064,1074, *1079, *1086. *1130, 1170, 1242,1244.
Runnels: 171 , 852, 853, 876.
Rusk: 773, *1130.
Sabine: 515 ,528,537, 773, 1077, *1078, *1130, 1206.
San Augustine: 249,528, 537, 970, 972,1077, *1078, 1097, *1130, 1191.1206.
San Jacinto: 774.
San Patricio: 512,643,690.693, 698, *810, 814, 937,979, 1286.
San Saba: 20, 22, 181, 300, *506, *507, 515, 519, 557, 678, 772, 773, 782, 799, 828,
830, *1130, 1204, 1229, 1238, 1247, *1273, 1286.
Scu rry: 15, 1100.
Shackelford: 8, 22, *324, 325, *488. *506, 515, 573, *602, 705 , 706, *825, 826, 82S,
830, 835, 852, *857, 860, 862, 865, 872, 874, *875, 876. 883, *923, 924, 947, 1091 ,
*1093.
Shelby: 433, 501, 515, *602, 773.
Sherman: 441, 774.

tgo

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Smith: '506, 542, *634, 718, 772, 773, *1130.
Somervell: *2, 519, 773, 1021, 1263.
Starr: 5. *43, 67, *75, 116, *190, ' 218, *284, 315, 334,525 , 527,577,615, *638, *674,
901 , 931, 1023, 1025, 1083, 1099, *11 30, *1208.
Stephens: 20, 70, 208, 325, *506, '602, 830, 870, 871 , 876, 883.
Sterling: *602, 853.
Stonewall: *356, 515, 809, *843.
Sutton: *506.
Swisher: 355, *589, 620, 903, 1021 , 1286.
Tarrant: 245,248, *540, *602, 606, *622, 827, 1080,1083, *1130, 1207.
Ta y lor: 8, 20, 22, 31, 33, 51 , *60, *61 , '63, 68, 76, 77, 116, 124, 147, 149, *154, 155,
173, 215,224,230.244,306,339. *341 , ' 356, 367,428, 446, *468. 474,487, *488,
489, 496, *506, 515, 523, *555, 557, 573, *586, *602, 642, *654, 655, 705, 745, 772,
773, 788, 809, *825, 827, *828, 829. 830, 831, 835, 836, 837, 838, 839, *843, 845,
846, 849, 852, 853, 854, 855, 856, *857, 858. 859. 8'60, 862, *863. 865, 866, *869,
873, *875, 876, 878, 879,880, 881.882, 883, 885, 887, *888,9 19, 933,947,949,978,
984, 985, 987, 989, 1047, 1091, *11 30, 1143, 1251 , 1270, 1274, 1275, 1278, 1280.
1281. 1286.
T errell: 31, 219, *242, *506, 519, 520, *579, *580, *581 , 593,994, 1035, 1055, *1130,
1286.
T erry: 515,557, *602, *1188.
Throckmorton: 882.
Titus: 229, 254, 292, *346, 500, 501 , 502, *506, 512, 515, 528, 601 , *602, 718. *755,
791.793, 936,1025, 1099. *11 30, 1170,1 191 , 1199, 1286.
Tom Green: 20. 171,537, 602, 772, 828. 830, 1083, *1130. 1207, 1238.
Travis: 31, 46, 47, 58, *60, *61 , 63, 175, *193, 281,306, 3'67, 473, 507, '508, 509, 512,
515, *555, 557, '572,5 73,606, *634, 669, 706,730, 755 , 772,773, 778, 779, 780,782,
783, 800, 809, 898, 899,919, *1125 , *1126, 1127, *1128, '1129, *11 30, 1206, 1229,
1247, 1286.
Tyler: 773, 1077, 1097, *1130.
Upshur: 69, 254, 292, 346, 434, 500, 501 , '506, 528, *530, 718, 751 , 791, 792, 793,
969, 972, 1025, 1087, 1099, *11 30, 1199.
Upton: *506.
Uvalde: 22, 67, 116, 173, 281. 481, '498, *506, 507. 515, 537, 557, *659, 660, 716,
745, 762, 772, 809, 903,934, *987, 1126, '11 30, 1206, 1207. 1229,1281.
Val V erde: 19, 125, 179, 181 , 191.194,222, *237, *242, 243, 252,256,311 , *335, 337,
339, 341, 367, 368, 414, 443. *464, 487, 489, *506, 512. 515, 518, 519, 520, 528,
546, 550, 555 , *559, *573. *579, *580, "581 , "583, 588, 674, •677, *689, *694, 695,
699, 706, 708, 722, 746, 751. *760, 761, 772, 779, 780. 782, 796, 800, *801 , 809, 917,
952,954, *959, *960, 992, *993, 1051 , 1055, *1090, 1091,1107, *11 30, 1134, *1135,
11 36, 1147, 1170,1207,1231 , 1269.1270, 1271 , 1274, 1275, 1278, 1287.
VanZandt : *225, 229, 254, *506, 514, 515, 528, *530, *539, 542, 599, *602, 718, 730,
751 , *755, 773, *1130, 1191.
Victoria: 67, 116, 269, 271 , 348, 352, 489, 502, 515, 601 , 674, 762, 778, 792, *810,
902, 979, 990, *1130, 1170, 1286.
Walker: 782.
Ward: 481 , 490, *602, 772, 809, 1021, *11 30, 1286.
Washington: 415, 772.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

191

Webb: 512, *1130.
Wheeler: '602. *742, 1097, 1118.
Wichita: 325,75 1, 1114, '11 30. 1170.1253.1261.
Wilbarger: 107, '602, 890, 891 , 892. 894, *11 30.
Willacy: *669.
Williamson: 17, 25. 27, 140, 141, *167, 225, 282, *341. 355. *506, 507, 509, 515, 519,
557, 573, 620, 712, 755, 772, 773, 779, 780, 782, (83, 785, 786, 792, 793, 794, 795,
796, 798, *961 , '975,978, *1130, 1155,1170,1286.
Wilson: 772.
Winkler: 131,260, *329, *465 , 490, "506, *602, 772,920, 1286.
Wise: 772, 1263.
Wood: 20,500, 501 , 502, '506, 515,599, *602, 718, 773, 791, 792, '11 30, 1191 , 1267,
1286.
Young: 163, 510, *602, *604, 730. 774, 882, 885, '1130, 1145, 1194, 1262, 1286.
Zapata: 5, 67, *75, *190, 315. 334,5 12,525, 527, 577, 615 , "638, 901 , 931, 1023, 1025,
1083, 1099, *1130, 1146.

Culture Index
PALEO-AMERICAN STAGE (LITHIC, PALEO-INDIAN )
References: 2. *8. 13. 15, 16, 23, 33, 42, 45, 48, 50, 51, 53, 56, 58, 60, '61 , 62, 63.
64, 66, 67, 68, 76, 77, 85. 93, 95, *98, 114, *116, '124, *130, 139, 143, 146, 147, 148,
149, *154. 155. 173, 174, 178, 200, *210, *211, *212. 215, 216, 223, 224, 225, 228,
*229, ' 2.~0 , *231 , 244, 246. 247, 249, 255, 257, 259, 282, *284, 285, '286, 300, 302,
303,306,307.308.312, 317,319,321 ,327,328,329, 339,340,341,342,344,354,355,
363, 366, 367, 3•68, 382. 388, 403, 406, 412, 428, 430, 431. 432, 434, 436, 440, 445. 446,
449, 467, 474, 481 , 482, 483, 490, 493, 494, 496, 497, 514, *523, 524, 528, 534, 535,
537, *538, 542,548, *555, 571 , 573,574,575,586, *603, 607, *609, 610,612, 614,615,
616, 617,618, 620, 621 , 623, 624, 625, 626, '627, 629, 631, 632, 635, 636, 641, 642.
644, *654, '655, *658, 660, 662, 664,668,674,681, 697, 702, 715 , 716, 717, 728, 731.
748, 755, '759, 762, 771 , 778, 783, 788, 794, 802, 811, 812, 813, 815, 825, 828, 829.
835, 83·6, 838, 839, 843, 846, 847, 850, 852, 856, 857, 858, 859, *863, 865, 866, *869.
*875, 876, 878, 879, 881, 882, 883, 884, 885, 886, '888, 889, 903, 907, 908, 909, 910,
913, *919, 920, 921, 922, 923, 925. 927, *928. 929, 930, 932, 933, 934, 935, 938, 940,
943, 946, '950, *961 , *964, 965, 974, *976, 977, *978, *979, *980, 981 , 982, 983. *984,
985. *986, *987, *988, *989, 993, 995, 1003, 1010, *1011, 1013, 1014, 1026, 1052, 1065,
1069, 1073, 1080, 1085, 1087,1089, 1093.1115, 1121 , 1126, *1130, 1139, 1143, 1157,
1188, 1192, 1196, 1203, 1207, *1208, *121 2. *121 3, 1218, 1222, 1225, 1235, 1236,
1248, 1252, 1253, 1255, 1258. 1261. 1263, 1265, 1274, 1275, *1277, 1278, 1279, *1281,
1286.
ARCHAIC STAGE

Hueco Phase. Earliest phase of the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon (see under
Neo-American Stage) . Same as Hueco Cave Dweller (Sayles ) and Hueco Basketmaker (Cosgrove ) . Area: extreme western portion of T rans-Pecos area and adjoining sections of southern New Mexico and northern Chihuahua. References:
12, 19, 29, 78, *79, 96, 125. *213, 214,258, 276,292,294, 299, 332, 341, *353, 367,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

437, *504, 419, 550,558,559,568.573,576, *651 , 652.668. 701, 704, 795, 915, 919,
939, *950. 952, *953, 954, 1027, 1051 , *1130.

Balcones Phase. Name proposed by Kelley, but it is not in wide current use.
Area: southwestern, central, and southern Texas, and northeastern Mexico. References: 161 , 167, 216, *555, 557, *562, 564, 568, *571 , 602, *614, 618, 637, 1075,
1080, 1081, *1085 , 1235.
Big Bend Aspect. Same as Big Bend Cave Culture (Smith), Dry Shelter Culture (Smith), and Big Bend Basket Maker (Martin ) . Area: southern part of
Trans-Pecos Texas and adjoining portion of northern Mexico. References: 7,
·s, 15, 19, 23, 24, 2s, 30, 37, 55, 63, 78, 92,113, *116, 120, *124, 125, 129, 148,
150. 152, 153, 156, *179, 181. 188. 189, 191 , 194, 195, *199, 219, 222, 225, 228,
*237, 238.239, 240,241, *242, 243, 258,269, 294, 300.301 ,310,311 ,334, 335.
337. 341, 358, 367,368.373. 385,414,437,442,443. 449, *464, *466, *506, 518,
519, 520, 533, 534, 546, 547, 548, 549, 550, 553, 555 . 557, 558, *559, 561, 562,
563, 565, 568, 570, *571. *573, 576, *579, *580, *583, 586, 595, 602, 614, 637,
668, 669, 672. 674, *689, *694, 695, 699, 700, 701, 704, 706, 708, 717, 722. 744,
746, 751 , *760, 776,779, 780, 782, 793, 800, *801 , 914,916, 917,919, 920,926,
939, 940, *950, 954, 957, *959, *960, 990, 991, 992, *993, 994, 996, 1028, 1030,
1033, 1035, 103'6, *1037, *1038, 1040, *1041, 1042, *1043, *1044, 1045, *1046,
*1049, 1051 , 1052, 1053, 1054, *1058, 1085, 1095, *1130, 11 34, *1135. 1136,
*1137, 1138,1147, 1206, 1207,1209, 1210, 1216,1231,1235, 1236, 1250, 1271,
1276, 1278. 1287.
Maravillas Complex. Area: Big Bend region , but presently known only from
the southern Davis Mountains. References: 153, 156, 225, 548, 555, 561, 562,
"571 , *573, 61~ 700.940,996,1085 , 11 3 ~ 1235. 1236, 1278.
Santiago Complex. Area: same as Maravillas complex. Refe ren ces : 156, 548,
561 ' 562, 568, 570, *573, 1085, 11 30.
Red Bluff Complex. Area: Big Bend region, but presently known only from
the southern portion. References: 8, 561, *573, 1130.
Pecos River Focus. Same as Pecos River Cave Dweller (Sayles). Area : southeastern portion of Trans-Pecos Texas, but particularly around the mouth of the
Pecos River on both sides of the Rio Grande. References: 7, •s, 15, 23, 55, 78, 92,
113. *116, 120, *124, 125, 15·6, *179, 181 , 191 , *199, 228, *237, 238, 239, 240,
241. *242, 243, 300, 334. 337. 341, 358. 443, 449, *464, *506, 518, 548, 550, 555 ,
*559, 561, 568, 570. *571 , *573, "579, *580, *583, 586, 602, 637, 669, 672. 674,
*694, 695.699,701,704,706.708, 717,75 1,800, *801 , 917,919,920, *950, 954,
*959, *960. 992, *993, 99'6, *1038, *1049, 1051 , *1058, 1085, *1130, 1134, *1135,
1136, *1137, 1138, 1147, 1206,1210, 1231 , 1235,1236, 1271.
Chisos Focus. Same as Big Bend Cave Dweller (Sayles ) . Area: southern part
of Trans-Pecos Texas. References: 78, 125, 153, 156, 191 , *1 99, 243, 385,
443, 449, 547, 548, 549, 550, 557. 558, 559, 561, 562, 563, 565, 568, 570, *571,
*573, 694, 701, 704, 744, 919, *950, 954, *993, 996, *1037, *1038, *1049, 1051,
1053, *1058, 1085, *11 30, 11 34, *11 35, 1136, 1147, 1235.
Edwards Plateau Aspect. Area: central Texas, especially in the Edwards
Plateau. References: 15 , 25. 27, 3 1. 46, 55, 58, *60, *61 , 63, 78, 80, 85, 111,113,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

193

*116, *120, *124, 140, 141 , 148, 149, 154, 156, 163, *167, 171, 172, 175, 176,
*179, 181, 187, 193, 216, 223, 224, 225, 228, 229, 296, 298, 300, 301 , 306, 321,
*341. 342, 352, 358. 367, 449, ~·67 , 471 , 473, 493, 497, *498, "506, *507, *508,
50~ 525, 533, 53~ 5 3 ~ 537, 54~ "555 , *55~ *557, 561 , 568, *571 , "57 ~ 573,
574,582, 586, 590, 598, 602.604, 606, *609, 614, '617, 618, 629, 637, 641 , "654,
659, 661 , 666, 66~ 67~ 67~ '681, 706, 70~ 71~ 713, 717, "73~ 74~ 751 , 755,
762, 766, 779, 780, 782, 788, * 792, 793, 795, 798, 799, 800, 803, 818, *825, 828,
830, 836, 850, *857. 858, 866, *867, "8'69, *875, 876, 877, 878, 881, 882, 883,
884. *885, 886. 887. *889, 898, 899, 903, 918, *919, 920, 923, 925, 93 1, *950,
*961, *975, 996. 999, 1025, 1026, 1052, 1060, 1061 , 1062, 1084, 1085, 1089, 1097,
1098, 1099, 1100, 1102. *1125, *1126, 1127. *1128, *1129, *1130, 1143, 1145,
1149, 1166, 1194, 1203, 1204. 1206, 1207, 1215, *1219, 1221 , 1222, 1226, 1229,
1235, 1236, 1240, 1258, 1272, 1273, 1274, 1275, 1278, 1278, 1281, 128'6.

Clear Fork Focus . Same as Texas Kitchen Midd 2n Culture, Bottom and
Middle Levels (P earce ), in part ; Abilen e Branch (Sayles) ; and Clear Fork
Culture (Ray ) . Area: central west T exa s and southward into th e Edwards
Plateau . References: 27, • 60, *61 , 78, 85, 111 , *116, * 120, *1 24, 148, 149, 154,
163, 167,172,224,225,228.306, *341 , 342, 358,467, 493, 497,536, 548, *555,
556, *571 , 573,586, 590, 602,614, 618, 637,641 , *654, 669,674,679, 681 , 730,
748, 755, *825, 828, 830, 836, 850, *857, 858, 866, *867 , *869, *875 , 876, 877,
878, 881, 882, 883, 884, *885, 886. *889, *919, 920, 923, 925, "950 .. "975, 999,
1052, 1085, 1089, *1125, *1126, *1128, *1129, *1130, 1143, 1203, 1235, 1236,
1258, 1275, 1278, 1281 , 1286.
Round Rock Focus. Same as Texas Kitchen M1ddeJJ Culture, Bottom and
Middle L evels (Pearce) , in part; Round Rock Phase (Say les ); Round Rock
Stage (Gladwin ) ; probably also Guadalupe Phase (Sayles), Guadalupe Sta ge
(Gladwin ), and M ena rd Stage (Gladwin ) . Area : central T exas, particularly
along th e eastern margin of the Edwards Plateau. References: 27, "60, *61 ,
78, 85, 113, *116, 120, *124, 163, *167, 1 72, 216, 224, 225, 228, 341' 358, *508,
*555, *556, 557, *571 , 573, 614, 618, 637, 661, 6'69, 674, '730, 755, 762, 931,
*950, *975, 1052, 1084, 1085, 1089, 1098, 1099, *1126, *1128, * 1129, *11 30,
1225, 1235, 1236, 1278.
U valde Focus. Same as Mound A Culture, Upper and Middle L evels
(Huskey) and Late Edwards Plateau Culture (Say les ) . Area: Edwards Plateau r egion, especially the southern portion. References: 55, *116, 156, 216,
358, *498, *556, *557 , 561, *571, 637, *950, 1084, 1085, 1089, 1099, *1126,
*1128, *1129, *1130, 1235, 1236.
Trinity Aspect. Area: upper Trinity River region, particularly in the vicinity
of Dallas. References: 90, 111 , 114, *116, *223, 224, *225 , 226, 227, *228, *229,
*230, *232, 254,272, 540, *571, *587, ·618, 999, 1010, 1014, *1130, 1236, 1281.
Carrollton Focus. Area: same as Trinity Aspect. References: 90, 111 , 114,
*116, *223, 224, *225, 226, 227, *228, *229, *230, *232, 254, 272, 540, *571 ,
618, *11 30, 1281.
.
Elam Focus. Area: same as Trinity A spect. Refer en ces: 90, 111, 114, *225 ,
227, *228,232,272, "571, *587, *11 30.

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Brazos Culture. Same as Sand Dune Culture (Ray), Brazos River Branch (Sayles) , and Brazos River Stage (Gladwin) . Area: Abilene region of central west
Texas. References: 15. 156, 163, 215, 306, *324, *341, *356, 573, 654, 661, 681 ,
*825, 828, 830, 831 , 836, 843, 850, 851, 858, 860, *861, 868, *889, 919, 920, 949,
*950, 1052, 1217, *1221 , 1274.
Monte Aspect. Term proposed by Kelley for Archaic cultures of southern Texas
and northeastern Mexico. References: 185, *555, *571.
Falcon Focus. Same as Coahuiltecan Phase (Sayles) and Coahuiltecan Stage
(Gladwin ) . Similar to Repelo and Abasolo complexes (MacNeish ) of northern
Tamaulipas. Area: Lower Rio Grande Valley, especially from Eagle Pass to
McAllen. References: 5, *43, *75, 78, 111 , *116, 176, *185, *190, *218, 224,315,
334, 341, *492, 525, 527, *571 , 577, 613, 615, *638, *669, 670, 673, *674, 687,
717, 762, 901 , 919, 931 , *950, 1023, 1025, 1099, *11 30, 1141, 1146, *1208, 1227.
1274, 1275.
Mier Focus. Similar to Catan comp lex (MacNeish ) of northern Tamaulipas.
Area: same as Falcon Focus. References: *116, 176, *571, 673, *674, *1130,
*1.208.
Aransas Focus. Area: central section of the Texas coast, particularly between
San Antonio and Corpus Christi bays. References: *116, 120, 164, *165, 166,168.
*172, *176, *180, 182, 491, 544, *571, 606, 674, *688, '690, 793, 814, 941, 1085,
11 29, *1130.
Oso Focus. Sayles defined an Oso Phase for the Corpus Christi-Baffin Bay area
of the T exas coast, but this culture has not yet been verified by excavation. Same
as Oso Stage (Gladwin ) . References: 339, *341 , 352, 491, 502. 544, 690, 696, 750,
762, 814,816, *919, *950, 1052, 1203, 1274, 1275.
Morhiss Focus. This name was proposed by Kelley, who thinks it probably belongs in the Edwards Plateau Aspect; but the culture has yet to be defined. Area:
undefined, but principally along the lower Guadalupe River. References: 352.
*555.
Red River Aspect. Same as East Texas Aspect ( Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ) . New
name proposed by C. H. Webb in this issue of the Bulletin. Area: northeastern
Texas and adjoining portions of Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana. References:
92,111 , *116,292, 321 , 434, *436, *571,617, 1088,1098, *1130.
NEG-AMERICAN STAGE (FORMATIVE)

lornada Branch of the Mogollon. See Hueco Phase ( under Archaic Stage) .
Area: western portion of Trans-Pecos T exas and adjoining sections of southern
New Mexico and northern Chihuahua. References: 10, 11 , 19, 28, 129, 186, 188,
191, 311 , 358, 364, 385, 442, 455, 480, 519, 520, 522, 535, 546, 558, 559, 562, 563,
567, 568, 570, 573, 595, '602, *651, 676, 681 , 720, 722, 723, *736, *737, 914, 915,
918, 939, 940, *950, 953, 958, 997, 1027, 1033, 1040, 1047, 1052, *1067, *1068,
1101, *1130, 1158, 1276.
Mesilla Phase . See Jornada Branch. References: 558, 562, 563, 568, 570, *651,
1027, *1 130.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

195

Dona Ana Phase. See Jornada Branch. References: 558, 562, 563, 658, *651 ,
1027, *1130.
El Paso Phase. See Jornada Branch. References: 191 , 358, 563, 568, 573, *651 ,
*736, *737, *950, 953, 997,1027, *1067, 1101, *1130.
Livermore Focus. Area: central Trans-Pecos Texas, especially in vicinity of
Davis Mountains. References: 78, 150, 153, 156, 311, 358, 449, 521 , 547, 548, 552,
553, 559, 563, 5'65, 566, 568, *570, *573, 637, 776, 959, 996, 997, 1033, 1034, 1038,
1049, 1085, 1089, *1130, 1135, 1136, 1235.
Bravo Valley Aspect. See also under Historic Stage. Area: Big Bend region,
especially along the Rio Grande, and along th e lower Rio Conchas of northern
Chihuahua. References: 7, *8, 32, 78, 150, 191 , 216, 250, 358, 373, 449, 465, 515,
522, 539, *5 53, 554, 555, 557, *558, 559, *560, *563, *565, *567, 568, 570, 571 ,
*573, 602, *650, 700, 730, 920, *950, *951 , 996, *997, 1085, *1130, 11 35, 1136,
1207, 1231.
La Junta Focus. Area: same as Bravo Valley Aspect. References: 358, 449,
515, 553, 554, 558, *560, *563, *565, *567, 570, *573, 602, *997, 1085,11 30.
Panhandle Aspect. Includes the Antelope Creek Focus of the Texas Panhandle
and the Optima Focus of th e Oklahoma Panhandle (see reference 1164) .
Antelope Creek Focus. Same as Post Basket Maker Culture (Studer), Texas
Panhandle Culture (Moorehead and .Studer), Panhandle Phase ( Sayles), and
Panhandle Culture (Johnston). Area: Texas Panhandle, especially in the Canadian River valley. References: 24, 95, *116, *121 , 132, 151, 157, 187, 216,
233,255,258,288,289,330,333, *343, 364,368, *448, 449, *457, *458,459, 460,
451 , *462, *463, 474, 499, 522, 533, *541 , 546, 589, *602, *604, *608, 641 , 647,
*705, 706, 707, *741 , *742, 743, 781 , 788, 793, 809, 827, 829, 900, 916, 920, 926,
*950, 955, 956, 993, 998, 1000, 1001 , 1003, 1006, 1047, 1052, 1073, 1085, 1088,
1116, 1117, 1118, 1119, *1120, *1121 , 1122, 1123, *1130, 1140, 1145, *1164,
1194, 1199, *1205, 1210, 1214,1231 , 1235, 1257,1268,1271.
Central Texas Aspect. Area : central Texas and eastern part of Trans-Pecos
Texas. References: 31, 46, 47, 58, *124, 175, 176, 179, 181 , 193, 216, 252, 300, 330,
341, 358, 449, 498, *507, 508, 525, *526, 527, 528, 539, 552, *555, *556, 557, 562,
565, *566, 568, 570, 571, *602, 604, 614, 637, 659, 674, *730, 755, 762, 788, *792,
799, 800, 803, 900, 903, 920,931 , *950, 959, 961,997, 1026, 1060, 1061 , 1075, 1080,
1084, *1085, 1089, 1097, 1098, 1100, 1102, *1126, 1127, *1128, *1129, *1130, 1145,
1194, 1204, 1222, 1229.
Austin Focus. Same as Texas Kitchen Midden Culture, Upper Level (Pearce ),
in part; Wichita Phase ( Sayles), in part. Area: central Texas. References: *124,
216, 330, 358, 508, 525, 527, 539, *555, 557, 568, 571 , *602, 604, 637, *730, 755,
900, *950, 1075, 1084, 1085,1089, *1126, *1128, *1129, *1130, 1194, 1222.
Toyah Focus. Same as Texas Kitchen Midden Culture, Upper Level (Pearce) ,
in part; Wichita Phase (Sayles ) in part. Area: .Same as Central Texas Aspect.
References: 252,358,525,539, 552, *555, *556, 557, 5•65, *566, 568, 570, 571 , 637,

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

674, *730, 755, 931, *950, 997,1075,1080, 1085, 1089.1098, *1126, *1128, 1129,
*11 30.

Nu eces Focus. Name proposed by Kelley, but culture still undefined. Area:
undefined, but presumably southern portion of Edwards Plateau. References :
*1085, 1128, *1130.
Tradinghouse Focus. Name proposed by Kelley, but culture never defined.
Area: vicinity of IVa co in central Texas. References : *1130.
Waco Focus. Name proposed by Watt, but status of this culture is not yet clear.
Area: Brazos River valley in vicinity of Waco. References: *1177, *1184, 1246.
Henrietta Focus. Same as Wichita Phase (Sayles ) , in part. Area: central part of
northern Texas and adjacent part of southern Okla homa. References: 38, 85, 103,
105, *116, 121, 126, 132, 157, 1'63, 176, 216, 255, 33 1, 333, 358, 364, 387, *392,
*413, *417, *420, 540, 555, 571, 600, *602, *604, 605, *608, 649, 730, 755, 758, 766,
805, *950, 955. 956, 998, 1000, 1005, 1006, 1063, 1070, 1080, 1085, 1086, 1088,
1099, *11 30, 1145, 1194, 1253, 1254, 1263.
Wylie Focus. Area: small area just east and northeast of Dallas, particularly
along the East Fork of the Trinity River. References: 114, *116, 216, 225, 315,
381, 391,394, 395, 396, 399,400,478,479, 525, 528,530, 539, 540, 571, 931, 1000,
1023, 1025, 1064, *1079, 1080, 1085, *1086, 1089, 1098, 1099, *11 30, 1145, 1199,
1241, 1242, 1244.
Valley Creek Culture. Same as Large Scraper Culture (Ray ), Small Scraper
Culture (Ray ), and Wichita Phase ( Say les), in part. Area: Abilene region of
central west Texas. References: 163, *356, 441, 573, *602, 714, 809, *825, *843,
850,860,881,882, 886, *889,919, *950, 1286.
Brownsville Focus. Same as Brownsville Phase ( Sayles) and Brownsville complex (MacNeish ) . Area: extreme southern section of the Texas coast, especially
the delta of the Rio Grande. References: *14, 75, *116, 176, 177, *185, *277, 279,
334, 492, 571, 574, 606, 640, *669, 670, 673, *674, 696, 706, *707, 708, 782, 788,
793, 800, *950, 990, 993, 1000, 1047, 1052, 1085, *11 30, 1208.
Barril Complex. Recently defined by MacNeish , who originally included it in
his Brownsville Complex. Area: northeastern Tamaulipas, with only a few sites
known in the extreme southern portion of Texas. References: *674.
Rockport Focus. Same as Rockport Phase (Sayles) . Area: middle section of the
Texas coast. References: *116, 165, 166, 168, 172, *176, 177, *180, 341,491,539,
566. 5'68, 571, 602, 630, 640, 674, *688, 690, 696, 706, 707, 710, 730, 750, 753, 788,
793, 800, *810, 814, 816, 898, 902, 937, *950, 997, 1047, 1052, 1085, *1130, 1207,
1222.
Galveston Bay Focus. Same as Attacapan Phase ( Sayles). Area: eastern section
of the T exas coast, between the Brazos and Sabine rivers. References: 58, 71, 73,
*116, *177, 352,358, 372, 623, *756 , 766, 823, *950, 970, 1020, 1052, 1059, 1097,
1115,1128, *1130, *1161, *1222.
Orange Focus. M entioned occasionally in the literature, but never defined. Area:
lower Sabine River, principally Orange County. References: 623, 766, 11 30.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITE RAT U RE

197

Gibson Aspect . Area : northeastern T exas, east ern Okla homa, southwestern
Arkansas, and northwestern Louisiana. Referen ces: 49, 52, 59, 68, *83, 84, *87,
*88, *89, 92, *99, 100, 101 , 103, *104, 105, 106, *108, 109, 110, 112, *11 6, 117, 118,
*1 21, 122, 123, *124, 128, 134, 135, *158, 161. 164, 177, 192, *1 98, 201,205, 206,
216, 217, 225, 233, 252, 254, 262, 264, 270, 274, 279, 290, 29 1. 297, *309, 313, 314,
*316, 318, 320, 321, 322, 323, 330, 331, 346, 352, 358, 359, 360, *361 , 363, 364,
374, *375, 380, • 384, *397, 403, 411, 412, 435, 436, 438, 475, 484, 500, 501 ' 502,
505, 511, 513, 514, 527, 530, 532, 533, 536. *538, 542, *545, 555,571 , 597, 598, 600,
*602, *604, 605, 606, *611 , 614, 615, 617, *'619, 622, 623, 641.648, 653, 656, *658,
660, 669, 674, 700, 719, 730, 735, 746. 751 , 754, *755 , 763, *764, *765, *766, 782,
789, 790, 791 , 792, 793, 804, 805, 808, 817, 818, 820, 822, 900. 903, 912, 942, 955,
956, 966, 967, 968, 971 , 998, 999, 1008, 1001. 1002, 1004, 1007, 1026, 1075, 1078,
1080, 1084, 1085, 1086, 1088, 1092, 1097, 1098, 1099, 1128, *11 30, 11 40, 1145,
1162, 1163, *1175, 1183, 1184, 1190, 11 91 , 1192, *1193, 1194, 1195, 1196, 1198,
*1199, 1200, *1201 , 1230, 1232, 1233, 1234, 1235, 1237, *1 239, 1243, 1244, 1245.
Alto Focus. Area: centra l eastern T exas. extendin g into northwestern Louisi ana. References: 68, 84, 100, 104, *116, 161 , 164, 177, 216, 217,225, 274, 279,
290, 291 , 297, *316, 318, 321, 330. 346, 358, 359, 360, 361 , 363, 364, *397, 435,
514, 530, 532, 533, 536, *538, 542, *545, 555, 571 ,597, 598, *602, *604, 605, 606,
*611 , 614, 615, 617, *619, 622,623,641, *658, 660,669,730, 746, 754, *755, 766,
805 , 808, 903, 942,967, 971,1004, 1078, 1085, 1097, 11 28, *11 30, 1162, *1175,
1183, 11 84, 1191 ,1 192. *1193, 1194, 1195, 11 96, *1199, 1233, 1234, 1235, 1237,
1244.
Gahagan Focus. Area: northwestern Louisiana. Referen ces: 89, 104, *11 6,
205, 274, 291, 331, 360, 361, 375, 555 , *602, 622, *735, *755, 764, 765, 766, 805,
971 , *11 30, 1191 ,1 193, 1196, 1198,1 199, *1201 , 1237.
Haley Focus. Area: extreme northeastern T exas, so uthwestern Ark ansa s, and
n orthwestern Louisiana. Referen ces: 99, 104. *116, *1 24, 216, 217, 262, 274,
316, 330, 358, 359, 361, *384, 527, 530, 598, *602, *604, 605, 619, 623, 656, 669,
674, *735, *755, 766, 805,967, 971 , 1026, 1085, *1130, 1162, 1191, 1193, 1194,
1195, 1196, *1199, 1200.
Sanders Focus. Area: northeastern T exas and southeastern Oklahoma. The
Nelson Focus of southeastern Oklah oma is possibly attributable to the Sanders
Focus. References: 89, 99, 103, 104, 105, 121 , *124, 192,216, 252, 254, 2/4, 316,
331, 352, 359, 361, 380,403, 411 , 412, 475, 505, 513, 597, 598, 600, *602, *604,
605, 619, 623, '653, 669, *755, 764, 766, 791 , 792. 805, 818, 822, 900, 955, 956,
999, 1000, 1001 ' 1004, 1075, 1085, 1086, 1088, *11 30, 1145, 1162, 11 83. 1184,
1191 , 11 94, 1195, 11 99, 1243, 1245.
Spiro Focus. Area: eastern Okla homa, with only slight r ep r esentation in extrem e n ortheastern T exas. Refer en ces: 49, 52, 59, *83, *87, *88, *89, *99, 103,
*104, *108, 110, 112, *116, 118, *121 , 122, *124, *158, 161, *198, 206,216, 233,
270, *304, 316, 331,360, *361, *375, 435, 484, 533, 619,622,623, 648, 653, *755,
763, *764, *765, 766, 805, 817, 818, 955, 956, 998, 1000, 1004, 1007, 1085, 1088,
*11 30, 1145, 1163, 1191 , 1199, 1200, 1230, 1237, *1239.
Fulton Aspect. Includes most of Red River Caddo and Hasinai phases (Sayles) .
Hist ~r i c Stag2. Area: northeastern T exas, eastern Oklahoma, south -

See also uncbr

tg8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

western Arkansas, and northwestern Louisiana. References: 16, 69, 78, 87, 89, 99,
103, 106, 109, *116, *121 , 122, 123, *124, 127, 128, 135, 176, 201, 216, 262, 264,
274, 292, 296, 297, 298,300, 313, 314, 316, 318, 320,321,322,323, 330, 331, *346,
352,358,360, 364,367,376,383, *384,396,398,399, 402,409, *411,433,434,435,
43'6, 451, '452, *453, 478, 500, 501, 502, 503, 505, 511, 527, *530, 537, 539, 542,
543, 555, 566, 597, 598, *602, *604, 605, 614, 619, 622, 623, 628, 641, 648, *653,
656, 674, 700, 719, 730, 733, 734, *735, 749, 751 , *755, 764, 765, *766, 779, 780,
782, 788, 789, 790, 791, 793, 795, 800, 805, 817, 818,819,822,912, *950, 969, 970,
972, 997, 999, 1000, 1001 , 1004, 1025, 1026, 1047, 1052, 1078, 1079, 1080, 1083,
1084,1085, 1086, 1087,1088,1089,1097,1098, 1099, 1126, *1130, 1140, 1162, 1183,
1184, 1189,1190, '1191, 1192, *1193, 1194,1195, *1196, *1197, 1198, *1199, *1202,
1210, 1214, 1222, 1231 , 1232, 1235.

Belcher Focus. Area: northeastern Texas, southwestern Arkansas, and northwestern Louisiana. References: *116, 216, 274, 330, 33 1, 358, 537, 598, *602,
*604, 605, 619,622, 653, 755, 766, 791,805,822, 1000, 1004, 1085, 1097, '1130,
1189, *1191, 1193, 1194, 1195, '1196, '1197, 1198, *1199, *1202.
Bossier Focus. Includes the former Shelby Focus, now abandoned. Area:
northeastern Texas and northwestern Louisiana. References: '116, 216, 318,
321, 330, 331 , 542, 598, *602, *604, 605, 619, 755, 766, 1026, 1078, 1080, 1085,
1097, '1130, 1191 , 1192, '1193, 1194, 1195,1196, *1199.
Fort Coffee Focus. Area: eastern Oklahoma. References: *121 , 653. '765, 766,
805, 1026, 1130, 1199, 1205.
Frankston Focus. Area: central part of eastern Texas. References: 16, 78, 21•6,
300, 331, 358, 360, 396, 398, 399, 402, 478, 530, 542, 555, 598, *602, *604, 605,
623, 730, *755, 766, 791 , 805, 969, 997, 1004, 1078, 1080, 1085, 1086, 1097, 1126,
*1130, 1183, 1184,1191,1194,1199,1222.
McCurtain Focus. Area: southeastern Oklahoma, with only slight representation in northeastern Texas. References : 89, *116, *121, 409, *411, 628, 648, 653,
766, 1000,1001,1004, 1088, *1130, 1191,1196, 1199.
Mid-Ouachita Focus. Area: southwestern Arkansas. References: ' 384, 451,
*452, *453, 653,766, 1004, *1130, 1199.
Texarkana Focus. Area: extreme northeastern Texas and southwestern Arkansas. References: *116, 216, 274, 316, 318, 358, *384, '411, 451, 527, 598,
*602, '604, 605, 619, 622, 623, 653, 674, 730, *735, *755, 765, 766, 791, 1000,
1004, 1085,1088, *11 30, '1191 , 1193, 1194, 1195, 1196, 1199.
Titus Focus. Area: northeastern Texas, especially in drainages of the upper
Sulphur and Sabine rivers. References: 69, '116, 176, 216, 274, 292, 316, 321,
331, '346, 358, 383,411, 433, 436, *530, 542,598, *602, *604, 605, 622, 674, 730,
755, 766, 791, 805, 969, 972, 1000, 1004, 1080, 1085, 1087, 1126, *1130, 1183,
*1191 , 1193, 1194,1199.
Turkey Bluff Focus. Area: eastern Oklahoma. References: *653, 1026, 1130,
1199.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

199

HISTORIC STAGE

Sites Yielding European Artifacts: 5, 32, 34, 65, 72, 78, 94, 163, 177, 180, 191,
203, 208, 216, 254, 255, 2'50, 263, 274, 275, 295, 300, 315, 316, 318, 331, 352, 358,
377, 393, 408, 411, 412, 415, 451, 453, 485, 486, 499, 500, 501, 502, 505, *506,
516, 522, 525, 527, 528, 529, *539, *553, 554, 555 , 557, 558, *563, *565, *566, *567,
568, *573, 588, 598, *602, 604, 605, 614, 623, 626, *638, 650, 653, '674, 680, 696,
734, 749, 751 , *752, 755, 756, 764, 765, 766, 769, 791, 802, 830, *896, 897, 898,902,
903, 920, 931, *950, *951, 972, *997, 1004, 1023, 1025, 1055, 1063, *1070, 1071,
*1075, 1078, 1080, *1081. 1082, 1083, 1085, 1087, 1098, 1099, 1109, 1119, *1130,
1135, 1159, 1160, 11'68, 1186, *1191 , 1193, 1194, 1196, 1199, 1249, *1256, 1263,
1266, 1267.
Bravo Valley Aspect. See under Neo-American Stage.
Concepcion Focus. Same as Jumano Phase (Sayles). Area : See Bravo Valley
Asp ect. References: 191, 216, 358, 449, *553, 554, 558, *563, *565, *567, 568,
*573, 602,920, *950, *997, 1085, *1130.
Conchas Focus. Same as Conchas Phase ( Sayles) . Area: See Bravo Valley
Aspect. References : 260, 358, 449, 522, 553, 554, 558, *563, *565, *567, *573,
*951 , *997, 1085, 1130.
A lamito Focus. Area: See Bravo Valley Aspect. References: 558, 565, 568,
*573, 1085, 1130.
Presidio Focus. Area: See Bravo Valley Aspect. References : 568, *573, *650,
1085, 1130.
Rockport Focus. See Rockport Focus under Neo-American Stage. Some Rockport Focus sites y ield European artifacts, others do not.
Spanish Fort Focus. Area: Montague County, east of Wichita Falls; two known
sites, one on the south bank of Red River in Texas, the other on the north bank in
Oklahoma. References : 216,260,358, *'602, *1070, 1071 , 1098, *1130, 1194, *1256.
Fulton Aspect. See Fulton Aspect under Neo-American Stage.
Allen Focus. Area: central part of eastern Texas. References: 78, 216, 274,
505,539, 566,614,623, 653, *755, 1004, 1078,1080, 1085, *1130, 1199.
Glendora Focus. Area: northeastern Texas, southwestern Arkansas, and
northwestern Louisiana. References: 203, 216, *26.3, 316, 318, 331, 352, 358,
411, *451, 539,598, *602, *604, 605 , 614,653, *734, 749,755,764, 765, 766, 791 ,
1004,1085, *1130, 1159, *1160, *1191, 1193,1194,1196,1199.
Little River Focus. A suggested focus (see C. H. Webb, this issue of th e
Bulletin ) ; not yet defined . Same as Hunt Focus (Krieger ). Area: extreme
northeastern Texas. References: *11 30, *1196.

Topical Index
RADIOCARBON DATES

Paleo-American Stage.
Lewisville site: 51 , 53, *130, 160, *2.30, *231, 249,635, 1236.

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Lubbock site: 68, *133, 173,312, 317, 363, 440, 497, *538, 548, 612, 621 , 632,
*658, 660, *928, 929, 930, 932, 933, *986, 987, 1065, 1130, 1212, 1235, 1236, 1280.
Plainview site: *130, *1 33, 635, 1212.
Scharbauer site (Midland ) : *1 33, 174,635,636, *1212, *121 3.
Archaic Stage.
Carrollton Focus: *232.
Falcon Focus: 43, 674, *687.
Pecos River Focus: *960, *11 37.
N eo-American Stage.
Central Texas Aspect (in zone of admixture with Edwards Plateau Aspect
artifacts ) : 660.
Gibson Aspect: 59, 118, 1002, 1199.
Alto Focus: 363, *538, *611 , 61 5, 619, *658, 660, 746, 1130.
Spiro Focus: 49, 59, 110, 112, 118, 1130.
Fulton Aspect: 1199.
Henrietta Focus: *413 .
RELATIONSHIPS WITH SURROUNDING CULTURE PROVINCES

Central Plains: 21, 32, 38, 255, 258, 289, 354, 364, 367, 448, 462, 463, 467, 474,
493, 513, 536, 541 , 546, 553, 598, 600, 601' *604, *605, 606, *608, 706, 707, *742,
*743, 755,942,993,997,1047, 1070, 1123, *1130, 1194, *1205.
Mesoamerica: 21, 32, 73, 138, 161 , 165, 185, 188, *193, 196, 205, 206, 217, 261 ,
270, *274, *277, 278,279, 318, 331,359, 360, 364,451, 492,536, *545, *564, 571 , 574,
578, *598, *600, 601, 604, *605, *606, 608, *622, *634, 640, 645, *669, 670, 671, *674,
691, 706, *707, *709, 710, *755, 765 , 781 , 782, 783, 792,793, 794, 804, 805, 820, *893,
903, 942, 952, 993, 1007, *1012, 1047, 1052, 1083, 1107, *1130, 1131 , 1142, 1154,
*1162, 1194, 1195, 1197, 1233, 1234.
Southeast: 21, 28, 38, 85, 196, 205, 206, 216, 217, 274. 278, *316, 359, 513, 527,
536, *545, *564, *600, 601 , *605, *606, 608, *611, 619, *622, 639, 640, 641, *669, *674,
691 , 706, *707, *755, 781 , 788, 792, 793, 794, 804, 822, 942, 993, 1007, 1047, 1052,
1078, 1080, 1084, 1098,1107, *1130, 1162,1194,1195,1220, 1222, 1233.
Southwest: 21 , 28, 32, 38, 150, 161, 188, 224, 255, 258, 259, 274, 286, 289, *339,
354,367, 368,388, 405, 411 , 412, 433,437,442, 448, 459, 461 , 462, 463,465, 466,474,
476, 504, 507, 535, 536, 541 , *545, 546, 553. 558. 561 , *571, 573, 576, 578, 598, 600,
601 , *602, *604, *605, 606, 608, 626, 639, 640. 641 , 645, 706, 707, *741 , *742, *743,
755, 781, 782, 783, 788, 792, 793, 794, 802. 805, 843, 845, 849, 851 , 853, 942, 952,
993, *997, 1024, *1041 , *1043, 1047,1052,1080, 1083,1088, 1116, 1120, 1122, 1123,
*11 30, 1137.1147, 1188, 1194, 1205,1210, 1218, 1233.1251 , 1253, 1262,1285.
TYPOLOGICAL AND DISTRIBUTIONAL STUDIES

Abrading stones: 1180.
Axes: 227.
Basketry: 1053, 1147,1209.
Beads, glass: 1168, 1186.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATU RE

201

Boatstones (spear-thrower weights) : 773.
Bolas stones ( "Waco sinker" ): 1170.
Clubs ( grooved) and rabbit sticks: 437.
Cordage: 1051.
Corner-tang artifacts: 305, 772, 774, 848, 855 .
Crown-polished boulders: 3, 4.
Figurines, fired clay: 439, 746.
Gouges: 867.
Gravers: 1286.
Knives: 325, 809, 1178, 1247.
N etting: 243.
Ornaments: 502, 515, 740.
Painted Pebbles: 242.
Pipes: 500, 512.
Pottery: 357, 501, 1130, 1202.
Projectile points: 92,113,116,119, 120, 434, 599, 603, 609, 674, 11 30, 1192,1225,
1226, 1247.
Projectile shaft smoothers.· 557, 1144.
Scrapers: 1192.
PICTOGRAPHS AND PETROGLYPHS: 6, 20, 23, 24, 31, 54, 58, 70, 102, 160,
*181, 186, 199, *213, 214, 219, *220, 221 , 237, 252, 273, *283, 296,299,300,310, 311,
367, 385, 410, 465 , 469, 480, 498, *506, 517, 518, 519, 520, 531, 546, 551, *559, 573,
*57~ *58~ *581 , *583, *585, *58~ *589, 593, 59~ 66~ 685, 68~ 694, 705, 70~ 70~
711 , 742, 751. 768, 776, 779, 780, 781 , 782, 783, 801 , 807, 819, 824, 827, 832, 833,
860, 870, 871 , 884, 897, 911 , 915, 931 , 948, 950, 952, 1028, 1029, 1031, 1035, 1036,
1038,1040, 1041. 1049, 1052, *1055, 1068, 1075, 1103, 1105, 1116, 1117, 1119, 1130,
1133,1134, 1135, *1136, 1158, 1180,1229,1273.
STUDIES OF HUMAN SKELETAL REMAINS: 2, 9, 42, *80, 81, 134, 135,
136, 174, *197. 201 , 234, 280, 324, 347, 348, 349, 350, *351, *352, 403, *468, 485,
486, 487, *488, *489, 507, 591, 605, 665, 666, 667, 677, 702, 749, *750, *756, *760,
761 , 801 , 826, 834, 864, 1059, *1090, 1091 , 1092, *1093, 1138, 1139, 1149, 1150,
1190, 1197, *1213, 1246, *1269, *1270, 1287.
USEFUL BIBLIOGRAPHIES AND CHECKLISTS: 41, 86, 91 , 115, 170, 183,
184, 196, 267, 336, 362, 363, 365, 684, 747, 944, 978, 984, 987, 1072, 1124, 1130,
1133, 1281.
GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS: 56, 74, 162, 202, 222, 250, 253, 362, 3'69,
370,454,569,639,646,675, 727,740,922,995,1022,1066,1124,1238.

Key to Abbreviations
A
An

The Alcalde. Austin.
L'Anthropologie. Paris.

202

Ar
AA
AAm
AAn
AAS
AB
A CIA
AJA
AJOOS
AJPA
AJS
AMBG
AN
APAM
APMA
APSY
ARBAE
ARBS I
ASUT
BAA
BAAPG
BAEB
BAGS
BBAA
BBY
BCTAS
BGSA
BLCAS
BML
BNSS
BNV
BOAS
BTAPS
BTAS
BUAS
BUNSM

c
Con

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Archaeology. Brattleboro.
American Anthropologist. Menasha.
Acta Americana. Los Angeles.
American Antiquity. Salt Lake City.
American Archaeology Series. The Pan American Union. Washington.
The Archaeological Bulletin. Hico, Texas.
Annaes do XX Congreso lnternacional do Americanistas. Rio de
Janeiro.
American Journal of Archaeology. lVIenasha.
American Journal of Orthodontics and Oral Surgery. St. Louis.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology. Philadelphia.
American Journal of Science. New Haven.
Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden. St. Louis.
The American Naturalist. Salem, Massachusetts.
Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural History.
New York.
Anthropological Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan. Ann Arbor.
American Philosophical Society Year Book. Philadelphia .
Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology. Washington.
Annual Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution.
Washington.
Archaeological Series, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas. Austin.
Bulletin of the American Anthropological Association. Menasha.
Bulletin of the American Association of Petroleum Geologists. Tulsa.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin. Washington.
Bulletin of the American Geographical Society of New York. New
York.
Boletin Bibliografico de Antropologia Americana. Mexico, D. F.
Britannica Book of the Year. Chicago.
Bulletin of the Central Texas Archaeological Society (same as Central
Texas Archaeologist ) . Waco.
Bulletin of the Geological Society of America. New York.
Bulletin of the Lea County Archeological Society. Hobbs, New Mexico.
Botanical Museum Leaflets, Harvard University. Cambridge.
Bulletin of the National Speleological Society. Washington.
BEF News and Views. Baytown, Texas.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society. Norman.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society (now
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society ) . Lubbock.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society (formerly Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society). Austin.
Bulletin of the University Archaeological Society, Brigham Young
University. Provo.
Bulletin of the University of Nebraska State Museum. Lincoln.
The Cattleman. Fort Worth.
The Condor. Berkeley.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

CA
CHSMN
CICAAH
CIWP
CMAI
CMNHPS

co
cs

CTA
CTASNL
CTCAS
DMNHPS
DT
E
Eth
EFWSI
EP
ESN
FA
FL
FMAS
GR
HB
HCRM
HW
ICG
IN
INM
IPGHP
JANSP
JG
JISAS
JSP
JWAS
JWH
L

203

Current Anthropology. Chicago.
Clearing House for Southwestern Museums News-letter. Denver.
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Contributions to American Anthropology and History. Washington.
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publications. Washington.
Contributions from the Museum of the American Indian. Heye Foundation. New York.
Colorado Museum of Natural History (now Denver Museum of Natural History), Popular Series. Denver.
The Chronicles of Oklahoma. Oklahoma City.
Ciba Symposia. Summit.
Central Texas Archaeologist (same as Bulletin of the Central Texas
Archaeological Society) . Waco.
Central Texas Archaeological Society News Letter. Waco.
The Catalogue of the Tarrant County Archeological Society. Fort
Worth.
Denver Museum of Natural History (formerly Colorado Museum of
Natural History ) , Popular Series. Denver.
The Dow Texan. Freeport.
Ecology. Durham.
Ethnohistory. Bloomington.
Explorations and Field-work of the Smithsonian Institution. Washington.
El Palacio. Santa Fe.
Engineering-Science News. Austin.
Fieldiana-Anthropology. Chicago.
Field and Laboratory, Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Field Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Series. Chicago.
The Geographical Review. New York.
The Humble Bee. Houston.
The Houston Chronicle Rotogravure Magazine. Houston.
The Humble Way. Houston.
International Geological Congress, Report of the Eighteenth Session,
Great Britain, 1948, Part XI. London.
Indian Notes. Museum of the American Indian, Heye Foundation.
New York.
Indian l\otes and Monographs. Museum of the American Indian, Heye
Foundation. New York.
lnstituto Panamericano de Geografia e Historia Publicaciones. Mexico,
D. F.
Journal of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. Philadelphia.
The Journal of Geology. Chicago.
Journal of the Illinois State Archaeological Society. Springfield.
Journal of Sedimentary Petrology. Tulsa.
Journal of VVashington Academy of Sciences. Washington.
Journal of World History. Paris.
Life. New York.

204

LATSB
LGSAS
LHSP
LSUCS

M
Ma
Mi
MA
MAAA
MJ
MN
MP
MSAA
MSAR
MUOI
NAN
NGM
NH
NHAS
NMA
NMHR
NN
NPSAR
OA
OASN
OGJ
OP
PA
PACNL
PAG
PAIA
PANSP
PAPS
PAT
PCMNH
PEASC
PFPC

PIAS
PMA

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Laboratory of Anthropology Technical Series Bulletin. Santa Fe.
Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Studies. New Orleans.
Louisiana Historical Society Publications. New Orleans.
Louisiana State University Studies, Coastal Studies Series. Baton
Rouge.
The Masterkey. Los Angeles.
Man. St. Mary's University. San Antonio.
The Mineralogist. Portland, Oregon.
The Missouri Archaeologist. Columbia.
Memoirs of the American Anthropological Association. Menasha.
Museum Journal. University of Pennsylvania Museum. Philadelphia.
Museum Notes. Texas Memorial Museum. Austin.
Medallion PapErs. Gila Pueblo. Globe, Arizona.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology . Salt Lake City.
Monographs of the School of American Research. Santa Fe.
The Museum of the University of Oklahoma, Information Series Circular. Norman.
National Archaeological News. Lancaster.
The National Geographic Magazine. Washington.
Natural History. New York.
The Newsletter of the Houston Archaeological Society. Houston.
New Mexico Anthropologist. Albuquerque.
New Mexico Historical Review. Santa Fe.
Notulae Naturae of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
National Park Service, Archeological Research Series. Washington.
Ohio Archaeologist. Dayton.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter. Norman.
Oil and Gas Journal. Tulsa.
The Oklahoma Prehistorian. Tulsa.
The Plains Anthropologist. Lincoln.
Plains Archeological Conference News Letter. Lincoln.
The Pan-American Geologist. Des Moines.
Papers of the Archaeological Institute of America, American Series.
Boston.
Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society. Philadelphia.
The Pan American Traveler. Lake Charles.
Proceedings of the Colorado Museum of Natural History (now Denver
Museum of Natural History ) . Denver.
Proceedings of the Eighth American Scientific Congress. Washington.
Proceedings of the Fifth Plains Archeological Conference. Note Book
No. 1. Laboratory of Anthropology. The University of Nebraska.
Lincoln.
Proceedings of the Indiana Academy of Science. Indianapolis.
Papers of the l\1ichigan Academy of Science, Arts, and Letters. Ann
Arbor.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

PMP
POAS
PPAS
PPFA
PPHR
PRS
PS
PSPC
PTAS
PTFLS
PTICA
PTTAS
PUSNM
QTHSA
R
RMEA
RPM

RUSNM

s
SA
SACNL
SAEM
SBOAS
SHQ
SJA
SL
SM
SN
SMC
SPA
SPSSQ
SSSQ

T
TnA
TA
TAl

205

Papers of the P eabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University. Cambridge.
P roceedings of the Oklahoma Academy of Science (University of Oklahoma Bulletin ). Norman.
Publications of the Philadelphia Anthropological Society.
Papers of the RobertS. Peabody Foundation for Archaeology. Andove r.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Review. Canyon.
Prehistory Research Series, Indiana Historical Society. I ndianapolis.
Picturesque Southwest. El Paso.
Proceedings of the Sixth Plains Archaeological Conference, 1948. University of Utah Anthropological Papers No. 11. Salt Lake City.
Proceedings of The Texas A cademy of Science. Austin.
Publications of the Texas Folk-lore Society. Austin.
Proceedings of the 29th International Congress of Americanists. Chi ..
cago.
Proceedings and Transactions of The Texas Academy of Science.
Austin.
Proceedings of the United States National Museum. Washington.
The Quarterly of the Texas State Historical Association (now Th e
Southwestern Historical Quarterly ). Austin.
The Record. Dallas Archaeological Society. Dallas.
Revista Mexi cana de Estudios Antropologicos. M exico, D. F .
Reports of the P eabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard University. Cambridge.
Report of the Unite:! States National Museum . Washington.
Science. Washington.
Scientific American. New York.
Southeastern Archeological Conference News L etter. Lexington.
San Antonio Express Magazine. San Antonio.
Special Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society. Norman.
The Southwestern Historical Quarterly (formerly The Quarterly of
the Texas State Historical Association ) . Austin.
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology. Albuqu erque.
Southwestern Lore. Boulder.
Scientific Monthly. Washington.
Science News-Letter. Washington.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections. Washington.
Student Papers in Anth ropology, Department of Anthropology, The
University of T exas. Austin.
The Southwestern Political and Social Science Quarterly (now The
Southwestern Social Science Quarterly) . Austin.
The Sout hweste rn Social Science Quarterly (form erly The Southwestern Political and Social Science Quarterly). Austin.
Time. The Weekly News Magazine. New York.
T ennessee Archaeologist. Knoxville.
T exas Archeology. The Newsletter of the Texas Archeology Society .
Austin.
The Texas Almana c and State Industrial Guide. Dallas.

206

TAlEG
TAGU
TAN
TAPS
TASMP
TGF
TGM
TJS
TMAB
TMJ
TMMIC
TP
TRB
TRMR
TTAS
UAB
UCPAAE
UGSA
UMB
UNMBAS
UNMBBS
USGSB
UTB
UTP
VFPA
WMMB
WSJ
WTHSS
WTHSSC
ZMA

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Texas Almanac and Emigrant's Guide to Texas. Houston.
Transactions of the American Geophysical Union. Washington.
Texas Archaeological News. Austin.
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society.
Tennessee Archaeological Society Miscellaneous Papers. Knoxville.
Texas Game and Fish. Austin.
The Texas Geographic Magazine. Dallas.
The Texas Journal of Science. Austin.
The Texas Museum Association Bulletin. Austin.
Tri-State Medical Journal. Shreveport.
Texas Memorial Museum Informational Circular. Austin.
Texas Parade. Austin.
Tree-Ring Bulletin. Tucson.
Tercera Reunion de Mesa Redonda de la Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia . Mexico, D. F.
Transactions of the Texas Academy of Science. Austin.
University of Arizona Bulletin. Tucson.
University of California Publications in American Archaeology and
Ethnology. Berkeley.
University of Georgia Series in Anthropology. Athens.
The University Museum Bulletin. Museum of the University of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia.
The University of New Mexico Bulletin, Anthropological Series. Albuquerque.
The University of New Mexico Bulletin, Biological Series. Albuquerque.
United States Department of the Interior, Geological Survey Bulletin.
Washington.
The University of Texas Bulletin (later The University of Texas Publication ) . Austin.
The University of Texas Publication (originally The University of
Texas Bulletin). Austin.
Viking Fund Publications in Anthropology. New York.
Witte Memorial Museum Bulletin (some issues listed as Big Bend
Basket Maker Papers ) . San Antonio.
TheW all Street Journal. Southwestern Edition. Dallas.
West Texas Historical and Scientific Society Publications. Alpine.
West Texas Historical and Scientific Society, Circular. Alpine.
Zietschrift fiir Morphologie und Anthropologie. Stuttgart.

List of References
1. Acree, Fred. Burial Mound on Leon. BCTAS 1: 24; Fig. 3, p. 23. 1935.
2. Adams, E. T. Skeletal Remains of Man and Extinct Animals: A Camp Site
Covered by River Drift. BTAPS 20: 7-20. 1949.
3. Adams, John Emory. Crown Polished Rocks of Trans-Pecos Texas (abstract ) .
BGSA56 (12): 1143.1945.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERAT U RE

207

4. - - - - - . Crown Polished Boulders of the Southwest . WTHSS 14: 4-31.
1950.
5. Adams, Marjorie V. History Under the River. HCRM Aug. 1, 1954: 8-9.
6. Albritton, Claude C., Jr. Hudspeth County; H ea rths Buried in Alluvial Fill ;
Petroglyphs as Criteria for Stability of Slope. TAN 2: 5-6. 1940.
7.
. Quaternary Stratigraphy of the Guadiana Valley, Durango, M exico. BGSA 69: 1197- 1216. 1958.
8.
and Kirk Bryan. Quaterna ry Stratigraphy in th e Davis Mountains, Trans-Pecos Texas. BGSA 50: 1423-1474. 1939.
9.
and L . Gray Pattillo, Jr. A Human Skeleton Found Near Carrollton, T exas. FL 8 (2): 59-64. 1940.
10. Alves, Eileen E. Shelter Caves of the El Paso District. BTAPS 2: 64-68. 1930.
11.
. Pottery of the El Paso Region. BTAPS 3: 57-59. 1931.
12.
. Perishable Artifacts of the Hueco Caves. WTHSS 4: 20-23. 1932.
13. Amsden, Charles. Man-hunting. M 5(2) : 37-47.1 931.
14. Anderson. A. E. Artifa cts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. BTAPS 4 : 29-31.
1932.
15. And retta, Antonio A. Central T exas Cultural Affiliations Below the Llano
Estacado. CT A 7: 33-40. 1956.
16.
. Commercialism in East T exas. ETAS 27: 208- 209. 1956.
17. Anonymous. List of Additions to th e Museum and Library for the Yea r 1880.
RPM 3: 32. 1880-1886.
18.
. (Archeological Specimens from Menard County, T exas). AB
6(4) : 87. 191 5.
19.
. Notes. IN 6 (4) : 407-411. 1929.
20.
Field Work of Members. BTAPS 2: 94-97. 1930.
21.
. The Lock Haven and T exas Expeditions. U MB 1 (1) : 10- 11. 1930.
22. - - - - -. Field Work of M embers. BTAPS 3: 90-94. 1931.
23.
. Museum News and Field Notes. BTAPS 4: 71-79. 1932.
24.
Archeological Research in Texas; Prehistor ic Races. TAl : 96-97.
1933.
25.
Ancient Man in T exas. S (Supplement) : 81 (209 ) : 6. 1935.
26.
Geographic Sketch of the Area . BCT AS 1: 10. 1935.
27.
Texas River T errace Yields Clues to Ancient Americans. SN
27 (721 ) : 67. 1935.
28.
. Big Bend Cave Dweller s. EP 43 (22-26 ) : 139-141. 1937.
29.
. Ceremonial Cave, El P aso. PS 1 (1) : 24. 1937.
30 . - - - - - . A Prehistori c Brewe ry . S 87 (2269 ) : 9 (supplement) . 1938.
31.
. A Guide to the Dioramas D epicting the Life of Various Indian
T r ibes in Texas. TMMIC 1. 1939.
Texas Site Yields M any Flints. EP 46 (2): 38-40. 1939.
32.
Mano Found in Pleistocene Deposit. EP 47 (3) : 61. 1940.
33.
34.
XIT Reunion, August 5 and 6. C 27 (3) : 9- 12. 1940.
35 . - - - - . Additional Informa tion about Dallas County Hand Axes. R 3( 1):
3. 1941.
3 6 . - - - - Two Indian Bur ials Discover ed in Dallas County. R 2(5): 25.
1941.
37. - - - - - . Texas Cavemen Also in Mexico. EP 49 (2) : 46. 1942.

208

38.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Report on the Recreational Resources of the Denison Dam and
Reservoir Project, Texas and Oklahoma. United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service. 1944.
39.
. Two Mussel Shell Hoes from Site 19A1 -2. R 9 (4) : 20. 1951.
40.
. Digging Up History. Willie Atwood Literally Digs up LittleKnown Facts from Indian Mounds Located in This Area. HB 18 (8): 12-13.
1952.
41.
. A Check List of 100 Named Projectile Points of the United States.
OASN 2(9): 2. 1954.
42.
. Ancient Midland Skull Discovery. EP 61 (9 ) : 306-308. 1954.
43.
. (Alex D. Krieger) A Radiocarbon Date on the Falcon Focus.
ETAS 25: 565. 1954.
44. - - - - - . Brazosporters Dig for Indian Relics. DT 11 (21 ) : 4. 1954.
45.
. Midland Man. T 64 (2 ): 66. 1954.
46.
. Progress Report of Excavation at the Onion Creek Site. SPA 1 ( 1) :
14-15. 1954.
47.
. The Smith Rockshelter, Travis County: A Preliminary Report.
SPA 1 (2) : 25-27. 1954.
48.
. 20,000-year-old American. L 27 (2 ) : 35-36. 1954.
49.
. (Robert E. Bell ) Radiocarbon Dates for Wood Specimens from
the Spiro Mound, Oklahoma. OASN 4 ( 1): 2. 1955.
50.
. Diggers: Ancient Hearths. T 68 (6 ) : 42. 1956.
51.
Oldest Traces of Early Man in the Americas. S 124 ( 3217): 396397. 1956.
5 2 . - - - - (Robert E. Bell) Stone Pipe Found in Muskogee County, Oklahoma. OASN 5 ( 5 ) : 5- 6. 1956.
53.
. Telling Time with Atoms. HW 12 (2): 1-4. 1956.
54.
. Pictographs at Paint Rock. HW 13 (4) : 11 -1 4. 1957.
55 .
(Robert E. Bell ) The Mantell Projectile Point. OASN 6 (7) : 1-2.
1958.
5 6 . - - - - (Robert E. Bell) The Scottsbluff Projectile Point. OASN 6 (8) :
3--4. 1958.
57 . - - - - (Wayne B. Neyland and H. Mewhinney ) Doubtful Mounds Reported. NHAS 1: 4-6. 1959.
58.
. (Robert E. Bell ) News- Meeting of the Texas Archeological
Society. OASN 8 ( 4): 3-7. 1959.
59.
. (Robert E. Bell ) News-Radiocarbon Dates from Oklahoma
Sites. OASN 8 (4): 2. 1959.
60. Antevs, Ernst. Conditions of Deposition and Erosion by Streams in Dry
Regions of the Great Plains. PSPC: 42-45a. 1950.
61.
. Postglacial Climatic History of the Great Plains and Dating the
Records of Man. PSPC: 46-50. 1950.
62.
. Climate of New Mexico During the Last Glacio-Pluvial. JG
62(2 ) : 182-191. 1954.
63.
Geologic-climatic Dating in the West. AAn 20 (4 ) : 317-335.
1955.
64.-- - - Geologic Age of the Lehner Mammoth Site. AAn 25 ( 1) : 31-34.
1959.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

209

65. Arbingast, Stanley A. Shell, A Marine Resource of the Texas Coast. SSSQ
33 ( 1) : 38-43. 1952.
66. Arellano, A. R. V. The Becerra Formation (Latest Pleistocene) of Central
Mexico. ICG: 55-62. 1951.
67. Arguedas R. de la Borbolla, Sol, and Luis Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda. A Plainview Point from Northern Tamaulipas. AAn 18 ( 4): 392-393. 1953.
68. Armillas, Pedro. Cronologia y Periodoficacion de la Historia Precolombina.
Escuela Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Sociedad de Alumnos. Suplemento de La Revista, Tlatoani. Mexico, D . F. 1957.
69. Atlee, William A. Caddo Burial Site in Northeastern Texas. CTA 6: 38. 1953.
70.
. Petroglyphs on Tonk Creek. CT A 7: 53-55. 1956.
71. Atwood, W. L . Three Sites near Baytown. BTAPS 23: 303-309. 1952.
72.
. Exit Arkrokisi. BNV September 9: 19-20. 1953.
73 .
. In: H. Bailey Carroll (editor ), The Texas Collection. SHQ
56(3): 465-466.1953.
74. Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis. Prehistoria de Mexico. Ediciones Mexicanas.
Mexico, D. F . 1950.
75.
. Reconocimiento Arqueol6gico en la Zona de la Presa Internacional Falcon, Tamaulipas y Texas. RMEA 12: 31-59. 1951 .
76.
. El Segundo Mamut F6sil de Santa Isabel Iztapan, Mexico, y
Artefactos Asociadas. Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia. Mexico,
D. F. 1955.
77.
. The Second Mammoth and Associated Artifacts at Santa Isabel
Iztapan, Mexico. AAn 22 (1) : 12-28. 1956.
78.
, Manuel Maldonado-Koerdell, y Pablo Martinez del Rio. Cueva
de la Candelaria. Volumen I. Memorias del Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, V . Mexico, D. F. 1956.
79. Ayer, Mary Youngman. The Archaeological and Faunal Material from Wil liams Cave, Guadalupe Mountains, Texas. PANSP 88: 599-618. 1936.
80. Aynesworth, K. H . Biographic Studies of Twenty-one Skulls of Central Texas
Indians. BCT AS 2: 30-34. 1936.
81.
. Flint Arrowhead \IVounds of Bones as Shown in Skeletons in Cen tral Texas. BCTAS 2 : 74-80 . 1936.
82.
. Stone Artifacts Peculiar to the Highest Brazos River Terrace.
CTA 4 : 98-99. 1938.
83. Baerreis. David A . Spiro Focus Basketry. MUOI 2. 1947.
84.
. Review: H. Perry Newell and Alex D. Krieger, The George C.
Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. AAn 15 (3): 259-260. 1950.
85.
The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern Oklahoma. APMA 6.
1951.
A Checklist of Regional Archaeological Journals. AAn 19 (2):
86.
208- 210. 1953.
8 7 . - - -- The Huffaker Site, Delaware County, Oklahoma. BOAS 2: 3548. 1954.
88.
Further Material from the Huffaker Site, Delaware County,
Oklahoma. BOAS 3: 53-68. 1955.
89.
. The Southern Cult and the Spiro Ceremonial Complex. BOAS
5: 23-38. 1957.

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

90.

The Archaic as Seen from the Ozark Region. AAn 24 (3) : 270275. 1959.

et al. A Checklist of Regional Archaeological Journals. AAn
23(3): 345-348. 1958.
92.
, Joan E. Freeman, and James V. Wright. The Contracting Stem
Projectile Point in Eastem Oklahoma. BOAS 6: 61-81. 1958.
93. Baker, William E. Flint Artifacts Relating to Cultures on the Great Plains.
OP 2(2): 2-7. 1939.
94.
and T. N. Campbell. Metal Projectile Points from the Oklahoma
Panhandle and Vicinity. BOAS 7: 51-54. 1959.
95.
, T. N . Campbell, and Glen L. Evans. The Nail Site: Evidence of
Early Man in the Oklahoma Panhandle. BOAS 5: 1-20. 1957.
96.
and A. V. Kidder. A Spear Thrower from Oklahoma. AAn 3(1):
51-52. 1937.
97. Bandelier, A. F. Final Report of Investigations among the Indians of the
Southwestern United States Carried on Mainly in the Years from 1880 to 1885.
PAIA 4 (2): seep. 575. 1892.
98. Barbour, Erwin Hinckley, and C. Bertrand Schultz. A New Fossil Bovid from
Nebraska, with Notice of a New Bison Quarry in Texas. BUNSM 2 (7): 63- 68.
1941.
99. Bareis, Charles John. The Brackett Site, Ck-43, of Cherokee County, Oklahoma. BOAS 3: 1-52. 1955.
100.
. Comments on Prehistoric Corn Samples. OASN 6 (5) : 7-8. 1957.
101.
. Ecology and Subsistence Practices in Prehistoric Eastern Oklahoma. OASN 8 (3): 8- 9. 1959.
102. Bartlett, John Russell. Personal Narrative of Explorations and Incidents in
Texas, New Mexico, California, Sonora, and Chihuahua, Connected with the
United States and Mexican Boundary Commission During the Years 1850, '5 1,
'52, and '53. Vol. 1. London and New York. See pp. 170-174. 1854.
103. Bell, Robert E. Recent Archaeological Research in Oklahoma. BTAPS 19:
148- 154. 1948.
104.
. Archeological Excavation at the Harlan Site, Fort Gibson Reservoir, Cherokee County, Oklahoma. PACNL 3(2): 3-15. 1949.
105.
Archeological Research in Oklahoma During 1947. PFPC. 6-7.
1949.
105.
Recent Archaeological Research in Oklahoma. CO 27 (3) : 303312. 1949.
107.
Corner Tanged Knives. OASN 2(5): 6. 1953.
108.
Pottery Vessels from the Spiro Mound, Cr-1, Leflore County,
Oklahoma. BOAS 1: 25-38. 1953.
Excavation at Lake Texoma, Marshall County, Oklahoma. OASN
109.
3(3): 2-3 . 1954.
110.
. Radiocarbon Dates from the Harlan Site, Cherokee County, Oklahoma. OASN 5 (6): 2. 1956.
Clear Fork Gouges Found in Oklahoma. BT AS 28: 285-288 . 1957.
111.
112.
. Radiocarbon Dates from the Spiro (Craig) Mound. OASN 6 (6) :
5-6. 1957.
113. - - - - . The Pedernales Point. OASN 6 (6): 2-4. 1957.
91.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

114.

211

. Archaeological Investigations at the Boat Dock Site, Ma-1 , in
the Lake Texoma Area. BOAS 6: 37-47. 1958.
115.
. Bibliography of Oklahoma Archaeology. BOAS 6: 89-91. 1958.
116.
. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points. SBOAS 1. 1958.
117.
. Notes and News-Oklahoma. OASN 7 (3) : 1-2. 1958.
118.
. Radiocarbon Dates from Oklahoma. OASN 7 ( 3): 3-4. 1958.
119.
. The Evans Point. OASN 6 (9): Z--3. 1958.
120.
. The Nolan Projectile Point. OASN 7 (3) : 4--6. 1958.
121.
and David A. Baerreis. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology.
BTAPS 22: 7- 100. 1951.
122.
and Charlene Dale. The Morris Site, Ck-39, Cherokee County,
Oklahoma. ETAS 24: 68-140. 1953.
123.
and Richard H. Fraser. Archaeological Discoveries at the Morris
Site, Cherokee County, Oklahoma. CO 30 (2): 215-235. 1952.
and Roland Scott Hall. Selected Projectile Point Types of the
124.
United States. BOAS 1: 1-16. 1953.
125. Bell, Willis H., and Edward F. Castetter. Ethnobiological Studies in the American Southwest. VII. The Utilization of Yucca, Sotol, and Beargrass by the
Aborigines in the American Southwest. UNMBBS 5 ( 5 ). 1951.
126. Bennett, Leonard D. Interesting Artifacts of Clay County, Texas. BTAPS 8:
87-93. 1936.
127. Beyer, G. E. The Mounds of Louisiana, II. LHSP 2 (1): 7-27. 1897.
128. Bolton, Herbert E. The Native Tribes About the East Texas Missions.
QTSHA 11 (4 ) : 249-276. 1908.
129. Brand, Donald D. The Distribution of Pottery Types in Northwest Mexico.
AA 37(2): 287-305. 1935 .
130. Brannon, H. R., Jr., A. C. Daughtry, D. Perry, L. H. Simons, W . W. Whitaker, and Milton Williams. Humble Oil Company Radiocarbon Dates. S
125 (3239) : 147-150. 1957.
131. Breckon, Thelma. Here and There. BLCAS 1: 1Z--13. 195 7.
132. Brighton, Harold D. Archaeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma.
BTAPS 22: 164-187. 1951.
133. Broecker, W . S. , and J. L. Kulp. Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements
IV. S 126 (3287 ) : 1324-1334. 1957.
134. Brues. Alice M. Skeletal Material from the Nagle Site. BOAS 5: 101-106.
1957.
135.
Skeletal Material from the Horton Site. BOAS 6: 27-32. 1958.
1 3 6 . - - - - Skeletal Material from the Morris Site (Ck-39 ) . BOAS 7: 63- 70.
1959.
137. Brunner, H . L. Aboriginal Rock-mortars near El Paso, Texas. AA 4( 4) : 385386. 1891.
138. Bryan, Frank. Archaeological Remains in the Black and Grand Prairies of
Texas. BTAPS 2 : 76- 84. 1930.
139.
Notes on the Archaeology of Central Texas. AA 33 (1) : 16-31.
1931.
140.
A Resume of the Prehistoric Cultural Remains So Far Discovered
in Central Texas. BCTAS 1: 5- 9. 1935.

212

141.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Evidence of Recent Movements along Faults of Balcones System
in Central T exas. BAAPG 20 (10 ) : 1357-1.371. 1936.
142.
. Geological Sketch of Moffat-Whitehall-P endleton Area. BCTAS
2: 28-29. 1936.
143.
. Preliminary Report on the Archeology of ~r este rn Limestone
County. BCTAS 2: 81 - 95. 1936 .
144.
. A Preliminary Report on the Archeology of W estern Navarro
County and Some Camp Sites in Hill and McLennan Counties. CTA 3: 70-79.
1937.
145.
Tree-ring Chronology in the Southeast. AAn 4 (1) : 60. 1938.
146.
The Coyote Lake Midden. CT A 6: 9-26. 1953.
147. Bryan , Kirk. D eep Sites n ear Abilene, T exas. BTAPS 10 : 273-275. 1938.
148. - -- - -. Stone Cul tures near Cerro Pedernal an :l Their Geological Antiquity . BTAPS 11: 9-45. 1939.
149.
Geologic Antiquity of Man in America . S 93 (2422 ) : 505-514.
1941.
150.
Pre-Columbian Agriculture in th e Southwest as Conditioned by
P eriods of Alluviation. PEASC 2: 57-74. 1942.
151.
. Flint Quarries-Th e Sources of Tools and , at th e Same Tim·~,
th e Factories of the Am erican Indian. PMP 17 (3) . 1950.
152.
and Claude C. Albritton , Jr. Wind-polish ed Rocks in th e TransP ecos Region, T exas and New M exico. BGSA 53: 1403-141 6. 1942.
153. - - - - and Franklin T. McCann. Sand Dunes and Alluvium near Grants,
New M exico. AAn 8 (3 ) : 281 - 290. 1943.
154.
and Cyrus N. Ray. Long Channelled Point Found in Alluvium
beside Bone of Eiephas columbi. BTAPS 10: 263-268. 1938.
and Louis L . Ray. Geologic Antiquity of the Lindcnmeier Site in
155 .
Colorado. SMC 99 (2 ) . 1940.
156.
and Joseph H. Toulouse, Jr. The San Jose Non -ceramic Culture
and Its Relation to a Puebloan Culture in New M exico. AAn 8 (3) : 269-280.
1943.
157. Buck, Arthur D ewey, Jr. The Custer Focus of the Southern Plains. BOAS 7:
1-3 1. 1959.
158. Burnett, E. K. The Spiro Mound Collections in the Museum. CMAI 14: 1-47.
1945 .
159. Burr, J. G. The Probable Earthquake Origin of Caddo L ake (abstract) .
PTTAS 26: 132. 1943.
160. Bylinsky, Gene. Probing the Past: Road, Pipeline Building Spurs Archaeologists to Hunt, Rescue Relics. WSJ 23 ( 69 ) : 1. 4. 1959. Reprinted in OASN
8 (1) : 6-10. 1959.
161. Caldwell, Joseph R. Trend and T radition in the Prehistory of th e Eastern
United States. MAAA 88. 1958.
162. Campbell, T. N. Organization of the Council of T exas Archaeologists. TAN
1: 1-11. 1940.
163.
Possum Kingdom Basin. TAN 2: 9-11. 1940.
164.
. In: Notes and N ews. AAn 6(4): 351. 1941.
165.
. The Johnson Site: T y pe Site of the Aransas Focus of the T exas
Coast. BTAPS 18: 40-75. 1947.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

166.

213

Prehistoric Hunters and Fishers of the Texas Coast. TGF 6 (2 ) :
16-17. 1948.

The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Allu vial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas. BTAPS 19: 7-35. 1948.
168.
. The Pocket Gopher at the Johnson Site: A Correction. BTAPS
19: 179.1948.
169.
. The Pioneer Tree-ring ·work of Jacob Kuechler. TRB 15 (3) :
16-20. 1949.
170.-- - - A Bibliographic Guid e to the Archaeology of Texas. ASUT 1.
1952.
171.
Early Archaeological Excavation in the Vicinity of Brownwood ,
T exas. R 10 (3) : 10- 14. 1952.
172.
. The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the T exas Coast.
BTAPS 23: 39-77. 1952.
'173.
. Revi ew: E. H . Sellards, Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. SHQ 57 (1) : 148- 150. 1953.
174.
. Review: Fred Wendorf, Alex D. Kri eger, and Claude C. Albritton , The Midland Discove ry: A Report on the Pleistocene Human Remains
from Midland, Texas. BTAS 26: 289-291. 1955.
175.
. TheyDigonSunday. A44 (3) : 64-65.1955.
176.
. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre,
T exas Coast. BTAS 27: 7- 46. 1956.
177.
. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas. TJS 9 (4 ) : 448-471. 1957.
178.
. Revi ew : H. M. i'Vormington, Ancient Man in North America ,
4th edition. BTAS 28 : 290. 1957.
179.
. The Fields Shelter: An Archeological Site in Edwards County.
T exas. TJS 9(1): 7-25.1957.
180.
. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas
County, Texas. TJS 10 (4 ) : 423-442. 1958.
181.
- . Origin of the Mescal Bean Cult. AA 60 ( 1) : 156- 160. 1958.
182.
. Probable Function of Perforated Oyster Shells Found in Aransas
Focus Sites. TA 2(2) : 7. 1958.
183.
. Publications of The Texas Academy of Science, 1892-1957. TJS
10 (1) : 86-126. 1958.
184. - - - - - -. Arch eology of Southern Texas and Northeastern M exico: A
Selected Bibliography. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Mimeographed. 1959.
185.
and Ja ck Q. Frizzell. Notes on the Ayala Site. Lower Rio Grande
Valley, T exas. BTAPS 20: 63-72. 1949.
186.
, Ben R. Howard. Claud e C. Albrition, Jr., and Dodd N. Osborn.
Petroglyphs as Criteria of Slope Stability. S 93 (2417 ) : 400. 1941.
187.
and Alex D. Krieger. The Conservation of Archaeological Resources in Texas. TJS 1 (1): 40-44. 1949.
188. Carter, George F. Plant Geography and Culture History in the American
Southwest. VFPA 5: see pp. 37-38, 42, 106-108. 1945.
189. Casey, Clifford B. The Trans- Pecos in Texas History. WTHSS 5: 7-18. 1933 .
167.

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

190. Cason, Joe F. Report on Archaeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season
of 1952. BTAPS 23: 218-259. 1952.
191. Castetter, Edward F., Willis H . Bell, and Alvin R. Grove. Ethnobiological
Studies in the American Southwest. VI. The Early Utilization and the Distribution of Agave in the American Southwest. UNMBBS 5 ( 4 ) : 1938.
192. Chelf, Carl. A Group Burial from Lamar County. TMMIC 6. 1939.
193.
A Greenstone Head from Travis County, Texas. BTAPS 13:
58-62. 1941.
194.
Boat-shaped Objects from Val Verde and Bosque Counties, Texas.
BTAPS 16: 91 - 97. 1945.
195.
. Grooved Clubs from a Peat Bog in Milam County, Tex3s.
BTAPS 17: 42--47. 1946.
196. Christensen, Ross T. Ancient Diffusion from Mesoamerica to the "Mound
Area" of Eastern United States: An Annotated Bibliography. BUAS 1: 13-19.
1950.
197. Clauser, Charles E. The Relationship between a Coastal Algonkin and a
Karankawa Cranial Series. PIAS 57: 18-23. 1947.
198. Clements, Forrest E. Historical Sketch of Spiro Mound. CMAI 14: 48-68.
1945.
199. Coffin, Edwin F. Archaeological Exploration of a Rock Shelter in Brewster
County, Texas. INM 48. 1932.
200. Colbert, Edwin H. The Association of Man with Extinct Mammals in the
Western Hemisphere. PEASC 2: 17-29. 1942.
201. Colquitt, W. T., and C. H. Webb. Dental Diseases in an Aboriginal Group.
TMJ 12(4): 24-14-2417.1940.
202. Committee for the Recovery of Archaeological Remains, The. The InterAgency Archaeological Salvage Program After Twelve Years. Columbia. 1958.
203. Compton, Carl B. An Introductory Survey of Bird-form Vessels. BT AS 27:
79- 110. 1956.
204.
. More Cruciforms and Som2 Problematical Objects. ETAS 28:
127-134. 1957.
205.
. The Lcng Nos2d God Motif: Some Notes on Its Distribution.
TASMP 3. 1957.
206. - - -- . The W eeping Eye Motif. TnA 15 (2 ) : 96- 110. 1959.
207. Conger, Roger N. An Interm ~ diate Site in Gray son County, T exas. R 1 ( 7) :
28-29. 1940.
208 . - - - - . Iron Trade Hatchets. CTA 6: 86-87. 1953.
209.
. S2cretary's Report. CTA 6: 102-104. 1953.
210. Cook, Harold J . Definite Evidence of Human Artifacts m the American
Pleistocene. S 62 ( 1612 ) : 459-4'60. 1925.
211.
. The Antiquity of Man in Americn . SA 135: 334--335. 1926.
212.
. New Geological and Paleontological Evidence Bearing on the
Antiquity of Mankind in America. NH 27(3 ) : 240- 247. 1927.
213. Cosgrove, C. B. Caves of the Upper Gila and Hu 2co Areas in New M exico and
Texas. PMP 24 (2) . 1947.
214.
. Hueco Mountain Caves. In: The Caves of Texas. BNSS 10: 79-83.
1948.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

215

215. Cotter, John L. A Consideration of "Folsom and Yuma Culture Finds." AAn
5 (2) : 152-155. 1939.
216.
. Stratigraphic and Area Tests at the Emerald and Anna Mound
Sites. AAn 17 (1) : 18-32.1951.
217.
. The Gordon Site in Southern Mississippi. AAn 18 (2 ) : 110-126.
1952.
218. Crane, H. R., and James B. Griffin. University of Michigan Radiocarbon
Datesll. S 127 (3306 ) : 1098- 1105.1958.
219. Crimmins, M. L. An Archaeological Survey of the El Paso District. BTAPS
1: 36-42. 1929.
220.
. The Pictographs at the Hueco Tanks. BTAPS 3: 24--30. 1931.
221.
. The Rattlesnake in the Art and Life of the American In dian.
BTAPS 17: 28-41. 1946.
222.
. Witte Mus oum , San Antonio. In: News Notes and Editorials.
BTAPS 19: 181- 183. 1948.
223. Crook, Wilson W., Jr. The Wheeler Site: A 3500-year-old Culture in Dallas
County, Texas. FL 20 (2 ) : 43-60. 1952.
224.
. Reconsideration and Geologic Revaluation of the Famous Abilene.
Texas, Sites. PPHR 28: 38-62. 1955.
225 .
and R. K . Harris. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The
Carrollton and Elam Foci. BTAPS 23: 7- 38. 1952.
226.
Som'! Rec ent Finds at the Wheeler Site near Carrollton. R 11 (5 ) :
21. 1953.
227. - - - - Another Distinctive Artifact: The Carrollton Ax. R 13 (2 ) :
10-18. 1954.
228.
. Traits of the Trinity Asp =ct Archaic: Carrollton and Elam Foci.
R 12 (1) : 2-16. 1954.
229.
. Scottsbluff Points in th~ Obshner Site near Dallas, Texas. BTAS
25: 75-100. 1955.
230.
. H earths and Artifacts of Early Man near Lewisville, Texas, and
Associated Faunal Materinl. ETAS 28: 7-97. 1957.
231.
. A Pleistoc ene Campsite n ~ar Lewisville, T exas. AAn 23(3): 233246. 1958.
232.
. C-14 Date for Late Carrollton Fccus Archaic Level: 6,000 Years
B. P. OASN 8 (3 ) : 1-2. 1959.
233 . Cutler, Hugh. Plant Mat erials from Six Oklahom~ Sites. OASN 8 (3 ) : 4--7.
1959.
234. Dahlberg. Albert A. The Dentition of the American Indian. In: William S.
Laughlin (editor ), The Physical Anthropology of the American Indian:
138-176. The Viking Fund. N ew York. 1951.
235. Daifuku, Hiroshi. A N ew Conceptual Scheme for Prehistoric Cultures in th e
Southwestern United States. AA 54 (2 ) : 191-200. 1952.
236. Dans::m, Edward B. In: Notes and N ews: Southwest: Texas. AAn 21 (3 ) :
339. 1956.
237. Davenport, J. Walker. Archaeological Exploration of Eagle Cave, Langtry,
Texas. WMMB 4. 1938.
238.
Big Bend Basket Makers. NAN 1 ( 12) : 22-23. 1938.
239.
. String Makers of Texas. NAN 2 (3) : 86-88. 1938.

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

240.-- - - T exas Aboriginal Burials. NAN 2 (1). 1938.
241.--- Some Experimonts in the Use of th e Atlatl. BTAPS 15: 30-37.
1943.
242.
and Carl Chelf. Painted Pebbles of the Lower P ecos and Big Bend
Region s of Texas. WMMB 5. 1941.
243. Davidson, D. S. Knotless Netting in America and Oceania. AA 37 ( 1) : 117134. 1935.
244. Davis, E. Matt. Recent Data from Two Paleo- Indian Sites on M edicine
Creek, Nebraska . AAn 18 (4 ) : 380-386.1953.
245.
. In: Notes and News: Plains. AAn 22 ( 1) : 99-100. 1956.
246.
. Review : Fred Wendorf, Alex D. Krieger, and Claude C. Albritton,
The Midland Discovery, A Report on the Pleistocene Human Remain s from
Midland, Texas. PA 7: 27-29 . 1956.
247.
. Review: Fred VVendorf, AI ~ x D. Kri eger, and Cla ud = C. Albritton,
Th e Midland Discovery, A Report on the Pleistocene Human Remains from
Midland, Tex2 s. EP 63(5-6): 187- 189. 1956.
In: No~ 2s &ncl N ews: Plains: Texas. AAn 22 ( 1) : 100. 1956.
248 .
In: Notes and News: Plains: Texas. AAn 22 (3) : 328. 1957.
249.
250.
In: N s t"s and N ews : Plains: T exas. AAn 22(4 ) : 440. 1957.
251 .
In: Notes and News: Plains : T exas. AAn 23(1 ) : 102. 1957.
252.
In: Notes and News: Plains: T exas. AAn 24 ( 1) : 100. 1958.
In: Notes and News: Plains: T exas. AAn 23 (2 ) : 223 . 1958.
253.
In: Notes and News: Plains: Texas. AAn 24 (3 ) : 340. 1959.
254.
255.
In: Notes and News: Plains: Texas. AAn 24 ( 4): 454. 1959.
256.
The Burin: Som: thing N : w and Important in Texas Archeology.
TA 3 (2 ) : 4. 1959.
and C. Bertrand Schultz. The Archaeological and Paleontological
257.
Salvage Program at the M edicine Creek Reservoir, Frontier County, Nebraska .
s 115 (2985 ) : 288- 290. 1952.
258. Da vis, Emily. Ancient Amer icans : The Archaeological Story of Two Continents. New York. 193 1.
259. Dick, Herbert W . Alluvial Sites of Central New Mexico. NMA 6-7 ( 1):
19-22. 1943.
260.
. Two Rock Shelters near Tucumcari, New M exico. In: River
Basin Surveys Papers, Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program. BAEB
154: 257-284. 1953.
26 1.
. The Dat Cave Pod Corn Complex: A Note on Its Distribution and
Archeological S!:;nificance. EP 61 (5 ) : 138-144. 1954.
262. Dickinson, S. D. Ceramic Relationships of the Pre-Caddo Pottery from the
Crenshaw Site. BTAPS 8: 56- 69. 1936.
263.
. Certain Vessels from the Clements Place, An Historic Caddo
Site. BTAPS 13: 117-132.1941.
264.
. Notes on the Decoration and Form of Arkansgs Caddo Pottery.
BTAPS 15: 9-29. 1943.
265. Dietz, VValter H . Shelter Burial on Bluff Creek n en r Crawford. BCTAS 1: 26.
1935 .
26·6.
. A Little Brazos River " Bird Point." CTASNL 6: 16-17. 1940.
267. Dockstader, Frederick J. Th e American Indian in Graduate Studies. A Bibliography of Theses and Dissertations. CMAI 15. 1957.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

217

268. Do rsey, H . W . In: Archa eological Field Work in North America During
1927. AA 30 (3) : 519. 1928.
269.
. In : Archaeological Field VVork in North America during 193 1.
AA 34(3 ) : 503. 1932.
270. D ougla s, Frederic H ., and Rene D 'Harnancourt. Indian Art of the United
St ates. The Museum of Modern Art. Second Edition. 1948.
271. Duffen , William A. Morhiss Site. TAN 2: 16- 18. 1940.
272. Dunlap, Robert C., and Claude C. Albritton. A Geographic Study of the
Carrollton Area . FL 2 ( 1) : 22-29. 1933.
273. Dur ham, Dorothy. Petroglyphs at Mesa de los P ad illas. E P 62 ( 1) : 3-17.
1955.
274. Du Solier, Wilfrido, Alex D. Krieger, and James B. Griffin. The Archaeological
Zone of Buena Vista, Huaxcama, San Luis Potosi, Mexico. AAn 13 ( 1) : 15-32.
1947.
275 . Eagleton, N. Ethie. An Historic Indian Cache in P ecos County. ETAS 26:
200- 217. 1955.
276. Eiseley, Loren C. Review: Mary Youngman Ayer, The A rcheological and
Faunal Material from \Villiams Cave, Guadalupe Mountains, T exas. AAn
4 (3) : 291-293. 1939.
277. Ekholm, Gordon F. Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca ,
Mexico. APAM 38 (5 ) : seep . 433 . 1944.
278.
. The Third Round Table Conference. AAn 9 ( 4) : 440-444. 1944.
279.
. In: Notes and News: Middle America. AAn 12 (3) : 208. 1947.
280. Ellcins, Aaron. The Skeletal Material from Ck-44, The Smullins Site. BOAS
i5- 61. 1959.
281. Elrod, H enry E . Flint: Its Occurrenc2, Composition and P atina . l:ITAPS 5:
53- 56. 1933.
282. Enlow, Donald H .. and T. N . Campbell. Some Paleo-Indian Projectile Points
from th e Southeastern P eriphery of the Great Plains. PPHR 28 : 29-37. 1955.
283. Estill. Julia. Indian Pictographs n ear Lange's Mill, Gill2spie County, Texas.
PTFLS 4: 103-11 4. 1925 .
284. Evans, Glen L. Ar tifact Occurrence in the Second T errace of the Rio Grand e
in Starr County, T exas (abstract ) . BGSA 52 ( 12) , Pt. 2: 1998- 1999. 1941 .
285.
. Late Quaternary Faunal Succession in the Southern High Plains
(abstract ) . BGSA 61 (12 ), Pt. 2 : 1457- 1458. 1950.
286. - - - - - and Grayson E. M eade. Quaternar y of the Texas High Plains.
UTP 4401: 485-507. 1945 .
287. Evans, 0. F. An alys is of Flint M ater ials from th e Lee and the Lacy Sites.
OAS I 6 ( 7) : 2-3. 1958.
288. Eyerly, T. L. The Ind ian Remains of the Canadian River Valley. AB 1 (3) :
77-80. 1910.
289.
. The Buried City of th e P anhan dle. AB 3 ( 1): 1-5. 1912.
290. Fairbanks, Cha rles H. A General Survey of Southeastern Prehistory . In : John
W . Griffin (editor) , The Florida Indian and His Neighbors: 55-75. Rollins
College. Winter P ark. 1949.
291.
. Archeology of the Funeral Mound, Ocmulgee National Monument, Georgia. NPSA R 3. 1956.
292.
. In: otes and News : Southeast. AAn 24 (3) : 344. 1959.

218

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

293 . Fenenga, Franklin, and Jo e Ben Wheat. An Atlatl from the Baylor Rock
Shelter , Culber son County, T exas. AAn 5 (3 ) : 221 - 223 . 1940.
294. Ferdon, Edwin N., Jr. An Exca vation of H ermit's Cave, New M exico. MSAR
10. 19416.
295. F ewkes, J. W. Pueblo Settl em ents n ear El Paso, T exas. AA 4 (1) : 57-75 . 1902.
296.
. Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology for the
Fiscal Year End ed June 30, 1920. ARBAE 41: 1-21. 1928.
297.
. Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology for the
Fiscal Year End ed June 30, 1921. ARBAE 41: 25- 44. 1928.
298 .
. Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology for the
Fiscal Year End ed June 30, 1922. ARBAE 41: 27-73. 1928.
299.
. In : ARBAE 44: 8- 9. 1928.
300. Field, Albert. Archeologi ca l Investigations in Lampasas, Burnet, Llano, and
San Saba Counties. T exas . BTAS 27: 161-184. 195 6.
301.
Painted Burial Stones Central Texas. Mi 25 (11 ) : 393-394. 1957.
302. Figgins, J.D. Th e Antiquity of Man in America. NH 27 (3) : 229-239. 1927.
303.
. Folsom and Yuma Artifacts, Part II. PCMNH 14 (2) : 1- 7. 1935.
304. Finkelstein, J. Joe. The Norman Site Excavation near Wagoner, Oklahoma.
OP 3 (3): 2--15. 1940.
305. Fischel, Hans E. A Note on Corner-tang Artifacts. AAn 4(2) : 152- 155.
4(2): 152---155. 1938.
306.
. Folsom and Yuma Culture Finds. AAn 4 (3) : 232-264. 1939.
307.
. A Reply to Ray's Review. AAn 5(2): 155- 156. 1939.
308.
. Supplementary Data on Early Man in America. AAn 6 ( 4) :
346-348. 1941.
309. Fleming, Charles and Vivian. An Austin County Burial Site. NHAS 1: 2---3 .
1959.
310. Fletcher, Henry T. Notes on the Ethnobotany of Bee Cave Canyon. WTHSS
3: 37-44. 1930.
311.
. Some Types of Archeological Sites in Trans-Pecos Texas. BTAPS
3: 7-17. 1931.
312. Flint, Richard Foster. Pin-pointing the Past with the Cosmic Clock. NH
60(5 ) : 200-206. 1951.
313. Ford, James A. Ceramic Decoration Sequence at an Old Indian Village Site
near Sicily I sland, Louisiana. LGSAS 1. 1935.
314.
. Analysis of Indian Village Site Collections from Louisiana and
Mississippi. LGSAS 2. 1936.
31 5.
. In: Archaeology: W estern H emisphere. BBY: 57. 1951 .
316.
. Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site in Avoyelles
Parish, Louisiana. APAM 44 ( 1 ) . 1951.
3 17.
. In: Archa eology: Western Hemisphere. BBY: 52--53. 1952.
318.
. Measurements of Some Prehistoric Design Developments in the
Southeastern States APAM 44(3): 311-384. 1952.
319.
. In: Archaeology: Western Hemisphere. BBY. 113- 115. 1955.
320.
, Philip Phillips, and William G. Haag. The Jaketown Site in
West-central Mississippi. APAM 45 (1). 1955.
321.
and Clarence H . Webb. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in
Louisiana. AP AM 46 ( 1) . 1956.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

322.

219

and Gordon R. Willey. Crooks Site, A Marksville Period Burial
Mound in La Salle Parish, Louisiana. LGSAS 3. 1940.
323.
. An Interpretation of the Prehistory of the Eastern United States.
AA 43 ( 3) : 325-363. 1941.
324. Forrester, Robert E., Jr. A Series of Eighteen Indian Skeletons Excavated in
Shackelford County, T exas. BTAPS 22: 132-143. 1951.
325.
. Report on an Unknown Type of Implem ent. ETAS 28: 122-126.
1957.
326. Fowke, Gerard. Stone Art. ARBAE 13: 47- 178. 1896.
327. Fowler, Melvin L. Modoc Rock Shelter: An Early Archai c Site in Southern
Illinois. AAn 24 (3): 257-170. 1959.
328. Fritz, W . C. A Texas Sandia Point. BTAPS 13: 168- 173. 1941.
and Bernice Fritz. Evidence of the Folsom Culture in the Sand
329.
Dunes of Western T exas. BTAPS 12: 217-222. 1940.
330. Fulton, Robert L., and Clarence H. Webb. The Bellevue Mound: A PreCaddoan Site in Bossier P arish, Louisiana. ETAS 24: 18--42. 1953.
33 1. Fundaburk, Emma Lila, and Mary Douglass Fundaburk Foreman. Sun Circles
and Human Hands. Luverne, Alabama. 1957.
.
332. Galinat, W. C., P. C. Mangelsdorf, and L. Pierson. Estimates of Teosinte
Introgression in Archaeological Maize. BML 17: 101-124. 1956.
333. Gallaher, Art. The Goodman I Site, Custer County , Oklahoma. BTAPS 22:
188-216. 1951.
334. Gardner, Fletcher. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During
1934. AAn 1 (2): 135. 1935.
and George C. Martin. A N ew Type of Atlatl from a Cave
335.
Shelter on the Rio Grande n ear Shumla , Val Verde County, T exas. WMMB 2.
n. d.
336. Gibson, Gordon D. A Bibliography of Anthropological Bibliographies: The
Am ericas. CA 1 ( 1): 61 - 75.1959.
337. Gilmore, M elvin R. An Inter esting Vegetal Artifact from the Pecos Region of
T exas. UTB 3734: 17- 26. 1937.
338. Gladwin, Harold S. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During
1931. AA 34 (3) : 505. 1932.
339.
. The Archaeology of the Southwest and Its Relation to the
Cultures of Texas. BTAPS 6: 19-37. 1934.
340.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1934.
AAn 1 (2): 135. 1935.
341.
Excavations at Snaketown, II: Comparisons and Theories. MP
26. 1937.
342.
The Significance of Early Cultures in T exas and Southeastern
Arizona . In: George Grant MacCurdy (editor) , Early Man: 133-1 38. 1937.
343. Glasscock, Keith and Alma. A Preliminary Report on CR-1 , An Indian Campsite in Moore County, Texas. PPHR 28 : 96- 106. 1955.
344. Goddard, P . E. The Antiquity of Man in America. NH 26 (3) : 257-259. 1926 .
345 . Goggin, John M. In: Notes and N ews: Southeast. AAn 18 (2 ) : 191. 1952.
346. Goldschmidt, Walter R. A Report on the Archeology of Titus County in East
Texas. BTAPS 7: 89- 99. 1935 .
347. Goldstein, Marcus S. Cranial Deformation Among Texas Indians. AJPA
2 7(2): 312-313. 1940.

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

348 .
Some Notes on Texas Crania (abstract ) . AJPA 27 (3) : 16. 1940.
349.
Crania from East Texas. SACNL 2 ( 4 ) : 5. 1941.
350. - - -- . Indian Skeletal Remains from T exas (abstract ) . BGSA 52 ( 12) .
Pt. 2 : 1999-2000. 1941.
351. - -- - D entition on Indian Crania from T exas. AJPA 6 (1) : 63- 84. 1948.
352. - -- Skel etal Pathology of Early Indians in Texas. AJPA 15 ( 3) : 299312. 1957.
353. Gould, Lois. A Grcoved Club and Other Artifacts from a Cave Seventy Miles
Northeast of El Paso, T exas. POAS 9: 155-159. 1929.
354. Green, Joe H. Some Flint Caches, the Alibates Quarry, and a Stone Pestle.
PPHR 28 : 78-81. 1955 .
355. Greenman, E. F. An American Eol ithic? AAn 22 (3 ) : 298. 1957.
356. Griffin, James B. Report on Pottery Sherds from near Abilene, Texas. BTAPS
7: 57-67. 1935.
357 .
. Review: A. T. Jackson, Types of East Texas Pottery. AAn 1 (2 ) :
169-170. 1935.
358.
Cultural Change and Continuity in Eastern United States. In:
Frederick Johns on (editor ), Man in Northeastern North America. PPFA 3 :
27-95. 1946.
359.
. Meso-America and the Southeast: A Commentary. In: John W.
Griffin (editor). The Florida Indian and His Neighbors: 77- 99. Rollins College.
Winter Park. 1949.
360.
. Review: H. P erry Newell and Alex D. Krieger, The George C.
Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas AA 52 (3 ) : 413-415. 1950.
361.
. An Interpretation of the Place of Spiro in Southeastern Archaeology. MA 14: 89-106. 1952.
362.
(editor) . Archeology of Eastern United States. University of
Chicago Press. Chicago. 1952.
363 .
. Radiocarbon Dates for the Eastern United States. In: James B.
Griffin (editor) , Archeology of Eastern United States: 365-370. 1952.
364.
. Unit ed States and Canada: Indigenous Period. Program of the
History of America, Comision de Historia. IPGHP 154. 1953.
365.
. Bibliogra phy of Radiocarbon Dates. BAAA 5 (2 ) : 1. 1957.
366. Gross, Hugo. Mastodons, Mammoths, and Man in America. BT APS 22:
101-131. 1951.
367. Guthe, Carl E. Archaeological Work in North America. In : Summary of
Archaeological Work in the Americas During 1929 and 1930. AAS 5: 21-52.
1931.
368. - -- - - . North America. In : Summary of Archaeological Work in the
Americas: 1931-1932-1933. AAS 7: 47-77. 1935.
369.
. Twenty-fi ve Years of Archeology in the Eastern United States.
In: James B. Griffin (editor ), Archeology of Eastern United States: 1-12.
1952.
370. - - - - . Texas Museums. PPHR 29: 1-20. 1956.
371. Gwin, Thomas B. An Interesting Type of Indian Artifact from Dallas and
E llis County. R 2 (9 ) : 41 - 43. 1941.
372. Haag, William G. Review: River Basin Survey Papers, Numbers 1-6. AAn
22 (1) : 93-94. 1956.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

221

373. H ack, John T. The Changing Physical Environment of the Hopi Indians of
Arizona. PMP 35 (1) . 1942.
374. Hall, Roland Scott. Ck-44 : A Bluff Shelter Site from Northeastern Oklahoma.
BOAS 2: 49-67. 1954.
375. Hamilton, Henry W. The Spiro Mound. MA 14: 13-88. 1952.
376. Hampton, Howard, and Grady Moore. A Burial Site in Northeastern Red
River County. BCTAS 2: 65-69. 1936.
377 . Hanna , Henry A., Jr. A Burial in Collin County. R 1 (9) : 37-38. 1940.
378.
. A Most Interesting Dallas County Indian Campsite. R 2(2) :
8- 11. 1940.
379. - - - - Two Rockwall County Indian Campsites. R 3(3): 14-17. 1941 .
380. - - - - Three Burials from Mound 2, T. M. Sanders Site. R 8 ( 4) : 16- 19.
1950.
381.
and R. K. Harris. BurialS, Site 27B1-1. R 7 (3) : 10- 11. 1948.
382. Harbour, Jerry. p,-eliminary Geology of the Lucy Site. EP 63 (2): 50-52.
1956.
383. Harrell, Robert P. Titus Focus (Fulton Aspect ) . BLCAS 1: 8. 1957.
384. Harrington, M . R. Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas . INM 10. 1920.
385 .
. A New Archeological Field in Texas. IN 5(3): 30 7-316.1928.
386. Harris, Ada Mae. Report on a Hunt County Indian Camp Site. R 1 (3) :
12-13. 1939.
38 7. H ar ris, R. K. Indian Campsites of the Upper Trinity River Drainage. BTAPS
8: 11 3-133. 1936.
388.
. A Survey of Three Denton County Indian Village Sites. R 1 (2) :
6- 8. 1939 .
389 .
Dallas Area. TAN 2: 8 9. 1940.
Two Indian Village Sites Near the City of Denton. R 2 ( 1) :
390.
5-6. 1940.
391.
The Gilkey Hill Pottery Site. R 3 (9): 48- 53. 1942.
392.
Bone Implement Burial, Collin County, Texas. BTAPS 16:
84-89. 1945.
393 .
An Interesting Copper Article from Garrett's Bluff. R 5(1): 7.
1946.
3 9 4 . - - - - An Infant Burial. R 6( 4) : 18- 19. 1947.
3 9 5 . - - - - A Pottery Site near Farmersville. R 6 (10 ) : 38-45 . 1948.
396 . - - - - Culture Traits, Rockwall1 (392/ RW1 ). R 6 (9) : 35-36.1948.
397.
Preliminary Report on an Alto Focus Site in Kaufman County.
R 7(4) : 13-15. 1948.
398 .
. Trait Lists. R 6 (9) : 34~37 . 1948.
Trait Lists of Our Area. R 6 (5 ) : 20-23. 1948.
399.
400.
Two Crema ted Burials: Site 27B-1-1 (RW1 ) . R 7 (2 ) : 7-9. 1948.
401.
Burial 7, Site 27 A5-19. R 7 ( 7) : 24-25. 1949.
402.
. Excavation of Fire Pit Site 27B1-1. R 8 (2): 6- 8. 1949.
403.
Preliminary Report, Site 27B6-1 . R 7 (9): 30-32. 1949.
404.
The Jordan Farm Site. R 8(1): 2-4. 194·9.
405.
Preliminary Report on Site 18C7- 10. R 8 (5 ) : 21-22. 1950.
(A Plainview Point from Denton County, T exas). R 10 (1): 2.
406.
1951.

222

407 .

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

. A P reliminary Report on Site 18C4-6 in Denton County. R
9 (4) : 18- 19. 1951.
408.
. French or Spanish or What is It? R 10 (1) : 2-3 . 1951.
409.
. Unusua l Stone Pipe from Kaufman Site. R 10 (2) : 6. 195 1.
410.
. A Mu ss~ l Shell Paint Container from Palo Pinto County, T exas.
R 10 (3): 14.1 952.
411.
. Th <:! Sam Kaufman Site, Red Riv ~ r County, T exas. ETAS 24:
43-68. 1953.
412.
. Two Rec2nt Trips to Sit::s in Fannin and Lamar Counties. R
11 (5) : 19-20. 1953.
41 3.
. C-14 Da t e on H enriE'tta Focus in T exas. OASN 8 (3): 2. 1959 .
414.
and K. L. Gowin. A Report on an In dian Burial Blanket from Val
Verde County, T exas. R 2 (6): 27- 29. 1941.
415. H asska rl, Robert A ., Jr. An Unusual Histori c H ouse Site in W ashington
County, T exa s. ETAS 28: 232-239. 1957.
416. H a tz enbuehler, Il obs rt C. Some Interesting Indian Work shops in Dallas
County . II 3(5) : 28-3 1. 1942.
417.
. Th e Ragland Site. R 4( 1) : 55-56. 1942.
Some Artifacts from Hopkins County, East Texas. R 2( 1) : 3-6.
418.
1946.
419.
A N e t Sinker Site nea r Trinidad, T exas. R 6 ( 1): 1- 4. 1947.
420.
Culture Traits Ragland Site. R -6(8) : 32-33 . 1948.
421.
Disturbed Burial n ear Seagoville. R 6 (8) : 33. 1948.
422. - - - - . An Indian Burial, Hopkins County, T exas. R 7 (10) : 34-36.
1949.
423. - - - - -. Preliminary Report, Si te 19C3-5 . R 8 (6 ) : 24- 26.1950.
424•.
. Preliminary Report, Sit:: 19C9- 1. R 9( 1) : 2-3. 1950.
425.
. A Preli minary Il eport on Site 19C3-1 in Hopkins County, T exas.
R 9 (4) : 16-17. 1951.
426.-----. A Flexed Burial, Delta County, T exas. R 11 (4) : 16-1 7. 1953.
427.
and R. K. Harris. BurialS, Site 27A5- 19. R 7 (6) : 21 - 22. 1949.
428. H a ury, Emil W. , E. B. Sayles, and William W. Wasley. The L ehner Mammoth Site, Southeastern Arizona. AAn 25 ( 1) : 2-30. 1959.
429 . H avard, V. Repo rt on the Flora of W estern and Southern Texas. PUSNM 8:
449-533 . 1886.
430. Hay, 0. P. The Pleistocene of th e W estern Region of North America and Its
Vertebrated Anima ls. CIWP 322-B. S3e p . 288 . 1927.
431.
and H arold J. Cook. Preliminary D escription of Fossil Mammals
Recently Discovered in Oklahoma, T exas, and N e w M exico. PCMNH 8 (2);
Pt. 1. 1928.
432.
. Fossil Vertebrates Collected Near, or in A ssociation with, Human
Artifacts at Loca lities n ear Colorado, T exas, Frederick, Oklahoma, and Folsom,
New M exico. PCMNH 9 (2 ) : 4-40. 1930.
433 . Hayner, E. VV. Another Puebloan Trade Sherd in East Texas. ETAS 26:
244-248 . 1955.
434.
Resea rch in East Tex as Projectile Points. ETAS 26: 235-243.
1955.
435 .
Some Pottery Bearing Camp-sites in and Around Caddo Lake.
OASN 5 (8) : 4-8. 1957.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

223

436.
. Three Archaic Sites in .East Texas. BTAS 28: 169-180. 1957.
437. Heizer, Robert F. Ancient Grooved Clubs and Modern Rabbit-sticks. AAn
8 (1) : 41-56. 1942.
438.
(ed itor). Th e Archaeologist at Work: A Source Bo:Jk in Archaeological M ethod and Interpretation . Harper & Brothers. New York. 1959.
439.
and Richard K. Beardsley. Fired Clay Human Figurines in
Central and Northern California . AAn 9 (2 ) : 199-207. 1943.
440. H enry, Thomas R. I ce Age Man, the First American. NGM 108 ('6): 781-806.
1955.
441. H esse, Curtis J. Some Archaeological Material in the Mus ~um of th e Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas. BTAPS 15: 80-91. 1943.
442. H eye, George G. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During
1928. AA 31 (2 ) : 356-357.1929.
443 .
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North Am erica During 1929.
AA 32 (2): 369-370. 1930.
444. Hibben, Frank C. Evidences of F.8rly Occupat:on in Sandia Cave, New
Mexico, and Other Sites in the Sandia-Manzano Region. SMC 99 (23 ) . 1941.
445.
. The First Thirty-eight Sandia Points. AAn 11 (4) : 257- 258.
1946.
446. - - - - -. The Lost Americans. Thomas Y. Crowell. New York. 1946.
447. Hill, Robert T. On the Origin of the Small Mounds of the Lower Mississippi
Valley and Texas. S 23 (592) : 704-706. 1906.
448. Hobbs, Hulda R. Texas Panhandle Ruins. EP 48 (6) : 121-128. 1941.
449.
and Marjorie F. Ti chy. Notes on Southwest Science Meet. EP
48 (5) : 110-116. 1941.
450. Hodge, F. W. In : ARBAE 27: 6-7. 1923.
451. Hodges, Mrs. T. L. The Cahinnio-Caddo: A Contact Unit in the Eastern
Margin of the "Caddo Area." BTAS 28: 190- 197. 1957.
452. Hodges, Dr. and Mrs. T. L. The Watermelon I sland Site in Arkansas. BTAPS
15: 66-79. 1943.
453.
. Suggestions for Identifi cation of Certain Mid-Ouachita Pottery as
Cahinnio Caddo. BT APS 16: 98- 116. 1944--1945.
454. Hold en, Frances M . The Museum at Texas Technological College. PPHR 29:
54-77 . 1956.
455. Holden, Jane. The Bonnell Sit ~ . BTAPS 23: 78- 132. 1952.
456.--- - -. Preliminary Report on the Bloom Mound, Chaves County, New
Mexico. BTAS 26: 165-181. 1955.
457. Holden, W. C. Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest
Texas. BT APS 1: 23-35. 1929.
458.
. The Canadian Valley Expedition of March, 1930. BTAPS 2:
21-32. 1930.
459.
. Texas Tech Archeological Expedition, Summer 1930. BTAPS 3:
43- 52. 1931.
460.
. Excavations at Tecolote During Summer of 1931. BTAPS 4:
25-28. 1932.
461. - - - - - . In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1931.
AA 34 (3 ) : 504. 1932.
462.
. Recent Archaeological Discoveries in the Texas Panhandle. SSSQ
13 (3) : 287- 293. 1932.

2 24

463.
464.
465.
466.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Excavation of Saddle-back Ruin. BTAPS 5: 39-52. 1933.
Excavation of Murrah Cave. BTAPS 9: 48- 73. 1937.
. Blue Mountain Rock Shelter. BTAPS 10: 208- 221 . 1938.
. M cKenzie Cave and Adj acent Sites in Pecos Co unty. BTAPS 13:
46- 57. 1941.
467. Holder, P reston, and Joyce Wike. The Frontier Culture Complex. A Prelimin ary Report on a Prehi storic Hunters' Camp in Southwes tern N ebraska.
AAn 14 (1): 260- 266. 1949.
468. Hooton, Earn est A. Notes on Five Texas Crania. BT APS 5: 25-38 . 1933.
469 . H orne, Sam. P etroglyphs. BCTAS 1: 30, 31, and Fig. 2 (p. 15 ) . 1935.
470.
. A Hamilton County Cache. BCTAS 2: 43. 1936.
471.
. Dating Cave Creek Sh elter Occupancy. CTA 4: 96-97. 1938.
472.
and F. H. Watt. A F ew Indian Camp Sites on Flag L ake.
CTASNL 2 (2) : 5- 8.1940.
473. H ou gh, Walter. A New T ype of Stone Knife. AA 29 (2): 296-298. 1927.
474.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North Ame rica Dming 1929.
AA 32(2) : 368. 1930.
475. H ousewright, Rex. A Multiple Burial in Lamar County . R 2 (8 ) : 37-39. 1941.
476.
. A Turquoise Bead Neckla ce. R 5 (2 ) : 10. 1946.
and Lester Wilson. A Flaking T ool Burial at Butler Hole, Collin
477.
County, T exas. R 3(7): 40- 44. 1942.
478.
and R. K . H arris. Culture Traits, Butler H ole Site. R 6 (6) :
25- 28. 1948.
479.
, Robert Hatzenbueh ler, and Henry Hanna . The Butler Hole
H ouse Site. R 6 (3) : 8-16. 1947.
480. H oward, Ben R. , Jr. Stability of Bould ers on Slopes in the Finlay Mountajns,
T exas. FL 9(2): 52- 59. 1941.
48 1. Howard, Edgar B. Evidence of Early Man in North Am erica. MJ 24 (2- 3).
1935.
482.
. An Outline of the Problem of Man's Antiquity in North Am erica.
AA 38(3) : 394- 413. 1936.
483.
. The Emergence of a General Folsom Pattern. In: Twenty-fifth
Anniversary Studies . PPAS 1: 111 - 11 5. 193 7.
484. Howard, Lynn. Preliminary Report of Cherokee County, Oklahoma Archaeology. OP 3 (1) : 2-9. 1940.
485. Hrdlicka , Ales. Catalogu e of Human Crania in the United States National
Museum Collections. PUSNM '63: 1- 51. 1924.
486.
. Catalogu e of Human Crania in the United States National
Museum Collections. P USNM 69: 1- 127. 1927.
487.
. Early Man in America: What H ave the Bones to Say? In:
George Grant MacCurdy (editor ), Early Man: 93- 104. Philadelphia and New
York. 1937.
488. - - - - Skeletal Remains from Northern Texas. BTAPS 10: 169- 192.
1938.
4 8 9 . - - - - Catalog of Human Crania in the United States National
Museum Collections: Indians of the Gulf States . P U SNM 87 (3076 ) : 315- 464.
1940.
490. Huffington, Roy M ., and Claude C. Albritton, .T r. Quate rn ary Sands on the
Southern High Plains of Western Texas. AJS 239: 325- 338. 1941.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

225

491. Huffman, George G., and W. Armstrong Price. Clay Dune Formation near
Corpus Christi, Texas. JSP 19 (3) : 11 8-127. 1949.
492. Hughes, Jack T . An Archaeological Reconnaissance in Tamaulipas, Mexico.
AAn 13(1): 33-39.1947.
493.
. Investigations in 'Vestern South Dakota and Northeastern Wyoming. AAn 14 (1): 266-277. 1949.
494.
. Little Sunday: An Archaic Site in the Texas Panhandle. ETAS
26: 55-74. 1955.
495.
and R. K. Harris. Refuse or Fire Pit Excavated in Site 27 Al-2.
R 10(2): 7-8.1951.
496. Hughes, Polyanna B. The First American Was a Texan. TP 15 (8): 34-35 .
1955.
497. Hurt, Wesley R., Jr. A Comparative Study of the Preceramic Occupations of
North America. AAn 18(3): 204-222. 1953.
498. Huskey, Vane. An Archeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon of T exas.
BTAPS 7: 105-114. 1935.
499. Hyde, George E. Indians of the High Plains: From the Prehistoric Period to
the Coming of Europeans. University of Oklahoma Press. Norman. 1959.
500. Jackson, A. T. Indian Pipes of East Texas. BT APS 5: 69-86. 1933.
501.
Types of East Texas Pottery. BTAPS 6: 38-57. 1934.
502.
. Ornaments of East Texas Indians. BT APS 7: 11 -28. 1935.
503.
. A "Perpetual Fire" Site. BT APS 8: 134-173. 1936 .
504.
. Exp loration of Certain Sites in Culberson County, Texas. BT APS
9: 146-192. 1937.
505 .
. Fire in East Texas Burial Rites. BTAPS 10: 77-113 . 1938.
Picture-writing of Texas Indians. UTP 3809. 1938.
506.
507.
. The Fall Creek Sites. UTP 3802: 11-118. 1938.
508.
. A Deep Archaeological Site in Travis County, Texas. BT APS
11: 203-225. 1939.
Austin Area. TAN 2: 12-16. 1940.
509.
510.
. General Reconnaissance. TAN 2: 24-25. 1940.
511.
. Northeast Texas: Hatchel Site; Paul Mitchell Cemetery. TAN
2: 18-21. 1940.
512.
Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas. BTAPS 12: 99-137.
1940.
513.
A Burial Site in Lamar County, Texas, Showing Possible Middle
Mississippi Valley and Plains Influences. SACNL 2(4): 20-22. 1941.
514.
In: Notes and News. AAn 6(3): 274-275 . 1941.
515 .
Pendants and Their Uses. BTAPS 13: 9-45. 1941.
Indian Arrow and Lance Wounds. BTAPS 15: 38-65. 1943.
516.
Picture-writing of Texas Indians. In: The Caves of Texas.
517.
BNSS 10: 85-87. 1948.
518 .
. Proposed : A Seminole Canyon Park. In: The Caves of Texas.
BNSS 10: 115. 1948.
519.
. Trailing Texas Troglodytes. In: The Caves of Texas. BNSS 10:
27-32. 1948.
520.
. West Texas Caves and Shelters. In: The Caves of T exas. BNSS
10: 69-76. 1948.
521. Janes, Susan M. Seven Trips to Mount Livermore. WTHSS 3: 8-9. 1930.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

522. Jelinek, Arthur J. Pottery of the Rio Bonito Area of Lincoln County, New
Mexico. BTAPS 23: 147-167. 1952.
523.
. Pleistocene Faunas and Early Man. PMA 42: 225-237. 1957.
524. Jelks, Edward B. Manual for Beginners in Central T exas Archaeology. Austin, Texas. Mimeographed. 1951.
525.
. The River Basin Surveys Archaeological Salvage Program in
Texas. TJS 4(2): 131-138. 1952.
526.
. Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. ETAS 24: 189- 207. 1953.
527.
. The River Basin Surveys: Recent Archeological Investigations
in T exas, Arkansas, and Kansas. TJS 5 ( 3) : 342--347 . 1953.
528.
Archeologists Add New Data on Texas' Past. ESN 7 (1): 1-4.
1959.
529. - - - - - Historic Archeological Sites in Texas. T A 3 ( 1) : 8. 1959.
530. - - - - - and Curtis D. Tunnell. The Harroun Site : A Fulton Aspect Compon ~nt of the Caddoan Area, Upshur County, Texas. ASUT 2, 1959.
531. Jenkins, John Holmes, III (editor). Recollections of Early T exas: The Memoirs of John Holland Jenkins. See p. 171. University of Texas Press. Austin.
1958.
532. Jennings, Jesse D . Revi ew: James A. Ford, Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles
Creek Site in Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana. AA 54( 4): 555- 556. 1952.
533 .
. The Am erican Southwest: A Problem in Cultural I solation. In:
Robert ·vvauchope (editor ), Seminars in Archaeology: 1955. MSAA 11: 57127. 1956.
534.
Danger Cave. MSAA 14. 1957.
535. Jennings, Noyce. The Mound Lake Site. BTAPS 23: 309-310 and Plate 34
(p. 307). 1952.
535. Johnson, Fr2derick. Archa eological News: American Archaeology, 1947. AJA
52(2) : 344-370. 1948.
537.
. Arch aeological News: American Archaeology, 1948. AJA 53 (3) :
286-301. 1949.
538.
(editor ). Radiocarbon Dating. MSAA 8. 1951 .
539. Johnson, LeRoy, Jr. , and Edward B. Jelks. The Tawakoni-Yscani Village,
1760: A Study in Archeological Site Identification. TJS 10( 4) : 405-422. 1958.
540. Johnson, Richard E. Reports on Site T-5 in Tarrant County. CTCAS 1 (1) :
2-7. 1956.
541. John ston , C. Stewart. A Report on the Antelop2 Creek Ruin. BT APS 11: 190202. 1939.
542. Jones, Buddy C. The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas. ETAS 28:
198-231. 1957.
543. Jones, Charles C., Jr. Antiquities of the Southern Indians. N ew York. 1873.
544. Jones, Richard A . Evidence for Recent Uplift on Gulf. OGJ 26 (4'6 ): 82, 115116, 118,121-122, 125-126, 129. 1928.
545. Jones, Volney H. Maize from the Davis Site: Its Nature and Interpre tation.
In: H. Perry Newell and Alex D. Krieger, The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. MSAA 5: 241 - 249. 1949.
546. Judd, Neil M. Progress in the Southwest. In: Essays in Historical Anthropology of North Ameri ca . SMC 100: 417-444. 1940.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

227

547. Judson, Sheldon. Geology of the Hodges Site, Quay County, New M exico. In:
River Basin Surveys Pap er s, No. 5, Th e Hodges Site. River Basin Surveys
Papers, Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program. BAEB 154: 285-302.
1953.
548.
. Geology of the San Jon Site, Eastern New Mexico. SMC 121 ( 1) .
1953.
549. Kaplan, Lawrence. Th e Cultivated Beans of the Prehistoric Southwest . AMBG
43: 189-25 1. 1956.
550. Kellar, James H. The Atlatl in North America . PRS 3(3) : 275-352. 1955.
551. Kelley, J. Charles. Report on Archeological Field Work in the Madera Vall ey.
WTHSS 5: 53-59. 1933.
552.
. The Route of Antonio d e Espejo Down the Pecos River and
Across the Texas Trans-Pecos Region in 1583 ; Its Relation to W est Texa s
Archeology. WTHSS 7: 7-25. 1937.
553.
. Archaeological Notes on the Excavation of a Pithouse n ea r Presidio, Texas. EP 46 (10): 221-234. 1939.
554.
. Presidio. TAN 2: 1-4. 1940.
555.
. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of th e Clear
Fork Focus. AAn 13 (2) : 97- 109. 1947.
55·6.
. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah ,
Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. BTAPS 18: 115- 128. 1947.
557.
. Arrow or Dart Shaft Tools and Problematical Incised Stones
from Central and Western Texas. EP 55 ( 3): 73- 85. 1948.
558.
. Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated House .Structures in
Western Texas. BTAPS 20: 89- 114. 1949.
559.
. Atlatls, Bows, and Arrows, Pictographs, and the Pecos River
Focus. AAn 16 ( 1) : 71-74. 1950.
560.
. A .Bravo Valley Aspect Component of the Lower Rio Conchas
Valley, Chihuahua, Mexico. AAn 17 (2) : 114-119. 1951.
561.
. Review: Emil W. Haury et al., The Stratigraphy and Archaeology of Ventana Cave. AAn 17 (2) : 152- 154. 1951.
562.
. Stephenson and Krieger on "Culture Chronology in Texas." AAn
17 (2) : 137-139. 1951.
563.
. Factors Involved in th e Abandonment of Certain Peripheral
Southwestern Settlements. AA 54(3) : 356-387. 1952.
564.
. Some Geographic and Cultural Factors Involved in MexicanSoutheastern Contacts. In: Sol Tax (editor ), Indian Tribes of Aboriginal
America, Vol. 3. PTICA: 139-144. 1952.
565.
. The Historic Indian Pueblos of La Junta de los Rios. NMHR
27 (4): 257-295; 28(1): 21-51. 1952, 1953.
5•66.
. Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. AA 57 (5):
981-995. 1955.
567.
. Settlement Patterns in North-central Mexico. In: Gordon R.
Willey (editor ), Prehistoric Settlement Patterns in the New World. VFPA
23: 128- 139. 1956.
568.
. Review: Dee Ann Suhm, Alex D. Krieger , and Edward B. Jelks,
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. AAn 22 (3) : 312-313. 1957.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

569.
570.
571.

Rejoinder to Krieger, Suhm, and Jelks. AAn Z3(Z): 173. 1957.
The Livermore Focus: A Clarification. EP '64(1-Z): 44-5!2. 1957.
The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in the Southwest and Texas. AAn !24(3): 276-!288. 1959.
57!2.
and T. N. Campbell. What Are the Burnt Rock Mounds of Texas?
AAn 7 (3) : 319-32!2. 194!2.
573.
and Donald J. Lehmer. The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits in the Big Bend Region of Texas. WTHSS
10: 9-173. 1940.
574. Kelly, A. R. Review: Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Volume 7. AAn 1 (4): 333-335.1936.
575. Kelsey, Lewis. The Marsalis Terrace: A High Level Terrace of the Trinity
River, Dallas, Texas. FL 3(!2): 54-56. 1935.
576. Kidder, A. V. Why are Cave Remains Important? In: The Caves of Texas.
BNSS 10: 78-79. 1948.
577. Kilstofte, June. The "Digs" at Falcon. SAEM: July Z7, 195!2: 6-7.
578. Kirchoff, Paul. Gatherers and Farmers in the Greater Southwest: A Problem
in Classification. With Comments by Ralph L. Beals, Carl 0. Sauer, and A. L.
Kroeber. AA 56 ( 4): 529-560. 1954.
579. Kirkland, Forrest. A Comparison of Texas Indian Pictographs with Paleolithic Paintings in Europe. CT A 3: 9-!26. 1937.
580.
. A Study of Indian Pictures in Texas. BTAPS 9: 89-119. 1937.
581.
. A Description of Texas Pictographs. BTAPS 10: 11 -39. 1938.
58!2.
. An Archaeological Survey of the Cranfills Gap Area. CTA 4:
71 -84. 1938.
583.
. Indian Pictures in the Dry Shelters of Val Verde County, Texas.
BTAPS 11: 47-76. 1939.
584.
. An Interesting Indian Workshop in Coryell County, Texas. R
!2(3): 15-17. 1940.
585.
Pictographs of Indian Masks at Hueco Tanks. BTAPS 1!2: 9- !29.
1940.
5 8 6 . - - - - Petroglyphs of the Abilene District. BTAPS 13 : 63- 76. 1941.
587. - - - - A Series of Non-pottery Sites in Dallas County, Texas. R 3 (6):
3!2-38. 194!2.
588. - - - - Historic Material from Fielder Canyon Cave. BTAPS 14: 61 - 71.
194!2.
589.
Indian Pictographs and Petroglyphs in the Panhandle Region of
Texas. BT APS 14: 9-!25 . 194!2.
590. - - - - - and Lula Kirkland. Clear Fork Culture Artifacts from an Extensive Workshop in Nolan County, Texas. R 3(!2): 6-11. 1941.
and R. K. Harris. Two Burials Below the White Rock Lake Spill591.
way. R !2(10): 49-53. 1941.
59!2.
, and Robert Hatzenbuehler. Refuse Pits Excavated in Site Z7 A1-Z. R 7(5): 17-19.1949.
593. Kirkland, Lula. A Pictograph Print of a Prehistoric Indian Bow. R 1 (6) : !2325. 1940.
594. Knowles, Nathaniel. Review: A. T. Jackson, Picture-writing of Texas Indians.
AA 41 (Z) : 313. 1939.

229

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

595. Koch, Peter. Cave-hunting in the Big Bend. In: The Caves of Texas. BNSS
10: 112-115. 1948.
596. Krieger, Alex D. Laboratories of the WPA-University of Texas Archaeological
Survey. TAN 2: 25- 26. 1940.
597.
. An Analytical System for East Texas Pottery. SACNL 2 (4 ) :
7- 9. 1941.
598.
. Archaeological Horizons in the Caddo Area. In: El Norte de
Mexico y el Sur de Estados Unidos. TRMR: 154-156. 1943.
599.
. The Typological Concept. AAn 9 (3 ) : 271 - 288. 1944.
600.
. An Inquiry into Supposed Mexican Innuence on a Prehistoric
"Cult" in the Southern United States. AA 47 ( 4 ) : 483- 515. 1945.
601.
Some Suggestions on Archaeological Terms. BTAPS 16: 41 - 51.
1945.
602.
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. UTP
4640. 1946.
603.
Certain Projectile Points of the Early American Hunters. BTAPS
18: 7-27. 1947.
604.
. The Eastward Extension of Puebloan Datings Toward Cultures
of the Mississippi Valley. AAn 12 (3): 141 - 148. 1947.
605 .
. The First Symposium on the Caddoan Archaeological Area . AAn
12 (3 ) : 198-207. 1947.
606.
. Importance of the "Gilmore Corridor" in Culture Contacts between Middle America and the Eastern United States. BTAPS 19: 155- 178.
1948.
607.
. The ~ew Plainview Finds. PFPC: 129. 1949.
608.
. The Southern Limits of Central Plains Cultural Complexes.
PFPC: 98- 99. 1949.
609.
. A Suggested General Sequence in North American Projectile
Points. PSPC: 117- 124. 1950.
610.
. In: Notes and News: Early Man. AAn 16 (2 ) : 182. 1950.
611.
. A Radiocarbon Date on the Davis Site in East Texas. AAn 17 (2 ):
144-145. 1951.
In: Notes and News: Early Man. AAn 17 (2 ) : 176. 1951.
612.
61 3.
Review: Luis Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda, Prehistoria de Mexico.
AAn 16 (4 ) : 357-359. 1951.
614.
Stephenson's "Culture Chronology in Texas." AAn 16 (3 ) : 265267. 1951.
615. - - - - Anthropology at University of Texas. BBAA 14: 97- 98. 1952.
616. - - -- . In: 1\"otes andNews: EarlyMan.AAn 18 (1) : 91.1952.
617.
. Review: David Albert Baerreis, The Preceramic Horizons of
Northeastern Oklahoma. AAn 18 (2) : 174-175. 1952.
618.
. Review: Wilson W. Crook, Jr. , The Wheeler Site: A 3,500 Yearold Culture in Dallas County, Texas. AAn 18 (2) : 183. 1952.
619.
. Review: James A. Ford, Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek
Period Site in Avoyelles Parish Louisiana. AAn 18 (2 ) : 175-179. 195'2.
6'20.
. In: Notes and News: Early Man. AAn 19 (1) : 100- 101. 1953.
621.
. New World Culture History: Anglo-America. In: A. L. Kroeber
(editor ) , Anthropology Today: 238- 264. University of Chicago Press. Chicago.
1953.

Office of the State Archeologist

Library

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

622.

Recent Developments in the Problem of Relationship s between
th e M exican Gulf Coast and the Eastern U nited States. In: Huastecos y Totonacos y sus Vecinos. RMEA 13(2--3): ·1<97- 518. 1953.
623.
. Review: Kenneth G . Orr, Survey of Caddoan Area Archeology.
In : James B. Griffin (editor ), Archeology of Eastern United States. AAn
19(2): 184-187. 1953.
624.
. A Comment on "Fluted Point Relationships" by John \ilfitthoft.
AAn 19 (3): 273-275. 1954.
625.
In: Notes and News: Early Man. AAn 20(3): 305. 1955.
626.
The Handbook of Texas Archeology. PPHR 28: 18- 28. 1955.
627.
A Plainvi ew Lance Point (?). ETAS 27: 254-257. 1956.
628.
Historic Survival of the Atlatl in the Lower Mississippi Valley.
ETAS 27: 195-207. 1956.
629.
. In: J. M. Cruxent and Irving Rouse, A Lithic Industry of PaleoIndian Type in Venezuela. AAn 22 (2 ) : 172--179. 1956.
630.
. FoJd H abits of the T exas Coastal Indians in the Early Sixteenth
Century. ETAS 27: 47-58. 1956.
In: Notes and News: Early Man: Texas. AAn 21 (4 ) : 451-452.
631.
1956.
632.
In: Notes and News: Early Man: Texas. AAn 22 ( 1): 105- 107.
1956.
633 . - - -- Review: Luis Aveleyra Arroyo de Anda , M anuel MaldonadoKoerdell , and Pablo Martinez del Rio, Cueva de Ia Candelaria. BT AS 27:
267-269. 1956.
634.
Some Mexican Figurine H eads in T exas. BT AS 27: 258- 265.
1956.
635. - - - - In : Notes and News: Early Man: Texas. AAn 22 (3) : 321-323.
1957.
636.--- - In: Notes and News: Early Man: Texas. AAn 22(4): 434-435 .
1957.
637.
, D ee Ann Suhm, and Edward B. Jelks. Reply to Stephenson and
Kelley. AAn 22 (3) : 313-315.1957.
638.
and Ja ck T. Hughes. Archaeological Salvage in the Falcon Reservoir Area: Progress Report No. 1. Mimeographed. Au stin, Texas. 1950.
639. Kroeber, A. L. Review : Bulletin of the Texas Archaeological and Paleontological Society, Volume 2, 1930. AA 33 (2): 238. 1931.
640.
Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. UCPAAE
38 . 1939.
Anthropology. Harcourt, Brace and Company. New Yot·k. 1948.
'641.
642. Krogman, W il ton Marion. The Antiquity of Man and His Culture in the
Americas. CS 3( 1) : 813-824. 1941.
643. Kuykendall, J . H . Aboriginal Antiquities of Texas. TAIEG: 175-178. 1872.
644. Lambert, Marjorie F. Early Man in the Southwest Exhibit Installed in the
Palace of the Governors. EP 62 ( 10): 290-293. 1955.
645.
. Review: Noel Morss, Clay Figurines of the American Southwest. EP 62(10 ) : 298-305. 1955.
646. Lange, Charles H. A Reappraisal of Evidence of Plains Influences Among
the Rio Grande Pueblos. SJA 9(2): 212-230. 1953.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

647.

231

. Plains-Southwestern Inter-cultural Relati:ms During the H istoric
Period. Eth. 4 (2 ) : 150-173. 1957.
648. Lawton, Sherman P . A Burial in McCurtain County, Oklahoma. ETAS 27:
185- 194. 1956.
649.
. The M ax Thomas Site, Gd-4. BOAS 6: 83-88. 1958 .
650. Lehmer, Donald J. Mod2rn Jacales of Presidio. EP 416 (8 ) : 183- 186. 1939.
651.
. The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. UAB 19 (2) . 1948.
652.
. Review: C. B. Cosgrove, Caves of the Upper Gila and Hu ~co
Areas in N ew M exico and T exas. AAn 14 (3) : 236-237 . 1949.
653.
. The Turkey Bluff Focus of the Fulton Aspect . AAn 17 ( 4): 313318. 1952.
654. Leighton. M. M. Geological Aspects of th e Finding of Primitive Man n ea r
Abilene, T exas. Preliminary Report. MP 24. 1936.
655.
. The Significance of Profiles of W ea th ?ring in Stra tigraphi c
ArchaeologY. In: George Grant MacCurd y (editor ), Early Man: 163-172.
Philadelphia and N ew York. 1937.
656. Lemley, H . J. Discoveries Indicating a Pre-Caddo Culture on Red River in
Arkansas. BTAPS 8: 25-55. 1936.
657. L eslie, R. H. (Buster ) . Thr 2e Hill Site. BLCAS 1: 6-7. 1957.
658. Libby, W. F. Radir.ca rbon Dates, II. S 114 (2960) : 291 - 296. 1951.
659.
. Chicago Radiocarb:m Dates, III . S 11'6 ( 3025) : 673- 681. 1952.
660.
. Rarliocarb:m Dating. University of Chi ca go Press. Chicago. 1955.
661. Lister, Robert H. The Stemmed, Indented Base Point, A Possible Horizon
Marker. AAn 18 (3) : 265 and Fig. 90 (p. 264). 1953.
662.
. Revi P.w: Fred Wendorf, Alex D. Krieger, and Claude C. Albritton , The Midland Discovery, A Report on the Pleistocene Human Remains
from Midland, T exfls. SL 21 (3) : 46- 47 . 1956.
663. Lomax, John A. Un explored Treasures of T exas Folk-Lore. PTFLS 1: 96-102.
1916.
654. Lull, R. S. Fauna of the Dallas Sand Pits. AJS 2: 159- 176. 1921.
665. Lux, Konrad. Dental Pathology from Crania Found in Central Texas. BCT AS
1: 13- 15. 1935.
666.
. A Detailed Report of the T eeth and Supporting Structures as
Found in Crania of Aycock Shelter. BCTAS 2: 29-42. 1936.
667.
. A Detailed Report of the Teeth and Supporting Structures as
Found in Crania of Aycock Shelter. BCT AS 2: 29-42. 1936.
668 . Ma cGowan, Kenn eth. K1rly Man in the N ew "\IVorld. New York. 1950.
669. MacNeish, Richard S. A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas, Mexi co.
AAn 13( 1) : 1- 15 . 1947.
670.
. A Synopsis of th e Archa 2ological Sequ en ce in the Sierra de
Tamaulipas. RMEA 11: 79- 96. 1950.
671.
. Ancient Maize and M exico. Ar 8 (2) : 108- 115. 1955.
672.
. The Developm ent of Agriculture and the Concomitant Developm ent of Civilization in M eso-Ameri ca . APSY 1954: 323-326. 1955.
673 .
. Prehistoric Settlem ent Pattern s on th e Northeastern Periphery
of Meso-America. In : Gordon R. Willey (editor ), Prehistori c Settlement Patternsofthe NewWorld: 140- 147. VFPA23.1956.
674.
. Preliminary Archaeological Investigation s in the Sierra de T amaulipas, M exico. TAPS 48 (6) . 1958.

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

675. McAllister, Gilbert. Obituary (J. E. Pearce). AAn 4( 4): 361-362. 1939.
676. McConnell, Robert B., and J. J. Crim, Jr. Buried Hearths in Alluvium of the
Finlay Mountains, Texas. FL 9(2): 48-52. 1941.
677. McCown, Theodore D. The Antiquity of Man in the New VVorld. AAn 6 (3) :
203-21 3. 1941.
678. McElroy, L. P. A Study of Indian Mortar Hole Sites in Mills and San Saba
Counties, Texas. R 1 (10): 40-42, 43-44. 1940.
679. McGregor, John C. In: 1otes and News. AAn 6 ( 1) : 84. 1940.
680.
. In: Notes and News. AAn 5 (3): 249. 1940.
681.
. Southwestern Archaeology. New York. 1941.
682. Mcintire, William G. Trafficability and Navigabi lity of Delta-type Coasts.
Trafficability and Navigability of Louisiana Coastal Marshes. Technical Report No. 5. Correlation of Prehistoric Settlements and Delta Development.
Louisiana State University. Baton Rouge. 1954.
683.
. Prehistoric Indian Settlements of the Changing Mississippi River
Delta. LSUCS 1. 1958.
684. McNutt, Charles H., and Richard P. Wheeler. Bibliography of Primary
Sources for Radiocarbon Dates. AAn 24 (3) : 323-324. 1959.
685. Ma llery, Garrick. Pictographs of the North American Indians: A Preliminary
Paper. ARBAE 4: 3-256. 1882--1883.
686.
. Picture-writing of the American Indians. ARBAE 10: 3- 822.
1893.
687. Mangelsdorf, Paul C. , RichardS. MacNeish, and Walton C. Galinat. Archaeological Evidence on the Diffusion and Evolution of Maize in Northeastern
Mexico. BML 17 ( 5) : 125-150. 1956.
688. Martin, George C. Preliminat-y Archaeological Survey of a Portion of the
Texas Coast Made by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 19271928-1929. Privately printed. n. d.
689.
. T he Big Bend Basket Maker. WMMB 1. n. d.
690.
. ~otes on Some Texas Coast Campsites and Other Remains.
BTAPS 1: 50-57. 1929.
691.
. A Vase and Some Carved Stones and Pebbles from Nueces County, Texas. BT APS 2: 18- 20. 1930.
692.
. Two Si tes on the Callo del Oso, Nueces County, Texas. BTAPS
2: 7-17. 1930.
693.
Texas Coastal Pottery. BTAPS 3: 53-56. 1931.
694. - - - - Archaeological Exploration of the Shumla Caves. WMMB 3.
1933.
695. - - -- Report on Four Shumla Cave Packets. BTAPS 7: 115-117. 1935.
Indian Tribes of the Mission Nuestra Senot·a del Refugio. San
696.
Antonio. 1936.
697.
. Caves on the Rio Grande. TAN 2: 4. 1940.
698.
. Some Texas Stream and Place Names. Norman Brock. San
Antonio. 1947.
699.
and Samuel Woolford. Painted Pebbles of the Texas Big Bend.
BTAPS 4: 20-24. 1932.
700. Martin, Paul S., George I. Quimby, and Donald Collier. Indians Before
Columbus. University of Chicago Press. Chicago. 1947.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

701.

233

, John B. Rinaldo, Elaine Bluhm, Hugh C. Cutler, and Roger
Grange, Jr. Mogollon Cultural Continuity and Change: The Stratigraphic
Analysis of Tularosa and Cordova Caves. FA 40. 1952.
702. Martinez del Rio , Pablo. Los Origenes Americanos. Second Edition. Mexico,
D. F. 1943.
703. - - - - -. Panorama de !a Prehistoria , Antropologia Fisica y Linguistica
del Norte de Mexico y Las Tres Areas Circunvecinas. In: El Norte de Mexico
y el Sur de Estados Un!das. TRMR : 156-162. 1943.
704.
. A Preliminary Report on the Mortuary Cave of Candelaria,
Coahuila, Mexico. BT AS 24: 208-25•6 . 1953.
705. Mason, J . Alden. The Texas Expedition. MJ 20 (3-4): 318-338. 1929.
706.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1929.
AA 32 (2): 361-363; 370- 371. 1930.
707.
. The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships Between
the United States and Mexico. BTAPS 7: 29-46. 1935.
708.
Notes on the Archeology of Southwestern Texas. BTAPS 8: 192-195. 1936.
7 0 9 . - - -- Further Remarks on the PreColumbian Relationships Between
the United States and Mexico. BTAPS 9: 120-129.1937.
710.
. Observations on the Present Status and Problems of Middle
American Archaeology, Part I. AAn 3 (3): 206-223. 1938.
711. Mason, Jam8s K. A Central Texas Multiple Metate. BCTAS 2: 80. 1936.
Buried Midden on the Brazos. BCTAS 2: 52--58. 1936.
712.
713.
. Supplementary Notes on Buried Midden on the Brazos. CTA 3:
68-69. 1937.
714. Matson, Frederick B. Identification of Aplastic Present in Pottery Sherds
from Texas. BTAPS 7: 68-69. 1935.
715. Mayer-Oakes, William J. Relationship Between Plains Early Hunter and
Eastern Archaic. JWAS 49(5): 146-156. 1959.
716. Mear, Charles. Folsom Culture. Ma 1 (2): 15, 39- 40. 1948.
717. Meggers, Betty J. (editor) . Functional and Evolutionary Implications of Community Patterning. In: Robert Wauchope (editor) , Seminars in Archaeology:
1955 : 129-157. MSAA 11.1956.
718. Melton, Frank A . "Natural Mounds" of Northeastern Texas, Southern Arkansas, and Northern Louisiana . POAS 9: 119-130. 1929.
719.
. Vegetation and Soil Mounds. GR 25 (3) : 431 - 433. 1935.
720. Mera, H. P. Chupadero Black on White. LATSB 1. 1931.
721.
. " Mescal Pits" -A Misnomer. S 77 (1989 ) : 168- 169. 1933.
722.
. Reconnaissance and Excavation in Southeastern New Mexico.
MAAA 51. 1938.
723.
. An Outline of Ceramic Developments in Southern and Southeastern New Mexico. LATSB 11. 1943.
724.
. Jaritas Rock Shelter, Northeastern New Mexico. AAn 9 (3) :
295-301. 1944.
725. Meroney, W . P. A Mass Burial near Waco. BCT AS 2: 59-60. 1936.
726. Mewhinney, H. Tips on How to Tell a Fake Point. OA 5 (2) : 40, 59. 1955.
727.
The Blade and the Core. AAn 21 (4 ) : 404--405. 1956.
728.
. A Manual for Neanderthals. University of Texas Press. Austin .
1957.

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

729. Millard, L. S. The Ancient Rock Mounds in Coleman and Adjoining Counties,
Texas. AB 8 (3) : 42.1917 .
730. Miller, E. 0., and Edward B. J elks. Archeological Excavations at the Belton
Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas. BTAPS 23: 168- 217. 1952.
731. Miller, John P . Review: Fred Wendorf, Alex D. Krieger, and Claude C.
Albritton, The Midland Discovery, A Report on the Pleistocene Human Remains from Midland, T exas. EP 63( 5-6) : 184-186. 1956.
732. Monroe, John Napier. Origin of the Clastic Dikes in the Rockwall Area, Texas.
FL 18 (4) : 133-143. 1950.
733. Moore, Clarence B. Certain Mounds of Arkansas and Mississippi. JANSP
13 (4) : 481-557. 1908.
734.
Antiquities of the Ouachita Valley. JANSP 14 (1) : 6- 170. 1909.
735.
. Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River. JANSP 14 (4) : 483- 644.
1912.
73'6. Moore, Mrs. Glen E. Twelve Room House Ruin. BTAPS 18: 94-114. 1947.
737.
and Mrs. Joe Ben Wheat. An Archeological Cache from the
Hueco Basin, Texas. BTAPS 22: 144-163. 1951.
738. Moore, H . G. A Sinker Factory Site. BCTAS 1: 11, 12. 1935.
739. Moorehead, Warren K. The Stone Age of North America . 2 Vols. Houghton
Mifflen Company. Boston and New York. 1910.
740.
Stone Ornaments of the American Indian. Andover, Mass. 1917.
741.
Recent Explorations in Northwestern Texas. AA 23 (1) : 1-11.
1921.
742. - -- - Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley . New Haven. 1931.
743. - - - - The Importance of Texas as an Archeological Field. BTAPS 5:
9- 13. 1933.
744. Morris, Earl H . Basketmaker III Human Figurines from Northeastern Arizona. AAn 17 (1): 33--40. 1951.
745. Morrow, Jam es G. A Prehistoric Cremated Burial of the Abilene Region.
BTAPS 8: 17- 24. 1936.
746. Morss, Noel. Cla y Figurines of the American Southwest. PMP 49 ( 1) . 1954.
747. Murdock, George Peter . Ethnographic Bibliography of North America. S econd
Edition. Human Relations Area Files. New Haven. 1953.
748. Nero, Robert W. A " Graver" Site in Wisconsin. AAn 22 (3) : 300- 304. 1957.
749. Neumann, Georg K. Types of Artificial Cranial Deformation in the Eastern
United States (abstract ) . SACNL 2 ( 4) : 3-5. 1941 .
750.
. Archeology and Ra ce in the American Indian. In: James B.
Griffin (editor ) , Archeology of Eastern United States: 13-34. University of
Chicago Press. Chicago. 1952.
751. New, Ina Claire. The Race Against Water by UT Archeologists. A 48( 1) :
12--15. 1959.
752. N ewcomb. William W ., Jr. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Cany on,
Lubbock County . BTAS 26: 186- 199. 1955.
753.
. A Reappraisal of the "Cultural Sink" of Texas. SJA 12 (2) : 145153. 1956.
754. Newell, H . Perry. Alto Mound. TAN 2: 22--23. 1940.
and Alex D. Krieger. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County ,
755.
Texas. MSAA 5. 1949.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

235

756. N ewman, Marshall T. Indian Skele tal Remains from th e Doering and Kohs
Sites, Addicks Reservoir, T exas. In : River Basin Sur veys Papers, No. 4, Th e
Addi cks Dam Site. River Basin Surveys Papers, Inter -Agency Arch eological
Salvage Program. BAEB 154 : '253-266. 1953 .
757. Nininger , H. H . M eteorite Collecting among Ancient Am ericans. AAn 4 ( 1) :
39- 40. 1938.
758. Oakes, John Underhil l. The Lacy Site, Garvin County , Oklahoma. BOAS 1:
17- '24. 1953.
759. Oakley, Kenneth P ., and Arthur E. Rixon. The Radioa ctivity of Materials
from the Scharbauer Site, near Midland, T exa s. AAn '24 ('2 ) : 185- 18 7. 1958.
760. Oette king, Bruno. Skeletal Remains from T exas. IN 7 (3) : 336-347. 1930.
761.
. Anthropomor phologisch e Beziehungen zwisch en der Ost erinsel
und Amerika . ZMA 34: 303-313. 1934.
76'2. Orch ard , C. D., and T. N . Campbell. Evidences of Early Man from the
Vi cinity of San Antonio, T exas. TJS 6 ( 4): 454-4165 . 195+.
763. Orr, Kenneth G. Field Report on the Excavation of Indian Villages in the
Vicinity of the Spiro Mounds, Leflore County , Okla homa. OP '2 (2 ) : 8-15.
1939.
764. -- - The Eufaula Mound: Contr ibutions to th e Spiro Focus. OP 4 ( 1) :
'2-1 5. 1941.
765. - - -- The Archa eological Situa tion at Spiro, Oklahoma : A Preliminar y
Report. AAn 11 ( 4) : 228- '256. 1946.
766.
. Survey of Caddoan Area Archeology . In: Ja m es B. Griffin (edi tor ) , Arch eology of E astern United States : '239- 255. U niver sity of Michigan
Press. Ann Arbor. 195'2.
767 . Osborne, J. 0. Plenly of Opportuniti es for Inter esting Study of th e Indians
in T exas. AB 8 (3): 36-3 7. 1917.
768. Osburn, Dodd N. P et rogly ph and Pictograph Sit e in th e Finlay Mountains.
FL 9 ( 1 ) : 30- 35. 1941.
769. Ozee, Delevan Worsh am. An Historic Indian Cach e in Clay County. ETAS
26 : 256-257 . 1955.
770. Paige, Sidney. The "Rock Wall" of Rockwall, Texas. S 30 ( 776 ) : 690- 691.
1909.
771. P atri ck, Ruth. D ia tom s from the P atschk e Bog. T exa s. NN 170. 1946.
772. P att3rson , J . T. Th e Corner-tang Flint Artifa cts of T exas. UTE 3618. 1936.
773.
Bo3t-shaped Artifacts of th e Gulf Southwest States. UTE 373'2.
1937.
774. - - - - Suppl em entary Notes on the Corn3r -tang Artifact. UTE 3734.
'27-39. 1937.
775. Pattillo, L. Gray, Jr. River T erra ces in th e Carrollton Ar2a, Dallas County ,
T exas. FL 8 (1) : 27- 3'2. 1940.
776. P eabody , Charles. A Reconnaissance Trip in Western T exas. AA 11 ('2 ) : '20'2216. 1909.
777. P earce, J . E. A Summary of Reasons W hy Texas Should Have a State Mu seum. TMAB 3. n . d.
778.
. T he U r gent Need for a T exas Stat e Museum . TMAB 1. n. d.
779.
. I ndian Mounds a n d Other Relics of Indi an Life in T exas. AA
'21 (3 ) : '223-234. 1919.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

780.
781.

Indian Mounds in Texas. A 6 (8): 440-447. 1919.
Museums- Their Use and Place in Learning and in the Transmission of Culture. U TB 2133. 1921.
782.
. Need and Opportunities for Anthropological Research in the
Southwest. SPSSQ 5(3 ) : 1- 21. 1924.
783.
. In : Archa eological Work by State Agencies in 1925. AA 28 ( 4):
690-694. 1926.
784.
. In : Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1926.
AA 29 (2): 326-327. 1927.
785.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1927.
AA 30(3): 518- 519. 1928.
786.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1928.
AA 31 (2): 355. 1929.
787.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1929.
AA 32(2): 368. 1930.
788.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1930.
AA 33(3): 480-481. 1931.
789.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1931 .
AA 34(3): 503. 1932.
790.
. .Significance of the East Texas Archaeological Field. Conference
on Southern Pre·history, Birmingham, Alabama, December 18-20, 1932. National Research Council. Washington, D. C. Pages 53-58. Washington. 1932.
791.
. The Archaeology of East Texas. AA 34(4): 670-687. 1932.
792.
. The Present Status of Texas Archeology. BTAPS 4: 44-54. 1932.
793.
. The Archeology of Texas. TAl: 97-100. 1933.
794.
. Fundamental Problems in Texas Archaeology (abstract). PTAS
18: 19-20. 1934.
795.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1934.
AAn 1 (2): 132- 133. 1935.
796 .
Tales that D ead Men Tell. UTB 3537 (see photograph captions) .
1935.
797.
Destructive Activities of Unscientific Explorers in Archeological
Sites. BCTAS 2: 44-47. 1936.
798 .
. Evidence of Early Man in T exas (abstract). TTAS 19: 34. 1936.
799.
. Field Work at Texas University. PAT 1( 1) : 25. 1938.
800.
. Geographic Influence and Civilization with Especial Reference
to Indian Texas. TGM 2 (1) : 1-1 5. 1938.
801.
and A. T. Jackson. A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde
County, Texas. UTB 3327. 1933.
802. Pearce, William M. A Survey of the Sand.hill Camp Sites of Lamb and
Bailey Counties. BTAPS 8: 184-186. 1936.
803. Perkins, John L. Tonk Creek Shelter. CTA 7: 41-47. 1956.
804. Phillips, Philip. Middle American Influences on the Archaeology of the
Southeastern United States. In: The Maya and Their N eighbors: 349-367.
D. Appleton-Century. New York. 1940.
, James A. Ford, and James B. Griffin. Archaeological Survey in
805.
the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley, 1940- 1947. PMP 25. 1951.
806. Pohl, E. F . Archaeology on the Texas Coast. NAN 1 ( 7) : 22-23. 1937.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERAT U RE

237

807. - - - -- . Pictographs and Petrogly phs of West T exas. NAN 1 ( 8 ) : 23- 24.
1937.
808. Porter, Muriel .'\foe. Tlatilco and the Pre-Classic Cultures of the N ew World.
VFPA 19. 1953.
809. Poteet, Sy bil. The Occur-rence and Distribution of Beveled Knives. BT APS
10: 245- 262. 1938.
810. Potter, Wendell H. Ornamentation on the Pottery of the T exas Coastal Tribes.
BTAPS 2: 41-44. 1930.
811. Potzger. J. E., and B. C. Tharp. Pollen Record of Canadian Spruce and Fir
from Texas Bog. S 98 (2557 ) : 584. 1943.
812.
. Pollen Profile from a Texas Bog. E 28 (3) : 274--280. 1947.
813.
. Pollen Study of Two Bogs in Texas. E 35 (4 ) : 462--466. 1954.
814. Price, W . Armstrong. Role of Diastrophism in Topography of Corpus Christi
Area, South Texas. BAAPG 17 (8): 907- 962. 1933. Reprinted with revisions
in Donald Barton and George Sawtelle (editors ), Gulf Coast Oil Fields: 205250. Tulsa. 193'6.
815.
. Greater American Deserts. PTTAS 27: 163- 170. 1944.
816.
and Gordon Gunter. Certain Recent Geological and Biological
Changes in South Texas, with Consideration of Probable Causes. PTTAS 26:
138-156. 1943.
817. Proctor, Charles. Report of Excavations in the Eufaula Reservoir. BOAS 1:
43- 59. 1953.
818.
. The Sam Site, L£-28, of Leflore County, Oklahoma. BOAS 5:
45-91. 1957.
819. Quimby, George 1., Jr. Review: Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 12. AAn 7(2 ) : 194--195.1941.
820.
In: Archaeology: Western Hemisphere. BBY: 67-68. 1947.
821.
. In : Archaeology: Western Hemisphere. BBY: 60. 1948.
822.
. The Medora .Site, West Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. FMAS
24 (2 ) : 79- 135. 1951.
823.
. Comment on: Morris Swadesh, Time Depths of American Linguistic Groupings. AA 56 ( 3) : 364. 1954.
824. Quinn, Jean, and Jane Holden. Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden
Counties. BTAPS 20: 115- 131.1949.
825. Ray, Cy rus N . A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene
Region . BTAPS 1: 7- 22. 1929.
New Evidences of Ancient Man in America . SA 140 (4) : 430826.
431. 1929.
In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1929.
827.
AA 32 (2) : 368-369. 1930.
828.
. Report on Some Recent Archeological Researches in the Abilene
Section . BTAPS 2: 45-58. 1930.
829.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1930.
AA 33 (3) : 481-482. 1931.
830.
. Recent Archeological Researches in the Abilene Section. BTAPS
3 : 76- 89. 1931.
831. - - --. Archeological Research in Central West T exas. BTAPS 4: 6370. 1932.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

832.

. In: Archaeological Field ·work in North America During 193 1.
AA 34 (3) : 503- 504. 1932.
833.
. Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds of th e Abilene Region.
BTAPS 5: 14--24.1933.
The Brownwood Skull. BTAPS 5: 95-98. 1933.
834.
835. - - - - Editor's Note. BTAPS 6 : 35-37. 1934.
836. - - - - Flint Cultures of An cient Man in Texas. BTAPS 6: 107- 111.
1934.
837.
Report on Two Mineralized Skeletons. BTAPS 6: 116- 118. 1934.
838.
In: Archaeological Field Work in North Am erica During 1934.
AAn 1 (2) : 134. 1935.
839.
Folsom Sites. BTAPS 7: 127- 129.1935.
8 4 0 . - - - - Indian Flint Saws. BTAPS 7: 125-127. 1935.
841.
On Artifact Forgers. BTAPS 7: 129- 130. 1935.
842.
Some Unusual Cremated Burials. BTAPS 7: 130-131. 1935.
The Pottery Complex Artifacts of the Abilene Region. BTAPS
843.
7: 70- 88. 1935.
844.
. Glyptodon Species. BTAPS 8: 188. 1936.
845.
. Large Piece of Obsidian Found in Taylor County. BTAPS 8:
191- 192. 1936.
846.
. New Data on Deeply Buried Sites. BTAPS 8: 189- 190. 1936.
847.
. Review: E. B. Howard, Evidence of Early Man in North Am erica. BTAPS8: 178-179. 1936.
848.
. Review: J. T . Patterson , The Corner-tang Artifacts of T exas.
BTAPS 8: 175- 176. 1936.
849.
. Rio Grande Glaze Paint Sherds Found in Tay lor County. BT APS
8: 190- 191. 1936.
850.
Some Comments on Sayles Survey . BTAPS 8 : 180- 184. 1936.
851.
. Some Unusual Cremated Burials Found near Colorado, T exas.
BTAPS 8: 9-16. 1936.
More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man. BTAPS 9: 193-217.
852.
1937.
8 5 3 . - - - - More Pueblo Pottery Found n ear Abilene. BTAPS 9: 235. 1937.
8 5 4 . - - - - Probable Uses of Flint End-scrap ers. AAn 2 (4) : 303-306. 1937.
855.
Review: J. T. Patterson, The Corner-tang Flint Artifacts of
Texas. AAn 2 (3) : 241-242. 1937.
856.
. New Evidence of Ancient Man in T exas Found During Prof.
Kirk Brya n's Visit. BTAPS 10: 269-273. 1938.
The Clear Fork Culture Complex. BTAPS 10: 193-207. 1938.
857.
Inaccuracies in Fischel"s Folsom Article. AAn 5 ( 1) : 58-64. 1939.
858.
859.
Is the Am erican Mano of Pleistocen e Age? BTAPS 11: 251-252.
1939.
860. - - - - Some Unusua l Abilene Region Burials. BTAPS 11 : 226-250.
1939.
861 . -- - - Four Sand Dune Culture Burials. BTAPS 12: 241-242. 1940.
New T ype of P ainted Pebbles Found n ear Abilene. BTAPS 12:
862.
242-247. 1940.
863.
. The Deeply Buried Gibson Site. BTAPS 12: 223- 237. 1940.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

864.

. Unusual Skull. BTAPS 12: 238-241. 1940. BTAPS 13: 168
(Plate 30 ) . 1941.
865.
. Was the American Mano and Metate an Invention Mad e During
Pleistocene Time? S 91 (2356) : 190- 191. 1940.
8"66.
Another Type of Gibson Site Point. BTAPS 13 : 177. 1941.
867.
The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. BTAPS 13: 152162. 1941.
Two Mistakes Made by the Editor: The "Iron Button." BT APS
868.
13 : 173- 175. 1941.
869.
. Ancient Artifacts and Mammoth's T eeth of the McLean Site.
BTAPS 14: 137-145, 149- 153. 1942.
870.
. Prehistoric Paintings Covered with Stalagmitic Deposit. BTAPS
14: 49-59. 1942.
871.
. Transparent Calcium Incrustation Over Rock Paintings. S
96 (2497 ) : 426-427. 1942.
872.
. A Texas Skeleton. S 98 (2456) : 344. 1943.
873.
. Ground Sandstone Balls of Upper Elm Creek Bed Gravel. BTAPS
15: 97-104. 1943.
874.
. Human Burial Covered by Twenty-one Feet of Silt. BTAPS 15:
110-116. 1943.
875.
Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. BTAPS 16: 117- 147.
1945.
876.
Folsom Blades. BTAPS 17: 108- 112. 1946.
877.--- - Of Manos, Metates, and Scrapers. BTAPS 17: 103- 104. 1946.
8 7 8 . - - - - Permian Polished Boulders of Texas. BT APS 17: 63-83. 1946.
879.
Scientists Inspect Ancient Hearths in River Silts. BTAPS 17:
104-107. 1946.
880.
Two Buried Multiple Stone Cist .Structures. BT APS 17: 18- 27.
1946.
881.-- - - Chemical Alteration of Silicate Artifacts. BTAPS 18: 28-39.
1947.
882.
Review: Alex D . Krieger, Culture Complexes in Northern Texas.
BTAPS 18: 160- 167. 1947.
883.
Ancient Man in Texas. PTTAS 30: 152-154. 1948.
884. - - - - Survey of Twenty Coke County Sites. BTAPS 19: 36- 56. 1948.
885. - - - - The Facts Concerning the Clear Fork Culture. AAn 13 (4 ) : 320322. 1948.
886.
Comments Concerning Some Type Names in "An Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology." BTAS 26: 272-278. 1955.
887.
. Stone-lined Basin with Charcoal in Lower Clear Fork .Silt. BTAS
26: 101 - 107. 1955.
and Kirk Bry an. Folsomoid Point Found in Alluvium Beside a
888.
Mammoth's Bones. S 88 (2281 ) : 257- 258. 1938.
and E. B. Sayles. An Agreement on Abilene Region Terminology .
889.
BTAPS 13 : 175- 176. 1941.
890. Ray, J. Henry. " Drum" Bones. AAn 10 ( 1) : 101.1944.
891.
. Peculiar Manos from Lower Pease River Valley. BTAS 26: 109111. 1955.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

892. Ray, Mr. and Mrs. J . Henry. A Crystal Arrow Point. AAn 10 (2) : 205206. 1944.
8 9 3 . - - -- Mexican Pottery Head Found in Texas. BT APS 17: 93-98. 1946.
894.-- - - Stone Celts Found in the Vicinity of Vernon, T exas. AAn 11 ( 4) :
261. 1946.
895. Reed, Cly de T . A Carankawa Fire Implement. BTAPS 9: 218-221. 1937.
896. Reed, Erik K. Burials at Mission Espiritu Santo. CT A 4: 85-95 . 1938 .
. Review: Central Texas Arch eological Society Bulletin, Nos 1-2;
897.
Central Texas Archeologist, No.3. AAn 4( 4): 364--367. 1939.
898.
In: Notes and News: Southwestern Area. AAn 6 (3) : 283. 1941.
899.
In: Notes and News: Southwestern Area. Ann 6 (4) : 356--35 7.
1941.
900.
Review: Alex D. Kri eger, Culture Complexes and Chronology
in Northern Texas. BTAPS 18: 157- 160. 1947.
901.
. In: Notes and News: General. AAn 16 (3) : 283. 1951.
902.
. In: Notes and News: Historic Sites. AAn 17 ( 1) : 79. 1951.
903. Reiter, Paul. In: Notes and News: The Southwest. AAn 13 (3): 272-273.
1948.
904.Remsburg, Geo. J. (editor) . In: The Round Table. AB 2(4) : 109.1911.
905 .
. In: TheRoundTable.AB3 (1) : 24.1912.
906.
. In: TheRoundTable.AB3 (4) : 133.1912.
907. Renaud , E . B. L'Antiquite de l'Homme clans !'Amerique du Nord. An 38:
23-49. 1928.
908.
. Prehistoric Flaked Points from Colorado and Neighboring Districts. PCMNH 10 (2) : 6-21. 1931.
909.
Yuma and Folsom Artifacts (New Material) . PCMNH 11 (2) :
5- 18. 1932.
910.
The First Thousand Yuma -Folsom Artifacts. University of Denver. Denver. 1934.
911.
. Review: A. T. Jackson, Picture-writing of the Texas Indians.
AAn 5 ( 4) : 356-359. 1940.
912. Rich, J . L. Soil Mottlings and M ounds in Northeastern Texas as Seen from
the Air. GR 24 ( 4) : 576-583. 1934.
913 . Richards, Annette H. Midland Man . NH 65 (3) : 154--158. 1956.
914. Rinaldo, John B. On Daifuku's N ew Conceptual Scheme for the Prehistoric
Southwes t. AA 54 (4) : 580-586. 1952.
915. Roberts, Frank H. H., Jr. Recent Archaeological Developments in the Vicinity
of El Paso, Texas. SMC 91 ( 7) . 1929.
916.
. A Survey of Southwestern Archaeology. AA 37 ( 1) : 1-35. 1935.
917.
. Review: J . E. P ea r ce and A. T . Jackson , A Prehistori c Rock
Shelter in Val Verde County, Texa s. AA 37 ( 4) : 676-678. 1935.
918.
. A rchaeology in the Southwest. AAn 3 ( 1) : 3-33. 1937.
919.
. D evelopments in the Problem of the North American PaleoIndian. In: Essa ys in Historical Anthropology of North America. SMC 100:
51- 116. 1940.
920.
. Arch eological and Geological Investigations in th e San Jon Distri ct, Eastern New M exico. SMC 103 ( 4) : 1-30. 1942.
921.
. Recent Evidence Relating to an Early Indian Occupation in
North America . PEASC 2 : 31-38 . 1942.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

922. - - - - Evidence for a Paleo-Indian in the New World. AAm 1 (2): 171 201. 1943.
923.
A Deep Burial on the Clear Fork of the Brazos River. BTAPS
16: 9-30. 1945.
924.-- - -. An Early Texan. SM 60 (5): 392--393. 1945.
925.
. The New World Paleo-Indian. ARBS! 1944: 403- 433. 1945.
926.
. Review: George F. Carter, Plant Geography and Culture History
m the American Southwest: Carter's Thesis in the Light of Archaeology:
Southwest. AAn 11 ( 4) : 266-269. 1946.
927.
. The Paleo-Indian in the Central Plains: PFPC: 119-121. 1949.
928.
. Radiocarbon Dates and Early Man. In: Frederick Johnson (editor ), Radiocarbon Dating. MSAA 8 : 20-22. 1951.
929.
The Early Americans. SA 184 (2): 15- 19. 1951.
930.
. Carbon-14 Dates and Archeology. TAGU 33(2): 170-174. 1952.
931.
. River Basin Surveys: The First Five Years of the Inter-Agency
Archeological and Paleontological Salvage Program. ARBS!, 1951: 351-383.
1952.
932.
. The Carb:m-14 Method of Age Determination. ARBS!. 1951:
335-350. 1952. (Revision , with addition of new material, of: Carbon-14 Dates
and Archeology. TAGU 33(2): 170-174. 1952).
933.
. Earliest Men in America: Their Arrival and Spread in Late
Pleistocene and Post-Pleistocene Times. JWH 1 (2) : 255-277. 1953.
934.
. Review: E. H . Sellards, Early Man in America: A Study in
Prehistory. AAn 19 (2) : 180-191.1953.
935.
. Review: Fred Wendorf, Alex D. Krieger, and Claude C. Albritton, The Midland Discovery: A Report on the Pleistocene Human Remains
from Midland, Texas. AA 58 ( 4): 754-756. 1956.
936. Roberts, 0 . M. Prehistoric Races in Texas. QTSHA 1 (3) : 145-150. 1898.
937. Roessler, A . R. Antiquities and Aborigines of Texas. ARBSI, 1881 , in: Senate
Miscellaneous Document No. 109, 1881 - 82, 47th Congress, 1st Session ( Series
No. 1994) : 613-616. 1882.
938. Romer, A. S. Pleistocene Vertebrates and Their Bearing on the Problem of
Human Antiquity in North America. In: Diamond Jenness (editor), The
American Aborigines. University of Toronto Press. Toronto. 1933. Pages
49-84.
939. Roosa , William B. Sandals of Feather Cave. BTAS 23: 133-146. 1952.
940.
. Preliminary Report on the Lucy Site. EP 62(2): 36-49 . 1956.
941. Rouse, Irving. The Southeast and the \Vest Indies. In: John W. Griffin
(editor ), The Florida Indian and His Neighbors: 117- 137. Rollins College.
Winter Park. 1949.
942.
. Review: James A. Ford, Measurements of Some Prehistoric
Design D evelopments in the Southeastern U nited States. AAn 19(3): 296- 297.
1954.
943 . Runkles, Frank A. Indi an Artifacts of Comanche County, Texas. BCTAS 2:
70-73. 1936.
944. Rusk, Mrs. Billie. Index to Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Volumes One through Twenty-two. BTAPS. 1953.
945. Russell, F. B. Arch eology of Bell County. BCTAS 2: 49-5 1. 1936.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

946. Sauer, Carl 0. Environment and Culture During the Last Deglaciation. PAPS
92(1): 65-77. 1948.
947. Sayles, E. B. Some Types of Archaeological Sites near Abilene, Texas.
BTAPS 1: 43- 49. 1929.
948.
A Rock Shelter in Coke County. BTAPS 2: 33-40. 1930.
949. - - - - - . Some Flint Sources in Central West Texas. BTAPS 3: 18-23.
1931.
950. - - - - An Archaeological Survey of Texas. MP 17. 1935.
9 5 1 . - - - - An Archaeological Survey of Chihuahua, Mexico. MP 22. 1936.
9 5 2 . - - - - Review: Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 9. AAn 4 (2 ) : 177- 182. 1938.
953.
. Infant Burial in Carrying Basket. BTAPS 13: 77-87. 1941.
954.
. Some Texas Cave Dweller Artifacts. BTAPS 13: 163- 1'68. 1941.
955. Schmitt, Karl. The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma. BT APS 21:
69-89. 1950.
956.
and Raymond Toldan, Jr. The Brown Site, Gd-1 , Grady County,
Oklahoma. ETAS 24: 141 - 17'6. 1953.
957. Schoffelmayer, Victor H. The Big Bend Area of Texas: A Geographic
Wonderland. TGM 1 (1): 1- 25. 1937.
958 . Scholes, France V., and H . P. Mera. Some Aspects of the Jumano Problem.
CICAAH 34. 1940.
959. Schuetz, Mardith K. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Materials. ETAS
27: 129-160. 1956.
960.
A Carbon-14 Date from Trans-Pecos, Texas. ETAS 28: 288-289.
1957.
961.
A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. ETAS 28:
135-1 68. 1957.
962. Schulman, Edmund. Dendrochronology in Big Bend National Park, Texas.
TRB 18 (2-3) : 18- 27. 1952.
963.
. Rio Grande Chronologies. TRB 19 (3-4) : 20-33. 1953.
964. Schultz, C. Bertrand. Some Artifact Sites of Early Man in the Great Plains
and Adjacent Areas. AAn 8 (3) : 242-249. 1943.
and W. D. Frankforter. The Geologic History of the Bison in
965.
the Great Plains (A Preliminary Report). BUNSM 3(1): 1-10. 1946.
966. Sears, William H. Excavations at Kolomoki. Season III and IV, Mound D.
UGSA 4. 1953.
967.
. The Sociopolitical Organization of Pre-Columbian Cultures on the
Gulf Coastal Plain. AA 56(3): 339-346. 1954.
968.
Excavations at Kolomoki: Final Report. UGSA 5. 1956.
In: Notes and News: Southeast: Texas. AAn 23 (1) : 104-105.
969.
1957.
970. - - - - In: Notes and N ews : Southeast : Texas. AAn 23 (2) : 218. 1957.
971. - - - - Burial Mounds on the Gulf Coastal Plain. AAn 23 ( 3) : 27 4-284.
1958.
972. - - - - In: Notes and News: Southeast: Texas. AAn 23 (4 ) : 459- 460.
1958.
973. Sellards, E. H. Ancient, Not Prehistoric, Relics Found. SN 18 (486): 77. 1930.
974.
. Malakoff Image (abstract) . BGSA 41 : 207. 1930.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

975.

243

. Recent Studies of Early Man in the Southwestern Part of the
United States. AN 70: 361-369. 1936.
Artifacts Associated with Fossil Elephant. BGSA 49: 999-1009.
976.
1938.
977.
A Prehistoric Stone Image. TMMIC 18. 1940.
978.
Early Man in America: Index to Localities, and Selected Bibliography. BGSA 51: 373-432. 1940.
979.
. Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee County,
Texas. BGSA 51: 1627-1657. 1940.
980.
Stone Images from Henderson County, Texas. AAn 7(1 ) : 29-38.
1941.
981.
Terrace Deposits as an Aid to Age Determination of Early Man.
BGSA 52(12), Pt. 2 : 2007-2008. 1941.
982.
. Ancient Carvings. In: Views in Texas Memorial Museum. MN
6: 23-29. 1944.
983.
. Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Texas (abstract ).
BGSA 56: 1196-1197. 1945.
984.
. Early Man in America: Index to Localities and Selected Bibliography, 1940-1945. BGSA 58: 955-978. 1947.
Clear Fork Points. BTAPS 21: 110-111. 1950.
985.
986.
. Age of Folsom Man. S 115 (2978 ) : 98. 1952.
987.
. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of
Texas Press. Austin. 1952.
988.
. Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Milnesand, New
Mexico. A An 20 ( 4) : 336-344. 1955.
989.
, Glen L . Evans, Grayson E. Meade, and Alex D. Krieger. Fossil
Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas. BGSA 58: 927-954.
1947.
990. Setzler, Frank M . A Prehistoric Cave in Texas. EFWSI, 1931: 133-140. 1932.
Prehistoric Cave Dwellers of Texas. EFWSI, 1932: 53-56. 1933.
991.
992.
. Cave Burials in Southwestern Texas. EFWSI, 1933: 35-37. 1934.
993.
. A Prehistoric Cave Culture in Southwestern Texas. AA 37 (1):
104-110. 1935.
994.
. Exploring a Cave in Southwestern Texas. EFWSI, 1938: 75-78.
1939.
995.
. Archaeological Explorations in the United States, 1930-1942.
AAm 1 (2 ) : 206-220. 1943.
996.
. Review: J. Charles Kelley, T. N . Campbell, and Donald J.
Lehmer, The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits
in the Big Bend Region of Texas. AAn 8(3 ) : 302-304. 1943.
997. Schackleford, William J. Excavation at the Polvo Site in Western Texas. AAn
20 (3) : 256-262. 1955.
Y98. Shaeffer, James B. The Nagle Site Preliminary Report. OASN 5 (6): 3-6.
1956.
999.
. The McCarter Site, A Late Archaic Occupation at Muskogee,
Oklahoma. BTAS 28: 240-268. 1957.
1000.
. The Nagle Site, Ok-4. BOAS 5: 93-99. 1957.
1001.
. Archaeological Evidence on the Oklahoma Highway System.
OASN 6 (9) : 4-10. 1958.

244

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1002.

Summer Activities of the Highway Salvage Project. OASN 7 (4) :
7. 1958.

1003.
1004.

The Alibates Flint Quarry, Texas. AAn 24(2): 189- 191. 1958.
The Horton Site, a Fultonoid Village near Vian, Oklahoma.
BOAS '6: 1-26. 1958.
1005. Sharrock, Floyd W. Preliminary Report on the Van Shuyver Site, Pottawotami
County, Oklahoma. BOAS 7: 22--40. 1959.
1006.
. Test Excavations at the Willingham Site, Ml-5, McClain
County, Oklahoma. BOAS 7: 41- 50. 1959.
1007. Shead, Ralph B. Engraved Shells of the Spiro Mound. Reprinted from: The
Seventh Annual Report of The Museum of The University of Oklahoma,
1950-1951.
1008. Shetrone, Hem·y Clyde. The Mound-Builders. Appleton Century. New York
and London. 1936.
1009. Shipley, Jack. Ancient Texas Village Site and Its Relics. AB 2 (3) : 63-64.
1911.
1010. Shuler, E. W. The Geology of Dallas County. UTB 1818. 1918.
1011.
. Occurrence of Human Remains with Pleistocene Fossils, Lagow
Sand Pit, Dallas, Texas. S 57 (1472): 333-334. 1923.
1012.
Figurine from a Gravel Pit of Dallas, Texas. BTAPS 4: 79-80.
1932.
1013.
Collecting Fossil Elephants at Dallas, Texas. BTAPS 6: 75-79.
1934. Reprinted in FL 3(1): 24--29. 1934.
1014.
. Terraces of the Trinity River, Dallas County, Texas. FL 3(2):
44--53. 1935.
1015. Simmons, Frank E. Subsequent Notes on the Sunken Middens of the Leon.
CT ASNL 3 (2) : 7-8. 1941.
The Hilltop Middens. CTASNL 2 ( 7) : 30-31. 1941.
1016.
1017.
(Untitled Notes ). CTASNL 3(5): 21-22. 1942.
1018.
Archeology in Coryell County. CTA 6: 27-37. 1953.
1019.
Snails of the Burnt Rock Middens. CTA 7: 49-51. 1956.
1020. Simmons, H. J. Human Bones Found Near Galveston, A Letter Communicated by Mr. James Douglas. BAGS 35(5): 548-549. 1903.
1021. Simpson, Bessie W. Gem Trails of Texas: A Field Guide for Collectors. Newman Stationery and Printing Co. Dallas. 1958.
1022. Smith, Arthur George. Suggested Change in Nomenclature of the Major
American Time Periods. AAn 23(2 ): 169. 1957.
1023. Smith, Carlyle S. In: Notes and News: Plains. AAn 16(2): 183. 1950.
In: Notes and News: Southern Plains. AAn 16(3): 288. 1951.
1024.
1025.
In: Notes and News: Southern Plains. AAn 17 (1): 86. 1951.
1026.
In: Notes and News: Plains: Caddoan Area. AAn 18(1): 95-96.
1952.
1027. Smith, Hale G. Review: Donald J . Lehmer, The Jornada Branch of the
Mogollon. AAn 15(1): 67-68.1949.
1028. Smith, Victor J. Indian Pictographs of the Big Bend in Texas. PTFLS 2:
18-30. 1923.
1029.
. The Human Hand in Primitive Art. PTFLS 4: 80-102. 1925.
1030.
. Some Notes on the Dry Rock Shelters in Western Texas. AA
29(2): 286-290. 1927.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

1031.

245

. In: Archa eological Field Work in North America During 1927.
AA 30 (3) : 519. 1928.
1032.
In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1928.
AA 31 (2): 356. 1929.
1033.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in I orth America During 1929.
AA 32(2): 369. 1930.
1034.
. The Susan M. Janes Collection. WTHSS 3: 7. 1930.
1035.
Archeological Notes of the Big Bend Region. BTAPS 3: 60-69.
1931.
1036.
In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1930.
AA 33(3): 482. 1931.
1037.
. Muller Rock Shelter, A Report on Dry Rock Shelter Excavation
in the Big Bend Region of Texas. WTHSSC 1. 1932.
1038.
. Carved Rock Shelter, A Report on Dry Rock Shelter Excavation
in the Big Bend in Texas. WTHSSC 2. 1933. (Portions of this published in
BTAPS 10: 222-233. 1938. )
1039.
. In: Archaeological Field ''Vork in North America During 1931.
AA 34(3): 504. 1932.
1040.
. Report on Anthropological Research. WTHSS 4: 49-50. 1932.
1041.
. The Relation of the Southwestern Basket Maker to the Dry
Shelter Culture of the Big Bend. BTAPS 4: 55-62. 1932.
1042.
. In: Field Notes and Reviews. BTAPS 5: 94--95. 1933.
1043.
. Sandals of the Big Bend Culture, with Additional Notes Concerning Basket-Maker Evidence. BTAPS 5: 57-65. 1933.
1044.
. Hord Rock Shelter. BTAPS 6: 97-106. 1934.
1045.
. In : Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1934.
AAn 1 (2): 134.1935.
1046.
. The Split Stitch Basket, A Distinguishing Culture Trait of the
Big Bend in Texas. BTAPS 7: 100-104. 1935.
1047.
. The Pottery Horizons of Texas. BTAPS 8: 94--112. 1936.
1048.
. Archaeology-Anthropology-Prehistoric Texas. In: The State of
Texas Book. Austin. 1937. Pages 13- 20. (Same as: A Survey of Indian Life in
Texas. WTHSSC 5. 1941.)
1049.
. Carved Rock Shelter. BTAPS 10: 222-233. 1938.
1050.
. Dust-exhaust in Caves During Archaeological Explorations. PAG
70 (2): 89-90. 1938.
1051.
Cordage of the Caves in the Greater Big Bend. BTAPS 12: 175194. 1940.
1052.
A Survey of Indian Life in Texas. WTHSSC 5. 1941. (Reprinted
from: Frontier Times, Bandera, Texas, August, 1941. )
1053.
. Some Unusual Basketry and Bags from th e Big Bend Caves.
BTAPS 13: 133-151. 1941.
1054.
. Some Unusual Basketry from the Big Bend Caves (abstract) .
PTTAS 24: 19. 1941.
1055.
. Evidence of European Influence in the Pictographs of West
Texas. BTAPS 14: 38-47. 1942. BTAPS 17: 48-62. 1946.
1056.
. The Use of Stone Walls for Fortification in the Big Bend of
Texas. CHSMN 55: 233-234. 1943.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1057.

The Use of Rock Wall Con stru ction by th e Indian s of the Big
Bend in Texa s. TJS 3(3) : 343-349. 1951.
1058 .
and J. Charles Kelley. The Meriwether Rock Shelter, A Report
on Rock Shelter Excavation in the Big Bend of Texas. WTHSSC 3. 1933.
1059. Snow, Charles E. T chefun cte Skeletal Remain s. In: James A . Ford and
George I. Quimby , The Tchefunct2 Culture, An Early Occupation of the
Lower Mississippi Vall ey : 99- 110. MSAA 2. 1945.
1050. Sollberg2r, J . B. Lamb's Creek Mound. R 7 ( 1) : 2- 5. 1948.
1061.
A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Kerr County, T exas. R 8 (3) :
9- 14. 1949.
1062. - -- - - (Three Sites in Atascosa County, T exas ) . R 9 (3 ) : 8- 14. 1951.
1063 . - - - - The Humphr eySite. R 11 (3) : 11- 14.1953.
and R. K. Harris. Burials 6 and 7, Site 27B1- 2. R 7 (8 ) : 27- 28.
1064. - -- 1949.
1065. Sorenson, John L . Dating Archaeological Finds by Radioactive Content.
BUAS 2 : 1- 6. 1951.
1066. Spaulding, Albert C. In: Notes and N ews: Texas Archeological Society. AAn
18 (3) : 302-303.1953.
1067. Stallings, W. S. , Jr. El Paso Poly chrome. LATSB 3. 193 1.
1068.
. Notes on the Pueblo Culture in South-central N ew Mexico and
in the Vicinity of El Paso. T exas. AA 34 ( 1) : 67- 78. 1932.
1069. Stearns, Charles E. Revi ew: Fred W endorf, Alex D. Krieger, and Claude C.
Albritton, The Midland Discovery : A Report on the Pleistocene Human
Remains from Midhnd. T exas. AAn 22 (2) : 197-198. 1956.
1070. Steen, Charlie R. Two Early Historic Sites on th e Southern Plains. ETAS 24:
177- 188. 1953.
1071.
. Bak2d Clay Figurin: s from the S p ani s~~ Fort Site. PPHR 28:
107- 109. 1955.
1072.
. Archeological SJcieties in Texas. BT AS 27: 245-252. 1956.
1073.
. Prehistoric Man in the A WR River Basins. In: A Survey of
Archaeology and History in th e Arkansas-White-Red River Basins. National
Park Service, Region Three. Santa Fe. 1955.
1074. Stephen son, L. VV. On the Origin of the "Rock Wall" of Rockwall, T exas.
JWAS 17 ( 1) : 1- 5.1927.
1075. St-ephens "n , Robert L. Archaeological Survey of Whitney Basin: A Preliminary Report. BTAPS 18: 129- H2. 1947.
1076.
In: Plains Archa eological Conferen ce. PACNL October 15, 1947.
1077.
. River Basin Surveys in T exas. PACNL 1: 31. 1947- 1948.
1078.
. Archaeologi cal Survey of M cGee Bend Reservoir: A Preliminary
Repor t. BTAPS 19: 57- 73.1948.
1079.
. A Note on Some Large Pits in Csrtain Sites near Dallas, T exas.
AAn 15 ( 1) : 53-55.1 949.
1080.
. Archaeological Survey of Lavon and Garza-Little Elm Reservoirs: A Preliminary Report. BTAPS 20: 21-62. 1949.
1081.
. A Survey of the Whitney Basin in Hill and Bosque Counties,
Texas. PFPC: 3 1- 32. 1949.
1082.
Glass Bottle Fragments, Hogge Bridge. R 7( 7) : 24. 1949.
1083.
River Basin Surveys in T exas. PACNL 2 (3) : 12- 13. 1949.
1084.
River Basin Surveys in T exas. PACNL 2 (4 ) : 8-9. 1949.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

247

1085.--- -. Culture Chronology in Texas. AAn 16 (2) : 151 -15 7. 1950.
. The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. AAn 17 (4) : 2991086.
312. 1952.
1087. - - - - - . Review: Central Texas Archeologist, No. 6. AAn 21 (2) : 193.
1955.
1088.
. Review: Bulletin of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 24.
AAn 21 (4 ) : 433-434. 1956.
1089.
. Review: Dee Ann Suhm, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks,
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. AAn 22(3): 310-312. 1957.
1090. Stewart, T . D .. Skeletal Remains from Southwestern Texas. AJPA 20 (2):
213-231. 1935.
1091.
. Some Historical Implications of Physical Anthropology in North
America. In: Essays in Historical Anthropology of North America. SMC 100:
15-50. 1940.
1092.
. The Circular Type of Cranial D eformity in the United States.
AJPA 28 (3) : 343-35 1. 1941.
1093.
Report on J . C. Putnam Skeleton from Texas. BTAPS 16: 31-39.
1945.
1094.
Distribution of the Type of Cranial Deformity Originally D escribed Under the Name "Tete Trilobee." In: El Occidente de Mexico: Cuarta
Reunion de Mesa Redonda sobre Problemas AnthropolOgicos de Mexico y
Centro America . Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia. Mexico, D. F. 1949.
Pages 17-20.
1095. Stirling. M. W . Archeological Reconnaissance in Texas and N evada. EFWSI,
1930: 173-176. 1930.
1096.
. In Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1930.
AA 33 (3) : 480. 1931.
1097.
. Report on the Bureau of American Ethnology. ARBSI, 1948:
53-84. 1949.
1098.
. Report on the Bureau of American Ethnology. ARBSI, 1950:
48-72. 1951 .
1099.
. Report on the Bureau of American Ethnology. ARBSI, 1951:
56-95. 1952.
1100.
. Report on the Bureau of American Ethnology. ARBSI, 1952:
56-85. 1953.
1101. Strain, W. S. El Paso. TAN 2: 4-5. 1940.
1102. Straley, W. Indian Village Sites near Comanche, T exas. AB 1 ( 1) : 13-15.
1909.
1103. - - - - A Work for the I. S. of A . AB 1 (3) : 58-59. 1910.
1104. - - - - A Jaunt to Ancient Haunts. AB 2 (4) : 101 - 102. 1911 .
1105. - - - - A Letter from T exas. AB 3(4 ) : 132-1 33. 1912.
1106. - - - - A Cave Sepulchre. AB 4 (3): 65-66. 191 3.
1107. - - - - Some T exas Items. AB 6 (1) : 13-14. 191 5.
1108. - - - - In: Found in the Editor's Mail Box. AB 7(3) : 90. 1916.
1109. - - - - In: Found in the Editor's Mail Box. AB 7 ( 4): 108. 1916.
1110. - - - - In: Found in the Editor's Mail Box. AB 7 (5 ) : 131-1 32. 1916.
1111. - - - - In : Found in the Editor's Mail Box. AB 7 (6): 148. 1916.
1112. - - - - In: Found in the Editor's Mail Box. AB 8(1): 14. 1917.
1113. - - - - In: Found in the Editor's Mail Box. AB 8(3) : 46. 1917.

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1114.
. In: Found in the Editor's Mail Box. AB 8(3): 46-47. 1917.
1115. Strong, William Duncan. Review : Wa ldo R. Wedel et al., River Basin
Surveys Papers : Inter-Agency Salvage Programs, Nos. 1- 6. AA 56(6): 11271128. 1954.
1116. Studer, Floyd V. Archeological Survey of the North Panhandle of T exas.
BTAPS 3: 70- 75. 1931.
1117. - - - - - . Discovering the Panhandle. PPHR 4: 7-23. 1931.
1118.
. Some Field Notes and Observations Concerning T exas Panhandle
Ru ins. In: Warren K. Moorehead, Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley :
131- 141. New Haven. 1931.
1119.
. Hunting Indians in the Panhandle-Plains Museum. PPHR 7:
79-94. 1934.
1120. - - - - - . Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55 . BTAPS 6: 80-96. 1934.
1121.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1934.
AAn 1 (2): 133-134. 1935.
11 22. - - - - . Department of Archaeology and Paleontology. In: Reports Read
at the Annual M eeting of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society at Canyon,
Texas, May 12, 1939. PPHR 12: 91-95. 1939.
1123.
. Archeology of the Texas Panhandle. PPHR 28: 87-95. 1955.
1124.
. Texas Archeological Society. PPHR 28: 5-17. 1955.
1125. Sturgis, H. F. A Burnt-rock Midd en Site in Travis County. ETAS 27: 111 - 128.
1956.
1126. Suhm, Dee Ann. Excavation at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas. ETAS
26: 7-54. 1955.
1127.
. Student Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County.
SPA 2 ( 1) : 23- 25 . 1955.
1128.
. Excavation s at th e Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, T exas.
TJS 9(1): 26-58.1957.
1129.
. The Williams Site and Central T exas Archeology. TJS 11 (2) :
218-250. 1959.
11 30.
, Alex D . Kri eger, and Edward B. Jelks, An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology . BT AS 25. 1954.
1131. Swanton, John R. Southern Contacts of the Indians North of the Gulf of
Mexico. ACJA 1: 53-59. 1924.
11 32. Talbot, Fred. The Big Bend Country of Texas. BLCAS 1: 10- 11. 1957.
11 33 . Tatum, Robert M. Distribution and Bibliography of th e Pctrogl yphs of the
United States. AAn 12 (2) : 122-125. 1946.
11 34. Taylor, H erbert C., Jr. An Archa eological Reconnai ssance in Northern
Coahuila. BTAPS 19: 74--87. 1948.
11 35.
. A T entative Cultural Sequence for the Area About the Mouth
of the Pecos. BTAPS 20: 73-88. 1949.
11 36.
. Comments on W est Texas Pictographs. JISAS 1 (3) : 67-74. 1951.
1137. Tay lor, Walter W. Some Implications of the Carbon-14 Dates from a Cave in
Coahuila, Mexico. BT AS 27: 215- 234. 1956.
11 38. Ta ylor, W. W ., Jr., and VV. C. Boy d. Blood Group s of th e Prehistori c Indians
of Coahuila by Serological Tests of Their Mummified Remains. APSY 1943:
178- 180. 1944.
1139. Thieme, Fred P ., Charlotte M. Otten. and H. Eldon Sutton. A Blood T y ping
of Human Skull Fragments from the Pleistocene. AJPA 14 (3) : 437-443. 1956.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERAT URE

249

1140. Thoburn, J. B. The P rehi storic Cultures of Oklahoma. In : Warren K. Mooreh ead, Archaeology of the Arkansas River Valley: 53- 71. Andover. 193 1.
1141. Thompson, J . Eric. In: Notes and News: Middle America: Mexico. AAn
18 (1) : 100. 1952.
1142. Thone, Frank. A Corridor for Corn. SN 27 ( 742 ) : 419. 1935.
1143. Toulouse, Joe H. , Jr. Ea rly Man in the Southwest. EP 43 (22- 26) : 130-136.
1937.
1144.
. Arrow-shaft T ools (with Notes on Their General Distribution ).
In: Clyde Kluckhohn and Paul Reiter (editors ) , Preliminary Report on the
1937 Excavations, Bc- 50- 51 , Chaco Canyon, New M exico. UNMBAS 3 (2 ) :
80-89. 1939.
1145. Troike, Rudolph C. Anthropologica l Theor y and Plains Archeology . ETAS
26: 113-143. 1955.
1146. Trowbridge, A. C. T ertiary and Quaternary Geology of the Lower Rio
Grande Region, Texas. USGSAB 837. 1932. Seep. 223.
1147. T schopik, Harry, Jr. Artifacts of Perishable Materials. In: Clyde Kluckhohn
and Paul Reiter (edi tors), P reliminary Report on the 1937 Excavations, BC-5051, Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. UMBAS 3(2) : 94 ~ 1 30. 1939.
1148. Tunnell, Curtis D., and Jack T. Hughes. An Archaic Bison Kill in the Texas
Panhandle. PPHR 28: 63- 70. 1955.
1149. Turner , Fred A . Chronic Arth ritis in the Early American Indian in Central
T exas. BCT AS 2: 35-38 . 1936 .
1150.
. Review of Skeletons from a Mass Burial n ear Waco. CTA 3:
29-33. 1937.
1151. U dden , J. A. The Origin of th e Small Sand Mounds of the Gulf Coast
Country. S 23(596): 849-851. 1906.
1152. Upton, R. G. Some Problematical Rocks (abstract ) . PTAS 23: 43. 1940.
11 53.
. The Mound Street M ound of Nacogdoches, T exas (abs tract ) .
PTAS 23: 10. 1940.
1154. Vaillant, George C. Some Resemblances in the Ceramics of Central and North
America. MP 12. 1932.
1155. Van Royen, W . Review: Frank Bryan, Evidence of Recent M ovements Along
Faults of Balcones System in Central T exas. AAn 3(3): 285-286. 1938.
1156. Veatch, A. C. On the Human Origin of the Small M ounds of the Lower
Mississippi Valley and T exas. S 23 ( 575 ) : 3~3 6. 1906.
11 57. Walker, Jimmy. The First T exan. TP 16 (9) : 2~27. 1956.
1158. W alker, Keith F., and David W. Trexler. An Indian Camp Site in the
Northern Finlay Mountains, Hudspeth County, Texas. FL 9 (2) : 60...!69. 1941.
11 59. Walker, Winslow M. A Variety of Caddo Pottery from Louisiana . JWAS
24(2) : 99-104. 1934.
1160.
. A Caddo Burial Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana. SMC 94 ( 14) .
1935.
1161. Walley, Raymond. A Preliminary Report on the Albert George Site in F ort
Bend County. ETAS 26: 218-234. 1955.
1162. W aring, A. J., Jr., Brief Symposium on the " Southern Cult." AAn 14 (2 ) : 151155. 1948.
1163.
and Preston Holder. A P rehistoric Ceremonial Complex in the
Southeastern United States. AA 47 ( 1) : 1- 34. 1945 .

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1164. Watson, Virginia. The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description
and Analysis. BTAPS 21: 7-68. 1950.
1165. Watt, Frank H. Stone Implements of Central Texas Area. BCT AS 1: 16-19,
25, 29, 30, 31. 1935.
1166.
A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County, Texas. BCTAS 2:
5-27. 1936.
1167. - - - - A Gravel Pit Burial n-,ar Litth River. CTA 3: 80-82. 1937.
1168. - - - - Descriptive Analysis of Glass Indian Trade Beads Found m
Central Texas. CTA 3: 61 - 67.1937.
1169.
. Report on a Small R:Jck Shelter in Coryell County . CT A 4:
103-104. 1938.
1170.
Th2 Waco Sinker. CTA 4: 21-70. 1938.
1171.
New Finds of the VVaco Sinker. CTASNL 2: 6. 1939.
Painted P ebbles. CTASNL 2 (3 ) : 12-13. 1940.
1172.
VVaco Area: Conclusions bas?d on Recent Work. TAN 2: 11 - 12.
1173.
1940.
A Central Texas Stone Pendant. CTASNL 3 (3 ) : 10-11. 1941.
1174.
1175.
Preliminary Report on Potsherds from Chupek Site. CT ASNL
2 (4 ) : 17- 19. 19~1.
1176.
. Surface Artifacts from Aycock Shelter Area. CTASNL 2 (5) :
22-25. 1941.
1177.
. Preliminary Report on Warner Site Numb8r 2. CTASNL 3 (3 ) :
12-14. 1941. CTASNL 3 (4 ) : 15-19. 1942. CTASNL 3 (5): 29-30. 1942.
1178.
. Beveled 4 Bladed Artifacts of Central Texas. CT ASNL 3 ( 5) :
27-29. 1942.
1179.
. Club Heads of the Central Brazos Terraces. CTASNL 3 (5) :
23-25. 1942.
1180.
. Abrading Implements, Cultural Indices in the Central Brazos
Valley Area. CTA 5: 2-16. 1944.
1181. - -- -- . Ash Pit in Buried Midd en on Brazos River. CTA 6: 40, 104
(Fig.13a ) . 1953.
1182.
Editorial Comment. CTA 6: 6-8. 1953.
1183. - -- Pottery Diffusions of the Central Brazos Valley. CTA 6: 57-85.
1953.
1184. - -- -- . Archeologicd Materials from the Asa Warner Sites. CTA 7:
7-29. 1956.
1185.
Two Coryell County Burials. CTA 7: 111. 1956.
and W. P. Meroney. Glass Indian Trade Beads in Central Texas.
1186.
CTA 3: 52-59. 1937.
1187. - -- - - . Supplementary Report on Mass Burial near Waco. CTA 3: 27-29.
1937.
1188. Watts, W. C. Lake Sites of the South Plains of Texas. BT APS 11 : 77-91. 1939.
1189. Webb, Clarence H. House Types Among the Caddo Indians. BTAPS 12:
49-75. 1940.
1190.
. Dental Abn:Jrmalities as Found in the Am2rican Indian. AJOOS
30 (9): 474-486. 1944.
1191.
. A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana.
BTAPS 16: 52-83. 1945.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

1192.

. Two U nusual T ypes of Chipped Stone Artifacts from Northwest Louisiana. BT APS 17 : 9- 17. 1946.
1193.
Caddoan Prehistory : The Bossier Focus. BTAPS 19: 100-1 47.
1948.
11 94.
Review: Alex D. Krieger, Culture Complexes and Chronology
in Northern Texas, with Extension of Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi
Valley. AAn 14 (2) : 140- 145.1948.
1195.
. Review: H. P erry Newell and Alex D. Krieger, Th e George C.
Davis Site, Cherokee County, T exas. BTAPS 21: 112--116. 1950.
1196.
. Comments Concerning the East Texas Section of "An Introdu ctory Handbook of Texas Archeology." BTAS 26: 259-271. 1955.
1197.
. Elements of the Southern Cult in the Belcher Focus. SACNL
5(1 ) : 21-30. 1956.
1198.
. The Role of the Nonprofessional in the Local Socie ty . AAn
22(2 ) : 170-172. 1956.
1199.
. The Belcher Mound : A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish,
Louisiana. MSAA 16. 1959.
1200.
and Monroe Dodd, Jr. Bone "Gorget" from a Caddoan Mound
Burial.AAn4 (3) : 265-268 .1939.
1201.
. Further Excavation of the Gahagan Mound; Connections with a
Florida Culture. BTAPS 11: 92--127 . 1939.
i202. - - - -. Pottery T y pes from the Belcher Mound Site. BTAPS 13 : 88-116.
1941 .
1203. Weckler, Joe. Review: Harold S. Gladwin. Excavations at Snaketown . Volume
II, Comparison and Theories. AAn 5 (2) : 180-189. 1939.
1204. Wedel, Waldo R. Review: A. T. Jackson, The Fall Creek Sites; and A. M.
Woolsey, Additional L ake Buchanan Sites. AAn 6 ( 1) : 89-91. 1940.
1205 .
. Culture Chronology in the Central Great Plains. AAn 12 (3) :
148- 156. 1947.
1206. - - - -. In: Notes and N ews. AAn 14 ( 1) : 74-75.1948.
1207.
. In: Notes and N ews. AAn 14 (3) : 244-245. 1949.
1208. Weir, Frank AI. Surface Artifacts from La Perdida, Starr County, Texas.
BTAS 27: 59-78. 1956.
1209. W eltfish, Gene. Preliminary Classification of Prehistoric Southwestern
Basketry. SMC 87(7 ) . 1932.
1210. Wendorf, Fred. A Reconstruction of Northern Rio Grand e P rehistory. AA
56(2) : 200-227. 1954.
12 11.
. Nancy Fox, and Orian L . Lewis (editors ), Pipeline Archaeology:
Reports of Salvage Operations in the Southwest on El Paso Natural Gas
Company Projects. The Laboratory of Anthropology and The Museum of
Northern Arizona. Santa Fe and Flagstaff. 1956.
1212.
and Alex D. Kri ege r. New Light on the Midland Discovery. AAn
25 (1) : 66-78. 1959.
121 3.
and Claude C. Albritton. The Midland Discovery: A Report on the
Pleistocene Human Remains from Midland, Texas. With a D escription of the
Skull by T. D. Stewart. U niversity of Texas Press. Austin. 1955.
1214. Wendorf, Fred, and Erik K. Reed. An Alternative Reconstruction of Northern
Rio Grande Prehistory. EP 62 (5-6 ) : 131-173. 1955.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1215. 'vV entworth, Irving H. A Few Notes on 'Indian Mounds' in T exas. S 23 ( 595 ) :
818-819. 1906.
1216. Wetmore, Alexander, and H erbert Friedmann. The California Condor in
Texas. Con 35 (1) : 37-38. 1933.
1217. Wheat, Joe Ben. Abilene Area. TAN 2: 7-8. 1940.
. Lubbock Area. TAN 2: 6-7. 1940.
1218.
1219.
. Preliminary Report on the Excavation of the Hodges Site.
BTAPS 12: 195-216. 1940.
1220.
. Archaeological Survey of the Addicks Basin: A Preliminary
Report. BTAPS 18: 143- 145. 1947.
1221.
. Notes on theW. A. Myatt Site. BTAPS 18: 87-93. 1947.
1222.
. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast
Texas. In: River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4, The Addicks Dam Site.
River Basin Surveys Papers, Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program.
BAEB 154: 143-252. 1953.
1223.
Two Archeological Sites near Lubbock, Texas. PPHR 28: 71-77.
1955.
1224.
Review: Dee Ann Suhm, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks,
An Introductory Handbook of T exas Archeology. AA 59 ( 4): 742.-743. 1957.
1225. \IVheeler, Richard Page. Selected Projectile Point Types of the United States:
II. BOAS 2: 1-6. 1954.
1226.
. Two New Projectile Point T ypes : Duncan and Hanna Points.
PA 1: 7-14. 1954.
1227. Whitaker, Thomas W ., Hugh C. Cutler, and Richard S. MacNeish. Cucurbit
Materials from Three Caves n ear Ocampo, Tamaulipas. AAn 22 (4): 353-358.
1957.
1228. White, J. B. Milam County. The Future Field for Archeologists. CTA 3:
41-48. 1937.
1229. White, Patrick J. Caves of Central Texas. In: The Caves of T exas. BNSS 10:
46-64. 1948.
1230. White, Sarah. Human Effigy Pipes from Spiro Mound, Leflore County,
Oklahoma.OP3 ( 1) : 10- 11.1940.
1231. Whittemore, Mary. Artifacts of Bone, Antler, and Shell. In: Clyde Kluckhohn
and Paul Reiter (editors) , Preliminary Report on the 1937 Excavations, Be50-51 , Chaco Canyon, New Mexico. UNMBAS 3(2) : 131 - 146. 1939.
1232. Willey, Gordon R. Archeology of the Florida Gulf Coast. SMC 113. 1949.
1233.
. The Florida Indian and His Neighbors: A Summary. In: John
W. Griffin (editor ), The Florida Indian and His Neighbors: 139-1'68. Rollins
College. \IVinter Park. 1949.
1234.
. Review: Muriel Noe Porter, Tlatilco and the Pre-Classic Cultures of the New World. AAn 22 ( 1) : 88-89. 1956.
1235.
and Philip Phillips. Method and Theory in American Archeology
II: Historical-Developmental Interpretation. AA 57(4) : 723-819 . 1955.
1236.
. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of
Chicago Press. Chicago. 1958.
1237. Williams, Stephen, and John M. Goggin. The Long Nosed God Mask in the
Eastern United States. MA 18 (3) : 1-72. 1956.
1238. Williams, ·walter J. Collection of Artifacts of the American Indian in the
Bay lor University Museum. BCTAS 1: 27-28. 1935.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL LITERATURE

1239. Willoughby, Charles C. Textile Fabrics from the Spiro Mound. MA 14:
107- 118. 1952.
1240. Wilson, Ernest W. Burned Rock Mounds of Southwest Texas. BTAPS 2:
59-63. 1930.
1241. Wilson, Lester. Campsite on East Fork near Wylie. R 2(5): 23-25. 1941.
1242.
Problematical Pits on East Fork. R 5 (2) : 11-12. 1946.
1243.
Two Small Pipes from the Sanders Site near Direct. R 6 ( 7): 30.
1948.
Preliminary Report on the Glen Hill Site, 27B1-6. R 11 ( 1):
1244.---Z-4. 1952.
and Rex Housewright. Scrapers from the Sanders Site, Lamar
1245.
County.R3 (4) : 19-21.1941.
1246. Wilson, Loyal K. Case Report on Burials, Warner's No.2. CTA 7: 56. 1956.
1247. Wilson, Thomas. Arrowpoints, Spearheads, and Knives of Prehistoric Times.
RUSNM, 1897: 811-988. 1899.
1248.
. Report on the Department of Prehistoric Anthropology in the
United States National Museum, 1888. RUSNM, 1888: see pp. 126-127. 1890.
1249.
. Arrow Wounds. AA 3 (3): 513-531. 1901.
1250. Winton, W. M. The Proposed Big Bend National Park (abstract). TTAS 19:
35. 1936.
1251. Wissler, Clark. In : Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1929.
AA 32(2): 369. 1930.
1252.
. In: Archaeological Field Work in North America During 1931.
AA 34(3) : 504--505. 1932.
1253. Witte, Adolph Henry. Archeology of a Section of Upper Red River Drainage.
BTAPS 7: 47-56.1935.
1254.
. Kitchen Middens of the Upper Red River Drainage. BTAPS 8:
71-86. 1936.
1255.
. Buried Middens in the Floodplain of the Little Wichita River.
BTAPS 9: 222--226. 1937.
1256.
. Spanish Fort, An Historic Site. BTAPS 10: 234--244. 1938.
1257.
. Certain Caches of Flints from the North T exas Area. BTAPS
14: 72--76. 1942.
1258.
. Channelled Points from Clear Fork Sites in North Texas. BTAPS
14: 27-31. 1942.
1259. - - - - -. Notes on the Big Bend Region of Texas. BTAPS 15: 108- 109.
1943.
1260.
. Additional Archeological Data from North T exas. BTAPS 17:
91-92. 1946.
1261.
. Certain Archaeological Notes on the High Plains of Texas.
BTAPS 18: 76-82. 1947.
1262.
. A Double Indian Burial from Donley County, Texas. PPHR 28 :
82--86. 1955.
1263.
. Surface Points from the Badlands of the Upper Western Cross
Timbers of Texas. BTAS 26: 249-255. 1955.
1264.
. An Artifact from the High Terrace of Red River. BTAS 27:
210-214. 1956.
1265. Witthoft, John. A Note on Fluted Point Relationships. AAn 19 (3): 271-273.
1954.

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1266. VVoldert, Albert. The Location of the Tejas Indian Village ( San Pedro ) and
the Spanish Missions in Houston County, Texas. SHQ 38 (3) : 203-212. 1935.
1267.
. Relics of Possible Indian Battle in Wood County, Texas. SHQ
55 (4 ) : 484-489. 1952.
1268. Wood, W. Raymond. The Square Earthlodge of the Central Great Plains.
PACNL 5(1): 5- 18. 1952.
1269. Woodbury. George. Notes on Some Skeletal Remains of Texas. UTB 3734:
5- 16. 1937.
1270. Woodbury, George and Edna. Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the Texas
Coast. MP 18. 1935.
1271. Woodbury, Richard. Ground and Pecked Stone Artifacts (Other Than Arrowshaft Tools). In: Clyde Kluckhohn and Paul Reiter (editors) , Preliminary
Report on the 1937 Excavations, Bc-50-51 , Chaco Canyon, New Mexico
UNMBAS 3 (2) : 58-79. 1939.
1272. Woolford, Sam. Types of Archaeological Sites in Bexar County, Texas.
WMMB 4. 1935.
1273. ·vvoolsey, Arthur M. Additional Buchanan Lake Sites. UTP 3802: 119-145.
1938.
1274. Wormington, H . M . Ancient Man in North America. CMNHPS 4. 1939.
1275.
. Ancient Man in North America. CMNHPS 4 (second edition).
1944.
1276. - - - - . Prehistoric Indians of the Southwest. CMNHPS 7. 1947.
1277.
. A Proposed Revision of Yuma Point Terminology. PCMNH
18(2) : 1-19. 1948.
1278.
Ancient Man in North America. DMNHPS 4 (third edition ) .
1949.
The Need for Changes in Terminology Used in Studies of Early
1279.
Stone Industries. PSPC: 26- 28. 1950.
1280.
. Origins: Indigenous Period. Program of the History of America,
Comision de Historia. IPGHP 153. 1953.
1281.
. Ancient Man in North America . DMNHPS 4 (fourth edition ) .
1957.
1282. Worthington, R. B. Houston Archaeological Society, Houston. In: News
Notes and Editorials. BTAPS 19: 183-184. 1948.
1283.
and Wayne B. Neyland. Fakes in Houston. NHAS 1: 1-2. 1959.
1284. Wright, George T. Triangular Points of Red River County. BTAPS 12:
169-174. 1940.
1285.-- - - -. A Pueblo Pot Found Near Paris, Texas. BTAPS 15: 92-96.
1943.
1286. Wright, Welty. The Type, Distribution, and Occurrence of Flint Gravers in
Texas. BTAPS 12: 31-48.1940.
1287. Wyman, Leland C., and William C. Boyd. Blood Group Determinations of
Prehistoric American Indians. AA 39 (4) : 583- 592. 1937.

