TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1958
President: RicHARD E. JoHNSON (Fort Worth)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAcK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. ScHUETz (San Antonio )
Editor of Publications: E. MoTT D AVIS
Directors (in addition to the above): T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W . C. HoLDEN (Lubbock)
Trustees: RoBERT E. BELL (Norman, Okla.) , WILSON W. CRooK, JR. (Dallas), 0. L.
SIMS (San Angelo), CHARLIE STEEN (Sante Fe, N . Mex.), FLoYD V. STUDER
(Amarillo ), FRANK H. WATT (Waco), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.),
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: C. E. BisSELL (Midland) , JoHN CoRLEY (Hobbs, N.Mex.) ,
W. L. EvERETT (Conroe), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), RoBERT L.
STEPHENSON (Lincoln, Neb.) , HENRY F. STURGIS (Austin), JoE BEN WHEAT
(Boulder, Colo. ), SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fellows: CYRus N . RAY (Abilene), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5 .00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum, Brackenridge Park,
San Antonio 9, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 29, for 1958
Editor: T . N. Campbell
Assistan t Editors:
E. Mott D avis
Edward B. Jelks

P ublish ed by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VOLUME

29,

FOR

1958

A Review of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
PART l
Edited by Edward B. Jelks, E. Mott Davis, and Henry F. Sturgis

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

Table of Contents
Foreword

.

Indian Tribes of Texas
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

vn

1

A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology
By Clarence H. Webb

35

A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
By Dee Ann Suhm

63

A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas Archeology
By Donald J. Lehmer

109

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas
Coast
By T. N. Campbell

145

Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature
Compiled and edited by T. N. Campbell

177

Foreword
THIS IS THE first of two volumes designed to serve as a review of the
current status of Texas archeology. The second volume will appear as
a later issue of the Bulletin. The review is in the form of a series of
papers, each dealing with a different area within Texas. In addition,
the presentation is made complete by the inclusion in the present
volume of W. W. Newcomb's paper on the historic Indians of Texas
and T . N . Campbell's revision , brought up to date, of his exhaustive
guide to the literature on Texas archeology, first published in 1952.
These papers are primarily aimed at a specific audience-the membership of the Texas Archeological Society. In other words, our desire
has been to present material which will be of maximum u se to persons
who are studying Texas archeology on the ground , primarily in their
spare time. Fulfilling this requirement fortunately also provides a
general review which should be of benefit to archeological specialists.
Accordingly, these reviews are designed to clarify the current status
of archeology in each of the several archeological areas within Texas,
and also to orient investigators-both amateur and professionaltoward the many urgent problems that need to be solved. In each
paper previous field work, classifications, and interpretations are reviewed, the major unsolved problems are outlined, and field techniques especially applicable to each area are discussed.
In the present volume, four areas are treated: East Texas, Central
Texas, Trans-Pecos Texas, and the central and southern parts of the
Texas Gulf Coast. A later volume will present papers on the Panhandle, the South Plains, North Central Texas, Southwest Texas, and
the Southeastern Coastal Plain.
A word of explanation is in order for the many members of the
Society who have long awaited the 1958 issue of the Bulletin, published here two years late, and who have anticipated eagerly the
reissuing of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology, by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, which was published in 1954 as Volume 25
of the Bulletin and which has been out of print for several years.
It was originally planned that the Handbook would be reissued in
essentially its original form, and that in addition a series of papers on
special problems in the different parts of Texas would be published.
Also, a volume on field techniques was to be prepared. Most of these
plans went awry because of pressure on the editors' time and slowness

Office of the State Archeologist

Ubrary

on the part of authors in submitting manuscripts, and therefore a
different order of events is now contemplated. The first part of the
Handbook-the part dealing with areas and complexes-is not to be
reissued; its place is to be taken in part by A Review of Texas
Archeology, of which the present volume is the first part. Part II of
the Handbook-consisting of descriptions and illustrations of pottery
and projectile point types-is to be reissued separately as a special
publication of the Society. In addition to the type descriptions , this
volume will also include the trait lists for the various foci and aspects
that appeared in Part I of the original Handbook. The manual of field
techniques is in preparation and will appear as a special publication or
a Bulletin, whichever seems most practical.
This, then, is the long-awaited 1958 issue of the Bulletin, and the
beginning of the revision of An Introductory Handbook of Texas
Archeology. It is our hope and belief that the members of the Society
will find the papers of general interest, and that those members engaged in active research will find them of particular value.

EowARD B. JELKS
E. MoTT DAvis
HENRY F. STURGIS
February, 1960

Indian Tribes of Texas
W. W. NEWCOMB, JR. *

Introduction
CoNTRARY TO popular belief, the Texas Indians were not all cut from
the same piece of cultural cloth. They varied in their cultures-in
their customary ways of living-about as much as the French, Chinese,
and Zulus do in theirs. They ranged all the way from some of the
most primitive and crudely equipped savages on the North American
continent to some of the most advanced, sophisticated, and civilized of
United States Indians. Such diversity is not surpri sing, considering
the size of the state, its rambling borders, and its wide range of natural
environments.
At the beginning of historic times Texas was also a meeting ground
and area of transition between peoples of diverse cultural ties. The
Coahuiltecan and Karankawan Indians of the W estern Gulf area were
close cultural relatives of groups south of the border, and in TransPecos Texas the Jumano had affiliations with the Pueblo cultures of
the Southwest culture area. The indigenous Tonkawa and Lipan
Apache, as well as the eighteenth century immigrants, the Comanche,
were members of the Plains culture area. The Wichita peoples, like
the Comanche, were historic immigrants, and their cultural affiliations
lay to the north and east. And lastly, the Caddo of eastern Texas and
the Atakapans of the southeast part of the State, faced east and south
in a cultural sense, being members of the Southeast culture area.
These are the tribes to be discussed here, but it should be clear that
while these were the principal Texas Indians, there were others who
for reasons of space cannot be discu ssed. In a brief paper such as this
it should also be clear that only the barest of outlines-:-the framework
*William W. Newcomb, Jr., Director of the Texas Memorial Museum, The
University of Texas, is an ethnologist with special interest in the Ameri can Indians.
His monograph, Th e Culture and Acculturation of the Delaware Indians, was
recently published by th e University of Michigan. Newcomb·s book, The In dians of
Texas, is sched ul ed for early publication by th e U niversity of Texas Press.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

2

-of the various tribal cultures can be described. But in doing this a
special attempt has been made to mention items or artifacts which
might be found or reflected in archeological studies.

The Gatherers of the Western Gulf
The Texas Indians who dwelled south of a line drawn roughly from
Del Rio through San Antonio to Galveston (Map 1) were members of
what has been called the Western Gulf culture area (Newcomb,
1956: 145-153). This tremendous area, of which southern Texas was
only a small part, extended from the vicinity of the Panuco River in
Mexico northward along the coast to Galveston Bay. Inland it took
in the Mexican states of Tamaulipas, Nuevo Leon, the eastern and
northern part of Coahuila, northern San Luis Potosi, and northeastern
Zacatecas, as well as the southern extremity of Texas. The Indians in
the Texas portion of the Western Gulf were the coastal Karankawa
and a number of inland bands and tribes of Coahuiltecans. Both groups
were similar in many respects and much of what can be said of one
OUERECHO

TEXAS

I NDIANS

17th CENTURY
MAP

APACHE

I

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

3

group applies to the other. The littoral environment of the Karankawa
made possible a somewhat different culture than that of more inland
peoples, but so far as is known it wa s not sufficiently distinct to set it
apart as a separate culture area.
Along the coast, from the mouth of the Brazos south to Baffin Bay,
an archeological complex known as the Rockport Focus represents the
archeological remains of the Karankawa (Suhm et al., 1954: 125-133 ;
Campbell, 1956, 1958 ) . Glass arrowpoints, the remains of metal tools,
and pipes of European manufacture have been recovered from Rockport Focus sites, and since the Karankawa were the only Indians in the
area in early historic times, the association of Rockport Focus with the
Karankawa seems certain. The prehistory of South Texas is not well
known, although from excavations carried out in the Falcon Reservoir region on the Rio Grande it appears that the area was occupied
for a very long period of time by nearly static cultures. Dart points,
characteristic of the area in Archaic times, were also found lying
on the floors of Spanish houses built in the eighteenth century, and
possibly were made and u sed by the people who then occupied them
(Suhmetal. , 1954: 138 ) .
South of the San Antonio River agriculture is practicable oniy
where the land can be irrigated: northeastward the coastal prairies are
increasingly well watered and verdant, but the heavy soils and the low
marshy topography would discourage even the most ambitious Indian
farmer. Today much of the region is ranch land, but a livelihood
based on stock-raising was of course denied to Indians. There were not
even enough game animals to sustain a hunting people. These facts
would seem to add up to a totally inhospitable land for a stone-age
people, yet this was not the case. For men who had a wise knowledge
of their land , particularly its thorny, prickly flora , and who were
willing to utilize things which to u s would seem to be nauseating or
trifl'. ng, this was a livable, occasionally even a gen erous land. The
story of the Coahuiltecans, and to a lesser extent that of the Karankawa, is essentially a tale of their utilization of desert plants-the tuna
or fruit of the prickly pear, the mesquite bean, the agaves, and others.
The typical Karankawa band (such as the Capoque and Han whom
Cabeza de Vaca wa s acquainted with in the Galveston area ) led a
wandering existence, determined by the availability of various wild
foods. In the fall they camped on the offshore islands catching fish in
cane weirs and eating the roots of certain underwater plants. In February the roots became useless as food and the bands were forced to
move. Until April they subsisted mainly on oysters that were found

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in abundance along the mainland shores. As summer approached the
coastal dwellers moved inland to harvest the fruits of various cacti,
principally tunas of the prickly pear. Oddly, the Karankawa never
seem to have become the seafaring people they could have been. Their
canoes were adequate for short journeys in bays in sight of land, but
they lacked sails, fishhooks and especially a viewpoint which would
have allowed them to reap the rich harvest of the teeming Gulf
waters.
The many inland groups, lumped together under the generic heading of Coahuiltecans, lived probably an even harsher, less abundant
life than did the Karankawa. They were forced to utilize almost every
edible food that a less than lavish nature provided. Summer was a
season of relative plenty, winter a time of starvation. Few living
creatures were overlooked as a source of sustenance, from the occasional bison that strayed into the region, to deer, javelinas (collared
peccary), birds, and lesser animals such as spiders, worms, lizards,
snakes, and ant eggs. Deer dung, rotten wood, and less likely materials
were eaten, and even the bones of animals were ground to a powder
and consumed. But the principal foods of the Coahuiltecans came from
plants. The fruit or tuna of the various species of prickly pear was one
of the most important foods. These ripened in early summer and
scattered bands made long journeys to the best tuna grounds. Some
Texas Coahuiltecans were able to preserve the tunas by squeezing out
their juice and sun-drying the fruit. The dried skins were pounded
into palatability and the juice was frequently squeezed into pits in the
earth, the earth-flavored juice being drunk with apparent relish. If
their campsites are ever located and excavated, these pits should be
found.
The many species of agaves were also an important food source for
Coahuiltecans. They supplied food the entire year and their fibers
were used in weaving. The agaves are widely distributed in the southwestern United States and Mexico, and in these areas the native
peoples, including Coahuiltecans, used the agaves extensively and in
similar ways. A fire was built in a pit and stones thrown into the fire.
When the stones had become thoroughly heated, the bulbs or crowns
of a number of agave plants were placed in the pit. The pit was then
covered with grass and earth and the bulbs left to cook for several
days. The roasted bulbs are said to taste sweet and are very nutritious.
Nor is it necessary to eat the fibrous mass immediately; it can be kept
for a long time without spoilage. Again, these cooking pits and perhaps

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

5

the chewed "quids" of agave should be sought by archeologists in the
brush country.
Mesquite beans were also a staple food of the Coahuiltecans. The
beans are not easily removed from their pods so that in keeping with
Coahuiltecan custom the entire pod was ground into a coarse sort of
flour. Some Coahuiltecans also prepared these beans by placing a
quantity in a hole dug in the earth and energetically used a wooden
club or pestle to reduce the beans to flour. Dirt, of course, became
mixed with the flour, and sometimes a special, sweet-tasting earth was
added. The earthy flour was thrown into a container, water added, and
the concoction eaten. Many other seeds, roots, fruits, berries, and nuts
were eaten by Coahuiltecans, their importance varying with the particular locale of the bands.
The tools and other material equipment needed by foragers of the
Western Gulf were simple. It does not take complicated tools or
machines to dig up agave bulbs or to catch lizards, nor can burdensome
gear be easily transported. But it should be mentioned that Karankawa
sites show a considerable use of shells for digging, scraping, and drilling. The principal weapon of the men throughout the area was the
bow, utilizing a deer sinew or lechuguilla (a species of agave) fiber
bowstring, and flint-tipped cane arrows. Cabeza de Vaca described
many of the south Texas natives as being superb archers. Curved
wooden rabbit sticks were used as all-purpose tools. Net cargo carriers
and net containers were manufactured for all sorts of articles, and
gourds and even fleshy but tough-skinned leaves of prickly pears were
also fashioned into containers.
The nomadic people of the Western Gulf were restricted to simple,
small and easily built dwellings. Their huts were constructed by the
women who placed a number of saplings in a circle, bending and
tying them together over the center, and throwing mats or skins on
this framework.
The south Texas Indians, and notably the Karankawa, had tall,
well-built, muscular physiques. The men wore no clothing; the
women, however, wore skirts of deerskin or Spanish moss. Although
naked, the men were not unadorned. Their lower lips, as well as the
nipples of their breasts, were pierced and sections of cane thrust
through these apertures. Both the Karankawa and the other Coahuiltecans also painted and tattooed their bodies in a variety of styles.
These appear to have symbolized band affiliations and also perhaps
served as marks of distinction.

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In keeping with their crude means of exploiting their niggardly
·world, the people of south Texas had a relatively simple and unsegmented social organization. The largest social unit was the band made
up of related kinsmen. Some bands may have been large and included
several hundred persons; others may have been counted at most in the
dozens . There was no political entity which could be called a tribe,
and even the bands were not strong, cohesive groups. For most of the
year small family groups, perhaps even a single family of parents and
offspring, were the only social unit. It was only in seasons of plenty
that an entire band, and occasionally several bands, could congregate
for a few days. Family groups followed a seasonal rhythm, in winter
foraging through their territory as best they could, in summer coming
together with others for the harvest of wild plant foods. Both sexes
labored diligently to contribute to the survival of the family. Women
and old men carried the burdens on their seasonal migrations; women
hauled the firewood, obtained the water, collected a considerable portion of the vegetable foods, and of course performed an assortment of
other household chores. The men hunted and fished or gathered shell
fish, if Karankawan, and protected their families.
Little is known about the child-bearing practices of the peoples of
the Western Gulf, partly no doubt because of their informal nature.
Infanticide, particularly of girls, or one member of a set of twins, and
of deformed babies was practiced. Despite infanticide and the occasional killing of children because of certain dream omens, early explorers noted that the south Texans were very fond of their offspring
and like many primitive peoples were indulgent parents.
Some Texas Coahuiltecans, at least, held puberty ceremonies in
which children were formally ushered across the threshold from youth
to adulthood. Tattooing was one of the prominent features of these
rites. Premarital chastity was not particularly important to Coahuiltecans, although virgins were somewhat more attractive as potential
wives. Marriages were arranged by a man with his prospective bride's
parents. The groom presented game, tools, or other things to the bride's
parents, acceptance of which signified their acquiescence to the match.
There was no formal marriage ceremony. For a time after marriage a
Karankawa man gave all the proceeds of his hunting and foraging to
his parents-in-law. Neither he nor his bride touched this food, depending instead upon the largesse of the girl's parents. An in-law taboo
prevailed among the Karankawa in which a man could not enter his
parents-in-laws' dwelling, nor could they enter his or those of his
children. The medico-religious practitioners, the shamans, often had

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

7

several wives; ordinary men normally had but one. Divorce was
frequent among childless couples, but was rare for those with children.
Quarrels over women led to fights between men and sometimes to
feuds between bands.
Of all the stages in the cycle of life, the final one, death, was attended with as much or more ceremony than any other throughout
the Western Gulf. Young men and boys were mourned for an entire
year, the period closing by the mourners undergoing a ritual of purification. Only the aged were not mourned, since it was felt that they had
lived a full life and were better off dead. Relatives of a youth declined
to obtain food for themselves for three months after his death. Other
relatives kept these mourners supplied with what food they could
during this period. Bereaved women mourned by pulling hair
from their heads and by slashing their bodies with knives. Shamans
were cremated and their ashes mixed with water to be drunk by relatives; other people were buried. The manner of interment of ordinary
people, and whether or not various artifacts were included with
burials, is unknown.
Little is known about the religious beliefs and practices of the
peoples of the Western Gulf. Summertime, when the members of a
band could congregate in one place, was the season for religious
festiva ls and ceremonies . Their ceremonies are usually termed
mitotes, although this term covers an assortment of varied activities.
Mitotes were held to give thanks for the harvest, for victory in their
brief wars, to celebrate puberty rites, and some served to consolidate
ties between separate bands. Dancing and feasting was an important
part of most mitotes, and sometimes shamans addressed the participants. The usual Coahuiletecan mitote was an all-night dance and
feast which included the consumption of the vision-producing cactus,
peyote, by both men and women. Many were drinking ceremonies,
and some or all of these were held solely by the men.
The chief activity of shamans seems to have been the curing of the
sick and ailing. Wounds were successfully treated by cauterization, by
sucking wounds and sores, and by blowing upon the affected parts.
Shamans also relieved pain, or attempted to, by sleight of hand tricks.

Nomads of the Plains
The tremendous sweep of the great plains of North America is
halted on the south by the mountains of Trans-Pecos Texas and the
scrub forests and deserts of south Texas. The flat eastward sloping

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

expanse of the Llano Estacada and the adjoining Edwards Plateau
were the southernmost sections of the plains in which vast herds of
buffalo were to be found. And here too were the southernmost Indians
who based their subsistence upon the bison herds.
In summer the entire bison range shifted northward a few hundred
miles and in winter it moved back south. But the presence or absence
of bison in any particular locality could not be predicted. Places which
for years were overrun with bison might suddenly be abandoned, and
areas which had had no bison might as suddenly find the landscape
black with them. For native pedestrian people the erratic movements
of the herds meant that a livelihood based on these beasts was at best
precarious. Perhaps a single hunter could have kept up with the herds,
but an entire group-women, children, babies, old folk, with their
gear-would be hard pressed to do so. As a result, there were few
if any pre-horse, pedestrian tribes that depended upon the bison as
much as many historic equestrian tribes were able to do. On the
Llano Estacada at the beginning of the sixteenth century were anumber of Apache bands and tribes (Map 1). Many if not most of them
farmed in small scattered communities, and those that did not bother
to farm seem to have carried on extensive intercourse-both trading
and raiding-with the Puebloan farming people in nearby New
Mexico. The hunting of bison was a major activity, but the failure
of the herds to appear did not doom them to starvation. In central
Texas the Tonkawa did not have a farming tradition to fall back on
and neither was the Edwards Plateau as favored by bison. While the
Tonkawa are here considered to be a Plains people, they can only be
viewed as poor relations-leading a life somewhere between that of
the proud Plains warriors and the Coahuiltecan foragers.
The introduction of the horse by the Spaniards in the seventeenth
century wrought a revolution in the life of the Indians on the plains.
At last a life built around and dependent upon the bison became easy
and rewarding. Indians already in the plains took it up enthusiastically, and many tribes from other regions fought their way onto the
plains to partake in the new life. In Texas these newcomers were the
Comanche, the Kiowa , and Kiowa Apache.

Tonkawa. Atop the Edwards Plateau and spilling over onto the
coastal plain to the south and the Brazos bottoms on the east and
northeast was the sixteenth century homeland of a number of independent bands of Indians who became known in the nineteenth
century as the Tonkawa. The principal Tonkawa bands were the

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

9

Mayeye (or perhaps Meghey ), Yojaune, Ervipiame and a number of
smaller, more obscure groups, the Cavas, Emet, Sana, Toho, and
Tohaha. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries these peoples were scattered and probably much reduced in numbers, but by
the beginning of the nineteenth century the remnants had united as
a single tribe, henceforth known as the Tonkawa. It is only after these
groups became the Tonkawa tribe that a description of their culture is
possible, and at this time they were fairly typical southern Plains
people, with some rather close similarities to the Lipan Apache.
Considerable linguistic data have been collected on the Tonkawa
(Hoijer, 1949 ), but it has been difficult to relate their language to any
other. Swanton has suggested that the Tonkawa were members of the
Coahuiltecan linguistic stock, but this hypothesis is difficult to substantiate since there are no longer any speakers of Coahuiltecan
(Swanton, 1915; 1940 ).
The most recent prehistoric archeological complex in central Texas,
the Central Texas Aspect, has been tentatively associated with Tonkawau peoples (Krieger, 1946: 165-168; Suhm, 1957: 54-56; but also
see Kelley, 1947). But since sites of the Central Texas Aspect intermixed with identifiable historic material are lacking, the association remains somewhat speculative. Nonetheless, since there is no evidence
that the Tonkawan peoples recently came from anywhere else, it is
assumed that their ancestors were the people whose remains are
known, or at least partly known, to archeologists as the Central Texas
Aspect.
Even well into the nineteenth century, when bison were no longer
numerous in central Texas, the Tonkawa continued to depend upon
this animal as the principal source of their food. Deer were also
valued, particularly for their hides, which could be traded to T exans.
Turkeys, rabbits, skunks, rats, rattlesnakes, tortoises , and many other
animals were also hunted. Apparently the only mammals the Tonkawa barred from their iron-lined stomachs were wolves and their
coyote kin, but only because of theological proscriptions. Dogs,
probably horses, and no doubt European cattle were eaten. Carrion
was consumed. Unlike typical Plains Indians, they ate fish and other
aquatic foods. Like their neighbors in the Western Gulf the Tonkawa
utilized many plant foods. Cactus fruit, acorns, and pecans were
among the most important.
The Tonkawa used the Plains bison-hide tipi until the herds in
central Texas had dwindled so drastically that they were forced to
turn to other materials. However, tipis never seem to h ave been the

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tall, imposing lodges which were typical of northern plains tribes;
instead they were apt to be squat and crude. The Tonkawa also used
brush arbors and windscreens as isolation huts for menstruating women, for parturition lodges, and for ceremonial purposes.
There are no data on the type of bow used, although it was probably
a simple one-piece bow. Arrows were poisoned, or so the Tonkawa
thought, by squeezing juice from the mistletoe on their points. The
Tonkawa also used lances, bison hide shields, and helmets of tough
hide. Much of their equipment came from the bison: glue for hafting
arrows and other purposes was obtained from the hoofs; its sinews
were used for thread and for bowstrings; the hair V\as fashioned into
ropes and belts and the horns into cups and spoons. Some sort of crude
cloth was made from the inner bark of mulberry trees (perhaps a
diffusion from the Caddo area to the east); baskets and mats were
woven of grass and other fibers, and at least in later times some pottery
was manufactured.
Each of the Tonkawa bands was directed by a chief and in time of
war there may have been special war leaders. After consolidation,
bands continued to have chiefs, but a titular tribal chief was added.
Band chiefs and the later tribal chiefs seem to have been selected by
the mature men. Clans may have existed before the consolidation of
the tribe, or they may have been remnants of autonomous bands.
Whichever the case, clans were the basic units of Tonkawa society.
The clans were matrilineal; children belonged to the clan of their
mother, and of course, marriage within the clan was considered incestuous. Clans, as elsewhere, joined a group of relatives into a cohesive, cooperative unit. The kinship system, which is of the "Crow"
type, cannot be described here. The Tonkawa practiced the levirate
(in which a woman married her deceased husband's brother) and the
sororate (in which a man married his deceased wife's sister), and
probably sororal polygyny (in which a man married several sisters).
Women bore their children alone in brush huts and bathed soon
after birth. Children were named when they were several years old,
but whether or not this was done in a formal ceremony is unknown.
There is not much knowledge of the facts of growing up and getting
married, perhaps indicative of the informal nature of learning to
become a Tonkawa. Death rites are better known. When a person was
thought to be on the verge of death his friends and relatives entered
the tipi where he lay, forming a circle around him and resting their
hands on his body. Others formed another larger circle around the
first one, placing their hands upon the shoulders of the others. If the

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

11

tipi was a large one, there might be several additional circles around
the pallet of the dying; swaying and chanting they hovered around
throughout the night. Most of the dead were buried immediately,
although chiefs and other important people lay in state for a time.
Treasured possessions such as guns and scalps were buried with the
carefully painted and adorned corpses. Like many other Plains
Indians a favorite horse was shot over the grave and occasionally a
pet dog was also put to death at the grave. The band of a deceased
person mourned for three days, but close relatives mourned for a
longer period. One of the better known customs associated with death
was the taboo on using a dead person's name, or even one which was
similar to that of some dead person.
Scattered data suggest that the Tonkawa believed there was an
omnipotent god or gods . The spirits of the dead were by far their most
important supernatural concern, however. These spirits were thought
to journey to a home in the west after death. But the souls of men
were apt to hang around watching their living relatives and calling
to them; many precautions were taken to minimize the evil they
could do. The ritual cannibalism the Tonkawa practiced may be
associated with these beliefs. They may have thought that they could
acquire some of the enemy's spirit power, or perhaps permanently
destroy his soul, by consuming his body.
Tonkawa shamans seem to have functioned mainly in the curing of
illness. They held many different kinds of dances, but little more is
known a bout their religious beliefs and practices.

Lipan Apache. In 1541 Coronado met Querecho Apache on the
Llano Estacada of eastern New Mexico or the Texas Panhandle and
the Teya Apache somewhere near the headwaters of the Brazos. The
Spaniards continued to encounter bison-hunting Apache on the
southern plains in the next century (Map 1) . In a very real sense they
may be regarded as the original Plains Indians.
All Apache peoples speak Athapaskan languages, but most
Athapaskan-speaking Indians are concentrated in Canada and Alaska.
There has been considerable speculation about how and when the
southern group became detached, and most investigators at least pay
lip service to the theory that there was a relatively late prehistoric
migration southward along the eastern slopes of the Rocky Mountains.
At whatever age the Apache arrived in the southwest and on the
southern plains, no archeological complexes have as yet been definitely attributed to them. The historic Apache peoples of the south-

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

western United States have been divided into an eastern and a western
division on the basis of linguistic and cultural differences. Of the
western Apache-Navaho, San Carlos, Chiricahua and Mescalero-only the Mescalero in early times ventured into Texas. The modern
eastern group-Jicarilla, Lipan, and Kiowa Apache-are the principal
remnants of the people who once dominated the southem plains.
By the beginning of the eighteenth century several things had happened which were to doom these Plains Apache. Having acquired and
mastered horses, they were raiding the Spanish settlements in New
Mexico more frequently than ever, and throughout the first half of
the century the Spaniards undertook numerous campaigns in retaliation. Also by the beginning of the eighteenth century the Comanche
and Ute had debouched into the plains to begin the battle for their
mastery. To make matters worse, the Comanche were able to obtain
guns from the French while the Spanish denied them to the Apache.
The end result was the defeat of the Plains Apache. Many bands were
wiped out; others, such as the Jicarilla, took refuge among the Pueblos,
and some, like the Kiowa Apache, affiliated with stronger tribes. Some
were driven to the margins of the plains-into Trans-Pecos Texas,
into Mexico, and even to south Texas. These became the Lipan
(Map 2).
Throughout their known history the Lipan lived primarily from
the bison. The principal hunting seasons were fall and spring, at which
times the bison were concentrated in huge herds on the southern
plains. Bison-hunting was ordinarily a cooperative, group effort, and
the "surround" was the favorite form of hunting. Many other animals
were hunted in addition to bison, particularly in the nineteenth
century when the bison were fast approaching extinction. Deer and
antelope had always been valued for their skins, and smaller animals
such as javelinas, rats, and the like were also taken. Wild turkeys
were eaten, but other birds, particularly water birds, were not regarded as fit for human consumption. While the Lipan always seem to
have depended more upon the bison than the women's gardens, the
raising of maize, beans, squash, and pumpkins was an important, if
secondary, subsistence activity. But after the Lipan adopted horses,
they became increasingly embroiled in wars, were driven from their
ancestral homes, and as a result the importance of agriculture
dwindled. In the drier regions of Texas and northern Mexico wild
plant foods came to play an important role. The agaves were one of
the most important of these, and their preparation was similar to that
described for the peoples of the Western Gulf. Tunas of prickly pears,

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

13

KIOWA
KIOWA

AND
APACHE

I
I

I

I
I
I

I
I
I

I

• o o,

"' "(!> ,.'
~

LIPAN

APACHE

\

0

\

u
\

\

(UPPER)

\

TEXAS

',

--

INDIANS·~

1840
MAP

2

mesquite beans, datil (Yucca baccata), nuts, and many fruits and
berries were also utilized by the Lipan.
Lipan tipis had a framework of light poles, often sotol flowering
stalks, the heavier ends being arranged in a circle on the ground, the
lighter ends being tied together at the top. Hides were thrown over
this framework leaving a smoke hole at the top and a small entry hole
which could also be covered with a hide. The larger tipis housed a
dozen persons, the smaller only three or four.
The Lipan bow and arrow was an extremely effective weapon for
hunting bison, even more so than muzzle-loaders, since several arrows
could be discharged for every shot fired. The bow and arrow had the
added virtue of being almost silent. Their bows were about four feet
long and were made of "mountain mulberry." Bow strings were of
split deer or bison sinews, twisted together. The arrows were of hard
wood, with three feathers tied on with sinew, and in historic times
tipped with iron points. Like the Tonkawa, warriors carried lances, and

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

for protection, oval shields made from thick, bull bison hides. In the
arid country the Lipan increasingly came to inhabit, containers for
water were necessary. Warriors often carried a canteen made from the
stomach of a beef or bison, and for camp use the Southwestern pitchcovered basketry water jug was utilized.
In summer men wore a breechclout, moccasins, and leggings. In
winter a buckskin shirt and a blanket were added. The women wore a
knee-length deerskin skirt, snug-fitting leggings fastened to a belt
around the waist, and high moccasins. The feminine costume by the
nineteenth century was topped by a Mother Hubbard style of blouse
fashioned from a complete doeskin. Warriors cut off their hair on the
left side of the head even with the top of the ear, while the hair on the
right side was allowed to grow long, sometimes reaching the ground
when allowed to fall free. Feathers and trinkets adorned the hair,
and earrings decorated pierced ear lobes. The men spent spare
moments plucking out their beard and eyebrows, the ideal masculine
face being completely devoid of hair. The face and body were smeared
with several colors of paint. The women also wore earrings, bracelets,
and anklets made of copper wire and beads. Their hair was worn in
one long plait dangling down the back, but for special occasions was
allowed to fall free.
Childbirth took place within the tipi, male members of the household being barred. A few days after birth the father named the infant
after some natural object. Babies were placed in a beaded buckskin
cradleboard in which they spent most of their time until old enough
to walk.
When a young man desired to wed a particular girl, he was expected to obtain permission from her father, her brother, or some
other male relative. If the union was agreeable to the father, the
bridegroom made a gift of horses, firearms, and hides to the girl's
parents. Marriage obligated a man to his wife's family, and as the
young men of a household married and moved away, the support of
the family increasingly fell to the husbands of the family's daughters.
Even when a man's wife died he was not released from her family,
and if possible he was supplied by them with another wife. The Lipan
also practiced sororal polygyny, although it was normally restricted
to chiefs and outstanding warriors.
The Lipan felt a great terror of the ghosts of the dead. This feeling
led to quick burial of the deceased, destruction of his property, and
relocation of the tipi in which a person had died. Care of the corpse
fell to elderly persons who were better able than younger persons to

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

15

deal with the contamination of death. The body was bathed and
adorned, tied to a horse, and led to a shallow grave. The head of the
corpse was placed to the east, and before closing the grave the corpse
was admonished to leave for the afterworld and not return to bother
his relatives.
The basic social unit among the Lipan was the extended family,
composed of parents, unmarried sons, daughters, sons-in-law, and
their offspring. A number of these extended families camped together,
and at least in early times remained within a given territory, after
which they were often named. The most important man of a local
group functioned as a leader to the extent that he was a chief adviser
and director of local group affairs. The largest grouping the Lipan
attained was the band, a confederation of these local groups. These
dwelled near enough together so that they could unite for defensive
or offensive purposes and could also meet on social and ceremonial
occasions. The most prominent and respected of the local group
leaders was the band chief. The Lipan were a tribe only in the sense
that they were a distinct cultural body-a politically unorganized
group of bands sharing a common life. In later times, as war and the
threat of war became chronic, bands came to have war chiefs in addition to the civil chiefs. Men became chiefs through acknowledged
bravery and experience. There was some tendency for chieftainship
to become hereditary; but as poor leaders were quickly deposed and
band membership was not necessarily permanent, it could never
develop further.
Surprise attacks were favored, and if they were not able to surprise
an enemy their attack was apt to be called off altogether. Scalps were
taken and portions of enemy bodies, particularly if Comanche, were
eaten by victorious warriors. This custom, however, may have been
borrowed from the Tonkawa. Captives were often tortured and killed,
but they were sometimes adopted. Scalp and victory dances were held
for successful war parties.
The important supernatural personages as far as the ordinary Lipan
was concerned were a number of deities whom individuals could
approach intimately and personally. But they did maintain beliefs in
a vague supreme power. Persons became shamans through supernatural experiences. Theoretically anybody could have these mystical
or visionary experiences, but they seem not to have been common.
Power thus obtained could be transferred, but was not ordinarily
passed on until the holder was aged. Shamanistic rites were conducted
to cure the sick, to help obtain game, to bring misfortune upon

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

enemies, to foretell an enemy's approach, to control weather, and
other things. Most shamanistic performances had only a few participants, but there were occasionally larger gatherings when the welfare
of all was at stake and in which all participated.

Comanche. Until the last quarter of the nineteenth century, years
after most other Texas Indians had been wiped out or otherwise
pacified, the Comanche raided throughout Texas and down into
Mexico. No wonder the Comanche are Texas' best known Indians!
The Comanche speak Shoshonean, a language belonging to the UtaAztecan family, one of the major language stocks of Indian America.
The Shoshonean-speaking peoples were centered in the Great Basin
country of western United States and are further subdivided into
three mutually unintelligible language families. One of these is called
Shoshone and this is the language the Comanche speak. Comanche
speech is, in fact, virtually identical with that of the Northern
Shoshone.
Sometime during the second half of the seventeenth century some of
the Northern Shoshone became familiar with horses. Like their relatives in the Great Basin area they were crude, primitively equipped
hunters and gatherers. By 1700, however, some had abandoned their
homes and had appeared on the plains of eastern Colorado and western
Kansas, apparently having moved down the Arkansas River Valley. By
1705 they had appeared in New Mexico, and before the century was
half over they were in control of much of the southern plains (Map 2).
From a scrounging, poor, militarily weak rabble, they became in less
than a century a mounted, wealthy, and powerful people.
While there was desultory hunting throughout the year, in summer
when the herds were fat, and also in the fall when the hides reached
their prime, the Comanche embarked upon large-scale communal
hunts. Like the Tonkawa and Lipan, and departing from normal
Plains custom, the Comanche had no military societies to direct or
police their communal hunts. A hunt leader was chosen, but he
functioned merely as a coordinator. After locating a suitable herd the
hunting party approached from down wind and slowly encircled the
herd, closing the gap on the up wind side last. The mounted hunters
circled the herd and compressed it into as small an area as possible.
If the herd could be made to mill a bout, its slaughter was that much
easier to accomplish. When a herd could not be surrounded, a line of
hunters might form down wind and charge the beasts at one time.
Bison were also stampeded over cliffs, often with the aid of an agile

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

17

boy who lured the animals on, disguised in a bison robe to which were
attached horns and ears.
Besides bison the Comanche hunted elk, black bear, antelope, and
deer. They did not normally eat fish, wild fowl , dogs, or coyotes, but
when starving would eat almost anything-rats, skunks, lizards,
grasshoppers, and decayed meat. They also collected many fruits and
berries to supplement their diet of meat. Corn and tobacco were never
grown but were acquired by theft or trade. As among other Plains
Indians, pemmican was a great favorite, providing a nutritious ration
for war parties and other travelers.
Boys wore no clothing in warm weather but when about eight or
nine donned the breechclout, leggings, and moccasins. Girls always
wore some sort of covering. Skin shirts, buffalo robes , and hide overshoes equipped the Comanche to withstand the coldest gales of the
plains. Feathered war bonnets were adopted late in the nineteenth
century, apparently at the expense of the horn headdress, but never
attained the vogue they did in the northern plains. Painting of the
face and body in a number of styles and colors was an important part
of preparing for special occasions.
The tipi was an ideal home for a nomadic people such as the
Comanche. The women could put one up in a few moments and as
rapidly dismantle it. Comanche camps were usually located near
running water and a large one might extend along a stream for several
miles. Within a camp tipis were not arranged according to any prescribed plan, although they were apt to cluster around a chief's lodge.
Babies who were in any way defective or abnormal were abandoned
to die, and one or both twins, especially if they were girls, were also
abandoned. While children of both sexes were welcomed and loved, it
was boys-the future warriors-who brought the greatest joy to a
family. Names were given children by prominent persons on request
of their fathers . Children were not usually punished physically for
misdeeds; instead they were taught correct behavior by persuasion
and object lessons. An older sister was normally the disciplinarian;
and if particularly harsh measures were called for, someone outside
the immediate family was called in.
As soon as a boy had demonstrated his ability as a hunter and obtained a supernatural guardian, he was ready to take his place in a
war party. His return signalled a celebration dance and marked the
beginning of adulthood. He was now eligible to marry, although he
usually postponed it for a few years. He wanted to gain a reputation
as a hunter and warrior, and by doing so he would be in a favorable

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

position to acquire the wife of his choice. Horses and other plunder
were also needed to marry such a girl, and acquiring these articles by
raiding was more respectable and desirable than wheedling them out
of a doting father.
When a man had decided he wanted to marry a certain girl, the
ordinary procedure was to give the girl's father, her brother, or other
close relatives a present, preferably a horse. A suitor's campaign was
climaxed when he sent an uncle, some other old relative, or perhaps a
friend to the lodge of the girl's parents with further gifts. If the suit
was rejected, the horses and gifts loaded upon them were simply turned
loose; if the suitor was accepted, the horses were driven into the herd of
the father or brother. The successful suitor then took his bride to his
tipi.
A man was obligated to provide meat for his parents-in-law, and
for this reason a family tried to arrange their daughter's marriage to
a man of their own band. Inter-band marriage did occur, however,
and in such cases n girl jo:ned her husband's group. Normally a man
inherited his wife's younger sisters as additional wives , and he might
take other women, especially captives, as wives too. The sororate was
in vogue as was the levirate.
When young and valuable warriors died, their mourning was intense and long lasting; for the aged it was brief. Women in their anguish mutilated their bodies in various ways, perhaps a survival of an
old Shoshonean custom of putting women to death at the graves of their
husbands. Burial was, if possible, in inaccessible caves or crevices, usually in high places and west of the tipi of the dead person. Corpses were
dressed and ornamented, and personal tools, such as guns, were also
included with the buriaL Favorite horses of the deceased were frequently shot over the grave.
The Comanche, like the Lipan, were never a tribe in a political
sense. There were at one time something more than a dozen bands,
differing in size, territory occupied, and in some minor cultural respects. Each band had a headman or chief who was not formally
recognized or given a title, but who spoke with the authority of the
consensus of the eminent men. Any headman could call a meeting of
his own band, and joint councils of several bands sometimes met. Each
band also recognized an eminent warrior as a paramount war chief.
Few peoples oriented their lives around warfare more thoroughly
and completely than did the Comanche. Comanche culture came into
being through military prowess and blossomed through raiding and

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

19

brawling. Almost every aspect of life became intertwined in one way
or another with war. The Comanche "counted coup" like other Plains
people. The highest coup was awarded for the act of greatest bravery,
and the most courageous deed was to touch or strike an enemy. Killing
an enemy with a bullet or arrow from a distance was not such a great
feat . Scalping a dead enemy hardly counted, although scalping enemies
(alive or dead) under perilous circumstances was appropriately rewarded. Stealing horses staked in an enemy camp, or under other
dangerous circumstances, also rated high on the list of war honors.
For a coup to count it had to be recognized by other warriors, and after
a battle the war chief gathered the participants together so that the
war honors claimed could be judged and accepted or rejected. The Comanche counted coup on a victim but twice, contrary to some of the
other Plains tribes who counted three or four times. Comanche war
parties struck swiftly, looted, and killed, and as rapidly withdrew.
When enemies could not be surprised they might be ambushed and
only if very inferior in numbers and fire power would they be charged.
If pursued, a war party dispersed, and the Comanche were noted for
their ability to withdraw more rapidly than any enemy could follow .
Religious practices were primarily a matter of individual concern ;
there were relatively few group religious observances. To live a successful life, to become a successful warrior, it was necessary to have supernatural assistance, however. Such aid was normally gained in mystical,
visionary experiences. Young men in lonely ordeals sought power, and
usually, it appears, were successful in such quests. Men also sought
visions on many occasions when help or guidance was needed. While
power was essentially an individual possession, those who had great
power were often called on to pass it to others. The power itself could
not be transferred, but the possessor could prepare others so that they
could receive it.
Comanche ideas about important deities were always vague. The
sun, moon, and earth were considered to be supernatural beings; and
in later times, if not earlier, there was a hazy belief in an omnipotent
power. This supernatural was the creator of the universe and of the
Comanche, and was always the first one addressed in prayers. By
many he was associated with the sun. Some Comanche also believed
in an evil counterpart to this benevolent figure . Other supernatural
powers could take any shape and reside in any object. They frequented
natural phenomena such as rivers , springs, and odd or outstanding
topographic features.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Gardeners
Jumano. Among the least known of Texas Indians are the Jumano.
Their land stretched from the vicinity of El Paso down the Rio Grande
Valley as far as the Big Bend region, and a short way up the Rio Conchas in Chihuahua. While their permanent villages were in these river
valleys, all of Texas south and west of the Pecos may be considered
as territory utilized by the Jumano or their nomadic relatives (Map 1).
The Spanish traversed Jumano territory repeatedly in the sixteenth
century, but despite their early and continued acquaintance with these
Indians, they never described-or perhaps knew-the Jumano intimately. Jumano culture disintegrated during the eighteenth century,
so that it cannot now be adequately described. Even the linguistic
affiliations of the Jumano are not known with certainty, although indirect evidence seems to favor their having been speakers of a UtaAztecan tongue (Sauer, 1934). To compound a difficult problem, the
Spanish applied the word Jumano and its variants at various times to
the Wichita (Taovayas) Indians, to a Pueblo group in eastern New
Mexico, and even to some Indians in Arizona (Scholes and Mer a,
1940: 269). To some Spaniards the word Jumano appears to have
been used for any Indians who painted or tattooed their bodies, probably in a certain way (ibid., 275). Jumano is, then, an unfortunate
term, but it has come to be commonly applied to the Indians of southwestern Texas and parts of northern Chihuahua, and for want of a
better term it is used here.
One of the more bothersome of Jumano anomalies has been the fact
that there were two geographically distinct groups in Trans-Pecos
Texas, each pursuing a different mode of subsistence, who have been
called Jumano. One group consisted of settled gardeners of the Puebloan tradition, wresting their living from garden plots in the valleys
of the Rio Grande and the lower Rio Conchos. The other Jumano lived,
or at least hunted, beyond the Chisos and Davis mountains on the
southernmost plains. It is presumed that they hunted throughout the
summer months in this region, but in the fall trekked to the valley
villages to trade, visit, and await the return of the hunting season.
Whether these two groups constituted an essentially single people,
sharing a common language and origins, is unknown. The nomadic
group is virtually unknown ethnographically, and it is assumed here
that there were few if any cultural distinctions separating the two
groups (seeKelley, 1955,foranotherviewpoint).

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

21

Archeological excavations have revealed that in relatively late prehistoric times the natives of this region were peripheral members of
the Puebloan civilization of the Southwest. The towns of the sedentary
Puebloans were scattered over a wide area in the southwest, through
northern Arizona and New Mexico, into Colorado and Utah, and it is
n ot surprising that this cultural pattern extended down the Rio Grande
into Texas.
Sometime around 1000 A.D. there was a rapid expansion of this
Puebloan culture, technically called the Jornada Branch of the Mogollon (and Mogollon for our purposes may be called Puebloan ), southward down the Rio Grande (Lehmer, 1948; Kelley, 1949, 89-114;
Suhm et al., 1954: 27-51 ) . By 1200 A.D. farming villages had spread
at least as far as El Ca;on, a canyon barrier about 125 miles downstream from El Paso (Kelley, 1952: 361-362) . These river valley
farms apparently depended upon the water from very small watersheds which today do not support any sort of farming. Between 1200
and 1400 this farming culture spread on down the Rio Grande as far
as Canon Colorado, below modern Redford, and up the Rio Conchas in
Mexico some forty miles. Soon after this period most of these villages
disappeared, and whether the historic sites in the area represent survivors or new immigrants is unknown. At any rate, it was these people
extending from La Junta (the vicinity of the junction of the Rio Conchas with the Rio Grande ) upstream almost to El Paso who became
the main Jumano body of historic times.
As the Puebloan culture spread down the Rio Grande and into
Trans-Pecos Texas, it did not enter a virgin, uninhabited land. There
were local cultures in the area , and the culture of the historic Jumano
and their immediate archeological forerunners suggests a mixture of
the imported Puebloan and an indigenous hunting and gathering culture. With such a mixture it is difficult to be confident whether the
local folk learned of the cultural advances made upstream, borrowed
some material items and techniques from them, and in time became
for all intents and purposes Puebloan, or whether they represented a
distinct migration. Whichever the case, what little is known of the
early historic Jumano culture suggests a provincial, watered-down,
poor and struggling Puebloan culture.
Physically the Jumano were as large and muscular as the robust
Karankawa . The women and old men wore skins, while young men
went naked. The men sported intricate feathered coiffures, and both
men and women painted their bodies with elaborate designs.
Those Jumano who lived at the choice locations along the Rio

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Grande and Rio Conchos in good years raised fairly ample crops of
corn, beans, and squash. But in dry years , and in the less favorable
locations, their farming endeavors were often unsuccessful. They had
access to many wild plant foods, however, the most important being
mesquite beans and the beans of its near relative, the screw bean or
tornillo ( Prosopis pubescens). Agaves also seem to have been used, as
were prickly pear tunas, and probably other cactus fruits. It is doubtful
whether buffalo meat figured very prominently in their diet before
the acquisition of horses. Few buffalo wandered into this area, and deer
and antelope were perhaps more important in their economy.
The Jumano lived in small villages. Their houses were singlestoried, flat roofed, adobe and thatch structures grouped together
around central plazas on ridges overlooking streams. Archeological researches have added considerably to our knowledge of their houses
(Kelley, in Kelley et al. , 1940: 35; Kelley, 1951 : 118 ) . Each village or
pueblo had one or two caciques (chiefs) and, at least at La Junta ,
there was a paramount chief over several villages. The existence of
such leaders suggests a well organized political system, but its specific
nature is unknown. The same mystery surrounds other aspects of
Jumano life. One house which has been excavated, and which has
been assigned to an entirely prehistoric period, contained a sealed pit
which is similar to the sipapu or ceremonial spirit entrance present in
southwestemkivas (Kelley, 1951: 118 ) .

Wichita. The Wichita, like the Comanche, were historic immigrants
to Texas. In the sixteenth century Coronado encountered them in central Kansas, and other related peoples lived to the southward, perhaps
extending into Oklahoma . All the Wichita peoples-Waco, Tawakoni
(Tahuacano) , Taovayas, Iscanis, and Wichita proper-are closely related linguistically. Their essentially common language, termed
Wichita, is one of the four distinct languages of the Caddoan stock, the
others being Pawnee, Caddo, and Kichai. If there were ever other
cultural differences which distinguished the various Wichita subgroups, they have long since been forgotten. During the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries the Wichita peoples moved southward, and
by the second half of the eighteenth century they had become a cohesive tribe (or tribes ) politically. The Waco and Tawakoni were in
the forefront of the southem migration. By 1772 they had settled on
the Brazos at Waco, and on the Trinity upstream from Palestine
(Hodge, 1907, 1910 : 702-704 ) . By 1779 the village on the Trinity had

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

23

been abandoned, its populace joining those on the Brazos. The Waco
tribe was, it seems, one of these Brazos River villages, and thus actually
a subdivision of the Tawakoni (Map 2).
Culturally the Wichita have been associated with the Caddo and the
Southeast culture area in general, and also with the Plains culture area
(Kroeber, 1939: 74-76 ) . Linguistically and in other cultural respects
they had much in common with the Caddo, particularly in early times.
But, during the eighteenth century, following their adoption of horses
and their many migrations, their culture became increasingly Plainslike. But even after the Wichita had become a mounted, equestrian
people, bison and other wild game remained supplementary to the
produce of their gardens. They cultivated extensive field s of corn,
pumpkins, beans, tobacco, and squash. Almost without exception the
earlier Europeans who visited them commented upon their bountiful
crops and the abundant supply of bison.
The Wichita lived in villages of grass houses similar to those used
by the Caddo. Wichita houses were not flimsy or temporary; they were
sturdy structures up to thirty feet in diameter and were used for many
years. Their interior supports were vertically placed, forked cedar
posts, connected with horizontal cedar logs. Long cedar poles were laid
against this framework , and their upper ends tied securely together.
Willow poles were tied to these horizontally, and coarse grass was
spread over and fastened to the exterior. Each house had two low, narrow doors, one facing east, and the other west. Open-sided, grasscovered arbors were built near the houses for family use during the hot
summers. Other arbors were constructed for storage and drying of
garden produce and meat.
The villages were inhabited from spring until fall while the women
were planting, tending, and harvesting their crops. After the harvest,
villages were abandoned for a winter hunt. Hunting parties lived in
tipis, and in other respects behaved like Plains Indians. By spring they
had returned to their villages for planting. Besides doing most of the
farming, women fenced the fields, tanned skins, cut and hauled firewood, and performed many other household tasks. Men devoted themselves chiefly to hunting and warfare, although they also did some of
the more strenuous tasks, such as installing heavy timbers in new
houses.
New fathers were excluded from their wives' lodges for four days
after the birth of a child. It was felt that their presence might sicken
mother and child. Children were often named before birth from aus-

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

picious dreams of the mother or other relatives. This led to some ridiculous names because many dreams did not conform to the subsequent
sex or character of the child.
Ordinarily the family of a marriageable boy initiated negotiations
with a girl's family by sending a middle-aged member of their group.
If a favorable reply was obtained, the prospective groom went to their
lodge the following evening and remained that night if the match was
still favored. Gifts and a feast solemnized the marriage. Residence of
the newly married couple was with the family of the bride, and the
groom was expected to perform a number of duties for his wife's family. Divorce was easy and common for childless couples. A woman
simply ejected her husband from her lodge, and a man could divorce
his wife by moving out. Sororal polygyny was practiced as was the
sororate.
Wichita cemeteries were located on hills, and bodies were buried
with the head toward the east. A warrior's effects were placed with
him, except for his shield, which was given to one of his friends who
understood the magical rites associated with it; or it was placed by the
grave, or hung on the limbs of a distant tree. For four days relatives
mourned their loss, and four times a day they purified themselves by
bathing in a stream. Surviving spouses continued to mourn for some
months.
Each village had a chief and a sub-chief elected by eminent warriors , an informal but powerful group, who could and did restrict any
autocratic tendencies on the part of the chief. Other village officials
were shamans, some of whom were in charge of particular ceremonies.
One of their number was the village crier. There were also a number
of lesser officials whose duties were primarily ceremonial. Officials of
various kinds were not necessary for maintaining internal order, since
harmony and cooperation were obtained through the extended matrilineal families. A woman , her husband, unmarried children, daughters
and their husbands, and grandchildren made up this family group.
The oldest competent woman was the director and dominant person
in family affairs, and the grass lodges were feminine property. While
on the hunt this matriarchal family was broken up to some extent,
since married women ordinarily had their own tipis, but the closeknit family camped together.
Throughout historic times the Wichita were involved in countless
raids and wars, both with other Indians and with Europeans. The
Osage may have been ancient enemies, enmity for the Plains Apache
was traditional, and until the French negotiated a treaty the Comanche

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

were bitter foes. When the Wichita peoples entered Texas they incurred the wrath of the Tonkawa and Lipan Apache. No vvonder the
principal activity of the men was war. The customs of war were typical of Plains Indians, at least in later times, and in Plains tradition
they "counted coup."
The Wichita believed in a pantheon of gods and goddesses, arranged
in a vaguely graded hierarchy. They were divided into sky and earth.
masculine and feminine dieties. But everything-animate and inanimate-possessed a soul or spirit. Some things had more power than
others, and some had power which could more readily be influenced
by men. Knowledge of these forces and beings was personally acquired
and, in fact, all spiritual knowledge was thought to come through individual revelation. The more important deities-those who controlled
tribal welfare-were worshipped by semi-secret religious societies.
The ceremonies and dances performed by these societies were intended
to enlist supernatural assistance in matters of general concern, such as
success in war, bountiful crops, and a plentiful supply of bison.

Caddo. Of all the Texas Indians the Caddo possessed the richest and
most highly developed culture. At the dawn of historic times there
were about twenty-five Caddo tribes joined together into three confederacies, plus some small independenl tribes. They occupied east
and northeast Texas, and adjacent portions of Louisiana, Arkansas,
and Oklahoma. Despite their numbers. and they must have been much
more numerous than any other group of native Texans, they passed
into oblivion as silently and with as little fanfare as any other Indian
people in the state. To many Texans the only significance of the Caddo
lies in the fact that the state's name was derived from the Hasinai confederation. The tribes in this confederation called each other allies or
friends, and the Spaniards to whom it was also applied, soon came to
use the word for these and other friendly Indians. Probably the pronunciation of the word was originally closer to " Tayshas" or " Taychas" than to the modern " Texas" (Swanton, 1942: 3) .
The Hasinai (variously called Asenai, Assoni, Asenay, Cenis, etc. )
was the largest Caddo confederacy. Originally the Hasinai appear to
have been composed of nine tribes and occupied the upper reaches of
the Neches and Angelina river valleys (Map 1) . The second group,
the Kadohadacho, or Caddo proper, occupied the great bend of the
Red River in northeastern Texas and southwestern Arkansas. In 1687
when visited by Europeans there were four tribes in this confederacy.
The third group was known as the Natchitoches, their location being

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the vicinity of the modern namesake town, Natchitoches, Louisiana.
Between the Natchitoches and the Kadohadacho was an independent
tribe, the Yatasi, which split in the early historic period, one segment
joining the Natchitoches, the other the Kadohadacho. Other independent Caddo tribes were the Adai, above the Natchitoches on the Red
River, and the Eyeish (or Hais) near the present town of San Augustine, T exas (Map 1).
These tribes and confederacies shared a common language, Caddo,
with but minor dialect differences separating them. Despite their linguistic affiliations with Wichita , Pawnee, and others to the north and
west, the Caddo faced east in a cultural sense, sharing a distinctive
cultural tradition with other Indians of the Southeast culture area, and
particularly with the Natchez.
The immediate archeological forerunners of the historic Caddo are
better known than those of other Texas Indians. The Allen Focus is
considered to be the remains of the Hasinai Confederacy, and the Glendora Focus to represent the Kadohadacho Confederacy. Both foci are
part of the more inclusive Fulton Aspect, which may be regarded as
the late prehistoric-early historic archeological remains of the Caddo
( Suhm et al., 1954: 156-157).
Almost all Europeans, when they first encountered the Caddo, were
startled by their appearance and behavior. The Cahinnio (and probably other Kadohadacho ) practiced cranial deformation, and this
custom turns up archeologically in the area (Krieger, 1946: Plate 21 ,
323). They also tattooed and painted their bodies, but the most disquieting aspect of meeting Caddo for the first time was their habit of
shedding copious tears.
The Caddo were expert gardeners who raised an abundance of corn,
beans, squash , sunflower seed, and tobacco. Two varieties of corn were
grown, one an early maturing, the other a late maturing variety, and
five or six varieties of beans were also raised. Both men and women
worked in the gardens, the men doing the heavier tasks. The cultivation of the fields was a communal enterprise. The first garden prepared was that of the highest politico-religious leader, then the next
most important, and so on until the planting and cultivating had been
done for all. Groups of men worked together but apart from similar
groups of women. The planting was done with surprisingly crude tools
considering the excellent results obtained. The principal tool was a hoe,
its blade being fashioned from the scapula of a bison or a piece of wood.
Animals never supplied more than a subsidiary part of the food
supply, and the only domesticated animal was the dog. Deer were prob-

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

ably the most important game animals hunted in early times, although
after the Caddo obtained horses bison were more frequently hunted.
Bears were sought primarily for their fat. Besides these a variety of
small birds, mammals, and fish were eaten. The Caddo environment
also supplied a wide and welcome variety of nuts , fruits, and berries.
In winter months moccasins, leggings, breechclouts, and shirts of
deer skin or buffalo hide were worn. In summer men often stripped
down to the comfortable breechclout. Dress-up clothing was richly
painted and ornamented. Cloth woven from nettles, turkey feathers ,
and the inner bark of mulberries was, as with other Indians of the
Southeast , used for the skirts of the more socially prominent women.
There were many styles of cutting, arranging, and adorning the hair,
perhaps associated with tribal and social distinctions.
The houses of the Caddo were similar to those of their Wichita relatives. Their grass lodges varied considerably in size depending upon
the number of occupants and their position in the social hierarchy.
Some of the Kadohadacho also seem to have plastered their grass houses
with mud, a common custom among Southeasterners. Temples were
like ordinary dwellings, although larger, and in early historic times at
least a few of them were still built on mounds laboriously constructed
by their ancestors.
The Caddo are well known in archeological circles for their varied
and beautifully made pottery. They also manufactured all sorts of reed
and basketry containers and mats whose esthetic qualities equaled if
they did not surpass those of their pottery. The Caddo were also well
known for excellent Osage orange bows, and these were an important
article of export.
Each of the Caddo confederacies was headed by a man titled xinesi
(pronounced "chenesi" or "shenesi"). At least in the Hasinai confederacy this office was hereditary in the male line. Under the xinesi were
caddi, tribal heads, who also attained their posts through inheritance,
and under them was a corps of lesser officials. Much of the power and
authority of a xinesi or a caddi derived from his role as a priest and a
voice of the gods.
The fact that the Caddo were grouped into confederacies of tribes
suggests that these originated as defensive measures. Preparations for
war were ritually elaborate, and in the defense of their homes the
Caddo were as courageous as any people, but the status of warriors and
the role war played was distinctly subsidiary in their culture. They
scalped enemies; captives were normally slain after ingenious torture,
and their bodies ritually eaten.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Like other Southeastern Indians the Caddo believed in an omnipotent heavenly deity. This deity was masculine, but he had a number of important and powerful female relatives. The Caddo also believed that there was a large number of lesser gods and spirits. Some
individuals had supernatural partners or helpers who were acquired
without a guardian spirit quest. The religious practices of the Caddo
centered around their temples and their guardians, the xinesi. These
priest kings kept perpetual fires burning in the temples, and utilized
fictitious boys as oracles and intermediaries between the supernatural
world and the world of man. These boys spoke to the xinesi (in his
own disguised voice) and told him what was expected of his people.
Besides priest kings there were medicine men or shamans. Primarily
devoted to the curing of illness, they also predicted the future course
of events, blessed new houses, named new-born children, and consecrated new crops. Shamans were organized into societies or guilds,
each of which dressed in their own regalia and publicly initiated new
members. Treatment of the sick generally consisted of sucking affected
parts of the body, sweating of patients, and sleight of hand tricks in
which various objects were " extracted" from a patient's body. Each
shaman had his own particular cures, probably differing but slightly
from others of his own shamanistic fraternity.
All in all, the imperfectly known cultures of the Caddo tribes come
to us as efficiently organized, mostly peaceful, productive, barbaric
theocracies.
Atakapa. Between the Caddo and the coast, occupying a stretch of
territory extending from southeastern Louisiana across the Sabine as
far as the Trinity River valley, were the little known Atakapan-speaking Indians (Map 1) . The Coastal Prairies were not as favorable for
native agriculture as Lhose lands farther inland; and at least partly
as a consequence, the Atakapan tribes, while belonging to the Southeast culture area, were peripheral, provincial reflections of the Caddo
grandeur. The Atakapa proper occupied southwestern Louisiana, but
extended across the Sabine in the vicinity of Sabine Lake. The Akokisa
dwelled on the lower Trinity River and probably to the eastward. To
their north in the San Jacinto River Valley lived another A taka pan
people, the Patiri. The Akokisa were allied to the Bidai who lived upstream in the Trinity valley; and north of the Bidai were the Deadose,
apparently a subdivision of the Bidai.
The archeology of this section of Texas is poorly known, but the sites
so far examined indicate that historic as well as prehistoric cultural

29

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

affiliations were with the Southeast culture area. A Galveston Bay
Focus has been defined by Suhm et al. ( 1954: 128-130 ) on the basis of
Wheat's work in the Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1947: 143-145; 1953:
143-252) . This focus is said to stretch along the coast from the Brazos
to the Sabine River, but no historic materials have been found in it,
and the focus seems to extend too far west for a positive affiliatio.:1 with
Atakapan tribes. Campbell ( 195 7: 448-471) has reported on the Caplen site, located on Bolivar Peninsula which juts into Galveston Bay.
Some European objects were found in this midden, but the cultural
affiliations of the materials found here are uncertain.
Most if not all of the Atakapan tribes appear to have been agricultural, and some even to have raised a surplus of maize. The gardens
were solely the concern of the women, and dependence upon game
and wild plant foods was significantly greater than for the Caddo.
Bison, deer, and bear, as well as many smaller mammals and fish, were
shot with bow and arrow or trapped. Considerable use was made of
wild fruits, nuts, roots, and berries.
Little is known of Atakapan dwellings, there being but one reference to bearskin tents among the Bidai (Sjoberg, 1951: 396-397 ) . Besides bows and arrows, spears, sometimes tipped with antler, were
used. Pottery was manufactured as was basketry.
Practically nothing is known about the social and political organization of any Atakapan tribe. The tribes do not seem to have been political units in early times, bands being the largest political groupings.
There was a belief in an omnipotent supernatural power, but other
religious practices and beliefs are unknown.

Conclusion
Unfortunately for the indigenous Texas Indians, their lands lay
on the northern margins of the Spanish Colonial Empire. As a result
they were exposed to the excesses of white man's civilization almost
two centuries earlier than were many tribes in the West. Before the
sixteenth century was over some natives had felt the steel of the Spanish conquistador. By the end of the seventeenth century much of Texas
had become a bone of contention between the Spanish and French to
the detriment of the native peoples. During the eighteenth century
immigrant Indians, particularly the Comanche, contributed heavily
to the downfall of the remaining native tribes. The advent of AngloAmericans early in the nineteenth century and the subsequent birth
of the Republic of Texas foreshadowed the expulsion or extinction of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

all the remaining Texas Indians. As a result, a state which once supported a striking diversity of Indians, has, unlike a majority of our
states, no descendants of its natives within its borders and very few
elsewhere.
Documentary researches, even when they have been relatively
thorough, can never provide a completely satisfactory picture of longextinct Texas tribes. But archeological analysis of late prehistoric and
early historic sites can add to and improve our frequently defective
knowledge of these extinct cultures.
ETHNOGRAPHIC GUIDE TO REFERENCES
Gatherers of the Western Gulf:
Campbell, 1956, 1958
Ga tschet, 1891
Hodge, 1907
M artin, 1936
Newcomb, 1956
Ruecking, 1953, 1954, 1955
Suhm et al., 1954
Nomads of the Plains :
Tonkawa: Hoijer, 1949, 1952
Kelley, 1947
Krieger, 1946
Sjoberg, 1953a
Suhm, 1957
Swanton, 1915, 1940
Lipan Apache: Dennis and Dennis, 1925
Opler, 1940
Sjoberg, 1953b
Comanche: vVall ace and Hoebel, 1952
The Gardeners:
Jumano: Bolton, 1916
Hammond and Rey, 1927, 1929
Kelley, 1949, 1951, 1952, 1955
Kelley et al., 1940
Lehmer, 1948
Sauer, 1934
Scholes and Mera , 1940
Suhm el al., 1954
Wichita: Curtis, 1930
Dorsey, 1904
Harper, 1953a-c
Hodge, 1910
Kroeber, 1939
Schmitt and Schmitt, n. d.

31

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

Caddo: Krieger, 1946
Parsons, 1941
Swanton, 1942
Suhm et al., 1954
Atakapa: Campbell, 1957
Flodge, 1907, 1910
Sjoberg, 1951
Swanton, 1911
Wheat, 1947, 1953

References Cited
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
AA-American Anthropologist
A An-American Antiquity
B-BAE-Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
B-TAPS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
E-TAS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
SJA-Southwestern Journal of Anthropology
TJS-The Texas Journal of Science
Bolton, Fl. E. (editor)
1916. The Espejo Expedition; The Mendoza-Lopez Expedition to the J umanos.
In: Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542- 1706, pp. 161-195, 311340. Original Narratives of Early American Flistory. New York.
Campbell, T. N .
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. E-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1957. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
TJS, Vol. 9, No.4, pp. 448-471.
1958. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. TJS, Vol. 10, No.4, pp. 423-442.
Curtis, Edward S.
1930. The Wichita. In: The North American Indian, Vol. 19, pp. 35- 104.
Dennis, T. S., and Mrs. T. D. Dennis
1925. Life of F . M. Buckelew, the Indian Captive, as Related by Flimself. Bandera, Texas.
Dorsey, G. A.
1904. The Mythology of the Wichita. Washington.
Gatschet, A . S.
1891. The Karankawa Indians, the Coast People of Texas. Archeological and
Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Vol. 1, No. 2.
Hammond, George P., and Agapito Rey
1927. The Rodriguez Expedition to New Mexico, 1581- 1582. N ew M exi co Flistorical Review, Vol. 2, pp. 239-269.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1929. Expedition into New Mexico Made by Antonio de Espejo, 1582--1583, as
Revealed in the Journal of Diego Perez de Luxan. Quivira Society Publications, Vol. 1. Los Angeles.
Harper, Elizabeth Ann
1953a . The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1719- 1768. The
Chronicles of Oklahoma, Vol. 31, No.3, pp. 268-289.
1953b. The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1769-1779. The
Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. 57, No.2, pp. 181-201.
1953c. The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1779-1835. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 23, pp. 1-32.
Hodge, F. W. (editor)
1907. The Narrative of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca. In: Spanish Explorers in
the Southern United States, 1528- 1543. New York.
1907, 1910. Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico. B-BAE, 30, Part 1
( 1907 ) and Part 2 ( 1910 ) .
Hoijer, Harry
1949. Analytical Dictionary of the Tonkawa Language. University of California
Publications in Linguistics, Vol. 5, pp. 1-74.
1952. Tonkawa Indians. In: Walter P. Webb (editor), The Handbook of Texas,
Vol. 2, pp. 788-789. Austin.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.
1949. Archaeological Notes on Two Excavated Structures in Western Texas.
B-TAPS, Vol. 20, pp. 89-114.
1951. A Bravo Valley Aspect Component of the Lower Rio Conchas Valley, Chihuahua, Mexico. A An, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 114-119.
1952. Factors Involved in the Abandonment of Certain Peripheral Southwestern
Settlements. AA, Vol. 54, No.3, pp. 356-387.
1955. Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. AA, Vol. 57, No. 5, pp.
981-995.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. The Association of Archaeological Materials with Geological Deposits in
the Big Bend Region of Texas. Sul Ross State Teachers College Bulletin,
Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 9- 173.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University
of Texas Publication, No. 4640. Austin.
Kroeber, A. L.
1939. Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. University of California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 38.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1948. The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. University of Arizona Bulletin, Vol.
19, No.2.

INDIAN TRIBES OF TEXAS

33

Martin, George C.
1936. The Indian Tribes of the Mission Nuestra Senora del Refugio. San Antonio.
Newcomb, W . ·vv., Jr.
1956. A Reappraisal of the "Cultural Sink" of Texas. SJA, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp.
145-153.
Opler , M. E.
1940. Myths and Legends of the Lipan Apache Indians. Memoirs of the American Folklore Society, Vol. 36, pp. 1-296.
Parsons, Elsie C.
1941. Notes on the Caddo. Memoirs of the American Anthropological Associa tion, No. 57.
Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
1953. The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico. TJS, Vol. 5, No.4, pp. 470- 489.
1954. Ceremonies of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. TJS, Vol. 6, No.3, pp. 330-339.
1955. The Social Organization of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. T.TS, Vol. 7, No.4. pp. 357-388.
Sauer, Carl
1934. The Distribution of Aboriginal Tribes and Languages in Northwestern
Mexico. !hero-Americana, Vol. 5, pp. 65-74.
Schmitt, Karl, and Iva Osanai Schmitt
n. d. Wichita Kinship Past and Present. Norman
Scholes, France V., and H . P. Mera
1940. Some Aspects of the Jumano Probl em. Carnegie Institution Contributions
to American Anthropology and History, Vol. 6, pp. 265-299.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1951. The Bidai Indians of Southeastern Texas. SJA, Vol. 7, No.4, pp. 391 - 400.
1953a. The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. TJS, Vol. 5, No. 3,
pp. 280-304.
1953b. Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. SJA, Vol. 9, pp. 280- 304.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1957. Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter. TJS, Vol. 9, No.1 , pp. 26-58.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-TAS, Vol. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1911. Indian Tribes of th e Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the
Gulf of Mexico. B-BAE 43.
1915. Linguistic Position of the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. AA, Vol. 17, No.1 , pp. 17-40.
1940. Linguistic Material from the Tribes of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. B-BAE 127.
1942. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
B-BAE 132.

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Wallace, Ernest, and E. A. Hoebel
195Z. The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. Norman.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1947. Archaeological Survey of the Addicks Basin: A Preliminary Report.
B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 143-145.
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southwest T exas.
In: River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4, The Addicks Dam Site. River Basin
Surveys Papers, Inter-Agency Arch eological Salvage Program. B-BAE
154, pp. 143-Z5Z.

