TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1958
President: RicHARD E. JoHNSON (Fort Worth)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAcK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. ScHUETz (San Antonio )
Editor of Publications: E. MoTT D AVIS
Directors (in addition to the above): T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W . C. HoLDEN (Lubbock)
Trustees: RoBERT E. BELL (Norman, Okla.) , WILSON W. CRooK, JR. (Dallas), 0. L.
SIMS (San Angelo), CHARLIE STEEN (Sante Fe, N . Mex.), FLoYD V. STUDER
(Amarillo ), FRANK H. WATT (Waco), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.),
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: C. E. BisSELL (Midland) , JoHN CoRLEY (Hobbs, N.Mex.) ,
W. L. EvERETT (Conroe), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), RoBERT L.
STEPHENSON (Lincoln, Neb.) , HENRY F. STURGIS (Austin), JoE BEN WHEAT
(Boulder, Colo. ), SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fellows: CYRus N . RAY (Abilene), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5 .00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum, Brackenridge Park,
San Antonio 9, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 29, for 1958
Editor: T . N. Campbell
Assistan t Editors:
E. Mott D avis
Edward B. Jelks

P ublish ed by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VOLUME

29,

FOR

1958

A Review of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
PART l
Edited by Edward B. Jelks, E. Mott Davis, and Henry F. Sturgis

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

Table of Contents
Foreword

.

Indian Tribes of Texas
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

vn

1

A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology
By Clarence H. Webb

35

A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
By Dee Ann Suhm

63

A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas Archeology
By Donald J. Lehmer

109

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas
Coast
By T. N. Campbell

145

Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature
Compiled and edited by T. N. Campbell

177

Foreword
THIS IS THE first of two volumes designed to serve as a review of the
current status of Texas archeology. The second volume will appear as
a later issue of the Bulletin. The review is in the form of a series of
papers, each dealing with a different area within Texas. In addition,
the presentation is made complete by the inclusion in the present
volume of W. W. Newcomb's paper on the historic Indians of Texas
and T . N . Campbell's revision , brought up to date, of his exhaustive
guide to the literature on Texas archeology, first published in 1952.
These papers are primarily aimed at a specific audience-the membership of the Texas Archeological Society. In other words, our desire
has been to present material which will be of maximum u se to persons
who are studying Texas archeology on the ground , primarily in their
spare time. Fulfilling this requirement fortunately also provides a
general review which should be of benefit to archeological specialists.
Accordingly, these reviews are designed to clarify the current status
of archeology in each of the several archeological areas within Texas,
and also to orient investigators-both amateur and professionaltoward the many urgent problems that need to be solved. In each
paper previous field work, classifications, and interpretations are reviewed, the major unsolved problems are outlined, and field techniques especially applicable to each area are discussed.
In the present volume, four areas are treated: East Texas, Central
Texas, Trans-Pecos Texas, and the central and southern parts of the
Texas Gulf Coast. A later volume will present papers on the Panhandle, the South Plains, North Central Texas, Southwest Texas, and
the Southeastern Coastal Plain.
A word of explanation is in order for the many members of the
Society who have long awaited the 1958 issue of the Bulletin, published here two years late, and who have anticipated eagerly the
reissuing of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology, by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, which was published in 1954 as Volume 25
of the Bulletin and which has been out of print for several years.
It was originally planned that the Handbook would be reissued in
essentially its original form, and that in addition a series of papers on
special problems in the different parts of Texas would be published.
Also, a volume on field techniques was to be prepared. Most of these
plans went awry because of pressure on the editors' time and slowness

Office of the State Archeologist

Ubrary

on the part of authors in submitting manuscripts, and therefore a
different order of events is now contemplated. The first part of the
Handbook-the part dealing with areas and complexes-is not to be
reissued; its place is to be taken in part by A Review of Texas
Archeology, of which the present volume is the first part. Part II of
the Handbook-consisting of descriptions and illustrations of pottery
and projectile point types-is to be reissued separately as a special
publication of the Society. In addition to the type descriptions , this
volume will also include the trait lists for the various foci and aspects
that appeared in Part I of the original Handbook. The manual of field
techniques is in preparation and will appear as a special publication or
a Bulletin, whichever seems most practical.
This, then, is the long-awaited 1958 issue of the Bulletin, and the
beginning of the revision of An Introductory Handbook of Texas
Archeology. It is our hope and belief that the members of the Society
will find the papers of general interest, and that those members engaged in active research will find them of particular value.

EowARD B. JELKS
E. MoTT DAvis
HENRY F. STURGIS
February, 1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology
DEE ANN SUHM*

Introduction
AREA

As AN archeological unit, central Texas may be defined generally as
embracing the middle stretches of the Colorado and Brazos rivers and
their tributaries. More specifically, it is customarily extended westward to include Tom Green and Edwards counties, northward to a
line reaching from Jones to Kaufman counties, eastward to the middle
Trinity River, and southward to approximately the central section of
the Gulf Coastal Plain (Fig. 1). Actually, precise boundaries have
not been established and one can anticipate that they will always
remain somewhat fuzzy. To be sure, additional excavations and
distributional studies will refine the present archeological definition of
central Texas, but boundary lines fluctuate through time and, more
importantly, it is difficult, even under the most ideal conditions, to
sharply distinguish one culture area from another.
Physiographically, the central Texas region is diverse, ranging
from fairly rugged landscapes to flat plains. The uplifted Edwards
Plateau, occupying the bulk of the area, is by far the most striking
geographic feature. The plateau rises abruptly above the coastal plains
to the south and southeast, but merges more gradually into the Great
Plains to the north and the gently rolling prairies and woodlands to
the northeast. On the west the plateau is technically extended across
the southern portion of the Pecos River valley to the Mexican Highlands which cut through the Trans-Pecos region. The rainfall gradu• Dee Ann Suhm, at present associated with the Department of Anthropology at
the University of Utah, is returning to Texas this year to join the staff of the Texas
Memorial Museum at The University of Texas. She is best known as senior author
and originator of An Introductory H andbook of Texas Archeology. Her excavations
at the Collins, Smith, and Williams sites have helped to clarify the archeology of
central Texas. This review paper was written in 1958.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ally decreases as one proceeds from the moderately well-watered
eastern portion to the semi-arid western parts. Changes in the vegetation and, to a lesser extent, fauna are closely correlated with the variations in rainfall. This environmental diversity within central Texas is
significant for the archeologist because it must have had important
effects on the types of economy, settlement patterns, and population
densities of the Indian groups.

Historic Indians
Most important of the aboriginal Indian tribes inhabiting central
Texas was the Tonkawa, who roamed over the grasslands in the
eastern and southern parts of the area. The Tonkawa, when first encountered, consisted of a number of politically and economically independent groups (including the Tonkawa proper, the Mayeye, the
Yojuane, the Ervipiame, and possibly the Emet, Cavas, Sana, Toho,
and Tohaha ) , who spoke a common language (Tonkawa ) and who
shared many cultural traits (Sjoberg, 1953a ) . It was not until the
18th century, with an increase in European expansion and a related
decline in Indian population, that these various groups formed a more
or less united tribe.
The Tonkawa as a whole may be described as semi-nomadic within
a defined territory, and as living primarily off game animals, wild
plant products and fish. Bison and deer were the most important
animals hunted. Other sources of livelihood included a wide variety
of small game and such vegetal foods as tunas (fruit of the prickly
pear ), pawpaws, acorns, pecans, herbs, and various edible roots.
Agriculture was probably not practiced until after European occupation, although the historic sources are not clear on this matter. Certainly agriculture was never very important to the Tonkawa.
Since many elements of their culture reflect adaptations to a grassland environment, the Tonkawa may be classified as nascent Plains
Indians (Newcomb, 1956 ) . Full development of the horse-using,
bison-subsisting complex was thwarted by the 18th century intrusions
of Comanche, Apache, and Wichita-speaking Indians, who pushed the
Tonkawa into marginal grasslands lacking the rich game resources of
the Great Plains. As marginal Plains dwellers, the Tonkawa were
unable to compete successfully with the more mobile and more
formidable tribes from the north and west, and never had the opportunity to become full-fledged bison-hunting peoples.

CENTRAL TEXAS

1

0

30

60

~

MILES

N

Fig . 1. Approxi mate boundaries of central Texas as an archeological unit.

Tonkawa history, as recorded by European explorers, missionaries,
and settlers, depicts a much-displaced tribe being rapidly decimated
by diseases and by hostile conflicts with Whites and other Indian
tribes. Thus, in 1885, when the Tonkawa were permanently settled
at the Oakland agency in the northeastern part of Oklahoma, they
numbered less than 50 persons. Today the descendants of these Indians
are living near the town of Tonkawa, Oklahoma.
Although there is no reason to believe that the Tonkawa did not
inhabit parts of central Texas prior to European exploration, archeological sites indisputably identifiable as Tonkawa have not been reported. Moreover, in view of recent stratigraphic evidence (Jelks,
1953; Suhm, 1957), the direct linkage of the Tonkawa with the Austin
Focus of the Central Texas Aspect (Krieger, 1946; Kelley, 1947a ) no

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

longer appears to be tenable. This apparent gap in the archeological
sequence has long been a puzzle to researchers working in the area,
and certainly remains as a major problem.
The Jumano Indians were a second and a much less-known group
who frequented parts of central Texas in historic times. A rather
confusing group to identify in the historical documents, the Jumano
evidently engaged in widespread trading activities which extended
from Trans-Pecos Texas to the Caddo region in east Texas. It is difficult, because of their far-flung movements, to indicate a focal area for
the Jumano, although some, if not all, seem to have wintered with the
Patarabueye Indians of the La Junta region on the Rio Grande
(Kelley, 1955).
During the early part of the 18th century, the Jumano became
closely associated with the southern Apache, and were probably absorbed by them. At least the Jumano are not mentioned in historical
accounts after the early 1700's. In view of the early disappearance of
the Jumano, it is not surprising that little is known of them, apart
from their extensive trading enterprises and their apparent reliance
upon the bison. The linguistic affiliations of the Jumano are likewise
uncertain, although workers have variously classified them as Athabascan, Uta-Aztecan or Caddoan speakers (Kelley, 1955: 982 ) .
Kelley ( 1947a, 1955) has suggested that the Jumano are to be
associated with archeological remains he named the Toyah Focus of
the Central Texas Aspect. However, sites containing historic material
which would link the Toyah Focus to the Jumano Indians are unreported. Consequently, the prehistoric origins of the J umano, like
that of the Tonkawa, have not been resolved to the satisfaction of all
researchers.
Apart from the Tonkawa and the Jumano, almost all of the historic
central Texas Indians are known to have arrived in the region after
the latter part of the 17th century. Most important of these intrusive
Indians were the Wichita peoples, the Apache, and the Comanche. The
Wichita group-including the Wichita proper, the Kichai, the Iscanis,
the Waco, the Taovayas and the Tawakoni-in the late 17th and early
18th centuries were driven south from the central Plains and by the
early 1700's several of their villages were reported in the Red
River Valley. Although the main body of the Wichita settled in northcentral Texas and adjacent parts of Oklahoma, three groups, theW aco,
the Kichai, and the Tawakoni, penetrated well into central Texas.
Their former presence in central Texas is attested by historic accounts and by a probable Tawakoni village (the Stansbury Site)

CENTRAL TEXAS

excavated in the Whitney Reservoir basin by the River Basin Surveys
(Suhm et al., 1954: 95 ) . Much of the material recovered from the
Stansbury Site bears striking resemblances to the objects from Spanish
Fort, a historic Taovayas village on the Red River (Witte, 1938 ). Both
sites are large and seem to contain fairly substantial house remains,
probably a reflection of the partial dependency upon agricultural
crops which could support semi-permanent villages.
The Comanche were among the most powerful and the most feared
tribes in the southern Plains. Linguistically, the Comanche are
closely affiliated with the Shoshone-speaking Indians of the Great
Basin. Their southward movements in the 18th century are well recorded in historical documents . The many Comanche bands ranged
over an enormous area, extending from the headwaters of the
Arkansas River in Colorado to the middle reaches of the Colorado
River in central Texas (Wallace and Hoe bel, 1954) . With the horse
and European guns, the Comanche became skilled bison-hunters and
notorious raiders and warriors. As such, they were a constant source
of terror to European settlers and were able to push other Indians,
particularly the Apache and the Tonkawa, into southern Texas.
There is little archeological evidence of the Comanche, but this is
not unexpected, in view of their late entry into Texas and their frequent camp movements which did not permit appreciable concentrations of artifacts and other refuse. To date, the most probable Comanche
remains reported have been isolated burials, such as the crevice
burial found in Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County (Newcomb,
1955). However, no definitely Comanche site or burial has been reported in central Texas.
Of the many Apache groups who inhabited parts of the American
Southwest, only the Lipan frequented the central T exas region to any
extent. Their initial entry into the area cannot be dated precisely,
although in 1732 the Lipan were reported as having recently arrived
in the vicinity of the San Saba River (Sjoberg, 1953b ) . The Lipan
moved about frequently, partly in search of food and partly because
of pressure from the Comanche Indians. Like the Comanche, they often
raided European settlements, kept large herds of horses and hunted
bison. Their basic cultural orientation, however, more closely resembled that of the Athabascan nomads in the Southwest than that of
the Plains Indians ( ibid .) . Although the Lipan are known to have
inhabited the San Saba and other missions, there are no archeological
remains in central Texas which can be attributed to them with
certainty.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In spite of the many documentary references to Indians in central
Texas, post-European contact sites are extremely rare and, aside from
the Stansbury (Towash ) Site in Hill County, none have been systematically excavated. Remains of some former missions are known,
but they have not been scientifically investigated by archeologists.
Even though archeological complexes belonging to the Historic
Stage ( Suhm, et al. , 1954: 20-21 ) remain undefined for central Texas,
there is no reason to believe that they do not exist. The notable absence
of historic sites is best explained by the semi-nomadic character of the
Indians and, more importantly, by the lack of archeological
investigation.

Archeological Sites
Throughout all parts of central Texas there are abundant evidences
of pre-European occupations. Former habitation sites, marked by concentrations of refuse, are by far the most common type of remains
bearing witness to the aboriginal occupations. The habitation sites,
which typically occur near all reasonably reliable water sources, are
either open campsites or rockshelters; sedentary village sites are, as
yet, unreported for the pre-European period.
Many of the open campsites (burnt rock middens ) are distinguished
by sizable accumulations of burned and cracked limestone mixed
with charcoal and ash-stained soil, as well as cultural debris (Fig. 2 ) .
Burnt rock middens are an unusual kind of site, having been reported
to date only in the Edwards Plateau and Trans-Pecos regions of Texas.
They vary greatly in size, sometimes reaching over an acre in extent
and six or more feet in thickness. In cross section the middens appear
as low knolls, while in outline they are circular or oval. Since it is
uniformly agreed that the burnt rock middens grew by accretions
incidental to occupation, they are not usually referred to as mounds,
the latter term being reserved for intentional structures such as burial
or temple mounds.
The discoloration and angularity of the rock fragments comprising
the midden deposits are a result of contact with fire and thermal
fracturing , and indicate that the burnt rock middens are largely
accumulations of hearthstones. WPA-University of Texas excavations
on the Colorado River near Austin (Kelley and Campbell, 1942: 320 )
provide data on the types of hearths making up the middens. The
most complex variety was made by lining a small oval or circular depression with stone slabs. Simpler types of hearths were made by

A

8
Fig . 2 . A, View of a burnt rock midden on Gillen Rench, Uvalde County. B, Cross section
of a burnt rock m idden deposit, Dies Rench Site, Travis County.

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

placing stones in a circle or oval on an undisturbed surface, or by
scooping out a shallow concavity and placing large stones around it.
The hearths were apparently used primarily for roasting and baking.
Repeated occupation of a site disturbed earlier hearths, creating a
more or less homogeneous deposit. In addition, there is some evidence
(Kelley and Campbell, 1942: 321; I elks, 1951) to indicate that burnt
rock middens consist of several independent accretions which gradually merged into a seemingly uniform accumulation. The complex
and disturbed nature of a burnt rock midden-resulting from the
mode of accumulation and from re-occupation of the site-have obvious and important bearings on the archeological analysis and
interpretation.
Other open sites in central Texas consist almost exclusively of refuse
buried in alluvial terraces (Fig. 3, A ) , or of thinly scattered refuse
deposits found on the surface of uplands. Although the terrace sites
may contain numerous hearthstones, the relatively rapid rate of alluvial deposition did not permit appreciable concentrations of rock fragments. These sites occur along all the major rivers and creeks, and vary
greatly in extent and in depth. Like the burnt rock middens, the terrace sites were temporary camping spots which were visited repeatedly.
Upland sites are usually found on bluffs or rolling hills some distance away from streams so that occupational refuse has had little opportunity to be buried by alluvium. While these sites may yield a
large number of artifacts from the surface, they rarely merit excavation. Most of them appear to have been occupied less intensively and
less frequently than either burnt rock middens or sites buried in terrace deposits. None of the campsites have yielded any indications of
dwellings, but it is reasonable to assume that some type of simple
brush and/ or hide-covered structure was erected.
Burnt rock middens and other open campsites can be related
through the artifacts obtained from them. Both kinds of sites yield predominantly stone objects. Chipped stone projectile points, knives, and
scrapers are the most common types of artifacts found, although grinding implements ( manos and m:Iling slabs ), choppers, and heavy hifacial blades are usually well represented in the inventories. Less frequent, but consistently present, are objects fashioned from bone, scored
pebbles, polished stone artifacts, chipped stone drills, worn pieces of
ochre and side-notched pebbles. Pottery is often found, but is usually
limited to the upper levels. Site features are simple, consisting largely
of hearths and burials.

A

B
Fig . 3. A, Cross section of occupation zones buried in a terrace d 2posit of lh e Colorado
Rive r, Site No. CT-1, Rob Roy Ranch , Travis County . 8, View of Smith Roc !<Shelter (52C5-20),
Trav is Coun ty.

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Much the same type of material is found in rockshelter sites (Fig.
3, B) which occur throughout the central Texas limestone region.
Rockshelters were apparently occupied whenever possible, while some
of the uninhabitable ones were occasionally used as burial areas
(Watt, 1936 ). Because of the central Texas climate and the character
of the shelters, perishable artifacts are very rarely found, but they are
not entirely unknown . Walls of shelters occasionally have pictographs,
most of which appear to belong to the Central Texas Aspect (see below ) .
On the basis of what is now known, none of the habitation sites can
be considered as entirely distinctive to any one cultural compl~x, although burnt rock middens are characteristic of the Archaic Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Later Central Texas Aspect materials are frequently
found at burnt rock midden sites, but usually as a thin veneer overlying Edwards Plateau Aspect material. Open sites may contain early
types of projectile points, but definite Paleo-Indian campsites are unreported. However, Kincaid Shelter in Uvalde County has yielded evidence of a late Pleistocene occupation. All other rockshelters investigated to date contain in situ materials belonging to post-Pleistocene
complexes. Village sites are not kno·wn for the pre-European period,
but it may be anticipated that sites approaching villages are likely to
be encountered on the margins of the Caddo region as that area becomes better known. For the historic period, villages which can be
identified with the southern Wichita group occur along the middle
reaches of the Brazos River.
Archeological remains in central Texas are by no means restricted
to habitation sites, although these constitute the most important type.
Other sites include quarry stations, isolated burials, pictographs, and
mortar holes. Quarries- areas where chipping materials were obtained from flint concentrations embedded in limestone, or from flint
nodules eroded out of limestone formations-are common and may be
located some distance away from former camping spots. Chipping
waste and unfinished or broken flint artifacts are frequently recovered
from quarry sites and often aid in establishing cultural affiliations.
Isolated burials are sometimes found in crevices or in small rockshelters not suitable for occupation. Burials of this sort are not frequent in central Texas, but have been reported for both prehistoric
and historic periods (for example, Field, 1956). Since burials antedating the European period rarely contain funerary offerings, it is
usually difficult to relate isolated ones to any cultural complex. The
same problem applies to pictographs and mortar holes found apart

CENTRAL TEXAS

73

from midden refuse. Pictographs are not common, perhaps partly because conditions of preservation are unfavorable. Those recorded so
far have been found on shelter walls and appear to be affiliated largely
with the Central Texas Aspect. They are usually simple geometric
lines with an occasional crudely executed human figure . Red is the
predominant color. Mortar holes, of more frequent occurrence, are
scattered throughout the central part of the State. Most distinctive of
these, but nevertheless of uncertain cultural affiliation, are the elliptical mortar holes which occur in the Abilene area (Sayles, 1935, Map
B) . The more common type of mortar hole has a circular or oval openmg.
In addition to the kinds of sites already known to occur in central
Texas, one would also expect to find ancient " kill" sites, as PaleoIndian projectile points appear regularly in collections. Kill sites, as
distinct from habitation sites, are localities where animals were
slaughtered, and the only artifacts recovered are the hunting and
butchering tools associated with the bones of the slain animals. Although not limited to the Paleo-Indian period, kill localities are the
most characteristic late Pleistocene and early post-Pleistocene sites.
Paleo-Indian projectile points, such as Clovis, Folsom, Plainview, and
Angostura, have been found in kill sites on the High Plains, and it is
reasonable-since Lhese po.inls occur in collections made in central
Texas-to assume that they will eventually be found in similar contexts in central Texas.
By and large the archeological sites found in the central part of the
State are characteristic of hunting and gathering peoples. The objects
recovered at these sites are relatively simple tools, and likewise suggest a hunting and gathering economy. While the typological problems are by no means easily resolved, the diversity of the artifacts and
the number of classes found are quite limited when compared with
archeological remains from sedentary societies. The basic tool kits of
hunting and gathering peoples have a number of features in common,
largely the result of similar subsistence and technological levels. These
factors-limited variation in artifact types and the far-flung similarities of the basic tools-present knotty archeological problems and often
make interpretations difficult. In view of the problems inherent in the
archeological remains of hunting and gathering complexes and the
ever-pressing need for additional excavations and reports, it is not
surprising that the prehistory of central Texas is viewed somewhat
differently by various archeologists.

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Syntheses and Interpretations
Although it is beyond the intended scope of this paper to present a
history of archeological investigations in central Texas, a resume of
the more important classification schemes and interpretations seems
essential. To credit properly all persons who have contributed to these
reconstructions is not feasible, for they are the result of years of work
by a number of amateur and professional archeologists. It is obvious
that only the major researchers and the highlights of their schemes
can be mentioned (Fig. 4).
In spite of the number of prehistoric sites, systematic investigations
into the archeology of central Texas did not take significant form until
after about 1930. The absence of spectacular remains and elaborate
artifacts did not afford much incentive to the institutions and foundations who were financing most of the archeological expeditions in the
late 19th and early 20th centuries. No doubt, the growth of scientific
interests and inquiries into the archeology of the area are correlated,
to a considerable extent, with the expansion of the activities of the Department of Anthropology of the University of Texas, and the founding of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society ( 1928 ).
J. E. Pearce, working out of the University of Texas, was one of the
first archeologists to direct appreciable energies toward excavation
and, to a lesser extent, interpretation of central Texas sites. He was
particularly interested in the "kitchen middens" (burnt rock middens ) and, in 1932, briefly distinguished and characterized three levels
of midden "culture." These levels, termed "upper," "middle" and
"lower," were essentially stratigraphic units marked by changes in
projectile point sizes and styles. The lower level was described as representing a crude and pure hunting type of culture; the middle level
as a higher hunter type, with little or no horticulture and lacking the
bow; and, finally, the upper level as a " finer" type of culture with the
bow and considerable horticulture, but still having basically a hunting
economy. Pearce further recognized some similarities between the
upper burnt rock midden level and the archeological remains of east
Texas. He even suggested that the upper level culture was derived
from east Texas, and that it became modified in adapting to the environment of central Texas.
More recent studies (Miller and Jelks, 1952; Suhm, 1955 ) have
borne out, in part, Pearce's stratigraphic sequence of projectile point
types, but his brief cultural characterizations and his hypothecated

(")

t"rJ

MAJOR

r--

CLASS! FICATION

(
RAY and SAYLES

;=r

Small Scraper
Culture
Mound

Culture

::0

I

RAY

PEARCE

Upper

I

Valley

Large

Sera

I

Culture

SAYLES

I
~w~~~:~
I I

Mound

Culture

Sand

Dune

Brazos

Culture

I

Lower Mound

Clear

-

Culture

Guadalupe

T/

Phase

Rover Phaoo

I

Fork~
Folsom

'"""''

I

Rock

Brozo1

:

'

Tonkawa

Jumono

Indians

Indians

INTERPRETATIONS

Tonka wa Indians

+

I

(from Coddoon
Root)

Culture

Fork

Culture

Phose

CURRENT

Central Texa[
Aspect {

'

Te~as

Central

>
t"'
>-l
t"rJ
~

>

(f)

I

(Remnants)

Aspect

r'r

Toyah Focus

Toyah

\ Austin Focus

t Focus

Austin Focus

Edwards
Plateau

Clear

Tonkawa

I

Creek

Culture

KELLEY

Aronome
Phose

Round

Middle

z>-l

SCHEMES

Culture

I

coastal Branch

I
""" \

(not
represente~
central
Texas

10

Branch

Edwards Plateau
Aspect
Uvalde

Edwards Plateau

Aspect

Focus

Round Rock Focus
Clear Fork Focus

Central

Texas

Srm
Gibson

Site

Artifacts

I
~

Abilene-Ours!
Types

"solut~eon" Root

Kincaid
Central

Texas Root

Shelter and surface finds

of~,~,~,

Angostura

and Plainview Points

Fig . 4 . Chart showing the major classificalion schemes which ha ·1e boen proposed for archeological remains found in central Texas .
'I
()1.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

migration to explain the origin of the upper level culture are now disregarded. Perhaps Pearce's major contribution was in stimulating
interest in the archeology of Texas, although his interpretations, which
often lacked the support of properly presented evidence, are of more
than historical importance.
During the 1920's and 1930's, while Pearce was excavating burnt
rock middens in the central part of the State, Cyrus N . Ray was concentrating on archeological remains in the Abilene area. In a number
of articles, most of which have appeared in the Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Ray has described and interpreted the finds he
has made over a period of more than 25 years. According to Ray
( 1940a, 1948 ), one of the earliest occupations in the Abilene region
is found in Taylor County, at the Gibson Site, which he considers as
dating back to the late Pleistocene. The disputed antiquity of the artifacts from the Gibson site hinges upon their tenuous association with
Pleistocene fauna and Folsom-"Yuma" points, upon their deeply
buried position in the silt deposits, and upon the chronological placement of these deposits. The Gibson site artifacts, which do not constitute a recognized culture complex, include the "Abilene," " Jones" and
" Gibson" points, stone scrapers, knives, and manos. Since Sayles had
labelled similar remains as " Durst Silt Eoliths," Ray and Sayles
( 1941 ) agreed that the name " Durst-Abilene Types" should supersede
their previous designations.
The " Clear Fork Culture," occupying a higher stratigraphic position in the alluvial silts, is thought to have evolved out of the vaguely
defined Durst-Abilene Types (Ray, 1948). Although initially recognized by Ray (1929, 1938 ) , it was later re-defined by Kelley (1947b)
as the Clear Fork Focus. Ray ( 1948), in the midst of lively controversy , has maintained that early Clear Fork artifacts are found in late
Pleistocene context. but that they are more recent than the DurstAbilene Types. Kelley , on the other hand, in 1947 suggested a beginning date for the Clear Fork Focus of about 4,000 or 2,000 B.C. , based
upon an analysis of terrace deposits on the Colorado River near Austin.
More recently, the problem of dating both the Durst-Abilene remains
and the Clear Fork Focus material has been reviewed by Crook ( 1955 ) ,
who suggests that their dates probably fall between the two extremes
proposed by Ray and by Kelley.
As a culture complex, both Ray ( 1938) and Kelley ( 1947b) generally agree that the Clear Fork is distinguished principally by dart point
styles: Ray's "Clear Fork Dart 1 and 2" ( same as Kelley's " Nolan
Beveled Stem"), Ray 's " Clear Fork Dart 3" (same as Kelley's " Baird

CENTRAL TEXAS

77

Beveled Blade") and Ray's " Clear Fork Dart 4" (same as Kelley's
" Taylor Thinned Base") . In addition, Kelley lists gouges as another
diagnostic, while Ray assigns the gouge, flint side scrapers, spokeshaves, gravers, awls, hand axes, discs, and abrading stones to the Clear
Fork. However, even the distinctiveness of the Clear Fork Focus has
been recently questioned (see discussion below ) .
To include more recent archeological remains in the Abilene region,
Ray ( 1929 ) distinguished the pre-ceramic " Sand Dune Culture" and ,
for later pottery-bearing complexes, the "Large Scraper Culture" and
the " Small Scraper Culture." Ray and Sayles ( 1941 ) , because they
had used overlapping terminology, recognized a "Valley Creek Culture," a combination of Ray's Large Scraper Culture and his Small
Scraper Culture and Sayles' "Wichita Phase" (see below ) . As diagnostic traits for the Valley Creek Culture they list: ( 1) pottery, (2 )
four-edged beveled knives, ( 3) double-pointed plain knives, (4) beveled dart points, (5 ) oval keel-backed scrapers, (6) "pine tree" shaped
arrow points, ( 7) side-notched triangular arrow points and (8) flake
drills. For the earlier "Brazos Culture," a combination of Ray's Sand
Dune Culture and Sayles' "Brazos Phase" (see below ), they list the
following as distinguishing traits : ( 1) serrated arrow points, (2) long
slender "pine tree" shaped arrow points, (3 ) long slender side notched
arrow points, (4 ) double pointed knives, (5 ) square based knives, ( 6)
recessed based knives and ( 7) side scrapers.
Krieger ( 1946: 132-137) , in reviewing the archeology of northcentral Texas, pointed out that neither the Valley Creek nor the Brazos
Culture is a consistent culture complex, as the supposedly diagnostic
traits for each appear in different combinations at various sites. In addition, the pottery, which is presumably the major characteristic of
the Valley Creek Culture, seems to consist largely of trade pieces. These
include a few Puebloan sherds, an appreciable amount of Caddoan
pottery (principally Frankston Focus types) and, frequently, shelltempered sherds probably from the Henrietta Focus (Krieger, 1946:
123 ) . The evidence at hand, then, suggests that both the Valley Creek
and the Brazos Cultures, as defined by Ray and Sayles, are to a considerable extent admixtures.
It is difficult to obtain a coherent picture of the archeology of the
Abilene area from the published literature. The definitions of the cultural complexes are vague and depend, to an undesirable degree, upon
surface collections. The importance and the uniqueness of the area
have probably been over-emphasized, although the early researchers
in the area w ere severely handicapped by a paucity of comparative

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

data. The present status of the Brazos Culture and the Valley Creek
Culture has not been made clear, and the dating of the Durst-Abilene
types is still unresolved. The ultimate solution to these problems rests
not upon a critical review of literature, but rather upon a number of
careful excavations and a thorough analysis of the material recovered.
Although at an early date both Pearce and Ray proposed classificatory schemes, the first real integration and detailed classification of
central Texas archeology (as well as for remains in all other parts of
the state) did not appear until 1935, when E. B. Sayles' "An Archaeological Survey of Texas" was published. This survey of Texas archeology, conducted under the auspices of Gila Pueblo, was intended to
bring together existing information, and to seek traces of the origin of
the Hohokam, one of the major prehistoric culture traditions in the
American Southwest. The survey failed to uncover the origin of the
Hohokam, but did lead to an important synthesis of Texas archeology.
Sayles, working within the framework of the Gladwin classification
system', defined in considerable detail a number of post-Pleistocene
hunting and gathering complexes for the central part of the State. Using projectile point styles, types of sites and other criteria (Tables 4
and 7) , Sayles distinguished the "Abilene" and "Brazos Branches,"
the "Edwards Plateau Culture," and the "Guadalupe River," " Round
Rock," "Wichita," "Araname," and " Tonkawa" phases. In a complicated, but highly tentative reconstruction (Table 13 ), two roots, the
"Solutrean" and the "Central Texas," were h ypothecated as the major
antecedents of the later complexes. The Solutrean Root was envisioned
as developing into the Brazos River Branch (renamed in 1941 by Ray
and Sayles as the Brazos Culture), which is listed as containing both
Folsom points and "Yuma" (most of which would now be classified as
Angostura, Plainview or Meserve ) points, as well as arrow points. The
Central Texas Root, at an early date, developed into the Abilene
Branch renamed by Ray and Sayles in 1941 as the Clear Fork Culture ) , which was followed by the Edwards Plateau Culture. Roughly
contemporaneous regional specializations following the Edwards Plateau Culture are referred to as the Guadalupe River and Round Rock
phases. The Round Rock Phase is indicated as having developed out of
the Edwards Plateau Culture, while the Guadalupe River Phase is
1 A classification system (Gladwin, 1934) which designates a broad cultural tradition as a root, the subdivisions of which are referred to as stems. Stems, in turn,
differentiate into branches, and variations within a branch are referred to as phases
(the latter term is roughly equivalent to the focus of the McKern or Mid-western
system).

CENTRAL TEXAS

79

thought to have been derived from the Coastal Branch of the Central
Texas Stem.
For the protohistoric and historic periods, three phases, the vVichita
(renamed in 1941 by Ray and Sayles as the Valley Creek Culture ) ,
Araname and the Tonkawa, are distinguished. Sayles recognized that
evidence linking the Tonkawa and the Araname 2 Indians with specific
archeological remains was lacking, but, none the less, suggested that
they represent the "remnants of once more numerous tribes living in
central Texas, who made the large middens and burnt rock mounds
found throughout the Edwards Plateau region" (p. 59). By contrast,
the Wichita Phase, a hunting complex with secondary dependency
upon domesticated crops, is defined as an archeological unit. It is indicated as an offshoot from the "Caddoan Root" and presumably represents a fairly late intrusion into central Texas.
Both Sayles and Ray were confronted with the problems of setting
up a classification scheme for the archeological remains they recovered, dating these remains, and determining their possible relationships. Since they, along with Pearce, were pioneers in the archeology
of central Texas, they did not have access to many site reports and
were forced to base their interpretations on extremely limited data.
As a result, many aspects of their interpretations have not been borne
out by subsequent research. Most of Sayles' reconstruction of central
Texas is not applicable to what is known today of the archeological
remains in that region. To a very large extent, his cultural complexes
were based upon surface collections, and have not been validated by
more recent work. However, in spite of its limitations, Sayles' survey
remains as one of the most basic references to Texas archeology.
J. Charles Kelley, re-examining the data presented by Ray and
Sayles, and analyzing materials excavated by the WPA-University of
Texas, published in 1947 two articles which present the classification
scheme currently used- although usually somewhat modified- by
most archeologists working in central Texas. For the early, pre-ceramic
horizon, Kelley recognized the Edwards Plateau Aspect, which he divided into three foci: Clear Fork, Round Rock and Uvalde. On the
basis of the remains found at the Lehmann Rock Shelter in Gillespie
County, he characterized the Edwards Plateau Aspect as having: ( 1)
large and irregularly shaped blades, (Z) fairly well chipped triangular
2 A group of poorly known Indians who, in historic times, lived on the lower
reaches of the Guadalupe River. They are sometimes classified as one of the many
Coahuiltecan groups (Ruecking, 1954) , formerly widely distributed in southwestern
Texas and northeastern Mexico.

8o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

blades, ( 3 ) heavy flake side scrapers, ( 4 ) small percussion-chipped
choppers made from cores, ( 5) one-hand unshaped manos either single
or double faced, (6 ) oval bowl "metates," ( 7) large gravers, ( 8) heavy
pick-like blades and (9 ) stemmed knives. These traits are considered
to have been shared by the three foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
For the Round Rock Focus, Kelley (1947a, 1947b) listed the following as diagnostic traits: ( 1) flat, side-notched pebbles, (2 ) numerous
" spike-like" blades and (3 ) dart point types " Pedernales Indented
Base," "Strawn Stemmed," and "Castroville Convex Base." Largely
following Ray ( 1938 ), Kelley defined the Clear Fork Focus as distinguished by: (1 ) gouges and (2 ) dart point type "Nolan Beveled
Stem" and, to a lesser extent, dart point types "Baird Beveled Blade"
and "Taylor Thinned Base." The Uvalde Focus is indicated (Kelley,
1947a, 1948) as being characterized by: (1) shaft straighteners and
(2 ) dart point types "Smithwick Small Stem," "Frio Flared Stem,"
and "Mantell Split Stem. " Kelley implies that these definitions are not
complete, but, lacking any indications to the contrary, it is assumed
that they embrace the traits which he considered to be the most distinctive.
The Round Rock Focus, which probably includes Sayles' Round
Rock and Guadalupe River phases, is indicated as, by and large, contemporaneous with the Clear Fork Focus. The distinctions between
the Clear Fork and Round Rock foci are far from clear or consistent,
for, as Kelley points out: "over much of central Texas components of
either focus are almost invariably mixed in varying (legrees; 'pure'
components of either focus are almost entirely lacking" (1947b: 100 ) .
The Uvalde Focus, which includes Sayles' late "Edwards Plateau Culture" and Huskey's ( 1935 ) "upper level" and "middle level" of
"Mound A Culture," is considered a later manifestation than the Clear
Fork and Round Rock foci , although in certain areas the three foci appear to have been co-existent.
By relating terrace deposits containing archeological remains to climatic cycles, Kelley suggested a beginning date of about 4000 or 2000
B.C. for the Round Rock and Clear Fork foci. For the Uvalde Focus, a
beginning date of approximately A.D. 1000 is suggested (Kelley, 1948:
78 ) . All three foci were thought to have survived until quite late, possibly up to about A.D. 1500, when they were replaced by the Central
Texas Aspect. More recent evidence (Miller and Jelks, 1952) , however, presents a strong argument for placing the close of the Edwards
Plateau Aspect at about A.D. 1200, at the very latest. The beginning

CENTRAL TEXAS

81

date for the Edwards Plateau Aspect remains uncertain, although
Kelley's lowest estimate still stands as a reasonable one.
The concept of the Edwards Plateau Aspect, which has recently
been amplified (Suhm et al. , 1954: 107- 112), has been useful and is
widely employed by almost all archeologists now working in central
Texas. It seems reasonably clear that the Edwards Plateau Aspect represents a cultural unit in a broad sense. However, regional and temporal variations within this long-persisting tradition are not well documented. The focal divisions are not as often used, and their validity
has been questioned (Suhm et al. , 1954: 103 ) on the basis that sufficient evidence demonstrating the existence of the foci has not been
presented, and that the supposed diagnostics for each of the foci frequently occur in associatio~. For these reasons, the above authors favor
using only the Edwards Plateau Aspect, leaving the problem of the
focal distinctions unresolved.
Kelley ( 1947b: 99) regards the Edwards Plateau Aspect as one of
several manifestations of a larger cultural horizon, which he termed
the "Balcones Phase". 3 Also included in this horizon are the preceramic materials along the central Texas coast (now classified as the
Aransas Focus ) and the Big Bend Aspect (Kelley et al., 1940 ). Although Kelley has not characterized the Balcones Phase, he does indicate that it has much in common with the Archaic complexes of the
southeastern United States and the "desert cultures" of the Southwest.
Presumably, it is approximated by the Archaic Stage which was defined to embrace post-Pleistocene hunting and gathering complexes in
Texas (Suhmetal., 1954: 18-20 ).
A distinction between the Archaic Edwards Plateau Aspect and
later complexes marked by the presence of pottery and arrow points
has long been made in central Texas archeology. The relatively late
arrival of the bow and pottery has been amply documented by stratigraphic sequences from excavated sites. Pearce ( 1932 ) labelled this
late horizon in central Texas as the upper level burnt rock mound culture; Sayles ( 1935) termed it, in part, as the Wichita Phase; and, more
recently, Kelley designated it as the Central Texas Aspect. Within the
Central Texas Aspect (which has superseded the previous designations), two foci-Austin and Toyah-are usually recognized. The
Nueces Focus, a third subdivision listed by Stephenson (1950) in his
3 The use of "phase" here is as defined by the McKern or Mid-western Taxonomic System (McKern, 1939) and is not to be confused or equated with the usage
of " phase" in the Gladwin System or the Willey·Phillips scheme ( 1958 ) .

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

summary paper on archeological sequences in Texas, has never been
defined.
The focal divisions of the Central Texas Aspect were originally recognized by Kelley (1947a, 1947b). The Austin Focus, however, was
first defined by Krieger (1946: 165-168), who listed as its most characteristic artifacts pottery type Leon Plain, Perdiz type arrow points,
Scallorn type arrow points, beveled knives, crude snub-nosed scrapers,
crude side scrapers, flint drills with unshaped bases, edged manos showing back-and-forth grinding, notched bison ribs, flexed burials in crude,
stone-lined pits, Oliva shell beads, triangular conch shell pendants,
Frankston Focus trade pottery, and, occasionally, European trade
articles. More recent work has shown that his characterization by and
large defines the Central Texas Aspect, and that Scallorn arrow points,
more than any other trait, differentiate the Austin Focus from the
Toyah Focus. Krieger, following Kelley, suggested that the Austin
Focus be identified as the archeological remains of the Tonkawa Indians.
For the Toyah Focus, Kelley (1947a) considered the followmg as
distinctive traits: arrow point types "Perdiz Pointed Stem," "Clinton
[should read "Cliffton"] Contracting Stem," "Form 63," and "Fresno
Triangular Blade;" and "Doss Red Ware" pottery. Kelley ( 1947 a;
1955) proposed that the Toyah Focus be linked with the Jumano Indians and that the widespread distribution of Perdiz arrow points be
attributed largely to the trading activities of the Jumano.
The Austin and Toyah foci were defined as contemporaneous manifestations, occupying more or less distinct territories: the Austin
Focus in the Colorado River drainage, and the Toyah Focus in the
central and western portion of the State (ibid.). The possible or: gins of
these foci are not made explicit, although Kelley suggested that the
bow and pottery diffused from either eastern or western parts of the
State, where they were present at an earlier date. Kelley seems to
have regarded the Edwards Plateau Aspect, at least in part, as representing groups quite distinct from those of the Central Texas Aspect
foci, for he states that the terminal phases of the Clear Fork and Round
Rock foci were contemporaneous and showed evidences of contact with
the Austin and Toyah foci .
Within the past six years, the concept of the Central Texas Aspect
has undergone considerable revision. Miller and Jelks ( 1952) , as a
result of their analysis of sites in the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County,
found that a distinction between the Austin and Toyah foci (as defined by Kelley) was not consistent with their data. The supposed

CENTRAL TEXAS

diagnostic traits for each of the foci-namely Perdiz, Scallorn, and
Cliffton arrow point types-were regularly associated with one another in the Belton sites. Following Krieger, they lumped the whole of
the Central Texas Aspect under the Austin Focus. In addition to reviewing the focal divisions, Miller and Jelks suggested that the initial
appearance of the Austin Focus (i.e., the Central Texas Aspect) be
dated, at the latest, at A.D. 1200, in place of Krieger and Kelley's previous estimate of circa A.D. 1500.
Along much the same lines as Miller and Jelks, the authors of the
Handbook of Texas archeology ( Suhm et al., 1954) did not make a
distinction between the Austin and Toyah foci. Instead, they published
a detailed trait list for the Central Texas Aspect, pointing out that differences in the distributions of arrow point types exist, but that these
had not yet been sufficiently documented to justify focal distinctions.
The excavation of several sites near Austin ( Suhm, 195 7), together
with materials from the Blum Rockshelter in Hill County (Jelks.
1953 ), however, provide a significant body of stratigraphic data to
support a two-fold division of the Central Texas Aspect. The earlier
division is marked by the appearance of Scallorn and Eddy arrow
points (Suhm, 1957; Jelks, 1953 ), and the later by Perdiz and Cliffton
arrow points and pottery, usually type Leon Plain (the definition of
Leon Plain follows that of the Handbook, which includes Kelley's
"Doss Red Ware"). The present author has suggested ( 1957) that the
term Austin Focus be applied to the earlier division and Toyah Focus
to the later. Apart from the arrow point types represented and the
presence or absence of pottery, there appear to be few traits which
differentiate the Austin Focus from the Toyah Focus.
While the Blum (Jelks, 1953) and Smith (Suhm, 1957) sites clearly
indicate a sequence from Austin Focus to Toyah Focus, there are sites
(Miller and Jelks, 1952; Suhm, 1955 ) where the diagnostic arrow
points for each focus are apparently in direct association with one another. This association would seem entirely reasonable if the Toyah
Focus developed out of the Austin Focus. Thus there may have been
a period when Scallorn and Perdiz points were simultaneously in use
by the same group. The evidence, however, is still too limited to attempt detailed reconstructions; and, certainly, even the validity of
these suggested divisions of the Central Texas Aspect must be tested
more thoroughly.
Regardless of the status of the Austin Focus and the Toyah Focus, it
seems quite evident that the Central Texas Aspect is not a homogeneous
tradition which appeared just prior to the arrival of Europeans in cen-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tral Texas. The direct linkage of the Austin Focus with the Tonkawa
Indians and the Toyah Focus with the Jumano Indians-which was
never amply supported by associations with historic objects-now
seems entirely out of the question. This does not, of course, exclude the
possibility of identifying either the Tonkawa or the I umano Indians
(or both) with the terminal phases of the Central Texas Aspect (i.e.,
the Toyah Focus).

Current Interpretations
Throughout this section there have been frequent, but scattered,
references to currently acceptable interpretations of central Texas
archeology. It now seems appropriate that these be briefly restated and
listed:
(1) The earliest occupations in central Texas are referable generally to
the late Pleistocene, with the best in situ manifestation at the Kincaid
Site, Uvalde County. The bulk of the evidence for the Early Man habitation, however, is based on more flimsy finds: surface collections of a few
Clovis, Folsom, and Scottsbluff points, and of numerous Angostura and
Plainview points. The Pleistocene dating of Ray and Sayles' DurstAbilene types remains undemonstrated, but not necessarily untenable.
Typologically, however, the Durst-Abilene types seem to share many attributes with Archaic assemblages.
( 2) From the numerous post-Pleistocene complexes defined for the
area, the Edwards Plateau Aspect and the Central Texas Aspect ( consisting
of the Austin Focus and Toyah Focus) emerge as the most useful, and
presumably the most valid, cultural units.
(3) The Edwards Plateau Aspect, most fully defined by Suhm et al.
( 1954), embraces pre-ceramic materials dating from about 5,000 or 4,000
B.C. to A.D. 500 or 1,000. Attempts to recognize consistent and significant
subdivisions within the Edwards Plateau Aspect have been, to date, unsuccessful. The focal divisions-Clear Fork, Round Rock, and Uvaldehave almost completely disappeared from recent classification schemes.
( 4 ) The Central Texas Aspect, consistently found overlying Edwards
Plateau Aspect material, is distinguished chiefly by the appearance of the
bow and, apparently somewhat later, of pottery. In contrast to the Edwards Plateau Aspect, there has been a recent revival of terms for two
Central Texas Aspect foci, namely Austin and Toyah. Although these two
foci seem to share many traits ( see list in Suhm et al., 1954: 112-117),
there has been observed in several stratified sites an early manifestation
(termed by the present author Austin Focus) marked primarily by the
occurrence of arrow point type Scallorn, and a later component ( termed

CENTRAL TEXAS

by the present author Toyah Focus ) distinguished by arrow point type
Perdiz and by the indigen eous pottery type L eon Plain. At present fuller
focal definitions are not possible. Mixed Austin and Toyah Focus sites
(such as those reported by Miller and Jelks, 1952) may represent an intermediate stage.
(5) Both the Edwards Plateau Aspect and the Central T exas Aspect
occur throughout central T exas, although the Abilene area on the northwestern margin poses a problem. Most of the Archaic remains in that
area seem closely affiliated with- in fact, are usually considered as a part
of-the Edwards Plateau Aspect. The later materials ( Ray and Sayles'
Brazos and Valley Creek cultures), however , cannot be satisfactorily included in the present definition of the Central Texas Aspect. The Brazos
and Valley Creek cultures, like the Durst-Abilene types, remain dangling
and largely ignored.
(6) Although the intra-areal relationships have not been well explored,
it seems plausible, but not yet fully demonstrated, that the post-Pleistocene
complexes represent by and large a gradual in situ development. The Edwards Plateau Aspect provid es a likely base, both typologically and
chronologically, from which the Central T exas Aspect might h ave sprung.
The Austin Focus, because it appears to represent the earliest yet r ecognized m anifestation of the Central T exas Aspect, may have, in turn,
developed into the Toyah Focus. Th e Toyah Focus, although not definitely
known from historic contexts in central Texas, may be, in part, the
archeological remnants of the Tonkawa-a nd even, perhaps, th e Jumano
Indians.

The association of archeological remains with historic Indians is
only one of the many problem s which still confront archeologists working in central Texas. Research of the past several decades has done
much to clarify the prehistory of the area, but it has also opened up
avenues for new lines of investigation.

Statement of Problems
To solve the problems of the prehistory of central Texas, the archeologist has only fragmentary material remains , and the contexts in
which these remains are found. From these limited data he must attempt to reconstruct the culture represented and its history as fully as
possible. In turn, the problems fundamental to all reconstructions are
the collection of data from archeological sites and the techniques for
analyzing the materials recovered.
Obtaining data from an archeological site almost invariably means
the excavation of that site. Methods of excavation are varied, depend-

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ing upon-among other things-the type of site involved and the facilities available. It is not appropriate to dwell at length on the excavation of central Texas sites, but only to make a few comments specifically directed to the more pertinent problems likely to be encountered.
Characteristically, central Texas sites are refuse accumulations and
contain few complex features. The problems of excavating these sites
are essentially those of obtaining an adequate sample, recognizing site
features, and detecting stratigraphic changes.
The only site features likely to be found are hearths , burials, and
simple pits. The recognition of these features is primarily a matter of
careful observation and excavation. These features may occur at any
occupation site. On the other hand, cultural and geological stratigraphy
are most often encountered in refuse accumulations buried in rockshelter or terrace deposits. Since cultural and geological breaks form
natural units, which may be of historical significance, it is often desirable to excavate a site in terms of such units. By doing this, the artifacts can easily be related to the most meaningful contexts in which
they occur. The existence of breaks in a deposit, which are detectable
by changes in the soil color and composition, may be uncovered by
means of test pits or by use of an auger. Should the breaks be widely
separated, as often happens in terrace sites, it may be necessary to use
smaller arbitrary levels (such as six-inch ones ) in excavation. If the
latter be the case, the artifacts should, nevertheless, be related to the
strata represented at the site. This can be accomplished by making
notations in the field records, which relate artifacts and stratigraphic
layers.
Stratigraphic breaks in burnt rock midden deposits are usually more
difficult to recognize, so that it is more often necessary to excavate
them in terms of arbitrary levels. However, before beginning to dig,
it is particularly important to make a detailed contour map of the site.
Thus, variations in surface elevations can be recorded and the relative
depth of any artifact can be established.
Burnt rock middens are difficult sites to dig, because of the many
rock fragments constituting the refuse deposit, and require the expenditure of a great deal of labor. It is, therefore, best not to tackle such
a site unless one is prepared to devote considerable time to it, or has
several crew members. A few pits sunk into a midden will not yield a
sufficient sample to be of much scientific value, and will serve only to
damage the site. Attempts to "peel" the entire midden down by layers,
or to dislodge large sections from vertical cuts do not yield nearly as
satisfactory results as the use of a grid system of five-foot squares. Be-

CENTRAL TEXAS

sides working the midden proper (i.e., the region of concentrated rock
fragments ), the areas a bout the midden should at least be tested, for
they may also contain evidences of occupation. The excavation should
sample various parts of the site, especially since there is evidence to
indicate that middens were accumulated, in part, by horizontal accretions.
Artifacts are probably more easily overlooked in a burnt rock midden than in any other type of site. It is often especially difficult to recognize pieces of grinding implements and scored stones among the
many rock fragments . A quick examination of the rock fragments ,
while time-consuming, will prevent many such artifacts from being
discarded. For the same reason it is useful to have a bucket of water at
the site. Objects can then be washed, making it easier to determine
whether or not they have been worked.
Excavations in central Texas have generally concentrated on sites
along the middle Colorado and Brazos drainages. As a result, the archeological boundaries of central Texas are not precisely defined and
regional variations in cultural complexes are poorly known. A better
knowledge of the remains in all parts of central Texas will undoubtedly clarify these problems, as well as yield important information on
relationships with adjoining areas. It is known, for example, that there
was some interaction between central Texas groups and people living
in east Texas. The nature and extent of this contact, however, are difficult to determine, partly because so few sites have been excavated
in the belt marginal to both areas. The spread of traits from and into
the central part of the State must have repeatedly occurred, but they
cannot be fully discerned until more detailed comparisons with archeological materials in adjacent regions are possible. Thus, there is every
reason to believe that central Texas Indians were never completely
isolated from neighboring peoples, although the direction, the nature,
and the intensity of contact must have varied from time to time. The
most obvious areas in which to seek the clearest evidences of interareal relationships are along the peripheries, which to date have been
little investigated.
Equally as important are the intra-areal relationships, for a critical
examination of all possible connections between the cultural complexes defined within central Texas is imperative for an understanding
of the prehistory. Did, for instance, the Toyah Focus develop out of the
Austin Focus? Did the Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects
exist side by side for a brief period of time? The dimensions of these,
and all other intra-areal problems, are expressions of relationships

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

through time and space. Their resolution is dependent upon data
which order, within this two-dimensional framevvork, each cultural
complex relative to other complexes; and which, through an analysis
of artifacts, indicate the nature of the relations.
Many of the present problems in intra-areal relationships stem from
poor and incomplete definitions of focal complexes, and from the general absence of good dates. Clearer definitions of foci, and the probable
recognition of new foci, rest upon additional excavations, detailed analysis of artifacts, and careful reporting. To be valid, focal distinctions
must be based on large samples accompanied by reliable distributional
data. The many controversies regarding the cultural units represented
in central Texas clearly call attention to the urgency of this problem.
Although recent work has done much to help clarify the relative
temporal arrangement of cultural complexes, precise chronological
placements are sorely lacking. Thus far, only one radiocarbon date has
been obtained from a central Texas site-a somewhat questionable
date of A.D. 742 ± 300, from the upper layer (No. 6) at Kincaid,
Uvalde Co. (Libby, 1955: 109). The radiocarbon method holds promise
of solving most dating problems, but other techniques, especially terrace correlations and the search for cross-ties with complexes of more
certain age, should be employed whenever possible-even if just to
check C-14 dates. While the general stratigraphic picture is beginning
to emerge more clearly, many questions about the sequence of specific
artifact forms remain unanswered. Certainly, much useful information is yet to be obtained from stratified sites, and from the seriation of
sites and specific artifact types.
The recognition and definition of artifact types, essential conceptual tools for analyzing collections, is still a major problem. The Handbook ( Suhm et al., 1954) attempted to present detailed descriptions of
pottery and projectile point types, but these must be regarded as preliminary and tentative definitions. Undoubtedly, many of the point
type descriptions will have to be refined and modified, and new ones
added, as more material is analyzed. There is a real need for studies
dealing with areal and temporal variations within types. Such studies,
however, require particularly good distributional data, largely unavailable at the present. Perhaps even more pressing is the need for a
re-examination of the pottery typology and the definition of types for
classes of artifacts other than projectile points. Almost all of the indigeneous pottery has been grouped into one type, Leon Plain, which
is certainly an over-simplification. A much needed ceramic study will
probably reveal a far more complex situation and will likely necessitate

8g

CENTRAL TEXAS

the definition of other pottery types. Whether or not types for classes
of artifacts other than pottery and projectile points can be successfully
defined has yet to be determined. There are, however, suggestions that,
at least, knives, drills, scrapers, and gouges can be profitably classified
into types. Typology, in general, is a troublesome archeological problem, but it is fundamental to archeological analyses.
Few of the problems mentioned here are unique to central Texas
archeology. For this reason, an emphasis has been placed on the statement of problems. An awareness of the gaps in our knowledge of the
prehistory of central Texas is as important as a good understanding of
the reconstructions and interpretations presented to date. It serves to
give direction to research and helps to complete more quickly the reconstruction of an accurate and detailed picture-insofar as it is possible-of the aboriginal cultures of central Texas.

Inventory of Excavated Sites in Central Texas
Listed and briefly described below are sites excavated in central
Texas and reported prior to the fall of 1958. For practical reasons, the
inventory includes only those sites which have been recorded in some
detail. The cultural affiliations have been assessed by the present
author from the published site descriptions , and are based upon the
criteria discussed in a preceding section (see Syntheses and Interpretations ) .
AMENT

Location: Coryell County.
Excavation: By D. B. Hill.
Description: Occupational debris and burials in a rockshelter.
Cultural affiliations: Predominantly Central Texas Aspect, • both Austin and Toyah foci (Scallorn and Perdiz points reported as offerings
in one grave ) . Scant traces of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Trade
items apparently found with the Central Texas Aspect include pottery pipe, Copena knives and arrow point type Alba from east Texas,
and 3 obsidian flakes, possibly from the Southwestern United States.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
*Miller and Jelks in 1952 did not distinguish between the Austin and Toyah
Foci. Rather, they grouped all late materials into the Austin Focus, following
Krieger's broad definition of 1946. The Austin Focus, as used by Krieger in 1946 and
by Miller and Jelks in 1952, can be equated with the current definition of the Central Texas Aspect.

go

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
AYcocK ( ALso KNowN As KELL BRANCH SHELTER No.1)

Location: On Kell Branch approximately 9 miles north of Belton, Bell
County.
Excavation: By members of the Central Texas Archeological Society
in late 1935 and early 1936.
Description: Shelter containing shallow midden refuse and 32 burials.
Cultural affiliations: Both late Edwards Plateau Aspect and Central
Texas Aspect (Toyah Focus only ) represented. The bulk of the midden deposit, however, appears to belong to the Edwards Plateau
Aspect. Only a few of the burials were associated with artifactsprojectile points in all cases. Some of the points were very likely the
cause of death. The cultural affiliations of the burials are difficult to
determine, but presumably represent individuals of both aspects.
References: Aynesworth, 1936; Lux, 1936; Turner, 1936; Watt, 1936.
BLUM

Location: Within the Whitney Reservoir, on the west bank of Nolands
River near the town of Blum, Hill County.
Excavation: In the early fall of 1952 by the River Basin Surveys, National Park Service, Austin.
Description: Rockshelter-open terrace site containing evidence of occupation buried as much as 1 7 or 18 feet beneath the surface.
Cultural affiliations: Attributed entirely to the Central Texas Aspect,
with Toyah Focus artifacts generally overlying those of the Austin
Focus.
Reference: Jelks, 1953.
E ucHA ' AN LAKE SITE No. 1

Location: In San Saba County, on the west bank of the Colorado River
about 1 mile upstream from the mouth of Fall Creek. Now covered
by Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: In 1937 by the WPA-The University of Texas.
Description: A refuse accumulation, consisting of a burnt-rock midden
overlain and underlain by shallow non-burnt rock midden debris,
on the crest of a knoll.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect, overlain by Central
Texas Aspect (Austin Focus only? ). The late component was found
only in the northwestern part of the site, in the upper non-burnt
rock midden.
Reference: Woolsey, 1938.

91

CENTRAL TEXAS
BucHANAN LAKE SITE No.

9

Location: On the west bank of the Colorado River, 17 miles northeast of
Llano, Llano County. Now covered by Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: By the WPA-The University of Texas in the late summer
of 1937.
Description: A shallow midden accumulation.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect overlain by the Central
Texas Aspect.
Reference: Woolsey, 1938.
BucHANAN LAKE SITE No.

57

Location: In Burnet County, on the east bank of the Colorado River,
one-half mile south of Fall Creek. Now covered by Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: By the WPA-The University of Texas in 1937.
Description: A long, narrow shelter with occupational debris extending
to a maximum depth of 87 inches. The south end of the shelter wall
contained faint traces of red horizontal, vertical, and cross-hatched
lines.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects.
Reference: Woolsey, 1938.
CEDAR PARK

Location: On the north side of South Brushy Creek, near the community of Cedar Park, Williamson County.
Excavation: The University of Texas; various collectors, especially
Erich Pohl.
Description: A large burnt rock midden, originally over an acre in extent and 7 feet in height.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects.
Points typologically similar or identical to Angostura, Plainview,
and Meserve were recorded.
Reference: Schuetz, 195 7 (only the Erich Pohl collection, housed in
the Witte Memorial Museum, has been reported).
CoLLINs

Location: Travis County, on the south bank of Onion Creek, approximately 6 miles south of Austin.
Excavation: In 1953-54 by students from The University of Texas.
Description: Occupational debris buried in the upper terrace of Onion

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Creek. Evidence of habitation extended to a depth of approximately
9 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect in the lower levels, with
mixture of Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects (largely
Austin Focus ) in the uppermost 18 inches of the terrace deposit.
Reference: Suhm, 1955.
FALL CREEK SITE

No.2

Location: In San Saba County at the junction of Fall Creek and the
Colorado River, on the opposite side of the creek from Fall Creek
Site No. 3 (see below). Site now covered by Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: Extensively by the WPA-The University of Texas, from
April to July, 1937.
Description and cultural affiliations: Not a single site, but 2 middens,
2 caves and 3 small rockshelters (only one of the shelters, however,
was excavated).
Midden No. 1: An extensive midden deposit with considerable
burned rock accumulation. Occupation refuse extended to a maximum depth of 72 inches. One flexed burial (BC-1 ) , placed beneath a number of stones, was recovered. Within or near the chest
cavity of the skeleton were found 2 arrow points, an Eddy and a
Scallorn. The lower levels of the midden yielded Edwards Plateau
Aspect artifacts, the upper ones, Central Texas Aspect artifacts.
Midden No. 2: A refuse deposit on top of a natural knoll. Artifacts extended to a depth of 52 inches in one part of the site; however, depths of 10 to 36 inches were more typical. Seven infant
burials (BD-1 to BD-7 ) were excavated. Associated with one of
the infant burials (BD-5 ) was a projectile point (type? ) . A second
burial (BD-7) had 6 unworked mussel shells resting, convex side
up, immediately above the skull. The eastern and northeastern
portions of the site were concentrated burnt rock midden accumulations. Both Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects were
represented at the site.
Cave No . 1: A small cave with a shallow refuse deposit. Cultural affiliations uncertain, although the presence of " large" projectile
points and a tanged knife suggests an Edwards Plateau Aspect occupation. Also found were a perforated mussel shell and a conch
shell bead.
Cave No. 2: Measured 36 feet long by 20 feet wide and contained
evidence of occupation to a depth of 50 inches below the surface.

93

CENTRAL TEXAS

Few artifacts were recovered and the cultural affiliations are uncertain.
Shelter No. 2: A small rockshelter with occupational refuse extending to a maximum depth of 30 inches. Apparently occupied only
by the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Jackson, 1938.
FALL CREEK SrTE

No.3

Location: On the Colorado River, 21 miles northeast of Llano, Llano
County. Now covered by waters of Lake Buchanan.
Excavation: Extensively by the WPA-The University of Texas in
1937.
Description and cultural affiliations: Not a single site, but a series of
refuse areas designated as Mound 1, 2 and 3; as Midden 1, 2 and 3;
and rockshelters labelled 1, 2 and 3.
Mound No.1: A burnt rock midden accumulation, consisting of the
southeast portion of the site, which yielded Edwards Plateau Aspect artifacts. The adjacent non-burnt rock area contained Central
Texas Aspect materials.
Mound No.2: A shallow refuse accumulation located on top of a natural knoll. The southern edge of the knoll contained a small burntrock midden affiliated primarily, or perhaps exclusively, with the
Edwards Plateau Aspect. The upper levels of the nearby ( ?) nonburnt rock refuse yielded Central Texas Aspect artifacts.
Mound No.3: A refuse deposit of the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Midden No.1: A small refuse accumulation of the Edwards Plateau
and Central Texas aspects.
Midden No . 2: An extensive midden , largely burnt rock, in front of,
and adjacent to Rockshelter No. 1 (see below ). The midden refuse extended to a maximum depth of about 6 feet. Edwards Plateau Aspect was found in the lower levels, Central Texas Aspect in
the upper ones. Also found in the upper portion of the midden
were 3 items of European origin: a fragment of brass stamped
" Anheuser Busch, St. Louis," a large, lustrous blue glass bead, and
a United States quarter dated 1876. The nature of these materials
is such that they may be intrusives left by recent European visitors to the area , rather than trade pieces associated with the
Indian occupation.
Midden No. 3: A midden adjacent to Shelter No. 3, Site 3. Maximum
depth of refuse was 36 inches. Edwards Plateau occupation overlain by a thin veneer of Central Texas Aspect refuse.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

94

Rockshelter No. 1: Maximum dimensions of 27 feet in length, 16
feet deep and deposit of about 6 feet. One burial (BB-1) was
found in a test trench dug in 1932. Artifacts, and very probably
the burial, belong to the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Rockshelter No. 2: A small shelter with a shallow refuse accumulation. Site yielded a possible cremated burial. Cultural affiliations
unknown.
Rockshelter No.3: A small shelter occupied primarily by the Central
Texas Aspect.
Reference: Jackson, 1938.
FIELDS

Location: Approximately 14.5 miles north of Barksdale in the eastern
part of Edwards County.
Ex cavation: In April 1934 by a small crew from The University of
Texas.
Description: The easternmost dry rockshelter as yet reported in Central Texas. It measures 25 feet long and has an overhang of 20 feet .
Cultural deposit in shelter was thin, varying from 4 to 20 inches in
depth.
Cultural affiliations: The lithic artifacts show, as might be expected in
view of the shelter's westerly geographic location, a blending of the
Edwards Plateau Aspect and the Pecos River Focus. A second component, possibly referable to an as yet undefined focus of the Central
Texas Aspect, was found at the site. This latter occupation shares
many traits with the late occupations reported by Huskey in the
nearby Nueces Canyon.
Reference: Camp bell, 195 7.
GIBSON

Location: On Elm Creek, in the Abilene vicinity.
Excavation: Only small cuts have been made in the high, vertically exposed stream bank by Cyrus N. Ray and others. Most of the in situ
artifacts from the site were removed from the bank after they had
been partially exposed by erosion.
Description: Occupational refuse, consisting largely of stone artifacts,
chipping waste and hearths, deeply buried under alluvial sediments.
The site is being exposed and destroyed by lateral cutting of Elm
Creek. At the base of the 30-foot vertical bank is a partially exposed
purplish marl or clay formation-the local bedrock. Lying on top of

95

CENTRAL TEXAS

the bedrock, and separated from it by a disconformity, is a 5-foot formation of reddish clay with small gravel lenses near the upper portion. (This layer is referred to by Cyrus N. Ray as the Lower and the
Upper-the topmost part with the gravel lenses-Clear Fork Silts;
and by M. M. Leighton and E. B. Sayles as the Durst Silts.) Immediately above the reddish clay lie 25 feet of horizontally bedded
pinkish-tan sands. These sands are lithologically homogenous, but
are separated by about 7 minor unconformities or layers (minor
erosional surfaces?) . The pinkish-tan sands are referred to by Ray
as the Nugent Silts, 1 through 5; and by Leighton and Sayles as
the Elm Creek Silts. All, or almost all (there is some confusion on
this point), of the in situ artifacts and oi:her evidences of occupation
are from the Durst-Elm Creek Silts (Clear Fork Silts), especially
the upper part, and from the Durst-Elm Creek (Upper Clear ForkNugent) contact. The age of the Durst and Elm Creek silts has
aroused considerable interest and controversy. Leighton, as Ray and
others have pointed out, erroneously thought both formations contained extinct fauna and, consequently, assigned them to the Pleistocene. There is, however, every reason to think that the Elm Creek
Silts belong to the Recent period. The dating of the Durst Silts has not
yet been resolved, but they too may be post-Pleistocene in age.
Cultural affiliations: In terms of the framework used herein, the material is classified as Edwards Plateau Aspect. Ray and Kelley, however, consider it as a manifestation of the Clear Fork Complex (Ray)
or Focus (Kelley).
References: Bryan, 1938; Crook, 1955; Kelley, 1947b; Leighton, 1936;
Ray, 1930,1939, 1940a, 1941,1945,1955.
GoAT BLUFF

Location: Southwestern part of Kerr County.
Excavation: By J. B. Sollberger, about 1945.
Description: Rockshelter about 40 feet in length and having a maximum overhang of a bout 10 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect and Central Texas Aspect (the latter component cannot be identified as either Toyah or
Austin Focus, and may constitute a distinct focus).
Reference: Sollberger, 1949.
GooDRICH

Location: On the east bank of the Colorado River, approximately 22
miles southwest of Lampasas, Burnet County.

g6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Excavation: Sporadically from 1952 to 1956 by Albert Field and associates.
Description: Rockshelter having a maximum overhang of 10 feet and
maximum length of 150 feet . Occupational debris abundantly represented in the sh elter fill and extends to a depth of at least 4 feet
below the surface. The shelter also contained an infant burial. In
the grave pit, above the burial, was an overturned milling slab, various rocks, and a waterworn limestone slab painted on both face s with
red parallel lines. Immediately below the burial was another painted
slab. The second slab had red lines running lengthwise on one end
of the slab and red lines running downward at about a 75 ° angle to
the parallel ones on the other end.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau and Central Texas aspects. The
burial appears to belong to the Central Texas occupation.
Reference: Field, 1956.
GmMEs-HouY BuRNT RocK MIDDEN

Location: In the Belton Reservoir area, Coryell County, on the canyon
rim about 200 feet northwest of the Grimes-Houy Shelter (see
below ) .
Excavation: In November, 1951 , by the Smithsonian Institution. River
Basin Surveys, Austin Office.
Description: An oval-shaped burnt rock midden, approximately 50 feet
long by 30 feet wide, and having a maximum depth of about 2 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Predominantly Edwards Plateau Aspect, but with
Central Texas Aspect material in the upper levels. Sherds found in
the upper levels most probably represent trade vessels obtained from
the Caddo region.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
GRIMEs-HouY SHELTER

Location: In the Belton Reservoir area, Coryell County, near the junction of Horse Creek and the Leon River.
Excavation: In January, 1951, by the Smithsonian Institution, River
Basin Surveys, Austin Office; and somewhat later by D . B. Hill.
Description: Rockshelter with a shallow deposit (about 24 inches )
containing occupational debris and 12 burials.
Cultural affiliations: Principally the Central Texas Aspect , with Austin and Toyah Focus components present. In the lower levels a few
dart points were found, apparently mixed with the Central Texas

97

CENTRAL TEXAS

Aspect material. The ceramic assemblage, as well as the occurrence
of Copena knives , suggest relationships with peoples of east Texas.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
HoDGES

Location: In Jones County, on the west bank of the Clear Fork of the
Brazos River, about midway between the community of Nugent and
the confluence of Elm Creek with the Clear Fork.
Excavation: WPA-Texas Technological College in early 1940.
Description: Intermittent orcupation zones of thinly distributed debris
deeply buried in river alluvium. Five zones were recognized
(Wheat, 1940 ) . They varied in depth below the surface from 6 feet
(level 1) to 22.5 feet (level 5). Level 1 yielded 3 slightly basinshaped stone hearths (average diameter 25 inches ), level 2 yielded
a similar-sized hearth composed of small angular rock fragments,
and level 4 yielded a very large hearth ( 15 feet in diameter and
maximum thickness of 11 inches ) composed of angular rock fra gments, charcoal, mussel shells, and burnt earth.
Cultural affiliations: Because of the paucity of artifacts, it is difficult
to assign the material to any specific complex. In general, however,
the artifacts fall into an Archaic tradition.
References: Crook, 1955; Ray, 1940b; Wheat. 1940.
HoRsE CREEK

Location: In the Belton Reservoir area , Coryell County, a bout 1 00
yards west of the Grimes-Houy Shelter.
Excavation: By the Smithsonian Institution, River Basin Surveys,
Austin Office, in November, 1951.
Description: A burnt rock midden with a vertical cross section exposed
by lateral cutting of Horse Creek. Midden debris visible from 12
inches below the surface to a maximum depth of about 66 inches.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
HuGHES

Location: Williamson County, approximately midway between Leander and Georgetown on the South Branch of the San Gabriel
River.
Excavation: Largely by Erich Pohl.
Description: Burnt rock midden.

g8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Cultural affiliations: Early points recovered include Meserve, Plainview, and the base of a questionable Clovis point. Most of the artifacts found, however, are identified with the Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Schuetz, 195 7.
INDIAN BLUFF

Location: Four miles west of Lampasas, Lampasas County.
Excavation: About 1927, by C. B. Taliferro; several years ago by Eric
Matthews and a group of Boy Scouts; and, most recently, by Albert
Field and others from the Lampasas area.
Description: Several small crevices at the base of a limestone-slate
bluff.
Cultural affiliations: The crevice excavated by Taliferro contained a
burial with associated offerings of glass beads and elk teeth. The
ethnic identity of the burial has not been determined. Areas excavated by Field and his associates have yielded evidences of both Edwards Plateau and Central Texas (apparently both Toyah and Austin components) aspects.
Reference: Field, 1956.
JoHNsoN HoLE

Location: In the Belton Reservoir area, Coryell County, along both
banks of Stockton Branch.
Excavation: By the Smithsonian Institution, River Basin Surveys,
A us tin Office, in November, 1951.
Description: A rather deep and extensive burnt rock midden. Site bisected after initial accumulation by lateral migration of Stockton
Branch.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect, overlain by Central
Texas Aspect. Trade sherds and intrusive projectile point types from
east Texas.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 1952.
KINCAID

Location: Four miles north of Sabinal, Uvalde County.
Excavation: In 1948 by the Texas Memorial Museum and, in 1953, by
The University of Texas Summer Field School in collaboration with
the Texas Memorial Museum.

99

CENTRAL TEXAS

Description: A cave-river terrace site containing occupational material
extending to a depth of more than 12 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Cultural debris , including a crude cobblestone
pavement, which dates from the late Pleistocene, but which has not
yet been assigned to any specific complex. None of the 5 Folsom
points from Kincaid was found in situ; all were from the back dirt
left by looters. In the upper layers in the cave and terrace deposits
in front of the cave were recovered Edwards Plateau Aspect artifacts, overlain by material of the Central Texas Aspect.
Reference: Sellards, 1952; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954 (an extensive report by T. N. Campbell and Glen Evans is in preparation).
LAKE LocKE

Location: Near Jarrell, Williamson County.
Excavation: Erich Pohl.
Description: Burnt rock midden.
Cultural affiliations: Early points of types Angostura, Meserve , and
Plainview. Bulk of artifacts, however, clearly affiliated with the
Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Schuetz, 195 7.
LEHMANN

Location: Three miles northeast of Doss, Gillespie County.
Excavation: In January, 1936, by the Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas.
Description: A crescent-shaped rockshelter, approximately 240 feet in
length, and having a maximum depth of 85 inches in the area excavated.
Cultural affiliations: Central Texas Aspect, particularly the Toyah
Focus and the Edwards Plateau Aspect. The one burial obtained
from the site probably belonged to the Toyah Focus occupation.
Refere nce: Kelley, 1947a.
LS-58

Location: Lampasas County, on the east bank of the Colorado River,
approximately 300 yards from the mouth of Lynch's Creek.
Excavation: By Albert Field and others from the Lampasas area, about
1956.
Description: A small shelter with a narrow overhang. Deposit shallow
and contained only slight evidence of occupation. A tightly flexed

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

crevice burial and a painted pebble, apparently associated with the
burial, were excavated. The rear wall of the shelter contained red
and black pictographs composed of horizontal and vertical lines.
Cultural affiliations: Undetermined. The painted pebble, however, is
remarkably like those obtained from near the mouth of the Pecos
River.
Reference: Field, 1956.
MAss BuRIAL

Location: On the west bank of the Brazos River, near Waco, McLennan
County.
Excavation: After the discovery by workmen in 1936, students from
Baylor University and, later, m embers of the Central T exas Archeological Society performed salvage excavations.
Description: At least 22 burials placed in an area about 12 feet x 14
feet and at depths varying from 48 to 60 inches. As the burials seem
to have been interred at the sam e time, they may represent a single
mass burial. The only artifacts recovered were 3 arrow points of
type Perdiz (all found in one skeleton and undoubtedly the cause
of death ) and a single earspool.
Cultural affiliations: The absence of burial offerings makes it impossible to assess the cultural affiliations ; however, the presence of the
Perdiz points suggests a late date for the interments. The earspool,
probably worn as an ornament by one of the individuals, was very
likely traded from the Caddo area.
References: Meroney, 1936; Lux, 1937; Turner, 1937; Watt and
Meroney, 1937.
MERRELL

Location: On the north side of Brushy Creek, one-quarter of a mile
northeast of Round Rock, Williamson County.
Excavation: In 1934 by The University of Texas. Additional testing
by J. Charles Kelley in June, 1940.
Description: Intermittent midden debris (in part, burnt rock midden
accumulation ) buried in a 20-foot terrace of Brushy Creek. Maximum depth of unquestionable occupation was 14 feet below the
surfa ce.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Campbell, 1948.

101

CENTRAL TEXAS
MaNTELL

Location: Uvalde County, near the Edwards County line.
Excavation: In 1947 by the Texas Memorial Museum.
Description: A small rockshelter.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect underlain by an unidentified occupation contemporaneous with extinct fauna , especially
tapir.
References: Sellards, 1952; Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954.
W. A .

MYATT

Location: East-central Jones County, approximately 20 miles east of
Anson.
Excavation: Limited testing by Cyrus N . Ray in 1929 and later. More
extensive excavations in the summer of 1940 by WPA-Texas Technological College.
Description: Occupational refuse deeply buried in alluvium.
Cultural affiliations: The earliest occupation has been assigned tentatively to the Brazos Culture (Wheat, 1947 ). There was not a sufficient amount of material recovered from the upper portion of the
site to determine the cultural affiliations of the late component.
Reference: Wheat, 1947.
N UECES

CANYON SITES

Location: In the Nueces River canyon, Edwards, Real, and Uvalde
counties.
Excavation: By Vane Huskey, prior to 1935.
Descriptions: Seven burnt rock middens ( 4 classified by Huskey as
" T y pe A." and 3 as " Type B"); 3 sites described as ... "mounds . . .
so situated as to be near small caves or deep fi ssures in the faces of
cliffs" (Huskey, 1935: 110 ); and 1 small rockshelter.
Cultural affiliations: (Assigned on the basis of Huskey's illustrations. )
All levels of " T ype A," according to the criteria u sed herein, are
identified with the Edwards Plateau Aspect. J. Charles Kelley, however, has suggested that the lower level of " Mound A Culture" be
identified with the Round Rock Focus, and that the upper and middle
levels be associated with the Uvalde Focus. The "Mound B Culture"
seem s to belong to the Central Texas Aspect, perhaps to an undefined local variant. The remainder of the sites excavated by Huskey

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

102

appear to have manifestations of both the Edwards Plateau and
Central Texas aspects.
Reference: Huskey, 1935.
PANORAMA

Location: Along the south shore of Lake Austin, a bout 18 miles west of
Austin, Travis County.
Excavation: By H. F. Sturgis on weekends throughout the summer and
fall of 1955.
Description: Several burnt rock middens and chipping areas on a high
terrace above present Lake Austin. Only two of the middens (No.
1 and No. 2 ) were excavated.
Cultural affiliations: Both middens excavated belonged to the Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Midden No. 1 yielded an Angostura point.
Reference: Sturgis, 1956.
RoB RoY

Location: On the south bank of the Colorado River, 10 miles above
Austin, Travis County.
Excavation: WPA-The University of Texas, in late 1938 and early
1939.
Description: Occupational debris, including numerous hearths, deeply
buried (up to a bout 30 feet ) in a terrace deposit of the Colorado
River. One flexed burial, placed beneath 11 limestone slabs, was recovered. Only artifact associated with the burial was an engraved
turkey bone.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect overlain by the Central
Texas Aspect.
Reference: Jackson, 1939.
SA N GABRIEL

Location: In Williamson County, 3 miles northwest of Leander on the
South Fork of the San Gabriel River.
Excavation: By Erich Pohl, about 1937.
Description: Burnt rock midden.
Cultural affiliations: Edwards Plateau Aspect, with some suggestions
of a light Central Texas Aspect occupation. Projectile points of probable Plainview, Angostura, Meserve, and (less certain ) Scottsbluff
types were found .
Reference: Schuetz, 1957.

CENTRAL TEXAS

103

SMITH

Location: Travis County, approximately 6 miles southeast of Austin.
Excavation: Sporadically from October, 1954, to mid-August, 1955, by
students from The University of Texas.
Description: A rockshelter approximately 130 feet long and having a
maximum overhang of 18 feet. The deposit contained 6 distinct occupation zones, extending from the surface to a depth of 8 or 9 feet.
Cultural affiliations: Predominantly Central Texas Aspect, with Toyah
Focus stratigraphically above the Austin Focus. The deepest occupation zone has been identified as late Edwards Plateau Aspect.
Reference: Suhm, 1957.
OAK CREEK

Location: On Oak Creek, Coke County.
Excavation: Partially destroyed by looters; the undisturbed portion
excavated by E. B. Sayles and Carl Chelf, apparently in the late
19ZO's.
Description: A small sandstone shelter containing 4 occupation zones,
each separated by a layer of sterile clay and silt. The ceiling, the
rear wall, and several large slabs or boulders contained numerous
petroglyphs. The petroglyphs consisted largely of narrow and broad
incised lines, generally oriented vertically.
Cultural affiliations: The artifact yield was scanty and consisted primarily of non-diagnostic scrapers and utilized flakes. A bottle glass
fragment found in the uppermost occupation layer, and which may
date about 1867, suggests that the site may be, in part, historic.
Reference: Sayles, 1930.
URBANKTE

Location: vVithin the Belton Reservoir area, in southeastern corner
of Coryell County, on Leon River immediately above its confluence
with Horse Creek.
Excavation: Rather extensive testing in December, 1950, by personnel
from Smithsonian Institution, River Basin Surveys, Austin Office.
Description: Shallow occupational debris covering an area 3 to 4 acres
in extent.
Cultural affiliations: Largely Central Texas Aspect with Austin and
Toyah foci both represented. Minor occupation by the Edwards
Plateau Aspect. Contact with the Caddoan area indicated by the
presence of trade sherds, including type Holly Fine Engraved.
Reference: Miller and Jelks, 195Z.

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

References Cited
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
A An- American Antiquity
B-CTAS-Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological Society
B-TAPS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society
E-TAS-Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
MP- Medallion Papers. Gila Pueblo.
SJA- Southwestern Journal of Anthropology
TJS-The Texas Journal of Science
UTP-The University of Texas Publications
Aynesworth, K. H.
1936. Biographic Studies of Twenty-one Skulls of the Central T exas Indians.
B-CTAS, No.2, pp. 30-34.
Bryan, Kirk
1938. Deep Sites Near Abilene Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 273-274.
Campbell, T. N.
1948. The Merrell Site: Archaeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 19, pp. 7-35 .
1957. The Fields Shelter: An Archeological Site in Edwards County, Texas.
TJS, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 7-25.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr.
1955. Reconsideration and Geologic Revaluation of the Famous Abilene, Texas,
Sites. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 38-62.
Field, Albert
1956. Archeological Investigations in Lampasas, Burnet, Llano, and San Saba
Counties, Texas. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 161-184.
Gladwin, Winifred and Harold S.
1934. A Method for Designation of Cultures and Their Variations. MP, No. 15.
Huskey, Vane
1935. An Archeological Survey of the Nueces Canyon. B-TAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 105114.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. The Fall Creek Sites. In: Annual Report of WPA and The University of
Texas Archaeological Research. Lake Buchanan, 1936-1937. UTP, No.
3802, pp. 11- 118.
1939. A Deep Archeological Site in Travis County, Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 11 , pp.
203-225.
Jelks, Edward B.
1951. Relationships between Foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect: A Distributional Analysis of Diagnostic Projectile Point Types from Archaeological
Sites in the Marshall Ford Dam Reservoir, Travis County, Texas. M. A.
Thesis on file at The University of Texas Library, Austin.
1953. Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. B-TAS, Vol. 24, pp. 189-207.

CENTRAL TEXAS

105

Kelley, J. Charles
1947a. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128.
1947b. The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the Clea r Fork
Focus. A An, Vol. 13, No. 2, pp. 97- 109.
1948. Arrow or Dart Shaft Tools and Problematical Incised Stones from Central
and \IV estern Texas. El Palacio, Vol. 55, No. 3, pp. 73-85.
1955. Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas. American Anthropologist,
Vol. 57, No. 5, pp. 981-995.
Kelley, J. Charles, T. N. Campbell, and Donald J. Lehmer
1940. The Association of Archa eological Materials with Geologi c Deposits in the
Big Bend Region of Texas. West Texas Historical and Scientific Society
Publication, No. 10, pp. 9- 173.
Kelley, J. Charles, and T. N. Campbell
1942. What Are the Burnt Rock Mounds of T exas? A An, Vol. 7, No. 3, pp.
319-322.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern T exas. UTP, No. 4640.
Leighton, M. M.
1936. Geological Aspects of the Finding of Primitive Man Near Abilene, Texas.
MP, No. 24.
Libby, Willard F.
1955. Radiocarbon Dating. University of Chicago Press.
Lux, Konrad
1936. A Detailed Report of the Teeth and Supporting Structures as Found in
Crania of Aycock Shelter. B-CT AS, No. 2, pp. 39-42.
1937. A Detailed Report of Teeth and Supporting Structures as Found in Crania
of Mass Burial. B-CT AS, No. 3, pp. 34--40.
McKern, W. C.
1939. The Midwestern Taxonomic M ethod as an Aid t o Archaeological Culture
Study. A An, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 301-313.
M eroney, VV. P.
1936. A Mass Burial near Wa co. B-CTAS, No. 2, pp. 59- 60.
Miller, E. 0 ., and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archeological Excavations at th e Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
B-TAPS, Vol. 23, pp. 168- 217.
N ewcomb, Willi am W. , Jr.
1955. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County. B-TAS,
Vol. 26, pp. 186- 199.
1956. A Reappraisal of the "Cultural Sink" of Texas. SJA, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp.
145-153.
Pearce, J . E.
1932. The Present Status of T exas Arch eology. B-TAPS, Vol. 4, pp. 44--54.

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Ray, Cyrus N.
1929. A Differentiation of the Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Region. BTAPS, Vol. 1, pp. 7-22.
1930. Report on Some Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene Section .
B-TAPS, Vol. 2, pp. 45-58.
1938. The Clear Fork Complex. B-TAPS, Vol. 11, pp. 226-250.
1939. Inaccuracies in Fischel's Folsom Article. AAn, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 58-64.
1940a. The Deeply Buried Gibson Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 223-237.
1940b. Untitled editorial note in: Joe Ben Wheat, Preliminary Report on Excavation of the Hodges Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 211-212.
1941. Another Type of Gibson Site Point. B-TAPS, Vol. 13, p. 177.
1945. Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. B-TAPS, Vol. 16, pp. 117-147.
1948. The Facts Concerning the Clear Fork Culture. A An, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp.
320-322.
1955. Stone-lined Basin with Charcoal in Lower Clear Fork Silt. B-TAS, Vol.
26, pp. 101-108.
Ray, Cyrus N., and E. B. Sayles
1941. An Agreement on Abilene Region Terminology. B-TAPS, Vol. 13, p. 175.
Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
1954. Bands and Band-clusters of the Coahuiltecan Indians. Student Papers in
Anthropology, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas,
Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 1-24.
Sayles, E. B.
1930. A Rock Shelter in Coke County. B-TAPS, Vol. 2, pp. 33-40.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas. MP, No. 27.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1957. A Report on Williamson County Mound Material. B-TAS, Vol. 28, pp.
135-168.
Sellards, E. H.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of Texas Press.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1953a. The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. TJS, Vol. 5, No. 3,
pp. 280-304.
1953b. Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. SJA, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp.
76-98.
Sollberger, J. B.
1949. A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Kerr County, Texas. The Record, Vol. 8,
No. 3, pp. 9-14.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1950. Culture Chronology in Texas. A An, Vol. 16, No.2, pp. 151-157.
Sturgis, H. F.
1956. A Burnt-rock Midden Site in Travis County. B-TAS, Vol. 27, pp. 111-128.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955. Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County. B-TAS, Vol. 26, pp. 7-54.
1957. Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. TJS, Vol. 9,
No. 1, pp. 26- 58.

CENTRAL TEXAS

107

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-T AS, Vol. 25.
Turner, Fred A.
1936. Chronic Arthritis in the Early American Indian in Central Texas. BCTAS, No.2, pp. 35-38.
1937. Review of Skeletons from Mass Burial. B-CTAS, No.3, pp. 29-33.
Wallace, Ernest, and E. Adamson Hoebel
1954. The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma Press.
Watt, Frank H.
1936. A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County, Texas. B-CT AS, No. 2, pp.
4-27.
Watt, Frank H., and W . P. Meroney
1937. Supplementary Report on Mass Burial near Waco. B-CTAS, No. 3, pp.
27-28.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1940. Preliminary Report on the Excavation of the Hodges Site. B-TAPS, Vol.
12, pp. 195-216.
1947. Notes on the VV. A. Myatt Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 18, pp. 87-93.
Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1958. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. University of Chicago
Press.
Witte, Adoph H.
1938. Spanish Fort, an Historic Wichita Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 234-244.
Woolsey, A.M.
1938. Additional Buchanan Lake Sites. In: Annual Report of WPA and The
University of Texas Archaeological Research, Lake Buchanan, 1936-1937.
UTP, No. 3802, pp. 119- 145.

