TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, pre-history and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1958
President: RicHARD E. JoHNSON (Fort Worth)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAcK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. ScHUETz (San Antonio )
Editor of Publications: E. MoTT D AVIS
Directors (in addition to the above): T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W . C. HoLDEN (Lubbock)
Trustees: RoBERT E. BELL (Norman, Okla.) , WILSON W. CRooK, JR. (Dallas), 0. L.
SIMS (San Angelo), CHARLIE STEEN (Sante Fe, N . Mex.), FLoYD V. STUDER
(Amarillo ), FRANK H. WATT (Waco), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.),
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: C. E. BisSELL (Midland) , JoHN CoRLEY (Hobbs, N.Mex.) ,
W. L. EvERETT (Conroe), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), RoBERT L.
STEPHENSON (Lincoln, Neb.) , HENRY F. STURGIS (Austin), JoE BEN WHEAT
(Boulder, Colo. ), SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fellows: CYRus N . RAY (Abilene), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5 .00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Memorial Museum, Brackenridge Park,
San Antonio 9, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 29, for 1958
Editor: T . N. Campbell
Assistan t Editors:
E. Mott D avis
Edward B. Jelks

P ublish ed by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VOLUME

29,

FOR

1958

A Review of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGY
PART l
Edited by Edward B. Jelks, E. Mott Davis, and Henry F. Sturgis

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1960

Table of Contents
Foreword

.

Indian Tribes of Texas
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

vn

1

A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology
By Clarence H. Webb

35

A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
By Dee Ann Suhm

63

A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas Archeology
By Donald J. Lehmer

109

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas
Coast
By T. N. Campbell

145

Texas Archeology: A Guide to the Literature
Compiled and edited by T. N. Campbell

177

Foreword
THIS IS THE first of two volumes designed to serve as a review of the
current status of Texas archeology. The second volume will appear as
a later issue of the Bulletin. The review is in the form of a series of
papers, each dealing with a different area within Texas. In addition,
the presentation is made complete by the inclusion in the present
volume of W. W. Newcomb's paper on the historic Indians of Texas
and T . N . Campbell's revision , brought up to date, of his exhaustive
guide to the literature on Texas archeology, first published in 1952.
These papers are primarily aimed at a specific audience-the membership of the Texas Archeological Society. In other words, our desire
has been to present material which will be of maximum u se to persons
who are studying Texas archeology on the ground , primarily in their
spare time. Fulfilling this requirement fortunately also provides a
general review which should be of benefit to archeological specialists.
Accordingly, these reviews are designed to clarify the current status
of archeology in each of the several archeological areas within Texas,
and also to orient investigators-both amateur and professionaltoward the many urgent problems that need to be solved. In each
paper previous field work, classifications, and interpretations are reviewed, the major unsolved problems are outlined, and field techniques especially applicable to each area are discussed.
In the present volume, four areas are treated: East Texas, Central
Texas, Trans-Pecos Texas, and the central and southern parts of the
Texas Gulf Coast. A later volume will present papers on the Panhandle, the South Plains, North Central Texas, Southwest Texas, and
the Southeastern Coastal Plain.
A word of explanation is in order for the many members of the
Society who have long awaited the 1958 issue of the Bulletin, published here two years late, and who have anticipated eagerly the
reissuing of An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology, by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, which was published in 1954 as Volume 25
of the Bulletin and which has been out of print for several years.
It was originally planned that the Handbook would be reissued in
essentially its original form, and that in addition a series of papers on
special problems in the different parts of Texas would be published.
Also, a volume on field techniques was to be prepared. Most of these
plans went awry because of pressure on the editors' time and slowness

Office of the State Archeologist

Ubrary

on the part of authors in submitting manuscripts, and therefore a
different order of events is now contemplated. The first part of the
Handbook-the part dealing with areas and complexes-is not to be
reissued; its place is to be taken in part by A Review of Texas
Archeology, of which the present volume is the first part. Part II of
the Handbook-consisting of descriptions and illustrations of pottery
and projectile point types-is to be reissued separately as a special
publication of the Society. In addition to the type descriptions , this
volume will also include the trait lists for the various foci and aspects
that appeared in Part I of the original Handbook. The manual of field
techniques is in preparation and will appear as a special publication or
a Bulletin, whichever seems most practical.
This, then, is the long-awaited 1958 issue of the Bulletin, and the
beginning of the revision of An Introductory Handbook of Texas
Archeology. It is our hope and belief that the members of the Society
will find the papers of general interest, and that those members engaged in active research will find them of particular value.

EowARD B. JELKS
E. MoTT DAvis
HENRY F. STURGIS
February, 1960

A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology
CLARENCE H. WEBB*

Area
NoRTHEAST TExAs, for the purposes of our discussion , consists of 37
counties which are bounded on the east by the Louisiana line, on the
west by the middle course of the Trinity River, on the north by the
Red River forming the Oklahoma line, and southward to the coastal
plains below Polk and Tyler Counties (Fig. 1) . Archeologically it is
included in the Caddoan Area, with northwestern Louisiana, southwestern Arkansas, and eastern Oklahoma. Geographically, this 4-state
area is fairly uniform. It is pleasant country of rolling hills interspersed with comparatively level prairies. Numerous streams cut across
it, most of them meandering in a southeasterly direction through valleys of varying widths. The Ozark and Arbuckle Mountains of southern Arkansas and Oklahoma afford the only major break in the topography, separating the Arkansas River Valley from the remainder of
the Caddoan province.
This is "the beautiful country" lovingly spoken of by the Caddo, a
country ideally adapted to their farming-hunting-fishing way of life.
The rainfall, 40 to 60 inches annually, resulted in abundant forests
of oak and pine on the hills, hardwoods in the lowlands, willows and
cypress along the streams and in the swampy areas. The rolling
prairie country formed good grasslands. The remnants of Pleistocene
terraces bordering streams, and even the higher hill country, were
reasonably satisfactory for agriculture of the less intensive type as
• Clarence H. Webb, a physician (pediatrics) who lives in Shreveport, Louisiana,
is well known for his contributions to Caddoan area archeology. His investigations
in northwestern Louisiana have made it possible to define several important phases
of culture in the Caddoan area, particularly the Gahagan, Belcher, Bossier, and
Glendora foci. His recent monograph, The Belcher Mound: A St ratified Site in
Caddo Parish, Louisiana, published by the Society for American Archaeology, is
recognized as an outstanding contribution to North American archeology.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

practiced by these Indians for the growing of Indian corn, beans,
squash, and tobacco in small patches. The fertile river valleys were
more productive but more hazardous because of insects, reptiles, and
periodic overflows. They were used, however, with increasing frequency as population pressures and :improved agricultural methods
developed, hence have numerous late pottery-bearing village sites.

OKLA.

I
I

''
\

''
\
\

,''
•'
'',,...,
I

......

...... ..... _

Fig . 1 . Map of northeastern Texas showing app roximate bounda ries of the Northeast
Texas archeolog ical a rea.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

37

There are six major streams in northeast Texas. ( 1) The Red River
flows along the northern border, is joined by major tributaries from
the Oklahoma side and by local streams from the hill country to the
south. It has a flat flood plain several miles in width. (2 ) The Sulphur
River is formed by tributaries from the high hills of the northern tier
of Texas counties and flows eastward entering the Red in southern
Arkansas. (3) Cypress Creek with several smaller streams forms the
headwaters of Caddo Lake. ( 4 ) The Sabine River cuts obliquely across
the central part of northeast Texas and then forms the southern part
of the Texas-Louisiana boundary line. (5) The Angelina and Neches
Rivers parallel the oblique course of the Sabine, receive tributaries
from the area south of this river , and unite at the southern end of the
area. (6 ) The Trinity River, in its middle course, forms the western
boundary of this area. All of these have valleys which are several miles
in width. although their flood plains tend to be narrow, ranging from 1
to 3 miles ·w ide, before they reach the coastal plains.
The topsoil through much of northeast Texas is sandy, with numerous deposits of red clay. In the central and northern parts, the heavy
iron content of the soil produces a preponderantly red color. A belt of
the famous " black lands" extends southward from Red River County .
Common native rocks are ferruginous sandstones , brown and light
tan sandstones, chert, jasper, hematite, limonite, and petrified woods
(Stephenson , 1950 ) .
Native flora is varied and abundant, especially in the valleys and
swamplands. Nut-bearing trees and shrubs- hickory, walnut, p ecan,
chinquapin (dwarf chestnut ) -and native fruits such as persimmon.
plum, hawthorn , wild grape, crab-apple, mulberry, and blcckberry are
present today and must have been important in the Indian diet from
Archaic to Historic times. Various grasses, bulbs, roots, and barks were
available as food, fiber, or medicinal sources.
The fauna is still abundant. Opossums, moles, shrews, bats, bears,
racoons, civet cats, minks, otters, skunks, foxes, wildcats, squirrels,
gophers, mice, rats, rabbits, deer , and armadillos (in the last 30 years
only ) have been mentioned as the main kinds of animals in this area
(Stephenson, 1950 ). Hunting of bison is recorded in the Historic period, although bison bones are generally missing in village refuse excavations. Migratory waterfowl are especially abundant in the lakes
and swampy areas, and along the major streams. These, as well as
other native and migratory birds, such as pigeons, dove, quail, turkey,
and woodcock, undoubtedly were prized as food by the Indians. Excavations in mound and village sites show that deer, squirrel, rabbit,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

turtle, and fish of various kinds were the chief meats consumed. The
larger varieties of fish, such as catfish, "gaspergou," buffalo-fish and
gar-fish were preferred. Mussels and snails formed secondary food
items and moderate deposits of shells occur in village middens. No
large shell middens comparable to those in coastal areas or the Tennessee River shoals, however, are to be found.

Historic Tribes
The Indians of east Texas are known chiefly through the narratives
of early Spanish and French explorers and from records of the Spanish
missions established among the Hasinai and related tribes. Probably
the first mention is by Cabeza de Vaca ( 1542) , who was marooned
on the Texas coast. He spent a number of years (1528-33 ) among the
coastal tribes and left an excellent description of their customs. Among
inland tribes he mentions the Atayos, probably the Caddoan Adai who
later had villages on each side of the Sabine between Natchitoches and
Nacogdoches. De Soto's expedition under Moscoso traversed northeast Texas in 1542, recrossing it after failing to reach Mexico (Elvas,
1907 ) . Moscoso is thought to have crossed the Angelina River near the
Attoyac junction and to have reached the Trinity River. Tribes mentioned in the Journals are the Nondacao (Anadarko ) , Nasoni,
Nacanish, Aays (Eyeish ), Nacacahoz and Naquiscoca ; the provinces
of Soacatino and Guasco were visited ( Swanton, 1939, 1942, 1946 ).
In 1685 La Salle stayed in an Indian village, probably Hasinai near
Nacogdoches, for a month due to illness. Two years later, after his
murder, seven survivors from his expedit:on, as detailed by J outel
( 1714) and Douay ( 1908 ), traveled from the Hasinai country northeastward to cross the Red River near Texarkana or Fulton, on their
way to the French post on the lower Arkansas River. Joutel mention s
the Cenis (Hasinai ) , Nahoudikhe, Assony (Nasoni ), Natsohsos, Nachitos and Cadodaquio. The last four groups were on the Red River,
probably near its great bend. Joutel's descriptions of the villages,
houses, foods, customs, and ceremonies of the Hasinai are extremely
valuable.
In 1690 the first Spanish mission was established in the Nebedache
village, west of the Neches near Arroyo San Pedro, followed by a second mission for the Neches nearby. These were abandoned in 1693
and reestablished in 1716. By the latter year four other missions had
been founded among the Hasinai: for the Anadarko in southern Rusk

39

NORTHEAST TEXAS

county, the Eyeish on upper Ayish Bayou, the Nacogdoche at the site
of present Nacogdoches, and for the Hainai nearby (Stephenson,
1950 ) . At the same time a mission was established among the Adai, on
the Louisiana side of the Sabine (Fletcher, 1912a ) . It was destroyed
by the French in 1719, but was reestablished with the Presidio de las
Adaes in 1721. The Sabine River was known as Rio de las Adaes
throughout this century. There were Adai in the Mission San Francisco de los Tejas that was established for the Hainai. The Adai were
divided in allegiance between the Spanish and French at a later date,
and the road from Natchitoches to San Antonio, famous as El Camino
Real, passed through their villages.
It seems clear that the southern group of Caddoans, known as Hasinai or Tejas, was well established in this area from earliest contact
times until the 1830's, when many members moved to the Brazos
River, then in 1859 to Oklahoma. They had been joined in 1835 by the
Caddo from Louisiana, after sale of their lands to the United States.
During the late period, Cherokee are reported to have been in this area
between 1828-1839; other groups may also have been here. The Alabama-Coushatta Reservation in Polk County, containing some 250
people, is the only Indian reservation in Texas today ( Stephenson,
1950 ) .
Much less information is available about historic tribes in the northern portion of northeast Texas. The Cadohadacho and allied groups
contacted by Joutel ( 1714) lived on both sides of Red River above the
Big Bend, probably extending into present Texas and Oklahoma. In
later times they moved downstream into Louisiana. Further upstream,
in 1 701 the Kichai were on the Red and southward to the upper Trinity (Fletcher, 1912b) . In 1712 they were at war with the Hainai, who
lived farther down the Trinity. In 1772 the main Kichai village was
east of this river, not far from Palestine. They moved to the Brazos
about 1840 and were placed on the Brazos reservation in 1855 . Shortly
thereafter they joined the Wichita. In the late period the Choctaw
moved westward across Louisiana and were at war intermittently
with the Caddo. By 1820 (Thomas and Swanton, 1912) there were
1200 Choctaws on the Sabine and Neches Rivers. It is likely that other
migrating tribes stopped in east Texas for varying periods.

Archeological Sites
A considerable variety of archeological sites is to be found in east
Texas. The major concentration of village sites can be expected along

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the larger streams and up their tributaries. Junctions of streams are
favorable places. The sites of pottery-making peoples are likely to
occur on the higher ground of natural levees or knolls in the river
valleys, on terraces or spurs of hills which flank or project into valleys
near present streams or older cut-offs, around the shores of lakes, and
along the banks of smaller tributaries. Sites which lie near old cut-off
channels tend to be older than those along present stream courses.
Most of these pottery sites are small, not over 1 to 2 acres in extent.
Major sites, however, are larger, up to 25 or more acres in size. Midden
deposits may be shallow and scattered, but in major sit es dark middens
two to three feet in thickness may occur. A deeper, pre-pottery, level
of Archaic occupation may be revealed by search around areas of wash
at these pottery sites, or by careful excavation.
Mounds (Fig. 2, 3, 4 ) may be more frequent in east Texas than was
once thou ght, although they diminish in number as one leaves the
Red River Valley. Some have been found along all of the major river
systems except the Trinity. They are likely to occur in the overflow
valleys and in connection with village sites, but some are situated on
terraces overlooking the valleys. Most of the east Texas mounds are
single and small, 2 to 10 feet in height and 40 to 100 feet in diameter

Fig. 2 . Mound a t Hatche l site near Texarkana in Bowie County . This is one of the large r
Caddoan mounds, b eing a li1:le over 30 feet high , with a max imum d iameter of 1 95 fee L
Excavations in 1938-39 reve aled that a small fla t-topped mound was built f irst and that
th is was late r covered by a larger flat-topp a d mound . Bo: h mounds belong to the Haley
Focus, G ibson Aspect. Covering the second mound was a th ick mantle of occupational
debris of the Te xa rkana Focu s, Fulton Aspe ct, that yielded ev idence of at least 1 6 house s.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

41

Fig. 3 . Mound at the Jonas Short site, San Augustine County . Th is small, circular,
platform mound is about 1 00 feet in diameter at the base and stands 7 feet high lfor
scale, note the man stand ing on the mound) . When partially excavated in 1956, it was found
to consist of a sandy sub-structure capped w ith a mantle of clay . It contained several
burials , including a cremation at the base of the mound, and several caches of ceremonial
artifacts . The test trench in the fo reground was one of several which were dug to determine
if there was a village area near the mound . No village was found . The cultural affiliation
of the Jonas Short mound has not been determined b ecause as ye t the arche ology of this
part of easlern Texas is imperfe ctly known .

(Fig. 3, 4 ) . Truncated temple mounds like those of the Mississippi
Valley are rare and no massive mounds or large mound groups arranged around a plaza are known. Mound sites of respectable size are
found at the Davis site, Cherokee County (Newell and Krieger, 1949 ) ,
where there were 3 mounds, the largest 250 feet in length and 16 feet
in height; the McDonald Site, Anderson County; Keith Site, Titus
County; T. M . Sanders Site, Lamar County; and the Hatchel Mound,
Bowie County, which was 30 feet in height (Fig. 2, 5) . A ll of the explored mounds of east Texas have been associated with pottery-bearing Caddoan sites, and this is probably true of most of the others. They
may show evidences of structures at varying levels or on the premound surface (Fig. 6) , and burials may or may not be associated

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with them (Fig. 7) . One should be on the lookout for small conical
mounds which may be burial mounds of earlier cultures and may
contain flexed burials or cremations. Such mounds have been found ,
usually situated on terraces overlooking valleys, in northwestern
Louisiana in the Bellevue Focus ( Fulton and Webb, 1953 ) on a Marksville time level.
Slight elevations on village sites may be produced by the accumulated refuse of many years; these are middens, not constructed mounds.
One must also be careful not to interpret as true mounds the outriders
or erosional remnants of surrounding hills which may occur on the
edges of valleys and were sometimes lived on by Indians. Moreover,
the thousands of natural "pimple" mounds which occur throughout
the Ark-La-Tex area must not be confused with aboriginal structures,
even though they were used for substructures occasionally.
Numerous non-pottery sites, often small, are found in the hill areas,
frequently on minor tributaries or " spring branches ." Search should
be made near well-known springs, as small Archaic occupations often
occur nearby. Non-pottery sites also can be found along major streams,
especially on terraces or high knolls. The river flood plains may contain Archaic sites which are buried by silts. Such sites may be exposed
by caving action of present streams, by ditching on farms , by pipeline excavations, by highway or bridge construction, or by any similar activity which removes river valley topsoil.
Caves and rock shelters are infrequent in east T exas, compared with
more rugged areas, but should be watched for and checked for evidences of occupation. The infrequency of caves and rock shelters in the
area makes it imperative that excavations in them should have professional advice or supervision.
Petroglyphs have been reported from only one site, in Henderson
County (Jackson, 1938b ). From this same county, at the Malakoff
site, three large stones carved into semblances of human heads were
found in gravel pits in a terrace on Cedar Creek (Sellards, 1941, 1952).
Skeletal remains of mammoth, horse, sloth, and a number of other
Pleistocene mammals were found in the gravels above the stone heads.
Any site where bones of extinct animals are uncovered should be
searched for tools or projectiles of early man.

Archeological Studies
Organized study of the archeology of east Texas was initiated by
Professor J. E. Pearce, long-time head of the Department of Anthro

NORTHEAST TEXAS

43

pology at the University of Texas. During the 1930's, the Department
sponsored a number of excavations in east Texas under the direction
of A. T. Jackson, and large collections were accumulated. In a series
of articles in the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society Jackson described types of pipes ( 1933), pottery ( 1934) ,
ornaments (1935), fire-temples (1936 ), fire evidences in burial rites
( 1938a), tubular pipes and stone tubes ( 1940), pendants and gorgets
(1941 ). He delineated four culture areas of east Texas in the four
river systems-Red, Sulphur, Sabine, and Neches-with corresponding variations in pottery and other artifact types. Goldschmidt ( 1935 )
reported on the archeology of Titus County. He first demonstrated pottery temporal sequence, with two culture complexes in the same area ,
and challenged the concept of consistent pottery or culture association
with river systems.
In the later 30's, extensive excavations of sites in east Texas were
made by W. P. A. crews, supervised by professional archeologists. The
most important of these projects were the Davis Site in Cherokee
County (Fig. 6) and the Hatchel Site (Fig. 2, 5 ) in Bowie County.
Alex D. Krieger (1944, 1946, 1947; Newell and Krieger, 1949 ) made
a comparative analysis on the basis of these controlled excavations and
the available information from other excavated sites, which included
Sanders and Keith mounds in East Texas, Spiro in Oklahoma, Crenshaw in Arkansas, and the Belcher Mound in Louisiana, together with
m:scellaneous collections from the 4-state area. He evolved the classification of Caddoan cultures, based on the McKern system of aspects,
foci, and components, which has been the basis of all subsequent study
in the 4-state area. His publications have clearly delineated the older
Gibson Aspect, of which the Alto, Sanders, Spiro, and Haley Foci are
represented in east Texas. Relationships and possible contacts with the
Southwest, Mesoamerica, the Plains and the Mississippi cultures were
also traced. He gave the basic outline of the later Fulton Aspect cultures, of which Texarkana, Titus, Frankston and Allen Foci are located in east Texas. He also identified in east Texas a few sites of other
Fulton cultures, including Bossier, Belcher, Glendora and McCurtain,
which center in adjoining portions of Louisiana and Oklahoma. An
outline of these cultures, in addition to a review of available information about the Paleo-Indian and Archaic periods in east Texas,
as well as numerous projectile point and pottery types pertinent to
this area, appears in the Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954).
During the past ten years, River Basin Surveys, under direction of

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 4 . A late stage in the excavation of a mound at the Whelan site on Cyp ress Creek in
Marion County . The mound was five fee t high and sixty feel in diame ter, a little larger
than most mounds in this immediate areo . The excovotion techniqu e being used is o modification of " Approoch 131" described in the text . The mound was dug in 10 x 10ft. squares
15 x 5 ft . might have served better, however!, eoch squore being stripped in six-inch
levels . The oppeoronce of the wolls ond floor of eoch squore wos recorded os soon os eoch
six-inch leve l wos cleored . A few thick eorth strips were left stonding as wolls between
e xcavation squares, as shown he re, in order that a cross section of the mound structu re
migh t be observed. In these walls the modern sod, mound fill , ond originol sod line may
be seen . The curved shelf in the foreground represents port of the floor of o circular pole
structure ; the floor wos detected ot the originol sod line underneoth the mound. The re were
no buriols in this mound. The work wos done in 1957 by the University of Texos ond
the Notionol Pork Service. This site has since gone under the woter of the Loke 0 ' The
Pine s.

NORTHEAST T EXAS

45

the Smithsonian Institution and the National Park Service, have
added information on the basis of site surveys and excavations in the
McGee Bend Reservoir (Jasper, Sabine, San Augustine, Angelina, and
Nacogdoches counties); Cooper Reservoir (Delta and Hopkins
counties); T exarkana Reservoir (Bowie, Cass, Titus, and Red River
counties), Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir (Marion, Harrison , Upshur, and
Camp counties ) , Rockland Reservoir (Angelina, Tyler, Polk, and
Trinity counties), and Blackburn Crossing Reservoir (Anderson,
Cherokee, H enderson, and Smith counties ) . Stephenson, Jelks, D avis,
Miller, Moorman, and Johnson have worked in these reservoir areas
at various times.
Numerous amateurs have contributed to the knowledge of the area,
especially the members of th e East Texas Archeological Society in
the middle counties and the Dallas Archeological Society in the northeastern segment. Harris and Crook in Dallas, Hooks in Sulphur
Springs, Miroir in Texarkana, Price in Atlanta , Nicholas in Daingerfield, Hayner in Karnack, Jones in Longview, Turbyfill in Palestine,
Procter and Whiteside in T y ler, and many others, have been active
and helpful in their localities.

Fig . 5 . House outlines a t Hatchel si te nea r Texa rkana. A round house w ith entrance
passag eway intersects an earlier house at left.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Archeological Complexes and Materials in East Texas
It should be understood that many of the material remains of prehistoric Indians in east Texas are imperfectly classified. Complexes or
cultures represented by these materials are only partially ordered, and
many gaps remain to be filled. We have adopted, as a tentative framework, the outline listed in the Handbook ( Suhm, Krieger and Jelks ,
1954).

Paleo-Indian or Paleo-American. This represents occupation from
the earliest times to approximately 3,000 B.C., a period of roving
hunters of big game, u sing lanceolate points. The Malakoff Site, dated
before the end of Pleistocene times by Sellards ( 1941, 1952) and by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954) has been mentioned. Unfortunately,
no tools or projectile points were found at this site. Elsewhere there
are scattered finds of lanceolate points, rarely fluted. Most of these
points are of the Scottsbluff, Plainview, Meserve, and Angostura
types; one Eden has been reported recently. In the northern tier of
counties, Scottsbluff points are more numerous than other Paleo types,
judging from the collections of I. B. Price, Jr. , in Atlanta and R. R.
Nicholas in Daingerfield. A similar situation prevails in adjoining
northwestern Louisiana. Further south. Jones (p ersonal communication ) reports for the central 7 counties (Gregg, Harrison, Panola,
Upshur, Rusk, Smith, and Wood) that Meserve, Plainview, and
Scottsbluff are nearly equal in numbers, with Meserve more frequent.
A few fluted points or fluted basal fragments, probably Clovis and
Folsom, occur. In the counties bordering on the Central Texas area,
collections of Turbyfill and others in Palestine (Anderson county)
show the presence of Scottsbluff, Meserve, Plainview, and Angostura
types, in this order of frequency, but no fluted points. \'Vith three
exceptio::1s, these points have been found on the surface of sites where
Archaic points are much more numerous and pottery is often present.
Paleo points are usually scarce, seldom more than 3 from a given site.
Sites such as the Will Lacey Place near Palestine, where larger numbers of Paleo points have been found, should be investigated carefully
for a Paleo occupation level.
Jones (personal communications) reports the finding of Paleo
points in the basal red clay of 4 sites in Gregg County. These sites
were on high terraces overlooking the Sabine at distances up to a mile

NORTHEAST TEXAS

47

from the stream. The sites were covered by 12---15 inches of topsoil
which contained Archaic projectile points. He has also found 9
Meserve points and 3 each of Angostura, Plainview, and Scottsbluff
types at the Grace Creek 1 site (Jones, 1957 ) . Some of these were
found in the red clay level beneath pottery and Archaic zones, others
in graded areas as surface finds . The location of this site in overflow
bottom lands of the Sabine River is unusual for Paleo-Indian material. It covers 6 acres, in comparison with the terrace sites which
are usually 1 to 3 acres in extent. Jones' excavations at the Spencer
site, in Upshur County, yielded 2 Scottsbluff points. They were
found in the lowest level, 16 to 17 inches below the surface, and were
thought to be associated with the Archaic manifestation which underlay the pottery zone.
It is hoped that accurate information may become available about
the Cary Lake Cave site, where 18 to 19 Plainview points, early bison
bones and several hearths are reported to have been found by members
of the East Texas Archeological Society.

Archaic. The first tentative description of this stage was given in
the Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954),
where it is listed as "East Texas Aspect." Since it seems to differ from
the Central Texas Archaic, and bears many resemblances to findings
in the adjoining areas of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Oklahoma, we propose the name "Red River Aspect," avoiding present geographic limits.
This aspect is estimated to have lasted from perhaps 3000 B.C. to A.D.
500-1000 and is characterized largely by non-pottery sites, most of
which are fairly small, up to 1-4 acres in size. Sometimes the sites
were later occupied by pottery-making people, and the original nature
of the site may be obscured by a veneer of debris containing potsherds.
The Handbook quotes amateur collectors to the effect that they find
more sites without pottery than with it. However, surveys show considerable variation. In the Cooper Reservoir survey, Delta and Hopkins
counties, 12 of the 24 sites were non-pottery (Moorman and Jelks,
1952) . In Gregg County, Jones (personal communication) has found
20 non-pottery sites and 80 containing pottery. In the McGee Bend
Reservoir, in the southern part of northeast Texas, only 8 definite and
6 possible non-pottery sites were found in a total of 80 sites (Stephenson, 195 0) . Limitation of most reservoir surveys to the expected
flooded areas increases the percentage of pottery sites, which are near
the streams. Davis, for example, reports (personal communication)

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

very few non-pottery and numerous Fulton Aspect pottery sites in the
Cypress Creek Valley, but states that there are a number of Archaic
sites on the uplands outside of the valley survey.
Artifacts found on these Archaic sites include projectile points, of
which Gary, Ellis, Yarbrough, Kent , and Wells types seem to be most
frequent. However, many other types listed in the Handbook are
found. There are also pitted stones ; hammerstones; hand-size manos;
milling stones with shallow oval basins; full-grooved axes of sandstone, quartzite, or hematite; fist-axes; drills; large and small end
scrapers; end scrapers made by reworking projectile points ("bunts" ) ;
small side scrapers. Compared with the southeastern and eastern
United States, polished objects are rare, only a few bannerstones,
boatstones, beads, and stone tubes having been described.
Apparently the northeast Texas Archaic overlaps the terminal
Paleo-Indian period, since so many reports indicate the presence of
lanceolate projectile points in predominantly Archaic sites. This situation may account for the number of Archaic types described in the
Handbook which have carried over the traits of basal concavity and
smoothing of bases or stems. This Paleo-Archaic overlap may also
explain why types like Meserve and San Patrice (Webb, 1946) are
not infrequent in the Archaic of northeast Texas and northwest
Louisiana.
At the recent end of the Archaic, small projectile (arrow) points
appear in some sites before pottery times. Jones (personal communication) has noted that these are more likely to be found at small sites
situated on low terraces or "rises" near small tributaries, rather than
on higher terraces.
Much work needs to be done on the Archaic period in this area in
order to distinguish cultural changes, variations in the different parts
of northeast Texas, and relationships to the antecedent Paleo-Indian
and subsequent pottery-making periods. It is likely that cultural
changes will become evident, such as those described from north
central Texas in the Carrollton and Elam Foci (Crook and Harris,
1952). The earlier Carrollton Focus contains larger projectile points
and scraping tools made of materials brought from some distance. The
later Elam Focus has smaller artifacts, often made of local materials,
which were more difficult to work and resulted in crude objects.

Neo-American Stage. This stage relates to the pottery-making,
sometimes mound-building, agricultural peoples, generally believed to
be prehistoric Caddo Indians of northeast Texas. They replaced the

NORTHEAST TEXAS

49

Archaic peoples somewhere between A.D. 500 and 1000, absorbing in
the process much of the Archaic culture and many of the Archaic
artifact types.
A possible exception, and a possible ceramic island in the Archaic
sea, is represented by the makers of sand-tempered pottery in the
southern portions of the area. Jelks (personal communication) reports
sand-tempered wares with Woodland conoidal-base shapes, in the
McGee Bend area, similar to the Goose Creek series. More significant
is the Jonas Short Mound in San Augustine County (Fig. 3 ), where
sherds of this type were associated with Adena-like objects-a reelshaped copper gorget, copper bracelets, quartz crystal pendants, boatstones, elk-teeth necklaces and large stemmed blades.
Non-Caddoan pottery (Marksville and Coles Creek types from the
central Louisiana area ) has been found in small amounts at the Davis
site in Cherokee County and at several sites around Caddo Lake in
Harrison County. The status of these as trade sherds is not established.
Several Coles Creek sherds are illustrated by Jones ( 195 7, Fig. 51,
G, H, N , Q) from the Grace Creek site near Longview. Search should
be made for Marksville or Bellevue Focus sites in those parts of northeast Texas which border on Louisiana. Trade sherds from the Louisiana sequence of cultures should be watched for. The pottery types
which characterize these Louisiana cultures are described in publications of Ford ( 1951 ), Ford and Willey ( 1940 ) , and Quimby ( 1951 ).
Krieger has separated the earlier Caddoan cultures, called Gibson
Aspect, and the later, called Fulton Aspect. In northeast Texas, the
Gibson Aspect is represented by the following.
(1) The Alto Focus is well established in the southern counties.
Additionally the Handbook lists the Keith and Hale sites in Titus
County and Hayner reports one Alto site on Caddo Lake. Jones ( 195 7)
also describes the pottery level at the Grace Creek sites, Gregg County.
as almost exclusively Alto, hence this focus seems to be widespread.
Such mound sites as Davis, McDonald, Keith, and Hale are large, but
in some areas smaller village sites have been identified. It is reasonable
to expect that the large ceremonial centers would have smaller satellite villages to support them. There is increasing evidence of this
arrangement throughout the Caddoan area.
(2.) Sanders Focus is represented by the T. M. Sanders site in
Lamar County, components at the Yarbrough and Joslin sites in Van
Zandt County, and smaller sites in Lamar, Fannin, Wood, and Hopkins counties ( Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954). Jones (personal communication ) reports Sanders sites in Upshur County. Krieger's (1946 )

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

preliminary description of Sanders Focu s should be rounded out by
studies of other sites, in order to clarify Sanders Focus content, origins,
and effects on later cultures. For example, it would be desirable to
know whether other sites exhibit the combination of Plains traits
(bison huntin g, bison scapula hoes, 4-edged beveled knives, stone

Fig . 6 . Ten overlapping round house outlines at the Davis site, an Alto Focus site in
Chero !<ee County . A portion of the flat-lopped mound may be seen at upper left. Detailed
stratigraphic study showed that these houses were built before the mound was constructed.

Fig . 7 . Mu lti ple burial at th e Sanders site , type site of the Sanders Focus . Thi s burial conta ined we ll-pr2se rve d

s ~< ele t ons

of six indiv iduals . Th a poll ery ve sse ls a re clustered at the

head end of the g rave. In Tex a s mu li iple burial s li ke th is ore to be expec ted in G ib son Aspe ct
s ites , bu l no t in the late r f u lton Aspect.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

elbow pipes ) , Caddoan traits, and southern cult objects described for
the Sanders site.
( 3) Haley Focus is found in the northeast corner along Red River,
specifically in the lower levels of the Hatchel Mound. Other Haley
sites or deeper Haley components of later pottery sites should be found
in this area.
( 4 ) Suhm, Krieger and Jelks ( 1954) list the Jaggers Site in Franklin
County and the Mustang Creek Mound in Red River County as Spiro
in affiliation , without Sanders pottery.
Careful checking of sites in the northern tier of counties should be
made to clarify (a ) similarities and differences of Sanders and Spiro
cultures, (b ) a comparison of their manifestations in Texas and
Oklahoma, and (c ) transitions to later cultures like those of Titus,
McCurtain, Texarkana, and Wylie foci.
Space does not permit a review of traits found in the several Gibson
Aspect Foci. The interested reader must be referred to the publications
of Krieger ( 1946 ) . Newell and Krieger ( 1949 ), Suhm, Krieger and
Jelks ( 1954), and the Oklahoma group-Orr ( 1946, 1952), Bell
(1953 ), Bell and Baerreis ( 1951 ) . A few notable characteristics of
this general period compared with the later Fulton Aspect, are:
( 1)
(2)
(3)
(4 )
( 5)
(6 )
( 7)
(8 )
(9)
( 10)
( 11 )
( 12)
( 13 )
( 14)

tendency to larger sites,
mounds more often present and larger,
ceremonial burials often in large or deep pits,
richer ornamentation,
" Cult" material, especially engraved shell gorgets and cups,
stone and other ear ornaments, often copper-plated,
white Catahoula sandstone hones,
long and spatulate celts, often of greenstone,
large projectile points of late Archaic types,
small projectile points with expanded or rectangular stems,
long-stemmed pottery pipes,
stone effigy or T-shaped pipes,
fine line engraving· on pottery,
domestic wares, tending to be thick and decor a ted with incising and
punctating rather than brushing,
( 15) tapered spout bottles.

The predominant Fulton Aspect or later Caddoan cultures of northeast Texas are:
( 1) Frankston Focus in the southern counties (especially Cherokee, Anderson, Henderson, VanZandt, Smith, Harrison, and southward to Na cogdoch es, Angelina, and San Augustine in the McGee Bend area) .

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(2) Titus Focus, centering in Titus, Camp, Upshur, Morris, and Franklin Counties, extending westward to Wood and Hopkins, southeast to
Marion and the northern portions of Harrison and Gregg Counties.
(3 ) Texarkana Focus sites are known in the northeast corner, in Red
River, Bowie, and Cass Counties, with the type site at the Hatchel Mound
in Bowie County. Davis (personal communication) reports some overlap
with Titus Focus sites on Cypress Creek above Caddo Lake in Marion, Harrison, Upshur, and Camp Counties. There is evidence of a hybridization of
these two cultures, also found by Jelks a long the Sulphur River.
( 4 ) Sites of the McCurtain Focus, which centers in southeastern Oklahoma, are reported in Red River and possibly in Bowie and Lamar Counties
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954 ).
(5) Belcher Focus (which centers along Red River in southern Arkansas
and extends into Louisiana) sites or materials are found in Texas in Harrison County and possibly in other fringe counties.
( 6 ) Bossier Focus projects into East Texas from its widespread manifestation in north Louisiana (Webb, 1948). It is found around Caddo Lake
in Harrison and Marion Counties, southward in the border counties of
Panola, Shelby, and Sabine, and into the McGee Bend Reservoir area of
San Augustine, Angelina, and Nacogdoches Counties. It overlaps Frankston Focus in the McGee Bend Area.
An example of the kind of work which needs to be done throughout
east Texas is Jelks' present study in the McGee Bend Area . H ere one or
more new foci may be developed related t o, but differing from, Alto, Bossier, and Frankston. Also noteworthy is the possibility of a n ew focus along
the Sabine River in Panola, Rusk, Smith, and Gregg counties, where

Fig. 8. Texarkana Focus burial at the Mitchell sile near Texarkana . Extended burials
with pottery vessels, ornaments, and other artifacts are common in the Caddoan area .

In this picture the vessels are shown placed along one side of the grave . Associated with
the ankle region are fragmen~s of several to rt oise shell rattles. A group of arrowpo !nts

may be

"e~n

at the left shoulder.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

53

Whiteside and Jones are finding sites with pottery which seem to represent a transition from late Alto to something resembling Bossier, but
showing sufficient differen ces to suggest a new focu s. These sites lie in the
zone between the Frankston and Titus Focus sites.
(7) The Allen Focus is represented by late sites, showing European trade
materials, probably representing the H asinai Caddoan group.
(8) The t enta tive Little River Focus is represented by several sites in the
northeastern corn er of the state-Womack site in Lamar County, Hunt
and Clements sites in Cass County, and Kaufman site in Red River County
-and probably relates to the Red River Kadohad acho and allied tribes.
The n am e Little River Focus was suggested for this group of sites by Williams ( 1958 ) . Much work needs to b e done to relate these sites to hi storic
tribes, or to find archeological sites at documented hi storic locations.
Descriptions of the Fulton Aspec t foci discu ssed above are to b e
found in the Handbook (Suhm , Krieger, and J elks, 1954) and the
publications of Krieger ( 1946 ), Bell and Baerreis ( 195 1), Dickinson
(1941), Webb (1945, 1948, 1959 ), and Webb and Dodd (1941).

Suggestions for Future Studies in East Texas
Some of the current problems in this nrcn have been mentioned or
intimated, but it may b e of value to assemble them and pose other
questions which seem important in clarifyi ng the prehistory of East
Texas.
A. Paleo-Indian :
( 1) Studies of distribution of Paleo-Indian projectile points.
(2) Identification of P aleo-Indian campsites or slau ghter sites, with
identification of tools other than proj ectile points.
(3 ) Does the occurrence of Paleo points on so man y Archaic sites indica te a late survival of P aleo in this area, an early origin of Archaic, or an
expected normal transition ?
( 4 ) Do M eserve and San Patrice types represent la te survivals of P al eoIndian techniques? What is their distributional and associational sta tus?
B. Archaic:
(1) Excavations and reports of Archaic sites are b adly needed.
(2) The tentative trai t list of "East T exa s Arch aic"-the Red River
Aspect of the present p aper-published in the Handbook (Suhm et al.,
1954) n eeds confirmation or corr ection.
(3) How does thi s Archaic relate to (a) Eastern Archaic, (b ) Central
Texas Archaic?

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

( 4 ) Since proj ectile point typ es afford the major indica tors for comparative studies in this period, just as pottery types do for the l a ter cultures, the
tentative typology publish ed in the Handbook should be worked over and
agree m ent r eached about the m a jor types; distributional studies would
then be more valuable. Studies of ch a nges in proj ectile point sizes among
the m a jor types, as w ell as sources of material from which they were
m a de, might be fruitful in view of findings elsewher e. Sear ch should be
m a de for local quarries.
(5 ) Since it appears tha t the Arch aic period m ay have l asted until
A .D . 1000 or later in east T exas, C-1 4 datings from late Archaic sites or
Arch a ic l evels of potter y sites, should be secured.
( 6 ) Did Archaic p eoples in east T exas acqui re agricultu re, pottery,
and a llied traits by diffusion and trade, or did p eoples m ove into this area
br inging these traits and displacing or absorbing the Arch ai c hunter s and
gath er er s?
C. Neo-American:

( 1 ) Is there an undiscovered Woodland horizon in east T exa s prior to
ea rly Caddoan? Search for sm all sites of Adena, Hopew ell, M arksville, or
Bellevue cultures is indica ted.
( Z) I s the sand-tempered potter y of east T exas rel a ted to tha t found in
Alaba m a, Florida, and T ch efun cte of the Louisiana coast, and ther efor e
ea rly ; or is it rel at ed to the presumably late sand-temper ed ware of
the T exa s coa st ?
(3 ) Bone tempering centers in east and central T exas; wha t are the
temporal and geogra phic ran ges?
(4 ) Knowledge of Alto Focu s should be expanded to include its burial
complex and small village p atterns.
( 5 ) Ca ddoan origins a re still a n intriguing topic for conj ecture. Alto in
east T exas, Gahagan in Louisiana, and early Spiro in Okla homa r epresent
the earliest known Caddoan manifestations. Yet Alto and the closely
rel ated Gahagan Foci ar e w ell developed cultures as presently known.
Where a re their anteced ents? Tf th ey developed out of loca l cultures, the
tran sitions should be discover able. If they resulted from an influx of n ew
p eople with full y develop ed culture, their sources must be sought:
( a ) Did those traits a nd i nfluen ces which are admittedly M esoam erican
enter the Caddoan Area through east T exa s along the Gilmore Corridor or
directly up from the T exas coa st ?
( b ) Did they and other traits enter via the Mississippi-Red River
cou rses? Sears consider s ea st T exas Caddo to be a p art of the Gulf Coast
tra dition and Ford sees much of the Caddoan developm ent a s derived
fr om th e central Louisiana culture sequen ce in its l a t er ( Pla quemine)
stages, with certain pottery t raits sw eeping westward from the Florida
w est coast through Louisian a into the Caddoan a r ea . Other s (including the
author of this section ) see eviden ces of p arallel cultura l developments in

NORTHEAST TEXAS

55

the lower Mississippi and the Caddoan areas in post-Marksville times,
which would equate early Caddo with Troyville-Coles Creek culture. W e
think that traits and influences moved in both directions. Krieger suggests
an even earlier time for Caddoan origins, coeval with Marksville at
A.D . 500-800. These chronological problems will only be answered by
more information about internal developments, trade and trait r elationships, and more C-14 datings or other time markers.
( c) Close ties are also in evidence between the Caddoan and Mississippian cultures. Extensive research is needed to establish the nature and priority of exchanges between these areas.
( 6 ) Internal development of Caddoan cultures in east Texas needs
closer scrutiny and further research:
(a ) Sanders and Haley foci are thought to be later than Alto; furth er
evidences are needed to establish this. Did Sanders Focus develop from a
fusion of Spiro (or Alto) with a Plains culture? Are there other marginal
foci with a mixture of Caddoan and Plains traits?
(b) Phases of transition from late Gibson (Sanders, Haley, late Spiro )
to Fulton (Titus, McCurtain, Texarkana, Wylie ) should be sought in the
northern part of east Texas.
( c) Is there a transitional period or focus interposed between Alto and
Frankston foci in lower east Texas?
(d) How nearly are the Spiro-like sites in east Texas (Jaggers site in
Franklin County, Mustang Creek in Red River County) identified with
Spiro in Oklahoma; what is their cultural and temporal relationship with
Sanders Focus?
(e ) Historic Caddoan sites should be located. These and unattached sites
which show European trade goods should be related to antecedent protohistoric cultures if possible.
( 7 ) There are numerous evidences of a strong tradition of overland
travel and trade throughout the Caddoan area and at all time levels.
This could have a bearing on Caddoan origins as well as the four-state
distribution of Caddoan cultures. Studies of site locations, trait distributions, and sources of trade objects might be made with the objective of
comparing overland versus riverine migration and travel.

Exploration and Excavation Problems in
Northeast Texas
Suggestions concerning location of sites in northeast Texas have
been mentioned in prior portions of this section. The archeology of
east Texas, however, differs in many respects from other parts of the
state, since it shares with the remainder of the Caddoan area the
manifestations of organized agricultural village life, mound construe-

s6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tion, and ceremonial customs more closely related to southeastern
archeology. Some details of village and mound study may therefore
be appropriate. In searching for sites of the pottery-making peoples,
relationship to adequate water supply and waterways for travel must
be kept in mind. Aerial photography is occasionally of help, especially
in the cultivated river valleys. Location of former river channels and
relating of sites to these channels (especially on old natural levees )
may be accomplished with these photographs more readily than from
topographical maps. Maps are of considerable value in checking
higher terrace country and forested areas where photographs are of
little help. Occas:.onally village features may be recognized by study
of aerial photographs with a good magnifying glass and in a few
instances we have located the sites of levelled mounds. County agricultural offices are good sources for these photos.
Certain features of village construction may be located best under
particular circumstances of season and weather, especially in plowed
fields. Everyone knows that artifacts may be found more readily after
plowing and a good rain. Habitation areas and house circles may at
times be recognized during the late winter and early spring, before
they are obscured by crops. Dark soil coloration usually means heavy
midden debris; potsherds, animal bones, and shell often mark these
areas. Heavy ash accumulations and fire-hardened soil may indicate
the centers of house circles. Caddoans usually had their firebeds in
the center of structures, and burning in the same area for long periods
resulted in heavy ash deposits. If this combination is found, careful
trenching or stripping may demonstrate an outline of post molds and
enable the house structure to be determined. Archeology of this area
would profit from more knowledge of house patterns, especially those
on village sites as contrasted with ceremonial structures on mounds.
Fired clay daub, which bears impressions of grass or poles, and "dirtdauber" nests may also mark the ruins of a house structure.
Digging in a village site should be done in an organized way, by
controlled trenches wide enough ( 5 ft. ) to give a good indication of
structures, refuse pits, post molds and other features. Haphazard
digging in the hopes of finding burials or pottery is destructive and
yields a minimum of information. Unless one is willing to devote
enough time to properly study a village site by trenching, he should
limit himself to surface collecting. Controlled trenching, studying and
diagramming the side walls as well as the advancing face of the cut,
and saving materials by zones, will give a maximum of informationand artifacts-in the long run. If soil coloration indicates definite

NORTHEAST TEXAS

57

zoning, it may be preferable to work by zones (i.e., surface and plowdisturbed soil, darker top zone, lighter sand, basal clay ) rather than by
depth in inches. Caddoan houses seldom had posts placed further apart
than 2 feet, hence a five foot trench which cuts across a house pattern
will show at least 2 or 3 post molds. These usually are about 2 feet in
depth, 4 to 10 inches in diameter, and may have looser or darker soil
filling them. Often a few sherds may be in the bottom of the post
mold, possibly a Caddoan ceremonial custom. If a house structure is
suspected, the trench should be carried to either side and the entire
pattern of molds demonstrated. Post molds can generally be differentiated from refuse pits because the pits are usually larger, narrowing
toward the bottom. Rodent burrows and tree roots or stump holes may
also be confusing, but a check of direction, size, and content will
usually clear the question.
Trenches should be dug down to undisturbed soil, especially to the
basal clay if this lies at a depth not exceeding 2 to 4 feet from the
surface. Sands below the pottery zone should be examined for
Archaic artifacts, and the basal clay surface should be checked for
Paleo-Indian artifacts. Many Caddoan villages had the custom of
placing burials below the habitation zone. Burial pits are at times
difficult to recognize in the dark sand-humus layer, but a trench
carried to basal clay will pick up the burials or burial pits intersecting
the clay.
Since many sites in this area cover more than one culture periodArchaic, early pottery and late pottery-a careful check should be
made of the kinds of artifacts, evidences of middens, house patterns,
etc., in various parts of the site. Do not forget to check the margins of
the site. Even in a small village, different kinds 'of artifacts may be
found in different areas. One may find pottery sherds, projectile
points, animal bones, or scrapers concentrated in one area, with
hammerstones, flakes, and rejects indicating a knapping area elsewhere. Larger and heavier objects such as pitted stones, grinding
stones or manos may be well away from the areas of denser occupation
debris. Remember also that larger stone objects struck during cultivation in recent years may be carried or thrown by the farmer into
gullies or fence rows or down stream banks.
Constructed mounds in the Caddoan area are likely to be (a) small,
rounded burial mounds, (b ) small (single house ) or large (multiple
house ) substructures on which houses or temples were placed, or
(c) combined mounds used for edifice substructures and also for
burials. Ceremonial burial mounds occur in the "Woodland" period

ss

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of Marksville and Bellevue in Louisiana and one of Adena-like context
has been found in east Texas. These are simple mounds heaped over
one or more burials, usually flexed or cremated, which may be on the
submound surface or on a small primary platform. Mounds in the
Gibson (early Caddoan ) period often were completed, then burial pits
were sunk from the surface to vary~ng depths, very often to submound levels. Sometimes, as in the Woodland period, a burial of one
or more individuals was placed on the original surface and the mound
built over these, then other pits sunk from the surface. Temple or
house substructure mounds may be just large enough for a single
temple, the house being 20 to 40 feet in diameter, the mound 50 to 75
feet. If this kind of mound is more than 5 to 6 feet in height, there may
be two or more house platforms at varying heights within the mound,
and sometimes a house floor is found on the original surface. The
Caddo frequently destroyed a house (often they burned it ) , built the
mound higher, levelled it, and then constructed another house. Very
large mounds, as at the Davis site, sometimes had more than one
structure on a single level.
Combined house and burial mounds probably were ceremonial
temple mounds originally. Later, burials of important people were
made in pits dug through the temple floors, or less often in pits outside
the temple. Occasionally it seemed that death occurred while the
mound was under construction and the body was incorporated in a
shallow pit, or without pit, in the mound fill . In the Belcher Mound,
houses were burned and covered over with a foot or two of dirt.
Burial pits were then dug through the debris, filled, and the mound
was levelled for a new house or temple.
With this multiplicity of mound purposes and expected findings,
mound excavation should be done carefully, slowly, and as a major
cooperative project. Unfortunately, many mounds have been " pitted"
with holes sunk from the top. This method is seldom productive of
artifacts and always destructive of important information.
Proper excavation of a mound includes clearing of its surface,
measurement of its size in all dimensions, relating it to the village
and natural topography, surveying and staking, then organized digging. Three approaches are possible. ( 1) If complete removal is
planned, trenches are cut from the village across the edge of the
mound to sub-mound levels, successively slicing across the mound as
one slices a loaf of bread. (2 ) To test a mound, one may carry a
5- to 10-foot trench from the village toward the mound center, watching
for levels or feature s, then enlarging the cut if more extensive excava-

NORTHEAST TEXAS

59

tion is desired. ( 3 ) Combined slicing and peeling (see Fig. 4 ), using
method 1 or Z to establish levels of habitation, if these exist, then peeling from the top down to each successive level to expose it completely.
Method 1 has the advantage of giving good profiles; Method 3, the advantage of exposing a house or temple floor at one time, for measurements and photography. In my experience method 3 has been the
preferable one for temple or house mounds, with or without burials.
It also eliminates danger of slumping or cave-in, always possible with
the trenching method. To avoid this danger, narrow trenches should
not be carried into a mound nor high vertical walls cut. The slices of
method 1 can be stair-stepped, with a vertical bank never more than
5 feet in height. Undercutting or tunneling should be strictly avoided
and care must especially be taken if the mound is waterlogged by
heavy rains or is composed of very dry sand. Dirt coloration and
features can always be seen better if the mound fill is just moist; and
at times, especially in very dry weather, troweling is assisted by
dampening the soil.
The floors and side walls of trenches and slices across a mound must
be cleared and shaved with trowel or square-blade shovel in order to
see soil color differences which indicate levels or features. These
should be marked or recorded and photographed while still moist, as
drying obliterates many of the color differences.
As one peels a mound by habitation layers, walls or pillars which
include the survey stakes should be maintained from one horizontal
level to the next, to keep control on the survey and to establish profiles.
As lower habitation levels are cleared, and if desired for photography,
the walls or pillars may be removed after vertical measurements are
taken, transferring the survey stakes to the lower cleared floor.
If burial pit fills are recognized in the upper levels, they should be
plotted, but patience should be exerted to work out the burials only
when the general mound stripping reaches them; otherwise, mound
structures and details may be damaged. Moreover, burials can never
be cleared, measured, and photographed as well in a pit as they can
when the surrounding mound fill is removed to, or just below, the
burial level.
Needless to say, careful recording, measurements, scale diagrams,
photographs and preserving of all features and artifacts should be
observed, as in all excavations. Only then does the amateur reach the
level of responsibility which entitles him to self-respect and the respect
of his professional colleagues.

6o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

References Cited
KEY TO ABBREVIATIONS
A An- American Antiquity
B-BAE- Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin
B-OAS- Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society
B-TAPS- Bulletin of the T exas Arch eological and Paleontologi cal Society
E-TAS- Bulletin of the T exas Arch eological Society
UTP-The University of T exas Publications
Bell, Robert E.
1953. Pottery Vessels from the Spiro Mound, Cr-1, Leflore County, Oklahoma.
B-OAS, Vol. 1, pp. 25-38.
Bell, Robert E., and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Arch aeology. B-TAPS, Vol. 22, pp. 7-100.
Cabeza de Va ca, Alvar Nunez
1542. Relacion (translation by Buckingham Smith) . In : Frederick W. Hodge,
editor, Spanish Explorers in the Southern United States. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, 1907.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr. , and R. K. Harris
1952. T rinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
B-TAPS. Vol. 23. pp. 7-38.
Dickinson, S. D.
1941. Certain Vessels from the Clements Place, An Historic Caddo Site. B-TAPS,
Vol. 13, pp. 117- 132.
Douay, Father
1908. Narrative of La Salle's Attempt to Ascend the Mississippi in 1687. Edited
by I. J. Cox. N ew York.
Elvas, The Gentleman of
1907. InT. H. Lewis (editor ), The Narrative of the Expedition of H ernando de
Soto. In: Spanish Explorers in the Southern United States. Charles Scribn er's Sons. New York.
Fletcher, Alice C.
1912a. Adai. In: Frederick V\T. Hodge (editor), Handbook of American Indians
North of Mexico. B-BAE, 30, P art 1. pp. 12.--13.
1912b. Kichai. In: Frederick W. Hodge (editor ) . Handbook of American Indians
North of M exico. B-BAE, 30. Part 1, pp. 682-683.
Ford, James A.
1951. Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site in A voyelles Parish,
Louisiana. Anthropologi cal Papers of the Am erica n Muse um of Natural
History, Vol. 44, Part 1.
Ford , James A., and Gordon R. Willey
1940. Crooks Site, A Marksville Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish. Loui siana . Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Study No. 3.

NORTHEAST TEXAS

61

Fulton, Robert L., and C. H. \iVebb
1953. The Bellevue Mound: A Pre-Caddoan Site. Bossier Parish, Louisiann .
B-TAPS, Vol. 24, pp. 18-42.
Goldschmidt, Walter R.
1935. A Report on the Archeology of Titus County m East Texas. B-TAPS,
Vol. 7, pp. 89- 99.
Jackson, A. T.
1933. Some Pipes of East Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 5, pp. 69- 86.
1934. Types of East Texas Pottery. B-TAPS, Vol. 6, pp. 38-57.
1935. Ornaments of East Texas Indians. B-TAPS, Vol. 7, pp. 11 -28.
1936. A "Perpetual Fire" Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 8, pp. 134-173.
1938a. Fire in East Texas Burial Rites. B-TAPS, Vol. 10, pp. 77- 11 3.
1938b. Picture Writing of the Texas Indians. UTP, No. 3809.
1940. Tubular Pipes and Other Tubes in Texas. B-TAPS, Vol. 12, pp. 99-137.
1941. Pendants and Their Uses. B-TAPS, Vol. 13, pp. 9-45.
Jones, Buddy C.
1957. The Grace Creek Sites, Gregg County, Texas. B-TAS. Vol. 28, pp. 198- 231.
Joutel, Henri
1714. Journal of La Salle's Last Voyage, 1684--1687. Reprinted by: H. R. Stiles,
1906. Joseph McDonough, Albany, New York.
Krieger, Alex D.
1944. Archeological Horizons in the Caddo Area. In: El Norte de Mexico y el
Sur de Estados Unidos. Tercera Reunion de Mesa Redonda de Ia Sociedad
Mexicana de Antropologia, pp. 154--156. Mexico, D. F.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern T exas. UTP, No. 4640.
1947. The Eastward Extension of Puebloan Datings Toward Cultures of the
Mississippi Valley. A An, Vol. 12, No.3, pp. 141-148.
Moorman, Edward H., and Edward B. J elks
1952. Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of the Cooper Reservoir, Delta
and Hopkins Counties, Texas . River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C. Mimeographed.
Newell, H. P erry, and Alex D . Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archaeology_ No. 5.
Orr, Kenneth G.
1946. The Archeological Situation at Spiro, Oklahoma : A Preliminary Report.
A An, Vol. 11. No. 4, pp. 228- 256 .
1952. Survey of Caddoan Archeology. In: James B. Griffin (editor ), Archeology
of Eastern United States. pp. 239- 255 . University of Chicago Press.
Quimby, George I.
1951. The Medora Site, West Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. Anthropologi cal
Series, Field Museum of Natural History, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 79- 135.
Sellards, E. H.
1941. Stone Images from H enderson County, Texas. A An _ Vol. 7, No. 1, pp.
29-38.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. University of T exas Press.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stephenson, Robert L.
1950. Archeologi cal Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir, Jasper, Sabine, San
Augustine, Angelina, and Nacogdoches Counties, Texas. A Preliminary
Report. River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.
Mimeographed.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. B-TAS, Vol. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1939. Final Report of the United States D e Soto Expedition Commission. 76th
Congress, 1st Session, House Document No. 71. Washington.
1942. Source M ate rial on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
B-BAE, 132.
1946. The Indians of the Southeastern United States. B-BAE, 137.
Thomas, Cyrus, and John R. Swanton
1912. Choctaw. In: Frederick W. Hodge (editor), Handbook of American Indians
North of M exico. B-BAE, 30, Part 1, p. 288.
Webb, Clarence H.
1945. A Second Historic Caddo Site at Natchitoches, Louisiana. B-TAPS, Vol.
16, pp. 52---83.
1946. Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts from Northwest Louisiana. B-TAPS, Vol. 17, pp. 9-17.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory : The Bossier Focus. B-TAPS, Vol. 19, pp. 100-147.
1959. The Belcher Mound: A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 16.
Webb, Claren ce H., and Monroe E. Dodd, Jr.
1941. Pottery Types from the Belcher Mound Site. B-TAPS, Vol. 13, pp. 88-116.
Williams, Stephen
1958. A Proposal for the Revision of Terminology of the Historic Phases (Foci )
in the Caddoan Area. Paper presented at the Caddoan Conference, Norman,
Oklahoma.

