lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect
Site In Northeastern Texas
J. DAN SCURLOCK

Introduction

The Culpepper site is located in the southwestern or Texas portion
of the Caddoan Area, an area which includes northwestern Louisiana,
southwestern Arkansas, southeastern Oklahoma, and northeastern
Texas. As defined by Webb (1960: 35), the Texas portion of the Caddoan Area extends from the Louisiana-Texas boundary westward to
the Trinity River and from the Red River southward to about the latitude of Jasper, Texas.
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 16-21 ) have recognized four stages
of cultural development in northeastern Texas-Paleo-American, Archaic, Neo-American, and Historic. The Paleo-American Stage is
poorly known and is represented primarily by surface finds of early
styles of dart points, such as Plainview, Meserve, and Scottsbluff. For
the Archaic Stage an East Texas Aspect has been defined (ibid .: 148151) , but not on the basis of published excavations. However, since
1954 one Archaic site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir has been excavated and published (Davis and Davis, 1960 ). The Neo-American
Stage in northeastern Texas is much better known and represents a
series of occupations by Caddoan peoples in prehistoric and early historic times. Two aspects, Gibson (earlier) and Fulton (later) have
been recognized, each being divided into foci representing regional
variations. For the Caddoan Area as a whole, five foci have been defined for the Gibson Aspect (Alto, Gahagan, Spiro, Haley, and Sanders ) and ten for the Fulton Aspect (Bossier, Frankston, Titus, Texarkana, Belcher, McCurtain, Turkey Bluff, Mid-Ouachita, Allen, and
Glendora).
The Culpepper site, which is the subject of this study, appears to
have been occupied during two stages-Archaic and Neo-American,
with the Neo-American occupation attributable to the Titus Focus of

286

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Fulton Aspect. The Titus Focus was originally defined on the
basis of lithic and ceramic collections from sites that were not explored
by carefully controlled excavations. Since 1954 five Titus Focus sites
have been excavated: Harroun (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959), McKinney
(Davis and Golden, 1960 ), Whelan (Davis, 1958 ), Segal (Davis and
Davis, 1961 ), and Dalton (Davis and Gipson, 1960 ), with the result
that the Titus Focus trait list has been expanded. The Culpepper site
is significant, not so much because it adds new Fulton Aspect traits, but
because its ceramic complex throws light on the time range of certain
key pottery types of the Fulton Aspect and suggests that the Titus
Focus extended into the historic period.

Excavations at Culpepper Site
This site is located on the H. L. Culpepper farm five miles south of
Saltillo, Hopkins County (Fig. 1) . This open burial site is associated
with a sandy knoll located on the south bank of Stouts Creek (Fig. 2).
It has had three site number designations, ET-34, 19D7-1, and 41HP1 ,
the last being the currently used site number. It was excavated during
the period of May 15 to May 19, 1931, by The University of Texas
under the field direction of A. T. Jackson. Excavation was financed
with funds from the Rockefeller Foundation. During the course of
excavation eight burials were uncovered that contained 34 complete or
restorable vessels, three arrow points, and one celt. Approximately 85
feet southwest of the burial area is a midden that probably represents
a village. Excavation in this midden yielded a mano. a metate, five
projectile points, and a flint knife. Various other lithic and ceramic artifacts were found on the surface and in exploratory digging in the
vicinity of the burials.
Thirty years prior to these excavations human skeletons and pottery
vessels were exposed by an overflow of Stouts Creek. Thereafter collectors dug at the site periodically. They are reported to have excavated
14 burials and 25 complete pottery vessels. In the fall of 1930 A. T .
Jackson purchased 17 specimens from B. F. Perkins of Weaver, Texas,
and this collection reputedly contains some artifacts from the Culpepper site.
The field notes on the Culpepper site are sketchy and inadequate by
present standards. Texas archeology was in its infancy at that time and
more emphasis was placed on collecting and displaying artifacts than
on scientific analysis and interpretation. The collection and the field
notes are at the Department of Anthropology of The University of

287

CULPEPPER SITE

OKLAHOMA

\
I

\

ARKANSAS

Caddo
Lake

LA.

TEXAS

l"'"

Fig. 1 . Map showing location of the Culpepper site.

Texas. An artifact inventory is included in the field notes , Nos. 1 to 71
being given to artifacts found in the burials and in general digging.
However, there are artifacts in the collection which have numbers
higher than 71, and these are not listed in the field notes. The highest
numbered artifact is No. 101.

288

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Burial Area
A total of eight single, extended burials was found in the low sandy
knoll adjacent to Stouts Creek. All of the skeletal material was in a
poor state of preservation, and in some cases only teeth and traces of
bone were found. Thus no data could be obtained on age, sex, or pathology. All of the burials contained artifacts.
According to local reports, 14 burials were removed from this site
prior to excavation by The University of Texas. Burials 2, 3. and 7
showed disturbance by previous excavators, and Burials 4 and 8 had
been disturbed by plowing. The burials were found at depths ranging
from three to 31 inches below the surface. In seven of the eight burials
the skeletons appear to have been oriented along an east-west axis,
with head to the east. This is open to question, however, because most
of the burials had been disturbed and were in a poor state of preservation. Burial 7 was definitely oriented northwest-southeast, with head
to southwest.
The greatest number of pottery vessels was found in Burial 6, which
contained seven. Most of the vessels were placed around the head and
shoulder regions of the body. Only Burials 5 and 6 contained bottles, a
Taylor Engraved bottle in Burial 5 and a Hodges Engraved bottle in
Burial 6, both spool-necked. Burial 1 contained a celt, and Burials 4, 6,
and 8 contained projectile points. No pipes accompanied any of the
eight burials.
Burial 1. Portions of this burial had been washed aw ay by flooding of Stouts
Creek. A total of six artifacts accompanied this burial, which lay at a depth of 30
inches and contained only a trace of skeletal m aterial. Th e h ead was oriented
toward the east.
Five pottery vessels (Nos. 1-5) and a celt (No. Sa) were grouped n ear traces of
the skull. F our of the vessels lay at the h ead of the grave and were arra nged in a
straight lin e that ran north-sou th. A fifth vesse l lay to the left of the skull and a
celt just south of this vessel. No record wa s made of the specifi c locations of individual vessels in any of the eight graves excavated. Specimens 3 and 5 are now
missing from the collection.
Three of the vess zls are bowls and two are pots (missing specimens identifiable
in field sketch es) . Vessel No. 1 is of type Simms Engraved, Vessel No. 2 is Ripley
Engraved, and Vessel No. 4 is L a Rue Neck Banded.
Burial 2 ( Fig. 3) . Burial 2 was found at a depth of 19 inches below the surface
and was 15.5 feet east-southeast of Burial 1. It had been disturbed by previous
excavators. The skeleton was fully ex tended on its back w ith h ead to the east. In
additi on to the sku ll, eight teeth and fragments of th e arms, pelvis, and legs were
identifiable.
Six vessels (Nos. 17-22) were associated with this burial , four pots and two bowls.
T hey wer e all placed east and north of the skeleton, three being arranged at the

289

CULPEPPER SITE

1
N

/

/
/
/
/
/
/
/

/
/
/
/
/

/
/
/

/
/

/
/

.......

I I I I I I I \

\

\\

'

'

Fig . 2 . Location of burials in the sandy knoll at the Culpepper site .

head of the grave in a north-south line, the fourth just to the right of the skull,
the fifth to the right of the pelvis, and the sixth near the right knee. Two vessels
are of Ripl ey Engraved type, one La Rue Neck Banded, and the remaining three
of unknown t ypes. Two flint flakes were noted near th e pelvis.
Burial 3. This was located 33 feet south-southwest of Burial 1 and at a depth of
18 inches. No skull was present, and only small fragments of leg bones could be

290

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 3 . Burial 2 at the Culpepper site .

identified. As this burial had been disturbed by previous excavation, orientation
is uncertain. Three bowls and a pot (Nos. 24-26) were associated with this burial.
Vessel Nos. 23, 24, and 26 are of Ripley Engraved type, and Vessel, No. 25 is of
La Rue Neck Banded type.
Burial 4. This burial, which con tained on ly fragments of the skull and leg bones,
was found 8.5 feet southwest of Burial 2 at a depth of three to five inches. I t was
badly disturbed by plowing and also by floodwater erosion. Although the field notes
state that only two badly crushed vessels were found, vessels n umbered 27, 27a,
and 27b are listed as coming from this burial. The three vessels are identifiable
respectively as Taylor Engraved, Hodges Engraved, and Nash Neck Banded. Field
records do not indicate where these vessels were located with respect to the skeleton.
Three arrow points accompanied this burial, but only one, a Talco point ( No. 28),
survives in the Cu lpepper collection. Although the points numbered 29 and 30 are
missing, outlines drawn in the fie ld notes indicate that they are also of Talco type.
Burial 5. This was located 73 feet southeast of Burial 1 and lay at a depth of 23
inches. The field record states that this burial was oriented east-west, with head
toward the east; but this is questionable, 1-ince the record also states that only a trace
of bone could be observed .
Five vessels ( Nos. 31-35, none complete) were found in this burial. One of these
is of Ripley Engraved typ e (No. 31), a second is a Taylor Engraved bottle (No. 32),
and a third is an Avery Engraved vase (No. 35). Vessel No. 33 is missing from
the collection and No. 34 is of unknown type.
A fi eld sketch of the burial shows a vessel placed on each side of the presumed
neck region, two on the chest, and another near the left hand. Two flint flakes
were noted near the feet.
Burial 6 (Fig. 4). Bu rial 6 was loca ted 7.5 feet southwest of Burial 5 and lay at
a depth of 29 inches below the surface. It was oriented northeast-southwest, with
head to the northeast. Th e only skeletal remains consisted of 12 teeth.
Seven vessels were associated with this burial ( Nos. 36--42), only one of which
was complete ( No. 36) . These includ e one vessel of Taylor Engraved, one of
Hodges Engraved, two of Womack Engraved, one of Simms Engraved , one similar

291

CULPEPPER SITE

Fig . 4. Bu ri al 6 at the Culpepper site .

to Avery Engraved, and one of unknown type. Three of these vessels were at the
head of the grave in an almost north-south line, two were on opposite sides of the
12 teeth, and the remainder were on the right side of the body area. Two projectile
points of Gary type (Nos. 43 and 44) were near the presumed knee region.
Burial 7. This disturbed burial was found about 32 feet northwest of Burial 6 at
a depth of 31 inches. Its axis was northwest-southeast, with head to the southeast.
Five broken vessels (Nos. 45, 45b, 46-48) were present, all of Ripley Engraved
type except No. 46, which is missing from the collection, and No. 48, which is of
Nash Neck Banded type. A small quantity of clay was found inside one of the bowls
(specific bowl not identified in field record).
Burial 8. This was found 16 feet southwest of Burial 1 at a depth of 8 inches
(shallowness due primarily to erosion and plowing). The head was to the east,
the feet to the west. About half of the skull, most of the teeth, and miscellaneous
leg bone fragments were present. vVith this burial four incomplete vessels were
associated (Nos. 59a, 59b, 60, 61 ), one of Taylor Engraved type (No. 59b), two of
Ripley Engraved type (5 9a, 60 ), and one of unknown type ( No. 61 , missing from
collection). Positions of these vessels in the burial are not recorded.

292

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Test Trench
A test trench (no dimensions recorded) was dug in the midden
southwest of Burial 6, and this yielded a metate (depth 18 inches), a
mano (depth 20 inches ) , a scraper (depth 23 inches), and some five to
eight projectile points at various depths ( 12, 14, 20, and 37 inches
specified) . The projectile points from this test trench cannot be identified in the collection.

Pottery Vessels
A total of forty-nine pottery vessels, complete and incomplete, is
now in the collection from the Culpepper site (see Table 1). Thirtyfour of these were found in association with burials. They vary greatly
in type, form, and shape. Only three bowls are of the true shouldered
type (Fig. 5, C, G, J) described by Krieger ( 1946: 226). Most of the
bowls are carinated, having steep sides and vertical rims. Two bottles
were found in burials, both having short spool necks.
Nine purchased vessels are included in the collection. Five of these
are Ripley Engraved, two are Tay lor Engraved, one is A very Engraved, and one is a Keno Trailed bottle, the only vessel of this type
in the collection.
Most of the vessels are engraved ( 78 %) , and the majority are either
of Ripley Engraved (39%) or of Taylor Engraved ( 15%) type. The
scroll or spiral is the most common decoration motif, and designs are
commonly repeated four times around the rim. Four vessels are neckbanded with applique design. Incising is rare and brushing is absent.
The majority of the vessels are clay or sherd tempered. Only one
(No. 17 ) is shell tempered, and it is incomplete and of unidentifiable
type. Buff is the most common color, but 16 vessels are red filmed. Most
of the vessels are thick and quite heavy, and most of the designs are
crude and poorly executed.
Ripley Engraved. The collection includes 19 vessels of Ripley Engraved type, 1Z
of which are from burials, all of the burials except Burial 4 and Burial 6 containing
at least one vessel. Ten of these 19 vessels are red filmed. All are carinated bowls
except for one shouldered bowl (purchased) and one small jar. Only the rims bear
decoration, and all of the lips are rounded. The paste is compact in all of these
vessels.
These Ripley Engraved vessels have been divided into three size groups: (1)
small, with oral diameter not greater than 15 cm. or height greater than 10 cm.;
(2) medium, with oral diameter between 15 and 20 cm. and height between 10
and 15 cm.; and (3) large, with oral diameter between 20 and 25 cm. and height
between 15 and 20 cm.

293

CULP E P PER SI TE

A

c

B

D
E

F

H

G

J

Fig. 5. Pottery vessels from the Culpepper site . A, Ripley Engraved (height 8.2 cm . I;
8, Ripley Engraved (height 9 .75 cm.); C, Ripley Engraved (height l 0 .25 cm.I; D, Ripley
Engraved ( height 7 .96 cm . ); E, Ripley Engraved (height 16.6 cm . ); F, Ripley Engraved
(height 15 .2 cm.I; G, Simms Engraved (height 6.5 cm.I; H, Womack Engraved (height 14 .2
cm.I ; I, Womac k Engraved (height 15 .3 cm.I ; J , Simms Engraved (height 9 .7 cm.I.

294

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE
Provenience of Pottery Vessels in the Culpepper Collection

-~

ii

Ripley Engraved
Taylor Engraved
Womack
Engraved
Simms Engraved
Hodges Engraved
A very Engraved
AYery-like
Engraved
La Rue Neck
Banded
Nash Neck
Banded
Keno Trailed
Other Engraved
Miscellaneous
Totals
3

""§

~

·-u
ii

2

3

"u

'-"

.,,.

Cl

~

r:

.;s

ii

~

ii

"

"'

3

"

a

u

;3

§.:

~

"'~

·- >

l

~ g
0 -"
u c
c. ~ c.

5
2

2
1

2

0

tll

5
~

~

"
19
7

39
15

3
2
2
2

6
4
4
4
2

2
6

4

3

4

7

4

3

2
4

9

3

6

2
1
3
4
49

4
2
6
8
100

(1) Small group (Fig. 5, A, B, D; Fig. 6, A , B; Fig. 9, A , B, D). Six specimens.
Shape- carinated bowls (4 specimens ) , a sbouldered bowl, and ·one jar. Decoration
- two with excised triangles between two parallel lin es on rim (almost identical
in size; both red filmed, one each found in Burial 1- see Fig. 5., A, and Fig. 6, Aand Burial 2 ) ; stylized scroll (Fig. 6, B) and use of excised hour-glass symbols.
Average rim thickness-4.7 mm. Provenience-four from burials; two purchased.
(2 ) Medium group (Fig. 5, C; Fig. 6, C; Fig. 9, E- G ). Seven speciments. Shapecarinated bowls (Fig. 9, E-F ) . Decoration-stylized scrolls with excised hour-glass
figures (three are red filmed )-see Fig. 6, C. Average rim thickness- 6.2 mm.
Provenience-five from burials, one of unknown provenience, one from surface.
(3 ) Large group (Fig. 5, E-F; Fig. 6, D; Fig. 9, N ) . Six specimens. Shapecarinated bowls (Fig. 9, N ) . Decoration-stylized scrolls and hour-glass (one red
filmed ) ; conventionalized scroll of parallel lines with hooked arms at the ends,
repeated three times around the rim (one specimen ) -s2e Fig. 6, D. Average
r im thickness- 6 mm. Provenience-two from burials, three purchased, one of unknown provenience. Remarks- two bowls have unusual shapes; one is illustrated by
Suhm et al. (1954: Plate 58, D ) ; the other is a very high ( 16.6 cm. ) , steep-walled,
red-filmed vessel that tapers to a small base.
Two additional vessels, r epresented by red-filmed sherds decorated with engraved
scrolls, were found in Burial 8. The sherd thicknesses average 7.5 mm.
Taylor Engraved. The collection includes seven Taylor Engraved vessels, four of
which are bottles, three having bulbous n ecks (the neck of the fourth vessel is
missing ) . Two other vessels are small, r ed-film ed jar s, and the seventh vessel is a

295

CULPEP PER SITE

A

W[(~~~l(
B

J(~lC
c

D

0

I

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10
~

CM.

Fig. 6. Designs from pottery vessels at the Culpepper site . A-D, Ripley Engraved ; E,
Womack Engraved .

296

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

steep-walled bowl. All vessels are decorated with scrolls or spirals with their centers
containing one, two, or three hooking arms. All have well-finished surfaces, and the
bottles show evidence of having been polished. The paste is dark and compact.
( 1) Bottles (Fig. 7, A ). Four specimens. Shape---globular bodies, bulbous necks.
Lip--11aring widely on two vessels, rolled out slightly on another. Decoration- walls
bear tight spirals with hooking arms in center; red pigment in the engraved lines
of the two flaring lip bottles; difficult to determine whether the design on one black
bottle was incised or engraved-this vessel has two complete scrolls on its base;
fourth bottle (incomplete) also black in color. Dimensions-height ranges from
15 to 18 cm.; oral diameter from 2 to 4.6 cm.; neck length from 4 .9 to 5.75 cm.
Provenience-two bottles purchased; two found in burials.
(2) Jars (Fig. 8, A; Fig. 9, H ) . One of the two jars has been restored and is
illustrated in Suhm et al. (1954: Plate 65, D ) ; the other is incomplete and only
partially restored. Shape-steep-sided jars, rim flaring out slightly, lip rounded
(see Fig. 9, H ) . Decoration- red filmed, tight scrolls engraved on rim with two
arms hooking toward one another in center· of the scrolls; white paste exposed by
engraving contrasts sharply with the reel filming. Dimensions of restored vesselheight 9.25 cm.; oral diameter 11.2 cm.; wall thickness 3 mm. ·wall thickness of
unrestored vessel-6 mm. Provenience---found in burials.
(3) Bowl (Fig. 8, A ) . Condition-restored but still incomplete. Shape-steepwallecl carinated bowl. vertical rim, rounded lip. Decoration- tight, negative scrolls;
hooking arms in center of scrolls; scrolls set between two parallel lines encircling
rim (see Fig. 8, A ) . Dimensions-height 14.25 cm.; oral diameter 29 cm.; wall
thickness 6 mm.
Womack Engraved (Fig. 5, H-I; Fig. 6, E; Fig. 9, I-J ) . Three vessels have been
identified as Womack Engraved on the basis of definition by Duffield and Jelks
(1961: 36-38). This type resembles Hodges Engraved and is commonly associated
with protohistoric and historic sites in north central and northeastern Texas. Two
of the vessels are heavy, squat bowls, while the third is a miniature duplicate of the
larger two. The paste is gray, compact, and tempered with clay.
Shape---squat, iim incurved, walls slightly concave between base and rim,
shoulder area rounded. base flat (see Fig. 9, I-J ) .
Decoration-engraved, negative meandering scrolls set between two ho1izontal
lines that encircle the vessel, one at the lip, the other just below the shoulder (see
Fig. 6, E ); red pigment present in scrolls; vessel gray and shows firing clouds;
area between scrolls filled in with arched parallel lines .
Dimensions- Height: large bowls, 14.2 and 15.3 cm.; small bowl 8.7 cm. Wall
thickness: large bowls, 7.5 and 5 mm.; small bowl, 5 mm.
Remarks- Included with the two large bowls in Bmial 6 were a Taylor Engraved
jar, a Simms Engraved bowl, an Avery-iike Engraved bowl, a Hodges Engraved
bottle, a very unusual squat bowl with a wide flaring rim (to be discussed later),
and two Gary points. The presence of these Womack Engraved vessels with Titus
Focus and Texarkana Focus ty pes indicates that perhaps th ese foci continued into
priotohistoric and perhaps even historic times. The presence of two Gary points may
also be significant in extending the temporal range of this projectile point type
further into the Neo-American Stage.
Simms Engraved (Fig. 5, G, J; Fig. 9, K- L). This type is represented by two
vessels, one a miniature bowl, the other a small bowl. Both are dark gray in surface
color and have a dark paste.

B

c

A

E

D

F

H

G

J
Fig. 7 . Pottery vessels from the Culpepper site. A, Taylor Engraved ( height 15 cm.I; B,
Hodges Engraved (height 15 .9 cm.); C, Keno Trailed (height 11.7 cm.I; D, Avery Engraved
!height 20.1 cm.I; E, pipe (height of bowl 7 . 1 cm .); F, Avery-like Engraved (height 15 cm .);
G, engraved vessel ( height 7 .5 cm.I; H, pipe (height of bowl 5 cm.); I, engraved vessel
{height 12.2 cm.I; J, engraved vessel (height 9 .7 cm.I.

298

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Shape- steep-walled, shouldered bowls with incurving rims (see Fig. 9, K-L); the
small bowl has an incurved rim that turns back upward in a vertical position.
Decoration- engraved lines on rim; use of ticked lines; small bowl has red pigment in the engraved lines; both ha ve a ticked lip.

A

B

c
0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

CM .
Fig . 8 . Designs o n pottery vessels from the Culpepper site . A, Taylor Eng rave d ; 8-C, unide ntified e ngraved .

Dimensions-Height: small bowl, 6.5 cm.; large bowl, 9.7 cm. Oral diametersmall bowl, 8.1 cm.; large bowl, 13.5 cm. Wall thickness-small bowl, 3 mm.;
large bow1, 6 mm.

CULPEPPER SITE

299

Provenience- small bowl from Burial 6, large one from Burial 1.
H odges Engraved. Only one of the two vessels, a bottle, is complete. The other is
represented by Z6 decorated sherds, part of the base, and po·r tions of the rim.
( 1) Bottle ( Fig. 7, B) . This polished gray bottle is quite light in weight and
appears to have been temp ered with shell, which has been lea ched out. leaving a
pitted surface. Shape-spool-shaped neck, fl aring lip, globular body, pedestal base.
Decoration-negative scrolls filled in with engraved cross-hatching cover entire
body; space around scrolls blank. Dimensions: h eight 15.9 cm.; height of neck 6 cm.;
oral diameter 4.5 cm.; neck wall thickness 3 mm. Provenience-Burial 6.
(Z) Sherds of second vessel ( Fig. 9, M; Fig. 10, E). Shape-appears to have been
a steep-sided bowl with slightly outcurving rim and lip (see Fig. 9, M ) . D ecora tion
- scrolls filled with engraved cross-hatching; lip scalloped. Color-gray to buff.
VVall thickness-4 mm. Provenience-Burial 4.
Avery Engraved ( Fig. 7. D ; Fig. 9, 0 ). This type is represented by two redfilmed vessels, a large vase found in a burial and a purchased carinated bowl.
Both have compact black paste.
(1) Vase (Fig. 7, D ) . Condition- restored and nearly complete. Shape-steepwalled vessel with flaring rim and lip; mouth much wider than body; lip rounded
(see Fig. 9, 0 ) . Decoration-wide engraved lines cut into white paste, contrasting
sharply with red filming; design consists of semicircular motifs with ticked lines
and spirals set in between. Dimensions: height Z0 .1 cm.; oral diameter Z7 cm.;
wall thi ck ness- 6 mm. Provenience- Burial 5.
(Z) Bowl (illustrated by Suhm et al., 1954, Plate 1, F). Shape-heavy, squat;
very similar to the two large Womack Engraved bowls; rounded shoulder and
s li ghtly concave body walls. Decora tion-engraved semicircular motifs repeated
five tim es around rim and set between two parallel horizontal lines, one encircling
rim at the lip, the other just below the shoulder of the bowl; background filled with
parallel lines. Dimensions: height 15.4 cm.; oral diameter Z3.3 cm.; wall thickness
5.5 mm .
Avery-like Engraved (Fig. 7, F; Fig. 9, C). In Burial 6 was found a steep-sided
bowl decorated with oblique straight lines and semicircles set between two parallel
lines that encircle the rim. The rim slants in slightly and the lip outward (see Fig.
9, C). Th e core is buff, and the vessel is tempered with large bits of clay. Dimensions: height 15 cm.; oral diameter 17.7 cm.; rim thickness 6 mm.
Keno Trailed (Fig. 7, C). This purchased vessel, which is the only representative
of Keno Trailed type in the collection, has been illustrated by Suhm e t al. ( 1954:
Plate 39. M ) . It is gray in color, polished, and shows excellent execution of design.
Shape-globular body, spool neck, rounded lip, short pedestal base. Decorationentire body covered with wide, shallow trailed lines consisting of parallel arcs and
parallel horizontal lines. Dimensions: height 11.7 cm.; length of neck 3.4 cm.;
maximum diam eter of neck 3.6 cm.; oral diameter 5.Z cm.
La Rue Neck Banded ( Fig. 9, P; Fig. 10, A). This type is represented by three
incomplete, unrestored vessels. All are gray in color and have the characteristic
crud e ne ck banding. Two of the vessels have short, vertical fillets on the rim, one
in a pair, the other in sets of three. One of these also has fillets set obliquely on the
body. All have vertical rims (see Fig. 9, P ). Average wall thickness is 6 mm.
Provenience-one each in Burials 1, Z, and 3.
Nash N eck Banded (Fig. 9, R; Fig. 9, Q; Fig. 10, C, D ) . This type is represented
by two vessels that are incomplete and unrestored. Both are gray-brown in color.

A

c

E

D

G

F

B

M

L

K
H

R

Q

s
0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

CM.

N

0

p

Fig. 9 . Rim profiles of pottery ve ssels from the Culpepper site . A-B , D, Ripley Engraved
(smalll ; C, Avery-like Engraved ; E-G , Ripley Engraved (med ium) ; H, Taylor Eng raved ; 1-J ,
Womack Engraved; K-l, Simms Engraved; M, Hodges Engraved ; N, Ripley Engraved llargel ;
0 , Avery Engraved ; P, La Rue Neck Banded; Q-R , Nash Neck Banded; S, unidentified engraved vessel.

301

CULPEPPER SITE

One vessel has a sharply flaring rim (Fig. 9, R) width a node set just under the
lip and repeated four times around the rim. Just below each node at the body-rim
junction is a vertical fillet running down the wall (see Fig. 10, D). Wall thickness
is 6.5 mm.
The second vessel has a flaring rim and rolled lip (Fig. 9, Q). The rim is
decorated with four parallel lines formed by elongated and slightly oblique punctates (see Fig. 10, C). Wall thickness is 5.5 mm.
Other Engraved Vessels. In this group are two jars and one bowl.
( 1) Jar (Fig. 7, J; Fig. 8, B; Fig. 9, S). This vessel appears to be unique in the
Caddoan area. Its design shows some similarity to the designs of Barkman Engraved,
but it cannot be classified as Barkman Engraved. Its shape cannot be duplicated in
known Caddoan vessel forms. The paste is laminated and appears to have been
tempered with shell, now leached out. The vessel is red filmed, and the engraved
lines contrast sharply with the red film. Shape-squat, globular body; rim flares
out almost horizontally (see Fig. 9, S). Decoration-combination of single engraved
lines with cross-hatched panels, repeated four times; lip notched; slightly polished.
Dimensions: Height 9.7 cm.; oral diameter 12.6 cm.; wall thickness 3 mm. Provenience-Burial 6.
(2) Jar (Fig. 7, I). Condition-incomplete. Shape- round body; high concave
rim with scalloped lip; three-fourths of rim missing. Decoration-single engraved
line encircling rim just below lip, another at junction of rim and body; extending
down alternately from the lower line, and repeated four times, are an engraved
triangle filled in with lines and a set of three parallel lines (these extend almost to
base); vessel red filmed. Dimensions-height 13.2 cm.; oral diameter 10.8 cm.; wall
thickness 5 mm. Provenience-Burial 2.
(3) Bowl (Fig. 7, G; Fig. 8, C). Shape-squat, carinated bowl rim slants inward
slightly; lip rolled out and rounded. Decoration-engraved; stylized scroll filled in
with cross-hatching, repeated three times on rim; red pigment in engraved lines
(see Fig. 8, C). Dimensions: height 7.5 cm.; oral diameter 13.9 cm.; rim thickness
6 mm. Provenience-Burial 5.
Miscellaneous Vessels . Three vessels are represented by plain gray body sherds
or incompletely restored vessels. The missing rims and absence of design render
them unidentifiable as to type. A fourth vessel has applique work on the body, but
its rim is also missing. The sherds of a fifth are unusually light in weight and have
a peculiar orange color. Sherd thickness in these five vessels ranges from 5 to 7 mm.

Potsherds
A total of 94 potsherds was collected at the Culpepper site. Of these,
43 were found in the midden, but the remaining 51 are of unknown
provenience. These sherds are clay or clay-grit tempered, some of the
clay being white in color (probably kaolinite) . Paste color ranges from
buff to black (four sherds bear a red film). Design techniques include
engraving, incising, appliqueing, punctating, and brushing. The
sherds have been grouped on the basis of design technique and will be
described under each of these headings.

302

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(
D

G
E

F

Fig . 1 0 . Rim sherds ( with profiles) and pottery figure from Culpepper site. A, La Rue Neck
Banded; B, Coles Creek Incised ; C-D , Nash Neck Banded; E, Hodges Engraved ; F, Nash Neck
Banded; G, dog (?) effigy from pottery vessel .

Plain Sherds. Among the 55 p lain sherds are 40 which range in color from buff
to red (five from midden, remainder of unknown provenience) . These range in
thickness from 5 to 13.5 mm. (one is a basal sherd). The reamining 15 sherds
ran ge from gray to black in color (11 from midden, remainder provenience unknown). One of these is a rim sh erd (from the midden) with slightly flaring lip.
Engraved Sherds. These number 2-9, of which 11 are rim sherds from t he midden,
the remainder being body sherds of unrecorded provenience. Eight of the 11 rim
sherds are of Ripley Engraved type (two are red fi lmed). All lips are rounded and
either continuous with the rim or slightly flaring. One of the three remaining
engraved rim sherds is decorated with two inverted chevrons that extend downward
from the lip. The rim sherds range in thickness from 5 to 9 mm.
Two of the 18 body sherds are red fi lmed, si x are dark gray in col1or, and the
remainder buff. Six sherds are of Taylor Engraved type and one is Ripley Engraved.
Thickness ranges from 4 to 8 mm.
Applique Sherds. Three body sherds bear a single applique fill et ( two of these
are from the midden) . Two are cream in color, the third dark brown. The creamcolored sherds both have thickness of 7 mm., the brown sherd a thickness of 6.5 mm.

303

CULPEPPER SITE

Punctate Sherds. One punctate rim sherd, found in the midden, is gray in color
and has a thickness of 8 mm. The lip is rounded at junction with the rim and flat
across the top.
Incised Sherds. A single deeply incised body sherd, brown in color and 7 mm.
thick, came from the midden. It bears a pattern of several intersecting lines that are
almost perpendicular. Four deeply incised gray rim sherds, all from the same
vessel, were found in the general trenching. The rim is thicker ( 7 mm.) than the
body (5 mm.), giving the rim an overhanging effect. The lip is flat, and three
parallel incised lines encircle the rim. The~e rim sherds appear to be of a Lower
Mississippi type, probably Coles Creek Incised (see Fig. 10, B ) . The sherds are
clay tempered.
Brushed Sherds. One body sh erd, provenience unknown, is buff in color and has
a thickness of 7 mm. The brushing technique may be characterized as two directional and overlapping.

Summary. The majority of the decorated sherds are of Ripley and
Taylor Engraved types. Brushing, applique, punctating, and incising
occur in minor quantities. Red filming is rare ( 4.4%) and does not
parallel the red-filmed vessel percentage (27.5 % ) . However, the sherd
sample is too small to be of much consequence. Over half (61 %) of
the sherds from this site are undecorated. Most of these are light in
color and appear to be from vessels that were fired in an oxidizing
atmosphere.

Clay Pipes
Two ceramic pipes, both purchased, are in the Culpepper collection.
One (No. 1) is a low, massive elbow pipe; the other (No. 2) is a highbowled, short-stemmed elbow pipe. Both are clay tempered and gray
in color.
(1) Pipe No. 1 (Fig. 7, H). Shape-squat bowl; thick stem that
curves up and grades into bowl. Decoration-combination of fine engraved triangles and encircling lines around both stem and bowl; triangles filled in with two lines; surface lightly polished. Dimensionslength 8.8 cm.; stem width 5.3 cm.; bowl diameter 5.8 cm.; bowl
height 5.3 cm.; bowl wall thickness 8 mm.
(2) Pipe No. 2 (Fig. 7, E). Shape-high, narrow bowl; short stem;
bowl makes about a 100 ° angle with stem, bulges near its base, and
tapers at the rim and lip. Decoration-slightly polished. Dimensionsstem length 3.6 cm.; stem width 2.7 cm.; bowl diameter 1.4 cm.; bowl
height 7.1 cm.; bowl wall thickness 5 mm. Remarks-a pipe of this
same form, but made of Ouachita sandstone, was found at the Sanders
site in Lamar County (Krieger, 1946 : 325;Plate22,F).

304

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Zoomorphic Figure of Clay
A ceramic figure (Fig. 10, G), probably representing a dog, is among
the purchased specimens. The figure, whose head is turned to its right,
is standing on a platform that evidently projected from the lip of a
pottery vessel. Such vessels have been found at various sites in northeastern Texas (Suhm et al., 1954: 277; Plate 22, A, D, F, H). This
specimen is clay-tempered and gray in color. It has a length of 5.9 cm.
and a maximum height of 4.8 cm.

Projectile Points
At the Culpepper site 46 chipped stone projectile points were found,
and of these 43 specimens have been located and described (the remainder are missing from the collection). This series includes 40 dart
points and three arrow points. The dart points represent two stem traditions-contracting stem (Types Gary, Wells, and Kent) and parallel-sided to slightly expanding stem (Types Yarbrough, Carrollton,
Trinity, Castroville, Pontchartrain, Edgewood, and Fairland-like).
The arrow point types represented are Talco and Catahoula.
Gary Points (Fig. 11 ) . At the Culpepper site 23 Gary points wei-e collected (1Z
from the surface, nine from trenches, and two from Burial 6 ), and within this
series five distinct varieties can be recognized on the basis of size and shape.
Variety 1 consists of nine specimens ( Fig. 11 , A-G ) that are diamond-shaped,
the shoulders, which are slight and rounded, occur just below the mid-section.
Overall size: small to medium. Blade: triangular in outline, with convex edges in
six specimens, slightly concave in three specimens. Stem: length one-third to threeeighths the length of the point, lateral edges convex to straight, and base rounded
to slightly pointed. Dimensions: length 3.2 to 5.7 cm.; width at shoulders 1.8 to
2.6 cm.; thickness .5 to .8 cm. Remarks: roughly flaked, but better flaked than
Variety 2.
Variety 2, represented by three specimens ( Fig. 11, H-I ), is similar to Variety 1
in outline. but the shoulders are rnor2 prominent and occur about four-fifths of the
way down to the base from the tip. Overall size : medium to large. Blade: triangular
in outline, with concave edges. Stern: length is one-fourth to one-third the length
of the point, edges range from convex (in two specimens ) to concave, and base is
rounded. Dimensions: length 4.5 to 7 cm.; width at shoulders 2 to 2.7 cm.; thickness
.8 to 1.2 cm. Remarks: roughly flaked , asymmetrical in outline; one found in
Burial 6.
Variety 3 consists of four specimens (Fig. 11, J-L ) that are uniform in size and
outlin2. They are large, have prominent shoulders, and the stems contract to a
point. Blade: triangular in outline with straight lateral edges. Stem: length is onefourth the length of the point, the lateral edges are slightly convex, and the base
is a rounded point. Dimensions: length 6 to 7.8 cm.; thickness 2.5 to 2.9 cm.
Remarks: better flaked than Variety 2 or 3; shoulders quite prominent; lenticular
in cross-section.

A

E

B

F

G
H

J

L

K

0
0

p

M

Q

N

R

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.

Fig . 11. Gary projectile points from the Culpepper site. A-G, Variety l; H-1 , Variety 2;
J-l, Variety 3; M-0 , Variety 4; R, Variety 5. J-l not to scale; l approximately the same
length as I.

306

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Variety 4, represented by six specimens (Fig. 11 , M-Q ), includes small points
with triangular blades, prominent shoulders, and narrow, tapering stems. Blade :
triangular in outline with lateral edges ranging from slightly convex to slightly
concave. Stem: length is one-fourth to one-half the length of the point. the lateral
edges are convex, and the base is rounded. Dimensions: length 3.2 to 4.4 cm.; width
at shoulders 2.8 to 4.9 cm.; thickness .6 to .9 cm. Remarks: roughly flak ed; tend to
be asymmetrical in outline; shoulders usually at right angles to the longitudinal
axis; one found in Burial 6.
Variety 5 consists of a single point (Fig. 11 , R) which is small and has moderate
shoulders with a wide stem and rounded base. Blade : triangular in outline with
straight edges. Stem: length is three-eighths of total length of the point; lateral
edges are straight and parallel ; base rounded. Dimensions: length 3.6 cm.; width
at shoulders 1.8 cm.; thickness .7 cm . Rema rks: a similar point, but with larger
stem, is shown by Duffield (1961: 63; Fig. 3. L ) .
Wells Points (Fig. 12, A-B). Two points of this type were found at the Culpepper site, one on the surface and the othe!· in the general trenching. One of these
(A) is of medium size, has a triangular blade with straight lateral edges; a long
stem (one-half total length of point) with convex lateral edges, and a rounded base;
and the following dimensions: length 5.5 cm., width at shoulders 1.7 cm., thickness
.9 cm. The other (B), which is made of chert, is asymmetrical in outline. has pronounced shoulders, and is roughly flak ed. Somewhat shorter than A, it has a triangular blade with one lateral edge concave, the other convex. The stem is about
five-eighths the total length of the point and has a rounded base. Its dimensions
are: length 4.1 cm.; width at shoulder, 1.8 cm., thickness .7 cm.
Kent Point (Fig. 13, A). One Kent point was found in trenching, a mediumsized specimen having a triangular blade with uneven edges, a fairly short stem
(one-third total length of point ) with straight lateral edges contracting to a convex
base, and the following dimensions: length 5.5 cm.; width at shoulders 2.3 cm. ;
thickness .9 cm.
Yarbrough Points (Fig. 12, C-F ) . The five points of this type all have slight
shou ld ers, slightly expanding rectanguloid stems, and some degree of basal grinding.
In size they range from small ( 1 specimen) to large ( 4 specimens) . The blades
are triangular and have slightly convex edges in most cases. The stems range
from one-fourth to three-eighths the total length of the points, have latera l edges
that range from concave to straight, and have bases that are slightly convex. The
dimension ranges are: length 3.5 to 5.3 cm.; width at shoulders 1.8 to 3 .1 cm.;
thickness .7 to 1 cm. Three of the Yarbrough points were coll ected from the surface;
the remaind er come from the trenches.
Carrollton Points (Fig. 13, B- C ). Of the two Carrollton points, one (C ) is small
in size. the other (B) medium in size and shows basal grinding on the stem. Both
have blades that are equi laterally triangular in outline, the lateral edges being
slightly concave. The stems, which represent about one-half the total length , have
straight lateral edges and bases that are strn ight to slightly convex. Their dimensions are as follows: lengths 3.5 and 4.1 cm.; widths at shou lder 2 and 3.25 cm.;
thicknesses .85 to .9 cm. One Carrollton point was found in trenching; the other is
of unknown provenience.
Trinity Points (Fig. 13, D- E ) . These two points have triangular blades with
convex edges and bulging stems with convex lateral edges and convex bases. Stem
lengths are about one-fourth the total length of the point in each case. Dimensions:

307

CULPEPPER SITE

t

c

B

A

G

F

K

-L

E

D

'

J

H

M

q I ? i 1 99 ? ~

N

0

~ 1,0

CM.
Fig . 12. Projectile points , gouges , and knives from the Culpepper site . A-8, Wells points;
C-F, Yarbrough points; G, Talco point; H, unidentifiable point; I, Catahoula point; J-K,
gouges ; L, shouldered knife; M, knife shaped like a Gary point; N-0 , oval knives .

length 5 cm. in both, w icfth at shoulders 2.2 and 2.5 cm.; thickness .8 to .85 cm.
Both specimens are tram the trenches.
Castroville Point ( Fig. 13, H ) . This single specimen from the surface collection
has a triangular blade with convex edges and moderate barbs. The stem is short
(one-fifth total length), has straight and slightly fla ring lateral edges, and bears a
straight base. This point has a length of 7.5 cm., a maximum width of 3.7 cm., and
a thickness of .8 cm.
Pontchartrain Point (Fig. 13, I ) . One specimen, which is made of gray flint,
appears to fa ll within the Pontchartrain type as described by Ford and Webb
( 1944: 54-55). It is rather narrow and one face bears a longitudinal ridge that

308

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

0

F

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

..

CM.
Fig . 1 3. Projectile points from the Culpepper site. A, Kent point; B-C, Carrollton points;
D-E , Trinity points ; F, Edgewood point; G, Fairland-like point; H, Castroville point; I, Pontchartrain point. H-1 not to scale; I slightly longer than G.

extends from the shoulders to the distal tip. The stem appears to have been broken
off squarely near the base. The narrow, triangular blade has straight lateral edges,
as does the rectanguloid stem. The lateral edges of the stem have been ground.
Dimensions: length 7.3 cm.; width at sho ulders 2.25 cm.; thickness .9 cm. This
point was found in trenching.
Edgewood Point (Fig. 13, F ) . One m edium-sized Edgewood point has a triangular
blade with con vex edges and a short (one-third total length ), flaring stem with
concave base. Dimensions: length 3.6 cm.; w idth at shoulders 2.5 cm.; thickness .8
cm. This point was found in the trenches.
Unidentified Dart Point (Fig. 13, G). This large point, which came from the
tren ches and resembles some variants of Fairland type, has a blade with strongly
convex, serrated edges. The stem, which is fairly short (one-fourth total length of
point), has fl aring, concave latera l edges that have been h eavily ground. The base
is deeply concave.
Talco Point (Fig. 12, G ). This point was found in Burial 4 with two additional
points that also appear to h ave been Talco points, judging from sketches in the

309

CULPEPPER SITE

field notes (these two specimens cannot be located). The surviving specimen, which
is made of light brown flint, has lateral edges that are slightly recurved. Dimensions: length 2.4 cm.; maximum width 1.7 cm.; thickness .2 cm.
Catahoula Point (Fig. 12, I). The single specimen of Catahoula type (collected
from the surface) is a very small point that has a triangular blade with concave,
slightly serrated lateral edges and barbs that are broad and squared at the tips.
The short stem, which is damaged, is about one-fourth the total length of the
point and has concave lateral edges and a convex base. Dimensions: length 2.2 cm.;
width across barbs 1.9 cm.; thickness .2 cm. This point is very similar to several
illustrated by Bell (1960: Plate 8, E-F ) .
Unidentifiable Arrowpoint (Fig. 12, H) . This small point from the general
trenching has a long triangular blade with straight, serrated lateral edges. The
short stem (one-fifth total length of point) has straight lateral edges and a convex
base. Dimensions: length 3 cm.; width at shoulders 1.3 cm.; thickness .3 cm.

Knives
Three fonns of chipped stone knives, all made of chert or quartzite,
occur at the Culpepper site. Five knives are oval in outline (Fig. 12,
N-0), have large flake scars, and appear to have been chipped by the
percussion technique. In length they range from 5.1 to 7.6 cm.; in
width from 2.6 to 3.7 cm.; and in thickness from .8 to 1.1 cm. A sixth
knife (Fig. 12, M) is diamond-shaped in outline and resembles Variety
1 of the Gary type projectile point. It bears large flake scars that indicate percussion chipping. It has a length of 7.9 cm.; a maximum width
of 4.5 cm.; and a thickness of 1 cm. The seventh knife is shouldered
and has a stem that is approximately one-fifth the total length of the
knife (Fig. 12, L). It has a triangular blade (the tip is missing) with
moderate shoulders, and the base is straight. The large flake scars also
indicate percussion flaking. Of the seven knives from this site, six were
found in trenching; the seventh was collected from the surface.

Gouges
Two gouges were found on the surface, one of large Clear Fork type
(Fig. 12, K) made of hematite, the other (Fig. 12, J) of small triangular form and made of quartzite. In both specimens the bit was formed
by unifacial beveling. Dimensions: length 7.6 and 3.1 cm.; width 3.5
and 2.4 cm.; thickness 2 and 1 cm.

Celts
Three celts (Fig. 14, B-F) were obtained at the Culpepper site and
three additional specimens were purchased. All of these celts are peta-

310

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

D

B

c

F

E
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
CM.

Fig. 14. Grooved axe and cells from Culpepper site. A, full -grooved axe ; B-F, cells .
B-C not to scale ; both approxi mately same s ize as A.

loid in form, and all show evidences of pecking. One of the purchased
celts is made of a dark green stone, is lightly polished, and shows 15
different planes of abrasion. The celts range in length from 8 to 10.5
cm.; in width from 3.1 to 4.9 cm.; and in thickness from 2.5 to 3.6 cm.
One celt ( Fig. 14, C) was found in Burial 1; the remaining two collected at the site are surface finds.

Stone Axes
Two grooved stone axes were purchased. One is large and well made,
the other ( Fig. 14, A ) small and poorly made (the stone is badly
pitted). Both axes are made of reddish-black h ematite. Dimensions:
lengths 13.4 and 10.1 cm.; widths 8.2 and 6 cm.; thicknesses 4.1 and
2.2 cm.

Comparisons
Although recent excavations by The University of Texas at the Iron
Bridge and Ferrell's Bridge reservoirs have helped to clarify the Ar-

CULPEPPER SITE

311

chaic and Neo-American stages in northeastern Texas, the archeological picture is far from being clear. A number of factors make it difficult
to evaluate the materials from the Culpepper site-the relatively small
amount of published field work in the area, the scarcity of sites that
span the transition from Archaic to Neo-American, and the complexity of the Culpepper ceramic collection itself.
The Archaic artifacts from the Culpepper site, that is, most of the
dart points, the stone axes, the knives, and the gouges, occur on the
provisional list of traits given for the East Texas Aspect of the Archaic
Stage (Suhm et al., 1954: 149-151 ). Present in the Culpepper collection, and included in the East Texas Aspect trait list, are an abundance
of Gary points (59%); Yarbrough, Wells, and Kent Dart points;
gouges; full-grooved axes; a milling stone and a mano. Two common
lithic traits listed for the East Texas Aspect, but absent from the Culpepper collection, are T-shaped drills and scrapers. As the Culpepper
sample is small, these absences are probably not especially significant. The presence of Gary, Yarbrough, Edgewood, and Wells points
suggest a late Archaic occupation at the Culpepper site (Davis and
Davis, 1960: 51-52). At the Limerick site, a late Archaic-early NeoAmerican site in Rains County located 40 miles southwest of the Culpepper site, Gary points were abundantly found in association with
Yarbrough, Edgewood and Trinity points (Duffield, 1961: 51-116).
However, the pottery from the Limerick site is attributable to the
Sanders Focus of the Gibson Aspect and is different from the pottery
from the Culpepper site.
As two Gary points were found in Burial 6, it is possible that not all
Gary points are associated with the Archaic occupation. This point type
may have survived into late Neo-American times and possibly even
into the historic period. This question has been discussed recently by
Krieger ( 1955: 195-207 ). As the field notes are none too clear. it is also
possible that these two points were in the fill of Burial 6.
The pottery in the Culpepper collection indicates a late Titus Focus
occupation. Thus far only two Titus Focus sites have been excavated
and published- the McKinney site (Davis and Golden, 1960 ) and the
Harroun site (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959) , both situated some 50 miles
southeast of the Culpepper site. Three burials from the McKinney site
yielded 18 Ripley Engraved vessels and seven Taylor Engraved vessels (25 out of a total of 32 vessels found). These frequencies (53%
and 32% respectively ) are comparable to the Ripley and Taylor frequencies at the Culpepper site (39% and 15% ). However, the McKinney site is a "classic" Titus Focus site, for Harleton Applique, Bailey

312

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Engraved, and Wilder Engraved vessels occurred in association with
Talco points and Ripley and Taylor Engraved vessels. No Harleton
Applique, Bailey Engraved, or Wilder Engraved vessels or sherds were
found at the Culpepper site, and the Ripley vessels were not "classic"
in shape or design as a whole (Suhm et al., 1954: 346-359 ). By "classic" Titus Focus sites and "classic" Titus vessels I mean those sites and
vessels which conform to those traits and vessel types listed for the
Titus Focus in the Handbook (Suhm et al., 1954: 189-195). This involves the association of Ripley Engraved, Taylor Engraved, and Harleton Applique vessels with Talco points. Early Titus Focus sites may
be recognized by the presence of Pease Brushed-Incised, a carry-over
from the Haley Focus, mounds over burned houses, mounds over
burials, and Perdiz points (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959). The ceramic
component at the Culpepper site, in my opinion. represents the late
Titus Focus and is probably protohistoric in age. This is indicated by
the presence of Womack Engraved, Simms Engraved, and Keno
Trailed pottery types, all believed now to be late in time.
At the Harroun site only two vessels were found, and both of these
are of Ripley Engraved type and occur in a mound burial (Jelks and
Tunnell, 1959: 59). Identifiable potsherds showed Pease BrushedIncised and Bullard Brushed to be the dominant types, with Ripley and
Taylor occurring in minor quantities. Pease Brushed-Incised is an
early Titus Focus trait, as shown at the Harroun site (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959: 59). No Pease Brushed-Incised vessels or sherds were
found at the Culpepper site.
At the Pearson site in Rains County, 40 miles southwest of the Culpepper site and near the previously mentioned Limerick site, sherds of
"\Vomack Engraved type were found on the surface (Duffield, 1961).
Also found were 86 dart points, attributed to an Archaic occupation,
the majority being Edgewood (7 specimens), Trinity ( 16), and Gary
( 101) types. The Pearson site yielded many European artifacts, most
of them coming from the surface, and this site has been placed in the
recently defined Nortefio Focus, representing the historic southern
Wichita tribes (Duffield and Jelks, 1961).
The presence of trade ware (Simms, Hodges, Avery, and Nash) in
the Culpepper collection denotes contact to the east or north with the
Texarkana and McCurtain foci. These types have been found in protohistoric and historic sites. The Womack Engraved type and the Keno
Trailed type, both represented in the Culpepper collection, are protohistoric or historic in age. The Womack type suggests trade with Nortefio Focus sites to the southwest or to the north. It is important to note

313

CULPEPPER SITE

that two Womack Engraved vessels were found in Burial 6 with two
Gary points, an Avery-like engraved vessel, a Taylor Engraved vessel ,
a Hodges Engraved vessel, and a Simms Engraved vessel, suggesting
contemporaneity.
In summary, it may be said that the lithic materials in the Culpepper
collection represent a late Archaic occupation, and that the ceramic
materials represent a later occupation by peoples of a later or protohistoric Titus Focus origin.

Summary and Conclusions
The Culpepper site is primarily a late Fulton Aspect site located on
Stouts Creek in Hopkins County, northeastern Texas. It consists of a
midden that appears to represent a small Caddoan village and cemetery area. Sixty-five stone artifacts, mostly of types attributable to
the late Archaic period of eastern Texas, were found scattered throughout the site.
Eight single, extended burials were found, all containing pottery,
the dominant types being Ripley Engraved and Taylor Engraved. One
vessel of Womack Engraved type came from the midden. Of 40 vessels
found at the Culpepper site, 14 were of Ripley Engraved type and five
were of Tay lor Engraved type. Less common were vessels of Avery
Engraved (2 ), Hodges Engraved (2 ), Simms Engraved (2 ), Womack
Engraved (3 ) , La Rue Neck Banded (3 ) and Nash Neck Banded (2 ).
The use of red slip was common, especially on Ripley Engraved vessels. A common feature is the repetition of the design four times around
the vessel.
Nine vessels were purchased and are believed to have come from the
Culpepper site. These vessels are of the same types as those found in
the burials. with the exception of a Keno Trailed bottle. Since the provenience of the Keno vessel is not certain, its significance is open to
question. Of the eight other purchased vessels in the collection, five are
of Ripley Engraved type, two are of Taylor Engraved ty pe, and one is
of A very Engraved type. Also purchased were three celts, a grooved
stone axe, two elbow pipes (one is engraved ), and a ceramic figure ·
possibly representing a dog.
Of the 94 potsherds found at the Culpepper site, 43 came from the
midden , but the others are of unknown provenience. Twenty-nine
sherds were engraved, three appliqued, five incised, one brushed, and
one punctated. Nine of these are identifiable as Ripley Engraved and
six as Taylor Engraved.

314

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Out of a total of 43 projectile points, 22 are of Gary type. Most of
the Gary points were found in general trenching or on the surface, but
two were found in Burial 6. Seventeen other points are identifiable as
Carrollton (2 ) , Castroville ( 1) , Edgewood ( 1), Fairland-like (1), Kent
( 1) , Pontchartrain ( 1), Trinity ( 2 ), Wells ( 2 ) , Yarbrough ( 5 ) , and
Talco ( 1). The Talco point was found in Bureal 4. Two additional
points, now lost, were associated with this burial, but field records
indicate they are also of Talco type.
One petaloid celt was found in Burial 1, and two additional specimens were found on the surface. Three celts and a grooved axe were
purchased. Seven bifacial knives were found , six of them in general
trenching and one from the surface. Two gouges were also found on
the surface. No post molds, fire pits, or other such features are reported
in the field notes.
The Culpepper site can be assigned to the Titus Focus of the Fulton
Aspect. Talco points and an abundance of Ripley Engraved and Taylor Engraved pottery are diagnostic of the Titus Focus. The methods of
pottery decoration- engraving, incising, repetition of designs, and use
of red slip-are other traits common to the Titus Focus, although not
confined to that focus.
The remainder of the lithic material from the Culpepper site appears
to represent an earlier pre-ceramic occupation, or more precisely the
East Texas Aspect of the Archaic Stage. However, it is believed that
Gary, Wells, and Yarbrough projectile point types may have survived
into the Fulton Aspect of the Neo-American Stage see Suhm et al.,
1954: 193, 430, 488, 492). The presence of two Gary points in a burial,
along with the high frequency of Gary points, suggests that the Titus
Focus people were still making or using Gary points. On the other
hand, if all of the lithic material represents a pre-ceramic occupation,
and if a Titus Focus group later occupied the site, then the two Gary
points may have been in the burial as part of its fill. No definite associateion of pottery with dart points in the midden is noted in the field
notes.
The occurrence of pottery types Avery Engraved, Hodges Engraved,
Simms Engraved, and Nash Neck Banded indicates trade outside the
Titus Focus area. These types are associated with the McCurtain and
Texarkana foci of the Caddoan area. The Womack Engraved vessel
suggests trade with the newly defined Norteiio Focus. However, this
type might have had its origin in the late Titus Focus.
The Culpepper site represents primarily a late Titus Focus occupation during protohistoric or early historic times. The high, steep-walled

315

CULPEPPER SITE

bowls with incurving rims are absent from "classic" Titus Focus ceramics. However, such bowls are found at the Hunt site in Cass County
and at the Womack site in Lamar County. Both of these sites yielded
European objects, but no European objects were found at the Culpepper site. It is significant that no Pease Brushed-Incised or Harleton
Applique pottery was found at the Culpepper site. The former is an
early Titus Focus type, and the latter is a "classic" Titus Focus type.

Acknowledgments
In the preparation of this report I have received assistance from a
number of individuals. Special thanks are due to Dr. E. Mott Davis and
Dr. T. N. Campbell for their suggestions, criticism, and advice; to
Molly Hays for typing the rough drafts of this report; and to Edward
B. Jelks, Lathel F. Duffield, and W . A. Davis for their many helpful
suggestions and comments.

References Cited
Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, No. 1.
1960. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, No. Z.
Davis, E. Mott
1958. The Whelan Site, A Late Caddoan Component in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir, Northeastern Texas. Technical report to the National Park
Service from the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of
Texas.
Davis, E. lVlott, and Bernard Golden
1960. The Ben McKinney Site, A Titus Focus Site in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir Area, Northeastern Texas. Technical report to the National
Park Service from the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Davis, E. Mott, and Jules R. Gipson
1960. The Dalton Site, A Late Caddoan Mound Site in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir Area, Northeastern Texas. Technical report to the National
Park Service from the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Davis, William A.
1961. The Isadore Segal Site at Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir, Northeastern Texas.
Technical Report to the National Park Service from the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Davis, William A., and E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir

316

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Area, Northeastern Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Archaeology Series, No. 3.
Duffield, Lathe! F.
1961. The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959 ), pp. 51 - 116.
Duffield, Lathe! F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas,
Archaeology Series, No. 4.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Part 1.
Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959. The Harroun Site: A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Archaeology Series, No. 2.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University of
Texas Publication, No. 4640.
1956. Historic Survival of the Atlatl in the Lower Mississippi Region. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 195-207.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25 .
Webb, Clarence H.
1960. A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. Vol. 29 (for 1958 ), pp. 35-62.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

