lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of
Northeastern Texas, With a Preliminary
Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
LEROY JOHNSON, JR.

Introduction
The primary purpose of this work is to report upon the archeological remains recovered from the Fred Yarbrough and Manton Miller
sites, located on the western frontier of the eastern woodlands in
northern Texas. Both of these important sites contain early ceramic
and preceramic components. A second purpose is to compare these
two sites with related archeological materials from early sites in the
eastern parts of Oklahoma and Texas, and to define tentatively an
archeological complex of the Archaic Stage to be known as the "La
Harpe Aspect." The third purpose is to draw from several new developments in the field of artifact classification and nomenclature, and to
attempt an application of "variety," "tradition," and other concepts
to the analysis of lithic materials.
Only partial success has been attained in the present paper. and a
great deal remains to be done, even with the archeological data reported upon here. For one thing, the paucity of site reports in the area
under consideration precludes any full definition of the La Harpe Aspect. Also, the attempted use of the variety, tradition, and other constructs in analyzing lithic materials encountered difficulties, primarily
since related archeological materials have not been studied in a similar
fashion. Hence comparisons with extant site reports yielded somewhat
limited returns. In the long run, it is felt that the primary value of the
present paper will be as a source of comparative material for future
investigators. On the other hand, it is hoped that the present definition
of the La Harpe Aspect will stand the test of time and new data-with
some modifications, to be sure-and, furthermore, that valid varieties,
traditions , or similar classificatory units will be recognized in typologies of lithic materials.

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The writer wishes to express his thanks and appreciation to two individuals in particular: Mr. Edward B. Jelks, Executive-Director of
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, and Dr. T. N. Campbell,
Chairman of the Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas. It is these two persons, more than any others, to whom the
writer is indebted for his foundation in archeology. Both have given
encouragement and assistance in the present study, as well as in many
other instances. In addition, Mr. Jelks worked with the writer to a
considerable extent on the problem of artifact typology, and aided appreciably in applying the variety concept to the artifacts described in
this paper. Mr. L. F . Duffield and Dr. E. M. Davis, of The University
of Texas, also gave useful suggestions and assistance during the writing
of this paper.
Preliminary Statements. The Yarbrough site is located in Van Zandt
County, Texas (Fig. 1), and was excavated some 20 years ago by The
University of Texas and the Works Progress Administration, but not
reported upon in detail. This site contained materials representing both
preceramic and early ceramic occupations. Dr. Alex D. Krieger examined the artifacts from the site and made several initial observations, noting that a number of distinct cultural components were represented (Krieger, 1946: 172; Suhm et al., 1954: 177, 186 ). With
Krieger's observations in mind the writer decided to undertake an
analysis of the site and to report upon the materials found there.
Many difficulties were encountered while doing the study. The
original field notes and the artifacts themselves had become scattered
through the years. The field notes were frequently scanty and incomplete, and few maps and profiles had been made. Yet it was felt that
whatever information could be gleaned from these data would be of
some value, irrespective of the incomplete nature of the field records,
especially since until the past three years almost no archeological research has been carried on in the immediate region of the Yarbrough
site. Also, the large numbers of lithic artifacts which had been recovered seemed to promise an excellent opportunity to try out new theoretical achievements made in the field of artifact typology, but heretofore employed exclusively in the analysis of ceramic collections.
The Miller site is located within the proposed Cooper Reservoir in
Delta County, Texas (Fig. 1), and was excavated in 1959 by the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project of The University of Texas. Like the
Yarbrough site, the Manton Miller site contained archeological materials representing both ceramic and preceramic components. Although differing from the Yarbrough site in several significant ways,

143

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

delta

•~HE

I

MILLER SITE

1

I

van zandt

co.

\
I

I

- ·· - ·1.
I
•

I

!

·- ·-.I

I

.

~

_ _J

I

THE YARBROUGH ANO MILLER

•.

SITES, GENERAL

LOCATION

Fig . 1 .

the Miller site nevertheless relates to the former, and belongs in part
to the La Harpe Aspect. In spite of its small size and the rather limited amount of material obtained from it, some important information
relating to the La Harpe Aspect was acquired through the analysis of
the Miller site.
The La Harpe Aspect is defined for the first time in the present
paper, and represents an Archaic Stage culture, or closely related
groups of cultures, which existed over a broad geographic area and
which underwent a uniform historic development from early Archaic

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

times into the early ceramic period. It is characterized by an early
phase with expanding stem dart points, a later phase with contracting
stem dart points, and finally, simple, plain-ware ceramics of various
types. The La Harpe Aspect ended with the introduction into the
area of abundant arrow points and decorated pottery, heralds of a
more sedentary mode of existence. Sites belonging to this complex can
be traced, in a belt, from the vicinity of Houston, Texas, northward
into central Oklahoma. The Yarbrough and Miller sites are included
in this series of sites.
Environment. The Yarbrough and Miller sites are only 55 miles
apart and are in very similar natural environments.
The Fred Yarbrough farm is situated on the flood plain of the Sabine
River on the south side of the stream channel. This river flows in a
southeastern direction across northern Texas, bending southward just
below the city of Marshall, thence flowing more or less due south until
it empties into the Gulf of Mexico below Port Arthur, Texas. Near its
disemboguement the Sabine is a large and important river. In the
region of its headwaters-the region directly northwest of the Yarbrough site-it is a much smaller stream which often becomes dry or
nearly dry during periods of prolonged drought. Its flood plain, which
provides a considerable amount of arable land, is somewhat entrenched
and is bounded in all directions by rolling terrain.
The Manton Miller site is located on the flood plain of the South
Sulphur River, on the north side of the stream channel. This river is
one of the headwater branches of the larger Sulphur River, which flows
in an eastern direction across northeastern Texas into southwestern
Arkansas, where it empties into the Red River. In the vicinity of the
Miller site the river channel is rather deep, and its banks are bordered
by an irregular flood plain dotted with low erosional remnants of the
uplands and a considerable amount of underbrush and small trees. Beyond the flood plain are the uplands, which are sculptured into gently
rolling hills.
The Sabine and Sulphur drainages are confined to the Western
Coastal Plain physiographic province (Atwood, 1940: 25), a region
characterized by a system of low, undulating hills composed of sands,
gravels, clays, and marls. Geologically speaking, this plain is a vast
lowlnnd which, throughout past ages, has been alternately above and
below sea level. Structurally the area forms a large homoclinal plain
composed of overlapping formations which dip gently toward the Gulf
of Mexico, outcropping as a series of belts or low cuestas generally
parallel to the coast.
.
. .
:)

;

~

145

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

The Yarbrough site is located over the Rockdale formation of the Eocene Wilcox group and is approximately 11 miles east of the contact
area between the Wilcox and the younger Midway group. The average elevation of northern Van Zandt County is 500 feet above sea
level.
The Miller site is located approximately at the contact zone between
the Cretaceous Navarro group and the Midway group of the Eocene.
The average elevation of southern Delta County is 520 feet above sea
level.
A humid climate with high temperatures characterizes the Western
Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province (Blair, 1950 ) , in which are
located the two archeological sites in question. In the summer months
the humidity averages approximately 70 per cent for the entire province, with long intervals in which the temperature is over 100° F.
The summer winds are usually from the south, but they change frequently to northerly during the winter months, bringing cold interior
currents with them.
For the area around Van Zandt County and the Yarbrough site the
rainfall averages slightly over 40 inches. For instance, the weather
station at Wills Point, in Van Zandt County, reported an average annual rainfall of 40.8 inches for the period of 24 years ending July 1,
1957.
Although no permanent weather stations are maintained in Delta
County (in which the Miller site is located) , the average rainfalljudging from the adjacent counties of Hopkins and Hunt-should be
about 40 inches (U.S. Weather Bureau records, n. d., from the office of
the Weather Bureau Climatologist for Texas, in Austin).
The Yarbrough and Miller sites fall within the confines of the Texan
biotic province (Dice, 1943: 23-24 ) which extends from northern
Oklahoma southward across Texas to the Gulf of Mexico. It is bounded
on the west by the more arid Kansan and Comanchean provinces and
on the east by the humid Austroriparian province.
Rolling plains spotted with growths of hardwood trees are common
in the Texan province, and many grasses and perennial flowering
plants are to be found therein. The trees are, for the most part, hickories and oaks, the most common examples being the Texas hickory
(Carya buckleyi), the post oak (Quercus stellata), and the blackjack
oak ( Q. marilandica) .
Mixed pine-oak forests occur along the eastern margin of the province. Among the dominant species along this eastern region are the
shortleaf pine (Pinus echinata ), the post oak (Quercus stellata), black-

0I:Uce or
f1 ' '

. '

rne State Archeologist

.' Lib.rAJJ -

<

. ....... .... ~ - . • f~~

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

jack oak (Q. marilandica ) , and the sweetgum (Liquidambar styracifiua).
In recent years much of the timber has disappeared. The Eocene
soils on which the pine-oak vegetation grows are generally very infertile, and as a result the farms in the region tend to be located along
fertile creeks and upon the best of the uplands. Since ample fresh land
has previously always been available for clearing and farming, it has
been the practice not to conserve the fertility of the fields . Heretofore
the farmers cultivated their land as long as it was profitable to do so,
and when their old fields became exhausted, they were abandoned for
new ones. At the present time, however, the practice of agriculture is
declining sharply in the region, and many old fields have been overgrown with dense thickets of young pines, persimmon, and sassafras.
The animal life of the area is quite diversified. Many reptiles and
amphibians can be found along the drainage ways. The raccoon ( Procyon lot or ), and the opossum ( Didelphis sp. ) are among the most
common mammals, while the Texas red wolf (Canis rufus ), the fox
(Vulpes sp. ) , and the Texas lynx or bobcat (Lynx rufus ) , the armadillo ( Tolypeutes sp. ) , and the cottontail (Lepus sylvaticus ) may be
found in some numbers. Once hunted nearly to the point of extermination in the area, the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus ) is now
quite common.
Ducks and geese enter the area from the north along with the first
" northers" in the fall of the year, congregating around the small lakes
and streams, then gradually moving southward as winter progresses.
Among permanent or nonmigratory birds are the turkey and numerous doves and quail.
Fish are common in most of the streams, as are several fresh-water
mollusks.
Ethnohistory of the Area. The Yarbrough and Miller sites lie on the
western fringe of the area which was inhabited at the time of Europ ean contact by various Caddoan tribes, and on the eastern margin of
the region held by several groups of Wichita-speaking Indians.
The first Europeans to come anywhere near this area were the members of the De Soto expedition, who in 1541 entered eastern Texas
under the leadership of Moscoso, the successor of the ill-fated De Soto.
Although the party entered eastern Texas, it is not known for certain
how deeply they penetrated the area. It was not until 1800 that close
contact was made with the area around the two sites, although by
shortly after 1700 strong European influence had been established in
southeastern and extreme northeastern Texas, where the Europeans

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

147

found many tribes of aborigines who can be classified as sedentary
horticulturalists. In the region of present-day Cherokee and Nacogdoches counties, on the Neches River and its principal tributaries, were
found the Nabedache, Neche, Nacanish, Anadarko, Nacogdoche, Nacono, Nasoni (Lower), Nacachau, and Hainai, all members of the
loosely-formed Hasinai Confederacy (Swanton, 1942: 8- 15 ) . To the
east of these were two independent Caddoan tribes, the Ayish and the
Adai. On Red River in Louisiana dwelt the Doustioni, Natchitoches
(Lower ), Washita, and the Yatasi (Lower) of the Natchitoches Con ·
federacy. Along the Red River in Arkansas and Texas were villages of
Cahinnio, Kadohadacho, Nanatsoho, Nasoni (Upper), Natchitoches
(Upper ), and Yatasi (Upper) of the Caddo Confederacy (ibid.: 8- 25 ) .
To the west of the sites, along the headwater area of the Sabine, the
upper Trinity, and the middle course of the Brazos, there lived less
sedentary tribes-the Taovayas, Tawakoni, Waco, Wichita proper,
Kichai, and Yscani-all referred to in early historic documents as the
norteiios. All of these groups, excepting the Kichai (who used a related
language ) , spoke Wichita, a language akin to the Texas Caddoan dialects, all belonging to the Caddoan family of the Iroquois-Caddoan stock
of the Hokan-Siouan phylum (Sapir, 1929: 138-141 ) . Swadesh ( 1959:
16 ) classifies the Caddo. on the basis of lexicostatistical studies, as a
secondary group of the Iroquois primary group.
There is good documentary evidence that many of the Wichitaspeaking groups migrated southward from the vicinity of the Arkansas River into Texas in 1757, and that they soon took up friendly relations with their distant kinsmen to the east, the Caddo (Harper, 1953:
268 ) . Recent archeological and documentary investigations, however,
have suggested the possibility that Wichita groups inhabited northcentral Texas long before the first half of the 18th century (Duffield
and I elks, 1960; Duffield, personal communication) . There is also
some evidence to suggest that the prehistoric archeological complex
known as the Henrietta Focus may be partially ancestral to the historic Wichita (Wedel, 1959: 583, 587). In spite of recent research, the
problem has not yet been resolved, and there remains the possibility
that this western area was occupied before 1720 by the Tonkawa. a
nomadic group of hunters and food-gatherers found in the central portion of Texas in later historic times. Data on this group are quite
scarce, however, and we can not be certain about their early history.
On the headwaters of the Sabine River in Rains County, twenty
miles to the west of the Yarbrough farm and thirty miles southwest of
the Miller site, the Tawakoni and Yscani maintained a village for a

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

short while which was visited by the Spanish in 1760 and 1761 (Johnson and Jelks, 1958). Farther to the northwest on Red River was the
large Taovayas town, the remains of which are known today as Spanish Fort, which was unsuccessfully attacked by the Spanish under
Colonel Parilla in 1759 (Allen, 1939 ) . Yet Spanish influence among
the Wichita groups was slight, and most of the trade which these peoples carried on was with the French who operated out of Louisiana.
The nucleus of Spanish missionary activity centered primarily in the
area som.e distance to the southeast of our two sites, where Christian
missions were maintained for the Hasinai from 1690 to 1693, 1716 to
1719, and again from 1721 to 1773.
In the year 1859, the remaining Caddo, decimated by war and disease, were removed from Texas; that same year the Wichita proper
(including the Taovayas ) , the Waco, and the pitiful remnants of the
Tawakoni and Kichai moved to a reservation near Anadarko, Indian
Territory. However, for all practical considerations, Indian activities
in north-central and northeastern Texas came to an end four years
earlier, in 1855.
In summary, we can say that near the sites in question were the
Hasinai to the southeast, the members of the Caddo Confederacy to the
north and east, and not far to the west the Wichita tribes. There were
some important cultural resemblances between these groups, particularly in an economic and material sense. All constructed thatched.
oval houses, lived in more or less permanent villages, were moderately
sedentary (the Caddo more so than the Wichita ) , farmed and cultivated maize, beans, and squash, and even shared common features in
language and social organization. It may be concluded, then, that a
rather consistent cultural pattern, although with a certain amount of
regional variation, existed for the area under study in late historic
times.
The Problem of Artifact Analysis and Typology. In the past few
years considerable progress has been made toward a more thorough
definition of typological concepts and their application to artifact analysis. The major portion of this endeavor, understandably, has been directed toward ceramic materials. and almost no attempt has been
undertaken to apply the new concepts and ideas to the classification of
non-ceramic artifacts. As stated earlier, one of the goals of this paper
is to classify the large sample of lithic artifacts from the Yarbrough
and Miller sites (referring here primarily to the projectile points ) and
to try to carry over into the realm of stone material certain concepts
developed by other workers in pottery analysis. Needless to say, the

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

149

usual descriptions and analyses included in site reports will also be
presented.
The main trend in typological theory has been toward a more intensive systematization so as to place artifacts in classificatory units
which can help to define archeological assemblages as precisely as possible. The most valuable result of this recent work, in the United States
and elsewhere, has been a drive toward crystallization and application
of the variety concept as well as several more inclusive concepts. In the
American Southwest, Wheat, Gifford, and Wasley (1958) defined the
variety and several broader concepts as they might be applied to the
ceramics of their region, and in eastern North America Phillips ( 1958)
has set forth his ideas on the type-variety problem and has also attempted to apply the concept to pottery in that region. Still more recent studies( Smith, Willey, and Gifford, 1960; Gifford, 1960) have
combined concepts from the theoretical taxonomic and typological systems as proposed for southwestern and eastern United States-making
certain significant modifications and additions-and have redefined
them so as to apply to pottery collections from the Mayan area, apparently with considerable initial success. In the light of these recent advances in the realm of theory, the time seems ripe to broaden the field
of attack in typology and to place lithic materials on the list of objectives. The Yarbrough site, with more than 1,300 projectile points, offers
a made-to-order test case for these new ideas, and to a lesser extent the
lithic material from the Miller site can be used. The amount of variation in the artifact collections from these sites is high, while the projectile point sample is large enough to provide some sort of statistical
security.
As a first step in the analysis, consideration must be given to the different attributes or traits which go to make up an artifact. The term
"attribute" is used here to mean a basic element of form which, associated in one artifact with other elements, combines with these others
to provide the artifact with its characteristic appearance. Thus various shapes or form variations in the stem, shoulders, base, blade, etc.,
of dart points are their attributes, and as such are the essence of any
larger classificatory grouping of artifacts. An attribute, the smallest
unit of study, need not be a purely functional trait, but can be artistic
or stylistic as well.
"Mode" is another extremely useful term, developed and elaborated
by Rouse in his study of Haitian archeological materials ( 1939) and
in his recent paper on artifact classification ( 1960). To quote from
Rouse (1960: 313):

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

By the term "mode" is meant any standard concept, or custom which
governs the behavior of the artisans of a community, and which they hand
down from generation to generation, and which may spread from community to community over considerable distances.

In this sense, then, a mode can be represented by a particular attribute of an artifact, or closely related group of attributes, which have
culturally or historically demonstrable meaning. To quote again from
Rouse (1960: 313):
Not all the attributes of the artifact are indicative of modes. Some attributes will instead express personal idiosyncracies of the artisans. A unique
design, which occurs only once, may be cited as an example. Other attributes fall within the realm of biology, chemistry, or physics rather than
culture.

In summation, an attribute which has been observed to occur
consistently in a number of artifacts, and which seemingly represents
the embodiment of a style concept which existed in the minds of the
manufacturers, can be called a mode or, speaking in more abstract
terms, the result of product of a cultural mode.
Let us turn now to the actual analysis as carried out in the laboratory. To begin with , all the artifacts of different classes (use categories: scrapers, projectile points, and so forth ) were placed into separate groups. Then a small card was prepared for each artifact, on
which was written the field catalogue number, the appropriate excavation square designation, and the depth at which the specimen was
found. These cards could then be assorted easily and arranged in any
desired order, and the technique lent itself very well to distribution
studies within the site, both of a vertical and horizontal nature.
In the typological study itself, attention was fixed on the various attributes of the particular artifacts and they were segregated into as
many small groups as possible. This was done in accordance with the
procedure recommended by Krieger ( 1944) , using care to include together only those specimens which were almost identical in form, i.e. ,
only those which showed essentially the same combination of attributes. This small number of attributes consistently occurring in all the
varieties constitutes the primary traits or attributes of a type, whereas
the secondary attributes are those which serve to distinguish the varieties from each other. Related groups or varieties go to make the type,
and the generally small number of attributes held in common by all
the varieties serve to set the limits of the type .
To summarize, if clusters (consistent combinations of attributes) oc-

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

151

cur within a given type, resulting in discrete groupings within it, we
may assume that varieties are represented. Inter- and intra-site distributional data may serve to corroborate the validity of the varieties,
but these are not at all necessary in setting them up.
In certain instances experience has shown that some difficulty may
be encountered in the use of the variety concept. The Alba arrow point
type at the l\!Iiller site, to give one example, shows a wide range of variation in blade form and size, shoulder and base form, etc., within certain limits. Yet the various attributes representative of the type do not
combine consistently with each other into clusters of homogeneous
small groups, that is, varieties. On the contrary, the attributes appear
to combine quite randomly with each other throughout the sample at
hand, and do not form consistent units within the Alba type. In cases
such as this, the division of the material into varieties is not feasible,
thereby illustrating that the nature of the cultural material itself must
determine whether types are divisible into varieties. In this example,
the Alba type can not be defined from the primary attributes held by
the varieties of the type, since no varieties could be established, but
must be defined on the basis of a comparison of the variation within the
group of points viewed as a whole.
The variety concept should be an important tool for the archeologist,
both on an intra- and an inter-site level of study. For accurate comparisons between the artifacts from different sites and diverse areas,
work on the variety level of organization is necessary if one wants to do
more than establish only general artifact resemblances and obtain general conclusions. For example, a carfeul comparison of strictly-defined,
tightly-knit varieties from two different archeological sites can reveal a
more exact picture of the proximity or distance, taxonomically speaking, between the two collections under consideration, and in more concrete terms, than can the usual comparison of types. In the present
paper very little comparison could be done on the variety level, since
no published reports exist which have used the variety concept in
describing lithic materials. Intensive comparative work will have to
await more site reports.
To summarize at this point, a type may be defined as a combination
of the most significant attributes which are held in common by the related varieties grouped together under it. Individual points, or artifacts not recognizable as belonging to any particular variety, but
nevertheless possessing a sufficient number of the major traits of the
type in question, should also be included within the type. In a case in
which almost no variation has been allowed in the manufacturing tech-

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nique, a type may be represented by only one variety. Yet determining
that the particular variety has no close relatives, and that it by itself
constitutes a complete type, is a significant accomplishment.
Above and beyond the type level of organization it is also possible to
see very general resemblances between artifact types, but here the
number of attributes which they hold in common-the number of cultural modes-is reduced to a very few. When resemblances are recognized on this level in analysis, usually only one or two important traits
or attributes can be emphasized. The typological or taxonmnic term
employed for this stage of classification is "tradition;" thus we have the
"cord-marking tradition," "shell-tempering tradition," and so on in the
field of ceramics. At the Yarbrough and Miller sites it seems that the
"contracting stem" dart points form one specific tradition, the "expanding stem" points another, and the "straight stem" points yet a third.
Comparison shows that these three traditions are represented at other
sites and in other areas, and comparative studies can be made easily on
this level of interpretation, although the dangers inherent are much
greater because of the larger personal or subjective element involved in
definition, particularly in respect to the selection of the attributes
which go to make up the group. Through the study of traditions much
of the data used in establishing uniform historic changes within the La
Harpe Aspect have been acquired. The concept of tradition is derived
from that of Willey and Phillips ( 1958: 37):
An archeological tradition is a (primarily ) temporal continuity represented by persistent configurations in single technologies or other systems
of related forms. The lack of specification in respect to the spatial dimension may be supplied by the use of qualifying terms, as in "regional tradition," "areal tradition," and so on.
The use of this term in the present paper, in respect to projectile point
stemming traditions, is more liinited or specific, in a certain sense, than
that quoted above, yet it falls within the Willey and Phillips definition
of a historical continuity, and is not a departure from their original
idea. These stem forms are only one possible kind of tradition, and it
is not intended to limit the usefulness of the term to this specific case.
Its uses and applications should be many.
In presenting the descriptions of artifacts which follow, under their
respective site headings, the order followed in the laboratory analysis
will be reversed. A tradition will be presented first, then its types, and
after each type its respective varieties, if any. This is looking at the
problem from the top down, hierarchically speaking, but gives the

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

153

reader the advantage that the conclusions of the analysis (in the form
of the resultant traditions and types) are given before the bulk of the
raw data (the varieties). Thus the reader has the opportunity to review the conclusions as the report progresses, and is not immediately
presented with an overwhelming body of data in the form of minute
variety descriptions outside their types and traditions.
One important problem of typology has not yet been touched upon,
the nomenclature to be followed in designating the traditions, types,
and varieties. On the tradition level of designation it seems best to employ a simple, descriptive term or simple combination of terms in
order to identify unmistakably the salient features or attributes which
have been selected to define the group of artifacts. Since, at this point
in the interpretation, the artifacts possess only a very small number of
commonly held attributes, which because of their cross-type occurrence we can safely say represent "modes," a descriptive term. is quite
in order if it accurately pictures the important feature, or traits, involved. The terms "contracting stem" and "expanding stem" for the
projectile point categories aptly depict the important features which
were used to define these groupings.
On the type level of interpretation the nomenclatural problem is not
so simple. Because of the larger number of important attributes which
have been used to group together the sundry varieties into one type,
the selection of a single feature such as "expanding stem" to be used
in the type name is completely unrealistic. I am in agreement with
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 16) when they explain the procedure
used in their study:
All qualifying terms have been dropped from projectile-point names, even
those which have previously been published. Thus, they are simply
"Nolan points," " Gary points," " Folsom points," etc. Qualifying terms
give too restrictive an idea of what variation may occur within a type.

Of course this is a departure from what is considered proper procedure in ceramic analysis, where such terms as "engraved," " plain,"
etc., are suffixed to type names. In ceramics, however, the problem is
somewhat different. These terms, with ceramics, can serve to stress
technique and technological traditions. Other workers, however, still
insist upon the qualifying suffixes in type names for projectile points;
at any rate, either method is workable and the difference in the two
practices should not be emphasized out of proper proportions.
In conclusion, then, a single name, printed in italics and beginning

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with an upper case letter* for ease in identification and recognition,
should be chosen for the type. This use of a single name is well established in most parts of North America and consists of selecting and employing the name of a locality in the area of occurrence of the artifact.
The procedure has been quite satisfactory in the past, but it should be
realized that the selection of a name- taken, for example, from a nearby city, village, or stream- is not meant to imply that this particular
city, village, etc., is the focal point of distribution for the type. It is
simply a convenient method for type designation which should not
carry unintended and undesirable implications.
Certain kinds of names should definitely be avoided in type designations. This point has been precisely put forth by Smith et al. ( 1960:
336 ) in reference to the ceramics of the Mayan region.
No two types or varieties should ever share the same place name as a
taxonomic label. In other words, once a geographical name has been
assigned as a type or variety name it should never be affixed to any other
type or variety . .. . No phase name should ever be used as a type or
variety name.

To illustrate a confusing practice, the characteristic ceramic type of
the Caddoan area Sanders Focus, Sanders Plain , has the same primary
name as its focus, and as a result some confusion has resulted because
it has been shown to occur in the Bryan, Wylie, and other foci as well.
The really big problem to be dealt with here is that of providing
workable designations for the varieties. A simple designation of varieties such as A, B, C, or 1, 2, 3, within a certain type, is certainly
functional, but it is difficult to work with such designations on a comparative, site-to-site basis. A better procedure is to provide names for
the varieties, as has been the practice with the types. The objection to
this procedure is that one type may end up with twenty varieties, each
with a different name, and that the resulting accumulation of names
might be somewhat bewildering. Fixed names should, however, exist
for ease of reference and to facilitate and standardize inter-site comparisons. It is further recommended that they be presented in italics
and begin with a lower case letter to distinguish them from type names
(e.g., the mabank variety of the Yarbrough type). To quote again at
length from Smith et al. ( 1960: 339).
On the face of it, and during the first applications of this method, there
may be those who are inclined to consider a large number of varieties,
• This procedure was recommended to the writer by E. B. Jelks, who is using a
similar printing style in his report on the Kyle site of Central Texas.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

155

each with a different name, as a disadvantage. But it will soon be observed
that by allowing all the variety units to be distinguished and named individually, the number of named type units is not in any way erroneously
increased (in fact this method tends to prevent the erroneous multiplication of named types). The types are the units most clearly reflecting
cultural phenomena; these are the units of cross-cultural comparison, the
units of synthesis, the units that are of greatest use to interested parties
in general (teachers and researchers alike). Types are most likely to be
committed to memory as the elements diagnostic of a ceramic complex [ or
lithic complex, in the case of the present study] within a phase. The
varieties are, by contrast, the units of basic laboratory analysis. Even
though they are meaningful units, they are tools of the specialist; they
are the fine breakdowns necessary at a certain level of research analysis.
But, and this is most important, it is not at all necessary for all workers
or for persons in allied fields to have them at tongue tip or even be
familiar with them. Varieties are of maximum use to the specialist. As a
consequence there should be no limitation on their number or on the
proliferation of variety names on this level of analysis.

The typological approach employed here is, then, different from that
heretofore used in Texas and adjacent areas; the older, and for that
time quite admirable, procedure consisted in delimiting the types in
an impressionistic manner without specific description of their respective variations.
It should be pointed out here that the concept which proved most
fruitful in the present study was the tradition. It was relatively easy
to do inter-site comparisons using the various dart point stemming traditions, and much useful information was acquired. It is hoped that in
the future the variety and other constructs will be of equal value. Their
extensive application, unfortunately, will have to await the publication
of detailed site reports, of which, at the present date, there is a great
lack.

THE FRED YARBROUGH SITE
The Fred Yarbrough farm is located approximately four miles
northeast of the town of Grand Saline, in Van Zandt County, Texas
(Fig. 1). In the files of The University of Texas the Yarbrough finds
have been designated as site 41 VN6. In truth, however, two adjacent
occupation areas have been grouped under this label: a primarily prepottery knoll located some 50 yards south of the Sabine River, and an
early ceramic site which was situated 300 yards to the south of the
knoll. In this paper the first will be called Area A, the latter Area B.
They and their artifacts will be described separately.

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Works Progress Administration, in conjunction with the Department of Anthropology of The University of Texas, began excavations at the Fred Yarbrough farm on April 1, 1940. This excavation
was known as Work Project 15409. The field party consisted of a crew
of local laborers, ranging in number from 17 to 20 men, and was under
the immediate direction of archeological foreman William A. Duffen.
Work at the site was terminated in September of the same year.
Before the knoll, Area A, was staked out in a grid system to be excavated, an extensive surface collection of artifacts was made and each
artifact recovered was labeled with an "S" to indicate its superficial
provenience. The knoll was then measured out in a 10-foot grid pattern and was prepared for excavation in the following manner. A
wooden stake was driven down near the east end of the knoll and was
designated "primary datum, stake 'O' " (Fig. 3). Rows of stakes were
then run north and south from this stake, and another row was run
westward across the long axis of the knoll. The entire rise was then
staked out in 10-foot squares which were numbered as follows. Each
square was given a two-part designation: the first number indicated
the distance of the square westward along the east-west line from the
primary datum point, stake "O," numbering consecutively from "O"
toward the west; the second part of the designation contained an "R" or
"L" to indicate location either to the right (north) or left (south) of
the east-west line, and a numerical appendage to show the correct distance right or left, beginning at the "O" stake and numbering 1 to 11
northward, and from 1 to 11 southward. Thus a typical designation
might read "11R7," a combination indicating that this square was the
11th 10-foot square west of "O" and the 7th to the north, the right
("R").
The vertical control methods used during the excavation of the
knoll were poor, to say the least. No attempt seems to have been made
to record the vertical provenience of artifacts in relation to any particular fixed reference point. Rather, the depth of both features and
artifacts was measured in inches from the surface of the soil, and since
no contour map exists for the site, the problem of determining stratigraphic relationships in the occurrence of particular artifact types has
been rather tedious, to minimize the difficulty.
Excavation with shovels was begun along the north-south line at the
eastern margin of the knoll and the entire eminence was excavated,
with work moving from the north-south line toward the west along the
whole structure. Each square, as it was reached, was dug down to the
clayey, sterile subsoil, and all of the artifacts recovered were labeled

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

157

with the appropriate square designations and their depth, in inches,
below the surface.
No excavating was done on the level area immediately around the
knoll, except for that at Area B, the area of charcoal-stained soil and
concentrated midden detritus which was approximately 300 yards
south of the knoll. In this area many potsherds and bone fragments
were recovered. At Area B neither vertical nor horizontal controls were
used during the excavations.

I. Area A (the Knoll) at the Yarbrough Site
Area A, the knoll or "mound," was a low, naturally-formed rise on
the Sabine flood plain capped with a midden deposit containing numerous lithic artifacts and a few potsherds (Fig. 2). It lay 50 yards south
of the stream channel. The structure was slightly elongate, the long
axis running east and west for a distance of 350 feet, the shorter running north and south 220 feet. It stood, before excavation, approximately 10 feet above the flood plain. According to the owner of the
land, Mr. Fred Yarbrough, the knoll was overgrown with timber when
first seen by him, and originally stood taller than at the time of excavation. Thirty years of cultivation had eroded and lowered it somewhat.
According to the local inhabitants, the area around the knoll is
flooded during periods of excessive rainfall, generally several times
each year. These informants did mention, however, that the top of the
structure was never completely covered by these inundations.
The knoll was composed of three mem hers: ( 1 ) a basal, mottled
brown and gray sand-the flood plain soil; on this (2) a sterile, yellowbuff clay which rose above the flood plain level; and upon this ( 3) a
surface midden deposit of dark sand, stained by humus (Fig. 3). The
midden zone was approximately 3.3 feet thick, but had been eroded
to a considerable extent on the slopes of the knoll so that the clay member was visible on the surface in several spots. The yellow-buff clay
member averaged 6.3 feet in thickness, and the basal sand extended
downward for an undetermined depth below the base of the clay. Soil
samples were not taken by the W. P. A. crew at Area A, and no grainsize, mineralogical, palynological, or other analyses could be attempted. It was likewise impossible to revisit the site for purposes of
collecting soil samples because the entire eminence was dug away.
A total of 2,696 artifacts, was recovered from the knoll (Area A) of
the Yarbrough site. This includes chipped stone material, ground stone
artifacts, ceramics, and bone and shell artifacts.

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOC I ETY

Fig . 2 . The Knoll , Area A at the Yarbrough Site l!oo kinq northeast; note automobile at
extreme left for scalel .

HORIZ .

SCALE

o'

20' 40' 60' eo' 100'
.._. .... M
M+j !wwl I

~

~:
4'

VE RT.

6'

a' SCALE

10'

I

11110 9

I I I I
I

.-.~

·,

- - - -

- - - -- -- - - -- -

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ; ....

A '.

°'Zll

Fig. 3. Plan and cross section of the Knoll, Area A, Yarbrough Site.

-

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1.

PROJECTILE POINTS

The projectile points at the Yarbrough site, Area A, fall into two
rather distinct categories. The first of these is a group of large, thick,
often quite heavy points, which because of their size and weight are
thought to have been employed on atlatl-propelled darts . Artifacts of
similar size and proportions have been recovered affixed to such implements in areas where perishable organic materials have been preserved, particularly in the dry caves of the American Southwest.
That the use of the atlatl was known throughout the southeastern
United States has been inferred primarily from the presence of atlatl
hooks in prehistoric archeological sites (W. S. Webb, 1939: Pl. 14 b;
W. S. Webb and DeJarnette, 1942: PI. 2241. , 3061.; Bell and Baerreis,
1951: Pl. 3) and the assumption that the group of large points from
Area A was used on such implements is therefore probably quite correct. There are also some historic data to support this supposition
(Krieger, 1956: 195-207 ) .
The other kind of projectile point is the arrowhead. It is distinguishable from the dart point in that it is lighter in weight and usually thinner-characteristics advantageous for the tip of the light arrow shaft.
There is so much long-accepted evidence to support this definition, both
of an archeological and ethnographic nature, that it hardly merits
repetition here.
These two use-categories furnish an extremely helpful archeological
tool, both for the establishment of types and for the hypothetical reconstruction of the life-way of the makers. Yet a word of caution is in
order regarding the rigid application of the function appellations. Primarily, these are intended to be classificatory, descriptive tools for the
archeologist, and one of their purposes is to assist him in "pigeonholing" artifacts for typological studies and comparisons; the uses to
which these specimens were put by the original possessors may, in
some cases, be a different matter. By way of example, several rather
small points (the hobson and col fax varieties of the Gary ty pe ) from
this site have been treated under the dart point heading because of their
resemblance to larger points in quality of workmanship, overall proportions, crudeness of manufacture, or even the general outline or
shape. Yet many of them, functionally speaking, would have served
equally well as arrow points.
The terminology to be used in describing the parts or sections of the
projectile points will be that suggested by Suhm et al. ( 1954: Fig. 7
opposite p. 531).

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

161

Dart Points
The dart points from Area A, including 1,342 specimens, belong
for the most part to three stemming traditions-the contracting stem,
straight stem, and expanding stem traditions. A few types, however,
represent stemless forms or intermediate forms which fall between the
major traditions. The W. P.A. field catalogue lists 74 projectile points
which were recovered from the excavations and which could not later
be found; these have been lost, discarded, or, more probably, were
originally mislabeled.
THE CONTRACTING STEM TRADITION. Of the 1,342 dart points and dart
point fragments found in Area A of the Yarbrough site, 548 belong to the contracting stem tradition, representatives of which occur in many parts of North
Ameri ca. Another five point fragments probably represent this tradition, but because of their fragmentary nature could not be described or properly classified.
They do not appear in the tabulations for the contracting stem tradition. The
Yarbm ugh site contracting stem specimens all represent the Garr type.

The Gary Type. The Gary dart point type (originally defined by Newell and
Krieger, 1949: 164-165, Fig. 57; see also Suhm et al., 1954: 430, Pl. 94) is represented by 328 relatively complete specimens which show a wide range of variation
within certain specific limits. In addition to the complete specimens mentioned
above, 211 dart point fragments probably belong to the Garr type, but because of
their fragmentary nature could not be assigned to any o.f the varieties. They do
not appear in the tabulations for the type. The diagnostic traits of the type are a
contracting stem, a roughly triangular blade, and (at this site), fair, but not
excellent workmanship--a trait governed probably by the poor quality of the chert
which was used in manufacture. Most of the varieties also have well develQped
shoulders, but lack true barbs.
The most common varieties are the kaufman and hobson, which, taken together,
form the "norm" for Garr at the Yarbrough site. The minor varieties include alsa,
runge, panna maria, kenedy, colfaz,.emory, and kemp.
The kaufman variety- 76 specimens (Fig. 4, A-C)
Blade : triangular, broad; edges straight or very slightly concave; shoulders prominent, four examples exhibiting true barbs.
Stem: one-third to one-half the length of the enti re point; contracting; edges
straight or slightly convex, frequently ground smooth; base pointed or very
slightly rounded.
Dimensions: length-average 42 mm., range of variation 34 to 77 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 32 mm., range 23 to 38 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 5 to 13 mm.
Workmanship: generally good, with some amount of secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 64 ), gray chert with sand
inclusions (9), homogeneous gray chert (2) , and petrified wood ( 1).
Remarks : The diagnostic attributes of the kaufman variety are its meclium size;
wide, triangular blade; prominent shoulders; triangular stem; pointed base; and
rather careful workmanship. This variety shows close affinity with the alsa

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

[J
,I

c

B

A

G

H

M

N

E

D

t
K

J

0

p

Q

L

s

R

x

w

y

v

u.

T

F

.·"
z

AA

BB

cc

DD

EE

FF

CM
Fig . 4 . Dart points of the Gary type . A-C , kaulman va riety ; D·F, a/so va riety; G-1 , hobson
variety; J-L, emory variety; M-0, runge variety ; P- 5, kemp variety; T-V, panna maria

variety ; W-Y , l1enedy va riety ; Z-CC, co/lox variety; DD-FF , miscellaneous Gary points .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

163

variety, although the alsa is heavier, cruder, and la cks the well developed shoulders of the kaufman variety. It strongly resembles the runge variety, particularly
in triangular blade form . The kenedy variety is practically a miniature reproduction of kaufman with, however, a proportionately longer stem.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961 ); Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960:
Fig. 4, Q); Scott (.Bell, 1953: Fig. 95, No. 4 from left in lin e 5); and Ha rroun
(Jelks and Tunnell, 195·9 : Fig. 15, A ) sites.
The alsa variety-17 specimens (Fig. 4, D-F)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight, slightly convex, or ( rarely) slightly
concave; shoulders well developed, without barbs, but somewhat out-flaring or
out-turned.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of th e entire point; short and contracting;
edges straight or slightly concave; base pointed .
Dimensions: length- average 50 mm., range of variation 30 to 55 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 35 mm., range 30 to 42 mm.; thickness-average 10 mm. ,
range 9 to 12 mm.
Workmanship: extremely crude; large flak es removed by percussion.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the alsa variety are its medium size, crude
workmanship, short, triangular stem, triangular blade, heavy weight, and great
thickness. The alsa points are similar in outline to the kaufman specim ens, but
are cruder, h ea vier, and have a somewhat shorter stem.
Known distribution : undetermined.
The hobson variety-144 specimens (Fig. 4, G-I)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight to slightly concave or slightly convex;
shoulders fairly prominent, lacking barbs.
Stem: about one-third to over one-half the length of the entire point; oontracting,
tending to be rounded; edges slightly convex to almost straight; base somewhat
rounded.
Dimensions: length- average 35 mm. , range of variation 22 to 58 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 20 mm., range 13 to 30 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm. ,
range 5 to 11 mm.
Workmanship: crude, although some examples show evidence of secondary pressure
flaking.
Materia ls: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (107 ) , homogeneous gray
chert (4), gray chert with sand inclusions (3), pink quartzite ( 14), homogen eous
gray-brown chert ( 11 ), novaculite (2), petrifi ed wood (2), and jasper ( 1) .
Remarks: Th e diagnostic, definitive characteristics of the hobson pionts are small
to medium size, short triangular blade, large and wide contracting stem. and
rounded base. The hobson variety resembles the kenedy variety. The latter, however, has a narrower, more pointed stem. Hobson also resembles the kemp
variety. Th e kemp points, however. can be distingui shed by their sharply pointed
bases. Likewise, a certain affinity can be discerned between the hobson and the
e mory varieties, although the latter has a distin ctively flat base which serves to
separate it from all others.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961 ); Harroun (Jelks and Tunnell. 1959:
Fig. 15, D ); Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 4, H, R, S ) ; Boat Dock ( Bell ,
o. 8 ) ; a nd Hogge Bridge
1958: Pl. 11 , E ) ; Sam (Proctor, 1957: Pl. 14,
(Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, Nos. 3 and 4 from left on line A ) sites.

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Th e runge variety-20 specimens (Fig. 4, M-0 )
Blade: triangular, moderately short; edges straight or slightly concave, sometimes
out-flaring at the shoulders; shoulders prominent, with slight barbs on a few
specimens.
Stem: approximately one-half the length of the entire point; long, na rrow, and
contracting toward the base; edges straight or slightly convex, a very few specimens have ground edges ; base pointed •o r somewhat rounded.
Dimensions: length- average 44 mm. , range of variation 31 to 52 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 28 mm., range 18 to 34 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.
Workmanship: genera lly quite good, although a few specimens show a poor quality
of flaking; many show second ary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (13), homogeneous light gray
chert (6), and white quartzite (1) .
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the runge variety are m edium size; long,
narrow stem; and relatively short blade. Because of its distinctive stem, this
variety stands apart rather w ell from the other varieties of Gary.
Known distribution: James (Ray, 1960: PL 14, No. 3); Ck-44 (Hall, 1954: PL 13,
Nos. 15-17); Davis (Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 57, H ); Hogge Bridge
(Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, Nos. 6, 7 and 8 from left on line A); and Sam
(Proctor, 1957: PL 14, No. 5) sites.
The emory variety-18 specimens (Fig. 4, J -L )
Blade: triangular or lozenge-shaped; edges straight, slightly concave, or convex; a
few points have blade edges which are concave near the shoulders, but convex
near the tip; shoulders fairly prominent, but lacking barbs.
Stem: about one-half the length of the entire specimen; relatively long and contracting; edges straight or slightly convex; base wide and tending to be
flattened.
Dimensions: length-average 33 mm. , range of variation 27 to 35 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 17 mm., range 14 to 24 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm. ,
range 7 to 9 mm.
vVorkmanship: generally good , most specimens show some secondary pressure
flaking .
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 15 ), pink quartzite ( 1), light
gray, homogeneo us chert ( 1), and novaculite ( 1).
Remarks: The distinguishing attributes of the emory variety are small size; relatively long, contracting stem; and flat base. It is much like the hobson variety,
but has a characteristic flat base which is lacking in hobson. It is also rather
closely similar to the col/ax variety, an ex tremely marginal Gary variety having
a less contracting stem that the emory.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961) and Davis (N ewell and Krieger,
1949: Fig. 57, B) sites.
The kemp variety-13 specimens (Fig. 4, P-S )
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight, very slightly concave, or slightly convex; shoulders prominent and protruding but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one-half the length of the entire point; long and contracting;
edges slightly convex; base pointed or very slightly rounded.
Dimensions; length-average 32 mm. , range of variation 29 to 40 mm.; width at

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

165

shoulders-average 15 mm., range 13 to 18 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 5 to 9 mm.
Workmanship: fair, most of the points show a little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 12 ), and pink quartzite ( 1) .
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the kcmp variety are small size; long, narrow
overall outline; long stem; and pointed base. The kemp points are quite similar
to those of the kenedy variety, but arc not as broad, and have a longer stem.
Strong similarities are also shown to the hobson and emory varieties, but the
kemp points stand apart as a result of th eir long stem.
Known distribution: Undetermined.
The panna maria variety-28 specimens (Fig. 4, T-V)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders indistinct,
lacking barbs.
Stem: one-third to one-half the length of the entire point; long and contracting;
edges straight to slightly convex; base pointed or slightly rounded.
Dimensions: length- average 51 mm ., range of variation 39 to 58 mm .; width at
shoulders-average 20 mm., range 15 to 28 mm.; thickness-average 11 mm. ,
range 7 to 18 mm.
Workmanship: fairly good, but most examples show little secondary pressure
flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (22), novaculite ( 1), yellow
jasper (1), and homogeneous gray chert (4 ) .
Remarks: The distinctive characteristics of the points of the panna maria variety
are medium size, indistinct shoulders, and long, narrow overall outline.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961); Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960;
Fig. 4, T ) ; Scott (Bell, 1953 : Fig. 95, No. 4 from left on line 1); and Ck-44 (Hall,
1954: Pl. 13, Nos. 8, 9 ) sites.
The kenedy variety- 4 specimem (Fig. 4, WY )
Blade: triangular; edges slightly concave; shoulders prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: between one-third and one-half the length of the entire point; sharply contracting; edges straight, or nearly so; one specimen has ground edges; base
pointed.
Dimensions: length-average 28 mm., range of variation 21 to 31 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 18 mm., range 15 to 23 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 7 mm.
Workmanship: moderately good, with some evidence of secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the kenedy variety are small size; small,
triangular stem; pointed base; very prominent shoulders; and diamond-shaped·
or lozenge-s haped outline. Although this variety stands well apart from the others
of the Gary type, it is close to the hobson variety, which, however, has a much
wider stem.
Known distribution: Davis site ( Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 57, C).
The colfax variety-8 specimens (Fig. 4, Z , AA-CC )
Blade: triangular; edges slightly concave, out-flaring at the shoulders; shoulders
prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: one-third to one-half the length of the entire point; slightly contracting, but
tending to be square; edges slightly convex, a few specimens have ground edges;

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

base flattened, with slightly rounded corners.
Dimensions: length-average 28 mm., range of variation 25 to 43 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 20 mm., range 14 to 23 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: fair. with some secondary flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The salient characteristics of the colfax vari e ty are small size, prominent
shoulders, short blade, and contracting but rather square stem with flattened base.
This variety stands apart, mainly, because of its almost square stem. It could
perhaps be considered as a variety marginal to the Gary type and the contractingstem tradition.
Known distribution: Undetermined.
Miscellaneous Gary Points
In add ition to the Gary points presented in the above varieties, another 10 speci·
mens (Fig. 4, DD-FF ) exhibit the salient attributes of the type but fit none of
those categories. These ten represent, perhaps, accid ental forms or individual idiosyncracies within the Gary type.
TYPES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN THE CONTRACTING STEM AND
STRAIGHT STEM TRADITIONS . Between the contracting stem tradition and
the straight stem tradition there are several types of projectile points which show
an intermediate position. The Wells points, for example, have long, almost straight,
but very slightly contracting stems, and though they show affinity with the contracting stem tradition. it was not deemed advisable to include them within it as a
legitimate member. The Kent type also falls within this category.

The W ells Type-28 specimens (Fig. 5, A- C)
Blade: roughly triangular or lanceolate ; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders
poorly to well developed, but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one- third the length of the entire point; extremely long,
slightly contracting; edges straight or slightly convex, about half the specimens
have ground edges; base convex.
Dimensions: length- average 60 mm. , range of variation 49 to 84 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 25 mm., range 18 to 31 mm.; thickness-average 10 mm.,
range 6 to 12 mm.
Workcanship: poor; large, uneven flake scars; almost no evidence of seconda ry
pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 14) , homogeneous gray chert
(10), petrified wood (2) , white quartzite (1), and jasper (1).
Remarks: The Wells points from the Yarbrough site fit very well the description of
this type given by Suhm et al. ( 1954: 488, Pl. 123). A certain close resemblance
is shown to panna maria variety of the Gary type, particularly in respect to general outline and overall proportions. The panna maria points, however, have a
much more sharply contracting and shorter stem. Resemblance is also shown to
that variety with regard to crudeness of workmanship.
In addition to this group of 28 points, six small fragme nts were recovered
which may represent this type, but because of their highly fragmentary nature
they are not included here. They likewise do not appear in the percentage tabulations for the type.

•1

;i'V, I
,J. .

A

H

J

N

T

D

c

8

K

p

0

u

v
Q

Q

w

?

~

x
4

y

~

?

F

E

y

~ 9
I

G

L

M

R

s

z

AA

19

CM.

Fig . 5 . Dart points : Wells, Kent, Bulverde, Morrill, and Elam types; miscellaneous straight
stem points . A-C, Wells type ; D-G, Kent type, phalba variety ; H-J , Kent type , quinlan
variety ; K-M, Bulverde type CM, barb fragments) ; N-P, Morrill type , s/ocum variety; Q-S,
Mo rrill type, san pedro variety; T-W, Elam type ; X-AA , miscellaneous points with straight
stems.

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Known distribution: Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 5, A-E); Boat Dock
(Bell, 1958: Pl. 11, F ) ; Hogge Bridge (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, Nos. 1 and 2
from left, line B) ; and Davis ( Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 58, P-W) sites.

The Kent Type. The Kent type dart point (Campbell, 1952: 66, Pl. 9, A-P; Suhm
et al., 1954: 432, Pl. 95 ), like Wells, shows transitional features between the
contracting stem and the straight stem traditions. This type is represented by
medium-sized points with triangular blades, prominent shoulders, and a short,
almost parallel-sided stem which, however, is slightly contracting. The Kent
type is represented at the Yarbrough site by two varieties: phalba and quinlan.
The phalba variety-11 specimens (Fig. 5, D-G )
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders fairly prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: one-third to one-half the length of the entire point; narrow, rather long;
sides more or less parallel; edges straight to very slightly convex; base flat or
slightly rounded.
Dimensions: length-average 40 mm., range of variation 35 to 44 mm.; width at the
shoulders--average 20 mm., range 14 to 25 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 5 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: poor, with little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (8), homogeneous gray chert
( 1 ) , and petrified wood ( 2).
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of this variety are medium size; narrow,
more or less parallel-sided stem; and flattish base. This variety resembles somewhat the colfax variety of Gary, but is longer, narrower, and has a less sharply
contracting stem. The phalba variety can be distinguished from the quinlan
variety of Kent since quinlan has a wider stem, a wider blade, and a somewhat
greater overall size.
Known distribution: Martin ( Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 6, A ) and Addicks
Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 36, U-W) sites.
The quinlan variety- 8 specimens (Fig. 5, H-J )
Blade: triangular; edges straight; shoulders prominent; three specimens have slight
barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point; sides almost parallel,
but contracting slightly; edges straight or slightly convex, a few specimens have
ground edges ; base flattened or somewhat rounded; a few specimens have a
ground base.
Dimensions: length-average 43 mm., range of variation 29 to 49 mm. ; width at
the shoulders-average 23 mm., range ZO to 26 mm. ; thickness- average 7 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.
Workmanship: poor, the relatively large flake scars indicate the percussion chipping
technique.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (7) and petrified wood (1) .
Remarks: The diagnostic, definitive attributes of the points of the quinlan variety
are medium size; heavy weight; wide, almost parallel-sided stem; and flattened
base. The quinlan variety is larger, broader, and heavier than the phalba, and
also has a wider stem. This variety resembles the colfax variety of the Gary type,
but the quinlan stem does not contract as much as that of the colfax.
Known distribution: Undetermined.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

169

THE STRAIGHT STEM TRADITION. A relatively small number of projectile
points belong to the straight stem tradition, which includes points with parallelsided stems having relatively flat bases. The Bulverde, Morrill, and Elam types are
its members at Area A. Four fragmentary points could not be properly described or
typed, but seem to represent the straight stem tradition. Because of the uncertainty
of this identification, however, they are not included in the general tabulations by
traditions.

The Bulverde Type- 10 specimens (Fig. 5, K-M)
Blade: triangular; edges straight or very slightly convex; shoulders prominent,
with moderately long barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third to one-half the length of the whole point; long,
straight; edges straight and tending to be parallel; base flat or slightly rounded
(convex ) .
Dimensions: length- average 48 mm., range of variation 43 to 58 mm.; width at
shoulders- average 32 mm., range 26 to 37 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm. ,
range 6 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: good, with some fine pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (3), homogeneous gray chert
( 4 ) , petrified wood ( 1), and novaculite (2).
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the Bulverde type are moderately large
size; relatively long, parallel-sided stem; flattened base, and well develop ed
barbs (Fig. 5, M, shows two large barb fragments ) . The ten specimens from Area
A fit the definition of this type given by Suhm et al. (1954: 404, Pl. 81). The
Bulverde point, although more characteristic of the central Texas area than eastern
or northeastern Texas, shows some resemblance to the Carrollton type of northern
Texas. However, Carrollton lacks the distinctive barbs of the Bulverde type.
Bulverde is also similar to the Travis type, but once again can be distinguished
by its prominent shoulders and barbs.
In addition to the 10 points described here, six basal fragments were recovered
which perhaps also belong to this type. Because of their fragmentary nature,
however, they are not included in any of the tabulations for the Bulverde type.
Known distribution: eastern Texas: Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 6, T, U )
and Davis (Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 59, L-Q) sites.
The Morrill Type. The Morrill category (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 167, 168, Fig.
58; Suhm et al., 1954: 456, Pl. 107) is represented by two rather consistent and
uniform varieties, the slocum and the san pedro, both of which have relatively long,
straight-sided, wide stems. These points are quite large, and are therefore not easily
confused with the somewhat similar, though smaller, Yarbrough type dart points.
The slocum variety-13 specimens (Fig. 5, N-P)
Blade: long, but roughly triangular; edges straight to slightly convex; shoulders
prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point; straight and long;
edges straight; a few specimens have ground edges; base tends to be straight
with rounded corners.
Dimensions: length-average 65 mm., range of variation 55 to 72 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 32 mm., range 25 to 35 mm.; thickness-average 10 mm.,
range 7 to 12 mm.

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

VVorkmanship: fair, but with little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 12) and homogeneous gray
chert (1).
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the slocum variety are large size, long blade,
long, parallel-sided stem, and flattened base. The slocum variety is quite easily
distinguished from the san pedro variety of the Morrill type, in that the former
has straighter stem sides, a relatively flatter base, and more prominent shoulders,
while the shoulders of the latter variety are slight and somewhat rounded.
Known distribution: Davis (Newell and Krieger, 1949 : Fig. 58, I, K ) and Hogge
Bridge (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, No. 8 from left, line B) sites.
The san pedro variety- 20 specimens (Fig. 5, Q- S)
Blade: triangular to lanceolate; edges straight to convex; shoulders not prominent,
rounded, without barbs.
Stem: about one-fifth to one-third the length of the entire point; nearly straight,
but slightly contracting; almost as wide as the shoulders; edges straight or very
slightly convex, most of the specimens have ground edges; base slightly rounded,
ground on many specimens.
Dimensions: length- average 62 mm. , range of variation 48 to 77 mm.; width at
should2rs- average 25 mm., range 23 to 30 mm.; thickness- average 9 mm. ,
range 8 to 12 mm.
Workmanship: fair, but with very little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 19 ) and quartzite ( 1) .
Remarks: The distinctive attributes of the san pedro variety are great length,
slightly contracting, very wide stem, slightly rounded base, and indistinct
shoulders. This variety can be distinguished from the slocum variety by the
presence, on san pedro, of a wide stem, slightly rounded base, and indistinct
shoulders.
Known distribution: Undetermined.

The Elam Type-6 specimens (Fig. 5, T-W)
Blade: triangular; edges straight; shoulders prominent, two specimens have slight
barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third to one-half the length of the entire point; expanding very slightly toward the base; edges straight to somewhat concave; three
specimens have ground, smooth edges: base tends to be flat and straight, and
three specimens have a ground base.
Dimensions: length-average 28 mm., range of variation 26 to 35 mm.; width at
shoulders--average 21 mm., range 19 to 23 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.
Workmanship: fair, but without secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 4), homogeneous whitish-gray
chert (1) , and novaculite (1) .
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the Elam points (Crook and Harris, 1952,
1954: 11, Pl. 6, Nos. 6-12; Suhm et al., 1954: 420, Pl. 82) at the Yarbrough sne,
Area A, are rather small size; short blade; proportionately large, almost straight,
but very slightly expanding stem with ground edges; and a straight base.
These points of the Elam type resemble those designated as Ellis, with the
characteristics of the groups overlapping somewhat. However, the stem and blade
of Elam are more equal in size; the stem does not expand so sharply at the base,

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

171

and the size of Elam is consistently less when groups of points representing the
two types are compared.
Known distribution: Milton (Crook and Harris, 1954: Pl. 1, Nos. lZ, 13 ); James
( Ray, 1960: Pl. 14, No. 9); Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 5, J-M ) ; Limerick ( Duffield, 1961 ) ; and Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 39, K, L ) sites.

Miscellaneous Points with Straight Stems ( Fig. 5, X- AA ) . In addition to the points
described under the types and varieties of the straight stem tradition, anoth er 17
specimens can be assigned to this group; but these exhibit a great deal of variation
and can not be placed in types or varieties. No two points of this miscellaneous
group are alike. Most are of medium size, have triangular or subtriangular blades,
prominent shoulders, a parallel-sided stem , and a flat, concave, or convex base.
TYPES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN THE STRAIGHT STEM AND EXPANDING STEM TRADITIONS. Under this heading are described the Marshall
and Yantis types.

Th e Marshall Type-3 specimens (Fig. 6, A-C )
Blade: triangular; edges straight; shoulders prominent, with long, broad barbs.
Stem: approximately one- fourth the length of the entire specimen; very slightly
expanding; edges straight; base straight, slightly concave, or slightly convex.
Dimensions: length- specimen 1, 70 mm. (estimated ), specimen 2, 45 mm. (es timated ) , specimen 3, 45 mm. (estimated ) ; width at the shoulders- specimen 1, 47
mm.; specimen 2, 35 mm., specimen 3, 32 mm.; thickness- specimen 1, 7 mm.,
specimen 2, 7 mm., specimen 3, 5 mm.
Workmanship: good, with secondary pressure flaking on the blade.
Materials: homogeneous gray chert (2) and quartzite ( 1) .
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the Marshall type (originally defined by
Suhm et al., 1954: 444, Pl. 101 ), at Area A, are medium size, large barbs, small,
slightly expanding stem, and narrow base.
Known distribution: Undetermined.
The Yantis Typ e. This type, composed of two varieties-the cook and swan-is
characterized primarily by large size, crude workmanship , and short, indistinct
stem.
The cook variety- 7 specimens (Fig. 6, D-F )
Blade: uncertain because of the fragmentary nature of the specimens, probably
triangular; edges straight or nearly so ; shoulders prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth the length of the entire point (estimate); short,
and expanding very slightly; edges gently concave, expanding slightly toward
the base, and a few have ground edges; base slightly concave with pointed
corners.
Dimensions: length- average (estimated) 60 mm.; width at shoulders- average 31
mm., range of variation 28 to 35 mm.; thickness-average 12 mm. , range 11 to
13 mm.
Workmanship: crude, little evidence of pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (6) and white quartzite ( 1) .
Remarks: The definitive attributes of the cook variety are large size, crude workmanship, slightly expanding stern, and sligh tly concave base. The last two features serve to distinguish this variety from the swan variety.
Known distribution: Mart in site (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 5, G).

H

G

M

s

c

B

A

N

F

J

K

L

v

u

I?

E

p

0

T

D

~34

y\J
CM.

Q

w

R

x

?'?'il 19

Fig. 6 . Dart points: Marshall , Yantis, Yarbrough, Ellis, and Trinity types . A-C, Marshall
type; D-F, Yantis type,

coo .~

variety; G-1, Yantis type, swan variety; J-L, Yarbrough type,

/inda/e variety ; M-0, Yarbrough type, di!ce variety; P-R, Yarbrough type, mabank variety;
S-U, Ellis type ; V-X, Trinity type .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

173

The swan variety-9 specimens (Fig. 6, G-1 )
Blade: crude, more or less lanceolate; edges irregular, tending to be somewhat
convex; shoulders poorly developed.
Stem: about one-fourth the length of the entire point; short and almost contracting;
edges slightly concave, a few have ground edges; base flattened or very slightly
convex.
Dimensions: length-average 58 mm., range of variation 50 (estimated) to 65
mm.; width at shoulders- average 37 mm., range 31 to 43 mm.; thickness-average 12 mm., range 9 to 15 mm.
Workmanship: crude, lacking secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the swan variety are large size. crude
workmanship, and rather short, almost contracting stem with flattened base. The
last wo attributes serve to distinguish the swan from the cook variety.
Known distribution: Martin site (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 5, H).
THE EXP ANDING STEM TRADITION. The Yarbrough , Ellis, Trinity. Edgewood, Ensor, Wesley, Fair land, Palmillas, and Lone Oak types are the representatives of the expanding stem tradition at the Yarbrough site.
In addition to the points of these types, another 33 fragmentary points were
found which represent this stemming tradition, but which could not, because of
their incomplete nature. be placed in varieties and types.

The Yarbrough Type. This type accounts for most of the representatives of the expanding stem tradition at the Yarbrough site. The Yarbrough type (originally
defined by Newell and Krieger, 1949: 168, Fig. 57; see also Suhm et al .. 1954: 492,
Pl. 125 ) , with its three varieties (the Lindale, dike, and mabank ) is characterized
by relatively long, well made points with a slightly expanding and usually concavesided stem.
Aside from the points described under the different varieties 19 additional, frag mentary, points perhaps represent the Yarbrough type but because of their in completeness could not be assigned to the varieties and do not appear in the
tabulations for the type.
The Lindale variety-98 specimens (Fig. 6, J-L)
Blade: triangular or subtriangular; edges convex or almost straight, two specimens show opposed, bifacial beveling; shoulders very prominent but without
barbs.
Stem: one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire specimen; expanding slightly
toward the base; edges straight or nearly so, most of the specimens having ground
lateral edges; base straight or, rarely, slightly concave or slightly convex, most
of the specimens having a ground base.
Dimensions: length-average 58 mm. , range of variation 34 to 74 mm.; width at
shoulders- average 22 mm ., range 15 to 32 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm.,
range 4 to 12 mm.
Workmanship: moderately good with some pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (86), homogeneous gray chert
(9) , petrified wood (2 ) , and black flint (1).
Remarks: The definitive attributes of the Lindale variety are medium size, slightly
expanding stem with straight edges, and straight base. The Lindale is rather close

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to the dike variety, except that the dike has a longer stem, the edges of which are
noticeably concave instead of straight.
Known distribution: Martin (Davis and Davis. 1960: Fig. 6, G, I, J ); Davis (Newell
and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 57, W , X ); Boat Dock ( Bell, 1958: Pl. 11, H , J ); Scott
(Bell, 1953: Fig. 96, No. 6 from the left, line 6); and Addicks Reservoir (Wheat,
1953: Pl. 37, I , J) sites.
Th e dike variety-15 specimens (Fig. 6, M-0 )
Blade: lanceolate or almost triangular; edges slightly convex; shoulders prominent,
but without barbs.
Stem: one-third the length of the point; narrow near the shoulders, but expanding
considerably at the base; edges markedly concave, most of the specimens having
ground edges; base straight and fl at.
Dimensions: length-average 51 mm., range of variation 38 to 62 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 25 mm., range 23 to 30 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm., range
5 to 9 mm.
VVorkmanship: good , but with very little pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 12), homogeneous gray chert
(2), and p etrified wood ( 1) .
Remarks: The dike variety can be distinguished by great length (in relation to the
width); narrow, sharply expanding stem with concave edges; and flattened base.
Known distribution: Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 6, C- E) and Limerick
(Duffield, 1961 ) sites.
The mabank variety-46 specimens (Fig. 6, P - R )
Blade: lance:ilate or roughly triangular; edges convex or almost straight, one specim en with opposite edges beveled; shoulders moderately prominent, but without
barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth to one-third the l ength of the entire point; expanding slightly toward the base; edges generally concave, but at times almost straight:
base markedly concave.
Dimensions: length-average 48 mm., range of variation 37 to 54 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 20 mm., range 17 to 24 mm. ; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 5 to 10 mm.
Workmanship: rather good , with some secondary pressure fl aking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 43) and homogeneous gray
chert (3) .
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the mabank variety are medium size,
lanceolate blade, narrow, expanding stem. and markedly concave base. The
mabank variety is quite like the dike except that the former has a lanceolate blade
and a concave base. Its concave base and concave stem edges likewise serve to
distinguish it from the lindale variety.
Known distribution: Hogge Bridge (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, No. 3 from the left
on line B) and Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 6, K) sites.

The Ellis Type-33 specimens (Fig. 6, S-U)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight to slightly convex; should ers prominent;
three specimens have short barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire specimen ;
sharply expanding and short; edges generally straight or very slightly convex;
base straight; a few specimens show grinding on the base.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

175

Dimensions: length-average 33 mm., range of vanatwn 21 to 41 mm.; widthaverage 22 mm., range 16 to 24 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm. , range 6 to
11 mm.
Workmanship: fair, but with little secondary flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (20), agate (1), petrified wood
(5) , white quartzite (5) , and homogeneous gray chert (2).
Remarks: The diagnostic characteristics of the Ellis points (originally defined by
Newell and Krieger, 1949: 166-176, Fig. 8; see also Suhm et al. , 1954: 422, Pl.
90) are short and broad proportions, expanding stem, and flattened base. The
Ellis points are somewhat similar to the Elam type, but are larger on the average
and have a stem which expands much more markedly at the base.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961 ) ; Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960:
Fig. 7, M-P); Wann (Sharrock, 1960: Pl. 4, E); Boat Dock (Bell, 1958: Pl. 11 ,
T, Y ) ; Ck-44 (Hall, 1954: Pl. 13, Nos. 36--40 ); Harroun (Jelks and Tunnell,
1959: Fig. 15, E ); Scott (Bell, 1953: Fig. 95, Nos. 7 and 8 from the left on line
1); and the Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 37, K ) sites.

The Trinity Type- 13 specimens (Fig. 6, V-X)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges irregular, straight to slightly concave or slightly
convex; shoulders prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point; expanding and
almost bulbous; edges irregular, many specimens having ground edges; base
rounded (convex ) or almost straight, many specimens with a ground base.
Dimensions: length-average 39 mm., range of variation 30 to 45 mm. ; width at
the sh oulders- average 20 mm. , range 16 to 26 mm.; thickness- average 8 mm.,
range 7 to 9 mm.
VVorkmanship: of poor quality with rather large flakes removed, presumably by
percussion; very little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (10 ) and homogeneous gray
chert (3).
Remarks: The most diagnostic attributes of the Trinity points (originally defined
by Crook and Harris, 1952, 1954: 3, Pl. 1, Nos. 5-9; definition changed considerable by Suhm et al., 1954: 486, Pl. 82; the present report follows the definition
of Suhm et al.) at the Yarbrough site are medium size and large, expanding,
bulbous stems.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961 ) and Trinity Aspect sites (Cro:.ik
and Harris, 1954: Pl. 1, Nos. 8, 9).
The Edgewood Typ e
The Edgewood type (originally defined by Suhm et al., 1954: 418, Pl. 88) is
characterized, at the Yarbrough site, by medium to large size; generally prominent
shoulders; short, expanding stem; and concave base. It is represented by three
varieties, the hooker, bull creek, and dixon.
The hooker variety-13 specimens (Fig. 7, A-B)
Blade: triangular or laurel leaf-shaped; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders
prominent, two specimens show short barbs.
Stem: one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire point; sharply expanding
and wide at the base; edges concave near the shoulders and straight near the base,
a few having ground edges; base concave, often as wide as the shoulders, corners
sharply pointed.

B

A

c

F

E

D

J

H

G

..
...
t~"t
-

II\.

,~

~~

....d

L

K

~

\

CJ
p

0

N

M

I

~,

r~

'

~\

""'\

Q

R

s

Lah
u

T

v

z

y

w

x

AA

BB

CM.
. L-~-- -

--

Fig. 7. Dar i points : Edgewood, Ensor, Wesley, Fair/and , Pa/mil/as , and Lone Oak types ;
miscellaneous expanding stem points, stemless dart points, miscellaneous dart points, and
points with one shoulder. A-B, Edgewood type, hooker variety; C-E, Edgewood type, bu//
creek variety ; F-H, Edgewood type, dixon variety; 1-J, Ensor type; K-M , Wesley type; N,
Fair/and type; 0-P, Pa/mil/as type; Q-T, Lone Oak type; U-V, miscellaneous expanding stem
points; W-X, sllemless dart points; Y-Z, miscellaneous dart points ; AA-BB, points with one
shoulder.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

177

Dimensions: length- average 37 mm. , range of variation 32 to 41 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 22 mm., range 18 to 24 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: moderately good with some amount of secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (9), petrified wood ( 1), and
homogeneous gray chert ( 3) .
Remarks: The definitive attributes of the hooker variety are medium size, relatively
long blades, expanding stems, and concave bases. The most important of these
attributes is the long blade.
Known distribution: Limerick site (Duffield, 1961 ) .
The bull creek variety-30 specimens (Fig. 7, C-E)
Blade: lanceolate, rarely triangular; edges convex or almost straight; shoulders
poorly develop ed and without true barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth the length of the entire point; expanding; edges
concave; base .narrow and deeply concave, many specimens having a ground
base.
Dimensions: length-average 47 mm., range of variation 31 to 73 mm.; width at
the shoulders--average 25 mm., range 16 to 29 mm.; thickness-average 9 mm. ,
range 7 to 13 mm.
Workmanship: crude, exhibiting percussion flaking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (21), homogeneous gray chert
( 4 ), pink quartzite ( 3), and petrified wood (2).
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the bull creek variety are rather large
size; narrow, lanceolate blade; short, expanding stem ; narrow, concave base;
and crude workmanship.
Known distribution: undetermined.
The dixon variety-7 specimens (Fig. 7, F- H )
Blad=: roughly triangular; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders prominent,
but lacking barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire point; sharp ly
expanding, very wide at the base ; edges deeply concave (or notched) ; base wide,
concave; corners distinctly blunted or turned up ; many of the specimens have a
markedly ground and smooth base.
Dimensions: length- average 37 mm., range of variation 24 to 45 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 20 mm., range 21 to 33 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 3 to 7 mm.
'\iVorkmanship: moderately good, with som e secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (3), jasper (2), and homogen eous gray chert ( 2) .
Remarks: The definitive attributes of this variety are comparatively wide blade ;
short, wide stem; and concave base with blunt corners. Th e stem form serves to
segregate this variety from others of the Edgewood type.
Known distribution: Undetermined.

The Ensor Type-2 specimens (Fig. 7, 1-J )
Blade: triangular; edges straight; shoulders fairly prominent, barbs absent.
Stem: approximately one-fifth the length of the entire point ; short and expanding;
edges concave; base straight or slightly concave; one specimen has a ground base.
Dimensions: length-specimen 1, 35 mm. , specimen 2, 46 mm.; width at the

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shoulders-specimen 1, 19 mm., specimen 2, 26 mm.; thickness-specimen 1,
6 mm. , specimen 2, 7 mm.
Workmanship: good, with some evidence of pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The original definition for the Ensor type (Suhm et al., 1954: 422, Pl.
90; see also Miller and Jelks, 1952: 172, Pl. 22, panel 2) is followed in the
classification presented here. Another approach, as opposed to calling Ensor an
expanding stem form, would be to consider it as a stemless point with side
notches on the blade.
Known distribution : Undetermined.

The Wesley Type-5 specimens (Fig. 7, K-M)
Blade: long and triangular; edges straight; shoulders not prominent.
Stem: approximately one-fifth to one-fourth the length of the entire specimen;.
expanding and wide; edges very slightly concave; base almost as wide as th e
shoulders and straight.
Dimensions: length-average 50 mm., range of variation 44 to 56 mm.; width at the
shoulders- average 23 mm., range 21to25 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm., range
7 to 9 mm.
Workmanship: good, with careful pressure flaking on four specimens.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 4) and pink quartzite ( 1).
Remarks: The definitive attributes of the Wesley type are medium size; long, triangular blade; short, wide, expanding stem; and straight base. The type resembles Trinity, but lacks the bulbous stem of that type.
Known distribution: Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 7, K, L) and Sam
(Proctor, 1957: Pl. 14, No. 15) sites.
The Palmillas Type-11 specimens (Fig. 7, 0-P )
Blade: triangular to laurel leaf-shaped; edges straight or convex; shoulders prominent, but lacking strong barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire specimen; expanding and
bulbous; edges concave near the shoulder, convex near the base; base rounded
(convex) with non-angular corners.
Dimensions: length-average 43 mm., range of variation 34 to 51 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 23 mm., range 21 to 30 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm. ,
range 4 to 9 mm.
Workmanship: rather poor with little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (8), novaculite (1) , quartzite
( 1 ) , and petrified wood ( 1 ) .
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the Palmillas type (named by MacNeish,
1958: 67, Fig. 24, Nos. 24--27; see also Suhm et al., 1954: 462, Pl. 110) at Area
A, are medium size, small bulbous stem, and convex base.
Known distribution: Undetermined.
The Lone Oak Type-5 specimens (Fig. 7, Q-T)
Blade: probably triangular, but uncertain because of the fragmentary nature of
the specimens; edges straight or very nearly so; shoulders prominent, with short
barbs on three specimens.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point; expanding, bulbous;
edges concave near the shoulders, convex near the base; base rounded (convex) .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

179

Dimensions: length-average 60 mm. (estimate): width at should ers-average 28
mm., range 26 to 31 mm.; thickness average 9 mm., range 7 to 10 mm.
vVorkmanship: crude, with almost no secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the Lone Oak type are medium size, large,
bulbous stem, and convex base. The points of this type resemble rather closely
those of the Palmillas type, but are larger, cruder, and have proportionally
shorter stems.
Known distribution: Undetermined.

Miscellaneous Expanding Stem Points (Fig. 7, U-V). In addition to the points described under the types and varieties of the expanding stem tradition, 12 additional
expa nding stem specimens were recovered which do not coincide with any of the
afore-described categories. The variation shown in these 12 points seems to be
a lmost random and, perhaps, accidental. All examples are of medium to large
size, have triangular or lanceolate blades, a few have barbs, and show either straight
or concave bases.
MISCELLANEOUS STEMMED AND STEMLESS POINTS.

Stemless Dart Points (Fig. 7, W-X). Although rare at the Yarbrough site, a few
stemless dart points were recovered. These 26 specimens are, almost without exception, very crude and of an irregular form and general outline. Indeed, some
doubt exists that they actually served as projectile points. Although great variation
is found in the outline, most specimens tend to be either lozenge- or laurel-leafshaped, with rounded bases. A few approach the subtriangular in shape.
These specimens, varying in length from 24 to 43 mm., were manufactured from
reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (15 specimens), petrified wood (8), homogeneous gray chert (1), and pink quartzite (2).
Because of their almost random variation in form, these stemless points could
not be grouped and described under variety or type categories.
Similar stemless points have been found at the Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960 :
Fig. 5, F ) ; Boat Dock (Bell, 1958: Pl. 11 , O) ; and Sam (Proctor, 1957: Pl. 15, No.
15 ) sites.
Miscellaneous Dart Points. Twenty-five crude, stemmed dart points were of an
irregular shape and could not be placed in types or varieties (Fig. 7, Y-Z) . Most of
these specimens (17), are of petrified wood, while the others, except for one large
point of whitish-gray chert, are of exceptionally poor quality reddish-gray chert.
The poor quality of the materials used in manufacture goes a long way in explaining the crudeness and heterogeneity of these specimens. Thirteen examples have
crude expanding stems, eight have straight stems, and four have slightly contracting
stems. Yet th eir stems are very crude and irregular, and it seems that the shapes
of the stems are almost random. For this reason these points have not been
included in the tabulations for the various stemming tradition s. Many of them,
particularly those made of petrified wood, are identical to specimens recently recovered at McGee Bend Reservoir in southeastern Texas (Jelks, personal communication).
Another interesting group of five miscellaneous dart points stands out because
only one shoulder occurs on the blade of each specimen (Fig. 7, AA-BB). On one
edge the blade joins directly to the stem, while the other blade edge terminates

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

just above the stem in the usual, prominent shoulder. Whether these artifacts
represent accidents, points reworked or resharpened only upon one edge, or a consistent style, can not now be determined. Among these there is a great deal of variation in stem forms, with two contracting, one bulbous, one straight, and one expanding stem represented. The expanding stem specimen is of petrified wood, but
the others are of local reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions. Their length varies
from 38 to 55 mm., the width at the shoulders from 18 to 26 mm., and the maximum thickness from 7 to 10 mm.

Unclassifiable Dart Point Fragments. One hundred fifty-five fragments of dart
point blades were found at the Yarbrough site, and these could not be classified into
varieties or types. It can only be said that no blade forms are present which do not
occur among the typed specimens.
Ninety-four fragments were recovered which are medial segments of broken
dart points. No type assignments can be made since these specimens lack their
bases.
POINTS OF POSSIBLE PALEO-INDIAN ORIGIN. A total of 19 projectile points
and projectile point fragments exhibit certain features which suggest their affinity
with Paleo-Indian artifact traditions or industries. In some cases the affinities and
resemblances are so patent that they allow for little doubt, while for other points
only general, non-specific resemblances can be noted to particular Paleo-Indian
point types.

The Clovis Type (Fig. 8, A-B). Two basal fragments of Clovis points were recovered at the site. Although these specimens are incomplete, a general lanceolate
outline can be inferred. Both are bifacially fluted and show ground lateral edges
and bases. The corners of the base turn out slightly- more so in one (A) than the
other (B). In outline, specimen A resembles very closely Clovis points from the
Miami locality of Texas (Sellards, 1952: 26, Fig. 9), while the base of specimen B
seems to flare out somewhat more than is common in points of this type. Specimen
A is of a brown, banded chert and specimen B of a homogeneous mottled gray
chert; both materials are presumably foreign to the immediate area of the Y arbrough site.
Dimensions: Specimen A-width at base 32 mm., thickness 5 mm.; specimen Bwidth at base 23 mm. , thickness 6 mm.
The Plainview Type (Fig. 8, C). One small basal fragment seems to have come
from a non-fluted, but Paleo-Indian point probably of the Plainview type. The sides
of this specimen are ground smooth, and its base is deeply concave and likewise
smoothed. The edges of the base flare out slightly. The base is 22 mm. in width.
and the maximum thickness is 4 mm. This point is made of pinkish-gray mottled
chert, presumably of non-local origin.
The San Patrice Type (Fig. 8, D-E). Two projectile points can be assigned to the
San Patrice type, originally defined by Webb (1946: 13-17, Pl. 1; 1948: 230-231 ) .
Although Suhm et al. (1954: 477) place the type in their Archaic Stage, there is
much evidence (general resemblance in outline to the Meserve type, smoothed
stems edges, etc.) to suggest a Paleo-Indian affiliation for these points.
The two specimens from the Yarbrough site, Area A, have a very short blade,
rather prominent shoulders, concave and ground stem edges, and a deeply concave,
thinned and ground base. Specimen E, of white quartzite, measures 34 mm. in

181

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

'·

... A

B

F

c

•

g
'

D

G

E

'

H

J

(tJ
K

L

M

R

N

s

,Q I ~ ~

u

T

1 ? fr ffi 'ii

p

0

v

19

CM.

w

x

y

z

Fig. 8. Dart points: Clovis, Plainview, San Patrice, Meserve, and Sandy Creek types;
miscellaneous Paleo-like points; arrow points; drills. A-8, Clovis type; C, Plainview type;
D-E, San Patrice type; F-H, Meserve type; 1-K, Sandy Creek type; L-P, miscellaneous Paleolike points; Q-V, arrow points; W-Z, drills.

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

length, 24 mm. in width at the shoulders, and is 6 mm. thick. Specimen D, of
milky quartz, is 30 mm. long, 27 mm. wide at the shoulders, and 6 mm. thick.
The stem of a possible San Patrice point (not illustrated), in contrast to D and E ,
is somewhat more narrow than the blade. This point resembles the Meserve type in
general outline, but lacks a beveled blade. The stem edges and base have been very
slightly smoothed by grinding. Its length is 35 mm., the width at the shoulders
22 mm. , and the thickness 5 mm. Moss agate was used in manufacture. and the general workmanship is quite good.
Similar points have been found at the Martin site (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig.
4, F-G ) and in Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 38, M ).

The Meserve Type (Fig. 8, F-H) . Three medium-sized projectile points fit th e broad
definition of the Meserve type as presented by Suhm et al. (1954: 450, Pl. 104), although perhaps they do not agree in every detail with the original points recovered
at the Meserve site in Nebraska ( Schultz, 1932; Davis, 1953 ) .
Specimen F most closely resembles the Meserve site examples. It ha s a stem
with ground edges, which is somewhat wider than the blade. The edges of the blade
are slightly convex, and are beveled on the right side of both faces (orienting the
point with the base downward ). The concave base is also noticeably ground and
smoothed. This point measures 39 mm. in length, is 21 mm. wide at the base, and
has a maximum thickness of 5 mm. It is made of a pinkish-gray, mottled chert of
non-local origin.
Specimen G is similar to specimen F , but exhibits cruder workmanship and
general execution, probably because of the poor quality of the petrified wood from
which it was manufactured. Its blade is less noticeably beveled than that of specimen
F , but its concave base and the stem edges are well smoothed by grinding. This
point measures 33 mm. in length, 23 mm. in width at the base, and 6 mm. in
thickness. The petrified wood from which it was manufactured is of local origin.
Specimen H is much like the others, but is wider at the shoulders than at the
base and its edges are not ground. The workmanship exhibited on this specimen
is excellent, and an apparently non-local moss-agate was used in its manufacture.
This point measures 34 mm. in length, is 22 mm. wide at the shoulders, and has a
maximum thickness of 4 mm.
The Sandy Creek Type (Fig. 8, I- K ) . Three small stemless points are of very crude
appearance, and though somewhat irregular in outline, tend to be laurel leafshaped. They have concave bases and present an overall outline quite like that of
many Paleo-Indian points, particularly those found east of the Mississippi River.
The bases of two specimens, along with the lower part of the edges, have been
carefull y smoothed by grinding. The third point r esembles the others in general
form but lacks any evidence of grinding.
Specimen I measures 34 mm. in length, 18 mm. in width, and 7 mm. in thickness.
Specimen J measures 36 mm. in length, 20 mm. in width at the base ( which is the
widest part of the specimen) and 7 mm. in thickn ess. Specimen K is 31 mm. m
length, 15 mm. in width at m id-section, and 7 mm. in thickness.
Similar specimens were found at Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 39, F ).
Miscellaneous Paleo-like Points (Fig. 8, L-P) . In addition to the aforem entioned
types, seven projectile points, which fit no defined types, show some relation in
form to points from the eastern U nited States having supposed Paleo- Indian affiliation.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

183

These seven specimens ex hibit a great deal of variation among them selves, though
all but three ha ve stems with ground edges and a ground base. Their blades are
short and ha ve very inconspicuous shoulders. One example has a triangular outline,
while th e others tend to be more lan ceolate in form. These points, although
·described together here, do not con st itute a homogeneous assemblage. The length
ranges from 29 to 37 mm. , the width at the shoulders from 15 to 24 mm., and the
thickness from 5 to 8 mm. Two were manufactured from petrified wood, three
from quartzite, one from rose quartz, and one from jasper.
A small segm ent of the ground base of another possible Paleo- Indian dart point
wa s also found. This has slightly con tra cting sides and a straight, thinn ed base.
The width at the base measures 8 mm., and the maximum thickness is 4 mm. It is
of a n on-local, mottled, siliceous stone.
A rrow Points
In contrast to the large number of dart points, only one complete a rrowhead
and eight fragments were obtained from the excavations. The complete specimen
(Fig. 8, T ), which is made of petrified wood, has a roughly triangula r but somewhat irregular blade, prominent shoulders, and a small bulbous stem. It is 29 mm.
in length, 16 mm. in width at the sh ould ers, and 3 mm. thick.
Three other specimens (Fig. 8, Q- S) , only slightly damaged, all h ave a triangular
blade and a short protrusion which serves as a rudimentary stem. Th e other five
specimens (Fig. 8, U-V) have lost their stems through breakage but show triangular
blades. The shoulders of two of th ese are square and have outflar ing barbs. The
length of th e fragmenta ry points ra nges from 21 to 32 mm. (estimate ), th e width
a t the shoulders from 14 to 23 mm., and th e thickness from 2 to 5 mm.
One of the fragmentary points is of a homogeneous gray chert, the others of
reddish-gray ch er l w ith abundant sand inclusions.

2.

BI FACIAL ARTIFACTS

A total number of 351 bifacial artifacts and fragments (excluding,
here, the projectile points) was recovered from the excavation of the
knoll, Area A. These generally crude and somewhat irregular artifacts
exhibit, except for a few exceptions mentioned below, at least one cutting edge prepared by the percussion flaking technique. Some have
definite points for piercing. while others have two cutting edges. The
distinctive feature of all is that they were worked from both faces, as
opposed to the scrapers which were flaked only from one face . Because
of their rather irregular shapes and the lack of comparative data of a
distributional nature, it is deemed best not to attempt t o classify these
artifacts into varieties and types for the present time. Rather, as many
as possible will be described in small, homogeneous groups which future research may show, it is hoped, to correspond to true varieties or
types. Here each group will be designated with Roman numerals.
Many of the bifacial artifacts were obviously intended to be used as
knives (they have clearly-distinguishable cutting adges ), while others,

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

though also worked from both faces, do not show such easily recognizable edges. The members of the first category will be called
"knives," those of the second, "Iniscellaneous bifacial artifacts."

Knives
Group I (Fig. 9, A-C ) consists of 28 knives which are lanceolate in
general outline (the edges are convex), and have approximately
straight bases which tend to contract. The workmanship shown on
these specimens is quite crude. Their length varies from 48 to 96 mm.,
the width from 21 to 45 mm. , and the thickness from 9 to 20 mm. Two
of the specimens were manufactured from ferruginous sandstone, 19
from reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions, six from petrified wood,
and one from homogeneous, gray chert.
Group II (Fig. 9, D-F) is made up of 20 rather small knives which
are triangular or subtriangular in general outline. Their edges are
straight or slightly convex, and the bases are very slightly rounded.
The workmanship is somewhat better than that exhibited by the Group
I specimens, but no pressure flaking was used. The length varies from
37 to 50 mm., the width (at the base ) from 27 to 36 mm., and the thickness from 6 to 13 mm. Four of these knives were manufactured from
quartzite, 11 from reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions, three from
petrified wood, and two from homogeneous gray chert.
Group III (Fig. 9, G-I ) consists of 32 medium-sized knives which
are ovate-acuminate in general outline. The edges are convex and the
base is rounded. The workmanship shown on these specimens is crude,
and the outline of many is irregular. The length varies from 40 to 66
mm., the width from 20 to 42 mm. , and the thickness from 8 to 18 mm.
Two were manufactured from quartzite, two from petrified wood, one
from a homogeneous light gray chert, and 27 from reddish-gray chert.
Group IV (Fig. 9, J-L) is made up of long, narrow knives with a
lanceolate outline. Their sides are slightly convex and their bases
flattened or somewhat rounded. The length varies from 53 to 125 mm.,
the maximum width from 25 to 35 mm. , and the thickness from 9 to
16 mm. These artifacts are somewhat better made than the previously
described groups, although only the percussion flaking technique was
employed in their manufacture. One was made from ferruginous sandstone, seven from reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions, one from
homogeneous gray chert, three from quartzite, and two from petrified
wood.
Group V (Fig. 9, M-P) is composed of 12 bi-pointed knives of medium size. Their edges are convex and contract at both extremities.

185

YARBROUGH AND MILL ER SITES

G

c

B

A

N

0

p

Q

v

'

L

K

J

H

F

E

D

R

w

5

x

" '

CM

Fig . 9 . Knives : Groups I-VIII. A-C , Group I; D- F, Group II ; G-1 , Group Ill ; J-L, Group
IV; M- P, Group V; Q-S, Group VI ; T- U, Group VII ; V-X, Group VIII .

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Here again the flaking is of the percussion type and quite crude. The
length ranges from 45 to 87 mm., the width (measured midway on
the edges ) from 22 to 29 mm. , and the thickness from 8 to 20 mm. One
is made of petrified wood, two from quartzite, one from ferruginous
sandstone, and eight from reddish-gray chert with abundant sand inclusions.
Group VI (Fig. 9, Q-S ) consists of 10 medium-sized knives which
have an ovate outline. The edges are convex and the extremities
rounded. The workmanship is quite crude. Their length ranges from
45 to 63 mm., the width (measured midway on the edges) ranges from
29 to 40 mm. , and the thickness from 7 to 16 mm. One specimen was
made from a black flint, while the remaining nine are of a reddishgray chert with sand inclusions.
Group VII (Fig. 9, T-U) is made up of 13 large, thin sheets or slabs
of petrified wood which hnve been worked bifacially along one side to
form a cutting edge. The outline of these specimens is very irregular
because of the poor quality of the stone. The maximum diameter varies
from 50 to 95 mm. and the thickness from 4 to 14 mm. This group has
been recognized in the lower Neches River area in McGee Bend Reservoir by Edward B. Jelks (MS ), who has designated them "Harvey
Blades. "
Group VIII (Fig. 9, V-X) consists of 27 medium-sized knives, all of
petrified wood, which are crudely formed into an approximate triangular or subtriangular outline. All of these specimens have one
pointed end, and several show flaking on one or both edges. The base is
generally flat and unworked, although slightly rounded in a few examples. The length ranges from 40 to 60 mm., the width from 24 to 50
mm., and the thickness from 6 to 22 mm. This distinctive group of
knives has also been recognized in the McGee Bend Reservoir area by
I elks (MS), who has called them "Bronson Blades."
Group IX (Fig. 10, A-C) is a residual category composed of 154 irregular, fragmentary, or unusual specimens which could not be placed
in any of the eight groups. It would be a great mistake to consider the
examples of those eight groups as typical of the knives from the Yarbrough site. On the contrary, almost half of the knives (the 154 specimens of Group IX) are irregular, crude, and unclassifiable. Round,
flat, and concave bases and all sorts of edges and tips are represented
in this group, but practically no two examples are alike. In fact, many
appear to represent stones which were slightly worked only on one
small portion of the specimen.

c

8

A

E

D

••

F

H

G

L

M

J

K

N

p

0

;.---,

'

J'

--,

' t

· ~-----

•' .

s

R

u

~~]

]

·.,,.·___ - - -

T

, -\
\

\

__
v

Q

l
I

w

x

Fig . 10. Kn ives (Group IXI, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts (Groups 1-V) , Mineola end
scrapers, triangular end scrapers, and side scrapers . A-C, knives , Group IX ; D-E , miscellaneous

bifacial ar!ifacts, Group I; F-H, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts , Group II ; 1-K, miscellaneous
bifacial artifacts, Group Ill; l-N, m iscellaneous bifacial artifacts , Group IV ; 0-0, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts , Group V ; R-T, Mineola end scrapers ; U-V, triangula r end scrapers ;

W-X , side scrapers.

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In sharp contrast to the others, one interesting specimen of this residual category is a long, thin, well-made knife which has the outline
(lanceolate blade and concave base ) of an Angostura point (Fig. 13,
G). This specimen has been made very thin by the removal of wide,
shallow flakes , and the edges have beer, evenly retouched by pressure
flaking. It was found at a depth of 18 in. in Analysis Unit 1, in the pottery zone. It is of a compact, gray chert, measures 125 mm. in length,
28 mm. in width, and 6 mm. in thickness.
In Group IX are 110 knives of reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions, 22 of petrified wood, 11 of quartzite, nine of homogeneous gray
chert, one of ferruginous sandstone, and one of agate.

Miscellaneous Bifacial Artifacts
Group I (Fig. 10, D-E ) is composed of five medium-sized, thick
bifacial artifacts with a circular outline. The workmanship shown on
these specimens is very crude, and only percussion flaking was used
in their manufacture. Their maximum diameter ranges from 35 to 51
mm. and the thickness from 14 to 25 mm. All are made from the local
reddish-gray chert.
Group II (Fig. 10, F-H) is made up of five thick, bifacial artifacts
with a circular outline which, apart from their much smaller size, are
equal to the specimens described under Group I. The workmanship
here is likewise very crude and only the percussion technique seems to
have been used in their manufacture. The maximum diameter ranges
from 2 7 to 33 mm. and the thickness from 9 to 14 mm. One example is
made of a homogeneous light gray chert; the other four are of reddishgray chert.
Group III (Fig. 10, I-K) is composed of 15 very small, crudely-made
artifacts with a lanceolate outline. A great deal of irregularity and
variation is shown by the members of this group. Were it not for their
relatively great thickness, crude workmanship, and rather irregular
outline, these artifacts might be considered projectile points. Their
length varies from 26 to 35 mm., the width from 16 to 24 mm., and the
thickness from 7 to 11 mm. All 15 specimens are made from reddishgray chert.
Group IV (Fig. 10 L-N) with its eight members, is identical to
Group III except that the general outline of the artifacts is subtriangular rather than lanceolate. The base is slightly rounded and the edges
somewhat convex. The maximum length ranges from 30 to 39 mm. ,
the width from 19 to 26 mm., and the thickness from 8 to 12 mm. All

189

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

of these specimens are made of the local reddish-gray chert with abundant sand inclusions.
Group V (Fig. 10, 0-Q) is composed of ten pointed artifacts which,
in all but their small size, resemble fist-axes. These were made from
small river or gravel pebbles and cobbles which were worked bifacially
near the point, but the lower half, still exhibiting the original cortex
patina, was left unmodified. Their general outline is ovate-acuminate
in shape. The typical base is rounded and the edges, although somewhat irregular, tend to be straight. The length ranges from 31 to 60
mm., the maximum width from 24 to 33 mm., and the thickness from 9
to 25 mm. Three examples were made from petrified wood and the
other seven from reddish-gray chert.

3.

SCRAPERS

Mineola End Scrapers (Fig. 10, R-T ) . Thirty-seven medium- to
large-sized end scrapers form an easily recognizable and discrete
group, here designated "Mineola end scrapers." All of these specimens were manufactured from slabs of petrified wood, generally have
a square or rectangular outline, and are flat on both faces. Chipping of
the percussion type was done on the bit end, frequently on the two
sides, and rarely on the base, but only from one face. The bit itself is
very steeply beveled and is concave on six specimens, forming a
"gouge" bit, is straight on 24 specimens, and is slightly convex on
seven examples. When more comparative data are available it may be
possible to group the various bit shapes into distinctive varieties, but
not enough is known at the present about the extra-site occurrence of
these artifacts to justify such division. Their length ranges from 40 to
70 mm. , the maximum width from 24 to 52 mm., and the thickness
from 6 to 13 mm.
It is quite probable that the rectangular form of these scrapers is a
function of the fracturing qualities of petrified wood. Since the flakes
removed by percussion tend to fracture in parallel planes, it would be
very difficult, with this material, to produce the usual triangular shape
found frequently on end scrapers. Parallel sides can be produced much
more easily and effectively when working with petrified wood.
Triangular End Scrapers (Fig. 10, U-V). A total number of 17 end
scrapers with an approximate triangular or subtriangular outline was
recovered from the excavation in Area A . These specimens have a
somewhat wide, convex bit and straight, slightly concave or slightly
convex edges. The base tends to be pointed on ten specimens and flat

190

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

or blunt on the remaining seven. These latter seven examples may represent specimens with broken bases. Although the artifacts were
roughly shaped by percussion flaking, careful secondary pressure
knapping was used to sharpen the bit, sides, and occasionally the
pointed base. In cross section a majority are plano-convex, with almost
all the chipping occurring on the convex side. Three scrapers, however,
are concavo-convex in cross section. In all cases the end scrapers are
thickest at the bit end and considerably thinner toward the base. The
angle of the bit is quite steep.
It appears that practically all these scrapers were manufactured
from large flakes struck from prepared platform cores. The bit was
fashioned on the end exhibiting the hinge fracture, while the base invariably shows a positive bulb of percussion on the flat or concave face
of the artifact.
Six of these scrapers were manufactured from a homogeneous whitish-gray chert, six from a homogeneous dark gray chert, one from
black flint, three from reddish-gray chert, and one from agate (a variety called "Quitaque flint" from Briscoe County in the Texas Panhandle).
Side Scrapers (Fig. 10, W-X). Thirty-five side scrapers, showing a
great deal of variation, were recovered. All of these show fine secondary pressure flaking. Fifteen have an approximately rectangular or
subrectangular outline, are worked from one face on only one of the
long edges, and are relatively flat on both faces. Another five show the
same general outline and are identical to the aforementioned scrapers,
but are worked on two adjacent edges.
Fifteen side scrapers have an approximate triangular outline, with
two long edges and one shorter edge. The two long edges, which come
together to form a prominent point, are both worked from only one
face, while the base is usually unmodified. The members of this last
group are usually plano-convex in cross section but not very thick.
Secondary pressure flaking was used to form the scraping edge of all
examples.
Since all these artifacts show a uniform size range, their dimensions
will be given together. Their length varies from 22 to 61 mm., the
width from 21 to 55 mm., and the thickness from 3 to 11 mm.
Two were manufactured from ferruginous sandstone, six from petrified wood, seven from homogeneous whitish-gray chert, 13 from homogeneous dark gray chert, four from reddish-gray chert with sand
inclusions, one from quartzite, one from agatized dolomite ("Ali bates

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

191

flint"), one from black flint, one from brown striated chert, and one
from an unidentified blue-white stone.
Miscellaneous Scrapers. Six medium-sized, irregular scrapers could
not be placed in any of the above categories. Three are plano-convex
(Fig. 11, A, C, F) , worked by pressure flaking from the convex face,
and are roughly circular in outline. The edge is worked around a
greater part of the circumference of these artifacts. One is of a pink
quartz, one of a light gray and the other of a dark gray chert. They
range from 28 to 40 mm. in diameter, and from 3 to 8 mm. in thickness.
Another specimen (Fig. 11 , B) is plano-convex in cross section, bipointed, and chipped by pressure flaking around the entire circumference of the convex face. It was made of reddish-gray chert with sand
inclusions. Its maximum length is 50 mm. and the thickness is 10 mm.
Another specimen (Fig. 11, D ) is a small, flat flake (20 mm. long and
4 mm. thick) of a very irregular outline which is worked around approximately half the circumference. It is made from banded gray
chert.
The last specimen is a thick scraper with a subtriangular outline
(Fig. 11 , E). It represents the initial flake struck from a large core, the
rounded cortical surface being unmodified while the other surface was
percussion flaked around the entire circumference. This unusual specimen is made of reddish-gray chert. The length is 48 mm., the maximum width 42 mm., and the thickness 15 mm.
4.

CLEAR FoRK GouGEs

Thirty-five complete artifacts and 15 fragments belong to the various varieties of the Clear Fork gouge described by Cyrus N. Ray
( 1941: 152- 162) . These were manufactured, without exception, from
ferruginous sandstone. Thirty of these (Fig. 11, G-I) belong to Ray's
Variety 1 ( 1941: 153-154, Pl. 27, Nos. 1, 2, 6, 11 ) . The specimens of
this group found at the Yarbrough site are triangular or subtriangular
in general outline and biconvex in cross section. The bit is deeply
concave on 10 specimens, straight or very slightly concave on 11 specimens, and slightly convex on nine. Crude percussion flaking was used
around the entire circumference of the specimens, and the underside
was ground smooth and shows extreme wear. Their length varies from
50 to 82 mm., the width (at the bit) from 34 to 45 mm., and the thickness (at the bit) from 12 to 15 mm. The thickness, however, decreases
considerably toward the base.

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

'·

.)

c

B

A

E

D

: , t;___--,

,-----1

__

F

_____

• rJ

H

G

/

,,

L

/

K

J

N

-----,

-----~

-----p

0

L__,
R

Q

v-L _ ,' ____.___._
' CM5

f

'?. !

'

Fig. 11 . Scrapers, gouges, and gravers . A-F, miscellaneous scrapers; G-1, Clear Fork
gouge , Variety 1; J-K, Clear Fork gouge, Variety 3; L-0 , gravers; P-R, Clear Fork gouge,
Variety 4 .

193

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

Although no specimens of Ray's Variety Z are present (although a
few Mineola end scrapers resemble them strongly), two basal fragments (Fig. 11, J-K) probably represent Variety 3 (Ray, 1941: 157,
Pl. 28, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6).
Variety 4 (Ray, 1941: 157, Pl. 28, Nos. 7, 10) is represented by four
specimens (Fig. 11, P-R) that are rectangular in outline, plano- or
biconvex, and have bits at both extremities. Their length varies from
36 to 60 mm. , the width from 25 to 50 mm., and the thickness from 1Z
and 22 mm.
The only real difference between the specimens discussed here and
those described by Ray is in the use-polish shown on the underside of
the Yarbrough site specimens. However, the hard flint from which
Ray's gouges were manufactured may account for the lack of polish on
his speciments.

5.

DRILLS

Three complete drills and three fragmentary drill bits were recovered from the knoll (Fig. 8, W-Z) . One of these, measuring 31 mm. in
length, has a short, narrow bit with a maximum thickness of 5 mm.,
and an irregularly shaped base 11 mm. wide. This artifact was made
from petrified wood by means of pressure flaking.
The other complete specimens arc short, broad, bi-pointed drills
made of reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions. The first measures
21 mm. in length and has a maximum width of 7 mm. The second
specimen measures ZO mm. in length and 9 mm. in width. Both were
shaped by pressure flaking.
The three fragments represent medial sections of bits ranging in
maximum thickness from 6 to 9 mm. Two were made from light grayish-brown chert and one from black flint.
6.

GRAVERS

Eleven gravers were recovered. These are rather small artifacts
which have a protruding beak or bit which was presumably designed
to serve for incising bone, ceramics, or other artifacts (Fig. 11, L-0).
The general outline of these specimens is irregular, with the maximum
diameter ranging between Z1 and 50 mm. All of the gravers except one
were worked by percussion flaking from only one face. The other specimen was worked bifacially. Two small concavities or notches were
made on one edge by means of pressure flaking; the protruding section remaining between the two concavities served as the bit of the

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

graver. Two of the gravers were made from petrified wood, two from
homogeneous light gray chert, one from quartzite, and six from reddish-gray chert.
7.

MISCELLA NEOUS CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

In addition to the artifacts described above, the following specimens
were recovered: a large fi st-axe, two small choppers, a spokeshave, a
small chipped hammerstone, a stemmed knife with crescent-shaped
blade, an unusual oval flint with numerous notches, two chipped
quartz crystals, and a slightly worked obsidian flake.
The large fist-axe (Fig. 12, C), made of ferruginous sandstone, was
crudely worked into a subtriangular outline by percussion flaking on
both faces. The end oppo ite the point is broad and was left unmodified.
This specimen measures 116 mm. in length, 100 mm. in width at the
base, and 45 mm. in maximum thickness.
The two small choppers (Fig. 12, D-E ) are flat pebbles of reddishgray chert which have been bifacially chipped along one long edge.
The percussion method was employed in their manufacture. The first
of these specimens measures 45 mm. in length, 32 mm. in width, and
11 mm. in thickness. The second is 60 mm. long, 35 mm. wide, and
13 mm. thick.
The spokeshave (Fig. 12, F ) is an irregular flake of gray chert
worked unifacially around the circumference by pressure flaking. On
one edge a concavity or notch, 7 mm. wide and 4 mm. deep, was
formed . The maximum diameter of this artifact is 41 mm.; the maximum thickness is 5 mm.
The hammerstone (Fig. 12, G) is a rectangular piece of petrified
wood, 55 mm. long, which has been percussion flaked from both faces ,
but only at one end. This worked end has been battered quite smooth,
presumable from repeated use.
A stemmed knife (Fig. 12, H ) of petrified wood was also found. This
artifact has a flat base, deep side notches just above the base, and a
broken but originally crescent-shaped blade. Though worked bifacially
by the percussion technique, one face shows a great deal more modification than the other. The original length cannot be accurately estimated, but the width at the base measures 34 mm., and the maximum
thickness 8 mm.
Little can be said about the oval artifact with numerous marginal
notches. The photograph (Fig. 12, I ) provides a much better impression than a description. It is made of a light gray chert, is 31 mm. long,

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

195

c
A

CM.
0 2 4 6 8 iO

I
F

E

...
/

H

'

O!

M

IA•

~

'• ;J

\~~

~

.....

K

J

~
L

CM.
23456789 10

0

N

CM.

Q \ 5 ~ 4 ~ q ? Sl ~ 19
Fig . 1 2. Miscellaneous chipped and g round stone a rtifacts . A-B , milling stone s; C, fi st
Axe; D-E , choppers; F, spokeshave; G, hammerston e; H, ste mmed knife; I, notched art ifact;
J -K, quartz crystals; L, obs id ian flake ; M-N, g round axes ; 0 - P, ch ipped a xes .

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

19 mm. wide, and 5 mm. thick. Four deep notches occur on each lateral
edge.
The two quartz crystals (Fig. 12, J-K) and the obsidian flake (Fig.
12, L ) show only very slight and indefinite indications of flaking.
8. AxEs
One complete axe and three fragments were recovered from the
knoll. The complete specimen (Fig. 12, M) is full-grooved, has a wide
blade and a rather small, rounded poll. It appears to have been worked
first by the percussion chipping technique and then ground smooth
with an abrader. Although the blade and bit are well ground, the poll
still shows rough flake scars. The length (poll to the bit ) is 75 mm., the
maximum width of the blade is 66 mm. , and the maximum thickness
is 35 mm. The groove is approximately 16 mm. wide and 6 mm. deep.
One of the fragments (Fig. 12, N) appears to represent a fullgrooved axe quite similar to the complete specimen described above,
but some differences are found. The poll of this fragmentary axe is approximately the same width and thickness as the axe blade. Many
small peck marks can be seen over the entire surface; and although it
was well ground, this axe was not thorough I y smoothed like the first
specimen. The complete axe shows no indications of the pecking technique, but rather exhibits percussion flaking. The maximum width of
the fragmentary axe is 79 mm. and the maximum thickness 35 mm.
The groove is approximately 14 mm. wide and 4 mm. deep.
The two remaining fragments represent the blade portions of axes.
One of these (Fig. 1Z, 0) was worked by the removal of large flakes by
the percussion technique and was then ground slightly on both faces ,
but not so thoroughly as to remove all traces of the flake scars. Whereas
the bit of the complete axe was slightly convex in profile, that of this
specimen is extremely rounded. It can not be determined whether this
fragment was fully grooved originally. There is some slight trace of
notches at the top and bottom edges like those occurring on the typical
Fourche Maline chipped stone axes (Bell and Baerreis, 1951 : Pl. 4, No.
9). The maximum width of the blade is 75 mm. and the thickness is
34mm.
The last fragment (Fig. 12, P) represents a blade much like the one
described above, except that it is flatter, more crudely chipped, and has
very little indication of grinding. Only the forward portion of the bit is
present. It is 80 mm. wide and 14 mm. thick, and resembles Fourche
Maline chipped axes.

197

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

All four axes were manufactured from reddish-brown ferruginous
sandstone.

9.

SINKER STONES

Four medium-sized stone artifacts were recovered which presumably were intended to function as weights, or as bolas stones. Three
are oval in outline, having a thickness somewhat less than the width.
Two of these (Fig. 13, C-D ) have shallow notches at both extremities,
while the other (Fig. 13, A ) has a shallow, almost V-shaped groove
around its longitudinal circumference. Presumably a string or thong
could be passed around the artifacts and held secure by means of the
end notches or the groove. The three were manufactured from ferruginous sandstone of a reddish-brown color. The maximum lengths of
the two end-notched specimens are 50 and 40 mm., their widths 31 and
29 mm. , and the thickness 21 and 20 mm. The longitudinally grooved
artifact measures 53 mm. in length, 37 mm. in width, and 27 mm. in
thickness.
The fourth of these artifacts (Fig. 13, B), made from a basaltic
stone, is cylindrical in form and has rounded ends. A shallow concave
groove runs around its latitudinal circumference. The length is 41 mm.
and the diameter averages 33 mm.
All four specimens appear to have been shaped by pecking and then
smoothed by grinding with an abrader.
10.

GoRGET FRAGMENT ( Fig.

13, E )

The rounded corner-section of a thin, perforated stone gorget was
made from a very fine-grained sandstone. Both faces are ground flat
and smooth, and the only corner which is present is rounded. The
single perforation was accomplished by drilling from both faces. The
maximum thickness of the gorget fragment is 5 mm., and the diameter
of the hour glass-shaped perforation measures 3 mm. at the narrowest
place.
11.

STONE PALETTE ( Fig.

13, F)

A small, concavo-convex, ferruginous sandstone artifact with a
square outline could easily have served as a small palette for mixing
and applying ochre pigments. It is 47 mm. in diameter and 7 mm.
thick. The concave face shows evidence of pecking and has a low,.
turned-up rim. The convex face is smooth.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

198

c

B

A

E

D

F

- - ~ ::J

LLLl • "

~ 1

a s

10

':~/

G

J
H

K

l

Fig. 13 . Ground stone artifacts and chipped knife. A-D, sinker stones; E, gorge! fragment ; F, palette; G, knife ; H-J, monos ; K, pitted mano; L-M , pitted stones.

199

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

12.

GRINDING SLABS

(Fig. 12, A-B )

Ten slabs of ferruginous sandstone have one or both surfaces (faces)
ground concave. These were apparently used, with manos, to crush
and pulverize plant parts. One specimen is quite large ( 18 X 24 X 6
cm. ) and has a roughly rectangular outline. One surface is deeply concave, evidencing a rotary grinding action, while the other is flat and
exhibits several grooves which presumably were used for abrading purposes. Another large specimen is roughly circular in outline (20 X
6 cm ) and is worked on only one face . Its face is concave and ground
fairly smooth, although peck marks can still be discerned on its surface. A third large stone is oval in outline (22 X 16 X 60 cm. ) and
concave on both faces. The surface concavities were pecked out, but
very little grinding was done on this stone subsequent to the original
shaping.
Four smaller grinding slabs are roughly rectangular in outline. and
are bifacially ground. Their surfaces are concave and still show indications of the pecking technique used to rough-shape the surfaces.
Their diameter ranges from 11 to 24 cm. and the thickness from 3 to
5cm.
Another group of three small grinding slabs is identical to the four
described immediately above, except that one of the faces has been left
unworked. The other face is concave and shallow. The diameter of
these grinding slabs varies from 10 to 16 cm. and the thickness from
5 to 9 cm.
All 10 specimens were made from locally acquired, reddish-brown
ferruginous sandstone.
13.

MANOS

A total of 40 manos-the small hand stones used with the grinding
slabs-was recovered from the knoll, Area A. These may be divided
into ( 1) those having two grinding surfaces, and ( 2) those showing
only one grinding surface.
Among those with only one ground surface, nine have rather irregular outlines, although several tend to be circular (Fig. 13, H). They
were manufactured from sandstone and quartzite cobbles. Their diameter ranges from 7 to 13 cm., and their thickness from 5 to 7 cm.
A few of these show slight modifications around the edges caused by
pecking. The grinding surfaces of all the manos are flat, or else very
slightly convex.

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Seven manos have only one grinding surface, are subrectangular in
outline, and were fashioned from reddish-brown ferruginous sandstone. The grinding surfaces of these specimens are flat, slightly concave, or sligthly convex. Their diameter varies from 6 to 10 cm. and
their thickness from 3 to 5 cm.
Three manos, also showing only one grinding surface, are like those
described immediately above except that they are irregular and
crudely-shaped, lacking the rectangular outline of the others. These
range from 5 to 10 cm. in diameter and from 3 to 4 cm. in thickness.
They, too, are of the reddish-brown ferruginous sandstone.
The remaining 19 manos all show two opposed grinding surfaces.
Seven of them, made of thick sandstone cobbles, tend to be round in
outline, and show considerable modification by pecking on the edges
and on the surfaces. These range in diameter from 7 to 11 cm. and in
thickness from 3 to 7 cm. Nine additional specimens have subrectangular outlines and were manufactured from reddish-brown ferruginous
sandstone (Fig. 13, I-J). Their diameter ranges from 6 to 11 cm. and
their thickness from 3 to 5 cm. A few show some slight indications of
grinding on the sides as well as on the surfaces. Three manos are identical to those described immediately above, but are highly irregular in
outline. They are of the same ferruginous sandstone and range from
7 to 9 cm. in diameter and from 3 to 4 cm. in thickness.
The surfaces of all the examples which have two grinding faces are
flat, slightly convex, or rarely slightly concave.
Almost all of the manos appear to have been used with a circular
grinding motion. Only a few of the rectanguloid specimens could
possibly have been used with a back and forth movement. The circular, concave basins commonly found on the grinding slabs also suggest
that manos were used with rotary motion.

14. PITTED STONES
In addition to the manos described immediately above, another 44
manos were found which show small pits or depressions on their
surfaces. An additional 35 irregular stones (not ground) also show one
or more of these pits. Heretofore, such artifacts have been called
"nutting stones" or "nut stones," but it has recently been suggested
(Honea, MS) that they were used as anvils or base stones in the
bi-polar flaking technique.
Of the pitted manos (Fig. 13, K), 21 have one pit on each grinding
surface (all of these manos are bifacially ground). Nine are irregular
in outline, eight are subrectangular, and four tend to be circular.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

201

Another group of 18 manos exhibit a single pit on only one grinding
surface. Of this group, nine are irregular in outline, two are subrectangular, and seven are almost circular. In addition to these, one
irregular mano has one pit on each face and on two of the sides as
well. Another shows three pits on one face and none on the other,
while yet another specimen has two elongated pits or channels on
only one face. A rather unusual modified mano has one elongated pit
or channel on each surface, one of which is crossed at right angles by
a narrow, V-shaped groove.
Thirty-five stones, which are not ground as were the manos, also
show one or more of these depressions or pits. All these specimens are
irregular in outline and were very roughly shaped by hammerstone
percussion. Seventeen of these have a pit on only one surface, 16 have
a pit on both surfaces, one has four pits on one surface and two on the
other (Fig. 13, L), and the last specimen has five on one surface and
four on the other (Fig. 13, M ) .
All the pitted stones, both those made from manos and those which
show no grinding facets , are of red ferruginous sandstone. Since the
size range is rather consistent throughout the different groups, only one
set of dimensions will be given for the entire lot of 79 artifacts. Their
maximum diameter ranges from 7 to 15 cm. and the thickness from
25 mm. to 7 cm. The diameter of the pits themselves varies from 2 to
4 cm. and their maximum depth from 2 to 9 mm. The pits occurring
on the manos are shallower than those on the other stones, and their
interiors are frequently smoothed by grinding. The pits on the irregular stones, however, are deeper, and their interiors show evidence
of pecking.
15 . CERAMICS
A total of 65 7 potsherds was recovered from Area A. In describing
the potsherds the usual presentation by types will not be followed.
This deviation from standard procedure is necessitated by the relatively small number of specimens and by the scarcity of complete
vessels. The sherds will be described and grouped primarily on the
basis of the techniques used in applying surface decoration ( engraving, punctating, brushing) . Of course the use of the term "decoration"
here is not quite correct, since several of the alterations made on the
vessel surfaces may have had a functional rather than an aesthetic
value (e.g., brushing, which could aid in firmly grasping greasy cooking vessels). Nevertheless, an effort has been made, when possible, to
show type affiliations or resemblances. In certain cases, however,

202

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sherds of different descriptive groups may conceivably represent the
S3me type.
Later, in the description of the ceramics from Area B-the small
occupation area 300 yards distant from the knoll, it will be possible to
follow a more orthodox presentation by types, since we have a larger
number of sherds and several reconstructed vessels from that area.
INCISED POTSHERDS. A total of 36 incised sherds was recovered from the knoll.
In this report the term "incised" is reserved for pre-firing incising, while the term
"engraved" is used for post-firing incising. Twenty-two specimens are rim or neck
sherds, apparently from large jars or deep bowls. Of these, 14 represent the high,
somewhat everted rims of the Maydelle Incised type of the Frankston Focus. Two
of the Maydelle sherds have parallel lines running diagonally toward the right and
downward from the lip (Fig. 14, A). Another six (Fig. 14, B) have parallel lines
running diagonally to the left and downward from the lip, two have almost vertical
parallel lines, and four (Fig. 14, C) have grids of crossed diagonal lines. The general
shape of these high rims is concave (viewing the outside surface) and the lip is
either rounded and everted, or flat and everted. Most of these potsherds fractured
along horizontal coil lines at the point where the rim joined, at a sharp angle, the
presumably globular body of the pot (see Suhm et al. , 1954: 324, Pl. 46). Another
rim sherd exhibits the same shape, but has horizontal parallel lines which do not
occur, so far as is known, on Maydelle vessels. This sherd can not be assigned to
any established type.
The remaining seven rim sherds appear to represent vessels affiliated with the
Gibson Aspect. These sherds are straight-walled and have the characteristic flattened
rims of Gibson Aspect ceramics, particularly those of the Alto and Sanders foci. Two
of these (Fig. 14, D-E), with parallel lines running diagonally to the left and
downward from the lip, are clearly of the Canton Incised type of the Sanders Focus.
Two of the remainder show crossed diagonal lines and another two have rather
random and wandering lines. These last four sherds can not be assigned to any
recognized types.
Fourteen sherds show parallel incised lines which can not be oriented. They
represent body sherds or perhaps rim sherds without the lip. No type designations
can be made for them.
The paste, thickness, and color of the various incised sherds varies uniformly
from one group to the next, hence all the specimens will be described as a single
unit. Their wall thickness ranges from 5 to 9 mm., the surface color from cream,
to brownish-black, to reddish-brown. The core is invariably darker than the surface
color, and is usually dark brown or black. One cream-colored sherd, however, has a
light brown core. Small lumps of clay and, rarely, ground potsherds were used as
tempering agents, lending a very granular appearance to the paste. The surface of
most of the specimens has been smoothed but not polished, and its hardness varies
from 3 to 4.5 according to Moh's scale.
BRUSHED POTSHERDS: Ninety brushed body sherds were recovered. A majority
of these are apparently from large pots or deep bowls, and may be assigned to the
Bullard Brushed type (Fig. 14, F-G) of the Frankston and Titus foci (Suhm et al.,
1954: 252, Pl. 9). Since many of these specimens fractured along horizontal coil

A

c

B

H

G

~

3~

~

~

J

L

N

M

~

~~
- · #

p

0

T

Q

------'
u

R

s

v

Fig. 14. Potsherds: Maydelle Incised, Canion lncise'1, Bullard Brushe'1, Sanders Engraved,
Poyne r Engrave::/, Sanders Plain, cmd Williams Plain types; punclaled, engraved, plain, and
sand-·:emi:erad sherds. A-C , Maydelle Incised ; D-E, Canion Incised; F-G, Bullard Brushed;
H-1, punclatecl sherds; K, N, 0, Sanders Engraved; L-M , Poynor Engraved ; P, engraved potsherd; Q, plain potsherd; R, Sanders Plain ; S, sand-temFered pla in slierd; T-V , Williams
Plain.

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lines, it is possible to or ient them correctly and to determine that the brushing wa s
applied vertically. The brushed lines tend to be fine , although some incisions are
deeper and heavier than others. Although generally parallel, some of the lines cross
each other and wander randomly. The main impression, however, is one of vertical
brushing. Perhaps a corn cob, bundle of grass, or straw was used to produce these
closely-spaced, fine lines. This type of brushing can be easily distinguished from
the circular brushing found on vessels of the Clements Brushed type.
The surfaces of the brushed sherds are porous and rough, and of a cream, light
brown, or reddish-cream color. The paste is coarse and tempered either with clay
lumps ( 70 specimens) or with ground bone combined with clay lumps (30 specimens ) . Th e core is either of a light cream or dark brown color, the latter indicative
of incomplete oxidation during the firing process. The wall thickness varies from
5 to 9 mm. and the hardness from 1.5 to 3 according to Moh's scale.
PUNCTATED POTSHERDS. Thirty -om sherds recovered from Area A have
punctations on their surfaces. These punctations were executed in three different
styles. The first of these, represented by 23 specimens, consists of a small and rather
deep groove which, viewed from above, has the outline of a half circle ( Fig. 14, H ).
Thes2 punctations are deepest at the straight side, where the clay was mounded up
and pushed back, generally causing the formation of a small node. These marks
were probably made by angular gouging with a circular stick or section of cane,
although this type has usually been designated as "fingernail-punctating. " Of these
23 sherds, five are rim sherds with a row of punctations just under the lip, and 18
are body sherds with apparently random surface punctations. Of this last group of
18, three show a certain amount of surface smoothing after the punctating was
done, which partially eliminated the nodes; the r emainder lack this trait.
The second kind of punctation, found on six body sherds ( Fig. 14, I ), consists of
short, narrow grooves or short incisions applied randomly over the vessel surface.
The two remaining sherds, which constitute the third style ( Fig. 14, J ), show long,
narrow gashes applied over the surface.
The paste, color, and other characteristics of all these sherds are rather consistent,
h ence a single description will suffice for the whole group. The wall thickness ranges
from 5 to 9 mm., and the surface color from cream to orange to grayish-brown. The
core of all the examples is a dark brownish-black, indicating an incompletely oxidizing firing atmosphere. The paste is coarse and granular, with 17 sh erds having,
as temper, small clay lumps (possibly including some ground potsherds ) and 14
having clay lumps plus ground bone. The surface hardness ranges from 3 to 3.5.
Rims d ecorated with rows of punctations have been found on vessels of Bullard
Brush'!d ( Suhm 1'! t al., 1954: 252, Pl. 9, B ) and on many miscellaneous vessels of
utilitarian ware, with both plain and punctated b:dies. of th2 Fulton Asp ect. Although this group of 31 sherds can not be assigned to definite types, it can safely be
ascribed to the Fulton Aspect.
ENGRAVED POTTERY. Fourteen engraved sherds were recovered during the
excavations, five of which are related to the Poynor Engraved type (Fig. 14, L, M )
and seem to represent the rims of squat bowls with rounded body and slightly
everted, rounded lips. The surface decoration consists of blank areas set off by ma sses
of closely spaced parallel lines, running either vertically or diagonally. Two of the
specimens in question, however, are slightly different from the Poynor bowls described by Suhm et al. (1954: 342, Pl. 55 ) in that parallel horizontal lines occur

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

205

below the lip. These horizontal lines are known, however, on bottles of this type
(ibid.: Pl. 56, A, B, G). The thickness of these sherds ranges from 5 to 8 mm. The
surface, which has been smoothed but not polished, is reddish-brown and the core
dark gray. The paste is coarse and granular and rather large clay lumps were employed as a tempering agent. The surface hardness varies from Z.5 to 3.
The six sherds of Sanders Engraved (Fig. 14, K, N, O; Fig. 15, A ) show small
triangles filled with somewhat crudely executed, cross-hatched lines. One represents
a straight-walled rim sherd with rounded lip, one a bottle fragment , and the remaining four are probably from carinated bowls. These last four come from the
area of the vessel where the rim joins the body. Similar vessels have been found
at the Sanders site (Krieger, 1946: Pl. Z7, C, D). The thickness of these sherds
ranges from 4 to 6 mm., and the exterior and interior surface colors range from
dark brown to grayish-black. The core is dark gray or black and the paste is coarse,
with clay lumps serving as the tempering agent. The surface hardness varies from
2.5 to 3.5.
The remaining three unidentifiable engraved sherds represent vessels with rims
which join the body at a sharp angle. Their engraving consists of rectilinear designs
fill ed with diagonal lines (Fig. 14, D ) such as is found in the Barkman Engraved
and Friendship Engraved types of northeastern Texas. The thickness varies from 5
to 7 mm., and the surface color ranges from brownish-gray to red. The color of the
core is the same as that of the exterior in all three cases. The paste is coarse and
clay lumps were used for tempering. The average hardness is Z.5 according to Moh.
PLAIN POTSHERDS. A total of 482 undecorated potsherds was recovered from
Area A. Most of these represent the same paste and manufacturing traditions represented by the previously described ceramics. Rather surprisingly for such a large
number of sherds, only 10 basal and nine rim sherds were found. This fact suggests
that a majority of these plain specimens represent the undecorated portions of
vessels belonging to Sanders Engraved, Maydelle Incised, and other types which
are generally decorated only along the area near the rim.
Four hundred seventy-six sherds are of the typical "Cadcloan" ware or paste, to
which the previously described types belong. Eight of the basal sherds, all quite
flat and varying from 7 to 10 mm. in thickness, and five of the rim sherds pertain
to this group. Three of the rim sherds have straight walls and slightly rounded lips
and are of Sanders Plain type (Fig. 14, R ) . The two remaining rim sherds are
concave and have rounded, everted lips (Fig. 14, Q). Although they are typical
of the form popular throughout the Fulton Aspect, no specific type assignment can
be made for them. Nine small sherds have vestiges of a dark reel wash or slip of
ochre which was applied to their interior and exterior surfaces; they represent
bottle and bowl fragments of the Sanders Plain type. One basal and two rim sherds
occur among these nine. One of the rim sherds is straight-walled with a rounded lip
and probably represents a simple bowl. The other, also from a bowl, has a depression
or channel just below the rim on the exterior surface, which lends to their rounded
lip an everted appearance. On the interior surface there is a marked thickening or
flange extending from the lip for a distance of 17 mm. downward toward the base.
This feature has been reported on other Sanders Plain vessels. The base shercl is flat
and moderately thick.
The remainder of the 476 specimens represent body sherds, mainly from large
bowls and jars. The following description applies to the entire group of 476 "Cad-

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

doan ware" plain sherds. Their wall thickness ranges from 5 to 8 mm., and the
surfa ce color from cream to reddish-brown to gray-brown. These differen ces or
variations in surface color do not appear to be important or intentional, however.
Indeed, most of the vessels were fired unevenly, with many smoke clouds and color
variations resulting on the same vessel. The core of these sherds is gener ally gray
and frequ ently darker than the interior and exterior surfaces. The paste is granular
and the following tempering agents and combinations were u sed: small clay lumps
(357 sh erds) , clay lumps plus sand (57), clay lumps and ground bone (44) , clay
lumps with sand and ground bone (18 ). The surface hardness varies from 2 to 3.5.
The remaining seven plain sherds are rather different from those described above.
One of these (Fig. 14, S) is the sharply rounded base sherd of a heavily sandtemp ered ware which has been reported at the D avis site (Newell and Krieger,
1949: 130-1 33) and at several sites of the McGee Bend Reservoir (Jelks, MS ) . The
surface and core color of this sh erd is a dark brownish-black and it m easures 12
mm. in thickness. The surface h ardness ranges between 3.5 and 4.
The other six sherds (Fig. 14, T-V) ar e of a thick-walled ware known as Williams Plain (Bell, 1953: 328-330; Proctor, 1957: 72-77). One of the rim sherds
represents a globular jar with a tall, constricting, con cave rim with flat lip. The
other rim sherd is from a large bowl which has a slight suggestion of a shoulder;
the rim is flat, as in the case of the first specimen. The two basal sherds are very
thick (m easuring 11 and 17 mm., respectively) and are flat, but are thicker in the
center than at the edges. The thickness of the rim and body sh erds is 9 mm. The
interior and exterior smface color is a dark brownish-bla ck, and the core is of the
same color. The paste is exceedingly coarse and granular, with clay lumps (5
sherds ) and clay lumps plus ground bone (1 sherd) being used as tempering agents.
The surface is smooth and has a hardness of 2 to 2.5.
MISCELLANEOUS POTSHE RDS. Four potsherds were found which do not fit
any of the previously described groupings. One of these, a concave rim sh erd with
slightly everted lip, is of the Frankston Focus type La Rue Neck Banded (Fig. 15,
A ) . This sherd shows three tiers of flattened neck coils. The wall thickness is 5 mm.
and the surface color is a light brown but the core is gray. The paste is coarse and
sm all clay lumps were used as temper ; the surface hardness is 2.5.
One strap-handle sh erd comes from a vessel decorated with vertical rows of
pinch-ma rks done in the style of Killough Pinched (Fig. 15, C). The rim is concave
and exhibits a rounded lip. The wall thickness is 5 mm., the surfa ce and core color
is a dark gray-black, and the core is coarse and temp ered with clay lumps plus
ground bone. Its surface hardness is 2.5.
The two remaining sherds (Fig. 15, D-E) show parallel diagonal incisions
bounded by rows of small punctations. These incised-punctated sherds are of the
Maydelle Incised typ e and possess the same general specifications as the incised
sherds of that type.
PIPE FRAGMENT. One ceramic pipe stem fragment (Fig. 15, F ) was recovered
from the surface of the knoll. This represents the forward portion of the stem just
behind the bowl. The surface and core color is a light orange-brown. The paste is
somewhat coarse, and is tempered with ground clay lumps combined with a small
amount of pulverized bone. The outside diameter of the stem is 11 mm. and the
inside diameter m easures 4 mm. Similar pipes occur at the Sanders site in Lamar
County, T exas (Krieger, 1946: 324, Pl. 22, G ).

207

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

c

B

0~·-10

~-

E

01 2 3 4 5

e

7

F

a

9 !O

CM .

I

I
G

I I I
0

2

I

I
3

4

•I

1:

5

CM.

K

' M
0 I 2 3 4 · 5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.
Fig . 1 5 . Potsherds (Sanders Engraved, La Rue Neck Banded, Killough Pinched, and
Maydelle Incised); pipe fragment ; beads ; and knife. A, Sanders Engraved potshe rd ; B, La
Rue Neck Banded potsherd; C, Killough Pinched potsherd; D-E , Moydelle Incised potsherds ;
F, pipe fragment ; G, ceram ic beads ; H-0 , kn ives from cache.

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CERAMIC BEADS. Fifteen small, tubular ceramic beads (Fig. 15, G) were found
at the neck of the skeleton of Burial 3. These are all of an untempered, compact
clay of a light grayish-brown color. The hardness of the surface of the beads varies
from 2.5 to 3.5, about that of most of the ceramic vessels from the site. The length
of the beads varies from 4 to 9 mm., the exterior diameter from 3 to 4 mm., and
the interior diameter from 1 to 2 mm. Their apertures are straight-sided and do not
appear to have been made by drilling; rather, the apertures were most likely
formed by molding the clay around a twig or some other smooth object, which was
later extracted. One end of eight of the beads is flat or somewhat rounded while the
other shows a marked concavity. The remaining seven, however, are flat or rounded
at both ends.
PROVENIENCE AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE ARTIFACTS FROM AREA A

Certain difficulties were encountered in attempting to plot the vertical distribution of the artifacts recovered from the knoll. First, the
depth of the artifacts had been recorded in relation to the surface and
not in relation to any fixed elevation points. Second, there exists no
contour map for the knoll, which fact increased the difficulty in
correlating the artifact stratigraphy from one 10-foot square to
another. A relatively reliable analytical procedure, however, was
finally decided upon, which is as follows. The occurrence of artifacts,
according to depth below the surface, was plotted for each square and
the data from adjacent squares were then compared. If alike or closely
similar, these squares were combined for analytical purposes. As a
result of this process of combining squares, two large analysis units
consisting of numerous squares were established for the knoll, Area A.
Substantial validity was given to these analysis units by the horizontal
distribution of the artifacts. When plotted horizontally on a plan of
the site, the artifacts fell naturally into two areal groupings which
corresponded very closely to the two analysis units established by
means of the vertical comparisons between squares. The location of
these units appears in Fig. 16. Although they account for a majority
of the artifacts found in the knoll, other implements were recovered
from several 10-foot squares which could not be combined with these
analysis units. The number of artifacts, by classes and types, occurring in Analysis Unit 1, in Analysis Unit 2, on the surface of the
knoll, and in squares outside the analysis units is presented in Table 1.
Analysis Unit 1 (Fig. 16) was composed of 60 10-foot squares in
the center of the knoll, and had rather good, clear-cut, vertical differentiation in the distribution of artifacts, particularly in the dart point
group. This part of the knoll had not been seriously eroded or disturbed. Unit 2, made up of 58 ten-foot squares (Fig. 16), was located

209

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

~.,

~. ~~~~: G 7 8 9 I0 II
I I I II II I II

11 10 9 6 7 6 5 4 3 2 I I 2 3
_I

£._
~

4
5
6
7
8

I I I I I I I I I I I

•

ANALYSIS
UNIT

L
10
_II
12
@__
14
~
16
17
18

~
20
21
22

2d
24
25

26
27
26
29
Fig. 16. Analysis Un its 1 and 2 , the Knoll , Area A, the Yarbrough Site.

on the western slope of the knoll and has a confused and mixed artifact
stratigraphy. It seems that artifacts and soil eroding from the slopes of
the knoll, particularly in late prehistoric and recent time, gradually

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

filled in this area , thereby causing a considerable mixture of artifacts
which represent diverse periods in the history of the site. Therefore a
major part of the emphasis in the stratigraphic and distributional
studies will be placed on Unit 1, although it is also possible to see, in
some instances, some valid but extremely gross stratigraphic differentiations in the distribution of the artifacts from Unit 2. The occurrence
of the artifacts of Unit 1 is presented in Table 2, those of Unit 2 in
Table 3.
TABLE 1
Provenience of the Artifacts, Area A

Analysis
U nit I

Gary kaufman
alsa
runge
panna mana
kenedy
colfax
hobson
emory
kemp
Misc. Gary
Wells
Kent phalba
quinlan
Bulverde
Morrill slocum
san pedro
Elam
Misc. Straight Stem
Marshall
Yantis cook
swan
Yarbrough lindale
dike
ma bank
Ellis
Trinity
Edgewood hooker
bull creek
dixon
Ensor
Wesley
Fairland

20

Un it II

Surface

Units

15

14
7
2
3
4
4
57
3

27
4
4
17
0
0
23
8
3

5
10

5
0
3
35

5
3
2

5
4

5
3

5
9
2

5
0
2
1
33
4
15
8
2
2
11
4

5' Sq 's .
Outside
Analysis

Analysis

4
3
0
29
2
2
13
0
1
3
0
2
3
6
0
1
2
23
5
12
6
5

5
6
1
0
2
0

5
6
3
3
2
0
2
3
1
0
0
2
2
14
3
2
8
2
2

5
2
0
0
0

7
4
0
4
6
6
0
6
3
2
4
28
3
17
11
4
4
8
0
1
2
0

T otals

76
17
20
28
4
8
144
18
13
10
28
11
8
10
13
20
6
17
3
7
9
98
15
46
33
13

13
30
7
2

5
1

211

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 1-Continued
Provenience of the Artifacts, Area A
5' Sq ' s.

Palmillas
Lone Oak
Misc. Expanding Stem
Steml ess Points
Misc. Dart Points
Clovis
Plainview
San Patrice
Meserve
Sandy Creek
Misc. Paleo-like Points
Arrow Points
Knives Group I
Group II
Group III
Group IV
Group V
Group VI
Group VII
Group VIII
Group IX
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group I
Group II
Group III
Group IV
Group V
Mineola End Scrapers
Triangular End Scrapers
Side Scrapers
Misc. Scrapers
Clear Fork Gouges
Drills
Gravers
Small Ch-0ppers
Chipped Hammerstone
Fist Axe
Axes
Spokeshave
Sinkers
Gorget
Stone Palette

Outside
Annh·sis

Anah·sis
Unii J

Analysis

Unit II

Surface

Uni'ts

Total s

2
0
2
3
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
10
6
10
7
3
5
3
10
44

2
2

4
0
5
13
8
0
0

3
3
4
3
6
0
0

11
5
12
26
30
2
1
2
3
3

2
1
0
1
2
8
5
13
2
13
0
2
0
1
0
2
0

7

6
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
3
3
2
4
7
40

1
2
4
3
19
5
9
1
8
2
2
1
0
2
1
2
0
0

1
1
3
8
2
8
4
0
5
4
29
1
3
9
3
0
8
5
5
0
11
4
6
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
3
0
6
7
8
3
2
3
6
41
1
0
4
0
5
2
2
8
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

7

8
28
20
32
14
12
10
13
27
154
5
5
15
8
10
37
17
35
6
35
6
11
2

4
4
1

212

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 1-Continued
Provenience of the Artifacts, Area A
5' Sq 's.
Outside

Grinding Slabs
Manos
Pitted Stones
POTSHERDS
Williams Plain
Sanders Plain
Sanders Engraved
Poynor Engraved
Bullard Brushed
Maydelle Incised
La Rue Neck Banded
Misc. Incised
Punctated
Misc. Engraved
Misc. Plain
Sandy \IVare
Canton Incised
TOTAL

Surface

Ana lys is
Units

Totals

1
6
6

8
29
64

0
2
7

10
40
79

1
0
0
0
12
2
0
1
5
0
33
0
0

2
3
4
3
71
13
0
12
25
2
376
0
2

1
7
0

6
12
6
5
90
17
1
21
31
3
442
1
2

Analysis
Unit I

Analysis
U nit II

1
3
2
2
2
2
1
3
2

1
33
1
0

4
0
0
7
0
0
22
0
0

2,124

A total of 572 fragm ent<iry and unclassified artifocts do not appea1 · in this tabulation. Includin g these 1
the grand total of artifacts from Area A is 2,696 .

Viewing the artifact sequence as a whole, we can discern an early
and stratigraphically low period of occupation represented by specific
dart point types, styles of knives, scrapers, and other implements. In
the upper levels most of the early styles of artifacts continued (although their late occurrence may conceivably result from a partial
mixing of the deposits ), but ceramics, arrow points, and new forms of
dart points, knives, etc., made their appearance. This gradual addition
of new artifacts to the older assemblage represents several later periods
in the history of the site. It should be understood that this periodification is intended to be used in a very specific, local way, and that these
periods are not designed for broad areal studies. The periods themselves are based ( 1) on stratigraphic data from the Yarbrough site, and
(2) on pertinent chronological data from related archeological sites.
To deal now with Period 1, we have some evidence in the way of
projectile point styles for brief occupations of the site by the big game
hunters of the Paleo-Indian, or Lithic, Stage of the late Pleistocene.
Regrettably, these early points were found either in Analysis Unit 2

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

213

(the mixed area), or in squares outside the areas embraced by the
analysis units, and can not, therefore, be clearly related to the artifact sequence defined on the basis of Unit 1. In Unit 2 these Paleo
and Paleo-like points occurred, in certain cases, in the same levels with
dart points characteristic of the Archaic Stage, and in some instances
at depths in which potsherds were encountered, albeit rarely. The
fact, however, that one Clovis point was found resting on the deep,
sterile clay member underlying the midden soil suggests considerable
antiquity. The practice of explaining away the Paleo-Indian points
found so frequently in Archaic sites of the region as material picked
up and reused by later cultures is unrealistic and unsatisfactory.
Although there is considerable evidence for stratigraphic mixing in
Unit 2, all the Paleo points, except one specimen, occur in the lower
deposits below a depth of 22 inches. Yet the Paleo materials at the site
do not indicate a single occupation by one people. Rather, the diversity
of types-Clovis, Plainview, Meserve, and San Patrice,-suggests that
the site was used as a brief camping spot throughout a long segment
of prehistoric time.
Period 2 (turning now to the Archaic materials) represents, in the
main, a preceramic gathering-hunting culture or cultures whose artifacts occur below a depth of 36 inches in Analysis Unit 1 (Figs. 17, 18).
The dart points which are well represented are the lindale and mabank
varieties of Yarbrough; Ellis; the bull creek and dixon varieties of
Edgewood; and the san pedro variety of Morrill. All of these points
but Morrill (which has a straight stem) represent the expanding stem
tradition (Table 2).
Period 3, which owing to the small numbers of artifacts grouped
therein is an extremely hypothetical and tentative construct, consists
of contracting stem points represented primarily by very small numbers of the runge variety of the Gary type. Yantis points also occur in
Period 3, while the types and varities of the previous period continue.
The 30-36 inch depths may be assigned to Period 3.
Several of the knife styles (Groups I, II, III, VIII, and IX) occur
in significant numbers in all periods, as do Mineola end scrapers,
triangular end scrapers, side scrapers, Clear Fork gouges, and fullgrooved axes. The only grinding slab found in place is from the lowest
levels of Unit 1.
Period 4, represented by the artifacts occurring above 30 inches
beneath the surface (Fig. 17, 18), represents a somewhat arbitrary
division in the stratigraphic continuum which, however, announces
the appearance of several new artifact classes and types. We do not

214
DEPTH
(INCHES)

0 - 6

7- 9
10 - 12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(NO)

POTSHER OS (•4)

21 - 79

3

-

10

13 - 15

6

16 - 18

5

19 -21
2

20-30

••
•

ARROW
(NO) POINTS (9.4)

I

I

DART
(NO.) POINTS(%)

4

5 . 18

50

3-50

28
24

I

14

I

I4
13

26

-72

18

-72

31 - 8 4

I

4

22

I

9

20

I

4

I

4

114

25

-

96
91
92

22

96

31-33

18

100

34-36

14

100

37- 39

10

100

6

100

5

100

43-45

100
1-100
52-54

100

Fig. 17. Area A, Analysis Unit 1, relative percentages of potsherds, arrow points, and
dart points.

have evidence, however, for a large population change from period to
period. Rather, we seem to have the gradual addition of new elements,
new kinds of artifacts, to the existing assemblage or artifact matrix.
The only other possible interpretation that occurs to me is that, due to
the absence of clearcut geologic strata at the site, the artifacts of dis-

215

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES
DEPTH
(INCHES)

CONTRACT I NG

(':°)

STU.. TRAD.

f:b

STRAIGHT

EXPANDING
STEM TRAD.
(NOJ
(%)

(NO.)STEM TRAD .(%)

0 - 6

I .20

7 - 9
10- 12

I
14

58

13-15

12

16 -16

20

71

19- 21

10

56

22-24

10

-•
3-

28-30

4

31-33

3 . 23

37 -39

33

2.2

I

5

•
I

I

6

I

I

4

7

-29

••
8-44
3

16

19

7

25

6

-31

.24

9 - 43

5 -28

9-50

3 .23

7

1111

40-42.

54

7

• • • 70

7

• • • 78

6 • • • • • • 100

43-45
46-48

67

12

30

II

2

33

3.

53

7

34-36

3

75

25-27

-

5 • • • • • • 100

• • • • • • 100

49-51

• • • • • • 100

!12-54

• • • • • • 100

Fig. 18 . Area A, Analysis Unit 1 , relative percentages of three dart point stemming
traditons .

tinct peoples or cultures became mixed together as the site grew up
slowly over a long period of time.
In Period 4, potsherds make their appearance (although 1 sherd
occurs in the Period 3 level), are rare at first, but increase in numbers
through time (Figs. 17, 18 ; Table 2 ) . Arrow points, although never
present in any quantity, also occur. Judging from studies carried out
in other areas, the ceramics from the knoll do not all represent the
same cultural complex. Those of the Williams Plain type, and perhaps Sanders Plain as well, will be included, on the basis of data from
other sites, in Period 4, while the sherds of Sanders Engraved, Poynor

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Engraved, Bullard Brushed, and Maydelle Incised will be placed in
Period 5 (Area B at the Yarbrough site belongs entirely to Period 5 ) .
Although representing several distinct periods of time, the materials
of Periods 4 and 5 occur as a single stratigraphic unit in the knoll.
Turning to the dart points of Periods 4 and 5, the types and varieties
of Periods 2 and 3 continue, but diminish in relative abundance with
the increase in popularity of contracting stem points, which appeared
at the end of Period 2 but were not abundant. The most important dart
points of Periods 4 and 5 (the upper 30 inches of Analysis Unit 1) are
the kaufman and hobson varieties of the Gary type; the phalba and
quinlan varieties of Kent; and the slocum variety of Morrill. Various
minor types and varieties occur in Periods 4 and 5, but many of these
can also be found in earlier periods (consult Table 2 ) .
TABLE 2
An alysis Unit 1, Area
Depth in inches
be low surface

T otal P otsherds
' Villiams Plain
Sanders Plain
Sanders Engraved
P oynor Engraved
Bulla rd Brushed
M aydelle Incised
La Rue Neck Banded
l\1 iscellanco us Incised
P unctated
l\Ji scell aneous Engraved
l\1i scellaneous Plain
Sand y \ Vare
Arrow Points

0-6
(21)

7-9 10- 1213-15 16-1 S I 9-2 1 22-24 25-27 28-30 3 1-33 3-~ -36 37-3940-42 43-45 +G-+8 +9-51 52-54
(3) ( 10)

(6)

(5)

( 1)

(2)

( 1)

( 1)

2

13

2

2

4

1

1

T ota 1 Dart Po in ts
Contrac tin g Stmn

( 5)

Points (Gary)
Gary, Kaufman
Ga ry, Al sa
Gary, Run ge
Gary , Panna Maria
Gary, Kenedy
Gary, Colfa x
Gary, Hobson
Gary, Emory
Ga ry, Kem p
Gary, I\1isc. Gary
Intermediate ContractStraight Stem
W ells
Kent, Phalba
Kent , Quinlan
Straight Stem Points
Bul verd e

(4 )

I
1
(3) (26 ) ( 13 ) (3 1) ( 22 ) (20) (25 ) (20 ) ( 13) ( 14 ) ( 10 )
( !+) ( 12 ) (20) ( 10 ) ( 10)
4
2
3

( 7)

(4 )

(3)

(3)

2

2

( 1)

(2)
2

(6)

(5 )

( 1)

( 1)

4

3
2
2

3

( 1)

( 1)

(3)

6

II
2

+

(2)

(!)

(2)
1

1
(!)

1
( 1)

2

( 1)

( 1)

(2 )

1

(3)

1
(5)

(5)
1

1
1
(3)

( 1)

( 1)

( 1)

(!)

( 1)

217

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 2--Continued
Analysis Unit 1, Area
Depth in inches
below surfa ce

0-6

7-9 10-12 13-15 16-1819-21 22 -24 25-2 7 28-30 31-33 3+-36 37 -39 40-4243-45 46-+8 49-51 52-54

i\ lorrill, Slocum

l\!Iorrill, San Pedro
Elam
::\1isc. Straight Stem
Intermediate StraightExpanding-Ste m Pts.
Yanti s, Cook
Yantis, Swan
Expanding Stem Points
Yarbrou gh : Lindale
Yarbrough , Dike
Yarbrough, lVJabank
Ellis
Trinity
Edgewood, Hooker
Edgewood, Bull Creek
Edgewood , Dixon
Ensor
"Wesley
Fairland
Palmillas
Lone Oak
i\1isc. Expanding
Stem Points
Stemless Dart Points
]'Vlisc. Dart Points
Total Knives
Knives, Group l
Knives, Group II
Knives , Group III
Knives, Group IV
Knives, Group V
Knives, Group VI
Knives, Group VU
Knives, Group Vlll
Knives, Group IX
Total :Miscellaneous
Bifacial Artifacts
lVlisc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group I
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group II
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group III
~1isc. Bifacial A.rtifacts
Group IV
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group V
Total Scrapers
Mineola End Scrapers
Triangular End Scrapers
Side Scrapers
1'1iscellaneous Scrapers
Clear Fork Gouges

2

2

2

( 1)
1
( 1)

(2)
2

(i )

4

(3)
2

( 7)
4

2

(8)
3

(6)
2

(9)
3

2

(2)
1
1
(9 )
4

(7)

3

2

(7)

( 7)

2

(6 )
3

(5 )
2

( 1)

2

2

2

3

2
2
1

(6 )

1
( 10)
1

2

(4 ) ( 14)
l

1
3

2

( 8) (11 )
1

1
2
(7) (1 4 )
3

1
(5)

1
(6)
2

(6)

(2 )

(3)

2

2

2

2

( 2)

(4)

(2)

(6)
2

2
2

2

2
2

1
3

2
2
2
(I)

2

2

3
(2 )

(I)

(2)

1

( 1)

(2)

(3)
2

(2)

( 1)
l

(5 )

2
2

2
3

4
4

2
3

3
2

( 1)

(1)
1

218

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 2--Continued
A naly sis Unit 1, Area
Depth in in ch es
below s nd ace

0- 6

7.9 10- 121 3-151 6 -1 8 19-2122-2+ 25-2728-30 3 1-333+-3637 -39 +0-+2+3-+H6 -+8 49-51 52 -54

Drills
Grrt,-crs
C hi pped 1Ta111mcrsto 11 c
Axes
Si nkers
Gorge t
Stone P ale tte
Grinding Slabs
l\ Ia nos
P itted Stones
( ) = Totnl s.

TABLE 3
Analy sis Unit 2, Area A
De pth in in cl ies
be low sul'f<t cc
T otal P otsherds
' Villia m s P lnin
Bulla rd Ill'ushed
I\ la yde ll e Incised
l\ Iiscellaneons I ncised
Punctatcd
l\1i scellaneo us P la in
A rrow P oints
T otal D art Points
Con tra cting Stem
Poin ts ( Gil ry )
G ary, Kau fman
Ga r y , A lsa
Gary , Run ge
Gary, Pamia }.far ia
Gary, H obson
Gary, E mory
Gary, Kem p
Ga ry , Colfax
1\ Iiscellaneous Gary
Interm edi ate ContractStraigh t Stem
W ells
Kent, Quin lan
Straight Stem Poin ts
Bulverde
l\Ion:ill, San Pedro
Ela m
l\Iisc. Straigh t Stem Points
lntennediat e Str a ig ht ~
Expand ing Stem Poin ts
Ya nt ls, Cook
Ya n tis, Swan
Expanding Stem Points
Ya r brough , Lindale
Yar brough , D ike
Yar brough , l\ Iabank

0-6

( 15 )
l
2

7.9 10- 12.13- 15 16-18 19-2.122-24 25 -27 28-30 3 1-33 34 -36 3 7-39 40-4243-'Vi +G-48 49-51 52-54
( 1) ( 10)

( 6)

(4)

4

4

4

(5 )

( 3)

3

2

2

(4)

( 3)

( 3)

1
3

2

2

( 7)

1
( 20 ) ( 27) (22 ) ( 19 ) (22) ( 17 ) ( 1 1) ( 10 )

( 3)

( 10)

3

( 5)
3

( 8)

2

(4 )
1

(5 )
2.

(4 )
1

(3)
1

( 5)

2

1
3

2

2

2

3

2

2

2

(3)
3

(1 )
1

(2)
2

(3)

( I)

(2 )

( 1)

(2)
1
1
(2)

3

2

(4 )

(5 )
2

(!)

( 8 ) ( 12)

(3 )

(2)

( 3)
1

(4 )

( 2)

2

3

1

(1)

( 1)
1

(!)

( I)

( 1)

1
(9)
3

1
1
( 3)
1

(8)

3
1
2

2

(1 )

2
(2)

( 7 ) ( 10 )
3
3

1

( 1)

( 1)

2
2

( 3)
1

(9)

(9)
3
2

(4 )
1
2

(! )

(5 )

(3 )

2

(1 )
1

219

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 3-Continued
Analysis Unit 2, Area A
Depth in inches
belo'v surface

0-6

7-9 10-12 13-15 16-18 19-2122-2425-27 28 -30 31-33 34-36 37 -39 40-4243-45 46-48 49-51 52 -54
2

Ellis
Trinity
Edgewood, Hooker"'
Edgewood, Bull Creek
E dgewood, Dixon
\Vesley
Palmillas
Lone Oak
l\1iscellaneous Expanding
Stem Points
Stemless Dart Points
Misc . Dart Points
Clovis
Plainview

2
2

2

2

z

~VIeserve

Sandy Creek
Misc. Paleo-like Points
Total Points
Knives, Group I
Knives, Group II
Knives, Group III
Knives, Group IV
Knives, Group V
Knives, Group VI
Knives, Group VII

2
(3)

1
(5)

(4) ( 10) (10) ( 12)
2
2
2

( 9)

1
(5 )

1
(2 )

( 1)

(8 )
2

(1)

2

4

1
6

(3)

( 1)

Knives, Group VIII

Knives, Group IX
Total l\ liscellaneous
Bifacial Artifacts
l\1isc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group I
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group II
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group III
::'vfisc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group IV
l\1isc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group V
Total Scrapers
:;VJineo1a End Scrapers
Triangular End Scrapers
Side Scrapers
:i\1iscellaneous Scrapers
Clear Fork Gouges
Drills
Gravers
Small Choppers
Spoke-shave
Fist Axe
Sinkers
Grinding Slabs
!vlanos
P itted Stones
Axes
()= Totals.

(4)

3

6

1
3

6

1

( 1)

( 2)

( 2)

( 1)

(1)

( 1)

( 2)
1

2

( 3)
1

1
( 3)

(5 )
2

1

1

( 7)

(6)
6

2

2
3

2

z

2

3

( 2)

2

(4)
2

(! )

( 1)

(1)

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Many other artifacts from Periods 2 and 3 continue in Periods 4
and 5: knives from Groups I, II, III, IV, VIII, IX, and the various
scrapers and Clear Fork gouges. Three knife groups-V, VI, and VII
-occur only in Periods 4 and 5, however, as do all of the groups of
the miscellaneous bifacial artifact category. Minor artifacts include
gravers, the gorget fragment, the small stone palette, manos, and
pitted stones. These last artifacts occur only in very small numbers
in the strata of Periods 4 and 5 and we certainly can not say, with our
statistically small sample, that these artifacts were not also in use in
the area during Periods 2 and 3.
As mentioned earlier, the artifacts from Analysis Unit 2 appear to
be extremely mixed, and therefore do not coincide with the pattern
of distribution which we have from Unit 1 except in the most general
and gross way.
In addition to the stratigraphic (vertical distribution) studies, the
horizontal distribution of each artifact type, class, variety, etc., was
plotted on plans of the site. In almost all instances the distribution of
types, etc., followed the general distribution of artifacts for the site,
i.e., they clustered almost equally in two areas: Analysis Units 1 and
2. Only two exceptions were noted: most of the Sanders Focus potsherds occurred in Unit 1 and the Paleo and Paleo-like projectile
points in Unit 2. This gives some substantiation to the idea that the
Paleo points represent separate occupations, and would suggest that
the Sanders Focus pottery, because of its clustering in one area, represents an occupation distinct from that represented by the Frankston
Focus potsherds.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES IN AREA A

The Burials
Eight burials were discovered in the knoll, Area A, all of which
were single interments (Fig. 19). The skeletal remains were generally
in very poor condition and were not collected for osteometric study.
However, general observations on age groups were made while in the
field.
Burial 1 was a tightly flexed adult burial encountered at a depth of 10 inches in
Square 16R2 in the sandy midden soil. The long axis of the skeleton was oriented
north-south with the head toward the south, and it rested on its left side. No associated artifacts were found.
Burial Z represents a highly fragmentary skeleton found at an unrecorded depth
in Square 18R2. Very few bone fragments were encountered, and although the head
seemed to be oriented to the northwest, it could not be determined whether the
burial was flexed or extended. No burial furniture was found therewith.

221

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

R
5

6

4

2

3

L

~o

I

I

~Q)

16

(I)

17

(2) ~;/

@

18

....

/1

7'-- 0
19

(3)

(4)

(ff/})

(7)

A

--

2c
'
(5)
~
~
t;)

2I

~

Cb_ (8)

22

~
~z

-

Fig . 19. Location of the bu rials , Yarbrough Site .

Burial 3 was a tightly fl exed adult interment encountered at a depth of 42 inches
resting on top of the red clay member of the knoll in Squares 18R2 and 19R2.
Although the skeletal material was extremely fragmentary, it could be determined
that the orientation was north -south with the head to the south. The skeleton rested
on the right side. Fifteen very small, tubular ceramic beads (Fig. 15, G) were found
in the neck region.
Burial 4 represents a few skull and teeth fragments found in the disturbed surface
soil in Square 19R6. The skeleton had been scattered and broken up by plowing and
the orientation of the remains could not be determin ed. No artifacts were found in
association.
Burial 5 (Fig. 20) consisted of a tightly flexed juvenile skeleton found in Squares
20R1 and 21R1 at a depth of 12 inches in the dark midden soil. The long axis of the
skeleton was oriented northeast-southwest with the h ead to the southwest; it rested

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 20 . Burial 5 , Yarbrough Site.

on the right side. The knees had been drawn up to the chin, and the arms were
extended downward with the hands at the pelvis. No associated artifacts were
recovered.
Burial 6 contained the badly broken skull fragments and shattered long bones of
a child. These were found at a depth of 24 inches below th e surface in dark midden
soil in Square 21R2. Because of the highly fragmentary nature of the remains it
could not be determined whether the skeleton was flexed or extended. Likewise, the
orientation was uncertain, although there is some indication that the head may have
been to the north.
Burial 7 (Fig. 21) was a tightly flexed adult burial in dark midden soil in Square
20R 1. It was found at a depth of 33 inches be1ow the surface. The orientation of the
long axis of the skeleton was northwest-southeast with the head to the southeast.
The skeleton rested on its back with the knees above the body and pulled up under
chin. The skull had fallen over slightly to one side, to the southeast. The position of
the upper limbs was not recorded by the field crew. No burial furniture was found in
association.
Burial 8 consisted of an incompletely flexed adult found at a depth of 30 inches
in dark midden soil, in Square 22L1. The skeleton was oriented northeast-southwest
with the head to the northeast. It lay on its back with the knees extending outward
to one side (the southeast) , forming a right angle with the long axis of the body.
The feet were drawn up against the pelvis. No burial furniture was found .

Unfortunately, the outline of the burial pits could not be discerned
by the field crew, and we do not know, therefore, from which levels
the burials were dug. The general absence of associated artifacts (a
trait of many burials in northern Texas dating from preceramic times )
and of ceramic vessels in the burials speak favorably for a preceramic

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

223

Fig. 21. Burial 7, Yarbrough Site.

date for most of the interments. Of the eight burials, seven occurred in
the area comprising artifact Analysis Unit 2 (Burials Z--8 ) making a
rather tight clustering: three below the lowest depth at which potsherds were fom1d (Ilurials 3, 7, 8), one at the lowesl level of the sherds
(Burial 6) , and two (Burials 4 and 5 ) in the upper levels and well
above the lowest occurrence of pottery. Burial 1, found outside the
analysis unit, was also in a pottery zone, and one potsherd was found
very near the bones. Still, it is safe to estimate that a majority of the
burials are preceramic in age, while the others date, perhaps, from the
period in which pottery was first being introduced into the site. Although ceramic beads were found with Burial 7, these do not occur, as
far as is presently known, in the later ceramic sites of the area, and the
burial probably belongs to the preceramic occupation of the site. Also,
the paste of these beads is more homogeneous than that of the late
ceramic vessels, lacking bone or other readily discernible tempering
agents. They could easily have been manufactured by people ignorant
of ceramic cooking vessels.
In summary, all the burials except Burials 2 and 6, which were very
fragmentary and badly disturbed, were flexed, four had the head to the
south or approximate southern direction, and the skeletons generally
rested on the right side. Burials 7 and 8, however, were in a supine
position, Burial 2 had the head to the northwest, and Burial 8 had the
head to the northeast.

224

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Knife Cache (Fig. 9).
In square 17L2, at a depth of 23 inches below the surface, a concentration of 10 knives was encountered (Fig. 15, H-0). This group of
artifacts seemingly represents a cache, since the knives were found in
close association five inches down into the sterile clay member of the
knoll. Unfortunately, the field notes do not record the level from which
the feature was dug.
Specimen 1 (Fig. 15, H) is a large stemmed knife or spear point with a lanceolate
blade, expanding stem, and deeply concave, bifurcating base. This specimen is of
gray but mottled compact chert which was well flaked by the percussion and
pressure techniques. The edges of the stem and the base have been ground quite
smooth. The length of this specimen is 161 mm., the maximum width 43 mm.,
and the thickness 12 mm. The workmanship shown on this knife is of a very high
quality.
Specimen 2 (Fig. 15, 1) is a stemmed knife or spear point much like specimen 1
in outline, but of a smaller size. Its blade is lanceolate, but serrated just above the
stem . The stem itself is expanding and bifurcating, and has a "fishtail" appearance.
Both the edges of the stem and the concave base are well ground. The flaking of
this specimen, made of a gray-brown mottled chert, is extremely good, with long,
shallow flake scars extending from the blade edge to the center of the specimen.
Long flakes were probably removed by some kind of indirect pressure. The length
of specimen 2 is 102 mm ., the maximum width 34 mm. , and the thickness 8 mm.
Specimen 3 (Fig. 15, J) is a narrow, stemless knife with a straight, notched base.
The flaking shown on this specimen is inferior to that of the preceding two, and it
appears only to have been worked by the percussion knapping technique. A coarse,
sandy agate was used in manufacture. The maximum length is 89 mm., the maximum width (at the base ) is 27 mm., and the thickness 10 mm.
Specimen 4 (Fig. 15, 0 ) , made from a white chert, is a medium-sized knife
belonging to Knife Group III, and Specimens 5 and 6 (Fig. 15, K, N ) belong
to Group IV. The reader is referred to the section on knives for a description of
these artifacts. Specimen 4 is 81 mm. long, 37 mm. wide, and 9 mm. thick. Specimen 5 measures 77 mm. long, 32 mm. wide, and 9 mm. thick, while specimen 6 is
74 mm. by 29 mm. by 8 mm. Specimens 5 and 6 are of a dark gray chert.
Specimens 7 and 8 (Fig. 15, L , M ) are simple knives with more or less lanceolate
blades which, unfortunately, lack their bases and can not therefore be assigned to
any of the knife groups. Specimen 7 measures 65 mm. in length (estimate ), 39 mm.
in width, and 7 mm. in thickness. Specimen 8 was approximately 75 mm. long
(estimate) , measures 31 mm. in width and 9 mm. in thickness. Both are of a gray ,
homogeneous chert.
Unfortunately, Specimens 9 and 10 have been lost since their exhumation in
1940, but judging from field drawings, both examples were of Knife Group I.

II. Area Bat the Yarbrough Site
The small midden located 300 yards to the south of the knoll has
been designated as Area B. This consisted of a small area, approx1-

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

225

mately 20 feet in diameter, of dark humus-stained midden soil containing many potsherds and bone scraps. The area was thoroughly
excavated by the W.P.A. field crew using shovels and trowels. Unfortunately, however, the provenience of the artifacts was not recorded, and it is therefore impossible to attempt distribution studies
within the area. It is also not known to what depth the excavation
penetrated, although the field notes indicate that this entire midden
area was troweled down to red, clayey subsoil. No occupation features
(hearths, post molds, etc.) were recognized, and although 612 potsherds, 8 reconstructable ceramic vessels, and several bone tools were
found, only two items of stone were recovered-a small ground piece
of ferruginous sandstone and a nondescript flint core.
From the meager field data it is hard to determine the kind of
feature Area B represented. The best guess, I think, would be that it
was a small habitation area of one, or at the most, two houses. The
lack of post molds may be due to the black color and homogeneous
composition of the soil, or to the gross excavation procedures employed
at the site. To support this hypothesis there are two pieces of wattleimpressed daubing such as is frequently found at house sites in the
Caddoan area. At any rate, the ceramic materials are all extremely
uniform and homogeneous, all representing the Sanders Focus of the
Neo-American (or Formative) Stage. The fact that only one unit is
represented at Area B, along with its small extent, allows us to suppose
a very brief occupation.
As mentioned above, the W.P.A. laboratory at San Antonio was
able to reconstruct eight vessels from the potsherds which were recovered. This relatively large number of pots is somewhat surprising
considering the small amount of sherds, and leads one to wonder
whether they represent furniture from graves or other features which
could have been destroyed by repeated agricultural cultivation of a
recent date. The insufficient field data, however, only serve to bring
up such possibilities and problems, and do not solve them.
THE CERAMICS

The 612 potsherds and eight reconstructed vessels from Area B
present a picture of uniformity and homogeneity. All are of typically
"Caddoan" paste and represent only Sanders Focus types: Sanders
Plain, Canton Incised, and Sanders Engraved. The paste, wall thickness, color, etc., vary uniformly from type to type, and one description of these characteristics will suffice for the whole collection. The
surface color varies from cream to light brown and (rarely) to black.

22.6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The paste is lumpy, with clay particles (possibly including some
amount of ground potsherds), clay lumps combined with pulverized
bone, and very rarely, shell, being used as tempering agents. The core
is either the same color as the surface or is slightly darker, the latter
condition indicative of an incompletely oxidizing firing atmosphere.
The wall thickness ranges from 5 to 8 mm. and the surface hardness
from 2.5 to 3.5 according to Moh's scale of hardness.
These sherds and vessels correspond well to those reported upon by
Krieger (1946: 185-192) from the Sanders site on Red River, with
one notable exception. The execution of the design motifs and elements themselves is much more careless and crude on the Yarbrough
site specimens than on the Sanders site examples. Also, the most
elaborate wares and types of the Sanders site are not present at Yarbrough. Otherwise the two collections resemble each other very
strongly.
The Canton Incised Type.
One reconstructed vessel and 126 rim and body sherds could be identified as the
Canton Incised type (originally defined by Krieger, 1946: 185-192; see also Suhm
et al., 1954: 254) . Of these, 71 sherds were tempered with small clay lumps and 55
with clay lumps combined with ground bone.
The one reconstructed vessel of this type (Fig. 22, B ) is cylindrical, round, and
has a flat rim and circular, concave base. Its oral diameter is 13 cm., the average
wall thickness is 5 mm., and the height 19 cm. The surface color is of a rather dark
reddish-brown, and ground clay lumps were employed as the tempering agent.
The decoration consists of a band of crossed, diagonal incised lines located on the
exterior surface just below the rim.
Sixty sherds represent cylindrical vessels with similar crossed diagonal lines
below the rim (Fig. 23, A, B) . Of these, about half the rim sherds have rounded,
and the remainder flat, lips. Another five sherds, two with flattened rims and three
with rounded lips, have alternate panels filled with diagonal lines running in
different or opposite directions; these are located just below the rim.
Seven sherds (Fig. 23, C) have vertical incised lines below the rim. Six of these
are from a small carinated bowl with flat lip, the other from a cylindrical vessel
having a l:'Ounded and very slightly everted lip.
Fifteen of the 126 Canton sherds (Fig. 23, P-E) have punctations combined in
various ways with incisions below the rim of cylindrical, presumably straightwalled vessels. All of these have flat lips except for one specimen the lip of which
is somewhat rounded. The design consists either of alternate panes of diagonal
incisions and punctations, or of diamonds formed by crossed diagonal lines and
filled with punctations.
An interesting group of 27 sherds (Fig. 23, F) represent flat-lipped carinated
bowls with parallel, diagonal incisions in a band around the rim. These lines run
downward and to the left from the rim. This group is particularly interesting since
the design and vessel shape are characteristic of the Sanders Engraved type. Here
we have the very same thing, but with incised instead of engraved lines.

227

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SI TES

A

c

B

'"'"'--,
. '..\

'·

;

}

D

Q

I 2

3

4

5 6 7
CM.

~

?

~

Fig. 22 . Ceramic vessels, Area 8, Yarbrough Site. A, Sanders Engraved; B, Canion Incised; C-G, Sanders Plain.

Another 11 incised body sherds probably belong to the Canton Incised type.
These are very small and the position of the parallel incised lines can not be
oriented with respect to position on th e vessel.
The Sanders Engraved Type
One partially reconstructed bowl and 45 body and rim sherds belong to the
Sanders Engraved type (originally defined by Krieger, 1946: 185-192; see also

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

\

/

_

'

_.;,..._, \

\ _,.-

-----,-

I-':

--- --- -- - --

c

B

A

]

____
D

G

E

F

7
L

K
()

'
Fig . 23. Potsherds . A-F, Canton Incised; G, Sanders Engraved; H-L, Sonders Plain .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

229

Suhm et al. , 1954: 352). Of these sherds, 34 were tempered with clay lumps and 11
with clay lumps combined with pulverized bone.
The partially reconstructed vessel (Fig. 22, A) is of the typical "Caddoan" paste,
and has a reddish-brown surface color. Clay lumps were employed as the tempering
agent. The bowl has a flat base, is carinated, and has a flat lip. Small, contiguous
engraved triangles filled with crossed diagonal lines form a band around the outside of the r im. The oral diameter is 117 mm ., the basal diameter 67 mm ., and the
height 62 mm.
Sixteen sherds, priobably representing a single vessel, are from a bottle of undeterminable dimensions and shape which was decorated with circles of crudely
made, indistinct triangles. These decorations were located on the body just below
the place where the neck was connected. In addition to the bands of triangles,
several apparently random zigzag and irregular lines occuned on parts of the
vessel body.
Another 11 sherds (Fig. 23, G) also show triangles filled with cross-hatching or
with parallel diagonal lines. Four of these come from bottles and seven from bowls.
In this last group, six rim sherds are represented, three with flat and three with
rounded lips.
Twelve rim sherds have parallel diagonal lines around the rim in place of
triangles. Three flat lip and two rounded-lip rim sherds are present in this group.
Another five potsherds, forming a miscellaneous engraved group, are small body
sherds with small patches of random engraving on th eir surlaces. These most likely
represent the Sanders Engraved type, but we cannot be certain about the.
identification.
The Sanders Plain Type
Seven reconstructed vessels and 89 rim and body sh<>rds could be identified as
the Sanders Plain type (originally described by Krieger, 1946: 185-192; see also
Suhm et al. , 1954: 350). Of these, 63 sherds were tempered with small clay lumps
and 26 with clay lumps combined with ground bone.
The reconstructed vessels will be described first. Vessel 1 (Fig. 23, I ) is a partially
reconstructed large, flat bowl of the type which has been found at the Sanders site
on Red River (Kri eger, 1946: PL 25 D). The lip is fl at and notched, and a small
rudimentary flange occurs on the interior just below the lip. Unfortunately, no
basal sherds of this vessel were recovered. The original oral diameter is estimated
at 10 cm. The surface is of a rather dark , r eddish-brown color and ground clay
lumps were employed as the tempering agent.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 22, C) is a small, simple bowl with a somewhat flattened base,
convex walls, and a rounded lip. Its oral diameter is 14 cm., the average wall
thickness is 5 mm., and the height 4 cm. The surface color is dark brown, and
ground bone along with small clay lumps were employed as tempering agent.
Vessels 3 (Fig. 22, E) is a rather small cylindrical vessel or cup having a
circular, concave base, relatively straight walls, and a slightly fl attened lip. Its
average oral diameter is 8 cm., the average wall thickness 5 mm., and the height
105 mm. The surface color is a mottled reddish-brown, and ground clay lumps were
used as the tempering agent. The smooth surface evidences vertical striations which
probably indicate polishing with a pebble or similar implement.
Vessel 5 (Fig. 22, D ) is a medium-sized, low, shouldered bowl having a small
flat base and a near vertical rim. The lip itself is rounded and somewhat inverted.
The oral diameter averages 18 cm., the height of the rim 35 mm. , the complete

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

vessel height 8 cm., the average wall thickness 9 mm., and the basal diameter 75 mm.
The surface is of a lustrous brownish red color and is well polished, seeming to
indicate the surface floating technique of finishing. Small fragments of hematite,
ground bone, and small clay lumps were employed as the tempering agents.
Vessel 6 (Fig. 22, G) is a large bottle with an elongated, gourd-shaped body and
a straight-walled but slightly contracting neck. The base is somewhat convex and
the lip is rounded. The oral diameter is 35 mm., the maximum diameter of the body
15 cm., the height of the body 17 cm., the height of the rim 9 cm., the total height
26 cm ., and the average wall thickness 7 mm. The surface color varies foam light
reddish-brown to dark black, the latter color evidently caused by fire after breakage
occurred. The surface is weU smoothed but not polished, and small clay lumps were
used as the tempering agent.
Vessel 7 represents the partially reconstructed lower section of a squat, shouldered
bottle, the bottom half of which is hemispherical in shape and the top half conical.
The base tends to be flat. Unfortunately the upper parts of the vessel are missing
and we can tell nothing about its neck and rim shape. The maxmium body diameter
is 16 cm., the diameter of the base 8 cm., and the thickness of the wall sherds 5 mm.
The surface exterior is quite rough and is of a purplish-red color. Small clay lumps
appear to have been used as the tempering agent.
Of the 89 potsherds definitely of the Sanders Plain type, 33 are from bottles of
the form represented by vessel 6 (Fig. 23, H ) . The remaining sherds are from
bowls or beakers (cylindrical pots) (Fig. 23, J, K).
Sixteen sherds with flat lips and 14 with rounded lips are from medium to large
size cylindrical vessels probably like Vessel 1. Another 15 sherds belong to one or
more large, flat bowls, have lips notched on the outside, and exhibit a prominent
thickening of the interior wall surface immediately below the lip.
Two sherds with flat lips (Fig. 23, L) belong to a medium-sized carinated bowl.
Another three sherds represent vessels with concave, or "recurved," rims and an
everted rounded lip. The remaining two sherds of Sanders Plain are from simple,
medium-sized, convex-wall bowls with rounded lips.
Miscellaneous Potsherds
In addition to the above-described types, various sherds were recovered which
belonged to other categories. One of these is a punctated strap handle of a vessel of
Monkstown Fingernail Punctated (Krieger, 1946: 185-191; see Suhm et al., 1954:
330). Another nine are body sherds covered on one or both surfaces with a bright
red och re wash. T hese could have belonged to Maxey Noded Redware, Sanders
Plain, or Sanders Engraved vessels.
Nineteen miscellaneous punctated body sherds could not be assigned to any type,
nor could 28 flat basal sherds.
Of some interest are 10 undecorated body sherds which, except for their shell
tempering, are like the other ceramics from the Yarbrough site. Although Krieger
does not report shell tempering in Sanders Focus ware, several vessels tempered
with shell and having a Sanders appearance have been reported from Spiro, Oklahoma (Duffield, personal communication).
A group of 392 miscellaneous body sherds could not be typed. These represent
undecorated potsherds which come, most likely, from Sanders Plain vessels and
from the undecorated part of vessels of the decorated wares. Of these, 263 have
clay lump tempering and 129 have ground bone combined with clay lumps.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

231

BONE IMPLEMENTS

Fourteen bone and antler implements, all of deer, were recovered
in Area B. Seven of these implements (Fig. 24, E-G ) represent worked
tips of antler, and were apparently used as awls or, perhaps, as
punches. Although similar specimens have been designated as pressure
flaking tools in other areas, a certain amount of doubt exists about this
identification. For example, the tips of these specimens are quite
smooth and do not show gouges, scratches, or mutilations which would
presumably be caused by flaking.
Six deer ulnae (Fig. 24, A-C) show modification of the forward
sections. Although these specimens are extremely fragmentary, it
seems likely that they were employed as awls or smoothing tools. A bit
was fashioned on the two nearly complete specimens.
One large section of antler (Fig. 24, H), although not otherwise
modified, has a small drilled hole which penetrates half the diameter.
The remaining bone artifact was manufactured from a segment of
long bone. This implement (Fig. 24, D) has been considerably
smoothed and one end has been ground from both faces into a narrow
bit. Similar implements found on the Plains have been identified as
fleshing tools.
AREA B, SUMMARY STATEMENT

In conclusion, it is possible to say that Area B was a small occupation area representing the Sanders Focus of the Neo-American (Formative) Stage. The material found here corresponds to Period 5 of the
knoll, Area A. The people who lived here were potters, making cylindrical vessels (beakers), cups, large flat bowls, both simple and carinated bowls, and large vessels, which were decorated by incising or
engraving, by punctating, or by applying a red wash. The only other
tools encountered were awls of deer ulnae and antler tips, and a longbone implement which may have served as a flesher. The absence of
arrow points, scrapers, and other lithic tools is rather surprising, but
perhaps reflects poor excavation techniques more than anything else.
THE YARBROUGH SITE-SUMMARY

The preceding site description and artifact analysis, as well as the
studies of artifact provenience and distribution, enable us to make certain general statements about the aborigines who inhabited the Yarbrough site, and to comment upon the general history of the site.
To deal first with history, the deep stratigraphic columns from Area

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

- -~-

...

B

~--~

• .<

"' :-.--·

- -~-~-::.2J
.,.

.
"'
'
"- ~·-- ..t ,.4 «
~
~-~ -- . .
-

\..

,, '
.;;_ _

-

0

E

c F.:J
,,

0

)

~

.,.

2

3

G

4

5

6

7

8

9

CM.
Fig . 24 . Bome implements. A-C , deer ulnae awls; D, long-bone artifact ; E-G, antler
implements; H, drilled antler segment.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

233

A give us evidence for various Paleo-Indian occupations of the site
(Period 1), and for three "periods" (Periods 2, 3, 4) of occupation during the Archaic Stage. The uppermost excavation levels of Area A, and
all of the artifacts from Area B, represent later occupations of the
site by peoples of the Neo-American, or Formative, Stage (Period 5).
The Paleo-Indian materials, unfortunately, all come from an area of
the site where the stratigraphy of the various artifact types is considerably mixed and confused. However, because of their stylistic peculiarities, the Paleo projectile points (representing Clovis, Plainview,
Meserve and other types) could be factored out of the collection. In
view of the numerous occurrences of Paleo-Indian points in archeological sites in eastern Texas and adjacent areas, I do not hold to the
oft-cited idea that these artifacts merely represent materials which
·w ere collected and reused by later groups of aborigines. It seems much
more reasonable to assume that they are the product of various brief
occupations of these sites by highly nomadic Paleo-Indian peoples.
To deal now with the Archaic artifacts, there is good evidence in the
lowest levels of the Yarbrough knoll that expanding stem dart points
were the most popular early form. This early Archaic material has
been designated at Period 2. There is some evidence (corroborated by
data from the Manton Miller and other sites) for a third period representing the introduction into the area of contracting stem dart points.
Unfortunately, the data on the straight-stem tradition does not allow
it to be placed within any particular single period. Rather, the straightstemmed points are found scattered throughout the vertical distribution
column in small numbers. In Period 4 contracting stem dart points
were the most common form, and simple, plain-ware ceramics made
their appearance (Williams Plain and, perhaps, Sanders Plain). The
peoples who belonged to the various periods of the Archaic Stage made
and employed, in addition to dart points, other stone implements such
as gouges, axes, grinding slabs, manos, flint scrapers, etc. All of these
tools are characteristic of a hunting-gathering society. Polished stone
artifacts, as opposed to those made by the knapping technique, were
never popular at the Yarbrough site. In sharp contrast, at many sites of
similar age and developmental position located farther to the east in
Norh America, abundant polished stone artifacts occur in great numbers.
Finally, the data we have from the Yarbrough site (Area Band the
uppermost levels of Area A) give evidence of an important change
which took place in the region, namely, the shift from a vigorously
nomadic or semi-nomadic mode of existence to a more settled way of

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

life (Period 5), the latter represented by arrow points and an abundance of highly developed, complex, decorated ceramics. This is the
Neo-American or Formative Stage.
The stratigraphic differentiation between Period 4 and the later
Neo-American stage is not good at the Yarbrough site, but conclusive
corroborative evidence for this break exists at other sites in the area.
Speaking now in terms of archeological taxa, the Archaic materials
at the site (including most of the plain-ware potsherds) belong to the
La Harpe Aspect, whose definition is presented later in this report. The
arrow points and more elaborate ceramics seemingly represent the
Sanders Focus of the Gibson Aspect, as well as one or more foci of the
later Fulton Aspect.

THE MANTON MILLER SITE
Location and Description
The Manton Miller site (University of Texas No. 41DT), which is
located within the proposed Cooper Reservoir in south-central Delta
County of northeastern Texas, was excavated in 1959 as part of the
Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program. The site occupies a knoll
on the northern flood plain of the South Sulphur River. Over the surface of the knoll is scattered a large quantity of cultural refuse, including both ceramic and lithic artifacts.
The Miller site lies 3.5 miles south of the town of Cooper, Texas,
adjacent to and on the east side of the Cooper-Peerless county road
(Fig. 25). The site covers an area of approximately 4 acres on the
summit and southern slope of the small knoll mentioned above, an
erosional remnant situated approximately 750 feet north of the stream
channel. This knoll, which is roughly 150 feet in diameter at the top,
stands 15 feet above the level of the flood plain and is not seriously
affected by the periodic inundations that occur in this area.
Two concentrations of cultural debris were located and partially excavated (Fig. 25). The first of these, designated as Area A, is located
on the highest part of the knoll, while the second, Area B, is a small
midden on the southern slope of the knoll, approximately 150 feet
southwest of the summit and 6 feet lower in elevation than Area A.
A long river levee encroaches upon the eastern margin of the site,
beginning on the eastern slope of the knoll and extending southeastward for a distance of a mile, in part paralleling the river. As far as
could be determined, the construction of this levee did not appreciably

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

235

0

<
0

4

,...~
MA'5~ETIC

~
Fig. 25. Manton Miller Site, contour map .

damage the site. In addition to the levee, the eroded remains of two
modern artificial contour terraces could still be seen around the western and southern margins of the knoll. These followed the 92 and 96

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

foot contours respectively (Fig. 25, 26). They were constructed, perhaps, in conjunction with the building of the levee or as an aid in contour farming. Unfortunately, they resulted in the utilization and removal of a great deal of the topsoil from the summit of the knoll,
Area A.
During the first half of the present century the area covered by the
site was cultivated intensively, but at the time of excavation it had
been allowed to grow up in grasses and weeds. It appears that cultivation, along with rainfall and terrace construction, has taken away an
appreciable quantity of soil from the surface of Area A. A burial (No.
1) in very poor condition was found eroding out of the surface of the
knoll, as well as a rather large quantity of artifacts and occupational
detritus.
Geologically speaking, the internal structure of the site is relatively
simple. In Area B, the thin surface zone is a layer of midden soil composed, for the most part, of black, humus-stained sand that contains a
considerable quantity of cultural refuse. This zone, which is entirely
lacking on the eroded knoll, Area A, has a maximum thickness of 1.5
feet in Area B. The upper part of this stratum has been considerably
disturbed by plowing. Below the dark, implementiferous midden soil,
occurs a yellow and generally sterile, clayey subsoil, extremely hard
and compact, which extends downward for an undetermined distance
below the midden zone. In Area A this body has been exposed by
erosion, and all of the cultural debris is confined to the plow zone.
The area between the knoll and Area B yielded very little cultural
material, and appeared to be considerably eroded. In many spots the
clayey subsoil was visible, and two burials (Nos. 2 and 3) were found
eroding out of this area.

Discovery and Excavation of the Site
The Miller site was first discovered and recorded during the vvinter
of 1951 by Edward B. Jelks and Edward H. Moorman while conducting a preliminary archeological reconnaissance of the Cooper Reservoir
area (Moorman and Jelks, 1952). The survey was carried out by the
Austin Office of the River Basin Surveys of the Smithsonian Institution. However, the planned construction of the dam and reservoir has
been delayed several years, and although work on the dam is scheduled to begin in the near future, the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers
reports that the exact specifications for the reservoir are still indefinite.
In order to re-evaluate the sites located during the 1951 survey,

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

237

L. F. Duffield and W. A. Davis made a brief visit to Cooper Reservoir
in May of 1959, examining the sites reported by Moorman and Jelks
(Duffield, 1959a ). Since both the 1952 and 1959 survey reports emphasized the importance of the Manton Miller site as a potential source of
valuable archeological data , and since the site is scheduled to be completely submerged by the Cooper Reservoir, steps were taken to provide
for salvage excavations prior to its inundation.
In October, 1959, under terms of a contract (No. 14-10-333-528)
between The University of Texas and the U.S. National P ark Service,
a field crew of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project was dispatched
to the Miller site to carry out the rerommended excavations. Work
was carried on from October 12 to November 9, under the direction of
Edward B. Jelks , Executive-Director of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project. In addition to Jelks, the field crew consisted of L. F. Duffield and C. D. Tunnell, archeologists, and the following assistants :
Richard E. Ross, John Ruegenberg, Chester Rogers, and W. C. Jones.

Excavation and Recording Methods
The excavation and recording procedures utilized at the Miller site
were those generally employed by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project. A grid system, oriented on magnetic north and using 5-foot
squares as excavation units, was imposed over the site (Fig. 26). A
horizontal reference or control point was set up to the southeast of the
site and was designated NO-WO, and all points on the site were measured from this datum. Each square in the grid was designated by the
coordinates of its southeastern corner measured from the datum. For
example, stake N350-W500 was located 350 feet north and 500 feet
to the west of the horizontal control point; the 5-foot square with that
stake at its southeastern corner was labeled Square N350-W500.
A large nail in the base of a telephone pole at the southern edge of
the knoll was selected to serve as a vertical control point. This was assigned an arbitarary elevation of 100 feet. and the surface of the site,
occupational features, and trench and pit floors were all recorded relative to this vertical control datum. No U. S. Geological Survey bench
markers were located in the immediate vicinity, and it was not feasible
to relate the arbitrary elevation system used at the site with sea-level
elevation.
To seek any occupational features which might be present and to
determine the stratigraphic composition of the site, test trenches were
run through Areas A and B.

238

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D

AREA

A

~AL*3

0

D

D

AREA B

0
,;',,,,. ~ --

'

\

I

I

I

I
I
I

~ ' / / tlOO
_,
POTHOL.£5

\

I
I

:.,._/"

/

_,.100
lt

Fig. 26. Manton Miller Site, plan of excavation, showing Areas A and B.

In Area A-the top of the knoll- trenches 2.5 feet in width and of
varying lengths w ere run east-west along the N350, N375 , and N400
lines, and north-south along the W475 and W500 lines (see Fig. 26 for
dimeri_sions and extent of the excavations) . At every spot where the

239

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

presence of occupational features (hearths, post molds, burials, etc.)
was suspected, the trenches were enlarged to expose them. As a general rule, the soil removed from the test trenches was not passed
through screens, since the primary purpose of these initial excavations
was to locate occupational features. In addition to the test trenches, a
large block of 5-foot squares was excavated in Area A a short distance
to the northeast of the trenches (Fig. 26). The soil removed during
the excavation of these squares was passed through screens of halfinch mesh.
In Area B, a test trench 2.5 feet wide was dug in an east-west direction along the N150 line (Fig. 26). Since the purpose of the trench was
primarily exploratory, the soil removed was not passed through
screens. After the test trench was completed, a row of 5-foot squares
was excavated both northward and southward from N150, following
the W550 line which crossed the approximate center of the Area B
midden. Several additional 5-foot squares were also put down in the
midden area, both to the east and west of the W550 line, in places
where further excavations were deemed advisable (Fig. 26).
All excavating was done in arbitrary half-foot vertical intervals
and the artifacts recovered were bagged by their respective levels. In
both areas, all the soil from 5-foot squares outside the test trenches was
passed through screens having a half-inch mesh and the "floors" of all
the half-foot levels were carefully troweled to facilitate the detection of
features. The excavations in Area A did not penetrate more than
1 foot below the surface of the soil; those in Area B did not go beyond
a depth of 2 feet.

Occupational Features
Four human interments, each containing one individual, a dog
burial, three pits of medium size, and seven earthen hearths were encountered in various parts of the site (see Fig. 26 ) during the excavations. Neither post molds nor house patterns were found.
Dr. T. W. McKern, physical anthropologist at The University of
Texas, examined the skeletal material from the Miller site and, where
possible, made appropriate measurements and observations. Because of
the fragmentary nature of the material and its poor state of preservation , he was only able to work vvith the skeleton from Burial 4.
BURIALS

Burial 1. This was encountered below the N365-W510 stake in Area A at a depth
of 0.2. fee t below the surface of the soil. A few bon e fragments, however, could be

240

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

seen eroding from the surface. The skeleton lay within the plow zone and rested
on the sterile clayey subsoil. Because of its location near the surface, the bone
material was badly broken and scattered by plowing; it was, therefore, not possible
to determine with any accuracy the original orientation and position of the skeleton.
Although most of the skull was missing, the mandible was found directly to the east
of the main bone mass, suggesting an east-west orientation of the burial with the
head toward the east. It appears that the skeleton rested on its right side and was
tightly flexed, although the fragmentary nature of the skeleton precludes any
certainty regarding the position.
Although the grave outline could not be traced accurately, the grave fill itself
was black, humus-stained soil which was distinct from the brownish sandy soil into
which the burial had been dug. No artifacts were found in association with the
remains.
Burial 2. This burial consisted of an extremely fragmentary and badly disturbed
human skeleton in Square N255-W465 , in the eroded section of the site between
Areas A and B. These skeletal remains, occurring just below the surface and extending to the base of the plow zone, were so thoroughly demolished by plowing
that neither their orientation, position, nor the dimensions of the grave outline
could be determined. Several small potsherds and animal bone fragments, obviously representing intrusive midden debris and not grave furniture, were found
scattered among the human remains.
Burial 3. This burial consisted of another highly fragmented skeletal find encountered in Square N250-W510, between Areas A and S. Most of the burial was at
a depth of 0.3 feet below the surface, although a few bone scraps were observed on
the surface itself. This burial was also within the plow zone and had been almost
completely destroyed, so that only a few skull fragments, one tooth, a few
phalanges, and other small scraps remained. The original position of the skeleton,
its orientation, dimensions, etc., could not be determined. Although one Gary type
dart point and a plain potsherd were found among the bone scraps, they appear
to represent only fortuitous midden debris.
Burial 4 (Fig. 27). This burial, a single human skeleton in an excellent state of
preservation, was encountered in Square N130-W545, Area B, at a depth of 1.5
feet below the surface. The skeleton was semi-flexed with the hands drawn up
toward the head, rested on its right side, and was oriented northeast-southwest with
the head to the southwest. The long axis of the grave (northeast-southwest)
measured 5 feet and the short axis, at the shoulders, 3.6 feet. Apparently the burial
pit was dug from the base of the plow zon2 or higher. The grave fill itself was of a
slightly darker, more humus-stained soil than the gray, compact sand into which
the grave had been dug. No burial furniture was found in association with the
skeleton remains; one plain potsherd found in the grave fill represented a seemingly
accidental inclusion.
The following observations on the bone material from Burial 4 were made by
Dr. T. W. McKern:
The skeletal remains, Bur. 4, from the Miller site are those of a fairly young and
robust American Indian female of approximately 17 years of age. The skull is dolichocranic (71.9 mm.) with narrow facial and nasal dimensions. The cranial contour
in normal verticalis is ovoid, parietal bosses are pronounced, the vault is keeled,
and the mastoids are large for a female. The cranial contour in norma lateralis is
distinguished by a pronounced occipital bun. Stature is approximately 5' 4".
The dental arcade is hyperparabolic, the gonions everted, and both genial spines
and mylo-hyoid ridges are pronounced.

241

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

MILLER StTE'
41 DT 1·
BURtAL-4
OCT 28 59

Fig. 27 . Burial 4 , Manton M ille r Site.

D ental wear is pronounced for the indicated age but not unusually so when
compared to known prehistoric Indians of the area. With the exception of an
impacted lower left third molar, the general condition of the teeth is good.
Other than slight lipping of the anterior borders of the lumbar centra, there is
no evidence of general or local pathology .
In addition to the human interments described above, one dog burial was found
(Fig. 28 ) . This was located in Area B, in the western edge of Square N155-W550
and extending into the eastern part of the square N155-W555, at a depth of 1.8 feet
below the surface. The skeleton was oriented north-south with the head to the
north, and rested on its right side facing >vest. These r emains lay in the humusstained midden soil just above the zone of contact with the clayey subsoil, and
thus had not been disturbed by plowing. Although a grave outline could not be
discerned, the remains nevertheless seem to represent a deliberate interment judging from the well-articulated skeleton and its neat placement. According to an
identification made by the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory of The University
of Texas, this animal is a domesticated dog. It was not passible to determine
whether the dog burial dates from the aboriginal or the recent Anglo-American
occupation.
PITS

The outlines of three medium-sized pits were encountered during the course of
the excavations. The fill removed from the pits contained nothing but the usual
midden debris and, from the limited evidence at hand, the use for which they were
intended can not be determined.

242

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 28 . Dog burial, Manton Miller Site.

Pit 1. Located on the top of the knoll, in Square N375-W495, Pit 1 was a roughly
basin-shaped, oval excavation having a maximum diameter of 3.5 feet. The pit was
apparently dug from the plow zone or above, and penetrated the clayey subsoil.
No ashes or other evidences of fire were encountered in or about the pit; thus the
possibility that it served as a hearth for cooking purposes can be eliminated. Perhaps
the purpose of the excavation was to acquire clay for the manufacture of ceramics
or, when lined with a hide, the pit could conceivably have been used in the stoneboiling technique of cooking. The fill yielded only three dart point fragments, a
knife, a few flint spalls, and several animal bone fragments-all common items of
midden refuse.
Pit 2. This pit, located in Square N375-W520, Area A, was oblong in shape, with
a maximum length of 2 feet, a maximum width of 1.51feet, and measuring 1.5 feet
in depth from the present surface of the site. The outline of the pit indicates that it
was dug from the base of the plow zone or from above. Unlike Pit 1, which was
more or less basin-shaped, Pit 2 had a flat bottom and relatively straight and vertical
walls. In the fill removed from the pit were found four potsherds, three resembling
the Williams Plain type, one unidentified; miscellaneous flint fragments; shells; and
animal bone fragments.
Pit 3. This was found in the Area B midden, in Square N150-W570. This pit was
basin-shaped, had a maximum diameter of 1.5 feet and reached a maximum depth
of 2.5 feet below the present soil surface. Although the outline of the pit was
easily discernible in the clayey sub-soil, it could not be followed clearly in the

243

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

overlying dark midden soil; h ence the level from which th e pit was dug could not
be determined. In the pit fill a bone awl, one Kent type dart poi nt, two unclassifiabl e anow points, an abundance of bone and shell fragmen ts, and a few pecan
hulls were found. This feature, like the twc: pits found on the knoll, evidenced no
ash or other indications of fi re.
HEARTHS

Seven shallow, basin-shaped hearths were found during the excavation of the
site. They were simple, sh allow depressions without linings of clay, stone, or other
materials. The internal struc ture of the hearths was very consis tent throughout
the group, h ence the detailed description of one (Hearth 3 ) should suffice for the
entire group. Only general dimensions and location will be g iven for the other
6 hearths.
Hearth 3, encountered in th e trench wall running from N125 to N130 along the
W555 lin e, consisted of a shallow basin 1.5 feet in diameter and 0.2 feet thick at
the center, thinning considerably , however, toward the edges. The top portion of
the h earth was composed of the lumps of clay of a bright orange color, presumably
the result of h eat. Beneath this was found a very light gray ash , which lined the
bottom and edges of the h earth. The top of this feature was encountered 0.5 feet
below the present surface of the site; the bottom at a depth of 0.7 feet. The other
six hearth s had a similar internal structure with burned clay overlying a layer of
almost white ash . Some of the hea rths showed other minor len ses, but nevertheless
retained the main compositional characteristics of H earth 3.
H ea rth 1 was located in Square N140-W550. It was approximately 3 feet in
diameter, reachf'fl a maximum thickness of 0.5 feet, and occurred between th e 1
and 1.5 feet depths below the surface.
H earth 2 was found in Square N110-W550. It measured 2.5 feet in diameter and
0.5 feet in maximum thickn ess, occurring between 1.8 to 2.3 feet below the surface
of the site.
Hearth 4, on ly half of which was uncovered, was discovered in Square N105W550. Since the whole feature was not exposed, its diameter and maximum thickness could not be determined. The top of the hearth, however , was enoountered at
a depth of 0.7 feet below the soil surface.
Hearth 5, in Square N140-W 550, was likewise only partly uncovered and its
complete dimensions were not determined; its top portion was encountered at a
depth of 1.4 feet below the surface.
Hearth 6 w as located on the N120 line between W551 and W553.3. It measured
3.5 feet in m aximum diamet er, but its thickness was not recorded. The top portion
of this hea rth was encountered at a depth of 1.5 feet below the surface of the site.
H ea rth 7, encountered at a depth of 0.5 feet below the surface, was located on
the N130 line between W 545 and W548 . The entire surfa ce of this hearth was
exposed by excavation; its average diameter was 2.5 feet. H earth 7 was like the
others, except that it oontain ed a larger amount of ash, charcoal, animal bones,
and shell fragm ents.
No post-mold patterns were found surrounding the hearths to suggest that th ese
features might h ave been located inside houses or other structures. Except for
several fired daub particles, no indications of house structures were encountered at
the Miller site. If the h earths were used for cooking purposes (and the bone and

244

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

other refuse in and about them would suggest this) cooking was probably done in
the open.

Description of the Artifacts
A total number of 1,046 artifacts was recovered from the Manton
Miller site; this includes the following categories : chipped stone artifacts, ground stone artifacts, ceramics, bone artifacts, and shell
artifacts.
CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

1. Projectile Points
In the following presentation of the projectile points recovered from
the Manton Miller site, the usual references and descriptions will not
be given for types and varieties which appear in the section of this
paper dealing with the Yarbrough site artifacts. Rather, in as many
instances as is possible, reference will be made back to the Yarbrough
site descriptions. Dimensions, however, will be given in all cases.
DART POINTS
Like those from the Yarbrough site, the dart points from the Miller site belong
to three stemming traditions-the contracting stem, straight stem, and expanding
stem traditions.
THE CONTRACTING STEM TRADITION. Of the 144 dart points and dart point
fragments recovered, 119 belong to the contracting stem tradition, which has been
recognized in many parts of North America. The Miller site contracting stem specimens are all of the Gary type.

The Gary Type. The Gary point type, represented by 71 relatively complete specimens and 48 fragments, represents a wide range of variation within certain specific limits. The diagnostic attributes of the type are a contracting stem, roughly
triangular blade, fair, but not excellent workmanship (at this site)-a trait governed
probably by the poor quality of the chert which was used in manufacture-and well
developed shoulders without barbs.
At the Yarbrough site nine varieties of the Gary type were recoginzed and
named. The most common were kaufman and hobson, while the minor varieties
were alsa, runge, panna maria, kenedy, colfax, emory, and kemp. In the Miller site
artifact collection, the following varieties could be recognized: kaufman, alsa, hobson, runge, colfax, emory, and k&mp.

Fig. 29 . Dart points and arrow points. Gary type: A-B, kaufman variety; C-D, a/sa
variety; E-F, runge variety; G-H , co/fax variety; 1-J, hobson variety; K-L, emory variety;
M-N, kemp variety. 0, Yarbrough type. P-Q, Yantis type, cook variety. R, Trinity type. S-T,
Pa/mil/as type . U, Morrill type, san pedro variety . V, We/ls type. W-X, Kent type, phalba
variety. Y-Z, Alba type. Fresno type: AA- CC, odas variety; DD-FF, fairlie variety. GG-HH ,
Talco type. II-MM, Minier type. NN-00, Scallorn type. PP-RR, Type X arrow points.

245

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

The kaufman variety-14 specimens (Fig. 29, A-B)
Dimensions: length-average 40 mm., range of variation, 37 to 56 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 36 mm., range 26 to 40 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.

A

B

H

G

DD

Q

x

EE

D

J

p

w

c

i

K

GG

0

M

L

s

R

y

FF

E

HH

JJ

BB

cc

KK

LL

00

MM

.

23 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

~

CM.

NN

v

u

AA

II

0

N

T

z

F

PP

OG

RR

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Material: reddish-gray chert with sand grain inclusions.
Remarks: In all other particulars the Miller site specimens of the kaufman variety
are like those recovered from the Yarbrough site.
The alsa variety-9 specimens (Fig. 29, C-D )
Dimensions: length-average 46 mm., range of variation 42 to 48 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 29 mm. , range 24 to 34 mm. ; thickness-average 10 mm.,
range 8 to 15 mm.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: In all other particulars, the Miller site alsa points are like those from
the Yarbrough site.
The runge variety-9 specimens (Fig. 29, E-F)
Dimensions: length-average 48 nun., range of variation 35 to 65 mm. ; width at
the shoulders-average 25 mm., range 21 to 33 mm.; thickness-avera ge 7 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand grain inclusions. Remarks: In all other
particulars the Miller site runge points are like those from the Yarbrough site.
The colfax variety-3 specimens (Fig. 29, G, H)
Dimensions: length-Specimen 1, 30 mm. , Spec. 2, 30 mm., Spec. 3, 36 mm. (est.);
width at shoulders-Specimen 1, 19 mm., Spec. 2, 19 mm., Spec. 3, 21 mm.;
thickness- Specimen 1, 5 mm., Spec. 2, 6 mm., Spec. 3, 6 mm.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: In all other particulars the Miller site specimens of this variety are like
those recovered from the Yarbrough site.
The hobson variety-21 specimens (Fig. 29, I-J)
Dimensions: length-average 34 mm., range of variation 30 to 45 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 18 mm., range 16 to 25 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 8 mm.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand grain inclusions (20), petrified wood ( 1) .
Remarks: In all other pertinent particulars the Miller site specimens of the hobson
variety are like those recovered from the Yarbrough site.
The emory variety-9 specimens (Fig. 29, K-L)
Dimensions: length-average 40 mm. , range of variation 20 to 42 mm., width at
the shoulders-average 21 mm., range 20 to 23 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 7 mm.
Material: r eddish-gray chert with sand grain inclusions.
Remarks: In all particulars the Miller site specimens of the emory variety are like
those from the Yarbrough site.
The kemp variety-6 specimens (Fig. 29, M -N )
Dimensions: length- average 31 mm. , nnge of variation 28 to 33 mm. ; width at
shoulders- average 6 mm. , range 15 to 17 mm.; thickness-average 5 mm. ,
range 5 to 6 mm.
Material: reddish-gra y chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: In all particulars these kemp dart points are like those recovered from
th e Yarbrough site.
Miscellaneous Gary Fragments

In addition to the points described above, 48 broken points were found which also
seem to repnsent th e Gary type, but which could not be assigned to any of the

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

247

varieties because of their incompleteness. However, there do not seem to be any
unusual forms present in the sample that do not also occur in the recognized
varieties. Forty-six were made of the locally acquired reddish-gray chert, one of
light gray chert, and one of pink, mottled novaculite.
TYPES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN THE CONTRACTING
STEM AND STRAIGHT STEM TRADITIONS

The Wells Type. One fragment of a W ells point (Fig. 29, V ), including the medial
and basal portions, was found. This specimen has well developed shoulders, but
lacks true barbs. Its stem is long (26 mm.), contracts slightly, and has a flattened
base. The edges of the stem have been well smoothed. The width at the shoulders
is 20 mm., and the maximum thickness is 9 mm. The material used in its manufacture is local reddish-gray chert.
The Kent Type. Two crude examples of the phalba variety of the Kent type (Fig.
29, W-X ) were recovered during the excavation of the Miller site. These have
triangular blades (although that of Specimen 1 is broken and appears to have been
reworked), shoulders without barbs, and approximately straight stems with convex
bases. Specimen 1 measures 35 mm. long, 19 mm. wide at the shoulders, and has a
maximum thickness of 9 mm. Specimen 2, whose blade is beveled on alternate sides,
measures 40 mm. in length, 20 mm. in width, and 5 mm. in thickness. Both are of
locally-acquired reddish-gray chert.
THE STRAIGHT STEM TRADITION

The Morrill Type. An incomplete Morrill point of the san pedro variety (Fig. 29,
U) is made of local reddish-gray chert, has slight shoulders, a long stem with more
or less straight sides and an irregular base. The width at the shoulders measures
23 mm. , and the maximum thickness is 9 mm. The workmanship is quite crude.
TYPE INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN THE STRAIGHT STEM
AND EXPANDING STEM TRADITIONS

The Yantis Type . Two specimens of the cook variety of the Yantis type were recovered at the Miller site (Fig. 29, P , Q). These rather crude specimens represent
the medial and basal portions of points which have very sharply expanding stems
with concave sides and flat bases. Specimen 1 is too fragmentary for accurate
measurement. Specimen 2 has a maximum thickness of 8 mm. and a basal width of
21 mm. Both are made of a local, mottled gray chert that has abundant sand
inclusions.
THE EXPANDING STEM TRADITION

The Yarbrough Type. One fragmentary Yarbrough point (Fig. 29, 0) cons1stmg
of the basal and medial portions was recovered from the site. It appears to be of the
lindale variety that has been established at the Fred Yarbrough site. Its shoulders
are strong but lack barbs; the stem expands slightly and has straight sides, and the
base is straight. The shoulder width is 24 mm., and the basal width 20 mm.; the
maximum thickness is 8 mm. It is made of locally acquired reddish-gray chert.
The Trinity Type. One specimen of the Trinity type was found (Fig. 29, R). This
small specimen has a short, triangular blade with straight sides, and slight, barbless

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shoulders. The stem is half the length of the entire specimen, expands quite
sharply, and has concave sides and a flat base. The length is 30 mm., the width at
the shoulders is 16 mm., the basal width 20 mm. , and the maximum thickne>s
measures 7 mm. This artifact was made from an impure variety of jasper.

The Palmillas Type. Two fragmentary Palmillas points (Fig. 29, S-T) (medial
and basal segments ) were found. These crude specimens, both made of a local,
impure gray chert, have well-developed, barbless shoulders and expanding, bulbous
stems with convex bases. Specimen 1 has a width (at the shoulders) of 23 mm.
and a maximum thickness of 8 mm. Specimen 2 measures 25 mm. wide at the
shoulders and has a maximum thickness of 18 mm.
Fragmentary Dart Points. In addition to the dart points described under the preceding categories, 81 dart point fragments were recovered. Fifteen are blades and
medial sections lacking the base and stem, thus precluding any typological identifications. All but two of these fifteen were manufactured from impure, reddish-gray
cert. The two exceptions are of petrified wood. Another 66 are tips, or distal fragments, of dart points and are made of reddish-gray chert.
SUMMARY STATEMENT CONCERNING DART POINTS

A great majority of the dart points recovered from the Miller site are representatives of the contracting stem tradition and, more specifically, of the Gary
type. The most common varieties of this type at the site are kaufman and hobson.
The few examples of the expanding stem tradition include the Yarbrough, Trinity,
and Palmillas types. Only one type of the straight stem tradition (the Morrill type ),
and a small number of types intermediate between the various traditions were
found .

ARROW POINTS
A total of 109 arrow points and arrow point fragments was recovered from the
surface and from the excavations at the Miller site. Both stemmed and unstemmed
forms are represented. Many of these do not fall into existing arrow point types,
hence it will be necessary to present several new typ e and variety names which,
for the present, are to be considered tentative.

The Alba Type-48 specimens (Fig. 29", Y-Z)
Blade: varying from subtriangular to triangular to lanceolate; edges straight, concave, or convex; also present is the so-called "recurved" blade shape frequently
found cm points in the Caddoan Area which are convex near the tip and concave
immediately above the shoulders; shoulders well developed and frequently outflaring; a few have slight barbs and many of the out-flaring shoulders terminate
either in a sharp point or are blunt and "square."
Stem: approximately one-fourth the length of the entire point ; subrectangular or
expanding very slightly, although the overall outline tends to be somewhat
bulbous; edges straight to slightly convex; base straight or convex with rounded
corners.
Dimensions: length-average 26 mm., range of variation 16 to 32 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 18 mm. , range 13 to 22 mm.; thickness-average 4 mm.,
range 3 to 5 mm.
Workmanship: fair, with pressure flaking.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

249

Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 46), homogeneous gray chert
(2.).
Remarks: In using the name Alba to describe this group of 48 points the original
definition by Newell and Krieger (1949: 161-162., Fig. 56, A-H) has been
followed. As mentioned earlier, a great deal of variation occurs within the
sample of Alba points from the Miller site, yet the diverse attributes do not
cluster consistently together forming varieties-as is the case within other types
having even less internal consistency-but occur quite randomly throughout the
sample. The diagnostic attributes of the Alba type as defined in this paper are
triangular or "recurved" blade, sharp shoulders sometimes with slight barbs, and
a rectangular or very slightly expanding stem.

The Fresno Type. The 13 points of the stemless, triangular type known as Fresno
(Suhm et al., 1954: 498, Pl. 128 ) fall into two rather discrete groupings, which are
here provided with tentative variety names. Lest the reader be alarmed at our
setting up varieties on such a small number of specimens, it should be stated that
several collections of artifacts from related sites were reviewed , and that the two
Fresno varieties are recognizable in other areas.
The odas variety-7 specimens (Fig. 2.9, AA-CC )
Shape: roughly triangular.
Edges: straight to slightly convex, or rarely concave.
Base: wide, convex with rounded corners.
Dimensions: length-average 2.6 mm., rar;ge of variation 2.0 to 30 mm.; width at
the base--average 17 mm., range 15 to 2.0 mm.; thickness-average 5 mm.,
range 3 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: rather crude with little evidence of pressure flaking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with abundant sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of this variety are its wide, convex base and
crude workmanship. The fairlie variety of Fresno is relatively longer and has a
straight base.
The fairlie variety-6 specimens (Fig. 2.9, DD-FF)
Shape: triangular to subtriangular.
Edges: straight or somewhat convex.
Base: relatively narrow and straight.
Dimensions: length-average, 2.5 mm., range of variation 18 to 30 mm.; width at
base- average 15 mm., range, 11 to 17 mm. ; thickness-average 6 mm., range
3 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: fair; better than for the odas variety.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the fairlie variety are its straight and relatively narrow base.
The Talco Type-3 specimens (Fig. 2.9, GG-HH )
Shape: subtriangular.
Edges: concave.
Base: concave.
Dimensions: length-Specimen 1, 18 mm.; Spec. 2., 2.1 mm.; Spec. 3, 2.5 mm.
(estimate); width at base-Specimen 1, 16 mm.; Spec. 2., 14 mm.; Spec. 3, 15
mm.; thickness-Specimen 1, 3 mm.; Spec. 2., 3 mm.; Spec. 3, 3 mm.
Workmanship: good, with long transverse flakes removed , apparently by pressure.

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Materials: novaculite ( 1), reddish-gray chert with sand (2).
Remarks: These points fit well the description of the type given by Suhm et al.
( 1954: 508, Pl. 133, A, B, C). Their definitive characteristics are concave lateral
edges and concave base.

The Scallorn Type- 4 specimens (Fig. 29, NN-00 )
Blade: triangular; edges straight to very slightly concave; shoulders barbed.
Stem: one-fourth to one-fifth the length of the entire specimen; short and sharply
expanding; edges straight to concave; base straight to slightly concave.
Dimensions: length-average 27 mm., range of variation 23 to 30 mm.; width at
the shoulders- average 15 mm., range 13 to 16 mm.; thickness- average 3 mm.,
range 2 to 4 mm.
Workmanship: very good, with evidence of secondary pressure flaking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: These four examples conform well to the type description given by
Suhm et al. ( 1954: 506, Pl. 132, A, B, C) .
The Minter Type-16 specimens (Fig. 29, II-MM)
Blade: irregular, but approaching subtriangular; edges irregular, at times concave
or convex; shoulders prominent, but lacking barbs.
Stem: one-fourth to one-sixth the length of the entire specimen; wide, short and
extremely rudimentary, sometimes expanding slightly; edges irregular, but frequently straight or concave; base irregular, approaching straight or convex.
Dimensions: length- average 23 mm., range 16 to 30 mm.; width at the shoulders
-average 18 mm., range 14 to 22 mm.; thickness-average 4 mm., range 2 to
5mm.
Workmanship: extremely poor; the small amount of pressure flaking is crudely
executed.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: These 16 points are representative of a type which has been recognized
elsewhere in north-central and northeastern Texas, but not heretofore named.
The most salient attributes of the Minter type are tlle irregular shape, resulting
from poor and careless knapping, and the wide, short, irregular stem.
Type X-4 specimens (Fig. 29, PP-RR)
Blade: triangular or subtriangular; edges slightly concave; shoulders protruding
and pointed, but lacking barbs.
Stem: one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire specimen; shape contracting;
edges ooncave; base pointed or slightly rounded.
Dimensions: length-range of variation 18 to 23 mm.; width at shoulders-range
11 to 20 mm.; thickness-range 3 to 5 mm.
Workmanship: poor, with little evident pressure flaking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: This small group of contracting stem arrow points has not been given a
type name here because of uncertainty regarding its affiliations. It is most likely
that when more evidence is available these specimens can either be given a
proper name or included within an existing type. There are certain strong resemblances, for example, to the Perdiz, Livermore, and Cliffton types.
Fragmentary Arrow Points. In addition to the above-described types and varieties,
50 arrow points were recovered from the surface and from excavations which,

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

251

because of their fragmentary condition, could not be assigned to any of the established categories. Most of these seem originally to have had expanding stems. They
fall within the normal dimensions of the major types described in the present paper
and, except for two of them, are all of locally-acquired impure reddish-gray chert.
One of the exceptions is of milky quartz and the other of a light gray-brown
homogeneous chert.

2. Bifacial Artifacts

A total of 68 bifacial artifacts (other than the projectile points) was
recovered from the Manton Miller site. These generally crude and
somewhat irregular artifacts exhibit, except for a few examples, at
least one cutting edge prepared by the percussion flaking technique.
Some of them have definite tips, probably for piercing, while others
may have two well-defined cutting edges. The most distinctive feature
of all is that they were worked from both faces, as opposed to the
scrapers which were usually worked from only one face. Because of
diverse shapes and the lack of adequate inter-site comparative data, it is
deemed best not to attempt to classify these artifacts into named types
at the present. Rather, the designation system established for similar
materials at the Fred Yarbrough site will be employed. This consists of
small, homogeneous groups labeled with Roman numerals. Future research, it is hoped, may show that these correspond to varieties and
types.
Many of the bifacial artifacts were obviously intended to be used as
knives (they have clearly distinguishable cutting edges), while others,
though also worked from both faces, do not show such easily recognizable edges. The members of the first category will be designated as
"knives," those of the second, "miscellaneous bifacial artifacts."
KNIVES

Group I knives were not found at the Miller site.
Group II (Fig. 30, A-B) is made up of five medium-sized knives
which are trianguar or subtriangular in general outline. The edges are
straight or slightly convex, and the bases are very slightly rounded
(convex). The workmanship is rather crude, and no pressure flaking
was used. The length varies from 32 to 55 mm., the width (at the
base) from 23 to 40 mm., and the thickness from 8 to 15 mm .. All of
these knives were manufactured from locally-acquired impure, reddish-gray chert.
Group III (Fig. 30, C-D) consists of two medium or small-sized
knives which are ovate-acuminate in general outline. The edges are
convex and the bases rounded. The workmanship shown on these speci-

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

B

D

F'

E

H
j

K

p

0

M

L

N

R

.\

Q

~T

v

u

'~·
0

w

x

z

cc
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
GM.

Fig . 30. Chipped stone artifacts and cell . Knives : A-B, Group II; C-D, Group Ill; E, Group
IV; F-G, Group V; H-1 , Group VI ; J, Group VIII. K-L, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts, Group I.
M-N , Knives, Group IX . 0-P, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts , Group II. Q , Knife , Group IX.
R-S, drills . T-V, spokeshaves . W-X , side scrapers. Y-Z, end scrapers. AA, stemmed scraper.
BB, graver. CC , worked nodule. DD, cell.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

253

mens is crude, and their shape tends to be somewhat irregular. Specimen 1 measures 32 mm. in length, 22 mm. in width, and has a maximum thickness of 8 mm. Specimen 2 is 38 mm. long, 22 mm. wide, and
10 mm. thick. Both are of local reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Group IV (Fig. 30, F) is made up of three long, slender knives with
a lanceolate form. Their sides are slightly convex and the bases are
flattened or somewhat rounded. The length varies from 47 to 55 mm.
(estimates) , the maximum width from 25 to 27 mm., and the thickness
from 10 to 13 mm. These artifacts appear to be somewhat better made
than several of the aforementioned groups, although only the percussion technique seems to have been employed. All were made of local
reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Group V (Fig. 30, F-G) is composed of two bi-pointed knives of
medium size. The edges are convex and contract .at both extremities.
Here again the flaking is of the percussion type and quite crude. The
length of these two specimens is 51and49 mm. , respectively, the maximum width 26 and 22 mm., and the thickness 14 and 11 mm. Both are
of reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Group VI (Fig. 30, H-I ) is made up of four medium-sized knives
which have an ovate outline. The edges are convex and the extremities
rounded. The workmanship is quite crude. Their length ranges from 35
to 44 mm., the width (measured midway on the sides) from 19 to 25
mm. , and the thickness from 5 to 10 mm. All are of local impure, reddish-gray chert.
Group VII knives were not found at the Miller site.
Group VI II (Fig. 30, J) consists of two medium-sized knives (one of
silicified wood, one of reddish-gray chert ) which are crudely formed
into an approximate triangular or subtriangular outline. Each of these
specimens has one pointed end and shows flaking on one or both edges.
The bases are straight to slightly rounded. The length of specimen 1 is
54 mm., the width 29 mm., and the maximum thickness 24 mm. ;
specimen 2 measures 56 mm. by 31 mm. by 20 mm.
Group IX (Fig. 30, M-N) is a residual category composed of 48 irregular, fragmentary, or otherwise unusual specimens which could not
be placed in the above-described groups. It is well to point out that it
would be a mistake to consider the examples of Groups II-VIII as the
major kinds of knives from the Miller site. On the contrary, 48 of the
knives-Group IX-are irregular, crude, and unclassifiable in respect
to geometric form, as opposed to the other groups. Among this group
round, concave, and flat bases and all sorts of edges and tips are represented, but practically no two examples are alike. Many appear to be
stones which were worked only slightly on one small portion of the

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

specimen. One interesting and unusually well made example of this
residual category is a long, thin, fragmentary knife (Fig. 30, Q) with a
rounded end and almost parallel sides.
MISCELLANEOUS BIFACIAL ARTIFACTS

Group I (Fig. 30, K, L) is composed of two medium-sized, thick, bifacial artifacts with roughly circular outlines. The workmanship
shown on these specimens is very cn1de, only percussion flaking having
been used in their manufacture. Maximum diameter ranges from 51
mm. (Specimen 1) to 56 mm., and the thickness from 22 mm. (Specimen 1) to 32 mm. Both are made from the local reddish-gray chert
which has numerous sand inclusions.
Group II (Fig. 30, 0-P) is made up of five thick bifacial artifacts
with circular outlines which, apart from their much smaller size, are
like the specimens described in Group I. The workmanship here is likewise very crude and only the percussion knapping technique seems to
have been used. The maximum diameter ranges from 20 to 39 mm.,
and the maximum thickness from 7 to 16 mm. All are made of reddishgray chert.
3. Scrapers

End Scrapers. Eight triangular, snub-nosed end scrapers (Fig. 30,
Y-Z) were recovered which have irregular, triangular outlines and
which are plano-convex or concavo-convex in longitudinal cross-section. The bit, the thickest part of these artifacts, is located on the side
opposite the apex. The bit itself varies from convex to almost straight
and the sides are slightly convex. The sides are worked by pressure
chipping on six of the eight scrapers. Six were made from impure
reddish-gray chert, one from jasper, and one from agate. Their length
ranges from 21 to 35 mm., maximum vvidth at the bit from 14 to 28
mm. , aud the maximum thickness at the bit from 2 to 9 mm.
Side Scrapers. A group of 96 side scrapers (Fig. 30, W-X ) is composed of irregular flakes which show small flake scars along one or
more si<les on one face of the specimen. The flakes themselves range
from large, wide, crude flakes to-more commonly-thin, long flakes
which may have been struck from prepared platform cores. Many of
the latter have very faint flake scars along their edges, and experiments made in the laboratory have shown that unmodified flakes
u sed for scraping wood easily develop identical small flake scars. On
the other hand, several of the larger side scrapers have deliberate pres-

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

255

sure flaking on their edges. These specimens vary from 20 to 53 mm. in
length, from 12 to 35 mm. in width, and from 4 to 10 mm. in thickness. All but two specimens were manufactured from the local, impure
reddish-gray chert. The two exceptions are of a light gray, homogeneous chert probably foreign to the immediate area of the site.
4. Drills.

Two small, irregular drills were found (Fig. 30, R-S). The bits of
these elongated, slender specimens are diamond-shaped in cross section and are rather noticeably beleled on both faces. These drills, apparently worked by pressure flaking, measure 37 and 31 mm. m
length, respectively, 10 and 12 mm. in width, and 6 and 4 mm. m
thickness. Both are local, impure, reddish-gray chert.

5. Spokeshaves
Three thin and irregular flakes (Fig. 30, T-V) of impure, reddishgray chert have marked concavities formed by pressure flaking on one
edge, hence the name "spokeshaves." The diameter of these specimens,
although irregular, falls between 21 and 31 mm., and the thickness
between 5 and 7 mm.

6. Gravers
Two irregular flakes of impure, reddish-gray chert have short projections on one edge which seem to have been shaped by pressure flaking (Fig. 30, BB). The diameters of these gravers are 27 and 22 mm.;
their thickness is, respectively, 8 and 4 mm.
7. Stemmed Scraper or Bunt

One small artifact (Fig. 30, AA) seems to be a stemmed scraper. The
blade is short, wide, and has a rounded distal edge; the stem is narrow
and moderately expanding; the base is convex. Although worked bifacially, the longitudinal cross section is plano-convex, hence the designation "scraper." Similar specimens, however, have often been called
"bunts" and are presumed to have been used as projectile points. Made
of reddish-gray chert, this artifact measures 25 mm. in length, 24 mm.
in width, and 6 mm. in thickness.
8. Worked Nodules

A group of eight nodules all retain much of their surface cortex
(patina). Apparently most of these are residue from knapping for the
purpose of obtaining small flakes. However, several show some amount

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of use after flaking. Four have battered edges and were employed most
likely as choppers or hammerstones, and one specimen (Fig. 30, CC )
has a well defined gouge bit on one edge. The remainder do not appear
to have been utilized after flakes were struck from them. Their diameters range from 40 to 76 mm.; and all were made of local, impure, reddish-gray chert.

9. Celt
One polished stone celt was found (Fig. 30, DD ). This specimen has
an irregular, polished bit which was worked bifacially, while the rest
of the artifact surface shows small depressions made by the pecking
technique. The length of this celt is 77 mm. , the width of the bit 42
mm. , and the maximum thickness 34 mm. It is made of a light-colored,
non-siliceous, igeneous stone.

10. Grinding Slab
One multifaced grinding slab (Fig. 31, Q) , made of sandstone, was
recovered from the Miller site. This irregular ';lrtifact has one flat
grinding surface on each face as well as a beveled grinding surface on
one edge. The maximum diameter of the slab is 173 mm. , and the
maximum thickness measures 61 mm.

11. Manos.
Three rather crude manos or hand stones were recovered ( Fig. 31,
R ). The smallest of these, which is fragmentary, is a utilized quartzite
cobble with grinding surfaces on two sides. Each of the two complete,
larger specimens, which measure 128 mm. and 111 mm., respectively,
in maximum diameter, has only one grinding surface. Both were made
of sandstone. All three of the manos appear to have been u sed with a
rotary grinding motion.
12. Pitted Stones
Two bifacial manos were found in addition to the three described
immediately above, both of which have small, pecked pits, or depressions in the center of their grinding surfaces (Fig. 31, S) . Heretofore
such artifacts have been called "nutting stones" or "nut stones" in
various parts of eastern North America, but it has recently been suggested (Honea, MS) that they were used as anvils or base stones in the
bipolar flaking technique, which has been defined archeologically in
Africa and elsewhere.

257

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

••
••
B

G

C

\

H

0

K

0

l

2 3 4 5 8 7 8 9 ID
CM.

\l!23i1l-J LU
CM

Fig . 31 . Miscellaneous artifacts. A-D, punctated potsherds; E, pipe fragment; F, clay
object; G-H , punctated potsherds; 1-J, wattle-impressed daub ; K, long -bone awls; L-M ,
deer ulnae awls; N-0, antler awls ; P, shell button ; Q , grinding slab ; R, mano ; S, pitted
stone.

258

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

13. Pebbles and Cobbles
Twenty-seven river-turned pebbles and cobbles were recovered
which, judging from their general absence from the local soils, we may
assume to have been picked up and brought into the site by the aborigines. Such stones were used, we know from ethnographic accounts,
for smoothing pottery vessels and for other purposes such as the stone
boiling technique of preparing food. One of these specimens shows
slight modification by pecking, but the others do not appear to have
been intentionally altered. Two are of sandstone, 22 of quartzite, and
three of other stones.

14. Ochre
Sixty-one fragments of ochre were found. This number includes 35
unmodified fragments of red ochre (hematite) , 15 fragments of red
ochre which have facets resulting from grinding, 10 unmodified fragments of yellow ochre (limonite), and one faceted fragment of yellow
ochre.
15. Ceramic Materials
A total of 500 potsherds was recovered from the Manton Miller site.
This number excludes, however, scores of extremely small sherds
measuring 4 mm. or less in diameter which, because of their size,
could not be accurately classified.
In describing the potsherds the usual presentation by types will not
be followed. This deviation from standard procedure is necessitated by
the relatively small number of specimens and by the absence of complete or reconstructable vessels. In view of these limitations, the sherds
will be described primarily on the basis of the technique of surface
treatment (engraving, punctating, plain surface, etc.). Nevertheless,
an effort will be made in as many cases as is possible to show type
affiliations or resemblances.
PLAIN POTTERY. The 449 undecorated potsherds form a very interesting, but in
a certain sense confusing, group. The most difficult problem brought up by this
material is that of typology. Many have paste, form, and other characteristics of
the Williams Plain type (Fig. 32, A-C) of the Oklahoma Fourche Maline Focus
(Bell, 1953; Proctor, 195 7), while others appear to be fairly representative sherds
of the Sanders Plain type (Fig. 32, D-E). Yet there is complete and uniform gradation between these two extremes (the coarse, thick Williams Plain and the thinner
Sanders Plain with more compact paste) and it would be completely artificial and
arbitrary to draw a line between the two groups, so complete is their intergradation
at the Miller site. What we actually seem to have is a single ware which ranges in

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

259

form, thickness, and other characteristics between two polar con cepts represented
by what h eretofore have been called the Williams Plain and Sanders Plain ty pes.
Of the plain sherds, 32,5 are tempered with lumps of clay and, rarely, with
ground potsherds. Another 117 have considerable quantities of ground bone in
addition to the tempering agents mentioned above, while seven show numerous
ground sh ell particles.
Those sh erds h aving only clay lumps or pulverized potsherds as t empering agents
have exterior surface colors ranging from brownish -black to light cream or tan,
depending on the amount of surface oxidation during fir ing. The interior surfaces
are generally the sa me color as the ext erior surfaces, or of a lighter shade of that
color, while the cores t end to be a dark brown or black, indicating an incompletely
ox idizing firing atmosphere. The cores are likewise granular and frequently porous.
The surface texture is quite fine and uniform, but small cracks appear on several
specimen s, and 34 of this group have well bur nish ed surfaces with a compara tively
high luster; four additional sherds show a reel slip on both surfaces. Thickness
ranges from 5 to 14 mm. , and, as has been pointed out before, the thinner sh erds
would be generally classified as Sanders Plain and the thi cker specimens as
Williams Plain. The surface hardness i"anges from 2, to (rarely ) 4 according to
Moh's scale.
The plain sherds t empered with bone (117) and shell ( 7) are like the above
specimens in all particulars except their tempering materials.
Looking a t this group of plain body sherds as a whole, we can get some idea of
the vessel sh apes represented by examining, par ticularly, basal and rim sherds.
The most common vessel form of which we can speak with asurance is the so-called
" flower pot" sh ape commonly found in the Williams Plain type. This typically ha s
a very heavy base with a thickened outer area where the body is attached, slightly
expanding walls, and a very moderately everted or straight n eck with slightly
rounded or fl attened lip.

DECORA TED POTTERY. Fifty-one potsherds bear some form of surface decoration. Among the different techniques represented are incising, engraving (postfiring
incising), punctating, and punctating combined with incising. Except for specific
instances which will be mentioned, all of these sh erds have the paste characteristics,
surfa ce texture, and color range of th e plain potsherds. However, the thickness of
the decorated specimen s, varying from 4 to 9 mm., is somewhat l ess than the ran ge
given for the plain sherds.
Among the 17 incised sherds, two (Fig. 32,, F) are of special interest because
they show the grooved lip and inverted rim form characteristically encountered on
vessels of Coles Creek Incised and Chase Incised types of the Mississippi Valley
(Phillips et al., 1951: 96; Cotter, 1952,). The paste of these two sh erds is fine-grained
and contains small amounts of sand. The surfaces are well polished and have a
hardness of 4.5, which is considerably harder than most of the sherds from the
Miller site. The lips of these two sherds are flat; wide, parallel, horizontal incised
lines occur just below the rims on the exterior surface. The incised lines, however,
are not " over-hanging" as in the case of Coles Creek Incised. One of the sherds
shows traces of diagonal parallel lines below the horizontal lines, a trait not found
on Coles Creek Incised.
Twelve of th e incised sherds (Fig. 32,, G, H ) are, for the most part, body sherds
with widely spaced parallel lines, which ca n not be assigned to any specific ceramic

260

TEXAS ARCHEOL OGI CAL SOCIETY

r -·-f

c

8
A

[

K-----

'-

__

D

E

J

H

M

N

s

R

0 12 3 456 7 89

GM.
Fig . 32 . Potsherds: A-C, Williams Plain ; 0-E, Sanders Pla in ; F, Coles Creek-like incised
sherds ; G-H , incised sherds ; 1-K, engraved sherds; L, Sanders Engraved sherd; M-0, Penninglon Puncrared-/ncised (?l potsherds ; P-R, Crockett Curvilinear-Incised sherds ; S-T, punctated sherds.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

261

types. Two of these have bone temper, ;ind one contains a large amount of sand
particles.
The nine specimens with engraved surfaces (Fig. 3Z, 1-K) are small, nondescript
body sherds about which very little can be said. The engraved lines are parallel to
each other on all specimens, and are straight on six specimens and slightly curved
on the remaining three. The width between the lines ranges from Z to 6 mm . One
of these (Fig. 3Z, L ), a rim sherd with rounded lip, has a diagonal orientation of
its parallel lines, and could easily represent the Sanders Engraved type. The paste
and color ranges of the engraved sherds are like those given for the plain pottery
above. Four have bone temper, whereas the others have only the usual clay lumps.
Three sherds having panels of small, circular punctations bounded by incised
lines (Fig. 3Z, M-0 ) could well represent the p,,mnington Punctated-Incised type
of the Alto Focus. The surface of these sherds is well polished and hard, ranging
from 3.5 to 4 on Moh's scale of hardness. The surface color, although brown, has
the typical reddish hue commonly found on Alto Focus sherds from the George
C. Davis site.
Three additional incised sherds (Fig. 3Z, P-R ), all from one large vessel, appear
to be of the Crockett Curvilinear-Incised type or, if not, they are at least very
closely related to it. These sherds are black, represent the carinated bowl form , and
have triangular panels filled with slightly curved, equally-spaced lines. The surface
is fairly well smoothed, but not highly polished.
A total of 19 punctated sherds exhibit several different techniques of surface trea tment. Ten body sherds and one rim sherd (Fig. 3Z, S-T) show the so-called "fingernail" punctation which is crescent-shaped and sometimes has a ridge of clay on the
flat or concave side of each punctation where the clay was pushed back and mounded_
The arrangement of the closely-spaced punctations themselves is random with the
exception of two potsherds on which they are arranged in a crude linear pattern.
Of the remaining punctated sherds, five have random, closely-spaced triangular
punctations (Fig. 31, A-C ), one has round punctations (Fig. 31, D ) , and two have
rows of short punctations formed by short incisions in the surface (Fig. 31 , G-H ).

MISCELLANEOUS CLAY OBJECTS. Twenty-eight pieces of fire-hardened, wattleimpressed daub (Fig. 31, 1- J) were recovered. These are relatively small specimens,
averaging about Z to 3 cm. in diameter, and for the most part appear to be well
oxidized by firing. Many of them are concavo-convex in cross-section, with the
concave surface relatively smooth and the convex face rough and covered with many
small impressions, probably of twigs or grass. We may assume, in construction of
houses, that the smooth inside surface was formed by pressing the clay against fairly
large, smooth poles, after which thatching was pressed into th e outside of the clay.
Perhaps thatch was held on in this manner.
One small, cylindrical clay object with one closed and on e open end was found
(Fig. 31, E ) . It is thought that this is a projection from the heel of a pipe bowl.
The outside diameter is 8 mm., and the diameter of the aperture measures 6 mm.
The closed end is flat, and the surface has been well smoothed , producing a noticeable luster. Similar pipe fragments, presumably belonging to the long stem variety·
of pipe, have been reported from the Texarkana Reservoir area (Jelks, personal
communication).
The last clay object to be described is a large piece of fired clay (Fig. 31, F)
which has on one side the impression of the inside surface of a bowl. Most likely·
this object r epresents potters clay (as yet untempered ) which was stored inside a.
ceramic vessel and was later fired, perhaps by accident.

262

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

16. Bone and Antler Artifacts
In all, 43 fragments of worked bone and antler were recovered from
the Manton Miller site. This number includes 16 small awl or needle
fragments made from the long bones of very small mammals. These
specimens (Fig. 31, K ) range in length from 7 to 10 cm. and from 5 to
15 mm. in thickness or diameter. One end of all these artifacts has been
cut down into an easily-recognized point which generally shows considerable smoothing and some evidence of use-wear.
Sixteen antler tips or tines (Fig. 31, N-0 ) show modification by
man. These specimens for the most part have been rounded and
blunted on one end. Although the sides of most are smooth, four show
cuts and gashes suggesting use as flakers in flintknapping.
Eleven deer ulnae (Fig. 31, L-M) have also been considerably modified and were presumably used as awls or punches. Their distal ends
have been removed and the shaft of the bone cut down and made
smooth. Two have a sharp piercing end, while the remainder have
blunt, rounded tips.

17. Worked Shell
One thin shell disc. or button (Fig. 31, P), about 12 mm. in diameter
and 1 mm. thick, has a small perforation near its center. It appears to
be made from mussel sh ell. This is the only shell artifact found at the
Miller site.

Provenience of Artifacts
As a first step in the distributional analysis, the provenience of all
the artifacts obtained from excavations at the Miller site was plotted by
levels on a large graph according to individual 5-foot squares. However, since no stratigraphic differentiation in the occurrence of the
various artifact categories was observed, the artifacts were then
grouped together into three units representing those recovered from
Area A, Area B, and from the surface (Table 4). The lack of cultural
stratigraphy in Area A is not at all surprising because this area has
been extensively eroded and excavation did not exceed one foot in
depth. In Area B, however, where excavation and cultural debris
reached a depth of two feet, there was, somewhat surprisingly, no discernible superposition of artifact types. Although most of the artifacts
came from the upper one foot of soil in Area B, a few potsherds, dart
points, and arrow points were recovered from the lower foot of the

263

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 4
Provenience of the Artifacts, The Miller Site

Surface

Garr, Kaufman
alsa
runge
col fax
hobson
emorr
kemp
misc.
Yarbrough
Morrill, s. ped.
Wells
Kent
Yantis, cook
Trinity
Palmillas
Alba
Fresno, odas
fairli&
Talco
Scallorn
Minter
TypeX
Knives, group II
group III
group IV
group V
group VI
group VIII
group IX
Misc. bifacial artifacts,
group I
group II
End scrapers
Side scrapers
Drills
Spoke shaves
Gravers
Stemmed scrapers
Worked nodules
Celt
Grinding slab
Manos
Pitted stones

7
2
7

2
10
2
2
19
0
0
0
1
0
0
13
0
1
3
1
0
3
4
2
0
2
21

4
14
1
0
0
0
2
1
0
0

Are<:1 A

3
4
1
0
5
1
0
15
1
0
1
0
0
1
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
6

0
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0

Area B

4
2
1

1
3
6
3
14
0
0
0
0
0
1
28
5
5
0
2
15
1
0
2

1
16

4
4
69
1
3

2
1

5
0
0
2

Unknown
proyen.ience

0
1
0
0
3
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5

0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

Totals

14
9
9
3
21
9
6
48
1

2
2
1
2
48
7

6
3
4
16
4

5
2
3
2
4
2

48

2
5
8
96

2
3

2
1
8
1
3

2

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 4--Continued
Provenience of the Artifacts, The Miller Site

Surface

Plain potsherds,
clay temper
123
bone temper
48
shell temper
0
Coles Creek-like
incised ware
0
Crockett-like
incised ware
1
Misc. incised
3
Sanders Engraved
0
Misc. engraved
5
Pennington Punct . Incised
2
Misc. punctated
6
Daub
2
Pipe stem
0
Clay lump
0
Long-bone awls
0
Antler tips
0
Ulnae, worked
0
Shell bead or button

Area A

Area B

11
1

171
57

0

Unkno\.vn
provenience

Totals

6

21
12
1

226
118
7

0

2

0

2

0
0
0

2
8
1
2
2
13
21
1

0

3
12

1
0
0

2
0
0
0
0
0
0

1

15
14
11
0

1
0
0
0
0

3
0
0

2
0
0

8
4
19
28
1
16
16
11

midden. These, however, were of the same types that occurred in the
upper part.
In spite of the lack of vertical differentiation, a comparison of the
artifacts from Areas A and B provides concrete evidence that there
were at least three major components, or occupations, at the site. The
most marked differences between the artifact assemblages from the
two areas can be summarized as follows: ( 1 ) Alba and Minter arrow
points-the two most numerous types-are confined almost exclusively
to Area B; (2) a great majority of the potsherds for which there were
provenience data (264 of 277) occurred in Area B; and (3) practically
all of the wattle-impressed daub particles come from Area B. Conversely, most of the dart point types, and the other artifact classes as
well, were more or less evenly distributed over both areas.
From this evidence, then, and from various comparisons with related archeological sites which will be dealt with somewhat more fully
later, we may safely assume that an early occupation by a non-ceramic
society is represented by Area A. This corresponds to Period 3 at the
Yarbrough site. The most common items to be included on the trait list

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

265

for this component are Gary points of the various varieties given in
Table 1, knives belonging primarily to Group IX, and side scrapers.
That this occupation represents, most likely, a single people may be
inferred from the presence of only one main dart point type, Gary, and
from the relative homogeneity of the artifact sample. Because of evidence which is to be presented in the following section, this component
is thought to represent the later part of the Archaic Stage.
The artifacts from Area B pose something of a problem. Here we
have the same artifacts found on the knoll, Area A, mixed with obviously later artifacts such as ceramics and arrow points. The question,
then, is whether we are confronted with the survival of late Archaic
stage elements in a later culture, or with a case of admixture--caused
by erosion, plowing, etc.-of two separate and discrete components.
The evidence at present is too inconclusive to allow for a definite answer to this question, but because of data from similar sites (Yarbrough, Davis, Limerick, Sam, Scott, and others) I am inclined to believe that Archaic elements survived into a later complex.
The Alba and Minter arrow points and the Williams Plain-Sanders
Plain pottery occur in Area B. For reasons to be given in the succeeding
chapter, this is thought to represent the late part of the Archaic Stage
and the early Gibson Aspect of the Neo-American Stage.
Also occurring in Area B are potsherds of Coles Creek Incised,
Crockett Curvilinear-Incised, Sanders Engraved, and Pennington
Punctated-Incised types, as well as shell-tempered pottery and triangular arrow points.

Bone Refuse
From the surface of the site, from Area A, and especially from Area
B, a great many animal bone fragments were found, which presumably represent general midden refuse (Table 5). These bones were
identified by C. D. Tunnell, who used the collections of the Vertebrate
Paleontology Laboratory of The University of Texas. The most common animal represented is deer, with several examples of ferret or
weasel, skunk, raccoon, opossum, dog, various hares, bird, and fish. In
all, 1,008 bone fragments were recovered, representing a minimum
number of 227 individuals.

The Miller Site- Conclusions
The preceding description and analysis of the Manton Miller site
allows us to draw certain limited conclusions regarding the cultural

266

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLF. 5
Bone Identifications, The Miller Site
Genus/species

Odocoileus sp. (deer )

Mustela sp.
Scluridae (ferret )
Mephitis sp.
Geomyidae (skunk)
Procyon sp. (raccoon)

Didelphis sp. (opossum )
Canis sp. (dog )

Terrapene sp.

Sylvilagus sp.
(cottontail )

Elements presen t

hoof
astragalus
calcaneum
medapodial
phalanx
mandible
maxilla
molar
aud. bulla
carp./ tars.
antler frag.
vertebra
scapula
rib
pelvis frag.
ulna
premax.
humerus
tibia
femur
radius
nav./cub.
mandible
mandible
mandible
mandible
mandible
maxilla frag.
molar
mandible
maxilla
mandible
carnassial
tibia
plastron frag .
carapace frag.
carapace
mandible
maxilla
femur
u lna
scapula
pelvis frag.

~J i n.

no. indi v.

2
12
10
10
10
22

8
8
11

8
3
5
4
1
2
1
5

8
1
9
6
3
2

10
3

Total

9
23
20
41
46
43
15
39
22
25
9
39
7
9
2
4
2
10
16
2
17
12
5
4
1
23
5
4
2
2

1
ca. 8
ca.20
1

1
30
261

8

16
1
2
1
4
3

2
1

267

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 5-Gontinued
Bone Identifications, The Miller Site
Genus/species

L <!pus sp. ( hare)

fish
bird (turkey? )
unidentified bone scraps
TOTAL

Elements presen t

mandible
maxilla
misc.
misc.

l\rlin. no. in<liY.

Total

2
1
1
8
227

5
34
185
1,008

affiliations of the site and its temporal position in relation to general
prehistoric trends in the region.
Three main occupational components seem to be present at the site,
although the data for the last two are not particularly strong; however,
supporting data occur at other sites in the area.
The first component consists of the Archaic materials from Area A.
The virtual absence of expanding stem points in Area A excludes an
early Archaic date, while the large number of contracting stem points
(Gary ) and the virtual absence of pottery and arrow points speak
favorably for a late Archaic date corresponding to Period 3 at the Fred
Yarbrough site. In fact, the presence of a more or less pure Gary component without ceramics at Miller gives support to the rather weak evidence for Period 3 (the pre-pottery Gary horizon) at the Yarbrough
site.
The next two components occur mixed together in Area B of the
Miller site, and are here separated on the basis of information from
other sites (see discussion of the Scott, Sam, and Wann sites, in the following section ). The first of these is thought to represent the terminal
Archaic Stage in the area, and is characterized by crude, plain ceramics of Williams Plain type. Williams Plain is the earliest known
ceramic type in parts of Oklahoma, where it apparently was adopted
by local Archaic peoples at the Scott (Bell, 1953), Sam (Proctor,
1957 ), and Wann (Sharrack, 1960) sites of the Fourche Maline Focus.
The second and later ceramic component is represented, it is believed,
by sherds of Coles Creek Incised and Crockett Curvilinear-Incised
pottery and, most likely, by the Alba and Minter arrow points from the
site. Of course there is no way to be certain that these arrow points belong with this group of potsherds, rather than with the Williams Plain
type, but it has been shown elsewhere (Newell and Krieger, 1949)
that the Alba point generally belongs with the Gibson Aspect of east-

268

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ern Texas and adjacent areas, which supposedly postdates Williams
Plain. In addition, at the Scott site (Bell, 1953) Williams Plain is definitely shown to antedate arrow points.
The non-ceramic component at the Miller site corresponds, as mentioned above, to Period 3 at the Yarbrough site, while the early ceramic
component at Miller (represented by Williams Plain ) corresponds to
Period 4 at Yarbrough, and both of these components may be assigned
to the La Harpe Aspect of the Archaic Stage. The remaining component, separated from the Williams Plain material by means of extrasite evidence, belongs to the early part of the Neo-American Stage, the
Gibson Aspect-Period 5 at Yarbrough.
Turning now to traits other than projectile points and ceramics,
evidence of house structures or other occupational features at the site
is lacking, but because of the eroded nature of the site we can not
rule out the possibility of their former existence. It can not be definitely
determined whether the flexed burials found at the site belong to the
pre-ceramic component, but the absence of ceramic or other grave
furniture, as well as a similiar pattern for burials at related Archaic
sites, suggests that some or all of the burials derived from the Archaic
occupation.

THE LA HARPE ASPECT
The comparatively deep stratigraphic column from the Fred Yarbrough site, as well as some of the archeological data from the Manton
Miller site, provide excellent examples of several changes in artifact
styles which occurred over a long period of time in a rather broad geographical area. On the western frontier of the eastern woodlands, in a
belt reaching from the vicinity of Houston, Texas, into east-central
Oklahoma, the following uniformities in prehistoric culture change
during the Archaic can be recognized. ( 1) At the beginning or early
part of the Archaic Stage there was a marked numerical prevalence of
expanding stem dart points over those of other stemming traditions.
(2) This was followed by a growth in the popularity of contracting
stem dart points (represented principally by the Gary type), which
development slightly preceded (3) the appearance of pottery vessels
of various plain and often crude wares. For purposes of the present
study, the Archaic Stage may be said to terminate in the area under
consideration with the introduction of numerous arrow points and
abundant decorated pottery, which accompanied, it is believed, the
introduction of maize agriculture and a more sedentary mode of existence.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

269

The Archaic culture or complex mentioned above we propose to label
the "La Harpe Aspect," thus following the McKern system of nomenclature, which is well established in the literature dealing with this
area. The term "East Texas Aspect," which has often been applied to
much, but not all, of the material included within the La Harpe Aspect,
has been rejected here because of its geographic limitations, particularly since components of the La Harpe Aspect are known to occur in
Oklahoma and may be expected to be found in western Louisiana and
southwestern Arkansas as well.
What we seem to have, then, in the La Harpe Aspect, is a rather
far-flung Archaic Stage culture, or group of related cultures, which
borders the western fringe of the eastern woodlands. The most salient
material traits of this aspect are ( 1) flexed burials, usually without
accompanying furniture; (2) pitted manos; (3) expanding stem dart
points (early phase); ( 4) contracting stem dart points (later phase);
(5) plain ceramics (terminal La Harpe Aspect); and (6) various
polished and ground stone artifacts (axes, gorgets, etc.) which vary
considerably in style and in abundance from locality to locality within
the La Harpe Aspect area.
It seems probable that this culture complex should be divided, some
day, into several foci on the basis of areal and temporal distributional
data. All that we can safely do at this point, however, is to recognize
three broad areal divisions of the La Harpe Aspect: (1) the Oklahoma
Fourche Maline Focus; (2) a central area represented, in Texas, by
the Yarbrough, Martin, Miller, and Limerick sites, and in Oklahoma
by the Boat Dock and James sites; and (3) a southern area represented
by the Sawmill site, the E. E. Runnells sites 1 and 2, and the Doering,
Kobs, and Gris bee sites.
In spite of the fact that the temporal sequence of the various projectile point stemming traditions is uniform over the entire La Harpe
Aspect area, some of the classes, types, and varieties of artifacts that
make up the complex have much more limited areal distributions.
Hence the Fourche Maline Focus is characterized by certain traits
which do not occur as frequently (or not at all) in the remainder of
the La Harpe Aspect: polished stone celts, Williams Plain pottery
(later part of the aspect), stone gorgets, boat stones, double-bitted
chipped stone axes, shell gorgets, bone atlatl hooks, and corner-tanged
knives. The central area shows certain traits which can be found in the
Fourche Maline Focus (double-bitted axes, triangular and oval knives,
small stemmed drills, and triangular end scrapers) , but has certain
distinctive traits of its own: large numbers of gouges, full-grooved

270

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

axes, many pitted manos and grinding slabs, and a scarcity of polished
stone artifacts. In the southern area of the La Harpe Aspect, the early
pottery is a distinctive plain, sandy ware, and knives and scrapers are
crudely fashioned from pieces of petrified wood. Polished stone artifacts are rare in this area.
The inter-site comparative treatment to be given in this report will
limit itself primarily to dart point stemming traditions, and to the
early ceramics of the area. The sites of the Fourche Maline Focus to be
dealt with here are the Sam, Scott, and Wann sites. Those belonging
to the central area are the James and Boat Dock sites in Oklahoma, and
the Limerick and Martin sites of Texas (the Fred Yarbrough and Manton Miller sites also belong to the central group). In the southern area
the Sawmill, Runnells No. 1, and Runnells No. 2 sites at McGee Bend
Reservoir, and the Doering, Kobs, and Grisbee sites at Addicks Reservoir will be considered.
The geographical limits of the La Harpe Aspect can not be set with
any great degree of certainty, although as previously mentioned the
constituent sites fall within a belt running northward from the city of
Houston into east-central Oklahoma. The western boundary of the
aspect is more distinct than the eastern, being set off by the Archaic
cultures of central Texas and by the Great Plains area in Oklahoma.
However, in the region of Tarrant and adjacent counties in Texas, we
encounter difficulty in setting our limits, for the Carrollton and Elam
foci of the Trinity Aspect seem to be intermediate, typologically and
stylistically speaking, between the La Harpe Aspect and the Archaic
of central Texas. The Elam Focus, particularly, might be included
within our aspect, although this has not been done in the present paper.
However, we should keep the door open, and when better data for the
Elam Focus become available it may be advisable to include it.
A similar problem is encountered in northeastern Oklahoma with
the Grove Focus (Baerreis, 1951; Shaeffer, 1957 ). This archeological
unit, although it seems to show several of the developmental trends
used to define the La Harpe Aspect, exhibits strong ties with Archaic
complexes of Missouri, Tennessee, and Kentucky.
If the task of delineating the complex geographically seems difficult
on the western front, the problem on the east is even more difficult. So
little is known about the Archaic cultures of northwestern Louisiana
and southwestern Arkansas that we are left with very little with which
to work. On the Ouachita River in Arkansas, Harrington (1920: 103110) reported a long Archaic occupation at the "Deep Deposit, Site
No. 1, Hot Springs." The comparatively small number of contracting

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

271

stem points at this site, however, as well as strong stylistic peculiarities,
leaves some doubt as to whether it should be placed in La Harpe Aspect.
Of course, when we go far enough eastward, we finally reach sites such
as Poverty Point, sites belonging to the Archaic of the Tennessee Valley, and complexes which are very different from La Harpe.
The sites which have been placed in the La Harpe Aspect will now
be reviewed briefly, and specific comparisons will be made between
these and the Fred Yarbrough site. In view of the fact that the Y arbrough site stratigraphic column (Fig. 16) is one of the longest, most
complete, and clearest for the entire complex, it furnishes an excellent
referential base for La Harpe.
Scott Site. Located in Le Flore County, Oklahoma, the Scott site
(Bell, 1953 ) represents both ceramic and pre-ceramic components of
the Fourche Maline Focus. At this site Bell found a deep, non-ceramic
level at the very base of the occupation zone (Fig. 33, A ) , represented
by a few miscellaneous, unclassified dart points. This is followed by
the introduction into the site of simple ceramics (Williams Plain) and,
near the surface, by arrow points and more complex ceramics. Although the numbers are somewhat statistically unreliable, expanding
stem dart points are slightly more prevalent in the lower levels of the
site (Fig. 33, B), while contracting stem points gain in popularity in
the upper part of the stratigraphic column. The Scott site--up until
the introduction of arrow points and complex ceramics-may be assigned to the La Harpe Aspect.
Sam Site. The Sam site (Proctor, 195 7), also belonging to the
Fourche Maline Focus and located in Le Flore County, Oklahoma,
presents the same general picture as the Scott site, except that it has its
beginning somewhat later in time than Scott. Dart points without ceramics are found only in the lowest level, but dart points are numerically more abundant in the lower and middle levels than in the upper.
Potsherds increase in abundance near the surface, and arrow points
are introduced into the site somewhat later than pottery (Fig. 34, A ) .
In respect to dart point stemming traditions, we have the same popularity trend found at Yarbrough, Doering, the Sawmill, and Runnells
No. 1 sites, with the expanding stem most prevalent in the lower levels,
and losing ground to the contracting stem tradition near the surface.
Like the Scott site, the middle and lower levels of the Sam site may be
assigned to La Harpe Aspect.
Wann Site. The Wann site (Sharrock, 1960 ) , also located in Le
Flore County, Oklahoma, and belonging to the Fourche Maline Focus,
exhibits a stratigraphic sequence very similar to the middle levels of

RELATIVE
NO. 0
SPEC.1

PERCENTAGES

, ,2,5, , , ,510,', ,1,5

I

ioo

6"LEVEL..S

187 ,..........._,__<--L..-L-L-L.-L-~..,1.-----__.l:.W..:.W~

I

79 t-'---'--'-+---------__J~.:..:..:..::.:.~

2

86

3

76

4

56

5

59

6

31

7

27

8

27

9

13

10

7

11

4

12

A.
NO. 0
SPEC. I
37

I

PROJ. PTS. IZZZl, WILLIAMS PLAIN
SHER DSc::::J,SHELL-TEMP. AND
SANDERS PLAIN SHERDS!:;.;.;.;;·:!
I

I

I

25
I I

I

I

I

50
I I

75
I

I

11

6 LEVELS
I

6

2

10

3

21

4

20

5

15

6

18

7

12

8

20

9

4

10

II
8. DART PTS.: CONTRACT. STEM TRAD.IZZZl,
STRAIGHT STEM TRAD};\;.;.;·:l,EXPANDING STEM
TRADITION c:=:J, ARROW POINTS -

273

YARBROUGH AND M I L L E R SITES

RELATIVE
25

NO. 0
SPEC.

PERCENTAGES
50

75

100 6" LEVELS

945

862

2

220

3

70

4

6

5

A.

DART POINTS !lZ2l
POTSHERDS
C::=J
ARROW POINTS R·::t·.::;.;1

RELATIVE PERCENTAGES
NO 0
25
50
75
100 II
sp Ec..i.J_J____J__Jl__l•---1.1__._.---'-'_JIL_1,__,_1--L'_,l__J,.___.J1L_11_._,_._,__.__,_.,__.1 6

LE v E Ls

502

I

461

2

175

3

59

4

6

5

8.

DART PTSI CONTRACTING STEM
TRADITIONITZI, STRAIGHT 5TEM
TRADITION~.!. EXPANDING
STEM TRADITluN l::\":~:·.::I

Fig . 34. Sam Site : A, relative percentages of dart points, potsherds, and arrow points ;
B, relat ive percentages of the dart po int stemming traditions .

the Sam and Scott sites. In the lower levels of the Wann site dart points
are more common th an in the u pper, while ceramics are more abundant near the surface (Fig. 35, A ) .
Turning to dart point stemming traditions (Fig. 35, B), contracting
stem points lose a little in relative popularity in th e lower levels, and
Fig . 33 . Scott Site: A, relative percentages of projectile po ints and pots herds; B, relative
percentages of dart point stemm ing traditions.

274

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the expanding stems increase at the bottom, but not markedly so. My
opinion is that the Wann site represents only a brief segment of the
stratigraphic columns from the Yarbrough and Scott sites, and should
be correlated with their middle levels, representing late La Harpe
Aspect.
Limerick Site. Located in Rains County, Texas, on the upper Sabine
River, the Limerick site (Duffield, 1961) has both ceramic and preceramic components . T he cultural affiliations suggested by the assemblages of dart points and other artifacts in the lowest levels (Area C)

NO.

RELATIVE
25

o

SPEC.l

PERCENTAGES
50
75
100

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

11

I

I

I

I

I 6 LEVELS

973

I

1108

2

685

3

173

4

A. DART

POINTS
POTS HER OS

RELATIVE

IZ'.ZZ1

C=:J

PERCENTAGES
50
75
100

NO. O
11
S PE C. L-I. . . . .__._.....__L-L--L......L......J.__.__.__.__..__.__.__.__.'--'-_,.__.I 6 LEVE LS
205

I

264

2

283

3

71

4

8.

DART POINTS: CONTRACTING
STEM TRAOITIONIZZZJ. STRAIGHT
STEM TRAD.c::J. EXPANDING STEM
TRADITION ~:":·:·:.:,

Fig . 35 . Wann Site : A, relati ve percen tages of da rt po ints and potsherds ; B, re lative
pe rcentages of dart po int stemm ing t raditions .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

275

have been thought to be primarily with the Elam Focus of the Trinity
Aspect. Whereas the Elam point, Gary dart points, leaf-shaped knives,
straight-edge gouges and "turtle-back" scrapers are present in these
lowest levels, arrow points and pottery are lacking. Since a majority of
the dart points from this early occupation are of the Gary type (which
is relatively late in the Yarbrough site sequence, barely antedating and,
later, occurring contemporaneously with ceramics), my own feeling is
that the early material at the Limerick site is closer to the middle section (Period 3 ) of the Yarbrough column and Area A of the Miller site
than to Elam. If this observation be correct, then we can include the
lower levels of Limerick with La Harpe Aspect.
The other archeological materials at the Limerick site seem to represent several late components. This material includes Alba, Minter (my
identification) , Bonham, Cliffton, and Perdiz arrow points as well as
potsherds of the Sanders Plain, Canton Incised, and Sanders Engraved
types. The plain pottery may well represent late La Harpe, comparing
favorably- with regard to general composition-with the upper levels
of the Yarbrough site (Area A) and Area B of the Miller site.
Jake Mart in Site. The Martin site (Davis and Davis, 1960 ) is located
in Upshur County, Texas, at the edge of the valley of Cypress Creek.
This site is entirely pre-ceramic, pre-arrow point in composition, containing, in a thin occupation zone, Pal eo-Indian projectile points of the
Meserve and San Patrice types (representing five per cent of the total
dart point sample), numerous expanding stem points primarily of the
Yarbrough type (representing 56 per cent), a few contracting stem
or semi-contracting stem or related points (Gary and Wells, 17 per
cent), a small number of straight stem forms (Elam, Carrollton,
Bulverde, Morrill, and Kent, six per cent), and various types intermediate between the straight and expanding stem traditions ( 16 per
cent).
Davis and Davis follow Suhm et al. ( 1954: 492 ) in assuming that
the Yarbrough and Yarbrough-like points constitute a late Archaic
type, this partly because they are sometimes found in ceramic sites.
Thus Davis and Davis assume that their dominance at Jake Martin
indicated that the site falls in the late Archaic. On the other hand, the
new evidence from the Yarbrough site indicates to me that Yarbrough
points and other expanding stem forms occur consistently earlier than
Gary points, ceramics, and arrow points, although they admittedly
may survive in very reduced numbers into later times (Newell and
Krieger, 1949: 168 ). To reiterate, the picture we have at the Yarbrough
site is that of ( 1) an early Archaic phase or period with Yarbrough
and other expanding stem dart points, (2) a later Archaic phase char-

276

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

acterized by Gary, (3) with the latter type continuing to increase in
relative abundance during early ceramic (terminal Archaic) timestoward the end of the La Harpe Aspect. An early Archaic date for the
Martin site-supported by the Yarbrough site stratigraphic column,
and the early occurrence of expanding stem dart points in Addicks
Reservoir and McGee Bend-agrees, I think, with the presence at
Martin of Meserve and San Patrice points, as well as with the complete
absence of pottery and arrow points at the Martin site (Davis and
Davis, 1960: 58) . The small Gary points at Martin, which are definitely Late Archaic, can be easily explained as representing a much
later component or occupation.
A comparison of the Yarbrough site and Martin site by types and
varieties of projectile points allows for a more specific dating of the
latter than was possible at the time when the Martin site was originally
analyzed. From all indications the main components represented at
the Martin site are of an early Archaic date, comparable to the lowest
levels (Period 2) of the Yarbrough site, Area A. The most significant
items supporting this assessment are the following: ( 1) the prevalence
at Martin of expanding stem dart points, as in the lower levels of the
Yarbrough site, (2) the presence of San Patrice and Meserve points,
which probably appear early at the Yarbrough site, (3) the presence
of stemless (Catan) points at Martin (although in small numbers)
which are very early at Yarbrough, (4) the presence of Bulverde
points at Martin, which are early at Yarbrough, and finally, ( 5 ) the
presence of the Yantis type at Martin (ibid.: Fig. 5, C), which is likewise early at the Fred Yarbrough site.
In summary, the Jake Martin site, which is primarily early Archaic,
apparently belongs to the early part of the La Harpe Aspect.
Boat Dock Site, The Boat Dock site (Bell, 1958), situated in Marshall
County, Oklahoma, has been assigned to the Bryan Focus, although
materials suggestive of the Carrollton and Elam foci were recovered
also. However, the exact cultural affinity of the site is still unsettled.
Simple shell-tempered pottery (Woodward Plain) and several sherds
of the Sanders Plain type clustered in the upper levels of the site, as
did arrow points and contracting stem dart points (Gary). Expanding
stem dart points occur in approximately even numbers throughout the
various levels. According to Bell ( 1958: 47) many different occupations are present at the site (ranging from Paleo-Indian through Historic Chickasaw) and, assuming that the site built up slowly over a
period of many years, we can understand the apparent mixture or
lack of good stratigraphic differentiation in the various artifact classes

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

2,77

and dart point stemming traditions. The site seems to represent the
middle part of the La Harpe Aspect, as well as several later cultural
units as well.
James Site. The James site (Ray, 1960 ) is located in Bryan County,
Oklahoma, and has been assigned to the late Archaic and Early Bryan
Focus. At this site Gary dart points constitute the major type, and begin in the lowest levels, increasing in popularity near the surface. Pottery, mostly of simple types, begins slightly later than Gary at the site
while, in the upper levels, arrow points make their appearance. Because of the lack of numerous expanding stem dart points, we may
correlate the James site with Periods 4 and 5 of the Yarbrough site
stratigraphic column, representing the La Harpe Aspect in part.
Sawmill Site. Located in McGee Bend Reservoir, on a sandy ridge
overlooking the Angelina River, San Augustine County, Texas, the
Sawmill site (Tunnell, 1961 ) has components dating from Archaic to
Neo-American times. The lowest levels of this site contain large percentages of various expanding stem dart points (as is the case in the
lowest levels at the Yarbrough site) , while Gary points (represented
by only five specimens), arrow points, and potsherds are confined almost exclusively to the middle and upper zones. There is also some
indication that ceramics were introduced into the site before arrow
points, and that the percentages of sand-tempered potsherds (an early
ty pe ) , compared to the decorated clay-tempered sherds, increase with
depth. This agrees with the general finding that late La Harpe Aspect
ceramics are simple and almost crude in appearance. The whole sequence at the Sawmill site, then, up to the introduction of arrow points
and abundant ceramics, is typical of the La Harpe Aspect.
Runnells Sites 1 and 2. The E. E. Runnells sites (Tunnell, 1961 ) are
located in San Augustine County, Texas, not far from the Sawmill site,
in McGee Bend Reservoir. At E. E. Runnells No. 1 we have a picture
much like that presented by the cultural stratigraphy of the Sawmill
site. Expanding stem dart points (representing a relatively early Archaic date ) are common in the lowest levels of the site, decreasing in
relative popularity toward the surface. Contracting stem projectile
points (Gary) begin in the middle zones and increase in numbers toward the top of the column, as does the simple, sand-tempered pottery.
Both clay-tempered (more complex) pottery and arrow points make
their appearance later. This site, up until the introduction of arrow
points and the abundant and rather advanced clay-tempered pottery,
belongs to the La Harpe Aspect. Runnells site No. 2, seems to be identi-

278

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cal to No. 1, but lacks adequate depth to allow for the meaningful
stratigraphic differentiation presented above for site No. 2.
Doering, Kobs, and Grisbee Sites. The Doering site (Wheat, 1953 )
and certain materials from the Kobs and Grisbee sites. represent the
La Harpe Aspect. These sites are situated in Harris County, Texas,
near the city of Houston, in Addicks Reservoir. At the Doering site,
which has a relatively deep stratigraphic column representing a comparatively long time period, Wheat found that dart points are strongly
represented in the lower excavation levels, while pottery is rare and of
the simple, sand-tempered type (Fig. 36, A ) . In the upper levels, however, the relative number of dart points decreases, pottery gains in
popularity, and arrow points appear. In respect to dart point stemming
traditions, expanding stem points are popular in the lower levels (Fig.
36, B) while contracting stem points (Gary and related types ) are
more popular in the middle and upper levels. Both the level-by-level
change in the relative popularity of dart points, potsherds, and arrow
points, and the popularity of the stemming traditions at various depths,
agree with the column obtained from the Fred Yarbrough site. Hence
the Doering site, up until the introduction of arrow points and numerous decorated potsherds, may be considered as La Harpe Aspect.
The Kobs and Grisbee sites present the same general picture except
that they begin after the introduction of ceramics and have, in their
upper zones, an abundance of arrow points and non-La Harpe elements. Their lower levels, however, may be assigned to this aspect, and
agree in composition with the Doering site.

The La Harpe Aspect-Summary Statement
The above-mentioned archeological sites from Oklahoma and Texas
have been grouped together under the La Harpe Aspect because they
show all, or part, of a common sequential, prehistoric development
which occurred on the western fringe of the woodland area from early
Archaic Stage times (excluding h ere Meserve and San Patrice from
the Archaic on stylistic grounds) to the time of extensive settlement
with abundant ceramics and arrow points. This whole complex fits
Willey and Phillips' (1958: 104- 143) "functional " definition of the
Archaic but, according to the classificatory system proposed by Suhm
et al. ( 1954), would likely be classified in its latter phase as early NeoAmerican stage.
The present definition of the La Harpe Aspect constitutes only a
rudimentary beginning at organizing this Archaic archeological ma-

279

YARBROUGH AN D MILLER SITES

RELATIVE

PERCENTAGES

o.__..__.____.____._2~5_._~......__,50___.__.____.____._1L5-'-.__.._~10~0 I) tM.LEVELS
SNo.c.
PE
25
I
53

2

58

3

69

4

69

5

53

6

~

7

5

8

A.

DART POINTS !Z2=Zl
ARROW POINTS ~:··:·:-:-::·. I
POTSHERDS C:::::J
RELATIVE

NO. 0
SPEC.

25

PERCENTAGES

50

75

100 l.tc.rM. LEVELS

7

I

30
37

2
"3
:·:·:::.: :

54

4

61

5

49

6

29

7

4

8

8.

DART PTS.: CONTRACT. STEM
TRAD. ·u::Z:.J,STRAIGHT STEM
TRAD.c=:J,EXPANDING STEM
TR AO. 1:::::;.::;.: I

Fig. 36 . Doering Site : A, relative percentages of dart points, arrow points , and potsherds; B, relative percentages of the dart point stemming traditions.

terial. l\1any problems remain to be answered, sm aller taxonomic units
remain to be defined, and typologies want definition. The dearth of
site reports precludes any further, meaningful elaboration at this time,

280

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and we can now only point out certain problems and possibilities along
which lines future investigators may wish to channel their energies.
For one thing, it will eventually be possible to subdivide La Harpe
along two lines, one temporal, the other areal. Even in a brief treatment such as that embodied in the present paper, one can see certain
specific differences between the materials found in Oklahoma, the
central area (northern Texas) , and the southern area (the sites near
Houston and those from McGee Bend). It will probably be possible, at
some future date, to recognize these areal differences by naming new
foci within the La Harpe Aspect.
On a temporal level, it may be possible to express the differences
between the early part of the La Harpe Aspect (with many expanding
stem dart points ), late La Harpe (with its contracting stem dart
points), and terminal La Harpe Aspect (with plain-ware ceramics)
by means of new taxonomic units. At the present state of knowledge,
however, it seems most advisable to delay this breakdown until more
data can be acquired. And this can only come about through a more
determined campaign of field work in the area.

References Cited
Allen, Henry Easton
1939. The Parrilla Expedition to the Red River in 1759. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vol. 43, July. Austin.
Atwood, Wallace W.
1940. The Physiographic Provinces of North America. Boston.
Baerreis, David Albert
1951. The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern Oklahoma. Anthropological
Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 6. Ann
Arbor.
Bell, Robert E.
1953. The Scott Site, Le Flore County, Oklahoma. American Antiquity, Vol. 18,
No. 4, April, pp. 314-331. Menasha.
1958. Archaeological Investigations at th e Boat Dock Site, Ma-1, in the Lake
T exoma Area, Marshall County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 6, March, pp. 37-47. Oklahoma City.
Bell, Robert E. and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 7-100. Lubbock.
Blair, Frank W.
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2. No. 1,
pp. 93-117. Austin.
Campbell, T. N.
1952. The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. Bulletin of

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

281

the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
Lubbock.
Cotter, John L.
1952. The Gordon Site in Southern Mi~sissippi. American Antiquity, Vol. 18,
No. 2, October, pp. 110-126.. Menasha.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeofogical and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 7-38. Lubbock.
1954. Traits of the Trinity Aspect Archaic: Carrollton and Elam Foci. The
Record, Publication of the Dallas Archaeological Society, Vol. 12, No. 1,
February, pp. 2--16. Dallas.
Davis, E. Mott
1953. Recent Data from Two Paleo-Indian Sites on Medicine Creek, Nebraska.
American Antiquity, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 380-386. Menasha.
Davis, W. A. and E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir
Area, Northeastern Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 3, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas. Austin.
Dice, Lee R.
1943. The Biotic Provinces of North American. Ann Arbor.
Duffield, Lathe! F.
1959. Archeological Reconnaissance at Cooper Reservoir, Delta and Hopkins
Counties, Texas, February, 1959. Report to the U. S. National Park Service
by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Austin.
1961. The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, T exas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, for 1959 (in press ) . Austin.
Duffield, Lathe! F. and Edward B. Jelks
1960. The Pearson Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 4. The University of Texas. Austin.
Gifford, Jam es C.
1960. The Type-Variety Method of Ceramic Classification as an Indicator of
Cultural Phenomena. American Antiquity, Vol. 25, No. 3, January, pp.
341-347. Salt Lake City.
Hall, Roland Scott
1954. Ck-44: A Bluff Shelter Site from Northeastern Oklahoma. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthmpological Society, Vol. 2, March, pp. 49-67. Oklahoma
City.
Harper, Elizabeth Ann
1953. The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1779-1835.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Review. Canyon, Texas.
Harrington, M. R.
1920. Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas. Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum
of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, Vol. 10. New York.

282

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Honea, Kenneth H .
1960. Pitted Stones and the Bipolar Flaking Technique in East T exas. Manuscript.
Jelks, Edward B.
1957. Excavations at McGee Bend Reservoir, Southeastern Texas. Manuscript.
Jelks, Edwa rd B. and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959. The Harroun Site: A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, T exas. Archaeology Series, No. 2, Department of Anthropology, The University of T exas. Austin.
J oh nson, LeRoy , Jr., and Edward B. J elks
1958. The T awakoni-Yscani Village, 1760: A Study in Arch eologi cal Site
Identification . The T exas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, D ecember,
pp. 405-422. Austin.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the T exas Arch eological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128. Lubbock.
Krieger, Alex D .
1944. The Typological Concept. American Antiquity, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 271-288.
Menasha.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publica tion No. 4640. Austin.
1956. Historic Survival of the Atlatl in the Lower Mississippi Region. Bulletin
of the Texas Arch eological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 195-207. Austin.
MacN eish, Richard S.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de T am a ulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n .s., Vol. 48,
Pt. 6. Philadelphia.
Miller, E. 0. and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archeological Excavations at the .Belton Reservoir. Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 168-217. Lubbock.
Moorman, Edward H . and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of the Cooper Reservoir, Delta
and Hopkins Counties, Texas. River Basin Su rveys, Smithsonian Institution, Texas Area. Austin.
Newell, H. Perry and Al ex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. D avis Site, Cherokee County, T exas. Memoir No. 5, American Antiquity , Vol. 14, No. 4, Pt. 2, April. M enasha.
Phillips, Philip
1958. Application of the vVheat-Gifforcl-Wasley T axonomy to Eastern Ceramics.
American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 2, October, pp. 117- 125. Salt Lake City.
Phillips, Philip, James A. Ford and James B. Griffin
1951. Archeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley, 19401947. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and
Ethnology, H arvard University, Vol. 25. Cambridge.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

283

Proctor, Charles
1957. The Sam Site, Lf-Z8, of Le Flore County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 5, March, pp. 45-91. Oklahoma
City.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1941. The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulletin of the Texas
A:rcheological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, pp. 15Z- 16Z. Abilene.
Ray, Max A.
1960. The James Site, Br- 11 , An Archaeological Site in Bryan County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 8, April,
pp. 53-74. Oklahoma City.
Rouse, Irving
1939. Prehistory in Haiti: A Study in Method. Yale University Publications in
Anthropology, No. Z1. New Haven.
1960. The Classification of Artifacts in Archaeology. American Antiquity, Vol.
Z5, No. 3, January, pp. 313-32.3. Salt Lake City.
Sapir, Edward
19Z9. Central and North American Indian Languages. Encyclopaedia Britannica,
14th Edition, Vol. 5, pp. 138-141. London.
Schultz, C. Bertrand
193Z. Association of Artifacts and Extinct Mammals m Nebraska. Nebraska
Museum, Bulletin 33, Vol. 1, pp. 171-183. Lincoln.
Sellards, E. H.
195Z. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. Austin.
Shaeffer, James B.
1957. The McCarter Site, A Late Archaic Occupation at Muskogee, Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. Z8, pp. Z40-Z68. Austin.
Sharrock, Floyd W .
1960. The Wann Site, Lf-Z7, of the Fourche Maline Focus. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 8, April, pp. 17-47. Oklahoma
City.
Smith, Robert E., Gordon R. Willey, and James C. Gifford
1960. The Type-Variety Concept as a Basis for the Analysis of Maya Pottery.
American Antiquity, Vol. Z5, No. 3, January, pp. 331-340. Salt Lake City.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. J elks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology . .Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. Z5. Austin.
Swadesh, Mauricio
1959. Mapas de Clasificaci6n Linguistica de Mexico y Las Americas. Cuadernos
del Instituto de Historia, Serie Antropol6gica No. 8. Mexico, D. F.
Swanton, John R.
1942.. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 13Z. Washington.
Tunnell , Curtis D.
1961. Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites in the McGee Bend

284

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Reservoir, San Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, for 1959 (in press). Austin.
Webb, C.H.
1946. Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts from Northwest Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 17,
pp. 9-17. Abilene.
Webb, William S.
1939. An Archaeological Survey of Wheeler Basin on the Tennessee River in
Northern Alabama. Bureau of American Ethnology. Bulletin 122.. Washington.
Webb, William S. and David L. DeJarnette
1942.. An Archeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Portions of
the States of Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 129. Washington.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 174. Washington.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154, No. 4, pp. 143-2.52.. Washington.
Wheat, Joe Ben, James C. Gifford, and William W. Wasley
1958. Ceramic Variety, Type Cluster, and Ceramic System in Southwestern
Pottery Analysis. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 1, July, pp. 34--47.
Salt Lake City.
Willey, Gordon R. and Philip Phillips
1958. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. Chicago.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

