lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

Archeological Reconnaissance in the
Drainage of the Rio Verde,
San Luis Potosi, Mexico
NANCY P. TROIKE

During July and December, 1957, two archeological reconnaissance
trips were made in the drainage of the Rio Verde, in the state of San
Luis Potosi, Mexico. This paper will present a brief summary and a
preliminary analysis of the information obtained during these trips.
The south-central part of the state of San Luis Potosi consists of an
extensive plateau lying at a height of approximately 1,000 meters
above sea level. On the west this plateau is rimmed by the Sierra
Gorda, and on the east by the Sierra Madre Oriental. Several small
streams drain the area and form the Rio Verde, which flows eastward
into the Panuco system. Geographically the Rio Verde drainage is
characterized by large flat valleys, low ranges of hills, generally fertile
soil, and a temperate climate.
The archeological sites of this region have been recognized for some
time as forming a westward extension of the culture of the Gulf Coast
Huastecs. Joaquin Meade, who for 25 years has studied the history
and archeology of the Huasteca, ha:, been one of the most active investigators of the area. In his ( 1948 ) survey of archeological sites in
the state of San Luis Potosi he recorded valuable data and descriptions
of some of the sites in the Rio Verde drainage. Only one archeological
excavation has been published for the region, however; it was conducted by Wilfrido Du Solier (et al., 1947) in 1941-42 at Buenavista,
Huaxcama.
The two reconnaissance trips were concentrated principally along
the main roads of the municipios of Rioverde, Rayon, and San Ciro.
A total of 61 sites was located in the region. Of these, 41 lay near the
San Luis Potosi-Rioverde highway within 50 kilometers to the west of
the latter town . The remaining sites (numbering 20) were located
within a triangle formed by the towns of Rioverde, Rayon, and San
Ciro which measured approximately 50 by 40 by 40 kilometers,

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

respectively. This clustering of sites generally reflects the division of
the region into eastern and western areas by a zone of alkaline soil
unfit for agriculture which extends along the north bank of the Rio
Verde from the east to the northwest of the town of Rioverde. During
the two trips a total of some 20 sites was visited, of which eleven will
be briefly described below in order to demonstrate the type of sites
characteristic of the Rio Verde drainage. Four of these lay in the
western zone and the remainder in the eastern area.

Descriptions of Sites
The westernmost site visited was in the municipio of San Nicolas
Tolentino ; it may be one of the sites mentioned by Meade ( 1948:
97-98, #137 ) for that area. Most of the site has been plowed over, and
only two undestroyed mounds were seen. However, this was the only
site in the Rio Verde drainage at which sherds identical to those found
west of the Sierra Gorda in the valley of San Luis Potosi were also
noted.
Twenty kilometers west of the town of Rioverde was a site consisting of some 20 mounds lying on the south bank of the Rio Verde. Most
of these mounds were grouped around a plaza measuring about 50
meters in length from east to west. The tallest mound seen was some
4 meters high. In the eastern part of the site were two long parallel
mounds close to one another whose long axes were oriented slightly
east of north. A few mounds on the north bank of the river appeared
to be a continuation of the site. Burials and whole pottery vessels were
said to have been found at this site.
A number of sites extending discontinuously for several kilometers
along the Rio de los Morales appeared to be associated with the extensive site of La Manzanilla. La Manzanilla was the largest site seen
in the Rioverde municipio and was undoubtedly a major center for
the area. It was estimated to contain at least 100 mounds, although
most of these were relatively small and none of those seen was more
than 4 meters in height. A pair of long parallel mounds oriented northsouth were noted. Unfortunately, a considerable number of the
mounds at La Manzanilla already have been damaged, especially by
the activities of local treasure-hunters. The site is very rich in cultural
materials and a number of important artifacts were said to have been
taken from it. Notable among these was a very finely carved basalt
yoke reportedly found lying around the head of a burial with which
three carved basalt bowls were also associated. Numerous pottery
vessels and figurines have also been found at the site.
The site of El J aral consisted of a compact cluster of 16 mounds

RECON N AISSANCE IN SAN LUIS POTOSI

49

arranged in the form of a hollow rectangle measuring a bout 140
meters north-south by 120 meters east-west, with a mound approximately in its center. Two parallel mounds some 50 meters long and
oriented north-northwest formed the southwestern side of the rectangle. The central mound was about 6.50 meters in height and 30
meters in diameter; treasure-hunters had dug a large pit into the
middle of it and were reported to have found a burial. Their digging
had revealed several periods of construction within the mound.
In the Rayon municipio in the eastern zone of the Rio Verde drainage, a small site called Salinas was found near the town of Rayon.
It had been badly destroyed by road construction and treasure-hunting, but consisted of several mounds grouped around a plaza, the
tallest mound being now no more than 2 meters high. Treasurehunters had cleared the debris from one mound and exposed a fine
lime plaster floor extending across most of its top.
At the site of Los Becerros, most of the mounds were grouped around
a large plaza. Rough limestone fragments set in mud had been used in
construction, and some mounds were faced with trimmed limestone
slabs. Two long parallel mounds on the western side of the site were
oriented approximately north-northwest. The tallest mound of the site
was about 10 meters high, with the others ranging downward from 7
to 1.50 meters in height.
The site of Las Revolcaderas lay on an old stream terrace southeast
of Rayon. It was a large site and contained a number of mounds
covered with a dense semi-tropical growth of trees, brush, and vines.
Mounds were faced with trimmed limestone slabs laid in courses. Two
parallel mounds each about 40 meters long were oriented northnorthwest and faced on their interior sides with trimmed limestone
slabs laid in stepped courses. The tallest mound seen had smooth sloping walls and reached a height of some 12 meters; recent damage to
one side of it had revealed the almost vertical wall of an interior
construction.
The largest site seen in the Rayon municipio was Los Juzgados,
which lies on the north edge of the Plan de la Quemada, an ancient
lake bed. A brief description and a sketch of part of the site have been
published by Meade (1948: 81-82, #104; 171, Lam. 42 ) . The site
covered an extensive area and there were a number of plazas, the
principal one having a large mound approximately in its center. Both
volcanic rock and uncut limestone were used in construction, with a
few mounds still retaining fa<;ades of trimmed limestone slabs laid in
courses in a clay-mud mortar. One mound in the northeastern part of
the site retained several courses of its facing of volcanic stones and

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

definitely had a circular base. The most unusual construction seen
during the reconnaissance trips was found at Los Juzgados. It consisted
of two parallel mounds or platforms each about 1.50 meters high and
76 meters long, standing 12 meters apart and oriented 15 ° west of
magnetic north. The interior sides of both mounds were faced with
trimmed limestone slabs laid vertically in courses. The ground between the mounds was very flat and was lower than the surrounding
ground level; there appeared to have been several steps at the north
end of the structure leading down to the interior level. At the northwestern corner the stone fa<;ade was continued outward to form a
three-sided area similar to a room, which had the same floor level as
the area between the mounds.
On the eastern side of the Plan de la Quemada, at the base of the
Espinosa del Diablo, was found the site of El Calichal. The mounds
extended for some 500 meters but unfortunately many of them had
been destroyed by plowing. The principal plaza was relatively small
and compact. This was the only site visited at which two separate
pairs of long parallel mounds were seen. One pair, oriented northsouth, formed the southeastern side of the main plaza. The other pair,
m easuring approximately 40 meters in length, were faced with
trimmed limestone slabs laid in stepped courses and oriented 17 ° west
of magnetic north.
The largest site visited in the municipio of San Ciro was La Soledad
de los Tepehuanes, which was called La Cuidad Muerta de la Sierra
Gorda by Velazquez ( 1946: Vol. I ). The site is built on a low ridge,
with terraced platforms used to secure level bases on the slopes. Forty
mounds were counted but the site contained many more and many of
these were in an excellent state of preservation. One mound was approximately 20 meters tall and at least three others reached 15 meters
in height. Mound facings consisted of large limestone fragments set
in a clay-mud mortar. A pair of long parallel mounds was also noted.
Approximately two kilometers north of the town of San Ciro was a
small site which is a favorite treasure-hunting area for the townspeople. This digging, coupled with natural erosion, has caused extensive damage. The tallest mounds of the site were some 6 meters
high, and mound facings were of limestone fragments set in a claymud mortar.

Discussion
A study of these eleven sites reveals both the range of variety as
well as the essential unity of the archeological culture of the Rio

RECONNAISSANCE IN SAN LUIS POTOSI

51

Verde drainage. All the sites visited were of a similar nature, consisting of a cluster of mounds usually grouped around one or more plazas.
The number of mounds in a site varied from only a few to as many as
100 or more. Most of the mounds appeared to have had square or
rectangular bases, although a few were seen which were definitely
circular. With one exception (at Los Juzgados) , no type of structure
was seen at any site which did not also occur at many or even most
other sites. There appeared to be no "typical" pattern of relationship
or arrangement for the mounds and plazas; the positioning of these
varied from one site to the next. Rarely was there any obvious orientation of the mounds to one another. Most mounds appeared to lack
stone fai;ades and perhaps had been faced with mud originally. Two
types of stone fa<;ades were seen : untrimmed limestone or volcanic
fragments, sometimes set in courses, and trimmed limestone slabs
laid in courses; both types were set in a mud matrix. At any single
site there was a definite tendency towards consistency in the fa<;ade
material used. No evidence was found of plaster facings over the stone
fa<;ades. Generally, sites in the eastern area appeared to be less numerous but individually larger than those in the western region.
The pairs of long parallel mounds noted in a number of the sites
appeared to be ball courts of the open-end type. Ball courts were
widely used in Mesoamerica during the pre-Hispanic period for a
game with quasi-religious significance. In the Rio Verde sites the
mounds were usually at least 40 meters long and 6 or 8 meters apart,
with the long axes all arranged in a north-south direction. At all sites
except one the orientation was to the west of magnetic north. Use of a
Brunton compass at El Calichal produced a reading of 17° west of
magnetic north, while readings with a smaller compass at other sites
showed slightly north of north-northwest. One site showed a reading
with a small compass of slightly east of north. The consistency of the
north-south orientation would appear to be an intentional feature of
these constructions and may therefore be assumed to be a matter of
importance to the builders.
In relation to these ball courts, it is noteworthy that a class of
ceramic figurines which may represent ball players was seen in several private collections. These figurines were hand-modeled and sometimes carried a ball held against the side or at times an instrument
resembling a bat. Some were decorated with knee guards and belts
crossed diagonally on the chest. It was reported that a stone ball court
ring, such as was sometimes used in open-end courts, has been found
at a site in the Rioverde municipio, but no information concerning it

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

could be obtained. There is a possibility that the unique construction
encountered at Los Juzgados may also represent a ball court. If the
room-shaped projection at the northwest corner of the two mounds
were to be matched at the other three corners, the structure might be
an I-shaped ball court of exceptional length. Its orientation, 15 ° west
of magnetic north, is similar to that of the open-end courts. However,
the possibility must also be considered that this construction represents a ceremonial avenue; Meade's ( 1948: 82) description of Los
Juzgados notes the occurrence of two "streets."
The similarities of the ceramics seen on the surface and in mound
fills appear to indicate that all the sites of the Rio Verde drainage were
occupied more or less contemporaneously. If true, the large number of
sites concentrated within this relatively small area would indicate an
intensive occupation by a large population. Economic support was
undoubtedly founded upon a firm agricultural basis; it is noteworthy
in this regard that sites are located in areas of fertile soil but are lacking in the alkaline soil zone which is unfit for farming. The number
and size of the mounds in the region would indicate that the population had a plentiful food supply and sufficient leisure time for construction activities, and would probably imply the existence of effective social controls to direct these activities.
Data collected during the two reconnaissance trips may most usefully be compared with the only published account of archeological
excavations in the Rio Verde drainage, that by Du Solier at Buenavista. Du Solier (et al., 1947: 16, 18; 17, Fig. 2) mentions the excavation of only two structures, one of which was a long narrow mound
having a series of eight steps up its southwestern side. Measurements
of his scale drawings of this structure show that it was approximately
38.50 meters in length by 11.50 meters in width by no more than 3
meters in height, and that its orientation was to the northwest. The
similarity of its size and orientation to the ball court mounds discussed
above is obvious, but as there was no parallel companion mound the
structure does not represent a ball court. Du Solier suggested that it
might have been a temple base "or even a gallery to view some
spectacle."
Most of the pottery types reported by Du Solier (et al. , 194 7: 18-21 )
for Buenavista were encountered at various sites during the reconnaissance trips, and other varieties were also noted. A possibly significant difference in percentages was discovered between the pottery
found in the eastern and western zones of the Rio Verde area. The
most common type seen in the eastern area was a red-on-white ware,

RECONNAISSANCE IN SAN LUIS POTOSI

53

while in the western region a polished and incised blackware appeared
to be of equal importance with the red-on-white. Du Solier (et al.,
1947: 18-20) noted the importance of the polished blackware at
Buenavista but did not report the red-on-white ware for that site.
Krieger and Griffin (Du Solier et al. , 1947: 27-30 ) have pointed
out the similarities existing between the pottery of the Caddoan area
and the polished incised or engraved blackware of Buenavista. They
noted that Buenavista sherds so closely resembled Barkman Engraved
(which is characteristic of the Texarkana focus ) that it was difficult
to distinguish the two types. Because the technique of incising and
engraving with colored pigments filling the lines is known to have
occurred quite early in Mesoamerica, they suggested that this method
of decorating polished monochrome vessels had diffused from northern
Mesoamerica into the Caddoan area.
During the Rio Verde reconnaissance trips a number of ceramic
smoking pipes were noted in private collections. All those seen had a
delicate conical bowl affixed near the end of a long slender round stem
which projected slightly beyond the bowl and often was formed into
a stylized ornament. These appear to be very similar in both shape
and size to the Caddoan "long-stemmed" pipes illustrated by Krieger
(Newell and Krieger, 1949: 147-148; Fig. 54) for the Davis site. The
presence of these pipes in both areas, when considered along with the
similarities in the polished blackwares, may indicate that the Rio
Verde drainage served as a route of reciprocal diffusion and contact
between the cultures of Mesoamerica and the Caddoan area.
Temporally, the sites of the Rio Verde drainage may be equated in
a general way with the archeological sequence developed by Ekholm
for the Huasteca. On the basis of ceramic similarities, the principal
period of Rio Verde occupation would seem to correlate with late
Panuco IV and early Panuco V (Ekholm, 1944: 358-364), although
the area may possibly have been occupied prior to this time but on a
more limited scale. This period might very tentatively be estimated at
approximately A.D. 600 to 1000. Within the vvider frame of Mesoamerican history these dates span the end of the Classic period and the
beginning of the Post-Classic. During this period the southward movements of aggressive nomadic groups caused increasing pressures on
the sedentary peoples of northern Mesoamerica and eventually
brought about widespread cultural changes. These pressures may have
been a factor in the abandonment of the Rio Verde drainage. At the
time of the Spanish Conquest, the Huastecs were living primarily in
the coastal plains and low foothills to the east of the Sierra Madre

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Oriental, and the Rio Verde area was occupied by the nomadic Pame
Indians.

Summary
This paper has reported the results of two archeological reconnaissance trips which were made in the drainage of the Rio Verde, in
south-central San Luis Potosi, Mexico. The culture represented in
this area was a western extension of the Gulf Coast Huasteca. Sixtyone sites were located, 20 of these being in the eastern Rio Verde zone
and 41 in the western. Sites were found to consist of a cluster of
mounds usually grouped around one or more plazas; many sites contained two long parallel mounds which appeared to be open-end ball
courts. The architecture and pottery seen during the reconnaissance
were similar to those reported for Buenavista, Huaxcama, but significant differences were also noted. Similarities in the polished incised
blackwares and ceramic smoking pipes were found to exist between
the Rio Verde region and the Caddoan area of the United States,
perhaps indicating reciprocal contacts and influences. The principal
occupation of the Rio Verde drainage was tentatively estimated to have
been from A.D. 600 to 1000.

Acknowledgments
The two reconnaissance trips reported in this paper were made
possible as a result of the interest and kindness of Sr. Dn. Octaviano
Cabrera lpifia, of San Luis Potosi, S.L.P. He also gave freely of his
own time and his wide knowledge of the history and geography of the
region to aid in the reconnaissance. Special thanks are due to Sra.
Profa. Antonieta Espejo, who first drew attention to the possibilities
of a site survey in the Rio Verde drainage and who participated in the
July trip as a representative of the lnstituto Nacional de Antropologia
e Historia. Sr. Dn. Joaquin Meade has generously shared his extensive
knowledge of Huastec archeology and history gained from his many
y ears of study both in the field and in the archives.

References Cited
Du Solier, Wilfrido, Alex D . Krieger and J am es B. Gr iffin
1947. The Archaeological Zone of Buena Vista, Huaxcam a, San Luis Potosi,
Mexico. American Antiquity , Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 15-32.
Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944. Excavations at T ampico and P anu co in the Hu asteca, M exico. Anthro-

RECONNAISSANCE IN SAN LUIS POTOSI

55

pological Papers, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 38, Part 5,
pp. 321- 512.
Meade, Joaquin
1948. Arqueologia de San Luis Potosi. Mexico.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Velazquez, Primo Feliciano
1946. Historia de San Luis Potosi. San Luis Potosi.
Ankara, Turkey

