lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

The White Site: An Historic Indian
Burial In Yoakum County, Texas
DEE ANN SUHM

Introduction
In the summer of 1955, J. D. White, in the course of levelling a
freshly plowed field, uncovered objects of historical and archeological
interest. Unable to investigate the site himself, Mr. White reported
the find to H. C. Morgan who, along with several friends, undertook
limited excavation. Shortly thereafter, news of the discovery reached
the l\1useum at Texas Technological College. After an examination of
the site by William M. Pearce and A. A. Andretta, members of the
Tech Museum field school, under the direction of Jane Holden Kelley,
spent most of one day excavating what remained of the site.
The White Site lies in the southwestern portion of Yoakum County,
approximately seven miles west and two miles north of Denver City,
Texas. Since at the time of investigation the site had been badly disturbed-in fact, almost entirely destroyed-by deep plowing, the
exact structure and extent of the site is impossible to determine. The
limited data available, however, indicate that the artifacts were concentrated in a relatively small area, approximately 15 to 20 feet
square, and that they were not deeply buried.
In view of these circumstances, the analysis has necessarily focused
upon the objects recovered rather than the specific context of each
find . But, unfortunately, it is difficult to appraise the completeness of
the collection. The site was known to a number of individuals and,
consequently, it is quite possible that some of the artifacts are in private collections. At any rate, the materials examined represent, by
and large, a consistent and significant complex which, with reasonable
assurance, can be identified as an historic Indian burial. As relatively
few historic Texas Indian burials have been described in detail, the
White Site, in spite of the severe disturbance to the burial and the
possible incompleteness of the collection, merits reporting.
In writing this paper I am indebted to The Museum at Texas

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Technological College for generously making available the materials
they collected, as well as the objects from the site donated to them by
H . C. Morgan; to Jane Holden Kelley of Lubbock for her invaluable
cooperation and assistance; to Edward B. Jelks for the section on beads ;
to William W. Newcomb, Jr. , for his many helpful suggestions; to
Florence E. Petzel for analysis of the textiles; and, finally, to Chris
Jelks and Hal M. Story for the illustrations which greatly enhance
this report.

Objects Recovered
The more than 2,000 specimens from the White Site can generally
be sorted into two major categories: personal paraphernalia and horse
trappings. While this gross breakdown has some measure of validity
and utility, there are specific subgroupings, such as conchas, which
are not mutually exclusive, and others, such as buckles, which are
somewhat arbitrarily assigned to one or the other major category.
Fortunately, the excellent preservation of materials, especially when
used in conjunction with ethnographic observations, provides an unusually good opportunity to examine function. The main emphasis,
however, has been placed on a detailed description of the objects
collected from the site. Comparative materials have been introduced
whenever possible, although no attempt has been made to provide an
exhaustive account.

Human Skeletal Remains
All human bones recovered belong to a young child (Fig. 8, 0)
probably between one and three years of age at the time of death
(T . W. McKern, personal communication ) . Many of the bones have
traces of a greenish stain derived from the numerous metal objects
which accompanied the burial. Considering the age of the individual
and the disturbance caused by the plow, the skeleton is surprisingly
well represented. Specifically, those parts found include a humerus,
radius, ulna, two probable finger bones, a tibia fragment, a fibula ,
portions of the lower jaw, eight teeth, a number of rib and vertebra
fragments, part of a clavicle, a nearl y complete scapula, and slightly
less than a third of the skull.
Since the bones were scattered by the plow, none of the details of
burial can be determined. Thus, the possibility of establishing tribal
identity is rendered difficult on several counts: condition of the bones,
age of the individual, and lack of specific data on mode of interment.

WHITE SITE

87

However, it is interesting and significant to note that such copious
and valuable offerings (assuming that virtually all artifacts found
and described herein were intended as burial furniture) should be
placed in the grave of such a young child. It is, therefore, possible that
the child was a male member of an important and well-to-do family;
or that one or more adults were also buried at the site. The latter
hypothesis seems more in keeping vvith the richness of the offerings,
but is not-because of the circumstances of excavation?-supported
by actual skeletal remains .
Brass bells (Fig. 1, A, B). So-called hawk or morris b8lls (Quimby,
1938 ) are represented by 27 complete or nearly complete specimens,
and by 22 small, unrestorable fragments. Each bell is formed from
two hemispheres of sheet brass joined together by rolling of the joint
and/ or solder. Obvious clappers are lacking, although four of the
complete bells did contain poorly preserved pieces of calcite which
could have served as such. The calcite pebbles, however, are heavily
coated with iron sulfides of copper and may be fortuitous deposits
which collected in the bell interiors.
In spite of being similar in many ways, two kinds of bells can be
recognized. The most common type (Fig. 1, A ) -25 of the complete
specimens and probably most of the fragments- is almost a perfect
sphere: 21 mm. in diameter and 20 mm. in height. The upper or
proximal parts have centrally placed, thin ( 1 mm. in diameter) brass
wire loops or shanks which provided for attachment to cloth or leather.
The distal end of each bell has two narrow slits (2.5 mm. wide and
11 mm. long ) which intersect one another and form an equilateral
cross. The two hemispheres are joined together by slight overlapping
(or rolling) of the lower hemisphere over the upper one, and possibly
by the use of solder.
The second type (Fig. 1, B) is represented by two very poorly preserved bells. In general appearance they are squat: 21 mm. in diameter
and approximately 16 mm. in height (the latter dimension is not exact
because of the condition of these bells ) . Attachment loops are of
narrow (2 mm. ) sheet brass rather than wire. This type also differs
from the former in that the two halves were joined by soldering together two narrow (2 mm. ) rims and thus producing a small medial
shelf around the exterior of the finished bell. Since traces of a slit can
be detected on one of the distal ends, it is probable that both, like those
of the first type, had an equilateral cross cut into the base.
Hawk bells have a long history in Europe where, as the name suggests, they ·were attached to the feet of hunting birds. However, the

Personal Paraphernalia

®D
.

.

E

F
G
H

0

2

I

I

I

3

4

I

I

CM
Fig . 1. A, brass bell , type I; B, brass bell, reconstructed, type II ; C, finger ring ; D, glass
button ; E, E', Army button, type I; F, Army button, type II ; G, brass button back still attached
to cloth fragment; H, embossed copper disc; I, I' undecorated copper button ; J , J', copper
(?) jingles ; K, jingles attached to cloth fragment ; L, jingles attached to leather fragment .

WHITE SITE

89

bells from the White Site could not; since they are of sheet brass, they
may not date much before the beginning of the 19th century (Lathrop, 1936; Ford, 1943 ) . There are suggestions (Newcomb, 1955;
Wedel, 1959: 126-127; Woolworth and Wood, 1960: 282) that those
of type I are characteristic of the first part of the 19th century, while
those of type II appear in the latter half of that century.
Copper finger ring (Fig. 1, C). Only one ring was recovered from
the site. It is a simple undecorated band of copper which measures
2.5 mm. in width and 12 mm. in diameter. The ends of the band do
not join and, although considerable adjustment in the diameter is
possible, the ring seems much too large to have been worn on the
finger of the young child represented by the human skeletal remains.
Buttons (Fig. 1, D-G, I, I' ) . Although fairly numerous, the 27
buttons from the White Site can readily be sorted into three distinct
kinds: glass, copper, and brass. The two milk white glass buttons (Fig.
1, D) are mold-made, and are indistinguishable from those that can
be purchased in stores today. They are, consequently, impossible to
date. Both are plain, have four attachment holes, are biconvex, and
have a slight depression in one face. They measure 11 mm. in diameter, and 3 and 4 mm. in thickness. Identical buttons were found with
the Yellowhouse Canyon burial (Newcomb, 1955).
Undecorated copper, or possibly copper alloy, buttons (Fig. 1, I, I' )
are represented by 11 specimens, most of which are complete. They
are of uniform diameter, 26 mm., and thickness, .05 mm. A simple
ring-shaped brass shank (Fig. 1, I') brazed onto the back provided a
means of attachment. None bears a maker's mark, nor any indication
of having once been covered with some other material, such as cloth.
In general they have the appearance of having been cheaply made:
they were punched from thin sheet metal and the edges of the buttons
are not well smoothed. This, coupled with the large diameters, suggests
that they may have been expressly manufactured for Indian trade,
and that they may have been valued more as ornaments than as
buttons per se.
Although a precise date, or range of dates cannot be assigned to
the copper buttons, the manner in which they were manufactured
(i.e., stamped from sheets of metal ) was not utilized in the United
States until about the beginning of the 19th century (Ford, 1943 :
205-206). The stamping or punching of buttons depended upon the
rolling of a metal, a process first tried in Waterbury, Connecticut, in
1790 (ibid.). Previously all one-piece metal buttons (apart from the
shank) were cast.

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Of the 14 brass buttons (Fig. 1, E-F) eight are complete, or nearly
so, and five are small back fragments with shanks still intact. Although
two kinds can be distinguished, all are identifiable as Army uniform
buttons, probably types worn on the dress blouse (E. H. Davis, personal communication; Smith, 1960: 212 ) . One type (Fig. 1, F ) , perhaps characterized solely by a larger diameter ( 19 mm. ), is represented by two very poorly preserved specimens. Other features which
might differentiate this type from that described in more detail below
are-because of the condition of the two specimens- impossible to
observe.
Each of the 12 brass buttons of the second type (Fig. 1, E, E' ) bears
on the back or shank face the manufacture's name: "Scovills & Co.
Extra. " This company and the Horstmann Bros. & Co. were, during
the 19th century, the principal manufacturers of such objects. These,
like the first type, are two part buttons-a kind first developed in the
early 1820's (Ford, 1943 : 206). The front faces bear die-stamped
national emblems: a spread eagle clutching arrows in the right foot
and an olive or laurel (? ) branch in the left foot. (There are indications that the first type had a similar or identical design. ) Both front
and back pieces are made from thin sheet brass. The shanks, also of
brass, extend through the back faces and are bent backward (Fig. 1,
E'), as well as brazed, to insure firm attachment. Somewhat smaller
than the first type, these buttons measure 15 mm. in diameter and
6 mm. in thickness. The shanks are+ mm. across and extend out 5 mm.
from the back face.
Several coarse textile fragments , one with a back fragment still
attached and four with impressions that match the brass buttons,
indicate that these buttons were sewed onto a garment (Fig. 1, G ) .
Unfortunately , not enough remains of the garment to identify it more
precisely .
Similar Army buttons are common and have been reported from
late 19th century military sites (Smith, 1960: 212 ) . Two-part buttons,
on the other hand, could date as early as 1830 (E. H. Davis, personal
communication; Ford, 1943: 206).
Embossed disc (Fig. 1, H ) . A thin copper disc-23 mm. in diameter
- bears on the upper surface an embossed design which resembles the
seal of the State of Texas. In the center is a five-pointed star, and
between each point of the star are three embosses or dots: a large one
(3 mm. in diameter ) flanked by two smaller ones. About the edges of
the disc is a wreath apparently composed of olive branches. The negative design is visible on the reverse side. In addition, the back center

WHITE SITE

91

has traces of iron, perhaps remnants of a shank or a disc. A thick and
badly rusted iron disc, 20 mm. in diameter, found at the site fits fairly
well onto the back side. Thus, it is possible that the copper piece was
screwed on, or in some way attached to the iron disc.
Since the copper piece bears no maker's mark and appears to be a
very cheap product, it may have been designed for use as an insignia
on a Texas Republic or state militia uniform, or perhaps made specifically for trade to the Indians. At any rate, the close similarity to
the Texas seal suggests a connection with some phase of the Republic
or state government. Although there have been changes in the official
seal, the lack of comparative material makes it presently impossible
to precisely date this specimen. However, it was probably made after
1836, when the five-pointed star was first adopted as the seal of the
Republic of Texas.
Copper (or brass?) iingles (Fig. 1, J-L) . Small, spheroidal jingles
number 106, including 26 still secured to cloth and leather fragments.
They are of uniform size: 9 mm. in maximum diameter and 7 mm. in
height. Each consists of two components, a spherical-shaped front and
a disc-shaped back to which the shank is attached. The shanks or eyelets are small oval loops ( 5 mm. in diameter) of thin brass wire. The
ends of the shanks extend through the back faces and are bent backward to prevent them from being pulled out. None of the jingles bears
any decoration.
Those specimens still in place (Fig. 1, K, L) provide interesting
data on modes of attachment and use. All are arranged in either single
( 4 instances) or double ( 1 case) rows. Mounted in this fashion the
jingles served both as ornaments and as noisemakers. That they were
not solely desired as ornaments is further suggested by the looseness
of attachment. Instead of simply sewing them on with thread (as is
indicated for the buttons ) , small slits were made, at intervals of 6 to
11 mm., into t extile ( 1 example) or leather ( 4 examples) garments
( ?) . The shanks of the jingles were then extended through the slits
and a long, narrow piece of leather was passed through each shank.
Copper bangles or tinklers (Fig. 2, A , B). Each of the 20 bangles is
made from a narrow sheet of copper rolled into a cylinder or tube.
Edges of all bangles are flush rather than overlapping. Lengths of the
complete specimens range from 20 to 31 mm., diameters from 3 to
4 mm. Traces of leather within a number of the bangles suggest that
they were formed around ends of thongs which dangled as fringes.
Shell hair pipes (Fig. 2, C) . Fragments of 19 rather long, tubular
beads, which have come to be knov:n as hair pipes or wampum hair

TEXAS ARCH EOLOGICAL SOCIETY

gz

"O
<'.

<!'

1.tf$

0

K

~

>

2

~

4

6

CM

8

10

WHITE SITE

93

pipes, were recovered from the site. None is complete, but most, if not
all, were probably at least 20 or 40 mm. long. Outside diameters range
from 5 to 8 mm.; diameters of the longitudinal perforation, or fenestration, are about 3 mm. Exterior surfaces are badly weathered, but
once must have had a glossy polish.
In an extensive and most useful study of Indian hair pipes, John
Ewers ( 1957) notes that those of shell were first commercially
manufactured for the Indian trade in the latter part of the 18th century, probably between the years 1776 and 1798. Earlier forms were
made of either silver or glass. However, the development of the shell
hair pipes, which perhaps can be traced to John W. Campbell of
Pascack (now Park Ridge), New Jersey (Ewers, 1957: 42), provided
less expensive and more durable trade items. Thus, between the years
ca. 1800 and 1880-when the shell hair pipes began to be replaced by
the even more durable bone ones-these ornaments gained widespread
popularity among the Indians. Throughout most of this period, the
Campbell family nearly succeeded in controlling the manufacture of
shell hair pipes. Since the most common type was made from the lip
of the West Indian conch ( Strombus gigas), it is probable that those
from the White Site are from the same type of shell. Perhaps they
were even made by members of the Campbell family.
Shell hair pipes probably did not reach the southern Plains in any
appreciable number until about 1830. They did not, in fact, truly
become common in that area until after about 1850, when hair-pipe
manufacturing shifted from a hand to a mechanized operation (Ewers,
195 7: 74 ) . In keeping with the relative ease of acquisition, earlier
uses emphasized ear and hair ornaments, and necklaces and chokers;
while in the post-1850 period more extravagant ornaments appeared,
especially breastplates.
The hair pipes from the White Site, if the sample collected is reasonably complete, are hardly numerous enough to account for the
presence of a breastplate. Rather, il simple necklace, ch oker, or hair
ornament seems more likely. Since nwst of these uses continued up to,
or beyond 1880, a wide range of dates, ca. 1830 to at least 1880, is
possible.

Fig . 2 . A, B, coppe r bangles ; C, fragment of she ll hair pipe; D, D', w ide, stamped b racelet; E, na rrow , fragmentary stamped bracelet; F, leather pouch ; G, dressed skin fragment
w ith concha (? ) and b rass be ll impressions ; H, d ressed sk in with beads still intact; I, J ,
portion s of concha belt; K, undecorated bras s wi re brace le t; L-0, design s on brass wire
brace le ts. Sca le of D 1h t hat of othe r ob jects ; L-0 , tw ice that of other ob jects.

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Glass beads (Fig. 2, H) . These are characteristic of middle to late
nineteenth century trade beads in the southern Plains. Four forms
are present: ( 1) tiny, simple seed beads in a variety of colors; (2) tiny,
compound seed beads; ( 3) simple, hexagonal tubular beads; ( 4) one
simple, cylindrical tubular bead. 1 The dimensions, colors, and frequency of the glass beads are given in Table 1. The seed beads were
undoubtedly sewn on clothing, containers, and the like to form designs, while the tubular beads were probably strung into necklaces.
A small fragment of dressed skin (deer)-evidently part of a moccasin, coat, or other item of clothing-has a group of tiny, simple
seed beads still in their original alignment as part of a beadwork
design (Fig. 2, H). The beads are sewn on with fine sinew (?) by
means of a technique known as the lazy stitch; i.e., the beads are
strung on threads which are fastened to the hide of cloth at the ends
of short parallel rows (Douglas, 1951: 90). The design consists of a
band made by placing rows of beads side-by-side, each row containing
eight beads. The beads are arranged by colors to create alternating,
diagonal, colored stripes that slant across the band: first a stripe composed of opaque white beads, then a stripe of translucent dark blue
beads, next another stripe of opaque white, then a stripe of translucent
red, after which the same sequence was apparently repeated. Traces
of vermilion-probably stain from the spilled contents of a small
leather pouch (see below)-are visible at one end of the fragment
beside the beadwork.
In addition to the dressed animal skin, there are two fragmentary
leather scabbards (one may be an awl case) which have parallel rows
of tiny impressions unquestionably made by the seed beads (Fig. 5,
D). The beadwork design on these was probably similar to that in
Fig. 2, H.
Wire bracelets (Fig. 2, K-0). More or less oval-shaped, heavy
(2 to 3 mm. in diameter) brass wire bracelets are well represented
( 70) and include both decorated and undecorated specimens. Of the
more numerous ( 64) undecorated ones, 34 are complete, eight are
about three-quarters complete, and 22 are less than half complete.
All six of the decorated bracelets are incomplete. Most specimens
measure approximately 75 mm. across, although the extreme range
1
The tenns used here for classifying bead structure are those devised by
Duffield and Jelks ( 1961; 40- 41 ) . Beads made from one kind of glass are designated as simple; beads made from two kinds of glass are termed compound.
" Translucent Red/ Opaque VVhite" refers to a bead that has a core of opaque white
glass, over which is a veneer of translu cent red glass.

95

WHITE SITE

TABLE 1
Glass Beads
No.

Fonn

Tiny simple seed beads (diameter:
2--21/z mm.; length: from slightly
less than 1 mm. to 1 Yz mm.; diameter of perforation: less than
1 mm. ) , in various colors:
Opaque white
Opaque yellow
Translucent red
Translucent green
Translucent milky
Opaque ultramarine
Translucent turquoise
Translucent pale blue-green
Opaque chartreuse
Translucent medium
to dark blue
Translucent light blue
Tiny compound seed beads, Translucent Reel/ Opaque White ( diameter: 2- 21/z mm.; length: from
slightly less than 1 mm. to 1 Yz
mm.; diameter of perforation:
less than 1 mm. ) .

449
178

507
12
3
14
17
3
2

178
21
Glass is smooth, with no visible bubbles;
surfaces are unfrosted.

4

Simple hexagonal tubular beads
(diameter: approximately 5 mm. ;
length: 4-6 mm.; diameter of
perforation : 2--3 mm. ) in two
colors:
Translucent amber

Heniarks

Glass is smooth, with no visible bubbles ;
some specimens are frosted on the
exterior, probably due to weathering.

Ends were broken irregularly, then
lightly smoothed.

35

Translucent blue
Simple cylindrical tubular bead,
pale powder blue, fragmentary
(diameter: 8 mm.; length: indeterminate; diameter of perforation: 2 mm. )
TOTAL
11 ,425

These are patinated heavily on the surface and appear purplish-black to the
naked ey e. They must be broken and
held before a strong light before th e
amber color can be discerned.

96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

extends from 39 to 85 mm. With a few exceptions, the wire bracelets,
like the finger ring, are too large to have been worn by a child.
The decorated specimens bear simple, geometric designs (ty pical
examples are shown in Fig. 2, L-0 ) apparently made with a chisel
and a fine rasp. The layout of the decorations suggest that they were
produced before the wire was bent to form bracelets. Edges of both
the decorated and the plain bracelets were sometimes filed.
Since large rolls of heavy brass wire, as well as an assortment of
tools, were often traded to Indians (see Winfrey, 1950a, b ), it is
probable that the bracelets from the White Site are of native manufacture. Certainly, it would have been easy to cut an appropriate
strip of wire and to bend it into shape. Likewise, the simple decorations which appear on several of the specimens are probably of Indian
origin. Although easily made, the wire bracelets, especially when
large numbers were worn, made striking ornaments (see, for example,
the Comanche woman pictured by Wallace and Hoebel, 1952 : 110 ) .
As these bracelets enjoyed long-at least 18th through 19th century
-popularity among a variety of Indians, they cannot be precisely
dated, nor identified with any one tribe.
Stamped bracelets (Fig. 2, D , E ) . The most complete of the two
stamped bracelets is a handsomely decorated specimen made from a
wide (22 mm. ) strip of metal, possibly copper or a copper alloy. Four
rows of continuous, but individually stamped crescents or arches adorn
the entire outside surface (Fig. 2, D' ) . These rows are grouped into
two parallel sets with the arches which make up each set facing one
another. A single die stamp, which measured 3 mm. across, was u sed
to make the design.
The second bracelet (Fig. 2, E ) is about two-thirds complete. It is
made from a narrow ( 8 mm.) strip of metal which appears to taper
very slightly toward the ends. Although badly damaged, traces of a
design can be detected on the exterior surface. Elements visible include
small, engraved ( ?) dots and small, stamped triangles. These are
arranged into clusters, each one of which consists of two vertical rows
of stamped triangles (apexes facing one another) , flanked on each side
by two converging dotted lines. A single triangle appears at the point
of convergence of the dotted lines.
Although the origin of these bracelets remains uncertain, it is possible that they were made by Indians utilizing tools and metals obtained from whites. According to Frederic Douglas (1941 : 15 ) some
of the Plains Indians have been manufacturing metal jewelry since
about 1830. He also notes that:

WHITE SITE

97

Engraving is the old basic method of decoration. Among the Navajo almost
entirely and to some extent on the Plains it has b een replaced by stamping
with dies. Stamping began in the latter region about 1870 ( Douglas,
1941: 14).

Thus, if correctly identified as being of native origin, these bracelets
- and some or all of the other stamped metal ornaments described
below-may provide one of the latest dates (ca. 18 70 ) for the burial.
Such an age seems more in keeping with the number of perishable
objects recovered and, more importantly, with the degree of white
influence. However, the possibility that the bracelets were traded to
the Indians, or even made by a Mexican captive, cannot be denied or
ignored.
Metal conchas (Figs. 3, 4). A striking array-42 more or less complete and 55 unrestorable and unclassifiable fragments- of circular
metal plates or conchas, as they are broadly termed herein, was recovered from the site. Perforations, or fairly wide metal shanks
brazed onto the backs provided m eans of attachment. Most are of
copper or brass; three, however, are of silver, and several may be of
German silver. The latter metal is an alloy of copper, zinc, and nickel
which from about 1865 on was frequently worked by Plains Indians
(Woodward, 1938: 7; Feder, 1962: 66-68). When the complete or
nearly complete conchas are examined in detail, a variety of forms ,
which may in part reflect different uses, can be recognized. These are:
1) The most numerous group (Fig. 3, A, B) consists of 19 undecorated specimens which are pronouncedly convex (Fig. 3, A' ) and
which have two small perforations along opposing edeges of the
concha. The perforations were made by driving a sharp implement,
an awl or nail, through the metal from the underneath side. Jagged
edges of the perforations are still visible on the exterior surfaces.
Diameters of these conchas vary considerably, from 24 to 65 mm. One
is of silver (Fig. 3, A, A'); the remainder are of copper or copper
alloys. The copper conchas are of sheet metal, generally less than
1 mm. thick; the silver one is slightly thicker and could have been
made from a silver coin. The latter is distinctive in another respect: it
has a third perforation. This third hole is much smaller in diameter
( 1.5 versus 3 mm. ) and is placed next to one of the larger perforations.
2) A second, less numerous group-four nearly complete specimens
and fragments of at least another two--are distinguished by one, or
perhaps two centrally placed perforations and by rims bent downward (Fig. 3, C) . With one exception (Fig. 3, D) they are undecorated. Diameters are more uniform than for the first group with

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~\
fl;
.
·,
.

A
~"'>
A'

B'

c

D

F

H

K

J
c

2

4

6

8

CM

Fig. 3. Metal conchas. A, A', small silver conchas, type I; B, fragment of large concha,
type I; C, undecorated conchas, type II; D, decorated concha, type II; E, concha, type Ill;
F, G, conchas, type IV; H-K, conchas, type V.

WHITE SITE

99

a range of only 65 to 70 mm. The perforations are cut rather than
punched. Since none of these conchas is complete, the shape of the
large central perforations remains somewhat conjectural. However,
it can be narrowed down to two possibilities: ( 1) a single more or
less cresent-shaped perforation partially divided by a narrow projection; or (2) two hemispherical-shaped slits separated from one another
by a narrow strip or tongue 5 to 6 mm. wide. Either way, a projection
or a tongue provided, as in the case of modern saddle conchas, for
attachment. The one decorated specimen (Fig. 3, D ) bears a very
faint engraved design which consists of three to four concentric circles
of minute dots. This design is placed about midway between the
central perforation and the rim of the concha.
3) Two, possibly three, fragmentary conchas, like the above, are
made from thin sheet metal and have either a single large, somewhat
crescent-shaped hole, or two hemispherical-shaped perforations. However, unlike the above, the rims were not bent downward. The most
complete example (Fig. 3, E) measures 70 mm. in diameter. None is
decorated.
4 ) Three conchas have three small attachment holes placed in a
line across the diameter: one in the center and one on each edge. All
three specimens are decorated. Two have shallow notches, either engraved or filed, around the rims (Fig. 3, F ) . The third, and least complete, has a sloppily executed engraved design consisting of numerous
short dashes. Groups of these dashed lines are arranged into more
or less straight lines which intersect one another at right angles
( Fig. 3, G).
5) Six conchas have two small, centrally placed perforations (Fig.
3, H-K). Apart from this they exhibit considerable variation. Three
are rather small, about 36 mm. in diameter, are of sheet metal, and
are undecorated (Fig. 3, J). A fourth is somewhat larger in diameter,
43 mm., is made of thicker metal (German silver? ), and has faint
traces of a stamped design around portions of the rim (Fig. 3, I ).
The largest of the six, 65 mm. in diameter, is also of heavy metal,
perhaps brass or German silver. The edges of the rim are bent downward and bear a stamped design dominated by crescents and featherlike elements (Fig. 3, H ). The back side of this concha (Fig. 3, H' )
has two, apparently randomly-placed, stamped designs. Since the
same design appears on the exterior surface, it is probable that the
impressions on the back side are experiments. Except for the nature
of the attachment holes, this concha is much like those of the second
group. The last example of this group (Fig. 3, K ) is actually more
semilunar than disc-shaped. It measures 3 7 mm. long and 22 mm.

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B

c

,,, 1111 \\

D

E

E"
0

2

4

6

8

10

CM
Fig . 4 . Metal conchas . A, presumed interior surface of concha , type VI; 8- E, conchas,
type VII.

WHITE SITE

101

wide. Shallow notches along the edges constitute the only decoration.
There is some evidence to suggest that this specimen was mounted on
the flap of a small leather pouch (Fig. 2, F ).
6) The remaining three conchas with attachment holes cannot be
assigned to any of the above groups, nor do they have features which
link them closely to one another. Consequently, they are described
individually. The only complete one (Fig. 4, A ) has a fairly large
(5 mm. in diameter) , centrally-placed perforation. The presumed
exterior surface is slightly convex, although not as pronouncedly so
as the first group of conchas. The exterior surface is undecorated, but,
curiously enough, the back side bears die-stamped impressions immediately about the perforation (Fig. 4, A ). Since these would hardly
be of decorative value, they probably represent experiments with
stamps, perhaps even before the metal was fashioned into a concha.
The second concha, like the first, has a centrally-placed perforation.
However, the perforation is smaller, 3 mm. across, and was clearly
punched out by a sharp implement. The exact diameter cannot be
determined, but it was probably in the neighborhood of 60 mm. The
third and last of the miscellaneous conchas has a faint zigzag design ,
which simulates rocker-stamping, about the rim. Because of the fragmentary condition of this specimen the exact placement of the attachment hole is uncertain. This specimen proba hly measured about 40
mm. in diameter.
7) The remaining six conchas have (or had ), in place of attachment holes, sheet metal shanks brazed onto the backsides. Shanks are
still intact on two of the conchas, and are clearly indicated by solder
scars on the other four. Two conchas are of silver, three of copper, and
one possibly of German silver. The two silver ones are virtually
identical to one another. They are undecorated, but bear many striations from use or manufacture, and are 57 mm. in diameter and 1 mm.
in thickness. One (Fig. 4, D, D') still has portions of the shank-two
strips of metal 6 mm. wide and 22 mm. apart-soldered onto the back.
In addition, a piece of cloth to which the shank was attached has been
preserved (Fig. 4, D'). This, coupled with shank and textile fragments
still secured to a leather strap (Fig. 2, I ), strongly suggest that both
of the silver conchas were worn on a belt.
The two smallest conchas in this group are 43 and 50 mm. in diameter. Both are made of thin copper; one is undecorated, the other has a
zigzag design about the rim (Fig. 4, E), is larger in diameter, 65 mm. ,
has decorations on both the exterior and interior surface, and has a
well-preserved, continuous shank. The exterior has diagonal rows of

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

zigzags. These begin at the rim and continue for a distance of about 7
mm. They are placed about 4 mm. across and 7 mm. in length. The
decoration on the back-probably the result of an experiment-consists of a single row, 23 mm. long and 1 mm. wide, of another zigzag
design. The individual stamp impression, clearly recognizable in this
case, measures 5 mm. long and 1 mm. wide. The shank is made from
a strip of metal 33 mm. long and 6 mm. wide. The ends of the shank
are bent back for a distance of 6 mm.; it is these bent portions that are
soldered onto the back. The resultant loop is 5 mm. high and 20 mm.
wide (Fig. 4, E" ) .
The German silver (?) concha (Fig. 4 , C) is 70 mm. in diameter
and 1.5 mm. in thickness. The back side bears two solder scars, probably remnants of a shank much like the above. On the exterior surface
is a decoration consisting of a centrally-placed circle from which
radiate rows of zigzags. The circle is made of dots, perhaps engraved,
and is 25 mm. in diameter. The zigzag rows were made with at least
two different sized stamps, one being 3 mm. wide and 6 mm. long, the
other 4.5 mm. wide and 6 mm. long.
Although popularly thought of as being typically Navajo, circular
metal plates have long been knowi1_ to southern Plains Indians, particularly the Kiowa and Comanche, who preferred to wear them as
hair ornaments and to fasten them onto leather belts (Woodward,
1938: 5-7; Adair, 1946: 29-32; FedE:r, 1962: 55-71 ). Less frequently,
and perhaps later they appear as bridle ornaments (see section below ).
The latter use may reflect Mexican or Spanish influence.
The Kiowa and Comanche are reported to have learned the art of
working metals from displaced Shawnee and Delaware Indians in
the 1830's (Woodward, 1938: 5-7 ). Feder ( 1962) , however, has presented data to the contrary. Along 1hese lines it is interesting to note
that the Kiowa calendar records 1866 as the year of " flat metal (i.e ..
German silver) sun dance" (Mooney, 1898: 318 ) . According to
l\!Iooney:
It was so called because a trader brought th em at this time a quantity of
German silver, from which they made h eaddresses, belts for women,
bracelets, and other ornaments. GermEln silver is known to the Kiowa as
"flC1t metC1l," because it is furnished to them in sheets, which they cut and
hammer into the desired shapes. On both rnlendars the event is recorded
in the same way, by the figur e of a h ead pend ant with silver di sks placed
near the medicine lodge. Such pendants were attached to the h ead of the
scalplock, and consisted of a strip of buffalo hide reaching nearly to the
ground and covered along the whole length with a row of silver, copper,

103

WHITE SITE

or German silver disks, gradua lly decreasing in size toward the bottom,
which was usually finish ed off with a tuft of bright-colored horsehair....
This was not the first time the Kiowa had obtained German silver. In the
old days these ornaments were made for them, of genuine silver, by Mexican silversmiths near the present Silver City, New Mexico ( 1898: 318- 319).

Conchas belt (Fig. 2, I, J ) . Four leather fragments which represent
approximately two-thirds of a wide (3 7 mm. ) strap or belt have
vestiges and impressions of conchas. The best preserved example (Fig.
2, I ) ha s part of a metal shank still lashed onto the belt. Curiously,
a piece of cloth was placed between the concha and the belt. This
suggests that the large silver conch 2s of type VII were worn on this
belt. The strap fragments have numerous perforations as well as
circular impressions evidently made by conchas (Fig. 2, J).
Textiles (Figs. 1, G, H ; 5, E-G ) . With one exception (Fig. 5, G),
the 98 textile fragments are of weaves and fabrics (Table 2 ) which
indicate a commercial origin. Most are badly stained, and all are so
fragmentary that it is impossible to reco~'lstruct the kinds of garments
represented.
TABLE 2
Textiles
);1i.

Fnb1·ic

'Vea,·e

D ccorntion

4

cotton
cotton

plain
plain

none
non::

3

cotton

twill

none

cotton

plain

cotton
cotton
wool
wool

plain
plain
twill
plain

possibly
printed
none
printed
none
none

wool
wool

twill
twill

none
none

wool
wool
cotton, wool,
bast fiber

twill
twill

uncertain
none

twill

cotton dyed

of pieces

6
6
2

24

2

5
7

36

Hemarks

1 with jingles attached;
3 copper stained.
1 copper stained ;
1 with stitching.
Attached to dressed
animal skin fragment.
Stitching present
1 stitch ed
1 has leath er strip
attached, possibly used
to secure an ornament.
Have traces or
impressions of buttons

Probably of native
manufacture

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Although obtained from whites, presumably by trade, several pieces
show native modification. These include three pieces sewed onto
dressed animal skin, one fragment with jingles attached (Fig. 1, K) ,
and five pieces with traces or impressions of buttons (Fig. 1, G ).
The one fragment evidently of native manufacture (Fig. 5, G )
consists of a narrow band, blue and white striped, from which dangles
a fringe (the warp elements). The weft (horizontal elements) is of a
coarse cotton, while the warp (vertical elements) is of an unidentified
bast fiber. Only the weft has been dyed. Sewed onto the upper part of
this piece are bits of cotton and wool cloth, possibly indicating that it
was once attached to the base of a coat.
Leather pouch (Fig. 2, F). Thirty-one pieces of leather can be
identified as parts of a small pouch. Although it cannot be completely
restored, the larger pieces indicate that it was approximately 75 mm.
long and 60 mm. wide. Stitch holes around the edges of the pouch
and the flap vary somewhat in size and spacing, suggesting that it was
hand-sewn. On the flap are two perforations which contain traces of a
narrow strip of metal and which were evidently for the attachment
of a concha. In addition to these perforations, there are two holes in
the crease of the flap, probably for a piece of cordage or strip of leather
which was used to lash the pouch to a belt. Heavy vermilion stains on
the interior surfaces clearly indicate the former contents of the pouch.
Scabbards or leather cases (Fig. 5, C, D ) . Remains of four small
leather scabbards, one of which is nearly complete, were recovered.
Two are covered with parallel rows of impressions undoubtedly made
by tiny seed beads (Fig. 5, D ). The others apparently were undecorated. One specimen (Fig. 5, D ) still has intact portions of a wooden
handle and iron blade of a small, narrow knife or stiletto. The nearly
complete scabbard is 22 mm. wide and 65 mm. long. The others range
from 15 to 32 mm. wide; lengths could not be determined.
Dressed animal skin (Fig. 2, G, H). Besides the many textile
fragments from the site, there are 24· pieces of dressed hide, possibly
deer. Seven pieces are large enough to suggest that they were moccasin
or garment fragments. One of these (Fig. 2, H ), which is more fully
described above, still has attached a band of tiny, simple seed beads.
A second fragment (Fig. 2, G) has impressions made by a brass hawk
bell and, less certainly, a concha.
In addition to these fragments, there are 18 narrow, fragmentary
strips of dressed skin. Some may be from a fringe, while others
may have been used in securing objects to clothing and horse
paraphernalia.

105

WHITE SITE

8

D

c

F

0
I

zI

4
I

6
I

CM

Fig . 5. A, restored bugle; 8, silver name plate for bugle(?); C, nearly complete scabbard;
D, scabbard and stiletto fragment; E-G, textile fragments. Scale of A 1h that of other objects .

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Cordage. Three differents kinds of cordage are in the collection.
l\!Iost numerous-16 pieces- is two-ply, S-spun, Z-twist fiber cordage.
The other two types are both one-ply. One, represented by two fragments, is of fine hair, possibly human. It is S-spun. The other one-ply
cordage, also represented by two fragments, is S-spun and is made
from a soft fiber (cotton? ) .
Bugle (Fig. 5, A ). Probably a late 19th century military (infantry? ) instrument, this restored bugle, or more strictly speaking
trumpet, is made of light sheet brass. The mouthpiece is missing and
the bell is only partially complete. Without the mouthpiece, the bugle
is 83 cm. long. The tube, which curves twice, varies in diameter from
11 mm. to an estimated 120 mm. across the bell. Tiny bits of cloth still
adhering to the edges of the bell, as well as textile impressions visible
on the surface of the tube, suggest that the bugle was wrapped in a
blanket or piece of cloth when placed in the grave.
In addition to the bugle there is a small, curved silver plate (Fig. 5,
B) which fits the con tours of the tube and which may have been
intended as a name plate. However, it has no marking on it. Perhaps
the bugle was issued directly from a military store to an Indian.
Of the Southern Plains Indians, the Kiowa appear to have made
most effective use of the bugle. During one battle, for instance, a
Kiowa is reputed to have befuddled attacking soldiers by blowing
calls opposite from those of the troop bugler (Mooney, 1898 :
316- 317 ).

Faunal Remains
Since the White Site is primarily a burial site it is not surprising that
animal bones are not numerous. Only two forms , deer (or possibly
antelope ) and horse, can be recognized (Gerald Raun, personal communication ) . The deer ( ?) bones are few-at the most four-and may
be intrusive, or may be remains of a food offering. Horse bones,
largely vertebrate and rib fragments , are more common; none the
less, the skeleton is far from complete.
Although the horse is a contemporary species, there can be little
doubt that it was associated with the burial. Strong evidence for such
is derived from the many pieces of riding gear, especially saddle and
bridle fragments, found at the site. Sacrificing of horses and horse
trappings at the time of inhumation was a widespread Plains Indians
custom (Ewers, 1955: 286 ) . Specifically, in the southern Plains it is
reported for the Comanche, Kiowa, and Wichita (ibid. ). It is interesting to note that the horse was fairly young, probably between 2 and 3

107

WHITE SITE

years of age at the time of death. P erhaps a young animal, one similar
in age to the child, was intentionally selected for sacrifice.

Horse Trappings
Bit (Fig. 6, C). Although badly rusted and only partially complete,
this iron bit can easily be recognized. It is of the curb type; i.e. , the
mouthpiece is unjoined and has in the center a high port or curve.
The cheek-bars are not complete, b~1t still have attached fragments of
the curb chain-the strap which passed under the horse's lower jaw.
A similar, though not identical bit in the Texas Memorial Museum
collections (TMM-1-362-36 ) is identified as being of an Army style.
It is possible, perhaps even likely, that this one is also a military bit.
Other military items recognized in the ·w hite Site collection include
brass buttons and, less certainly, a bugle.
M etal rings (Fig. 6, A, B) . Nine, heavy iron rings, varying in
diameters from 35 to about 100 mm. , are very likely saddle and bridle
parts. Three smaller ones, 35 to 52 mm. in diameter, are probably rein
and ch eek-strap rings from the bridle. The larger ones, on the other
hand, may be from riggings on the saddle.
M etal buckles (Fig. 6, D ) . Three complete, but badly rusted iron
buckles were recovered. One is rectangular-shaped and two are nearly
D -shaped. The tongue in each case is attached to one end. Inside
m easurements vary from 15 to 20 mm., to 16 by 26 mm. These
buckles were probably attached to straps between 20 and 26 mm.
wide. They could have been part of the bridle, but, admittedly, could
also have come from a belt.
Saddle (Fig. 6, E-H ). Although for from complete, a saddle is indicat ed by a n umber of leather and wood fragments . Specifically, those
parts which can be recognized include the horn, wood from the tree,
bits-including tooled fragments- of leather from the sa ddle covering.
Other, less confidently identified parts, such as iron rings and strap
fragments, have been listed and described separately.
The horn is especially interesting, as it is capped with a thin sheet
of copper (Fig. 6, F ) . Edges of the copper sheet are bent down for a
distance of about 6 mm. around the horn. The copper cap was secured
by means of nails, one in the center and an undetermin ed number
(only one is still intact ) along the bent sides. The horn itself, which
consists of a poorly preserved wooden piece covered with leather, is
83 mm. in diameter.
All 5 pieces of wood from the tree are in poor condition, and none

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0
I

2
I

4
I

CM

6
I

8
I

WHITE SITE

109

can be assigned to a specific part of the saddle. The largest fragment
is illustrated in Fig. 6, E . The wood has not been identified, but it is
very soft. The more numerous leath er fragments ( 4 7 pieces) from the
saddh are also difficult to relate to specific parts. However, the 22
tooled pieces may be from the skirt or sweat guards. Undecorated ones
are more likely from the pommel and cantle. The tooled designs are,
in general, floral patterns. Typical examples are shown in Fig. 6, G, H.
In addition to the leather fragments there are two upholstery tacksone apparently of iron, the other of brass-and 12 small iron nails.
Both the tacks and the nails were probably used to attach the leather
padding and covering to the saddle tree. One nail (Fig. 6, J ), in fact,
still has bits of wood adhering to the shaft.
Rivets (Fig. 6, K, L ) . The six copper rivets range from 7 to 10 mm.
in length and from 10 to 12 mm. in diameter across the head. The
shafts are uniformly 5 mm. in diameter. Three rivets are still attached
to leather fragments, two of which are probable saddle straps (Fig.
7, A ). The third piece (Fig. 6, L) is more fragmentary, but may also
be from the saddle.
Nail and/ or rivet ornaments (Fig. 6, M ) . Seven disc-shaped specimens, all of lead, appear to have been hammered onto rivet or nail
heads and intended as ornaments . They are small in diameter, 11 to
13 mm ., and generally about 3 mm. in thickness. The upper surfaces
have stamped checkerboard-like decorations apparently produced by
a blunt implement. Impressions of rivet or nail heads appear as shallow, more or less circular depressions (about 8 mm. in diameter) on
the underneath sides.
Metal shank fragments (Fig. 6, N) . Thirty-six fragmentary strips
of sheet metal are remains of shanks or attachment loops which were
once soldered onto the back sides of conchas and strap ornaments.
They agree in every detail with the few found intact (Fig. 4, E', E" ) .
Most are of copper, although a few appear to be of brass. Ends are
always bent down and back so that the complete shank was rectangular-shaped. The sheet metal varies from 5 to 12 mm. in width.
Leather straps (Fig. 7, A-C, F , H ) . The numerous (68 ) pieces of
leather straps can be sorted into two groups. One group consisting of
45 specimens is narrow in width, 15 to 19 mm., and probably repre-

Fig . 6 . Horse t rapp ings . A, B, iron rings; C, bridle bit; D, iron buc kle ; E, wood fragment
from saddle tree ; F, saddle horn and coppe r cap ; G, H, too led leather from saddle ; I, upholstery tac k; J, iron na il; K, rive t; L, rivet still attached to leather frag m ent; M , ri vet o r
nail ornam ent ; N , sha nk fragm ent .

B

D

F

H

G

E

·.:; .. •)1;",1,.:,j,.t,,,,,;,i,lJ.,•/

-~

""',.-,.-,.-~

f
f.

"1~

t.~~­
f:
·i ·:
~.
f!@f,(,q,'iN!ll~V,~

..
''·'

'-1\J\

K
0
I

2
I

4
I

CM

Fig . 7 . leather straps and strap (bridle) ornaments.

6
I

8
I

WHITE SITE

111

sents bridle and rein fragments. A second type, varying in width from
25 to 35 mm., is more likely from the saddle girth and rigging straps.
Four specimens of the latter type are riveted together (Fig. 7, A );
this would seem to identify them further with the saddle. In addition,
four of the narrow straps have attached shanks or metal strips (Fig. 7,
6, F, H) which were used to affix them to metal strap ornaments.
Strap ornaments (Figs. 7, 8 ) . Among the most interesting and
elaborate objects recovered from the site are 22 metal, probably
German silver, strap ornaments. Although quite varied in form, each
one has, on the underneath side, solder scars to which shanks and/ or
strips of metal were attached. All but two of the ornaments bear
simple, presumably stamped decorations. On the basis of form, two
major types can be recognized. Twelve are narrow, about 25 mm.
wide, and have bent down lateral edges (Fig. 7, D, E, G, I-K ). The
remaining 11 are more difficult to characterize as a group, but, in
general, they are nearly flat and m ore or less rectangular in outline
(Fig. 8, A-H ) . The latter type, however, varies considerably in size.
The narrow strap ornaments can be further subdivided into three
groups, with four examples of each group:
1 ) L-shaped pieces with notched ends. These specimens are 74 to
76 mm. long and 65 to 75 mm. wide across the "L." In size and decoration they can be further sorted into two closely matched pairs. Decoration in all cases is restricted to the ends, with stamped zigzags and dots
predominating (Fig. 7, K ).
2) Slender, rectangular-shaped pieces which are notched and, with
0:1.e exception, decorated on only one end. In each case, the end opposite the notched one has soldered oPto the exterior surface a narrow,
tapered strip of metal, apparently intended only as adornment (Fig.
7, J). These four, like the ones above, can be divided into two pairs.
One pair is 101 mm. long and 22 mm. wide, and has two parallel rows
of vertically-placed zigzags on one end. The second pair is somewhat
shorter, 98 mm. long, and has two rows of horizontally-arranged
zigzags on one end. In addition, one member of the first pair has a
series of small, stamped zigzags around the metal strip.
3 ) Four specimens taper toward the presumed distal end, finally
terminating in a small crescent (Fig. 7, D, G, I ). Unlike the above,
these cannot be divided into pairs. All are similar in size: total length
of 115 mm., maximum width of 25 to 27 mm., and minimum width
( just above the crescent) of 4 to 6 mm. The crescents measure from
8 to 11 mm. across. The band-like decorations, usually confined to the
proximal ends, are unique in each case. One consists of two parallel

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rows of dots, another of two vertically-p laced rows of zigzags, a third
of a single row of contiguous circles, and the last of two rows of dots
between which is a row of circles.
Two pieces of narrow leather straps, one of which still has attached
a metal loop and another which has affixed a narrow metal strip, fit
perfectly into these strap ornaments. The manner in which the loops
were used is quite evident. The strips, however, are somewhat more
complicated, but were critical in attaching the strap to the ornament
because they prevented up and down movement. Both modes of attachment (see Fig. 7, E-H ) strongly suggest that the narrow ornaments
were used on a bridle, probably on the cheek straps.
Unlike the first type, the remaining 11 strap ornaments are more or
less rectangular-shaped plates. They are differentiated, perhaps arbitrarily, from the conchas largely on the basis of outline form. Metal
shanks, indicated by solder scars, were brazed onto the back sides and
provided the only means of attachment. All but two are decorated,
with stamped zigzags and dots being the most common elements. In
addition, most are partially or entirely notched around the edges. With
the exception of the two undecorated specimens (Fig. 8, G, H ) they
can also be divided into pairs. One pair (Fig. 8, A, B) is much longer
( 112 mm. ) than it is wide (maximum of 41 mm. ), is tapered slightly
toward the ends, and is notched along all edges. Another two specimens are somewhat similar to the above in outline, but are much
smaller ( 45 mm. long and 26 mm. vvide) , and have shallow notching
only along the lateral edges (Fig. 8, C) . A third, very closely matched
pair has rounded corners and a deep notch in the center of each edge
(Fig. 8, D). Less clearly paired are two specimens, one of which is a
rectangular plate with deeply notched ends (Fig. 8, E ) ; the other one
(Fig. 8, F ) tapers slightly toward the ends, and has a single deep notch
in the upper and lower margin, as well as numerous shallow notches
on both ends. One of the undecorated specimens (Fig. 8, G ) is almost
cross-shaped, with two wide ( 7 mm. ) but short (2 mm. ) projections
extending from opposing edges. The other undecorated specimen (Fig.
8, H ) is small, 44 mm. long and 26 mm. wide, and is tapered toward
the ends.
It seems probable that both types of strap ornaments were used on
a bridle. Similarly adorned Plains Indians (especially Comanche and
Kiowa) and Navajo bridles are well documented (Woodward, 1938:
36; Adair, 1946: 41-43; Ewers, 1955: Plate 6 a; Newcomb, 1955:
Plate 27; Feder, 1962: 71-73). However, when an attempt is made to
fit all 22 ornaments from the site onto a single bridle it becomes clear

11 3

WHITE SI TE

B

A

c

D

E

[]
.. ·.,

.

•

•.

=.

...
•

.

.

..

·:·

H

G

F
,

I

I

J

, '

K

L

M

N

4

6

8
I

CM
Fig . 8. A-H, metal strap (bridle) ornaments, type II ; J-K, arrow points ; L-N, dart points ;
0, portions of human skeleton .

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

that at least two complete sets are represented-a duplication not
observed in other horse paraphernalia. Careful matching of pairs even
permits a reasonably good sorting of the two sets. Thus, while the
precise arrangement is somewhat speculative, it is possible to reconstruct the general appearance of one bridle (Fig. 9 ) .

Fig . 9 . R>eonstruclion of bridle ornament.

115

WHITE SITE

Chipped Stone Artifacts
The seven flint artifacts and 21 flu.kes recovered from the site are of
unquestionable Indian origin. While they may have been intended as
burial offerings, it seems more likely, especially in view of the presence of flakes , that they are derived from a nearby-and probably
older-campsite. Most of the types represented, since they most often
occur in prehistoric sites, support this interpretation.
Arrow points (Fig. 8, I-K ) . The tbree arrow points are identifiable
as types Perdiz, Harrell, and Fresno. Only the Harrell point (Fig. 8, I )
is complete; however, fresher flake scars along the marginal edges
indicate that it was rechipped, possibly from the distal end of a dart
point or knife. It is triangular in outline form, has two side notches,
and a notched, concave base. It measures 29 mm. in length and 22
mm. in maximum width. The Fresno point (Fig. 8, J)-an unnotched
triangular form-has a pronounced concave base. It is 11 mm. wide
across the base. The distal end is missing, but the point must have been
approximately 30 mm. long. Least complete of the three is the Perdiz
(Fig. 8, K ) which lacks both barbs and the distal end. It probably
measured about 28 mm. in length and 20 mm. across the shoulders.
The stem is 8 mm. long and 6 mm. wide.
Dart points (Fig. 8, L-N ). Only one of the three dart points, an
Edgewood (Fig. 8, L ) can confidently be identified with a previously
established type. It has a slightly concave base, a triangular, convexedged blade, and an expanded stem. It measures 33 mm. in length and
21 mm. across the shoulders. The markedly expanded stem is almost
flush with the shoulders. One of the untyped dart points (Fig. 8, M )
has a convex-edged blade, barbed shoulders, and a parallel-edged,
indented base stem. It resembles Pedernales points, but is perhaps distinctive enough to reserve positive identification with that type. It is
44 mm. long and 24 mm. wide. The other unclassified dart point
(Fig. 8, N) is a large specimen, 55 mm. in length and 25 mm. across
the shoulders, chipped from quartzite. Edges of the blade are straight,
the shoulders lack barbs, the stem is faintly expanded, and the base is
slightly concave.
Flake scraper. The only other chipped stone artifact is a flake
scraper which has steep marginal retouching along both lateral edges.
It is 35 mm. long and 22 mm. wide.

Interpretation
The White Site, in spite of having been severely damaged by plowing, is among the richest nineteenth century Indian burials yet re-

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ported in Texas. In this respect it compares favorably with the Yellowhouse Canyon Site, a possible Comanche burial found near Lubbock,
Texas (Newcomb, 1955) . All objects recovered from the White Site,
with the probable exception of the chipped stone artifacts, are identifiable as personal possessions. They include a wide assortment of
jewelry, clothing, a horse, and horse trappings. Camp debris and
everyday domestic implements are conspicuous by their absence. This,
coupled with the concentration of material (within an area approximately 15 to 20 feet square ) , leaves little doubt as to the basic nature
of the site. The details of burial, however, are absent.
In view of the richness of the offerings, it is surprising and somewhat puzzling that the only human skeletal remains in the collection
represent a child, probably between one and three years of age at the
time of death. v'Vhile it is possible that other human remains from the
site are still in the hands of a private collector, the available evidence
-especially, the success achieved in the restoration of broken specimens-suggests that the child was the only individual buried at the
site. Since it was a common custom among Plains Indians for relatives
and friends to make offerings to a burial, all the objects recovered need
not have belonged to the child.
Almost all of the artifacts point to a middle to late nineteenth
century date for the burial. And, although specimens indicative of a
more specific age are lacking, it seems probable that the range can be
narrowed down to between 1860 and 1875. At least, the generally
excellent condition of perishable objects and marked extent of white
influence would seem to argue for a relatively late date, but one which
precedes the confinement of southern Plains Indians to reservations.
In the latter part of the 19th century, the Panhandle region was
dominated by the Comanche and the Kiowa, including their close
associates, the Kiowa-Apache. Either tribe could have made the burial.
The personal ornaments and horse trappings found at the site are of
types used by both groups (Fig. 10; Woodward, 1938; Wallace and
Hoebel, 1952; Newcomb, 1955; 1961 ) . Both also frequently sacrificed
one or more horses over the grave of a deceased (Yarrow, 1881: 99100; Wallace and Hoebel, 1952: 149-154; Newcomb, 1961: 172-174,
206 ) . On the other hand, the Comanche, as well as the Kiowa, preferred to bury their dead in high, inaccessible places, such as natural
caves or crevices. Perhaps in this case the urgency of disposing of the
body and the distance to the nearest relief in topography outweighed
tradition. At least, it does not seem sufficient evidence to indicate that
it was not a Comanche or Kiowa burial.

WHITE SITE

117

Fig. 1 0 . Photograph of young Kiowa boy, son of A'piatan, shows many of the personal
ornaments and horse trappings found at the White Site. Taken on the Kiowa Reservation in
Oklahoma in 1 893 by James Mooney. Photograph reproduced from Smithsonian Institution,
Bureau of American Ethnology Neg . 1 393 .

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Literature Cited
Adair, John
1946. The Navajo and Pue blo Silversmiths. University of Oklahoma Press.
Douglas, Frederic H.
1941. Main types of Indian Metal Jewelry. Denver Art Museum Leaflet, No.
104, pp. 14-16.
1951. Plains Beads and Beadwork Designs. Denver Art Museum Leaflet, No. 7374, pp. 90-96.
Duffield, Lathe! and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology
Series, No. 4.
Ewers, John C.
1955. The Horse in Blackfoot Indian Culture. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bull. No. 159.
1957. Hair Pipes in Plains Indian Adornment: A Study in Indian and White
Ingenuity. Anthropological Papers, No. 50, pp. 29-86'. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bull. No. 164.
Feder, Nonnan
1962. Plains Indian Metalworking with Emphasis on Hair Plates. American
Indian Tradition, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 55-76.
Ford, Grace Horney
1943. The Button Collector's History. Pond-Ekberg Company.
Lathrop, William G.
1936. The Development of the Brass Industry in Connecticut. Tercentenary
Commission, Yale University Press.
Mooney, James
1898. Calendar History of the Kiowa Indians. Seventeenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology, Pt. I , pp. 129-468.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1955. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 186-199.
1961. The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press.
Quimby, George I., Jr.
1938. European Trade Articles as Chronological Indicators for the Archaeology
of the Historic Period in Michigan. Papers of the Michigan Academy of
Science, Arts and L etters, Vol. 24, pp. 25-31.
Smith, Hubert G.
1960. Archeological Investiga tions at the Site of Fort Stevenson (32ML1 ),
Garrison Rese rvoir, North Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 19.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bull. No. 176, pp. 159-238 .
Wallace, Ernest and E. Adamson Hoebel
1952. The Comanches: Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma
Press.
W edel, Waldo R.
195 9. An Introdu ction to Kansas Archeology . Bureau of Ameri ca n Ethnology,
Bull. 174.

WHITE SITE

119

V\Tinfrey, D orma n H., editor
1960a. T exas Indian Papers, 1844--1845 . Published by the T exas State Library.
1960b. T exas Indi an Papers, 1846-1859. Published by the Texas State Library.
V\Toodward , Arthur
1938. A Brief History of Navajo Silversmithing. Museum of N orthe rn Arizon a,
Bull. No. 14.
·wool worth, Alan R. and W. Raymond vVood
1960. Th e Archeology of a Small Trad ing Post (Kipp's Post 32MN1 ) in th e
Garrison Reservoir, North Da kota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 20.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bull. 176.
Yarrow, H . C.
1881. A Further Contribution to the Study of Mortuary Customs of the North
American Indians. First Annu a l Report of the Burea u of American Ethn ology, 1879-80.
Texas Memorial Museum
Austin, Texas

