lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande,
Falcon-Zapata Area, Texas
GLEN L. EVANS

Archeological salvage work in the Falcon Reservoir area on the Rio
Grande of South Texas was carried on at intervals during the period
from 1951 to 1953 by the National Park Service in co-operation with
The University of Texas and the Smithsonian Institution. In the
course of this work a number of archeological sites were developed in
the alluvial terraces of the Rio Grande and its tributaries. At the request of Erik Reed, Regional Archeologist for the National Park Service and of other archeologists participating in the project, I made preliminary geological studies of these terrace deposits, with principal
attention given to those containing buried archeological material.
Until a more thorough study of the Rio Grande terraces can be made
in the reservoir area, I hope that this report will serve as an aid in the
interpretation of the late Quaternary geology and the human prehistory of the region.
A total of approximately 35 days , in 195Z and January, 1953, was
spent in the field. Most of the work was confined to localities which
could be approached by automobile, but some of the more inaccessible
arroyos were covered on foot, and the section of the Rio Grande between Zapata and Falcon was traversed by rowboat. My work and the
work of Hal Story, who assisted me for one week, was supported by the
Texas Memorial Museum. The Museum's participation was on the
basis of an informal co-operative effort in the salvage program. Special
thanks are due to Mr. Philip C. Royer, General Superintendent of the
Falcon Dam Constructors, who repeatedly gave valuable assistance to
our work.
Inasmuch as an extensive report being prepared by Alex D. Krieger,
former archeologist for The University of Texas, will include a thorough description of the physiographic and ecological setting of the
area, only those features directly related to the river's geological
history will be discussed in this report.

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Valley
In the Falcon Reservoir area the Rio Grande flows through a broad
valley developed in marine sandstones and shales of lower Tertiary
age. These strata dip northeast and the river, controlled by the strike
of the outcropping beds, flows in a general southeasterly course. The
bedrock consists of hard, erosion-resistant strata alternating with
softer, easily eroded beds. This condition has resulted in gentle undulations and low rock benches on the valley slopes and has had a pronounced effect on the nature of the river's channel. Bordering the
present channel is a series of low bluffs formed by lateral cutting of
the river into the flood plain and terrace deposits and occasionally
into the Tertiary bedrock of the valley wall.

Terminology and Explanation
The terminology that refers to deposits and physiographic features
formed by rivers and streams is not standardized and is not without
ambiguities. For this reason it seems best to explain what is meant by
some of the terms used in this report. The definitions are intended to
facilitate clarity. They are not offered as necessarily the best definitions, nor is it proposed that they be generally adopted.
Flood plain, or fiood plain terrace, refers to the lowest well-developed body of alluvium which is still subject to periodic flooding. In the
Falcon Reservoir area the flood plain is a nearly continuous, flattopped terrace having an average width of about 2,000 feet and average surface elevation of 28 to 30 feet above low water level. The term
bench applies to a discontinuous, narrow strip of alluvium bordering
the main channel and having a flat or scour-grooved surface that lies
well below the level of the flood plain. There are at least two benches,
averaging about 12 feet and 20 feet, respectively, above the low water
level, locally present along the Rio Grande. These benches are deposited during intermediate flood stages and are usually best developed
on the concave side of meanders and bends. It should be noted here
that the 20-foot bench appears to widen gradually downstream, and
is probably the equivalent of the main flood plain of the McAllenReynosa area. A comparable downstream development of the 12-foot
bench is to be expected.
The word terrace may be used exclusively in a physiographic sense,
or it may be used to include both the physiographic feature and the
underlying alluvial deposits. In this report, terrace surface and terrace

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

35

deposit apply respectively to the physiographic and lithologic aspects
of a particular stream deposit.
Inasmuch as some of the individual terraces are made up of two
distinct phases of deposits, and these phases may be separated by a
substantial time break, it is important to determine which phase is involved when considering the age of the deposit, or when attempting to
reconstruct the environment at the time of deposition. The two phases
to which reference is made are (a) channel deposits, and ( b ) highlevel flood deposits. Theoretically, if not actually, an intermediate
phase of medium-level flood deposits should also be present in some
parts of the terrace sections, but I was not able to identify such
intermediate phase deposits except on the relatively minor modern
benches.
Channel deposits are characterized by heterogeneous-sized sediments, mainly cross-bedded gravel and sand, with local clay lenses.
They are confined to the central and deeper parts of the valley in
which they accumulated and therefore normally occupy the lower
part of a terrace section. In the low series of Rio Grande terraces, with
which we are primarily concerned, channel deposits probably average
less than one-third of the total terrace section, but of course the thickness varies greatly from place to place.
High-level flood deposits are characterized by well-bedded, homogeneous sediments, consisting mainly of silt with subordinate amounts
of fine sand, clay, and humus. They overlie channel deposits in the
central parts of their respective valleys, but towards their outer edges
they overlap the older gravels and rest directly on bedrock. Although
there is a remarkable uniformity in the composition of the main body
of high-level flood deposits, local variations in both composition and
texture occur near the outer edges where tributary streams and slopewash have contributed sediments derived from the bedrock of valley
walls. Whereas the channel deposits represent essentially continuous
deposition and were subject to extensive reworking as the river meandered back and forth across its valley, the high-level flood silts represent intermittent, slow deposition, and show very little indication
of reworking by stream action.

Channel and Modern Sediments
At low-water stage the Rio Grande channel in the Falcon area consists of a series of rapids separated by long, deep water holes. The
rapids have formed where the river is cutting into the outcropping

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

edges of resistant sandstone beds, and the deep holes are cut into the
softer Tertiary strata. Gravel bars are forming against some of the
rock barriers above the rapids, and in several places have built up to
such an extent as to cause the river to divide, leaving gravel islands in
mid-stream. Clay muds settle out in the quiet water holes and in some
places overlap the up-stream edge of the gravel bars.
Modern channel sediments, then, consist of localized gravel bars
which accumulate mainly during high water stages when the current
is sufficiently strong to move the coarser pebbles; and fine grained
muds, mainly clay, which are deposited in the quiet pools during low
water stages. Sands and silts are for the most part deposited during
intermediate flood stages on the low, narrow benches or incipient flood
plains which border the river channel. Silts and some fine sand are
also being deposited during occasional high floods on the main flood
plain, and locally on the surface of the first terrace above the flood
plain.

Ttrtiory Btdrock

ldtoli.ttd erou uction showino Rio Grandt terrocu in tht fa lcon Atst rvoir area.

Fig . 1.

The Terraces
The physiographic relationship of the several Rio Grande terraces
recognized in the Falcon Reservoir area is shown in the idealized
cross-section (Fig. 1). Of these, the Reynosa is the only well preserved
unit of the river's high terrace system. The Reynosa is much older and
much more extensively developed than the other terraces, and probably represents a complex depositional history lasting through most or
all of one of the major Pleistocene stages. The other terraces belong

37

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

to a closely related series occupying the central and deeper parts of
the modern valleys of the Rio Grande and its tributaries. These low
terraces were formed during relatively minor sub-stages or intervals,
beginning in the late Pleistocene and continuing into the present.
As with other deposits, the age of terraces can sometimes be determined on the basis of their contained faunas, the extent of leaching
of their sediments, the degree and nature of cementation, and by other
familiar geological criteria. However, the simplest and often the most
reliable method of determining relative age of an individual terrace is
by its elevation in respect to the other terraces and to the bed of the
parent stream. In general, the oldest terrace of a series occupies the
highest elevation, and successively y ounger terraces occupy progressively lower levels down to the modern flood plain deposit.
The difficulty with this method of relative dating is that it is based
on an assumption that is not entirely true. And to the extent that it is
not true, serious errors can be made in dating terrace deposits or any
materials that may be buried within them. Partial exceptions to the
rule that a higher terrace is older than the next lowest in a series occur
where low terraces are separated by relatively small differences in elevation and exist on a stream that is subject to high-level flooding. In
such situations alluviation may take place simultaneously on two or
more terrace surfaces. Alluviation is, of course, normally much more
rapid on the lower surfaces, which are subject to frequent flooding~
than on higher surfaces which may be covered only by rare high
floods. Thus a thick section in the lower or middle part of a given
terrace deposit may represent the time equivalent of a much thinner
section near the top of the next higher terrace. Furthermore, the basal
part of a lower terrace may actually be older than the uppermost part
of the next highest.

-

. . . : : ':" ......

:.: .

HIGH L EVEL FLOOD DEPOSITS (Silt)

,-;..

.. ·.

....--: .

Oiogr am otic illustration of relat ion ship bet ween Ch annel and Hioh Level F lood dep os its.

Fig . 2 .

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

It follows that we cannot accept the assumption that a higher terrace is necessarily older in all its parts than the next lower terrace of
a series. When considering a related group of terraces separated by
small vertical intervals, a much more dependable rule is that the base,
middle or surface of a given terrace is normally older than comparable
parts of the next lower terrace, and younger than comparable parts of
the next higher member of the series.
The somewhat complicated interrelationship of stream deposits as
outlined above is well illustrated in the low series of terraces in the
Falcon area (Fig. 2) , and it must be understood if we are to properly
interpret the late geology and human prehistory of the area. At gauging stations in the general reservoir area floods have been recorded to
heights of more than 40 feet above the river's low water stage. Such
floods spread over and deposit sediments concurrently on the low
alluvial benches-which are incipient flood plains, the main flood
plain terrace, and parts of the higher Rosita terrace. It seems evident
that a similar depositional pattern has obtained throughout the period
of development of the low terrace series.

Reynosa Formation
The highest terrace preserved in the reservoir area is the Reynosa
formation, a very extensive silt and caliche-capped gravel terrace
named (Penrose, 1889) for outcrops at Reynosa, Mexico. This terrace
is best preserved downstream from Falcon Dam, between Rio Grande
City and Mission, Texas, where excellent exposures can be seen in
road cuts and gravel quarries along U.S. Highway No. 83. In the reservoir area most of the Reynosa has been destroyed by erosion and is
now represented only by widely separated gravel remnants which cap
ridges and hills at levels from 110 feet to 135 feet above adjacent parts
of the Rio Grande. The high position above the river, and vertebrate
fossils found in some of the gravel quarries, indicate that the Reynosa
is of middle Pleistocene age.
No special study was made of the Reynosa formation, since very
little of it will be flooded by the Falcon Reservoir and since it is not
involved directly in the archeological salvage work. It is of some
interest, however, that the Reynosa was the source of much of the
gravel that is present in the low series of terraces. These gravels,
which are still being carried to the river by tributary streams, are
preponderantly siliceous. A variety of brown chert is most common
and is everywhere the most conspicuous of the gravel materials. Agate,

39

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

jasper, and rhyolite porphyry pebbles are also fairly common. It is
noteworthy that quartz pebbles are Pxtremely rare among the gravels ;
and limestone pebbles, deeply etched by solution, are present, but
make up less than one per cent of the total gravel in the outcrops
examined.

Zapata Terr ace
The name Zapata is here used to designate the highest of the low
series of Rio Grande terraces in the Falcon Reservoir area. The name
is derived from the town of Zapata, which was originally built on a
typical area of this terrace. 1 The terrace is an important unit of the
late Quaternary geological sequence, and it contains a large part of
the buried archeological sites that have been discovered in the area.
The Zapata terrace is well developed and well exposed on both sides
of the Rio Grande throughout the length of the reservoir area, although it is, of course, breached in numerous places by tributary
streams and by meanders of the river where they impinge on the
valley walls. The terrace surface :is a remarkably flat plain, having
an average elevation of about 65 feet above low water level of the
river. The terrace base, which rests on Tertiary bedrock, has an
average elevation of about 30 feet above low water level. As seen in
transverse section, however, the terrace base is by no means as flat as
the surface, ranging from more than 50 feet above low water level at
its outer edges to as low as 12 or 15 feet above low water in the deeper
channel entrenchments in the central part of its valley.
Channel deposits, consisting mainly of gravel derived from the
Reynosa, make up the basal part of the terrace section and are best
developed in the more deeply entrenched part of the containing valley.
These channel deposits rarely extend higher than about 35 feet above
low water level. The presence of the extinct Pleistocene mammals,
Parelephas and Mammut americanum, at several places in the channel deposits, and the higher position of the terrace in respect to other
terraces of known post-Glacial age, indicates that the basal part of the
Zapata terrace is of late Pleistocene Wisconsin age.
The upper part of the terrace consists of 25 to 30 feet of light
grayish-tan silts which overlie and overlap the basal gravels. The silts
occur characteristically in thin, even beds which in some places exhibit
indistinct laminations. The type of bedding, the fine-grained and wellsorted character of the sediments, and the absence of apparent intra1 The town of Zapata has been moved to higher ground, since much of the
original townsite is now beneath the waters of Falcon Reservoir.

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sectional disconformities indicate that the main body of the silts represent intermittent deposition from shallow and comparatively slowmoving flood waters.
The silt section-at least in its upper part-is rich in archeological
materials, but faunal material is exceedingly meager in all exposures
examined. Land snails and river unios of several species occur in the
silts, and are commonly associated with buried middens, but these
forms belong to living species and at present have little value for age
determination. Some fragmentary vertebrate remains were found
(deer and bison ) , and these also appear to belong to modern species.
Carbonaceous materials associated with buried middens may eventually provide reliable radiocarbon dates for some horizons in the silt
section. In the meantime, a consideration of the nature and position of
the deposits seems to be the best means of approximating their age.
The silts were evidently deposited by occasional high-level floods, and
continued to accumulate while a new and deeper valley was being
formed. The upper part of the silt section-approximately that part
which contains archeological materials-clearly belongs to a later
geological sub-stage than the basal channel deposits. It would not be
surprising if the uppermost part of the Zapata terrace proves to be
several thousand years younger than the basal gravels.

Rosita Terrace
Remnants of a terrace occupying a vertical position below the Zapata terrace and above the main flood plain occur at several localities
in the reservoir area. The name Rosita, by which this terrace is here
designated, is derived from the village of Rosita in Starr County,
Texas, where the terrace is well developed and where excellent exposures of the full section of deposits are easily accessible. A brief
description of the terrace section has been published in abstract form
(Evans, 1941 ).
In the reservoir area most of the Rosita terrace has been cut out of
the main river valley by erosion of the later inner valley which contains the flood plain and low bench deposits. Some of the best preserved remnants of the terrace are found just inside the mouths of
tributary valleys where they have been partially protected from
lateral erosion by the river. In the exposures examined the terrace
surface has an average elevation of about 45 feet above low water
level. The base, which was exposed in only two of the localities visited,
was 10 to 15 feet above low water level.

41

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

The sediments in the upper part of the Rosita terrace are light tan,
well-bedded silts, and are practically indistinguishable from those of
the higher Zapata terrace. A thin section of channel-deposited gravel
is present in the terrace base at the outcrops exalllined, but exposures
are too limited to permit observations on its extent or range of
thickness.
No fauna of definitive value ha s been found in the Rosita terrace,
but archeological materials occur in some localities throughout the
greater part of its section. Quite possibly artifacts, and particularly
carbonaceous materials associated with them, may eventually provide
satisfactory dates for different parts of the deposits. At the present we
can be reasonably confident that the Rosita terrace overlaps in time a
part of the higher Zapata terrace and a part of the lower flood plain
terrace. Consequently it can be assigned to a sub-stage near the middle
of the post-Glacial period.

Flood Plain Terrace
The flood plain terrace is still in the process of active alluviation in
the reservoir area. That it may be approaching maturity, however, is
indicated by its appreciable height and width, and by the widening
channel bordered by rapidly developing alluvial benches.
The flood plain surface is approximately 30 feet above low water
level. The base is rarely exposed, but appears to be near the river's
low-water level. Where exposed the sediments are less compact and
seelllingly more sandy than those of the higher Rosita and Zapata
terraces.
Although the flood plain must have been forming during the latter
stages of aboriginal occupation, no archeological sites have been found
either on its surface or buried in its deposits. Quite likely any artifacts
which may be present are completely buried beneath flood deposits of
the historic period.

Royer Site
On the north bank of the Rio Grande and near the Starr-Zapata
County line the Zapata terrace is well exposed in a group of deep
tributary arroyos. Archeological materials are weathering out of different horizons in the upper 15 to 18 feet of the terrace section at
numerous places in the area, but none were found in the lower part
of the section. Several large excavations were made at selected locations in the course of archeological salvage work previously men-

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tioned. The deepest of these excavations was designated the Royer
site (41-78B9-17) by Joe Cason (1952 ) , archeologist in immediate
charge of the field work.

65'
60'

55'

50'
45'
40'

35'

1'4"'-S.;:,;ii'o,..;.;;..;.:.,~!'!:".'""""'

30'
25'

20'
15'
10'

5'
LOW WATER LEVEL-RIO GRANDE

o'

~ ·.

Section near Royer Site, Storr-Zapato County line.

Fig. 3.

The excavations are located near the outer margin of the Zapata
terrace, where the artifact-bearing, high-level flood silts, which constitute the upper part of the terrace section, rest directly on Tertiary
bedrock. The section shown in Fig. 3 was measured on the river bluff
about one-fourth mile west of the excavations. It was selected in
preference to the excavated sites because it shows the relationship of
the high silts to the underlying, older channel deposits. The upper silts
outcrop continuously on river and arroyo bluffs between the measured
section and the excavations, so that it is possible to estimate closely
the vertical position of the excavated middens. When allowance is
made for the apparent surface erosion at the Royer site excavation,
the deepest artifact horizon encountered should lie at approximately
the level of the 45 foot marker in the section illustrated in Fig. 3.
Other middens occur in the silts at higher levels and on the weathered
surface of the Zapata terrace.
It seems evident that a relatively long span of time separates the
deepest buried middens from those in the uppermost beds and on the
surface. The regular, thin-bedded and laminated character of the
silts indicates deposition from shallow, slack water that spread out
from the channel at the crest of high-level floods. Although we cannot
establish the frequency, duration and amount of sediments derived
from individual floods, we can be reasonably sure that flooding became

43

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

increasingly rare as the terrace approached its maximum vertical development, and consequently deposition must have proceeded at a
very slow rate.

Burro Site
An exposure of the Rosita terrace deposits containing buried archeological materials occurs on the east bluff of Burro Arroyo, three
miles northwest of Zapata, Texas, and 1,000 feet upstream from the
junction of the arroyo with the Rio Grande. The section at the Burro
site, illustrated in Fig. 4, shows the relationship of the terrace to the
arroyo bed, and the position of the principal buried midden.
The deepest midden, which was not excavated due to the excessive
thickness of overburden, lies from 24 to 26 feet below the somewhat
eroded surface of the terrace. Midden materials consist of hearth
stones, flint flakes, charcoal, and shells of river mussels and land snails
definitely in place in terrace silt. The position of the deep midden
leads me to suspect that it correlates in time with middens occurring
in the uppermost few feet of the Zapata terrace. There are also
archeological materials buried in silt beds near the top of the Rosita
terrace at the site. These high materials should be younger than any
midden materials occurring in situ in the Zapata terrace.
There are also remnants of the Rosita terrace with deeply buried
midden materials at other localities, as, for example, in the mouths of
two prominent arroyos near the Royer site previously described. For
those who wish to examine this terrace, however, the best exposed
localities are the Burro site and the extensive meander-cut bluff on
the Rio Grande at the edge of Rosita, Texas.

Tributary Drainages
The time available for field work was completely inadequate for a
thorough study of the geological and archeological sites on the many
tributary streams of the Rio Grande. A study of at least one of the
tributaries seemed desirable and the Arroyo Valeno was selected
because its lower reaches will be inundated by the reservoir and
because it affords many excellent exposures of terrace and valley fill
deposits.
Arroyo Valeno is the principal tributary entering the Rio Grande
on the American side of the reservoir area. It is an intermittent stream
rising in Webb County about 40 miles above its mouth and joining the
Rio Grande 3 miles southeast of the original site of Zapata, Texas.

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

42

Rosita Terrace

38

-

·-

~

J

1

1

. .J

34'

_

_ . _·_._._. . ..:_

.

_.

_.

30

1

26

1

22'

14
"1ffl'!""iiiio!ol;;l...........~.-.--~.;;;.;..,,~~I0

. . . . . . ..
. ..
. ..
. ... ·.
. . . ..

·....
...
..

..

. .
... Eocene
.... . .. .

. ..

. . ..

.

.

. ... ..
...
.. .

1

1

. ..

.

. .. 6'
. ..
Sandstone : : ·. . .. ·. . 2'
. ...
o'
..
•

•

t

.

•

•

•

•

•

•

Section at Burro Site
Fig . 4.

Field studies were restricted mainly to the lower 8 or 10 miles, which
is approximately the portion of the stream that will be included in the
Falcon Reservoir.
In its lower reaches the Valeno valley contains a broad, flat-surfaced
alluvial fill. The modern arroyo, which is a deep, actively eroding

45

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

channel, cuts through the fill into underlying bedrock and provides
excellent and almost continuous exposures of the alluvial deposits. For
the most part the deposits consist of highly compact, mixed clay and
sand, with local gravel lenses in the basal part. In some areas there is
a dark gray humus-bearing member making up the upper two or three
feet of the section. Secondary calcium carbonate nodules, derived
from leaching of the upper part of the section, occur commonly in the
lower part.
Although there is indication that at least two stages of deposition are
represented in the main body of alluvium, it was not possible to make
a definite separation except in favorable locations. At a few places
remains of the extinct elephant, Parelephas, were found in the basal
gravels. This indicates that the lower part of the alluvium is probably
contemporaneous with the channel deposits of the Zapata terrace.
Archeological materials occur commonly in the upper part of the
alluvium, and in one place, the Valeno site, were found at a depth of
11 to 13 feet. It seems quite likely that a comparison of artifacts from
the Valeno site might serve as a basis for correlation of the artifactbearing part of the alluvium with low terraces on the Rio Grande.

References Cited
Cason, Joe F.
1952. Report on Archeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season of 19512..
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society , Vol. 23,
pp. 218-259.
Evans, Glen L.
1941. Artifact Occurrence in the Seoond Terrace of the Rio Grande in Starr
County, Texas (abstract) . Bulletin of the Geological Society of America,
Vol. 52, No. 12, Part 2, pp. 1998-1999.
Penrose, R. A . F., Jr.
1889. A Preliminary Report on the Geology of the Gulf Tertiary of Texas from
Red River to the Rio Grande. Texas Geological Survey, Annual Report 1,
pp. 3- 101.
Midland, Texas

