lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

Lake Creek: _t\. Woodland Site in the Texas
Panhandle
JACK T. HUGHES

This paper reports the results of some initial investigations of an
Indian campsite with probable Woodland affiliations in the Panhandle
of Texas. The investigations were sponsored by the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum in the fall of 1952. The site is numbered A48 in
the museum records.

Location of the Site
The site is located on the J. Evetts Haley Ranch in the eastern part
of Hutchinson County. It is situated on the west bank of Lake Creek,
which empties into the South Canadian River about 4 miles southeast
of the site. It is near the center of the John Gibbs tract and is about
%. of a mile upstream from the ranch headquarters.

Natural Setting
The Canadian River has cut a valley about 15 miles wide and 500
feet deep in this part of its generally eastward course across the High
Plains. Both rims of the valley are bordered by extensive level plains
of Quaternary loess (the Panhandle formation). The long slopes on
both sides of the valley are Tertiary sediments (the Ogallala formation ) dissected by many tributary streams, of which Lake Creek is
typical. At the mouths of these creeks, their floodplains of Quaternary
alluvium merge with the broader floodplains bordering the wide sandclogged channel of the river. Spurs of Permian redbeds (the Quartermaster formation ) , held up by a resistant dolomite layer (the Alibates
member ) , extend into the river floodplains at intervals.
Winter and summer, this semi-arid land has prevailingly pleasant
weather, bright and mild-but subject to sudden violent storms of
wind, dust, rain, hail, or snow.
Above all, this is grass country-on uplands, slopes, and lowlands.

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The uplands are treeless. Rougher parts of the slopes are sprinkled
with junipers. Cottonwoods and several other kinds of deciduous trees
and shrubs are clustered along the ·wetter parts of the stream valleys.
Chief game animals were the gr2zing bison and antelope of the
grasslands, and the browsing deer of the woodlands. Although faunal ,
floral, and mineral resources are lirnited in variety, most of the elements present in this environment were eminently useful to primitive
man for food and fuel, tools, clothes, and shelters.

Historical Background
In historic times this stretch of the Canadian valley was a favorite
wintering ground of the Comanche and their allies. In a creek valley
some three miles east of the Lake Creek site are the remains of Adobe
Fort, which was built before 1840 by William Bent for trade with the
Comanche, Kiowa, and Apache (Grinnell, 1923: 42--44 ). In November, 1864, a strong cavalry force from New Mexico under Col. Kit
Carson found the winter villages of these tribes, with some Cheyenne
and Arapaho, near the ruins of the fort. The troops burned one village,
but barely escaped encirclement, and retreated under continual harassment. Ten years later, in June, 1874, a second battle took place at
some sod houses near the ruins of the fort, when a small party of
buffalo hunters withstood repeated attacks by a large number of
Comanche, Kiowa, and Cheyenne.

Description of the Site
The Lake Creek site occupies n small bench between the main
stream to the east and a tributary draw to the south. The east and
south sides of the bench are steeply eroded slopes about 20 feet high.
Along the base of these cutbanks are bogs fed by seep water.
The bench is capped by a deposit of eolian sand several feet thick,
which forms a gently rounded surface about an acre in area. The
bench top rises gradually toward the northwest to merge with the
valley slope, and is overgrown with grass, sage, and yucca. The edge
of the marshy floodplain below the bench is tree-covered. The southern
slope of the bench has a small plum thicket. Wildlife, notably deer and
turkey, is still plentiful around the site.
Cultural remains are strewn over the upper parts of the cutbanks
around the southeastern corner of the bench. They are especially
abundant along the southern edge of the bench, where the sand is

67

LAKE CREEK SITE

darkened with soot and contains charcoal, burned rocks, flint chips,
animal bone fragments, and a variety of artifacts.

Investigations
The site was first visited on the afternoon of Friday, October 3,
1952. A brief inspection produced a small sample of artifacts, and
indicated the desirability of further surface searching coupled with
some exploratory trenching. With the able assistance of Mr. Curtis
Tunnell, then a student at West Texas State College, some additional
work was accomplished in the following November, from Friday 14
through Sunday 16. I am much indebted to the owner, Mr. Haley,
the noted rancher-historian, for guiding me to the site, for giving me
permission to excavate, and for providing the generous hospitality of
his ranch during the work.
A test trench was staked out at a place near the eastern edge of the
site where a concentration of pottery had been found, although the
southern edge looked more promising otherwise. The trench was 15
feet long in a northeast-southwest direction, averaging about five feet
wide, bounded on the east by the irregular edge of the bench and on
the west by a line roughly parallel to the edge.
The trench was excavated to a depth of 30 inches, in five 6-inch
levels parallel to the slight southward slope of the surface. Each level
was removed with trowels and shovels, the earth being passed through
a Yz-inch screen . Except for flint chips and burned rocks, all cultural
materials found on the screen were saved and sacked according to the
level from which they came.

Stratigraphy
The surface of the test trench produced only a few burned rocks,
evidently representing a disturbed hearth, and indicating a final
occupation of the site that was very light, at least in the area tested.
The 0 to 6-inch level was brownish humic sand. The site probably
was not occupied during its deposition. This level was practically
sterile, producing only two specimens. These probably were intrusive
from above or below by means of trampling, burrows, roots, or other
kinds of disturbance.
The 6 to 12-inch level was the same brownish humic sand as the
overlying level, except toward the south end of the trench, where the
sand became less humic and more yellowish, and all along the bottom

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the level, where a dark sooty sand with occasional burned rocks
and flint chips marked the top of an occupational zone. Nine specimens were collected from the 6 to 12-inch level, but most of these
came from the dark sooty sand at the bottom of the level. This level,
like the overlying one, probably was not occupied during deposition.
The 12 to 18-inch level was the same dark sooty sand of the occupational zone that appeared at the bottom of the overlying level. Here
and there in the 12 to 18-inch level were clusters of three or four
burned rocks and small patches of soot. This level produced 22 specimens.
The 18 to 24-inch level was similar in all respects to the overlying
level, except that in some places a yellowish limey sand appeared at
the bottom of the level, especially toward the northern end of the
trench. The 18 to 24-inch level produced 13 specimens.
The 24 to 30-inch level was the same yellowish limey sand that
appeared at the bottom of the overlying level, except toward the
southern end of the trench, where the top of the level had some remnants of the dark sooty sand of the occupational zone. The 24 to 30inch level probably was not occupied during deposition. It was essentially sterile. Most of the five specimens found in it came from the
dark sooty sand at the top of the level.
In summary, the test trench revealed a rather simple stratigraphy:
1) at the surface, scant traces of a brief occupation; 2) below the
surface, a sterile layer of brownish humic sand about 12 inches thick;
3) in the middle, a zone of dark sooty sand, ranging from about 10
inches thick at the northern end of the trench to about 14 inches thick
at the southern end, heavily occupied without detectable hiatus for a
considerable period; 4) at the bottom, a sterile layer of yellowish
limey sand, of undetermined thickness.
By inference, an important occupation of the test area seems to
have been followed, after a period of abandonment, by a very minor
occupation. The 49 specimens found below the 0 to 6-inch level probably represent the earlier occupation; the two items found in this
level (a snub-nosed end scraper, #105 , and a bison limb bone fragment, # 106 ) probably represent the later occupation.

Collections
In all, 154 items were collected at the Lake Creek site, of which 103
came from the general surface, and 51 from the test trench. These
specimens are described under the following headings : pottery, pro-

69

LAKE CREEK SITE

jectile points, knives, scrapers, gravers, blade, chopper, chopperhammer, hammer, cores, manos, grinding slabs, bone bead, and animal
remains. In the descriptions the numbers given in parentheses are the
catalog numbers of the specimens. If a specimen came from the test
trench, its level is added; if it came from the general surface, no
provenience is given.
For the 53 objects of chipped stone, the probable source of the
material is usually indicated. Most of these objects ( 45) are Alibates
flint; one is Tecovas flint; one is Edwards flint; and six are miscellaneous rocks of indeterminate origin. The Alibates flint probably
came from the Alibates dolomite member of the Quartermaster formation of uppermost Permian age. Silicified zones in the Alibates
dolomite outcrop at several places on both sides of the Canadian River
north of Amarillo. The Tecovas flint probably came from the Tecovas
formation of upper Triassic age, which contains siliceous lenses outcropping in numerous places along the eastern Caprock escarpment
from Palo Duro Canyon southward. The Edwards flint may have
come from the Edwards formation of lower Cretaceous age in Central
Texas.
Although Alibates and Tecovas flints are not invariably distinguishable megascopically (Green and Kelley, 1960 ) , my geological and
archeological experience in this region leads me to believe that the
distinction generally is reliable and important enough to be worth
recording.
POTTERY

The Lake Creek site produced 48 sherds of two very different kinds
of pottery which may be characterized as corded ware and plain ware.
Corded ware. Most of the sherds ( 43 ) belong to a distinctive type
of corded ware. Except for one rim sherd ( #121 , 12.-18" ), all are
body fragments. Only seven of the corded sherds came from the test
trench ( # 113, 6-12" ; # 121 through 125, 1Z-18"; and # 149, c-12" ) .
The other 36 corded sherds were surface finds ( # 16 through 26 and
54 through 78 ) .
The outer surface of the body sherds is predominantly gray, ranging
from light brown to black. It show,. the marks of a cord-or fabricwrapped paddle. The cord impressions on most sherds are too indistinct
for the arrangement to be clear; on several examples they are rather
deep and coarse, showing a roughly parallel, widely spaced arrangement; on a few others (Fig. 1, a ), an open-mesh, fabric-like pattern
is suggested by additional transverse impressions. The inner surface

70

TEXAS ARCHEOL OGI CAL SOCIETY

e

j

9

,,

m

k.

I

()

w

v
Fig . 1 . Ariifac ls from the La ke Creek site . a-b , corded wa re; c-d , plain w are ; e-i, light
points ; j, medium point ; k-1 , heavy points; m, beveled kn ife ; n-p, pla in knives ; q-r, fla ke

knives ; s-u, end scra pe rs ; v, side scraper; w , fla ke scraper; x-z , gravers .

LAKE CREEK SITE

71

is similar in color to the outer, tends to be rather uneven, has small
cracks and pits, and visible particles of temper.
The core of the sherds tends to be darker than the surfaces. The
paste has abundant coarse temper of angular limestone particles and
rounded quartz grains in a bout equal proportions. The "limestone"
may be caliche or dolomite rather than ordinary limestone. The paste
is soft and lumpy, the edge of the sherd crumbling easily under the
thumbnail. Vessel walls were rather thick; measurement of 25 unsplit
sherds showed an average and m edian thickness of 11 mm. , and a
range of 7 to 13 mm.
The body sherds do not reveal much about vessel size and shape,
the largest fragment having a maximum dimension of 64 mm. Curvature of even the largest sherds is slight, suggesting big vessels; none
of the sherds shows the high curvature of a little vessel. That the
vessels may have been shoulderless is hinted by the absence of any
fragments representing a neck-shoulder junction. The possibility of
pointed bottoms is indicated by one body sherd ( #122, 12- 18") which
becomes thicker and more strongly curved toward one end.
The rim sherd ( # 121, 12-18", Fig. 1, b ) resembles the body sherds,
but gives a little more information o.bout form and decoration. It indicates a vessel having the upper part contracting gradually toward a
somewhat thinned and slightly everted lip, the outer surface of the
upper part being smoothed, and decorated below the lip with long
incised diagonal lines.
Although this corded ware may represent the same general ceramic
tradition as the Borger Cordmarked type characteristic of the Antelope
Creek Focus or Panh andle Aspect (Suhm et al., 1954, pp. 390-93), it
belongs to a different type as yet undefined in this region. The traits
of fabric-marking, limestone temper, shoulderless form, pointed
bottom, and diagonal-incised decoration all point toward an earlier
Woodland horizon.
Plain ware. A ceramic tradition quite different from that of the
corded type is represented by five plain body sherds ( #27, 28, 52, 53,
and 139, 18-24" ) .
The outer surface of these sherds is light brown to dark gray, undecorated, smooth and even, and sometimes has a few specks of temper
visible. The inner surface is similar but lighter in shade.
The core is dark brown to black. The paste is tempered with abundant fine angular particles of feldspar. The paste is compact and homogeneous, the edge of the sherd flaking with some difficulty under the

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

thumbnail. Vessel walls were moderate in thickness, one sherd having
a thickness of 5 mm. , three of 7 mm. , and one of 8 mm.
Curvature of all fragments is slight, indicating fair-sized vesselsthe largest piece is 64 mm. across. There is no clue as to vessel form.
Two sherds ( #52, Fig. 1, c; #139 ,18-24", Fig. 1, d ) have a repair
hole drilled near the edge.
This plain pottery closely resembles the so-called "brown ware" of
the middle Pecos River valley in eastern New Mexico (Jelinek, 1958).
PROJECTILE POINTS

Eleven specimens are classifiable as projectile points, representing
three mai11 categories- light, medium, and heavy.
Light points. Most of the projectile points ( seven ) are the relatively
small and thin kind usually regarded as arrow points. The light points
include ovate, triangular, side-notched, and corner-notched forms, and
unclassifiable fragments.
The single light ovate specimen ( # 2, Fig. 1, e) is ti pless, measures
? X 17.0 X 3.8 mm., and is milky Alibates. Points of this type (cf.
Young points) occur sparsely in several late complexes of this region.
One of the two light triangular points ( # 34, Fig. 1, f ) is complete,
has a convex base, slightly convex lateral edges (one edge has an accidental nick), measures 30.6 X 15 .3 X 3.9 mm., and is maroon Alibates.
The other ( #132, 18-24", Fig. 1, g ) is tipless, has a straight base,
straight to slightly convex blade edges, measures 17+ X 19.0 X 4.2
mm., and is maroon Alibates. Light triangular points (cf. Fresno
points) are not uncommon locally in several late complexes. The base
is more often straight or concave than convex.
The one light side-notched point ( #1, Fig. 1, h ) is complete and unusually small, measuring 20.8 X 9.5 X 2.5 mm. Unlike most light sidenotched points, maximum width occurs at the notches rather than at
the base. The base is also unusual in being convex rather than straight
or concave. The blade edges are convex, with small notches located
closer to the base than usual. Width between the notches-a possible
indication of foreshaft diameter-is 6.4 mm. The material is milky
Alibates. Except for the peculiarities noted, this specimen resembles
the Harrell point, characteristic of the Antelope Creek Focus and other
late complexes hereabouts.
The one light corner-notched point ( # 3, Fig. 1, i) has the tips of the
barbs and the corners of the base missing. It measures 25.5 X 15 + X
3. 7 mm. It was notched diagonally from the basal corners to produce

73

LAKE CREEK SITE

an expanding stem and pronounced barbs. The base seems to have been
straight; the blade edges are concave. Minimum stem width-which
may conform to foreshaft diameter-is 5.5 mm. Material is milky Alibates. Points of this type (cf. Scallorn points) occur locally in several
late complexes; they are not characteristic of the Antelope Creek
Focus.
Unclassifiable fragments of light points include a tip fragment
( #101 ) of maroon and yellow flint which may be Tecovas, and a
medial fragment ( #133, 18-24") ofmaroonAlibates.
Medium points. One point represented only by a stem fragment
( #4, Fig. 1, j) appears to have been intermediate in weight ( and
size ) between the light and heavy points often regarded respectively as
arrow and dart points. The stem fragment apparently belonged to a
corner-notched point. The edges expand from a neck width of 9.6 mm.
(foreshaft diameter?) to a base width of 13.3 mm. The base is convex.
The stem is about 10 mm. long. It is milky Alibates. Similar points are
found locally in several middle to late contexts; they are not typical of
the Antelope Creek Focus.
Heavy points. Two of the three heavy points are corner-notched; one
is an unclassifiable tip fragment.
One of the heavy corner-notched points ( #107, 6-12", Fig. 1, k )
is complete except for a missing barb. Diagonal notching from the base
corners gives a sharply expanding stem and definite barbs. Neck width
is 11.8 mm., base width 18.3 mm. The base is slightly convex and the
blade edges are straight. The point measures 33.5 X 22+ X 4. 7 mm. It
is maroon Alibates. The other example ( #5 , Fig. 1, 1) is a stem fragment that is slightly larger than the stem of the complete specimen and
more flaring from a wider neck (12.8 mm.) toward a wider base (19.8
mm. ) . The base is slightly convex. Material is milky Alibates. Locally such points (cf. Ellis points) characterize several middle to late
complexes, but not the Antelope Creek Focus.
The unclassifiable tip fragment ( #6) is pink Alibates. It may
represent a knife rather than a heavy point.
KNIVES

Eleven bifacially chipped flint artifacts probably were used chiefly
as cutting tools. Three main categories-beveled, plain, and flake
knives-are recognizable.
Beveled knife. A small tip fragment (#35, Fig. 1, m) of a narrowpointed, straight-edged knife of milky Ali bates has a right-bevel (when

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the specimen is lying on either face, pointing upward, beveling is visible on the right edge). Diamond-shaped, alternate-beveled knives are
characteristic of the Antelope Creek Focus and other late complexes in
the Panhandle.
Plain knives. Six knives are plain in the sense that they are not
beveled. Several sizes and shapes are represented.
One tipless plain knife ( #114, 12-18", Fig. 1, n ) of maroon Alibates is small, thick, and ovate, has a rounded base, and measures
? X 26.2 X 10.0 mm.
The basal portion ( #36, Fig. 1, o ) of a large, thin, presumably ovate
plain knife with flattened base is milky Ali bates.
Three tip fragments suggest plain knives of medium size. One ( # 7)
of translucent orange quartzite is medium thick with convex edges.
Another ( #150, 12-18", Fig. 1, p ) of pink Alibates is thin with
convex edges. Another thin tip ( #37 ) of maroon and milky Alibates
is crudely flaked, with straight edges and blunted point.
One plain knife of pink and brown Alibates is represented only by a
small piece of its thin convex edge ( # 134, 18-24" ) .
Flake knives. This category includes four flakes with bifacially retouched edges. One is pointed; the rest are unshaped.
One medium-sized flake knife of maroon Alibates ( #50, Fig. 1, q )
has a thin point with short bifacial retouching on one edge and longer
unifacial retouching on the other; the opposite end is wide, thick, and
unworked.
Three other flake knives of irregular outline are unworked except
for a single long bifacially retouched edge. One flake ( #40 ) of blue
and gray Alibates is small and thin with a straight worked edge. A
larger flake ( #145, 24-30", Fig. 1, r ) of maroon Alibates also is thin
and has a straight worked edge. The worked edge on another flake of
maroon Alibates ( #115, 12-18"), small and thick, is convex.
SCRAPERS

Twenty-one unifacially chipped flint artifacts probably served
mainly as scraping tools. Principal categories distinguishable are end,
side, and flake scrapers.
End scrapers. Six specimens are assignable to this category. Two
varieties-snub-nosed and thin-bitted-are recognizable.
Five incomplete specimens appear to represent ordinary snub-nosed
end scrapers of medium size and thickness. Three are bit fragments
and two are medial fragments. One bit fragment ( #41, Fig. 1, s) has:

LAKE CREEK SITE

75

a very steep, slightly convex bit; a flat dorsal face worked on both lateral edges; and retouching on one edge of the ventral face. It is milky
Alibates, measuring ? X 28 X 8 mm. Another bit fragment (#105,
0-6", Fig. 1, t) has a less steep, more rounded bit, and a low-peaked
dorsal face roughly worked on both lateral edges. Of buff Alibates, it
measures ? X 32 X 10 mm. Another bit fragment ( #9) has a heatdamaged bit and a low-ridged dorsal face with worked parallel lateral
edges, one edge being slightly worn. It is maroon Alibates and measures ? X 32 X 11 mm. One medial fragment ( #8) of maroon Ali bates
has a flat dorsal face with worked lateral edges expanding bitward. The
other medial fragment (#42) of gray Edwards is similar except for
some retouching on both lateral edges of the ventral face .
One end scraper bit fragment ( #47, Fig. 1, u) differs from the rest
in being thinner and narrower toward the bit than toward the base; it
is also smaller, measuring ? X 22 X 5 mm. The bit and lateral edges
form a worked parabola around the flat dorsal face. Material is milky
Ali bates.
Side scraper. A tabular flake fragment of smoky chalcedony ( #43,
Fig. 1, v), of medium size and thickness, with both ends broken away,
has one long, slightly convex edge dorsally pressure-flaked and retouched, and a short, straight, convergent part of the opposite edge
dorsally retouched. It measures 34+ X 29 X 10 mm. It could be part of
a peculiar end scraper, but seems more likely to represent a side
scraper.
Flake scrapers. Grouped under this heading are 14 flakes and flake
fragments unworked except for some retouching along one or more
edges of the dorsal face. The complete and broken flakes are of various
shapes; they range in size from very small to medium, and in thickness from thin to thick. Parts of one or two edges may be retouched,
varying a good deal in length of retouching, and in shape of the retouched edge, which may be straight, convex, sinuous, or rounded.
Except for one specimen, all are Alibates.
No. 10 is a small thick flake of maroon and milky Ali bates retouched
on two slightly convex edges forming a corner. No. 11 is a small thin
flake of maroon Alibates retouched on one convex edge. No. 12 is a very
small thin flake fragment of milky Alibates retouched on one convex
edge. No. 38 is a small thick flake fragment of milky and maroon Alibates retouched on one rounded edge. No. 45 is a small thin flake fragment of milky and maroon Alibates retouched on two sinuous edges.
No. 46 is a small medium-thick flake fragment of milky Alibates retouched around a corner. No. 48 is a small thin flake of maroon Ali-

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

bates retouched on one rounded end. No. 49 is a medium-sized thick
flake fragment of milky Alibates retouched on one convex edge. No.
108, 6-12", is a small thick flake fragment of maroon Alibates retouched on one convex edge. No. 117, 12-18", is a small thick flake
fragment of milky Alibates retouched on one straight edge. No. 118,
12- 18", is a very small thick flake fragment of maroon Alibates retouched on one straight edge. No. 136, 18-24", is a very small thin
flake of milky and maroon Alibates retouched on one convex edge. No.
137, 18-24", is a medium-sized and medium-thick flake of colorful
silicified wood retouched on one rounded corner. No. 151, 12-18", Fig.
1, w , is a medium-sized thin flake of maroon Alibates retouched on
one convex edge.
GRAVERS

Three unifaces may have functioned as gravers. These are small
flint chips of irregular outline with edges dorsally retouched so as to
produce one or more small beaks.
One small thin flake fragment of milky Alibates ( #13, Fig. 1, x)
has a single beak between finely retouched concavities near the middle
of a convex edge. A larger thicker flake of maroon and milky Alibates
( #44, Fig. 1, y ) has two beaks with retouched concavities between
them and on both sides, as well as a retouched straight edge on the
opposite side of the flake . One flake fragment of maroon Alibates
( #116, 12-18", Fig. 1, z), of similar size but greater thickness, has
two slightly concave edges crudely worked to form a strong sharp
point.
BLADE

One piece of pink and milky Ali bates ( # 39) appears to be the broad
thick tip fragment of a percussion-flaked blade or blank.
This artifact ( #110, 6-12", Fig. 2, a ) is a tabular piece of buff
chert, roughly trianguloid in outline, with one edge sharpened by
removal of a few chips by percussion from one face. Most of the rest
of the artifact is encrusted with a thick patina. It is small as choppers
go, measuring 69 X 65 X 27 mm.
CHOPPER-HAMMER

This artifact ( #79) is a block of translucent gray quartzite broken
away from one corner of a large stream-worn cobble. The broken face
is percussion-flaked at one end to produce a sharp edge, and the rest

77

L AKE CREEK SI TE

CHOPPER

Fig. 2 . Artifacts from the La ke Cre e k site . a, chopper; b, hammer; c, oval mano ; d , thin
mano ; e , b • vebd mano ; f, wedge-shaped mano ; g, thin slab ; h, thick slab .

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of this face is battered around the
111 X 77 X 55 mm.

·~dges

from hammering. It measures

HAMMER

This artifact ( #80, Fig. 2, b ) is a yellow-crusted stream pebble of
light gray andesite porphyry. The original tetrahedral shape of the
pebble is unmodified except for a battered edge at one end. It measures
105 >< 62 X 42 mm.
CORES

A polyhedral block of maroon Ali bates flint ( #51 ) the size of a
small fist evidently had a number of flakes removed from it by percussion. Two other fragments of maroon Alibates (#109, 6-12", and
# 135, 18-24") show percussion flaking.
MANOS

Twenty-one manos, only five of which are complete, may be sorted
into oval, rectanguloid, beveled, wedge-shaped, and unclassifiable
categories. As a whole they are small relative to the usual mano size
in this region ; only two or three approach medium size. Grinding
surfaces rarely show peck-marks. Materials are mainly sandstones
and gneisses. All materials are available locally: the sandstones occur
in bedrock and in gravels; the gneisses, other metamorphic rocks and
various igneous rocks occur in gravels. The finer-grained reddish
sandstones probably come from Permian or Triassic formations, the
coarser-grained grayish sandstones from Triassic or Tertiary beds.
Oval manos. Most of the manos ( 11 ) are of this type. Only two are
complete; the rest are end fragments, except for one longitudinally
split specimen. Most of these manos are small thick oval stream
pebbles, little modified except for more or less grinding on one or both
faces. The worn face is transversely convex, the convexity varying
from nearly flat to highly arched.
Six of the oval manos, all end fragments, are bifacially worn. One
fragment ( #84 ) represents the lar gest mano in the collection, approaching medium size for the region; it is a light gray to brown,
coarse-grained, hard gneiss pebble with one face slightly convex and
the other highly convex, the latter retaining a few peck-marks. Another ( #85) is light brown, fine-grained, medium-hard sandstone
with both faces moderately convex. Another ( #86) is a light gray to
reddish, fine-grained, hard gneiss pebble with both slightly convex

LAKE CREEK SITE

79

faces showing much wear. Another ( #119, 12-18") is brown, finegrained, hard sandstone with both frees moderately convex. Another
( #89 ) is light gray to brown, coarse-grained, medium-hard sandstone
with one face slightly convex, the other largely split away. The last
of the bifacially worn oval manos ( #111 , 6-12" ) is a red, mediumgrained, hard gneiss pebble with both faces moderately convex.
Five of the oval manos are unifacially worn. Two are complete,.
two are end fragments, and one is a side fragment. One of the complete
specimens ( #81 , Fig. 2, c) is a red, coarse-grained, hard gneiss pebble
with a slightly worn, slightly convex face; size is 105 X 61 X 42 mm.
The other complete specimen ( # 82) is similar except that it is a
reddish, fine-grained, hard andesite pebble ; it measures 95 X 62 X 37
mm. One of the end fragments ( #83 ) is a reddish, medium-grained,
hard gneiss pebble with a moderately worn, slightly convex face. The
other end fragment ( #102 ) is a light brown, fine-grained, hard andesite pebble with a slightly worn, moderately convex face. The side
fragment ( #87 ) is a light gray to brown, fine-grained, hard gneiss
p ebble with a well-worn , slightly convex face retaining a few peckmarks.
Thin manos. This group consists of one complete specimen and three
edge fragments which may represent a similar kind of mano. The
complete specimen ( # 30, Fig. 2, d ) not only is thinner th;m the oval
manos, but also is more rectangular and somewhat larger, approaching medium size for the region; it measures 108 X 78 X 30 mm. It is
a light brown, medium-grained, hard gneiss pebble. Both faces are
much worn, one slightly convex, the other moderately so, in such a
way that on both faces the crest of the convexity runs diagonally
across the long axis of the mano from upper left to lower right corners
(when either face of the mano is observed with the long axis in a horizontal position ) . The three edge fragments resemble this specimen in
thinness; size and shape are indeterminate. One ( #120, 12-18" ) is
light brown, fine-grained, medium-hard sandstone with two wellworn, slightly convex faces. Another ( #91) is similar except for light
gray color. Another (#90 ) is pinkish, medium-grained, medium-hard
sandstone with only one grinding surface, well-worn and slightly
convex.
Beveled manos. Two manos, one complete and the other essentially
so, are worn in a peculiar fashion. Both are small thick oval pebbles
of light gray to brown, medium-grained, hard sandstone. The complete
specimen ( #93, Fig. 2, e ) has one face steeply beveled toward both
e:ids by much grinding in such a way that a sharp crest runs diago-

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nally across the long axis of the mano from upper left to lower right
corners (with the specimen oriented as described above ) . It measures
94 X 61 X 54 mm. The damaged specimen ( # 31 ) has both faces
beveled in this manner, the form of the mano resembling that produced by cupping the left hand across the right hand. It measures
87 X 67 + X 38 mm.
Wedge-shaped manos. Two other manos also are worn peculiarly.
Both are small, squarish, made of brown, fine-grained, medium-hard
sandstone, and much worn bifacially so that one end is much thinner
than the other. One is complete, the other is a side fragment. The complete specimen ( #29, Fig. 2, f ) , measuring 84 X 83 X 41 mm., has
slightly convex faces with low crests running diagonally across the
long axis of the mano in the same direction noted for previously described manos. The side fragment ( #88 ), split from thick end to thin
end, has flat faces; it measures 85 X ? X 42 mm.
Unclassifiable mano fragments. A probable central fragment of a
mano is a small block of light brown, medium-grained, medium-hard
sandstone ( #112, 6-12" ) with one flat worn surface. A probable edge
fragment is a large chip of light gray, medium-grained, medium-hard
sandstone ( #92 ) with a flat worn surface.
Most of the manos from the Lake Creek site resemble those of
various non-ceramic complexes in the Panhandle more closely than
those of the Antelope Creek Focus, which are generally larger, thicker,
more rectanguloid in outline, and less aberrant in manner of grinding.
GRINDING SLABS

Ten grinding slabs are separable into thin and thick groups. The
thin slabs are sandstone, the thick are dolomite. Most of the specimens
are small fragments; only one is complete.
Thin slabs. Of the seven thin slabs, one is complete, three are edge
fragments , and three are central fragments. The complete specimen
( # 33, Fig. 2, g ) is rather small relative to the usual slab size in this
region, measuring 375 X 250 X 85 mm. It is brown, fine-grained,
medium-hard sandstone, oval in outline, with edges partly shaped by
chipping. Worn into one face is a long oval trough, rather deep and
narrow-140 mm. wide and 30 mm. deep. The trough has much
higher sides than ends, giving an open-ended effect. The rim of the
trough is worn flat near one corner of the slab. A slightly convex
portion of the opposite face also shows some wear.
The three edge fragments are worn more or less concavely on one
face only, and show no definite shaping of the roughly convex edges.

81

LAKE CREEK SITE

One (#97) is a large fragment 0£ a thin slab (maximum thickness
40 mm.) of light brown, fine-grained, hard sandstone. Its basin evidently was quite shallow. Another (#138, 18-24") is a smaller piece
of a somewhat thicker slab (maximum thickness 50 mm. ) which evidently possessed a deeper basin with a thin bottom. It is light gray,
fine-grained, medium-hard sandstone. Another (#96 ) is a small fragment of gray, fine-grained, soft sandstone. The slab was thin (maximum thickness 38 mm. ) , and the worn concavity suggests an openended trough like that of the complete slab described above.
Two of the three central fragments are worn on both faces. One
( # 32) is a very small piece of white, coarse-grained, hard sandstone
with one face worn deeply concave, the other worn flat; the bottom
of the basin evidently was very thin. Another (#98 ) is a large fragment of pinkish, medium-grained, medium-hard sandstone with both
faces worn very slightly concave. Another ( #94) is a small thin
fragment of light gray, medium-grained, medium-hard sandstone with
one flat-worn face.
These thin grinding slabs resemble those of various local non-pottery
assemblages.
Thick slabs. This type of slab is represented by a large end fragment,
a smaller corner fragment, and a very small central fragment. All are
white, fine, hard Alibates dolomite. The end fragment (#100, Fig.
2, h ) indicates a very thick slab of medium size ( ? X 220 X 105 mm.)
and subrectangular outline, with edges partly shaped by chipping.
The worn oval basin in one face evidently was more than 35 mm.
deep. The smaller corner fragment (#99 ) indicates a slab not quite
so thick with a basin not quite so deep. The very small central fragment (#95) has a worn and pecked concavity on one face, the other
being split away; it is grouped with the larger pieces because it has
the same composition.
The usual grinding slab of the Antelope Creek Focus resembles these
specimens in both form and material.
BoNE BEAD

A tubular bird bone bead (#140, 18-24") may be represented by
a weathered half-cylinder of thin bone, 17.2 mm. long and about 8
mm. in diameter, which appears to have been cut at both ends.
ANIMAL REMAINS

In the collection from the Lake Creek site are 21 unworked pieces
of animal material. Bison is represented by two teeth (#128, 12-18";

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

#141, 18-24" ); one limb bone fragment ( # 106, 0-6" ) ; six foot bones
( #14; #103; #127, 12-18" ; #142, 18-24" ; #143, 18-24" ; #152,
24-30" ) ; and two rib fragments ( #129, 12-18" ; #130, 12-18" ) .
Deer: one foot bone fragment ( #104 ). Jackrabbit: one tooth ( #144,
18-24"); one limb bone fragment ( #131 , 12-18" ) . A small unidentified rodent: one limb bone fragment ( #146, 24-30"). T errapin: two
shell fragments ( #147, 24-30"; #148, 24-30" ). Mussel: four shell
fragments ( #15 ; #126, three pieces, 12-18" ) .

Conclusions
The Lake Creek site made an uttractive camping place for small
groups of prehistoric Indians, situated as it is on a sm all bench very
close to spring water but well above flood level, in a sh eltered part of
a little valley with plenty of timber , game, and other r esources.
Present evidence indicates that the site was occupied long enough
for accumulation of an occupational zone about 1 foot thick; abandoned during deposition of about 1 foot of blow sand; and reoccupied
very briefly when the surface w as about as it is now.
The only items referable with much certainty to the latest occupation found at or near the surface of the test trench are a bit fragm ent of a snub-nosed end scraper, a bison limb bone fragment, and
som e burned rocks.
Found in the buried occupational zone in the test trench, and almost
certainly referable to the earlier occupation, are the following items:
eight corded sherds of Woodland ware; one plain sherd of Pecos valley
" brown ware"; one light triangular point; one medial fragment of a
light point; one heavy corner-notched point; one small ovate plain
knife; one tip fragment of a plain knife; one edge fragment of a plain
knife ; one graver; two flake knives ; six flake scrapers; one chopper;
two core fragments; one bone bead; two bison teeth ; four bison foot
bones; two bison rib fragments; one jackrabbit tooth; one jackrabbit
limb bone fragment; one small unidentified rodent limb bone fragment; two terrapin shell fragments; three mussel shell fragments; and
a quantity of unworked flint flakes and burned rocks .
It seems very likely that most of the rest of the collection, gathered
from the eroded edges of the site, also belongs to the earlier occupation,
although any particular item, of course, could as well represent the
later occupation. The surface finds could represent the Antelope Creek
Focus, or more broadly, the Panhandle Aspect, except for the following items which rarely or never appear in this complex: Woodland
sherds ; Pecos valley " brown ware" sherds; a light side-notched point

LAKE CREEK SITE

83

rather different from the usual Harrell point; corner-notched light,
medium, and heavy points; beveled and wedge-shaped manos; and
thin grinding slabs. Several traits most distinctive of the Panhandle
Aspect are lacking among the surface finds, chiefly Borger Cordmarked
sherds and ordinary Harrell points. The only artifacts in the entire
collection which have been considered diagnostic of the Panhandle
Aspect are the thick grinding slabs found on the surface.
Although it is not clear, therefore, whether the latest occupation
represents the Panhandle Aspect or some other complex, the conclusion seems inescapable that the earlier occupation represents a complex quite different from the Panhandle Aspect.
At present this complex, which may be designated the Lake Creek
Focus, seems to be characterized chiefly by a distinctive type of Woodland pottery associated with large to small corner-notched projectile
points. Full definition of the focus is not yet possible.
As for the temporal position of the focus , a few clues are available,
but much more work at the Lake Creek site, and at other components
elsewhere in the region, will be needed to establish the age of the
complex satisfactorily. The fact that the type component of the complex is buried under a foot of blow sand does not necessarily imply
much antiquity; many of the latest manifestations in the Panhandle
have a much thicker eolian overburden. Some light may be shed on
the age of the focus if further work at the Lake Creek site can determine the identity and age of the component which overlies the Lake
Creek component. Further work at the site probably would produce
enough organic remains for radiocarbon dating of the Lake Creek
component.
At present, perhaps the best indication of the age of the Lake Creek
Focus is provided by the definitely associated trade pottery from the
Pecos valley. According to Jelinek ( 1958 ) , the Pecos valley pottery
was being manufactured from aboc1t A.D. 950 to 1300.
A date well before A.D. 1300 is also indicated by trait similarities
of the Lake Creek Focus with complexes which are older than the
Upper Republican Aspect in the Central Plains and the closely related
Panhandle Aspect of the southern High Plains, since the Upper Republican Aspect is now thought to have originated as early as A.D. 1000
(Wedel, 1959: 570 ) , and the Panhandle Aspect as early as A.D.
1100 ( Suhm et al., 1954: 392). Similarities with the Woodland complexes which pre-date the Upper Republican Aspect are provided by
the corded pottery, which closely resembles Woodland ware in essential traits of surface finish, tempering material, and vessel shape, and
by the light to heavy corner-notched points. Similarities with certain

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

as yet undefined complexes of a late pre-pottery (late Meso-Indian
or Archaic ) stage of development which locally pre-date the Panhandle Aspect are provided by the points, and by the grinding implements.
Although Woodland pottery, and all other elements of the Lake
Creek Focus, are known from various sites in this region, nothing is
known as yet about the distribution of the particular complex 0£ traits
which constitutes the focus.
Use of local flint for most of the chipped stone artifacts suggests
that the Lake Creek Focus represents a group residing in this region
rather than one passing through it. All in all, the trait assemblage is
suggestive of a local complex which has passed from a late pre-pottery
(Meso-Indian or Archaic) stage of development into an early pottery
(Neo-Indian or Neo-American) stage, largely through the borro'<ving
of a Woodland tradition of pottery-making.
The general character of the pottery, the light triangular points,
and certain other traits indicate that the Lake Creek Focus ultimately
may be shown to have a place somewhere in the genealogy of the
Panhandle Aspect.
Perhaps the most significant discovery at the Lake Creek site was
the finding of Woodland and Puebloan sherds in clear association. This
is an important addition to the accumulating evidence of cultural exchange between the Plains and the Southwest at an early date.

References Cited
Green, F. Earl, and Jane Holden Kelley
1960. Comments on Alibates Flint. American Antiquity, Vol. 25, No. 3. pp.
413-414.
Grinnell, George Bird
1923. Bent's Old Fort and Its Builders. Collections of the Kansas State Hi storical
Society, 1919-22, Vol. 15, pp. 28-91.
Jelinek, Arthur J.
1958. Archaeological Materials from the Middle Pecos River, New Mexico.
Papers of the Michigan Academy ,of Sciences, Arts, and Letters, Vol. 43,
pp. 159-168.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 174.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
Canyon, Texas

