lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

IN MEMORIAM

George Charles Marius Engerrand *
A. P. BROGAN, J. G. MCALLISTER, AND T. N. CAMPBELL

Dr. George Charles Marius Engerrand, Emeritus Professor of
Anthropology at The University of Texas, died at the age of 84 in
Mexico City on September 2, 1961. His long career as a scientist and
teacher includes two disciplines (geology and anthropology) , three
languages (French, Spanish, and English), and four countries (France,
Belgium, Mexico, and the United States). He was known for the
breadth of his intellectual and professional interests, for his command
of anthropological literature, and for his magnetic personality in the
classroom. He had the respect of scholars, students, and laymen.
Dr. Engerrand was born on August 11 , 1877, at Libourne near
Bordeaux in southwestern France. He was of French Basque ancestry
and was proud of being both Basque and Gascon. He exhibited the
rugged independence of both but was too modest and self-effacing to be
typically Gascon. He received no formal secondary education but was
taught at home by private tutors who prepared him for the examinations required for the B.S. degree. In France at that time a B.S. degree
entitled the student to enter a university.
In 1895, at the age of 18, Dr. Engerrand enrolled as a student in the
Faculte des Sciences of the University of Bordeaux. After three years
of study in the natural sciences he received two degrees, a Licentiate
in Geology (1897) and a Licentiate in Botany ( 1898 ). In the early
part of his career as a student at Bordeaux, Dr. Engerrand's prime interest was paleontology. Then he read Topinard's Elements d'anthro*This memorial resolution appears in Documents and Minutes of the General
Faculty of The University of Texas, pp. 7805-7808. It was filed with the Secretary
of the General Faculty by T . N. Campbell, Chairman of the Special G. C. M .
Engerrand Memorial Resolution Committee, on November 18, 1961, and was distributed among the members of the General Faculty by the University Stenographic
Bureau on December 20, 1961. Its publication here has been approved by the
Secretary of the General Faculty.

George C. M. Engerrand

ENGERRAND MEMORIAL

3

pologie generale and acquired a new interest-anthropology. This was
further stimulated by the sensational archeological discoveries that
were then being made in the nearby Dordogne region. He also began
attending lectures by Emile Durkheim, the famous French sociologist,
who at that time was teaching at Bordeaux.
During his last year at Bordeaux the Dreyfus controversy rocked
France, and Dr. Engerrand aligned himself with a group of students
who spoke out for Dreyfus. He decided that he could not voluntarily
serve his term of military service until Dreyfus was returned from
Devil's Island. In 1898 he went to Brussels, Belgium, and never lived
in France again.
He chose Belgium because the great geographer, Elisee Redus, also
a Gascon, had invited him to teach at L'Institut Geographique de
Bruxelles. Between the years 1898 and 1907 he held various research
and teaching positions in Belgium, some of them concurrently. He was
a geologist on the staff of the Service Geologique de la Belgique and
eventually held professorships at a number of other Belgian institutions. During this Belgian period Dr. Engerrand published frequently,
and he became more and more concerned with anthropology. His most
important work was a book, Six ler;ons de prehistoire ( 1905) , for which
he received the Prix de Keyn from the Belgian Academy of Sciences.
He was much in demand as a popular lectun~r and became deeply
interested in university extension work, an interest he retained
throughout life.
His long dream of going to Mexico was realized in 1907 when the
Mexican government invited him to serve as a geologist with the Mexican National Geological Survey. In time he became chief geologist,
and his field work took him to many parts of Mexico. He always managed to do some anthropological work in connection with his geology.
In 1908 he was also made Professor of Archeology in the Museo
Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, a position he held
until 1914. For the year 1912.-1913 he was elected director of the
International School of American Archeology and Ethnology, succeeding the North American anthropologist Franz Boas.
Political revolutions made it impossible for Dr. Engerrand to continue work in Mexico, and in 1917 he left for the United States. After
teaching one year at the Gulf Coast Military Academy at Gulfport,
Mississippi, he accepted a position as Assistant Professor of Geology
at the University of Mississippi, where he also acquired an M.A.
degree.
In 1920 Dr. Engerrand came to The University of Texas as Adjunct

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Professor of Anthropology. In 1923 he was made associate professor
and in 1929 professor, a position he held until he became emeritus professor one day before his death. He became interested in the Wend
colonists and their descendants in Texas and published a monograph
on these people in 1934. He also received the Ph.D. degree from The
University of Texas in 1935. During the summers of 1943-1946 inclusive he was a visiting professor at the Universidad Nacional Aut6noma de Mexico. In 1959 he was awarded La Croix de Chevalier de
l'Ordre des Palmes, a French government decoration for distinguished
teaching and scholarly publication. At the time of his death he was
writing a biography of his friend, teacher, and associate, :Elisee Redus.
Dr. Engerrand is survived by his wife, five children, and eleven
grandchildren. In 1898 he married Alice Delsaute, from whom he was
separated in 1902. Two sons were born of this marriage-Elisee, now
an attorney in France; and Gabriel, who teaches at North Georgia College. In 1904 Dr. Engerrand married Jeanne Richard, who survives
him and lives in Austin. They have three children, one son and two
daughters-Jacques of Kent State University in Ohio; Jeanne, wife of
W. F. Helwig of the Department of Electrical Engineering at The
University of Texas; and Anita, wife of F. H. Gafford of North Texas
State University.
Dr. Engerrand's main contribution to The University of Texas was
his forty years of successful teaching. Over these years he taught a variety of courses, each of which was carefully prepared on the basis of
the latest and most reliable data. In the classroom he was dynamic and
exciting, and his students felt compelled to do their best. His wit, his
encyclopedic knowledge, and his cosmopolitan background made a fine
antidote for Texas provincialism. Taking a course with Dr. Engerrand
was, for most students, an unforgettable experience.

Publications of George C. M. Engerrand
Abbreviations
AMN
BMN
BMSA
BSAB
BSBG
BSGM
BUPM

E
EIS

Anales del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia.
Boletin del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia.
Bulletins et Memoires de la Societe d' Anthropologie de Paris.
Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie de Bruxelles.
Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie.
Boletin de la Sociedad Geologica Mexicana.
Bole tin de la U niversidad Popular Mexicana.
L'Essor.
Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir.

ENGERRAND MEMORIAL

EUB
HP
ICA
IGB
JMH
MSC
PIGM
RA
RGS
SHQ
SLB
SSSQ
VTB

5

Extension Universitaire de Belgique (pamphlets).
L'Homme Prehistorique.
Reseiia de la 2a Sesion de! 17° Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1910.
L'lnstitut Geographique de Bruxelles Publications.
The Journal of Modern History.
Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio Alzate."
Paregones de! lnstituto Geologico de Mexico.
Revue Anthropologique.
Revue Generales des Sciences.
The Southwestern Historical Quarterly.
Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux.
The Southwestern Social Science Quarterly.
The University of Texas Bulletin

Titles
1898. Note sur deux nouveaux affleurements du calcaire grossier superieur clans
!es environs de Blaye. SLB, Tome 53, pp. 33-35.
1898. Note sur un exemplaire du Gaulteria orbignyi trouve a Blaye clans !es
carrieres du haut de la ville. SLB, Tome 53.
1898. Note sur un nouvel affleurement de falun situe clans la propriete de M.
Piganeau, a Merignac. SLB, Tome 53, pp. 40-42.
1901. Book Review: A. lssel, Osservazioni sul Tongriano di Santa Giustina e
Sallello. BSBG.
1901. Book Review: Communicac6es de Direcc;ao dos Servic;os Geologicos de
Portugal, 1900. BSBG.
1901. Book Review: G. Rovereto, Illustrazione dei rnolluschi fossili Tongriani.
BSBG.
1901. L'Accroissernent du delta du Po au XIXeme siecle. IGB, Pub. 6.
1902. Book Review: C. de Georgi, Ricerche su i terremoti avvenuti in Terra:
d'Otranto dall' XI al secolo XIX. BSBG, pp. 216-226.
1902. Des animaux qui ne meurent pas. EIS.
1902. Le Quaternaire Beige. RGS, 712-725, 775-786.
1902. Les grandes decouvertes de Soignies. EIS.
1902. Un musee prehistorique. EIS, Tome 4.
1903. Book Review: G. Dollfus et Ph. Dautzenberg, Conchyliologie du Miocene,
moyen du bassin de la Loire . BSBG, pp. 146- 150.
1903. Demographie. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 86-91.
1903. Histoire du littoral beige. EIS, Tome 5, pp. 43-47.
1903. La terra a briques de Boom et ses fossiles. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 90-91.
1903. La collectionisme. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 48-52.
1903. Les boniti du monte Nerone par Tito Alippi. BSBG, pp. 69- 75.
1903. L'Etude de la mer. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 291-296.
1903. Notions sur !es premiers ages de l'humanite. EUB.
1903. Les premiers evolutionnistes. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 75-79.
1903. Un apotre. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 80-85.
1904. Book Review: G. Agamennone, Determination des bradysismes clans·
l'interieur de continents au moyen de la photographie. BSBG, pp. 29-38.
1904. L'Origine de l'homme. In: Six conferences sur !'evolution, EUB, pp. 14--16 ..

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1905. La prehistoire. La Patrie Belge, pp . 24-31.
1905. Los gigantes. Boletin de la Escuela Moderna . Ano 5, Num. 3, pp. 36- 37.
1905. Six lec;ons de prehistoire. Bruxelles. 263 pp. (Translated into Spanish, 1905,
as: Nociones sobre las primeras edades de la humanidad, Barcelona; also
translated into Dutch, 1906, as: De eerste tijden der menschheid, HobokenAnvers).
1906. Aperc;u sur les peuples de la terre. EUB.
1906. A propos de la grotte de Furninha. A propos de silex d'Otta. BSAB,
Tome 25. Also in: Communicac6es dos Servic;os Geologicos de Portugal,
1906-1909.
1906. La verite sur l'ile des Pygmees. BSAB, Tome 25, pp. xxx-xxxii.
1906. Les arts plastiques chez les peuples primitifs. EUB .
1906. Les eolithes et la logique. Bruxelles.
1906. Les geants, d'apres MM. P.-E. Launois et P. Roy. BSAB, Tome 25, pp.
xxxii- xli.
1907. L'Enseignement populaire en Belgique. E, Tome 1, pp. 1-3, 9-10, 25-27.
1907. Les phenomenes de la telegonie et de la xenie, sont ils inexplicables?
MSC, Torno 26, pp. 285- 295.
1907. Les variations de la taille humaine, le gigantoinfantilisme et l'acromegalie.
MSC, Torno 26, pp. 261 - 276.
1908. (with Fernando Urbina ) Las ciencias antropologicas en Europa, en los
Estados Unidos y en la America latina . MSC, Torno 27, pp. 81- 123.
1908. Las razas humanas. Barcelona. 201 pp.
1908. (with Fernando Urbina ) Un cote neglige dans le probleme de l 'education
- Algo que se ha descuidado en el problema de la educacion. MSC, Torno
27, pp. 181 - 223.
1909. (with Fernando Urbina ) Nota preliminar acerca de un y acimiento prehistorico ubicado en Concepcion (Estado de Campeche), acompafiada de
un resumen frances. BSGM, Torno 6, pp. 79- 87.
1909. (with Fernando Urbina ) Primera nota acerca de la fauna Miocenica de
Zuluzum (Chiapas) . BSGM, Torno 6, pp. 119-140.
1909. Note preliminaire sur un gisement prehistorique decouvert a Concepcion,
etat de Campeche (Resume extrait du Boletin de la Sociedad Geol6gica
Mexicana ) . MSC, Torno 29, pp. 27- 29.
1909. Una sociedad para el estudio del folklore chileno. MSC, Torno 29, pp. 413416.
1910. Etude preliminaire d' un cas de croisement entre un chinois et une yucateque. BMSA, 6eme serie, Tome 1, pp. 263- 265 .
1910. (with F. Urbina and collaboration of J . Baz y Dresch) Informe acerca de
una excursion geologica preliminar efectuada en el Estado de Yucatan.
PIGM, Torno 3, Num. 7, pp. 369-424.
1910. Informe sobre una excursion prehistorica en el Estado de Yucatan. AMN,
Torno 2, pp. 245- 259.
1910. La extension en el tiempo y en el espacio de la raza humana de Lagoa
Santa segun el Dr. Rivet. MSC, Torno 28, pp. 223-227.
1911. La organisacion de la Extension Universitaria en Belgica. MSC, Torno
31, pp. 67-72.
1911. L'Organisation des etudes geologiques au Mexique. RGS, 22eme annee,
pp. 602-607.

ENGERRAND MEMORIAL

7

1911. Programa general del Curso de Prehistoria. BMN, Tercera Epoca, Torno 1,
Num. 3, pp. 46-51.
1912. La huella mas antigua quiza del hombre en la peninsula de Yucatan.
Estudio de la industria de Concepcion (Campeche). ICA, pp. 89-100.
1812. L'.Ecole internationale d'archeologie et d'ethnologie americaines. RA, Tome
22, pp. 491-492.
1912. L'Etat actuel de la question des eolithes. RGS, 23eme annee, pp. 541-548.
1912. Nota complementaria acerca de los petroglifos de la Baja California.
BMN, Torno 2, Num. 1, pp. 2-4.
1912. Note sur deux enfants nes d'un chinois et d'une mexicaine de race blanche.
RA, Tome 22, pp. 122-125.
1912. Nouveaux petroglyphes de la Basse-Californie. RA, Tome 22, pp. 200-211.
1912. Nuevos petroglifos de la Baja California. BMN, Tercera Epoca, Torno 1,
pp. 197-201.
1912. Observaciones del Padre Marquez acerca del calendario del codigo mexicano del Cardenal Borgia ( traduccion del Italiano). AMN, Torno 3, pp.
165- 173.
1912. Preuves geologiques de ce que la partie nord de la peninsule yucateque
n'a pu etre habitee par l'homme durant l'epoque quaternaire. ICA, pp.
100-105.
1912. Un caso de cruzamiento entre un chino y una yucateca de origin indigena.
ICA, pp. 105-106.
1912. Une arme maya. HP, Tome 10, pp. 389-392.
1913. Book Review: H. Beuchat, Manuel d'archeologie americaine, avec une
preface de H . Vignaud. Isis, Tome 1, pp. 530-537.
1913. Discurso pronunciado por el Sr. Prof. Jorge Engerrand, el dia 20 del
actual, con motivo de la apertura de la exposicion anual de la Escuela
Internacional de Arqueologia y Etnologia Americanas, de la que es director. BMN, Torno 2, Num. 12, pp. 263-265.
1913. Estado actual de la cuesti6n de los eolitos. BMN, Torno 2, N11m. 8, pp.
150-160.
191 3. (with Trinidad Paredes) lnforme relativo a la parte occidental de la
region norte de la Baja California. PIGM, Torno 4, Num. 2-10, pp. 277306.
1913. lnforme sabre una excursion a la Baja California. BMN, Torno 2, Num.
8, pp. 149-150.
1913. La exposici6n de la Escuela Internacional de Arqueologia y Etnologia
Americanas. BMN, Torno 2, Num. 12, pp. 266-268.
1914. Les travaux de l'ecole internationale d'archeologie et d'ethnologie americaines pendant l'annee 1912-1913. RA, Tome 24, pp. 239-243.
1915. (with I. Ramirez Castaneda) Les simples destines a des usages medicaux
ou superstitieux vendus au marche de Zumpango, Mexique. RA, Tome
25, pp. 55-62.
1915. Lo que sabemos acerca de los primeros hombres. BUPM, Torno 1, Num.
14, pp. 65-68.
1917. Etude preliminaire sur les ornaments de coquilles des anciens mexicains.
RA, Tome 27, pp. 81-S5.
1917. Les mutilations dentaires chez les anciens Mayas. RA, Tome 27, pp. 488493.

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1925. The Teaching of Anthropology at the University of Texas. RA, Tome 35,
pp. 394-398.
1926. Book Review: H. H. Wilder, The Pedigree of the Human Race. SSSQ,
Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 84-85.
1929. Mexico (sections on geography, geology, population, and economics) .
Encyclopedia Britannica, 14th Edition, Vol. 15, pp. 377-386.
1931. Ethnology of Africa South of the Equator. University Travel League.
Cleveland.
1934. The So-Called Wends of Germany and Their Colonies in Texas and Australia. UTB, No. 3417. 179 pp.
1936. Book Review: Wendell C. Bennett and Robert M. Zingg, The Tarahumare,
An Indian Tribe of Northern Mexico. SHQ, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 248-250.
1960. Book Review: Eric R. Wolf, Sons of the Shaking Earth. SSSQ, Vol. 41 ,
No. 2, pp. 177-178.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
W.W. NEWCOMB, JR.

At the opening of the twentieth century modern anthropology was
just getting under way, a strange, unfamiliar word for a then amorphous science growing out of a maturing western world and from new
discoveries about the world and man. As early as 1836, Boucher de
Perthes in France had maintained that man had been a contemporary
of extinct animals, though it was not until more than twenty years
later that the stone artifacts of his proof were accepted by the scholarly
community of Europe. In 1859, the bomb of Darwin's work exploded,
reducing to rubble the fantasies of the medieval mind and leaving a
deep impression not only on biological anthropology but on all its
fields. Discoveries such as Pithecanthropus erectus in Java, the recognition of what Neanderthal man represented, and the work of many
men in all the countries of the West brought the new science into a
promising being by the beginning of the new century. George C.
Engerrand was not, of course, present at the birth of the new science.
Perhaps he should not even be called one of its pioneers, but he arrived
on the scene-it is difficult not to think of it as a wild frontier-just
after its boundaries had first been explored, and before its roads had
been built or its fields cleared. It was an exciting time to become an
anthropologist; to participate vociferously in its growth and to witness
its very considerable development over the next half century and more
is an experience shared by few others.
Engerrand came into the field of anthropology, as so many others
after him, from geology. His first published papers were in this field.
"Note sur un exemplaire de Gaulteria orbignyi trouve a Blaye clans
les carrieres du haut de la ville," " Note sur deux nouveaux affleurements du calcaire grossier superieur clans les environs de Blaye," and
"Note sur un nouvel affleurement de falun situe clans la propriete de
M. Piganeau, a Merignac" all appeared in the Bulletin de la Societe
Linneenne de Bordeaux in 1898. These brief papers resulted from a
reconnaissance of the D epartment of Gironde in southwestern France,
and he wrote enthusiastically of the discovery of new strata and their

10

TEXAS ARCHEO LOGICAL SOCIETY

fossils. Emigrating to Belgium, and positions as Professeur a !'Institute
des H autes Etudes de Bruxelles and in !'Extension Universitaire de
Belgique, his interest in geology continued. For example, h e published
a two-part review in 1902 of "Le Quaternaire Belge" in the Revue
Generale des Sciences. Part 1 is a concise summary of the stratigraphy,
fauna, and flora of Belgium during th e Quaternary. Part 2, entitled
"Les industries humaines," signals a new-found interest in prehistory,
an interest or rather a devotion, which occupied him until hi s death.
His conception of eoliths, derived from his mentor, M. A. Rutot, then
Conservateur au M usee d'Histoire Naturelle de Bruxelles, is here
found for the first time.
In the next several years Engerrand's interests ranged wider, finding expression in a number of Belgian publications. Some were unsigned and the soubriquet "Georgerrand" was often u sed in the
Encyclopedie lllustree du Soir. One short article, published in this
journal in 1903 and entitled "Histoire du littoral Belge" (unsigned ) ,
was a summary of the geological and cultural history of the Belgian
coast, with emphasis on the more recent past. Another of the same
year, "La terre briques de Boom et ses fossiles" (signed "Georgerrand" ) , told in part the tragic story of Arsene Dumont, as did another
entire piece, "Demographie." Dumont, one of the founders of modern
demography, was unable to pay his bills and for this reason took his
own life. That society should so neglect its needed and most able
members deeply shocked Georgerrand, and his biting criticism of it
is as pertinent today as it was then. Dumont had assiduously sought
the causes of depopulation then occurring in various French communes, and Engerrand was keenly interested in this phenomenon. It
should be remarked that Dumont was one of the first to ascribe multiple socio-cultural causes for such population changes, and he was able
to suggest specific factors responsible for the depopulation of certain
regions.
"Un apotre" ("An Apostle"), which briefly reviewed the life and
accomplishments of Boucher de Perthes, also appeared in 1903, as did
"Notions sur les premiers ages de l'humanite." This twenty-four page
review of European prehistory, published by the Extension Universitaire de Belgique, demonstrated Engerrand's marked talent for condensing the pertinent facts of prehistory into a relatively few pages in
a style the man in the street, or the people its author taught in the
extension university, could readily comprehend. The extension university also published " L'Origine de l'homme," one part of Six conferences sur l' evolution. This brief summary paper is composed of a

a

ENGERRAND IN EUROPE

11

series of statements of fact and belief, and deductions from these,
demonstrating that man is an anthropoid, that he evolved from nonman, and, finally, that his beginnings predate the Quaternary.
The productive year 1903 also saw publication in Encyclopedie
lllustree du Soir of "Les premiers evolutionnistes," in which the relatively new idea of evolution, which Engerrand fervently embraced,
was examined in historical perspective. Actually a review of C. Fenizia's Storia della evoluzione (Milan, 1901 ) , Engerrand recounted the
insights concerning life and the principles of evolution that had
dawned or almost dawned on the savants of the classical world. But
he rightly concluded "La verite ne se revele pas subitement clans les
esprits; elle se conquiert par de penibles travaux et de longues recherches. " ("The truth is not suddenly revealed in the mind; it is
conquered by intensive work and lengthy studies. ")
"Le collectionnisme," signed Georgerrand and placed in the Encyclopedie, also appeared in 1903. The vandalism of archeological sites
was a subject about which he had written before in "Le Quaternaire
Belge." The more recent essay could well be translated and inserted in
a modern American archeological newsletter, both for its pertinence
and because it is written vvith a dash and fire not often enough encountered these days. To him there were two kinds of collectors, those
who made collections to study and those who did so ceremonially, to
gratify mere personal whim and ego. He also distinguished between
harmless collections of infinitely available specimens, such as leaves or
butterflies, and archeological collections which are limited in number.
He then caustically criticized those who were pillaging archeological
sites all over Europe merely to gratify individual whim. Finally, he
suggested that antiquities laws based on those already in effect in Denmark be enacted.
Rounding out the year 1903, Georgerrand penned an essay on
oceanography, "L'Etude de la mer. '' At that point in history Belgium
had done nothing to improve her knowledge of the sea, although
neighboring countries had already begun scientific studies of the seas
and were reaping practical benefits from them. The author, never one
to let such impractical neglect pass unnoticed, made a strong plea for
the government to establish a center for the study of oceanography.
The year 1905 marked the publication of Engerrand's major European work, Six le<;ons de prehistoire. It is a summary of an elementary
course in prehistory given in different Belgian cities under the auspices
of the extension university, but it is something more than a textbook
review of what was then known about European prehistory. The first

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lesson is introductory in nature, defining what prehistory is, briefly
surveying its development, and concludes by criticizing the shortcomings of some who have contributed more confusion than knowledge to prehistoric studies. Altogether it is a charming introduction,
particularly for those who are surprised to encounter Gallic battlecries
at various junctures, and to find sections concluded with such observations as "Mais la verite triomphe toujours." ("But the truth always
triumphs.")
The second lecture is entitled " L'Homme Tertiaire" (Tertiary
Man) and, together with the third lesson, "Les eolithes," makes the
book more than a text. For this, apparently, was one of the first times
the arguments for the acceptance of an eolithic age had all been put together in one place. Drawing on the work of M. A. Rutot and others,
Engerrand strongly championed the cause of an eolithic stage and,
as a result, was shortly to become embroiled with Marcellin Boule in
a heated argument. Chapter 2 opens with a discussion of the Tertiary,
examining its climate, fauna, flora, and paying particular attention to
the evolution of the primates, building a case for the logical stand that
the relatively sophisticated flint knappers of the Old Stone Age must
have developed from more primitive beginnings. From these prefatory
remarks the author turns to a discussion of various sites where
"eoliths" were found-Thenay (Lair-et-Cher), Puy-Courny (Cantal ) ,
and Saint-Prest (Eure-et-Lair ) in France, Otta near Lisbon, the chalk
plateau of Kent and the Cromer forest beds of England. This discussion is capped by a review of the recently (1894 ) discovered
remains of Java man, Pithecanthropus erectus. In the third lesson,
following Rutot, a series of Belgian Quaternary eolithic industries are
described- "Reutelien," "Mafflien," and "Mesvinien." This chapter
also discusses what eoliths are, describes the history of their discovery,
and contains a detailed examination of the objections to the acceptance
of eoliths. The geology of the Quaternary is carefully outlined, other
pertinent matters are discussed, and a strong argument for an eolithic
stage is made.
As is true of many similar controversies, both sides have since
proved to be partly right and partly wrong. Certainly Engerrand's
logic was impeccable. Lower Paleolithic cultures, the Chellean for
example, were preceded and derived from more primitive cultures of
earlier times. But in the enthusiastic search for what had to be, the
difficulty-even the impossibility- of recognizing these cruder remains was evidently not fully appreciated. The eoliths of Thenay and
Puy-Courny, both of which Engerrand felt showed traces of having

ENGERRAND IN EUROPE

13

been used by man, are now regarded as from Miocene deposits and
entirely the result of natural causes (Breuil and Lantier, 1959: 67 ) .
The pieces of flint found in the Tertiary gravels on the North Downs
of Kent, the so-called Harrisonian eoliths, can be duplicated by flints
chipped naturally by the friction of one stone against the other which
occurs in soil-creep (Oakley, 1957: 11). EvenRutot's Belgian Quaternary eolithic industries are now regarded as being naturally chipped
flints, lacking proof of being made or used by man (Breuil and Lantier,
1959: 67). In fact, the only flints that have stood the test of time and
intensive study are those from the Cromer forest beds. These East
Anglia flints were presumably derived from a deposit laid down in the
interglacial preceding the Mindel glaciation, and so are generally
regarded today as Lower Pleistocene. Large flakes, presumably from
this deposit, have been picked up along the shore at Cromer. But that
they come from the Cromer forest beds has not been demonstrated.
Crude hand-axes have been found in situ in the deposit, however, and
are now considered to be pre-Chellean tools, not eoliths (Leakey,
1960: 68-69).
Dawn stones-eoliths-undoubtedly exist. Early men, as do modern
campers intent on pounding a tent stake, picked up suitable rocks and
u_sed them as temporary tools. But to identify any particular pebble
as an eolith, or even a piece of flint which has fortuitously come to
resemble a hand-axe, scraper, or knife, and claim man used it, is to
err. An eolithic stage in human cultural development was a logical
construct to build; in fact, such a postulate may be regarded as almost
inevitable, but for all of that it was an impossible one to demonstrate.
In addition, the tremendous increase in know ledge a bout fossil man
since the beginning of this century ha.s brought general agreement that
"man or a precursor very similar to him" did not "make his appearance on earth toward the middle of the Tertiary epoch." A chronically
tool-using, tool-making primate, that is, man, is as yet confined to the
Quaternary.
The remaining three chapters of Six ler;ons de prehistoire are concerned with the Lower Paleolithic, Upper Paleolithic, and Neolithic.
They comprise a concise summary of European prehistory, and illustrate again the author's ability to compress a large amount of factual
data into a relatively few pages. The publication of this book provoked a reply by Marcellin Boule in the pages of L' Anthropologie
("L'Origine des eolithes," Tome 16: 257-267 ) in which he roundly attacked the position of all those who accepted eoliths. Such men as Harrison, Bell, Shrubsole, Lewis-Abbott, Ashington Bullen, Johnson, and

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

others in England; Capitan, Chantre, Thieullen in France; Hahne,
Klaatsch, Krause, Schweinfurth, and others in Germany; and Rutot in
Belgium, who was named as the head of this school of thought, were
singled out by Boule. You might say that Engerrand, significantly not
mentioned by Boule, stood with a large and distinguished company.
It was in this article that Boule reported on his experiments in which,
by mechanical means, he had produced eoliths. Engerrand soon replied to this assault in a privately printed paper, entitled "Les eolithes
et la logique." In it he ridiculed Boule's manufacture of "artifactual"
eoliths, suggesting that it was possible with modern machinery to
make things much more complicated than eoliths, and again demonstrating that logically a cultural stage must have underlain the Paleolithic. Thus ended the controversy, but by such debate understanding
is tested and strengthened.
The broadness of Engerrand's anthropological interests was again
illustrated in 1906 by the publication of several articles. In "Les arts
plastiques chez les peuples primitifs" he noted that in primitive societies men were more gaily ornamented than females, as with many
male birds and other animals. Setting up an interesting classification
of art forms, he also suggested that adornment of the body was the
most elementary form of art. "Les geants, d'apres MM. P. E. Launois
et P. Roy," was a review of their Etudes biologiques sur les geants,
demonstrating a continuing interest in human biology and abnormality. Another article, "A propos de la Grotte de Furninha," concerned a debate with M. J.-F. Nery Delgado, which had also been
mentioned in "Les eolithes et la logique." A case of misunderstanding,
it was Engerrand's contention that unknown vandals had despoiled
the archeological remains of this cave while seeking treasure.
In 1907, closing out his writings in French and his Belgian sojourn,
Engerrand published a three-part article in L' Essor concerning popular education in Belgium. Education had always been one of his keen
interests, and nowhere is it better shown than in this article. He stated
that the need for knowledge had become greater and greater for all
classes of citizens, and that this popular demand had resulted in the
creation of the extension universities. In the courses which were given,
or at least in those he gave, the aim was not only to give scientific facts
but to inculcate the scientific spirit. His feeling about the necessity for
education was summed up in the concluding lines of Part I: "Ignorant
people," really ignorant nations, "are incapable of realizing great
works."
The second and third parts of "L'Enseignement populaire en Bel-

15

ENGERRAND IN EUROPE

gique" are most interesting and revealing, not so much for what they
relate about their author, but in the picture they portray of Belgian society at the beginning of the twentieth century. We are treated to a
vivid picture of the worker who spat on the lecture room floor because
he knew no better and the bourgeoisie who spat on the floor because he
did, or at least spat because he did not care for the niceties of etiquette.
The author suggests ways of improving such behavior, mostly by the
example to be set by extension professors. If the professors removed
their hats on entering the lecture halls, most of the audience would do
likewise, claims the optimistic author. In short, Engerrand not only attempted to inculcate the scientific spirit in extension courses, but he
also hoped to implant civilized etiquette and raise the general level of
behavior of his students. He likewise suggested that attempts be made
to improve the attractiveness of lecture halls-to provide flowers ,
blackboards, heat, etc. It is hard to imagine that American professors,
and presumably their modern Belgian counterparts, could successfully
teach the type of students in the kind of setting that Engerrand was so
familiar with in Belgium at the turn of the century.
This brief reveiew does not cover by any means all of the published
work in French of George C. Engerrand, as a glance at the attached
(perhaps incomplete) bibliography will show. He wrote many book
reviews and other articles, some of which I was unable to obtain. I
believe, nevertheless, that his major works and the principal currents
of his thought have been covered here, enough certainly to suggest the
breadth of his interests and his deep concern with education.

Bibliography
Breuil, Henri, and Raymond Lantier
1959. Les hommes de la pierre ancienne. Paris.
Engerrand, George C.
1898. Note sur deux nouveaux affleurements du calcaire grossier superieur dans
les environs de Blaye. Bulletin de la Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux, Tome
53, pp. 33-35.
1898. Note sur un exemplaire du Gaulteria orbigny trouve a Blaye dans l es
carrieres du haut de la ville. Bulletin de la Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux, Tome 53, pp. 36-39.
1898. Note sur un nouvel affleurement de falun situe dans la propriete de M .
Piganeau, a Merignac. Bulletin de la Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux,
Tome 53, pp. 40-42.
1901. Book Review: A. lssel, Osservazioni sul Tongriano di Santa Giustina e
Sessello. Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie. Bruxelles.

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1901. Book Review: Communicacoes de Direcc;ao dos Servic;os Geologicos de
Portugal, 1900. Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie. Bruxelles.
1901. Book Review: G. Rovereto, Illustrazione dei mulluschi fossili Tongriani.
Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie. Bruxelles.
1901. L'Accroissement du delta du Po au XIXeme siecle. L'lnstitute Geographique de Bruxelles Publications, No. 6. 36 pp. +map.
1902. Book Review: C. de Georgi, Ricerche su i terremoti avvenuti in T erra
d'Otranto dall' XI al secolo XIX. Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie,
pp. 216-226. Bruxelles.
1902. Des animaux qui ne meurent pas. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir. Bruxelles.
1902. Le Quaternaire Belge. Revue Generale des Sciences, pp. 712-725, 775-786.
1902. Les grandes decouvertes de Soignies. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir.
Bruxelles.
1902. Un musee prehistorique. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir. Bruxelles.
1903. Book Review: G. Dullfus et Ph. Dautzenberg, Conchyliologie du Miocene,
moyen du bassin de la Loire. Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie, pp.
146-150.
1903. Demographie. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp. 86-91.
1903. Histoire du littoral belge. Encyclopedie lllustree du Soir, Tome 5, pp.
43--47.
1903. La terre a briques de Boom et ses fossiles. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir,
Tome 4, pp. 90-91.
1903. Le collectionisme. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp. 48-52.
1903. Les boniti du monte Nerone par Tito Alippi. Bulletin de la Societe Belge
de Geologie, pp. 69-75.
1903. L'Etude de la mer. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp. 291-296.
1903. Notions sur les premiers ages de l'humanite. Extension Universitaire de
Belgique. Bruxelles. 24 pp.
1903. Les premiers evolutionnistes. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp.
75-79.
1903. Un apotre. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp. 80-85.
1904. Book Review : G. Agamennone, Determination des bradysismes dans l'interieur de continents au moyen de la photographie. Bulletin de la Societe
Belge de Geologie, pp. 29-38.
1904. L'Origine de l'homme. In: Six conferences sur l'evolution, pp. 14-16. Extension Universitaire de Belgique. Cinquieme Conference. Bruxelles.
1905. La prehistoire. La Patrie Belge, pp. 24-31.
1905. Los gigantes. Boletin de la Escuela Moderna, Ano 5, Num. 3, pp. 36-37.
1905. Six lec;ons de prehistoire. Bruxelles. 263 pp. (Translated into Spanish,
1905, as: Nociones sobre las primeras edades de la humanidad, Barcelona; also translated into Dutch, 1906, as: De eerste tijden der menschheid,
Hoboken-Anvers).
1906. Apen;u sur les peuples de la terre. Extension Universitaire de Belgique.
Bruxelles. 20 pp.
1906. A propos de la grotte de Furninha. A propos de silex d'Otta. Bulletin de
la Societe d'Anthropologie de Bruxelles, Tome 25, pp. xxiv-xxx. Also in:
Communicacoes dos Servic;os Geologicos de Portugal, 1906-1909.

ENGERRAND IN EUROPE

17

1906. La verite sur l'ile des Pigmees. Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie de
Bruxelles, Tome 25, pp. xxx-xxxii.
1906. Les arts plastiques chez les peuples primitifs. Extension Universitaire de
Belgique. 12 pp.
1906. Les eoliths et la logique. Bruxelles. 7 pp.
1906. Les geants, d'apres MM. P.-E. Launois et P. Roy. Bulletin de la Societe
d'Anthropologie de Bruxelles, Tome 25, pp. xxxii-xli.
1906. Comment on: Traite l'Anthropologie a la Societe d'Anthropologie de
Bruxelles. Bruxelles. 22 pp.
1907. L'Enseignement Populaire en Belgique. L'Essor, Tome 1, No. 1, pp. 1-3,
9-10, 25-27.
Leakey, L. S. B.
1960. Adam's Ancestors: The Evolution of Man and His Culture. Harper Torchbooks, 4th edition. New York.
Oakley, Kenneth P .
1957. Man the Tool-maker. The University of Chicago Press. Chicago.
Texas Memorial Museum
Austin, Texas

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
JOHN A. GRAHAM

Under invitation of the Mexican Government George C. Engerrand
left Europe to go to Mexico in 1907 as a geologist. During the subsequent ten years in Mexico, until 1917 when he came to the United
States to begin his long, fruitful academic career here, Engerrand was
engaged in a wide variety of scholarly activities only partly reflecting
the breadth and depth of his versatile personality. Here I attempt to
review briefly this ten years of work and to assess their significance
in the history of Mexican studies. Although Engerrand published
numerous short papers and communications from his Mexican work,
a great deal of it unfortunately remained unpublished. 1 In particular
he had planned several monographs, including one on his excavations
in Colima in 1912 or 1913; surely at least in part the failure to produce
these studies may be attributed to his unforeseen and untimely departure from Mexico in 1917, when the unstable conditions of revolutionary Mexico rendered continuance of scientific field work largely impossible.
Engerrand had come to Mexico in 1907 as a geologist, and his
association with the government geological agency, the Instituto
Geologico Nacional, where he held the position of Chief Geologist,
Tertiary-Quaternary Section, lasted until 1915. Although by this
period geological research in Mexico was being implemented largely
by Mexican geologists, Engerrand was in a sense a continuation of an
earlier tradition when Mexican geological studies had been carried out
largely by European geologists. It was not until 1888 that the Mexican
Government, having been convinced of the necessity for organizing
a comprehensive program for the development of Mexican geological
studies, created the Geological Commission which led to the establishment of the Instituto Geologico Nacional a few years later. From the
1 The list of Engerrand's Mexican publications in the bibliography of this paper
should be fairly complete, although some minor titles have probably escaped me.
I am indebted to T . N. Campbell for providing a basic bibliography of Engerrand's
publications for this period.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

beginning one of the Institute's primary aims had been the creation
of a definitive geological map of Mexico, and much of Engerrand's
geological work in Mexico was in connection with the development of
this map.
In 1908, 1909, and 1910 Engerrand made important surveys in
Chiapas, Campeche, and Yucatan, and in 1911 he participated in the
extensive Baja California survey. He worked in Vera Cruz and
Tabasco, and there is also a casual reference to mapping done in
Tamaulipas in 1911or1912 (Engerrand, 1912: 122). As much of the
surveying seems to have remained unpublished, although presumably
reports were filed in the Institute, the full extent of Engerrand's field
work is not immediately apparent. In any event he was soon recognized as a leading authority on Mexican geology and was later invited
to prepare the section on Mexican geology for the 14th edition of the
Encyclopedia Britannica (Engerrand, 1929).
I am not qualified to assess accurately the importance of Engerrand's contributions to Mexican geological science, even if that were
possible from his published works. Perhaps, however, his significance
was greatest in the influence and impetus of his personal contact with
Mexican geology. Engerrand brought to Mexico a highly trained and
experienced mind, well grounded in academic and practical European
education, not only in geology but in other related fields of natural
science. He had an aggressive and scientifically ambitious personality
always demanding the highest in standards. Unfortunately this was
not an auspicious time for scientific and academic endeavor in Mexico
and his career there was premature! y cut short.
The bulk of Engerrand's published works during his years in
Mexico dealt not with geology, however, but with anthropology. In
1909 Engerrand became Professor of Prehistory in the Museo N acional
de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, a position he held until 1914
simultaneously with his appointment in the Instituto Geol6gico Nacional. Although to a certain extent Engerrand considered himself, at
this time at least, above all a geologue et prehistorien, his interests
ranged over the whole field of anthropology. He published short communications on Maya dental mutilations, Aztec shell ornaments, a
Spanish translation of the Italian text of Marquez's description of the
Aztec calendar, and some interesting ethnographic notes on medicinal
herbs used by Nahuatl-speaking Indians at Zumpango. He was very
much concerned with the inadequacy of anthropological training
offered in Mexico and in 1908 published with Fernando Urbina a
lengthy discussion of anthropology as an academic discipline. He discussed the extent of anthropological instruction in Europe and in the

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

21

United States, urging recognition of the need of adequate instruction
in Mexico, and concluded by presenting a comprehensive program for
anthropological training in Mexico. It should be noted that this was
during the period when Franz Boas and others were putting their
efforts into the creation of the International School of American
Archaeology and Ethnology in Mexico; perhaps this was a stimulus
behind Engerrand's paper and plea.
Somewhat related to his concern with competent academic training
in anthropology was his life-long interest in university extension work
and in bringing the results of modern scientific investigation to the
attention of the public. In a paper published in 1911 which discussed
the university extension program in Belgium, particularly emphasizing instruction in anthropological and biological science, Engerrand
appealed to Mexican national pride to provide similar opportunities
for popular education in Mexico. He was also active in extension work
itself in Mexico (Engerrand, 1915b ) .
Engerrand's sustained interest in physical anthropology is reflected
in several papers and communications published during his period in
Mexico ( 1907a, b; 1910d; 1912b, i ) . The first two of these, on giantism and acromegaly and on "telegony" are general discussions, not
based upon data gathered in Mexico and. in the case of the former, represent a continuance of an earlier interest. Another aspect of physical
anthropology in which he manifested an abiding interest was racial
mixture. The Societe d'Anthropologie de Paris, with which in addition
to the Ecole d' Anthropologie he maintained association throughout his
years in Mexico, had established a Commission permanente pour
l'etude des croisements ethniques and devised a questionnaire for
cases of mixture. In Mexico Engerrand briefly studied two cases of
racial mixture, one in Tamaulipas of a Chinese-Mestizo crossing, and
one in Yucatan of a Chinese-Maya crossing, which he reported to the
Societe. He photographed both families and noted in each case the predominance of oriental physical traits in the offspring, although he
reached no specific conclusions. In each case he hoped to follow the
growth pattern of the children to observe the stability or instability of
the observed oriental traits. He also noted such points as moral qualities of the parents, although it is not clear whether he viewed these as
possibly racially linked. 2 With Fernando Urbina he also wrote a paper
2 This was of course just prior to Boas' The Mind of Primitive Man. However,
Engerrand long and early displayed a keen interest in national culture and character and it may be that here he was interested in what pattern these diverse personality characters might be reflected in the children.

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

on public education in Mexico, which he felt should pay close attention
to the matter of racial mixture. In particular he urged detailed records
to be kept, including annual photographs, of the physical and moral
development of the Mestizo population.
As Professor of Prehistory in the National Museum, Engerrand
offered instruction in European prehistory. Students in the Museum
at this time should have counted themselves exceedingly fortunate in
having such experienced instruction in the subject. His plan of instruction, involving a course program of several years duration, included
comprehensive lectures on the various Paleolithic industries as well
as Paleolithic art and advanced Pleistocene geology. 3
In addition to teaching he carried out field research. By virtue of his
position as Chief of the Tertiary-Quaternary Section in the Instituto
Geologico Nacional and his related field work in the preparation of the
geological map of Mexico, Engerrand was able to conveniently combine his research responsibilities as prehistorian in the National Museum with his geological field work. In fact, his discovery of the Concepcion Complex in 1909 was made during geological surveying of the
Yucatecan peninsula. 4
At Concepcion, one jornada north of the Guatemalan frontier on the
itinerary from Flores, Peten, to the ports of Campeche and Champoton, Engerrand discovered a rich lithic workshop resting upon an exposed Pliocene surface and otherwise lacking any geological association. The artifact complex, which Engerrand called the industry of La
Concepcion, was of exceedingly primitive aspect and recalled implements of French Lower Paleolithic typology; no forms of more advanced culture types, as pressure-flaked projectile points, manos and
a Scattered notes on the lecture topics and instruction are to be found in the different numbers of the Boletin del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia r
Etnnlogia, Tercera Epoca, Tomos 1-2 (1911-1913) , but see especially Engerrand,
1911 c.
4 Two preliminary reports were published on the Concepcion discovery. The
original report, published in 1909. does not give the discovery date. The second
report, presented to the 17th International Congress of Americanists meeting in
Mexico City in 1910, was essentially a brief summary of the 1909 report, together
with a republication of the 1909 plates. Here it is stated that the discovery was
made in 1900- presumably a printing error for 1909. In other places Engerrand
gave the elate of discovery as 1909, obviously the correct date since this was the year
of the Upper Usumacinta-Campeche survey (Engerrand, 1910c: 258- 259; 1912f:
492 ) .
Modern writers appear to be unaware of the slightly fuller original report of
1909, since they cite only the later summary (cf. A veleyra, 1950, and VVormington,
195 7) . It should be noted that the republished plates in the later report are, on
the whole, distinctly inferior to those of the original publication.

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

23

and metates, or ceramics, were present. The discovery was made near
the end of the long, arduous Upper Usumacinta-Campeche survey and
limited time prevented a prolonged study of the site. Furthermore, as
the h orses were already heavily loaded and tired, only a representative
sample could be brought back from the large number of artifacts observed. Relatively speaking, however, this was a sizeable collection
compared to most other finds of reputedly early archeological complexes. Engerrand planned to return to the Concepcion locality for
further study and hoped also to discover other similar sites during the
projected Campeche mapping survey, but these plans apparently could
never be carried out.
While not contradicting an assumption of considerable antiquity
for the Concepcion materials, the geological circumstances precluded
any good geological assessment of their age. Engerrand stressed the
resemblances of the Concepcion implements to the French Lower
Paleolithic typology, thus a suggestion of "prehistoric" or great antiquity, but denied that this meant a comparable antiquity. His approach was cautious and his presentation rigorously scientific. Finally,
39 specimens were described and illustrated at % or natural size in
excellent photographic plates, the quality of which is seldom approached in most Mexican publications even of today.
In spite of Engerrand's cautious presentation of the Concepcion implements at the 17th International Congress of Americanists meeting
in Mexico City in 1910, considerable opposition arose to according the
Concepcion Complex any degree of respectable antiquity. I particularly recall hearing Engerrand's vivid account, in his inimitable style,
of Hrdlicka's comments with reference to the antiquity of man in the
New World.
In a more recent appraisal of Engerrand's Concepcion Complex,
Aveleyra has written (Aveleyra, 1950: 42-44):
Desde el punto de vista estrictamente tipologico, es preciso confesar que
los artefactos de La Concepcion presentan un aspecto de lo mas genuinamente prehistorico, pudiendose comparar, como el autor lo hace, con el
material de los niveles mas bajos del paleolitico europeo aunque, con loable
reserva, indica que esta relacion es simplemente hecha a base de tipologia .
. . . Los artefactos de La Concepcion son completamente diferentes a
cualquier otro complejo de piedra de horizontes historicos; su aspecto tosco,
primitivo, su forma y las tecnicas de trabajo que representan, parecen
confirmar la opinion que de ellos expresa el senor Engerrand que cree
tienen antigiiedad prehistorica .
. . . Es muy probable, aun teniendo como i'.mico buluarte el inseguro
argumento tipologico, que Engerrand este en lo cierto al asegurar que el

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

taller de La Concepcion representa "la huella mas antigua del hombre en
la peninsula de Yucatan."

Further evidence of Engerrand's cautious and rigorous attitude toward early lithic complexes of the New World may be seen in his description of a gTOUp of artifact-like specimens from Baja California
which he found in 1911 during a combined geological-prehistoric
reconnaissance. These he published and described as pseudo-eoliths,
attributing them to natural processes (Engerrand, 1912a, 1913a, b).
His discussion of the eolithic question which preceded this by way of
introduction is essentially acceptable even today. With the exception
of some important later studies, such as that of Barnes on the fracture
angles of genuine Paleolithic tools versus those of eolithic assemblages
and demonstrably naturally fractured stones, it remains an up-to-date
and succinct summary of the eolithic problem and still may be read
with profit.
The era of modern scientific archeology in Mesoamerica was inaugurated in the Maya area in 1881 when A. P. Maudslay first began his
brilliant work. Maudslay laid the foundations of a scientific Maya
archeology which has continued to develop largely uninterrupted since
his initial work. Outside the Maya area the beginnings of scientific
field archeology were later and were perhaps more diffuse and difficult
to clearly delimit. In central Mexico it might be said that modern scientific field archeology had its inception in the work of the short-lived
International School of American Archaeology and Ethnology. The
School came into existence in 1910 and first opened in 1911 under the
directorship of Seler. Boas succeeded Seler as director for the academic
year of 1911-1912 and, characteristically, energetically set about carrying out an ambitious and comprehensive progTam for the development of anthropological studies in Mexico. Of very gTeat significance
was his progTam in archeology. Boas had gathered a large series of
ceramic surface collections and proceeded to organize them into the
now familiar tripartite division of Mexican archeology. 5 Boas then
5 Under the names "tipo de los cenos" (i.e., Preclassic), Teotihuacan, and Aztec.
In a recent paper Gamio has given the impression that it was he who established this
initial classification: "Entonces fue cuando despues de detenido estudio, logre
establecer que habia tres tipos principales de ceramica arqueol6gica en el Valle de
Mexico y eran los correspondientes a teotihuacanos, arcaicos y aztecas" (Gamio,
1959: 117). In this point, as in several other statements in his paper, Dr. Gamio's
memory apparently served him poorly; he himself acknowledged in an early paper
that it was Boas who had originally isolated these ceramic groups, coined the
name "de los cerros," and gave the first description of the Valley of Mexico Preclassic (Gamio, 1920: 128). See also Adams, 1960: 99.

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

25

directed Gamio, one of his students in the school, to undertake the demonstration of the chronological succession of these ceramic groups or
horizons through stratigraphic excavation. The resulting excavations
at Atzcapotzalco produced the desired verification. This clearly was a
landmark in the development of Mexican archeology and stratigraphic
archeology continued to be employed in subsequent work by the
School. 6
Through the personal influence of Boas, Engerrand was selected by
the Mexican Government to succeed him as director for the academic
year of 1912-1913. Engerrand described his program for the year as
follows (1912f: 492):
Comme geologue et prehistorien, je vais surtout m'occuper de travaux
archeologiques bases sur la stratigraphie et employer des metodes purement geologiques. Une serie de sondages dans la vallee de Mexico vont me
permettre de determiner les points les plus importants en ce qui concerne
la succession des civilisations et d'entreprendre, par consequent, des
fouilles completes qui nous £assent arriver, s'il est possible jusqu'aux
6 As Adams (1960 ) has recently pointed out, the importance of Gamio's excavation, slightly anticipating Nelson's most important work in the Southwest, has
generally been overlooked. I would argue that great credit is due Boas for it seems
to have been he who first conceived the importance of undertaking stratigraphic
excavations in the Valley of Mexico and established the stratigraphic principle as
a basic methodology of the School's archeological program. His successors, Engerrand, Tozzer and Hay, and Gamio fully appreciated the importance of the method
and carried on the work (cf. Woodbury, 1960: 401 ) . Stratigraphic observations of
one sort or another had of course been made at various times earlier, but their
great significance seems to have been rarely appreciated and not adequately exploited. To mention only one instance, Holmes over two decades earlier called
attention to the ceramic stratigraphy revealed in a deep exposure in Mexico City,
recognizing the sherds from the upper levels as Aztec and those below as representing several earlier horizons of pottery style (Holmes, 1885: 68-81 ).
It would be of the greatest interest to know more of this real birth of stratigraphic
archeology in Mexico with the work of Boas. Boas wrote in 1915: "A survey of the
wells and brick-yards in the environment of the City of M exico showed that this
question (i.e., the sequence of cultures) could be studied by observations on geological sequence of strata. In the year 1911 - 1912 a careful investigation ... was
carried out under supervision of the Director (i. e. Boas) by Mr. Manuel Gamio"
and conclusively proved the sequence of the three civilizations (Boas, 1915: 385).
I cannot but conjecture whether Engerrand may have had some role in the development of the idea of applying the stratigraphic method at this time; he was freshly
arrived from Europe with wide experience in geological stratigraphy and the
current field work being carried out in European Paleolithic archeology. I have
absolutely no evidence for this conjecture, although Boas does acknowledge the
aid of Engerrand in studying the geological strata of the excavations (Boas, 1913:
176). In any case, Engerrand certainly embraced with enthusiasm the application
of the stratigraphic principle in archeology.

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

couches quaternaires OU du tertaire SUperieur, de fac;on a etudier definitivement la question de l'homme prehistorique dans cette riche region qui a
toujours ete un centre d'attraction pour l'homme americain. Des etudes
analoques se feront dans l'Etat de Michoacan et dans celui de Campeche,
sur la frontiere du Guatemala ou j'ai trouve, en 1909, des restes d'un type
tout specialement archaique. En dehors de cela, des fouilles seront faites
dans les regions limitrophes des Etats de Vera-Cruz, Puebla y Oaxaca, OU
se reunissent trois civilisations differentes. Enfin des etudes de linguistique,
de folklore et d'ethnologie seront entreprises en plusieurs points determines.
Thus Engerrand conceived a broad program of investigation, continuing the work of Boas and building upon its important foundations.
His program fully demonstrates Engerrand's appreciation of the application of the stratigraphic method to archeology in the Valley of
Mexico; but to reiterate this point, which is of great significance for
this stage of American archeology's development, I quote from his
address at the opening of the annual exposition of the School in 1913,
at the end of his year of directorship ( 1913c: 263) :
El metodo seguido en los estudios arqueol6gicos ha sido el moderno o
sea el estratigrafico, que se aleja bastante del que llamare tradicionalista.
Se hacen excavaciones, estudiando con todo cuidado lo que se va encontrando en las capas sucesivas, de manera que, segun este metodo, un fragmento de tepelcate adquiere el mismo valor que un f6sil, pues cada uno de
ellos es un dato determinativo, al que se le puede atribuir por sus caracteres, un lugar relativo en el tiempo.
As noted in his report on the work of the School during his year as
director, it was not possible to carry out all of his program due to the
unstable conditions of the time (Engerrand, 1914: 239). Nevertheless,
two students, Isabel Ramirez Castaneda at Culhuacan and Manuel
Gamio at Santa Lucia and Atzcapotzalco, carried out further stratigraphic tests, continuing the School's work of the previous year. Engerrand himself made several soundings in the Valley of Mexico in an
effort to tie archeological complexes to the local geology as ·well as
undertaking a series of archeological excavations in Colima. 7 The other
two Fellows of the School, J. Alden Mason and Paul Radin, carried
out linguistic, ethnographic, and folklore studies.
I have little data for Engerrand's activities in Mexico following completion of his year as director of the School until his departure in 1917.
7 Engerrand, 1913c, d; 1914. Although there exist several references to the Colima
report "in preparation," apparently none of Engerrand's work saw publication.

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

27

His professorship in the National Museum ended in 1914 and his association with the Instituto Geol6gica Nacional ended in 1915. Other
than a short communication to the Revue Anthropologique on the
work of the School during his directorship and a paper on folk medicine and herbs used at Zumpango, I know of no publications for this
period. 8 This was an increasingly difficult period of time in Mexico,
and I can only conjecture that in terms of research it was not very
fruitful, particularly after 1915.
In recalling some of the more salient points which I have tried to
bring out above concerning Engerrand's anthropological career in
Mexico, several matters should be borne in mind. Engerrand came to
Mexico as a geologist; with the exception of a year's leave of absence
from the fostituto Geol6gico Nacional in 1912-1913 to assume directorship of the International School, most of Engerrand's time was
probably consumed in his geological studies, through which he acquired an outstanding reputation as an authority on Mexican geology.
Furthermore, we are dealing with a very short period in his career, a
period in which scientific and academic endeavor became increasingly
difficult due to the instability of the times. Finally, much of his work
went unpublished and unfinished, probably in part a result of the unforeseen difficulties of a revolutionary Mexico. 9
In Mexican archeology Engerrand as a European prchistorian ·was
certainly something of a rara avis. In a field in which virtually no attention has been given to preceramic cultures even until most recently,
Engerrand devoted himself to a considerable extent to discovering a
Mexican prehistory-in the narrower sense of this tenn. In a time
when some were recognizing New World "Paleolithic" assemblages
on the scantiest of evidence and many were denying any antiquity
greater than the time of Christ for man in the New World, Engerrand
approached the problem of early man with remarkable dispassion, bold
yet rigorously cautious; his discovery of the industry of La Concepcion
may yet prove to be of great significance. By the time of his appointment as director of the International School, he was turning his efforts
toward investigating ceramic cultures and their chronology. He early
embraced stratigraphic archeology, carrying on the brilliant begins Titles 1915b, 1917 a, b, wer e prepared earlier and were delayed in publication.
a It is particularly to be r egretted that he was not able to continue his study of
the industry of La Concepcion and that we do not know more of his geologicalarcheological soundings in the Valley of Mexico and excavations in Colima during his directorship of the International School. These were investigations which
might have enhanced his professional reputation enormously.

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nings achieved by Boas and consolidating stratigraphic methodology
as basic to Mexicanist research. His anthropological interests were not
restricted to archeology, however, and in one way or another he
touched upon many of the varieties of anthropological pursuit in Mexico; his continued efforts toward achieving a more adequate basis for
anthropological instruction and research in Mexico and his concern
with the problems of mestizoation in the development of the Mexican
nation are particularly significant. Although his career in Mexico was
cut short, his influence continued as a teacher of Mexicanist studies in
the United States.

Bibliography
Adams, Richard E.
1960. Manuel Gamio and Stratigraphic Excavation. American Antiquity, Vol.
26, No. 1, pp. 99.
A veleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis
1950. Prehistoria de Mexico. Mexico.
Boas, Franz
1913. Archaeological Investigations in the Valley of Mexico by the International
School, 1911-12. 18th International Congress of Americanists, London,
1912, pp. 176-179.
1915. Summary of the Work of the International School of American Archaeology and Ethnology in Mexico, 1910-1914. American Anthropologist,
Vol. 17, pp. 384--389.
Engerrand, George C.
1907 a. Les variations de la taille humaine, le giganto-infantilisme et l'acromegalie. Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica " Antonio Alzate," Torno 26,
pp. 261-276.
1907b. Les phenomenes de la telegonie et de la xenie, sont-ils inexplicables?
Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio Alzate," Torno 26, pp. 285295.
1908a. (with Fernando Urbina) Las ciencias antropol6gicas en Europa, en los
Estados Unidos yen la America latina. Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica
" Antonio Alzate," Torno 27, pp. 81-123.
1908b. (with Fernando Urbina) Un cote neglige clans le probleme de l'educationAlgo que se ha descuidado en el problema de la educaci6n. (Parallel
French and Spanish text ). Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio
Alzate," Torno 27, pp. 181-223.
1909a. Una sociedad para el estudio de! fo lklore chileno. Memorias de la Sociedad
Cientifica "Antonio Alzate," Torno 29, pp. 413-416.
1909b. (with Fernando Urbina) Nota preliminar acerca de un yacimiento prehist6rico ubicado en Concepcion (Estado de Campeche) , acompafiada de
un resumen £ranees. Boletin de la Sociedad Geol6gica Mexicana, Torno 6,
pp. 79-87
34 plates.
1909c. (with Fernando Urbina) Primera nota acerca de la fauna miocenica de
Zuluzum (Chia pas). Boletin de la Sociedad Geol6gica Mexicana, Torno 6,
pp. 119-140
3 plates.

+

+

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

29

1909d. Note prelimineire sur une gisement prehistorique decourert a Concepcion,
etat de Campeche (Resume extrait du Boletin de la Sociedad Geologica
Mexicana ) . Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio Alzate," Torno
29, pp. 27-29.
1910a. La extension en el tiempo y en el espacio de la raza humana de Lagoa
Santa segun el Dr. Rivet. Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio
Alzate," Torno 28, pp. 223-227.
1910b. (with F. Urbina and collaboration of J. Baz y Dresch) Informe acerca de
una excursion geologica preliminar efectuada en el Estado de Yucatan.
Paregones del Instituto Geologico de Mexico, Torno 3, Num. 7, pp. 369424, + 22 plates.
1910c. Informe sobre una excursion prehistorica en el Estado de Yucatan. Anales
del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Tercera Epoca,
Torno 2, pp. 245-259.
1910d. Etude preliminaire d'un cas de croisement entre un chinois et une yucateque. Bulletins et Memoires de la Societe d'Anthropologie de Paris, 6eme
Serie, Tome 1, pp. 263-265.
1911a. La organizacion de la Extension Universitaria en Belgica. Memorias de
la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio Alzate," Torno 31, pp. 67-72.
1911 b. L'Organization des etudes geologiques au Mexique. Revue Generale des
Sciences, 22eme Annee, pp. 602-607.
1911c. Programa general del Curso de Prehistoria . Boletin del Museo Nacional de
Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Tercera Epoca, Torno 1, Num. 3, pp.
46-51. (Unsigned but almost surely written by Engerrand. Attributed to
Engerrand in "El Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, su contribucion editorial, cientlfica y de cultura," Mexico, 1954).
1912a. L'Etat actuel de la question de eolithes. Revue Generale des Sciences,
23eme Annee, pp. 541-548. (Differs in minor details only from 1913b).
1912b. Note sur deux enfants nes d'un Chinois et d'une Mexicaine de race
blanche. Revue Anthropologique, Tome 22, pp. 122-125.
1912c. Nouveaux petroglyphes de la Basse-Californie. Revue Anthropologique,
Tome 22, pp. 200-211. (See 1912d).
1912d. Nuevos petroglifos de la Baja California . Boletin del Museo Nacional de
Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Tercera Epoca, Torno 1, Num. 10,
pp. 197-201+13 figures. (Differs from 1912c in addition of colored
plates).
1912e. Nota complementaria acerca de los petroglifos de la Baja California. Boletin
del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etno1ogia, Tercera Epoca,
Torno 2, Num. 1, pp. 2-4 + 2 figures.
1912f. L 'Ecole internationale d'archeologie et d'ethnologie americaines. Revue
Anthropologique, Tome 22, pp. 491-492.
1912g. La huella mas antigua quiza del hombre en la peninsula de Yucatan.
Estudio de la industria de Concepcion (Campeche). Reseii.a de la 2a Sesion
del 17° Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1910, pp. 89100 + 34 plates. (Summary of 1909b) .
1912h. Preuves geologiques de ce que la partie nord de la peninsule yucateque
n 'a etre habitee par l'homme durant l 'epoque quaternaire. Reseii.a de la
2a Sesion del 17° Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1910,
pp. 100-105.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1912i. Un caso de cruzamiento entre un chino y una yucateca de origin indigena. Reseii.a de la 2a Sesion del 17 ° Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1910, pp. 105-106. (Summary of 1910d).
1912j. Une arme maya. L'Homme prehistorique, Tome 10, pp. 289-292.
1912k. Review of: H . Beuchat, Manuel d'archeologie americaine. Isis, Tome 1,
pp. 530-537.
19121. Observaciones del Padre Marquez acerca del calendario del codigo mexicano del Cardinal Borgia ( traduccion del italiano). Anales del Museo
Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia : Numero extraordinario
en homenaje al XVIII Congreso Internacional de Americanistas. Issued
as "Apendice al Torno 3" (1911) of the Anales del Museo Nacional . ..
1913a. Informe sabre una excursion a la Baja California. Boletin del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Torno 2, Num. 8, pp. 149150.
1913b. Estado actual de la ceustion de los eolitos. Boletin del Museo Nacional de
Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Torno 2, Num. 8, pp. 150-160. (Differs
only in minor details from 1912a.)
1913c. Discurso pronunciado por el Sr. Prof. Jorge Engerrand con motivo de la
apertura de la exposicion anual de la Escuela Internacional de Arqueologia y Etnologia Americanas de la que es director. Boletin del Museo
Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Torno 2, Num. 12, pp.
263-265.
1913d. La exposicion de la Escuelo Internacional de Arqueologia y Etnologia
Americanas. Boletin del Museo Nacional de Arquoologia, Historia y
Etnologia, Torno 2, Num. 12, pp. 266-268.
1913e. (with Trinidad Paredes ) lnforme relativo a la parte occidental de la
region norte de la Baja California. Peregones del lnstituto Geologico de
Mexico, Torno 4, Num. 2-10, pp. 277-306.
1914. Les travaux de l':Ecole internationale d'archeologie et d'ethnologie americaines pendant l'annee 1912-1913. Revue Anthropologique, Tome 24, pp.
239-243.
1915a. (with I. Ramirez Castaneda) Les simples destines a des usages medicaux
ou superstitieux vendus au marche de Zumpango, Mexique. Revue Anthropologique, Tome 25, pp. 55-62.
1915b. Lo que sabemos acerca de los primeros hombres. Boletin de la Universidad
Popular Mexicana, Torno 1, Num. 4, pp. 65-68.
1917a. Etude preliminaire sur les ornements de coquilles des anciens Mexicains.
Revue Anthropologique, Tome 27, pp. 81 - 85 .
1917b. Les mutilations dentaires chez les anciens Mayas. Revue Anthropologique,
Tome 27, pp. 488-493.
1929. Mexico : Sections on Geography, Geology, Population, Economics. Encyclopedia Britannica, 14th edition, Vol. 15, pp. 377-386.
Gamio, Manuel
1920. Las excavaciones del Pedregal de San Angel y la cultura arcaica del Valle
de Mexico. American Anthropologist, Vol. 22, pp. 127-143.
1959. Boas sobre ceramica y estratigrafia. In : The Anthropology of Franz Boas.
Memoirs of the American Anthropologi cal Association, No. 89, pp. 117118.

31

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

Holmes, William Henry
1885. Evidences of the Antiquity of Man on the Site of the City of Mexico.
Transaction of the Anthropological Society of V\Tashington, Vol. 3, pp.
68-81.
Woodbury, Richard B.
1960. Nels C. Nelson and Chronological Archaeology. American Antiquity,
Vol. ZS, pp. 400-401.
1960a. Nelson's Stratigraphy. American Antiquity, Vol. 26, pp. 98- 99.
vVormington, H. M.
1957. Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series 4.
Peabody Museum
Harvard University
Cambridge 38, Mass.

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande,
Falcon-Zapata Area, Texas
GLEN L. EVANS

Archeological salvage work in the Falcon Reservoir area on the Rio
Grande of South Texas was carried on at intervals during the period
from 1951 to 1953 by the National Park Service in co-operation with
The University of Texas and the Smithsonian Institution. In the
course of this work a number of archeological sites were developed in
the alluvial terraces of the Rio Grande and its tributaries. At the request of Erik Reed, Regional Archeologist for the National Park Service and of other archeologists participating in the project, I made preliminary geological studies of these terrace deposits, with principal
attention given to those containing buried archeological material.
Until a more thorough study of the Rio Grande terraces can be made
in the reservoir area, I hope that this report will serve as an aid in the
interpretation of the late Quaternary geology and the human prehistory of the region.
A total of approximately 35 days , in 195Z and January, 1953, was
spent in the field. Most of the work was confined to localities which
could be approached by automobile, but some of the more inaccessible
arroyos were covered on foot, and the section of the Rio Grande between Zapata and Falcon was traversed by rowboat. My work and the
work of Hal Story, who assisted me for one week, was supported by the
Texas Memorial Museum. The Museum's participation was on the
basis of an informal co-operative effort in the salvage program. Special
thanks are due to Mr. Philip C. Royer, General Superintendent of the
Falcon Dam Constructors, who repeatedly gave valuable assistance to
our work.
Inasmuch as an extensive report being prepared by Alex D. Krieger,
former archeologist for The University of Texas, will include a thorough description of the physiographic and ecological setting of the
area, only those features directly related to the river's geological
history will be discussed in this report.

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Valley
In the Falcon Reservoir area the Rio Grande flows through a broad
valley developed in marine sandstones and shales of lower Tertiary
age. These strata dip northeast and the river, controlled by the strike
of the outcropping beds, flows in a general southeasterly course. The
bedrock consists of hard, erosion-resistant strata alternating with
softer, easily eroded beds. This condition has resulted in gentle undulations and low rock benches on the valley slopes and has had a pronounced effect on the nature of the river's channel. Bordering the
present channel is a series of low bluffs formed by lateral cutting of
the river into the flood plain and terrace deposits and occasionally
into the Tertiary bedrock of the valley wall.

Terminology and Explanation
The terminology that refers to deposits and physiographic features
formed by rivers and streams is not standardized and is not without
ambiguities. For this reason it seems best to explain what is meant by
some of the terms used in this report. The definitions are intended to
facilitate clarity. They are not offered as necessarily the best definitions, nor is it proposed that they be generally adopted.
Flood plain, or fiood plain terrace, refers to the lowest well-developed body of alluvium which is still subject to periodic flooding. In the
Falcon Reservoir area the flood plain is a nearly continuous, flattopped terrace having an average width of about 2,000 feet and average surface elevation of 28 to 30 feet above low water level. The term
bench applies to a discontinuous, narrow strip of alluvium bordering
the main channel and having a flat or scour-grooved surface that lies
well below the level of the flood plain. There are at least two benches,
averaging about 12 feet and 20 feet, respectively, above the low water
level, locally present along the Rio Grande. These benches are deposited during intermediate flood stages and are usually best developed
on the concave side of meanders and bends. It should be noted here
that the 20-foot bench appears to widen gradually downstream, and
is probably the equivalent of the main flood plain of the McAllenReynosa area. A comparable downstream development of the 12-foot
bench is to be expected.
The word terrace may be used exclusively in a physiographic sense,
or it may be used to include both the physiographic feature and the
underlying alluvial deposits. In this report, terrace surface and terrace

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

35

deposit apply respectively to the physiographic and lithologic aspects
of a particular stream deposit.
Inasmuch as some of the individual terraces are made up of two
distinct phases of deposits, and these phases may be separated by a
substantial time break, it is important to determine which phase is involved when considering the age of the deposit, or when attempting to
reconstruct the environment at the time of deposition. The two phases
to which reference is made are (a) channel deposits, and ( b ) highlevel flood deposits. Theoretically, if not actually, an intermediate
phase of medium-level flood deposits should also be present in some
parts of the terrace sections, but I was not able to identify such
intermediate phase deposits except on the relatively minor modern
benches.
Channel deposits are characterized by heterogeneous-sized sediments, mainly cross-bedded gravel and sand, with local clay lenses.
They are confined to the central and deeper parts of the valley in
which they accumulated and therefore normally occupy the lower
part of a terrace section. In the low series of Rio Grande terraces, with
which we are primarily concerned, channel deposits probably average
less than one-third of the total terrace section, but of course the thickness varies greatly from place to place.
High-level flood deposits are characterized by well-bedded, homogeneous sediments, consisting mainly of silt with subordinate amounts
of fine sand, clay, and humus. They overlie channel deposits in the
central parts of their respective valleys, but towards their outer edges
they overlap the older gravels and rest directly on bedrock. Although
there is a remarkable uniformity in the composition of the main body
of high-level flood deposits, local variations in both composition and
texture occur near the outer edges where tributary streams and slopewash have contributed sediments derived from the bedrock of valley
walls. Whereas the channel deposits represent essentially continuous
deposition and were subject to extensive reworking as the river meandered back and forth across its valley, the high-level flood silts represent intermittent, slow deposition, and show very little indication
of reworking by stream action.

Channel and Modern Sediments
At low-water stage the Rio Grande channel in the Falcon area consists of a series of rapids separated by long, deep water holes. The
rapids have formed where the river is cutting into the outcropping

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

edges of resistant sandstone beds, and the deep holes are cut into the
softer Tertiary strata. Gravel bars are forming against some of the
rock barriers above the rapids, and in several places have built up to
such an extent as to cause the river to divide, leaving gravel islands in
mid-stream. Clay muds settle out in the quiet water holes and in some
places overlap the up-stream edge of the gravel bars.
Modern channel sediments, then, consist of localized gravel bars
which accumulate mainly during high water stages when the current
is sufficiently strong to move the coarser pebbles; and fine grained
muds, mainly clay, which are deposited in the quiet pools during low
water stages. Sands and silts are for the most part deposited during
intermediate flood stages on the low, narrow benches or incipient flood
plains which border the river channel. Silts and some fine sand are
also being deposited during occasional high floods on the main flood
plain, and locally on the surface of the first terrace above the flood
plain.

Ttrtiory Btdrock

ldtoli.ttd erou uction showino Rio Grandt terrocu in tht fa lcon Atst rvoir area.

Fig . 1.

The Terraces
The physiographic relationship of the several Rio Grande terraces
recognized in the Falcon Reservoir area is shown in the idealized
cross-section (Fig. 1). Of these, the Reynosa is the only well preserved
unit of the river's high terrace system. The Reynosa is much older and
much more extensively developed than the other terraces, and probably represents a complex depositional history lasting through most or
all of one of the major Pleistocene stages. The other terraces belong

37

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

to a closely related series occupying the central and deeper parts of
the modern valleys of the Rio Grande and its tributaries. These low
terraces were formed during relatively minor sub-stages or intervals,
beginning in the late Pleistocene and continuing into the present.
As with other deposits, the age of terraces can sometimes be determined on the basis of their contained faunas, the extent of leaching
of their sediments, the degree and nature of cementation, and by other
familiar geological criteria. However, the simplest and often the most
reliable method of determining relative age of an individual terrace is
by its elevation in respect to the other terraces and to the bed of the
parent stream. In general, the oldest terrace of a series occupies the
highest elevation, and successively y ounger terraces occupy progressively lower levels down to the modern flood plain deposit.
The difficulty with this method of relative dating is that it is based
on an assumption that is not entirely true. And to the extent that it is
not true, serious errors can be made in dating terrace deposits or any
materials that may be buried within them. Partial exceptions to the
rule that a higher terrace is older than the next lowest in a series occur
where low terraces are separated by relatively small differences in elevation and exist on a stream that is subject to high-level flooding. In
such situations alluviation may take place simultaneously on two or
more terrace surfaces. Alluviation is, of course, normally much more
rapid on the lower surfaces, which are subject to frequent flooding~
than on higher surfaces which may be covered only by rare high
floods. Thus a thick section in the lower or middle part of a given
terrace deposit may represent the time equivalent of a much thinner
section near the top of the next higher terrace. Furthermore, the basal
part of a lower terrace may actually be older than the uppermost part
of the next highest.

-

. . . : : ':" ......

:.: .

HIGH L EVEL FLOOD DEPOSITS (Silt)

,-;..

.. ·.

....--: .

Oiogr am otic illustration of relat ion ship bet ween Ch annel and Hioh Level F lood dep os its.

Fig . 2 .

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

It follows that we cannot accept the assumption that a higher terrace is necessarily older in all its parts than the next lower terrace of
a series. When considering a related group of terraces separated by
small vertical intervals, a much more dependable rule is that the base,
middle or surface of a given terrace is normally older than comparable
parts of the next lower terrace, and younger than comparable parts of
the next higher member of the series.
The somewhat complicated interrelationship of stream deposits as
outlined above is well illustrated in the low series of terraces in the
Falcon area (Fig. 2) , and it must be understood if we are to properly
interpret the late geology and human prehistory of the area. At gauging stations in the general reservoir area floods have been recorded to
heights of more than 40 feet above the river's low water stage. Such
floods spread over and deposit sediments concurrently on the low
alluvial benches-which are incipient flood plains, the main flood
plain terrace, and parts of the higher Rosita terrace. It seems evident
that a similar depositional pattern has obtained throughout the period
of development of the low terrace series.

Reynosa Formation
The highest terrace preserved in the reservoir area is the Reynosa
formation, a very extensive silt and caliche-capped gravel terrace
named (Penrose, 1889) for outcrops at Reynosa, Mexico. This terrace
is best preserved downstream from Falcon Dam, between Rio Grande
City and Mission, Texas, where excellent exposures can be seen in
road cuts and gravel quarries along U.S. Highway No. 83. In the reservoir area most of the Reynosa has been destroyed by erosion and is
now represented only by widely separated gravel remnants which cap
ridges and hills at levels from 110 feet to 135 feet above adjacent parts
of the Rio Grande. The high position above the river, and vertebrate
fossils found in some of the gravel quarries, indicate that the Reynosa
is of middle Pleistocene age.
No special study was made of the Reynosa formation, since very
little of it will be flooded by the Falcon Reservoir and since it is not
involved directly in the archeological salvage work. It is of some
interest, however, that the Reynosa was the source of much of the
gravel that is present in the low series of terraces. These gravels,
which are still being carried to the river by tributary streams, are
preponderantly siliceous. A variety of brown chert is most common
and is everywhere the most conspicuous of the gravel materials. Agate,

39

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

jasper, and rhyolite porphyry pebbles are also fairly common. It is
noteworthy that quartz pebbles are Pxtremely rare among the gravels ;
and limestone pebbles, deeply etched by solution, are present, but
make up less than one per cent of the total gravel in the outcrops
examined.

Zapata Terr ace
The name Zapata is here used to designate the highest of the low
series of Rio Grande terraces in the Falcon Reservoir area. The name
is derived from the town of Zapata, which was originally built on a
typical area of this terrace. 1 The terrace is an important unit of the
late Quaternary geological sequence, and it contains a large part of
the buried archeological sites that have been discovered in the area.
The Zapata terrace is well developed and well exposed on both sides
of the Rio Grande throughout the length of the reservoir area, although it is, of course, breached in numerous places by tributary
streams and by meanders of the river where they impinge on the
valley walls. The terrace surface :is a remarkably flat plain, having
an average elevation of about 65 feet above low water level of the
river. The terrace base, which rests on Tertiary bedrock, has an
average elevation of about 30 feet above low water level. As seen in
transverse section, however, the terrace base is by no means as flat as
the surface, ranging from more than 50 feet above low water level at
its outer edges to as low as 12 or 15 feet above low water in the deeper
channel entrenchments in the central part of its valley.
Channel deposits, consisting mainly of gravel derived from the
Reynosa, make up the basal part of the terrace section and are best
developed in the more deeply entrenched part of the containing valley.
These channel deposits rarely extend higher than about 35 feet above
low water level. The presence of the extinct Pleistocene mammals,
Parelephas and Mammut americanum, at several places in the channel deposits, and the higher position of the terrace in respect to other
terraces of known post-Glacial age, indicates that the basal part of the
Zapata terrace is of late Pleistocene Wisconsin age.
The upper part of the terrace consists of 25 to 30 feet of light
grayish-tan silts which overlie and overlap the basal gravels. The silts
occur characteristically in thin, even beds which in some places exhibit
indistinct laminations. The type of bedding, the fine-grained and wellsorted character of the sediments, and the absence of apparent intra1 The town of Zapata has been moved to higher ground, since much of the
original townsite is now beneath the waters of Falcon Reservoir.

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sectional disconformities indicate that the main body of the silts represent intermittent deposition from shallow and comparatively slowmoving flood waters.
The silt section-at least in its upper part-is rich in archeological
materials, but faunal material is exceedingly meager in all exposures
examined. Land snails and river unios of several species occur in the
silts, and are commonly associated with buried middens, but these
forms belong to living species and at present have little value for age
determination. Some fragmentary vertebrate remains were found
(deer and bison ) , and these also appear to belong to modern species.
Carbonaceous materials associated with buried middens may eventually provide reliable radiocarbon dates for some horizons in the silt
section. In the meantime, a consideration of the nature and position of
the deposits seems to be the best means of approximating their age.
The silts were evidently deposited by occasional high-level floods, and
continued to accumulate while a new and deeper valley was being
formed. The upper part of the silt section-approximately that part
which contains archeological materials-clearly belongs to a later
geological sub-stage than the basal channel deposits. It would not be
surprising if the uppermost part of the Zapata terrace proves to be
several thousand years younger than the basal gravels.

Rosita Terrace
Remnants of a terrace occupying a vertical position below the Zapata terrace and above the main flood plain occur at several localities
in the reservoir area. The name Rosita, by which this terrace is here
designated, is derived from the village of Rosita in Starr County,
Texas, where the terrace is well developed and where excellent exposures of the full section of deposits are easily accessible. A brief
description of the terrace section has been published in abstract form
(Evans, 1941 ).
In the reservoir area most of the Rosita terrace has been cut out of
the main river valley by erosion of the later inner valley which contains the flood plain and low bench deposits. Some of the best preserved remnants of the terrace are found just inside the mouths of
tributary valleys where they have been partially protected from
lateral erosion by the river. In the exposures examined the terrace
surface has an average elevation of about 45 feet above low water
level. The base, which was exposed in only two of the localities visited,
was 10 to 15 feet above low water level.

41

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

The sediments in the upper part of the Rosita terrace are light tan,
well-bedded silts, and are practically indistinguishable from those of
the higher Zapata terrace. A thin section of channel-deposited gravel
is present in the terrace base at the outcrops exalllined, but exposures
are too limited to permit observations on its extent or range of
thickness.
No fauna of definitive value ha s been found in the Rosita terrace,
but archeological materials occur in some localities throughout the
greater part of its section. Quite possibly artifacts, and particularly
carbonaceous materials associated with them, may eventually provide
satisfactory dates for different parts of the deposits. At the present we
can be reasonably confident that the Rosita terrace overlaps in time a
part of the higher Zapata terrace and a part of the lower flood plain
terrace. Consequently it can be assigned to a sub-stage near the middle
of the post-Glacial period.

Flood Plain Terrace
The flood plain terrace is still in the process of active alluviation in
the reservoir area. That it may be approaching maturity, however, is
indicated by its appreciable height and width, and by the widening
channel bordered by rapidly developing alluvial benches.
The flood plain surface is approximately 30 feet above low water
level. The base is rarely exposed, but appears to be near the river's
low-water level. Where exposed the sediments are less compact and
seelllingly more sandy than those of the higher Rosita and Zapata
terraces.
Although the flood plain must have been forming during the latter
stages of aboriginal occupation, no archeological sites have been found
either on its surface or buried in its deposits. Quite likely any artifacts
which may be present are completely buried beneath flood deposits of
the historic period.

Royer Site
On the north bank of the Rio Grande and near the Starr-Zapata
County line the Zapata terrace is well exposed in a group of deep
tributary arroyos. Archeological materials are weathering out of different horizons in the upper 15 to 18 feet of the terrace section at
numerous places in the area, but none were found in the lower part
of the section. Several large excavations were made at selected locations in the course of archeological salvage work previously men-

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tioned. The deepest of these excavations was designated the Royer
site (41-78B9-17) by Joe Cason (1952 ) , archeologist in immediate
charge of the field work.

65'
60'

55'

50'
45'
40'

35'

1'4"'-S.;:,;ii'o,..;.;;..;.:.,~!'!:".'""""'

30'
25'

20'
15'
10'

5'
LOW WATER LEVEL-RIO GRANDE

o'

~ ·.

Section near Royer Site, Storr-Zapato County line.

Fig. 3.

The excavations are located near the outer margin of the Zapata
terrace, where the artifact-bearing, high-level flood silts, which constitute the upper part of the terrace section, rest directly on Tertiary
bedrock. The section shown in Fig. 3 was measured on the river bluff
about one-fourth mile west of the excavations. It was selected in
preference to the excavated sites because it shows the relationship of
the high silts to the underlying, older channel deposits. The upper silts
outcrop continuously on river and arroyo bluffs between the measured
section and the excavations, so that it is possible to estimate closely
the vertical position of the excavated middens. When allowance is
made for the apparent surface erosion at the Royer site excavation,
the deepest artifact horizon encountered should lie at approximately
the level of the 45 foot marker in the section illustrated in Fig. 3.
Other middens occur in the silts at higher levels and on the weathered
surface of the Zapata terrace.
It seems evident that a relatively long span of time separates the
deepest buried middens from those in the uppermost beds and on the
surface. The regular, thin-bedded and laminated character of the
silts indicates deposition from shallow, slack water that spread out
from the channel at the crest of high-level floods. Although we cannot
establish the frequency, duration and amount of sediments derived
from individual floods, we can be reasonably sure that flooding became

43

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

increasingly rare as the terrace approached its maximum vertical development, and consequently deposition must have proceeded at a
very slow rate.

Burro Site
An exposure of the Rosita terrace deposits containing buried archeological materials occurs on the east bluff of Burro Arroyo, three
miles northwest of Zapata, Texas, and 1,000 feet upstream from the
junction of the arroyo with the Rio Grande. The section at the Burro
site, illustrated in Fig. 4, shows the relationship of the terrace to the
arroyo bed, and the position of the principal buried midden.
The deepest midden, which was not excavated due to the excessive
thickness of overburden, lies from 24 to 26 feet below the somewhat
eroded surface of the terrace. Midden materials consist of hearth
stones, flint flakes, charcoal, and shells of river mussels and land snails
definitely in place in terrace silt. The position of the deep midden
leads me to suspect that it correlates in time with middens occurring
in the uppermost few feet of the Zapata terrace. There are also
archeological materials buried in silt beds near the top of the Rosita
terrace at the site. These high materials should be younger than any
midden materials occurring in situ in the Zapata terrace.
There are also remnants of the Rosita terrace with deeply buried
midden materials at other localities, as, for example, in the mouths of
two prominent arroyos near the Royer site previously described. For
those who wish to examine this terrace, however, the best exposed
localities are the Burro site and the extensive meander-cut bluff on
the Rio Grande at the edge of Rosita, Texas.

Tributary Drainages
The time available for field work was completely inadequate for a
thorough study of the geological and archeological sites on the many
tributary streams of the Rio Grande. A study of at least one of the
tributaries seemed desirable and the Arroyo Valeno was selected
because its lower reaches will be inundated by the reservoir and
because it affords many excellent exposures of terrace and valley fill
deposits.
Arroyo Valeno is the principal tributary entering the Rio Grande
on the American side of the reservoir area. It is an intermittent stream
rising in Webb County about 40 miles above its mouth and joining the
Rio Grande 3 miles southeast of the original site of Zapata, Texas.

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

42

Rosita Terrace

38

-

·-

~

J

1

1

. .J

34'

_

_ . _·_._._. . ..:_

.

_.

_.

30

1

26

1

22'

14
"1ffl'!""iiiio!ol;;l...........~.-.--~.;;;.;..,,~~I0

. . . . . . ..
. ..
. ..
. ... ·.
. . . ..

·....
...
..

..

. .
... Eocene
.... . .. .

. ..

. . ..

.

.

. ... ..
...
.. .

1

1

. ..

.

. .. 6'
. ..
Sandstone : : ·. . .. ·. . 2'
. ...
o'
..
•

•

t

.

•

•

•

•

•

•

Section at Burro Site
Fig . 4.

Field studies were restricted mainly to the lower 8 or 10 miles, which
is approximately the portion of the stream that will be included in the
Falcon Reservoir.
In its lower reaches the Valeno valley contains a broad, flat-surfaced
alluvial fill. The modern arroyo, which is a deep, actively eroding

45

RIO GRANDE TERRACES

channel, cuts through the fill into underlying bedrock and provides
excellent and almost continuous exposures of the alluvial deposits. For
the most part the deposits consist of highly compact, mixed clay and
sand, with local gravel lenses in the basal part. In some areas there is
a dark gray humus-bearing member making up the upper two or three
feet of the section. Secondary calcium carbonate nodules, derived
from leaching of the upper part of the section, occur commonly in the
lower part.
Although there is indication that at least two stages of deposition are
represented in the main body of alluvium, it was not possible to make
a definite separation except in favorable locations. At a few places
remains of the extinct elephant, Parelephas, were found in the basal
gravels. This indicates that the lower part of the alluvium is probably
contemporaneous with the channel deposits of the Zapata terrace.
Archeological materials occur commonly in the upper part of the
alluvium, and in one place, the Valeno site, were found at a depth of
11 to 13 feet. It seems quite likely that a comparison of artifacts from
the Valeno site might serve as a basis for correlation of the artifactbearing part of the alluvium with low terraces on the Rio Grande.

References Cited
Cason, Joe F.
1952. Report on Archeological Salvage in Falcon Reservoir, Season of 19512..
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society , Vol. 23,
pp. 218-259.
Evans, Glen L.
1941. Artifact Occurrence in the Seoond Terrace of the Rio Grande in Starr
County, Texas (abstract) . Bulletin of the Geological Society of America,
Vol. 52, No. 12, Part 2, pp. 1998-1999.
Penrose, R. A . F., Jr.
1889. A Preliminary Report on the Geology of the Gulf Tertiary of Texas from
Red River to the Rio Grande. Texas Geological Survey, Annual Report 1,
pp. 3- 101.
Midland, Texas

Archeological Reconnaissance in the
Drainage of the Rio Verde,
San Luis Potosi, Mexico
NANCY P. TROIKE

During July and December, 1957, two archeological reconnaissance
trips were made in the drainage of the Rio Verde, in the state of San
Luis Potosi, Mexico. This paper will present a brief summary and a
preliminary analysis of the information obtained during these trips.
The south-central part of the state of San Luis Potosi consists of an
extensive plateau lying at a height of approximately 1,000 meters
above sea level. On the west this plateau is rimmed by the Sierra
Gorda, and on the east by the Sierra Madre Oriental. Several small
streams drain the area and form the Rio Verde, which flows eastward
into the Panuco system. Geographically the Rio Verde drainage is
characterized by large flat valleys, low ranges of hills, generally fertile
soil, and a temperate climate.
The archeological sites of this region have been recognized for some
time as forming a westward extension of the culture of the Gulf Coast
Huastecs. Joaquin Meade, who for 25 years has studied the history
and archeology of the Huasteca, ha:, been one of the most active investigators of the area. In his ( 1948 ) survey of archeological sites in
the state of San Luis Potosi he recorded valuable data and descriptions
of some of the sites in the Rio Verde drainage. Only one archeological
excavation has been published for the region, however; it was conducted by Wilfrido Du Solier (et al., 1947) in 1941-42 at Buenavista,
Huaxcama.
The two reconnaissance trips were concentrated principally along
the main roads of the municipios of Rioverde, Rayon, and San Ciro.
A total of 61 sites was located in the region. Of these, 41 lay near the
San Luis Potosi-Rioverde highway within 50 kilometers to the west of
the latter town . The remaining sites (numbering 20) were located
within a triangle formed by the towns of Rioverde, Rayon, and San
Ciro which measured approximately 50 by 40 by 40 kilometers,

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

respectively. This clustering of sites generally reflects the division of
the region into eastern and western areas by a zone of alkaline soil
unfit for agriculture which extends along the north bank of the Rio
Verde from the east to the northwest of the town of Rioverde. During
the two trips a total of some 20 sites was visited, of which eleven will
be briefly described below in order to demonstrate the type of sites
characteristic of the Rio Verde drainage. Four of these lay in the
western zone and the remainder in the eastern area.

Descriptions of Sites
The westernmost site visited was in the municipio of San Nicolas
Tolentino ; it may be one of the sites mentioned by Meade ( 1948:
97-98, #137 ) for that area. Most of the site has been plowed over, and
only two undestroyed mounds were seen. However, this was the only
site in the Rio Verde drainage at which sherds identical to those found
west of the Sierra Gorda in the valley of San Luis Potosi were also
noted.
Twenty kilometers west of the town of Rioverde was a site consisting of some 20 mounds lying on the south bank of the Rio Verde. Most
of these mounds were grouped around a plaza measuring about 50
meters in length from east to west. The tallest mound seen was some
4 meters high. In the eastern part of the site were two long parallel
mounds close to one another whose long axes were oriented slightly
east of north. A few mounds on the north bank of the river appeared
to be a continuation of the site. Burials and whole pottery vessels were
said to have been found at this site.
A number of sites extending discontinuously for several kilometers
along the Rio de los Morales appeared to be associated with the extensive site of La Manzanilla. La Manzanilla was the largest site seen
in the Rioverde municipio and was undoubtedly a major center for
the area. It was estimated to contain at least 100 mounds, although
most of these were relatively small and none of those seen was more
than 4 meters in height. A pair of long parallel mounds oriented northsouth were noted. Unfortunately, a considerable number of the
mounds at La Manzanilla already have been damaged, especially by
the activities of local treasure-hunters. The site is very rich in cultural
materials and a number of important artifacts were said to have been
taken from it. Notable among these was a very finely carved basalt
yoke reportedly found lying around the head of a burial with which
three carved basalt bowls were also associated. Numerous pottery
vessels and figurines have also been found at the site.
The site of El J aral consisted of a compact cluster of 16 mounds

RECON N AISSANCE IN SAN LUIS POTOSI

49

arranged in the form of a hollow rectangle measuring a bout 140
meters north-south by 120 meters east-west, with a mound approximately in its center. Two parallel mounds some 50 meters long and
oriented north-northwest formed the southwestern side of the rectangle. The central mound was about 6.50 meters in height and 30
meters in diameter; treasure-hunters had dug a large pit into the
middle of it and were reported to have found a burial. Their digging
had revealed several periods of construction within the mound.
In the Rayon municipio in the eastern zone of the Rio Verde drainage, a small site called Salinas was found near the town of Rayon.
It had been badly destroyed by road construction and treasure-hunting, but consisted of several mounds grouped around a plaza, the
tallest mound being now no more than 2 meters high. Treasurehunters had cleared the debris from one mound and exposed a fine
lime plaster floor extending across most of its top.
At the site of Los Becerros, most of the mounds were grouped around
a large plaza. Rough limestone fragments set in mud had been used in
construction, and some mounds were faced with trimmed limestone
slabs. Two long parallel mounds on the western side of the site were
oriented approximately north-northwest. The tallest mound of the site
was about 10 meters high, with the others ranging downward from 7
to 1.50 meters in height.
The site of Las Revolcaderas lay on an old stream terrace southeast
of Rayon. It was a large site and contained a number of mounds
covered with a dense semi-tropical growth of trees, brush, and vines.
Mounds were faced with trimmed limestone slabs laid in courses. Two
parallel mounds each about 40 meters long were oriented northnorthwest and faced on their interior sides with trimmed limestone
slabs laid in stepped courses. The tallest mound seen had smooth sloping walls and reached a height of some 12 meters; recent damage to
one side of it had revealed the almost vertical wall of an interior
construction.
The largest site seen in the Rayon municipio was Los Juzgados,
which lies on the north edge of the Plan de la Quemada, an ancient
lake bed. A brief description and a sketch of part of the site have been
published by Meade (1948: 81-82, #104; 171, Lam. 42 ) . The site
covered an extensive area and there were a number of plazas, the
principal one having a large mound approximately in its center. Both
volcanic rock and uncut limestone were used in construction, with a
few mounds still retaining fa<;ades of trimmed limestone slabs laid in
courses in a clay-mud mortar. One mound in the northeastern part of
the site retained several courses of its facing of volcanic stones and

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

definitely had a circular base. The most unusual construction seen
during the reconnaissance trips was found at Los Juzgados. It consisted
of two parallel mounds or platforms each about 1.50 meters high and
76 meters long, standing 12 meters apart and oriented 15 ° west of
magnetic north. The interior sides of both mounds were faced with
trimmed limestone slabs laid vertically in courses. The ground between the mounds was very flat and was lower than the surrounding
ground level; there appeared to have been several steps at the north
end of the structure leading down to the interior level. At the northwestern corner the stone fa<;ade was continued outward to form a
three-sided area similar to a room, which had the same floor level as
the area between the mounds.
On the eastern side of the Plan de la Quemada, at the base of the
Espinosa del Diablo, was found the site of El Calichal. The mounds
extended for some 500 meters but unfortunately many of them had
been destroyed by plowing. The principal plaza was relatively small
and compact. This was the only site visited at which two separate
pairs of long parallel mounds were seen. One pair, oriented northsouth, formed the southeastern side of the main plaza. The other pair,
m easuring approximately 40 meters in length, were faced with
trimmed limestone slabs laid in stepped courses and oriented 17 ° west
of magnetic north.
The largest site visited in the municipio of San Ciro was La Soledad
de los Tepehuanes, which was called La Cuidad Muerta de la Sierra
Gorda by Velazquez ( 1946: Vol. I ). The site is built on a low ridge,
with terraced platforms used to secure level bases on the slopes. Forty
mounds were counted but the site contained many more and many of
these were in an excellent state of preservation. One mound was approximately 20 meters tall and at least three others reached 15 meters
in height. Mound facings consisted of large limestone fragments set
in a clay-mud mortar. A pair of long parallel mounds was also noted.
Approximately two kilometers north of the town of San Ciro was a
small site which is a favorite treasure-hunting area for the townspeople. This digging, coupled with natural erosion, has caused extensive damage. The tallest mounds of the site were some 6 meters
high, and mound facings were of limestone fragments set in a claymud mortar.

Discussion
A study of these eleven sites reveals both the range of variety as
well as the essential unity of the archeological culture of the Rio

RECONNAISSANCE IN SAN LUIS POTOSI

51

Verde drainage. All the sites visited were of a similar nature, consisting of a cluster of mounds usually grouped around one or more plazas.
The number of mounds in a site varied from only a few to as many as
100 or more. Most of the mounds appeared to have had square or
rectangular bases, although a few were seen which were definitely
circular. With one exception (at Los Juzgados) , no type of structure
was seen at any site which did not also occur at many or even most
other sites. There appeared to be no "typical" pattern of relationship
or arrangement for the mounds and plazas; the positioning of these
varied from one site to the next. Rarely was there any obvious orientation of the mounds to one another. Most mounds appeared to lack
stone fai;ades and perhaps had been faced with mud originally. Two
types of stone fa<;ades were seen : untrimmed limestone or volcanic
fragments, sometimes set in courses, and trimmed limestone slabs
laid in courses; both types were set in a mud matrix. At any single
site there was a definite tendency towards consistency in the fa<;ade
material used. No evidence was found of plaster facings over the stone
fa<;ades. Generally, sites in the eastern area appeared to be less numerous but individually larger than those in the western region.
The pairs of long parallel mounds noted in a number of the sites
appeared to be ball courts of the open-end type. Ball courts were
widely used in Mesoamerica during the pre-Hispanic period for a
game with quasi-religious significance. In the Rio Verde sites the
mounds were usually at least 40 meters long and 6 or 8 meters apart,
with the long axes all arranged in a north-south direction. At all sites
except one the orientation was to the west of magnetic north. Use of a
Brunton compass at El Calichal produced a reading of 17° west of
magnetic north, while readings with a smaller compass at other sites
showed slightly north of north-northwest. One site showed a reading
with a small compass of slightly east of north. The consistency of the
north-south orientation would appear to be an intentional feature of
these constructions and may therefore be assumed to be a matter of
importance to the builders.
In relation to these ball courts, it is noteworthy that a class of
ceramic figurines which may represent ball players was seen in several private collections. These figurines were hand-modeled and sometimes carried a ball held against the side or at times an instrument
resembling a bat. Some were decorated with knee guards and belts
crossed diagonally on the chest. It was reported that a stone ball court
ring, such as was sometimes used in open-end courts, has been found
at a site in the Rioverde municipio, but no information concerning it

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

could be obtained. There is a possibility that the unique construction
encountered at Los Juzgados may also represent a ball court. If the
room-shaped projection at the northwest corner of the two mounds
were to be matched at the other three corners, the structure might be
an I-shaped ball court of exceptional length. Its orientation, 15 ° west
of magnetic north, is similar to that of the open-end courts. However,
the possibility must also be considered that this construction represents a ceremonial avenue; Meade's ( 1948: 82) description of Los
Juzgados notes the occurrence of two "streets."
The similarities of the ceramics seen on the surface and in mound
fills appear to indicate that all the sites of the Rio Verde drainage were
occupied more or less contemporaneously. If true, the large number of
sites concentrated within this relatively small area would indicate an
intensive occupation by a large population. Economic support was
undoubtedly founded upon a firm agricultural basis; it is noteworthy
in this regard that sites are located in areas of fertile soil but are lacking in the alkaline soil zone which is unfit for farming. The number
and size of the mounds in the region would indicate that the population had a plentiful food supply and sufficient leisure time for construction activities, and would probably imply the existence of effective social controls to direct these activities.
Data collected during the two reconnaissance trips may most usefully be compared with the only published account of archeological
excavations in the Rio Verde drainage, that by Du Solier at Buenavista. Du Solier (et al., 1947: 16, 18; 17, Fig. 2) mentions the excavation of only two structures, one of which was a long narrow mound
having a series of eight steps up its southwestern side. Measurements
of his scale drawings of this structure show that it was approximately
38.50 meters in length by 11.50 meters in width by no more than 3
meters in height, and that its orientation was to the northwest. The
similarity of its size and orientation to the ball court mounds discussed
above is obvious, but as there was no parallel companion mound the
structure does not represent a ball court. Du Solier suggested that it
might have been a temple base "or even a gallery to view some
spectacle."
Most of the pottery types reported by Du Solier (et al. , 194 7: 18-21 )
for Buenavista were encountered at various sites during the reconnaissance trips, and other varieties were also noted. A possibly significant difference in percentages was discovered between the pottery
found in the eastern and western zones of the Rio Verde area. The
most common type seen in the eastern area was a red-on-white ware,

RECONNAISSANCE IN SAN LUIS POTOSI

53

while in the western region a polished and incised blackware appeared
to be of equal importance with the red-on-white. Du Solier (et al.,
1947: 18-20) noted the importance of the polished blackware at
Buenavista but did not report the red-on-white ware for that site.
Krieger and Griffin (Du Solier et al. , 1947: 27-30 ) have pointed
out the similarities existing between the pottery of the Caddoan area
and the polished incised or engraved blackware of Buenavista. They
noted that Buenavista sherds so closely resembled Barkman Engraved
(which is characteristic of the Texarkana focus ) that it was difficult
to distinguish the two types. Because the technique of incising and
engraving with colored pigments filling the lines is known to have
occurred quite early in Mesoamerica, they suggested that this method
of decorating polished monochrome vessels had diffused from northern
Mesoamerica into the Caddoan area.
During the Rio Verde reconnaissance trips a number of ceramic
smoking pipes were noted in private collections. All those seen had a
delicate conical bowl affixed near the end of a long slender round stem
which projected slightly beyond the bowl and often was formed into
a stylized ornament. These appear to be very similar in both shape
and size to the Caddoan "long-stemmed" pipes illustrated by Krieger
(Newell and Krieger, 1949: 147-148; Fig. 54) for the Davis site. The
presence of these pipes in both areas, when considered along with the
similarities in the polished blackwares, may indicate that the Rio
Verde drainage served as a route of reciprocal diffusion and contact
between the cultures of Mesoamerica and the Caddoan area.
Temporally, the sites of the Rio Verde drainage may be equated in
a general way with the archeological sequence developed by Ekholm
for the Huasteca. On the basis of ceramic similarities, the principal
period of Rio Verde occupation would seem to correlate with late
Panuco IV and early Panuco V (Ekholm, 1944: 358-364), although
the area may possibly have been occupied prior to this time but on a
more limited scale. This period might very tentatively be estimated at
approximately A.D. 600 to 1000. Within the vvider frame of Mesoamerican history these dates span the end of the Classic period and the
beginning of the Post-Classic. During this period the southward movements of aggressive nomadic groups caused increasing pressures on
the sedentary peoples of northern Mesoamerica and eventually
brought about widespread cultural changes. These pressures may have
been a factor in the abandonment of the Rio Verde drainage. At the
time of the Spanish Conquest, the Huastecs were living primarily in
the coastal plains and low foothills to the east of the Sierra Madre

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Oriental, and the Rio Verde area was occupied by the nomadic Pame
Indians.

Summary
This paper has reported the results of two archeological reconnaissance trips which were made in the drainage of the Rio Verde, in
south-central San Luis Potosi, Mexico. The culture represented in
this area was a western extension of the Gulf Coast Huasteca. Sixtyone sites were located, 20 of these being in the eastern Rio Verde zone
and 41 in the western. Sites were found to consist of a cluster of
mounds usually grouped around one or more plazas; many sites contained two long parallel mounds which appeared to be open-end ball
courts. The architecture and pottery seen during the reconnaissance
were similar to those reported for Buenavista, Huaxcama, but significant differences were also noted. Similarities in the polished incised
blackwares and ceramic smoking pipes were found to exist between
the Rio Verde region and the Caddoan area of the United States,
perhaps indicating reciprocal contacts and influences. The principal
occupation of the Rio Verde drainage was tentatively estimated to have
been from A.D. 600 to 1000.

Acknowledgments
The two reconnaissance trips reported in this paper were made
possible as a result of the interest and kindness of Sr. Dn. Octaviano
Cabrera lpifia, of San Luis Potosi, S.L.P. He also gave freely of his
own time and his wide knowledge of the history and geography of the
region to aid in the reconnaissance. Special thanks are due to Sra.
Profa. Antonieta Espejo, who first drew attention to the possibilities
of a site survey in the Rio Verde drainage and who participated in the
July trip as a representative of the lnstituto Nacional de Antropologia
e Historia. Sr. Dn. Joaquin Meade has generously shared his extensive
knowledge of Huastec archeology and history gained from his many
y ears of study both in the field and in the archives.

References Cited
Du Solier, Wilfrido, Alex D . Krieger and J am es B. Gr iffin
1947. The Archaeological Zone of Buena Vista, Huaxcam a, San Luis Potosi,
Mexico. American Antiquity , Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 15-32.
Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944. Excavations at T ampico and P anu co in the Hu asteca, M exico. Anthro-

RECONNAISSANCE IN SAN LUIS POTOSI

55

pological Papers, American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 38, Part 5,
pp. 321- 512.
Meade, Joaquin
1948. Arqueologia de San Luis Potosi. Mexico.
Newell, H. Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Velazquez, Primo Feliciano
1946. Historia de San Luis Potosi. San Luis Potosi.
Ankara, Turkey

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
RUDOLPH C. TROIKE

Prior to the nineteenth century, the area which today comprises
southern Texas and northeastern Mexico was inhabited by roving
bands of hunting-and-gathering Indians known collectively as
Coahuiltecans. The name "Coahuiltecan" was first used in a linguistic
sense by J. W. Powell ( 1891: 68) to refer to the related dialects
spoken throughout this area. He adapted the term from the designation "Coahuilteco" coined earlier by Orozco y Berra ( 1864) from the
state name of Coahuila, Mexico. There is no evidence, however, that
these groups of Indians ever considered themselves a single people.
On the contrary, the Spanish sources refer to numerous small bands
which bore distinct names and which were often at war with one
another.
The size and composition of these bands must have differed considerably, and probably even varied seasonally with changes in the
available food supply. The combination of a simple technology and a
harsh environment made it necessary for them to spend most of their
time in the quest for food. Except in summer, when plant foods were
abundant, starvation was an ever-present threat to these people.
Nevertheless, the adaptation of their culture to the environment was
sufficiently successful to permit a much higher concentration of population than is found in many parts of the same area today.
By 1800 the Coahuiltecans had virtually disappeared due to the
combined effects of war, disease, and acculturation. Our somewhat
meagre knowledge of their culture is derived principally from seventeenth and eighteenth century Spanish accounts. Most of the available
information on Coahuiltecan culture has been summarized and analyzed in a series of articles by Ruecking, ( 1953, 1954a, 1954b, 1955 ),
and a small amount of additional data from documentary sources has
been published recently (Troike, 1959). In general, ethnographic
references to the Coahuiltecans are so fragmentary and scarce that it
seems worthwhile to translate and publish them in order to make the
data more readily available.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In 1749 Jose de Escandon established the first Spanish settlements
in the colony of Nuevo Santander (the present-day state of
Tamaulipas, Mexico ). He was accompanied on this colonizing expedition by Fray Simon del Hierro, who left a valuable diary covering the
activities of the expedition from December, 1748, to June, 1749
(Lejarza, 1947: 29*-57*; Archivo General de la Nacion, Mexico,
Ramo Historia, Torno 29, Exp. 20 ). Hierro mentions numerous encounters with groups of Indians throughout the territory, and occasionally gives information of ethnographic significance.
While Escandon's party was camped along the Soto la Marina River
east of the Sierra de Tamaulipas, a group of Indians came from the
Sierra to meet them. Hierro (Lejarza, 1947: 51 *) identifies them as
Pasitas Indians. He states (Lejarza, 1947: 32*; translation mine ) that
there were
about 150 tramp Indians, well armed, all strong, stout, and of similar
stature, about ZO years old and upwards. They came in peace, loaded with
squash, sweet potatoes, and beans, so that they provided food for all the
companies of settlers and soldiers for some time. After three days they
promised to return, and they returned loaded in the same fashion, so that
there were squash and beans to eat along much of the distance of the road
until the return to the north .

The Spaniards distributed gifts of clothing and trinkets to the Indians, but succeeded only in causing dissatisfaction among them because some Indians received more gifts than others. In addition to the
150 Pasitas who came the first time, Hierro states that more than 50
additional warriors remained behind as a rear guard.
The Pasitas Indians were evidently agricultural, as indicated by
the reference to squash, sweet potatoes, and beans, and the large number of warriors in the party which met Escandon. Hierro (Lejarza,
1947: 51 *) confirms this when he describes the Pasitas as the "best"
(most advanced?) and most numerous "nation" of Indians in the
colony, and states that "They sow much corn, squash, sweet potatoes,
and tobacco." This appears to be the northernmost occurrence of agriculture in Tamaulipas known from ethnographic sources. These ethnographic data correspond closely to the archeological evidence for the
northward extension of agriculture in the Sierra de Tamaulipas (MacNeish, 1958), and indicate that it was still being practiced at the time
of Spanish contact.
The only additional information on Pasitas culture in Hierro's account concerns an interesting ritual performed by the Pasitas leader to

COAHUILTECAN ETHNOGRAPHY

59

signalize peace between themselves and the Spanish (Lejarza, 1947,
32 *; translation mine).
The leader of these Indians, who was a captain, asked for a jar of water
and, beginning with the Colonel [Escandon], went about washing the
hands of all the captains and chiefs who were seated at the table. Afterward, gracefully taking off the breech-cloth which covered him between
his two legs, with it he went about cleaning the washed hands in sign of
peace. He washed and cleaned the hands of the Priest, who was also seated
at the table, and the top of his head as well. Indeed the admonition was
necessary not to laugh; as he did it with such seriousness, the same was
shown: but then and afterwards the joke was celebrated among those who
had been washed.

This unusual ceremony is somewhat reminiscent of the Caddo practice of washing the faces of visitors (Swanton, 1942: 178-181), though
the similarity may well be fortuitous. Culturally, the Pasitas must be
classified as a peripheral Mesoamerican group rather than as part of
the Coahuiltecan (or Western Gulf) area, because of their knowledge
of agriculture. Since they were the closest Mesoamerican group to the
Caddo area, further information on their culture and language would
be very desirable.
Along the route of the expedition Hierro records encounters with
various bands of Indians. During the journey from Barra de las Salinas (near San Fernando) to Camargo, the Spaniards followed the Rio
San Fernando and the Arroyo San Lorenzo (Lejarza, 1947: 36*-37*).
The party left Barra de las Salinas on April 25, following the river
upstream. On April 26 they encountered some Pintos Indians, who
guided them as far as the Sierra de los Pamonares, where they found a
camp of Pamonares Indians. These Indians guided them the next day,
until they came to a place with some pools of water, which they named
San Macario. Here they encountered a Boca Prieta Indian who seems
to have been a somewhat Hispanicized band leader. He led them as far
as the juncture of the river with the Arroyo San Lorenzo and thence
up the arroyo to the Charco de Ramirez.
From here on the Boca Prieta said that he did not know the road, because
these were now the lands of other different rancherias. They either did not
want to pass for fear of the other Indians, or b ecause each one observed
the boundaries of his lands. The same almost happened with the Pinto and
Pamorano [sic] Indians who served as guides the previous days. (Lejarza,
1947: 37*; translation mine.)

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

It is evident from this remark that the bands did observe some sort of
territorial boundaries, within which they carried on their nomadic
existence.
Hierro mentions the location of two Indian camps ( rancherias ) with
sufficient precision that it might be possible to locate the corresponding
archeological sites. Such a possibility would be significant for the development of historical archeology in the area. A camp of Pinto Indians was reported as being located on the Arroyo de las Chorreras
about three leagues from San Fernando, at a place where there was a
spring of good water. Escandon ordered that a mission should be established there for the Pintos (Lejarza, 1947: 39"'-40*). The second site
is stated to have been on the road from Santander (Jimenez ) to La
Barra, at a distance of four leagues (presumably from Santander),
where a very thick growth of tall royal palms was found around a
spring. The Indians were identified only by the name of their leader,
Santiago. An interesting reflection of Spanish influence beyond the
boundaries of actual settlement was revealed in the fact that a number
of the Indians in this band understood and spoke Spanish, albeit poorly
(Lejarza, 1947: 40* ).
Ruecking ( 1955: 377) notes only one reference to the taking of
heads of enemies killed in battle, and this instance occurred north of
the Rio Grande. The trait was also found in southern Tamaulipas,
however. While Escandon's party was at Horcasitas, word arrived
from Llera of a fight between the Spanish and the Janambre Indians.
The Janambres killed two Spaniards in the battle, then fled the field,
taking the heads with them and leaving the decapitated bodies behind
(Lejarza, 1947: 45*). Usually, however, the Indians of Tamaulipas
tried to carry off the entire bodies of enemies fallen in battle (Santa
Maria, c. 1795: 418 ).
Demographic data on Coahuiltecan groups are rather scarce; however, some population data are available for Indian groups living in or
near the missions of Nuevo Santander. The information given in two
reports, one written in 175 7 by Jose Tienda de Cuervo and the other in
1770 by Lino Nepomuceno Gomez (Cervantes, 1942 ), is summarized
in Table 1. Unfortunately, comparable figures are not available for
most groups, and those for which such figures are given (Pisones, Janambres ) are not properly Coahuiltecan groups. Additional data are
necessary before it will be possible to assess the impact of Spanish
colonization on the native population of this area.
Gabriel Saldivar (1943) has published the most complete map available to date showing the geographical location of the Coahuiltecan

61

COAHUILTECAN ETHNOGRAPHY

TABLE 1
1770

1757

Place
Aguayo

Pisones

Altamira

Anacnnaes
Aretines
Huastecos

Camargo

Escandon

Horcasitas

Llera

Fam.

Indians

Tareguanos
Pajaritos
Venados
Tejones
Cueros Quemados
Parnes
JanamL1·es

'.!6

l

Tamaulipa
(San Carlos)

17

x
x
x

x
x
x

243

58

246

21

51

71

37

107
97

24

Pisones

40

166

24

Janambres

80

300

Pintos
Comecrudos
Tejones
Nazas
Narices
Pintos ( 1 )
Pintos (2)
Quiniquames ·
Pamoranos
Comecrudos
Quer cfei1os

H4

x

x

x

x

}

169

f

150

J

69

26

x
101

11

25

50•

222

x

x

x

x

x

Pisones

31

74

76

Bocas Prietas
Damiches
Ina pa names
Mezquites
Parnes

80
x
x

"
243

x

150

lnapanames
Temacapa nes

16

400

ir

c.70

200

Lived nearby; had 2 captains.
l\la ny origina lly from Santa
Rosa mission near Jaumave.
1757: recently missionized.
1770: seasonal, pagans.

No Indians in 1757. Children
included?

•GOO in text.

Lived nearby.
1770: Quedejei10s. In 1757 were

ten leagues from mission.
1757: 48 men, 41 women, 33
children, 17 absent.
1757: rancheria nearby; 10 men,
10 women, 11 children.
1757: 28 men , 18 women , gz
children , 8 absent.
1770: left mission.

100

x
x
x

La<linos from Santa Rosa mission
In mountains; made attacks on
settlement.
1757: stated they were from the
Sierra de Tamaulipas.

(2) pagans.
'1770 : Quiniacapemes.

80
x

Remarks
1757 figure for families refers to
"houses"; name not given in
1757.
No Indians in 1770.
Seasonal.
Came with settlers.

( 1) Christians;

73
139

Dienteftos

x

200

x

Parnes

Villegas
Comecamotes
Morales
Matucapames
Aracates
Chapoter10s

x

13
13

Janambres

Soto la l\1arina

116

30

Garzas
l\1alahuecos
Guala gueftos

Santanilla

50

21

Revilla

Santander

18

Olive5.

Garzas

Santa Barbara

Per.

150

13

Malahuecos

San Fernando

Fam.

Huastecos
Palagueq ues

Mier

Rey nosa

Per.

70
130

x

Said to come and go.
'Vork on fanns for E scandon.
1757 figure includes Inapanames
and an unnam ed group, neither
in mission. Left mission in 1768.

x
1770: Left area in 1765-66.

J
x

x

- ==l\1entioned but no population figures gi ,·en.
x=Not mentioned.

30

1770: Hecentl y missioniz.ed.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

bands in Tamaulipas. His map is undoubtedly a composite of information from various sources and does not indicate changes which may
have occurred from time to time. One discrepancy between the map
and the report by Nepomuceno Gomez may be noted in respect to the
Saulapahuemes, Taniacapemes, and Cotomanes (or Cotonames). Saldivar (1943: map) locates these bands on the south bank of the Rio
Grande, whereas in 1770 they are definitely stated to be "On the other
[i.e., north] side of the Rio Bravo del Norte, at a distance of about six
leagues .... " (Cervantes, 1942: 62). It is possible that the map is in
error, but it seems more likely that these bands simply moved from
one side of the river to the other at some time during the century. A
map or series of maps which would show the band locations at different times is needed in order to give a more accurate picture of Coahuiltecan geography.

R eferences Cited
Archivo General de la Nacion, Mexico
1749. Ramo Historia: Torno 29, Expediente 20.
Cervantes, Enrique A.
1942. Visita a la Colonia del Nuevo Santander, hecho por el Licenciado Don Lino
Nepomuceno Gomez, el Ai\o de 1770. Mexico.
Lejarza, P. Fidel de
1947. Conquista Espiritual del Nuevo Santander. lnstituto Santo Toribio de
Mogrovejo, Madrid. Appendix, Document V I, "Diario que hizo el Padre
Fr. Simon del Hierro en el Seno Mexicano, Ano de 1749," pp. 30•-52·.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1958. Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 48,
Part 6.
Orozco y Berra, Manuel
1864. Geografia de las Lenguas y Carta Etnografica de Mexico. Mexico.
Powell, John Wesley
1891. Indian Linguistic Families of America North of Mexico. Bureau of American Ethnology, Seventh Annual Report, pp. 7-142. Washington.
Ruecking, Frederick, Jr.
1953. The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 5, pp.
480- 497.
1954a. Ceremonies of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 6, pp. 330-339.
1954b. Bands and Band-clusters of the Coahuiltecan Indians. Student Papers in
Anthropology, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 1-24.
1955. The Social Organization of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas
and Northeaste rn M exico. The T e xas Journal of Science, Vol. 7, pp.
357- 388.

COAHUILTECAN ETHNOGRAPHY

63

Saldivar, Gabriel
1943. Los Indios de Tamaulipas. Instituto Panamericano de Geogra fia e Historia,
Pub. No. 70. M ex ico, D .F.
Santa Maria, Vicente
c.1 795 Relacion historica de la Colonia del Nuevo Santander y Costa del Seno
M exicano. Publicaciones del Archivo Gen eral de la Naci on , XV, pp. 353482. M exico, D .F.
Swanton, John R.
1942. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Bu reau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 132. ~'ashington.
Tienda de Cuervo, Jose
1757. Informe del Reconocimiento e Inspeccion de la Nueva Colonia de! Seno
M exicano. Publicaciones del Archivo General de la Nacion, XV, pp.
3-158. M exico, D .F.
Troike, Rudolph C.
1959. Researches in Coahuiltecan Ethnography. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, pp. 301- 309.
Georgetown University English Language Program
Ankara, Turkey

. '

~·

. ·'

Lake Creek: _t\. Woodland Site in the Texas
Panhandle
JACK T. HUGHES

This paper reports the results of some initial investigations of an
Indian campsite with probable Woodland affiliations in the Panhandle
of Texas. The investigations were sponsored by the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum in the fall of 1952. The site is numbered A48 in
the museum records.

Location of the Site
The site is located on the J. Evetts Haley Ranch in the eastern part
of Hutchinson County. It is situated on the west bank of Lake Creek,
which empties into the South Canadian River about 4 miles southeast
of the site. It is near the center of the John Gibbs tract and is about
%. of a mile upstream from the ranch headquarters.

Natural Setting
The Canadian River has cut a valley about 15 miles wide and 500
feet deep in this part of its generally eastward course across the High
Plains. Both rims of the valley are bordered by extensive level plains
of Quaternary loess (the Panhandle formation). The long slopes on
both sides of the valley are Tertiary sediments (the Ogallala formation ) dissected by many tributary streams, of which Lake Creek is
typical. At the mouths of these creeks, their floodplains of Quaternary
alluvium merge with the broader floodplains bordering the wide sandclogged channel of the river. Spurs of Permian redbeds (the Quartermaster formation ) , held up by a resistant dolomite layer (the Alibates
member ) , extend into the river floodplains at intervals.
Winter and summer, this semi-arid land has prevailingly pleasant
weather, bright and mild-but subject to sudden violent storms of
wind, dust, rain, hail, or snow.
Above all, this is grass country-on uplands, slopes, and lowlands.

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The uplands are treeless. Rougher parts of the slopes are sprinkled
with junipers. Cottonwoods and several other kinds of deciduous trees
and shrubs are clustered along the ·wetter parts of the stream valleys.
Chief game animals were the gr2zing bison and antelope of the
grasslands, and the browsing deer of the woodlands. Although faunal ,
floral, and mineral resources are lirnited in variety, most of the elements present in this environment were eminently useful to primitive
man for food and fuel, tools, clothes, and shelters.

Historical Background
In historic times this stretch of the Canadian valley was a favorite
wintering ground of the Comanche and their allies. In a creek valley
some three miles east of the Lake Creek site are the remains of Adobe
Fort, which was built before 1840 by William Bent for trade with the
Comanche, Kiowa, and Apache (Grinnell, 1923: 42--44 ). In November, 1864, a strong cavalry force from New Mexico under Col. Kit
Carson found the winter villages of these tribes, with some Cheyenne
and Arapaho, near the ruins of the fort. The troops burned one village,
but barely escaped encirclement, and retreated under continual harassment. Ten years later, in June, 1874, a second battle took place at
some sod houses near the ruins of the fort, when a small party of
buffalo hunters withstood repeated attacks by a large number of
Comanche, Kiowa, and Cheyenne.

Description of the Site
The Lake Creek site occupies n small bench between the main
stream to the east and a tributary draw to the south. The east and
south sides of the bench are steeply eroded slopes about 20 feet high.
Along the base of these cutbanks are bogs fed by seep water.
The bench is capped by a deposit of eolian sand several feet thick,
which forms a gently rounded surface about an acre in area. The
bench top rises gradually toward the northwest to merge with the
valley slope, and is overgrown with grass, sage, and yucca. The edge
of the marshy floodplain below the bench is tree-covered. The southern
slope of the bench has a small plum thicket. Wildlife, notably deer and
turkey, is still plentiful around the site.
Cultural remains are strewn over the upper parts of the cutbanks
around the southeastern corner of the bench. They are especially
abundant along the southern edge of the bench, where the sand is

67

LAKE CREEK SITE

darkened with soot and contains charcoal, burned rocks, flint chips,
animal bone fragments, and a variety of artifacts.

Investigations
The site was first visited on the afternoon of Friday, October 3,
1952. A brief inspection produced a small sample of artifacts, and
indicated the desirability of further surface searching coupled with
some exploratory trenching. With the able assistance of Mr. Curtis
Tunnell, then a student at West Texas State College, some additional
work was accomplished in the following November, from Friday 14
through Sunday 16. I am much indebted to the owner, Mr. Haley,
the noted rancher-historian, for guiding me to the site, for giving me
permission to excavate, and for providing the generous hospitality of
his ranch during the work.
A test trench was staked out at a place near the eastern edge of the
site where a concentration of pottery had been found, although the
southern edge looked more promising otherwise. The trench was 15
feet long in a northeast-southwest direction, averaging about five feet
wide, bounded on the east by the irregular edge of the bench and on
the west by a line roughly parallel to the edge.
The trench was excavated to a depth of 30 inches, in five 6-inch
levels parallel to the slight southward slope of the surface. Each level
was removed with trowels and shovels, the earth being passed through
a Yz-inch screen . Except for flint chips and burned rocks, all cultural
materials found on the screen were saved and sacked according to the
level from which they came.

Stratigraphy
The surface of the test trench produced only a few burned rocks,
evidently representing a disturbed hearth, and indicating a final
occupation of the site that was very light, at least in the area tested.
The 0 to 6-inch level was brownish humic sand. The site probably
was not occupied during its deposition. This level was practically
sterile, producing only two specimens. These probably were intrusive
from above or below by means of trampling, burrows, roots, or other
kinds of disturbance.
The 6 to 12-inch level was the same brownish humic sand as the
overlying level, except toward the south end of the trench, where the
sand became less humic and more yellowish, and all along the bottom

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the level, where a dark sooty sand with occasional burned rocks
and flint chips marked the top of an occupational zone. Nine specimens were collected from the 6 to 12-inch level, but most of these
came from the dark sooty sand at the bottom of the level. This level,
like the overlying one, probably was not occupied during deposition.
The 12 to 18-inch level was the same dark sooty sand of the occupational zone that appeared at the bottom of the overlying level. Here
and there in the 12 to 18-inch level were clusters of three or four
burned rocks and small patches of soot. This level produced 22 specimens.
The 18 to 24-inch level was similar in all respects to the overlying
level, except that in some places a yellowish limey sand appeared at
the bottom of the level, especially toward the northern end of the
trench. The 18 to 24-inch level produced 13 specimens.
The 24 to 30-inch level was the same yellowish limey sand that
appeared at the bottom of the overlying level, except toward the
southern end of the trench, where the top of the level had some remnants of the dark sooty sand of the occupational zone. The 24 to 30inch level probably was not occupied during deposition. It was essentially sterile. Most of the five specimens found in it came from the
dark sooty sand at the top of the level.
In summary, the test trench revealed a rather simple stratigraphy:
1) at the surface, scant traces of a brief occupation; 2) below the
surface, a sterile layer of brownish humic sand about 12 inches thick;
3) in the middle, a zone of dark sooty sand, ranging from about 10
inches thick at the northern end of the trench to about 14 inches thick
at the southern end, heavily occupied without detectable hiatus for a
considerable period; 4) at the bottom, a sterile layer of yellowish
limey sand, of undetermined thickness.
By inference, an important occupation of the test area seems to
have been followed, after a period of abandonment, by a very minor
occupation. The 49 specimens found below the 0 to 6-inch level probably represent the earlier occupation; the two items found in this
level (a snub-nosed end scraper, #105 , and a bison limb bone fragment, # 106 ) probably represent the later occupation.

Collections
In all, 154 items were collected at the Lake Creek site, of which 103
came from the general surface, and 51 from the test trench. These
specimens are described under the following headings : pottery, pro-

69

LAKE CREEK SITE

jectile points, knives, scrapers, gravers, blade, chopper, chopperhammer, hammer, cores, manos, grinding slabs, bone bead, and animal
remains. In the descriptions the numbers given in parentheses are the
catalog numbers of the specimens. If a specimen came from the test
trench, its level is added; if it came from the general surface, no
provenience is given.
For the 53 objects of chipped stone, the probable source of the
material is usually indicated. Most of these objects ( 45) are Alibates
flint; one is Tecovas flint; one is Edwards flint; and six are miscellaneous rocks of indeterminate origin. The Alibates flint probably
came from the Alibates dolomite member of the Quartermaster formation of uppermost Permian age. Silicified zones in the Alibates
dolomite outcrop at several places on both sides of the Canadian River
north of Amarillo. The Tecovas flint probably came from the Tecovas
formation of upper Triassic age, which contains siliceous lenses outcropping in numerous places along the eastern Caprock escarpment
from Palo Duro Canyon southward. The Edwards flint may have
come from the Edwards formation of lower Cretaceous age in Central
Texas.
Although Alibates and Tecovas flints are not invariably distinguishable megascopically (Green and Kelley, 1960 ) , my geological and
archeological experience in this region leads me to believe that the
distinction generally is reliable and important enough to be worth
recording.
POTTERY

The Lake Creek site produced 48 sherds of two very different kinds
of pottery which may be characterized as corded ware and plain ware.
Corded ware. Most of the sherds ( 43 ) belong to a distinctive type
of corded ware. Except for one rim sherd ( #121 , 12.-18" ), all are
body fragments. Only seven of the corded sherds came from the test
trench ( # 113, 6-12" ; # 121 through 125, 1Z-18"; and # 149, c-12" ) .
The other 36 corded sherds were surface finds ( # 16 through 26 and
54 through 78 ) .
The outer surface of the body sherds is predominantly gray, ranging
from light brown to black. It show,. the marks of a cord-or fabricwrapped paddle. The cord impressions on most sherds are too indistinct
for the arrangement to be clear; on several examples they are rather
deep and coarse, showing a roughly parallel, widely spaced arrangement; on a few others (Fig. 1, a ), an open-mesh, fabric-like pattern
is suggested by additional transverse impressions. The inner surface

70

TEXAS ARCHEOL OGI CAL SOCIETY

e

j

9

,,

m

k.

I

()

w

v
Fig . 1 . Ariifac ls from the La ke Creek site . a-b , corded wa re; c-d , plain w are ; e-i, light
points ; j, medium point ; k-1 , heavy points; m, beveled kn ife ; n-p, pla in knives ; q-r, fla ke

knives ; s-u, end scra pe rs ; v, side scraper; w , fla ke scraper; x-z , gravers .

LAKE CREEK SITE

71

is similar in color to the outer, tends to be rather uneven, has small
cracks and pits, and visible particles of temper.
The core of the sherds tends to be darker than the surfaces. The
paste has abundant coarse temper of angular limestone particles and
rounded quartz grains in a bout equal proportions. The "limestone"
may be caliche or dolomite rather than ordinary limestone. The paste
is soft and lumpy, the edge of the sherd crumbling easily under the
thumbnail. Vessel walls were rather thick; measurement of 25 unsplit
sherds showed an average and m edian thickness of 11 mm. , and a
range of 7 to 13 mm.
The body sherds do not reveal much about vessel size and shape,
the largest fragment having a maximum dimension of 64 mm. Curvature of even the largest sherds is slight, suggesting big vessels; none
of the sherds shows the high curvature of a little vessel. That the
vessels may have been shoulderless is hinted by the absence of any
fragments representing a neck-shoulder junction. The possibility of
pointed bottoms is indicated by one body sherd ( #122, 12- 18") which
becomes thicker and more strongly curved toward one end.
The rim sherd ( # 121, 12-18", Fig. 1, b ) resembles the body sherds,
but gives a little more information o.bout form and decoration. It indicates a vessel having the upper part contracting gradually toward a
somewhat thinned and slightly everted lip, the outer surface of the
upper part being smoothed, and decorated below the lip with long
incised diagonal lines.
Although this corded ware may represent the same general ceramic
tradition as the Borger Cordmarked type characteristic of the Antelope
Creek Focus or Panh andle Aspect (Suhm et al., 1954, pp. 390-93), it
belongs to a different type as yet undefined in this region. The traits
of fabric-marking, limestone temper, shoulderless form, pointed
bottom, and diagonal-incised decoration all point toward an earlier
Woodland horizon.
Plain ware. A ceramic tradition quite different from that of the
corded type is represented by five plain body sherds ( #27, 28, 52, 53,
and 139, 18-24" ) .
The outer surface of these sherds is light brown to dark gray, undecorated, smooth and even, and sometimes has a few specks of temper
visible. The inner surface is similar but lighter in shade.
The core is dark brown to black. The paste is tempered with abundant fine angular particles of feldspar. The paste is compact and homogeneous, the edge of the sherd flaking with some difficulty under the

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

thumbnail. Vessel walls were moderate in thickness, one sherd having
a thickness of 5 mm. , three of 7 mm. , and one of 8 mm.
Curvature of all fragments is slight, indicating fair-sized vesselsthe largest piece is 64 mm. across. There is no clue as to vessel form.
Two sherds ( #52, Fig. 1, c; #139 ,18-24", Fig. 1, d ) have a repair
hole drilled near the edge.
This plain pottery closely resembles the so-called "brown ware" of
the middle Pecos River valley in eastern New Mexico (Jelinek, 1958).
PROJECTILE POINTS

Eleven specimens are classifiable as projectile points, representing
three mai11 categories- light, medium, and heavy.
Light points. Most of the projectile points ( seven ) are the relatively
small and thin kind usually regarded as arrow points. The light points
include ovate, triangular, side-notched, and corner-notched forms, and
unclassifiable fragments.
The single light ovate specimen ( # 2, Fig. 1, e) is ti pless, measures
? X 17.0 X 3.8 mm., and is milky Alibates. Points of this type (cf.
Young points) occur sparsely in several late complexes of this region.
One of the two light triangular points ( # 34, Fig. 1, f ) is complete,
has a convex base, slightly convex lateral edges (one edge has an accidental nick), measures 30.6 X 15 .3 X 3.9 mm., and is maroon Alibates.
The other ( #132, 18-24", Fig. 1, g ) is tipless, has a straight base,
straight to slightly convex blade edges, measures 17+ X 19.0 X 4.2
mm., and is maroon Alibates. Light triangular points (cf. Fresno
points) are not uncommon locally in several late complexes. The base
is more often straight or concave than convex.
The one light side-notched point ( #1, Fig. 1, h ) is complete and unusually small, measuring 20.8 X 9.5 X 2.5 mm. Unlike most light sidenotched points, maximum width occurs at the notches rather than at
the base. The base is also unusual in being convex rather than straight
or concave. The blade edges are convex, with small notches located
closer to the base than usual. Width between the notches-a possible
indication of foreshaft diameter-is 6.4 mm. The material is milky
Alibates. Except for the peculiarities noted, this specimen resembles
the Harrell point, characteristic of the Antelope Creek Focus and other
late complexes hereabouts.
The one light corner-notched point ( # 3, Fig. 1, i) has the tips of the
barbs and the corners of the base missing. It measures 25.5 X 15 + X
3. 7 mm. It was notched diagonally from the basal corners to produce

73

LAKE CREEK SITE

an expanding stem and pronounced barbs. The base seems to have been
straight; the blade edges are concave. Minimum stem width-which
may conform to foreshaft diameter-is 5.5 mm. Material is milky Alibates. Points of this type (cf. Scallorn points) occur locally in several
late complexes; they are not characteristic of the Antelope Creek
Focus.
Unclassifiable fragments of light points include a tip fragment
( #101 ) of maroon and yellow flint which may be Tecovas, and a
medial fragment ( #133, 18-24") ofmaroonAlibates.
Medium points. One point represented only by a stem fragment
( #4, Fig. 1, j) appears to have been intermediate in weight ( and
size ) between the light and heavy points often regarded respectively as
arrow and dart points. The stem fragment apparently belonged to a
corner-notched point. The edges expand from a neck width of 9.6 mm.
(foreshaft diameter?) to a base width of 13.3 mm. The base is convex.
The stem is about 10 mm. long. It is milky Alibates. Similar points are
found locally in several middle to late contexts; they are not typical of
the Antelope Creek Focus.
Heavy points. Two of the three heavy points are corner-notched; one
is an unclassifiable tip fragment.
One of the heavy corner-notched points ( #107, 6-12", Fig. 1, k )
is complete except for a missing barb. Diagonal notching from the base
corners gives a sharply expanding stem and definite barbs. Neck width
is 11.8 mm., base width 18.3 mm. The base is slightly convex and the
blade edges are straight. The point measures 33.5 X 22+ X 4. 7 mm. It
is maroon Alibates. The other example ( #5 , Fig. 1, 1) is a stem fragment that is slightly larger than the stem of the complete specimen and
more flaring from a wider neck (12.8 mm.) toward a wider base (19.8
mm. ) . The base is slightly convex. Material is milky Alibates. Locally such points (cf. Ellis points) characterize several middle to late
complexes, but not the Antelope Creek Focus.
The unclassifiable tip fragment ( #6) is pink Alibates. It may
represent a knife rather than a heavy point.
KNIVES

Eleven bifacially chipped flint artifacts probably were used chiefly
as cutting tools. Three main categories-beveled, plain, and flake
knives-are recognizable.
Beveled knife. A small tip fragment (#35, Fig. 1, m) of a narrowpointed, straight-edged knife of milky Ali bates has a right-bevel (when

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the specimen is lying on either face, pointing upward, beveling is visible on the right edge). Diamond-shaped, alternate-beveled knives are
characteristic of the Antelope Creek Focus and other late complexes in
the Panhandle.
Plain knives. Six knives are plain in the sense that they are not
beveled. Several sizes and shapes are represented.
One tipless plain knife ( #114, 12-18", Fig. 1, n ) of maroon Alibates is small, thick, and ovate, has a rounded base, and measures
? X 26.2 X 10.0 mm.
The basal portion ( #36, Fig. 1, o ) of a large, thin, presumably ovate
plain knife with flattened base is milky Ali bates.
Three tip fragments suggest plain knives of medium size. One ( # 7)
of translucent orange quartzite is medium thick with convex edges.
Another ( #150, 12-18", Fig. 1, p ) of pink Alibates is thin with
convex edges. Another thin tip ( #37 ) of maroon and milky Alibates
is crudely flaked, with straight edges and blunted point.
One plain knife of pink and brown Alibates is represented only by a
small piece of its thin convex edge ( # 134, 18-24" ) .
Flake knives. This category includes four flakes with bifacially retouched edges. One is pointed; the rest are unshaped.
One medium-sized flake knife of maroon Alibates ( #50, Fig. 1, q )
has a thin point with short bifacial retouching on one edge and longer
unifacial retouching on the other; the opposite end is wide, thick, and
unworked.
Three other flake knives of irregular outline are unworked except
for a single long bifacially retouched edge. One flake ( #40 ) of blue
and gray Alibates is small and thin with a straight worked edge. A
larger flake ( #145, 24-30", Fig. 1, r ) of maroon Alibates also is thin
and has a straight worked edge. The worked edge on another flake of
maroon Alibates ( #115, 12-18"), small and thick, is convex.
SCRAPERS

Twenty-one unifacially chipped flint artifacts probably served
mainly as scraping tools. Principal categories distinguishable are end,
side, and flake scrapers.
End scrapers. Six specimens are assignable to this category. Two
varieties-snub-nosed and thin-bitted-are recognizable.
Five incomplete specimens appear to represent ordinary snub-nosed
end scrapers of medium size and thickness. Three are bit fragments
and two are medial fragments. One bit fragment ( #41, Fig. 1, s) has:

LAKE CREEK SITE

75

a very steep, slightly convex bit; a flat dorsal face worked on both lateral edges; and retouching on one edge of the ventral face. It is milky
Alibates, measuring ? X 28 X 8 mm. Another bit fragment (#105,
0-6", Fig. 1, t) has a less steep, more rounded bit, and a low-peaked
dorsal face roughly worked on both lateral edges. Of buff Alibates, it
measures ? X 32 X 10 mm. Another bit fragment ( #9) has a heatdamaged bit and a low-ridged dorsal face with worked parallel lateral
edges, one edge being slightly worn. It is maroon Alibates and measures ? X 32 X 11 mm. One medial fragment ( #8) of maroon Ali bates
has a flat dorsal face with worked lateral edges expanding bitward. The
other medial fragment (#42) of gray Edwards is similar except for
some retouching on both lateral edges of the ventral face .
One end scraper bit fragment ( #47, Fig. 1, u) differs from the rest
in being thinner and narrower toward the bit than toward the base; it
is also smaller, measuring ? X 22 X 5 mm. The bit and lateral edges
form a worked parabola around the flat dorsal face. Material is milky
Ali bates.
Side scraper. A tabular flake fragment of smoky chalcedony ( #43,
Fig. 1, v), of medium size and thickness, with both ends broken away,
has one long, slightly convex edge dorsally pressure-flaked and retouched, and a short, straight, convergent part of the opposite edge
dorsally retouched. It measures 34+ X 29 X 10 mm. It could be part of
a peculiar end scraper, but seems more likely to represent a side
scraper.
Flake scrapers. Grouped under this heading are 14 flakes and flake
fragments unworked except for some retouching along one or more
edges of the dorsal face. The complete and broken flakes are of various
shapes; they range in size from very small to medium, and in thickness from thin to thick. Parts of one or two edges may be retouched,
varying a good deal in length of retouching, and in shape of the retouched edge, which may be straight, convex, sinuous, or rounded.
Except for one specimen, all are Alibates.
No. 10 is a small thick flake of maroon and milky Ali bates retouched
on two slightly convex edges forming a corner. No. 11 is a small thin
flake of maroon Alibates retouched on one convex edge. No. 12 is a very
small thin flake fragment of milky Alibates retouched on one convex
edge. No. 38 is a small thick flake fragment of milky and maroon Alibates retouched on one rounded edge. No. 45 is a small thin flake fragment of milky and maroon Alibates retouched on two sinuous edges.
No. 46 is a small medium-thick flake fragment of milky Alibates retouched around a corner. No. 48 is a small thin flake of maroon Ali-

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

bates retouched on one rounded end. No. 49 is a medium-sized thick
flake fragment of milky Alibates retouched on one convex edge. No.
108, 6-12", is a small thick flake fragment of maroon Alibates retouched on one convex edge. No. 117, 12-18", is a small thick flake
fragment of milky Alibates retouched on one straight edge. No. 118,
12- 18", is a very small thick flake fragment of maroon Alibates retouched on one straight edge. No. 136, 18-24", is a very small thin
flake of milky and maroon Alibates retouched on one convex edge. No.
137, 18-24", is a medium-sized and medium-thick flake of colorful
silicified wood retouched on one rounded corner. No. 151, 12-18", Fig.
1, w , is a medium-sized thin flake of maroon Alibates retouched on
one convex edge.
GRAVERS

Three unifaces may have functioned as gravers. These are small
flint chips of irregular outline with edges dorsally retouched so as to
produce one or more small beaks.
One small thin flake fragment of milky Alibates ( #13, Fig. 1, x)
has a single beak between finely retouched concavities near the middle
of a convex edge. A larger thicker flake of maroon and milky Alibates
( #44, Fig. 1, y ) has two beaks with retouched concavities between
them and on both sides, as well as a retouched straight edge on the
opposite side of the flake . One flake fragment of maroon Alibates
( #116, 12-18", Fig. 1, z), of similar size but greater thickness, has
two slightly concave edges crudely worked to form a strong sharp
point.
BLADE

One piece of pink and milky Ali bates ( # 39) appears to be the broad
thick tip fragment of a percussion-flaked blade or blank.
This artifact ( #110, 6-12", Fig. 2, a ) is a tabular piece of buff
chert, roughly trianguloid in outline, with one edge sharpened by
removal of a few chips by percussion from one face. Most of the rest
of the artifact is encrusted with a thick patina. It is small as choppers
go, measuring 69 X 65 X 27 mm.
CHOPPER-HAMMER

This artifact ( #79) is a block of translucent gray quartzite broken
away from one corner of a large stream-worn cobble. The broken face
is percussion-flaked at one end to produce a sharp edge, and the rest

77

L AKE CREEK SI TE

CHOPPER

Fig. 2 . Artifacts from the La ke Cre e k site . a, chopper; b, hammer; c, oval mano ; d , thin
mano ; e , b • vebd mano ; f, wedge-shaped mano ; g, thin slab ; h, thick slab .

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of this face is battered around the
111 X 77 X 55 mm.

·~dges

from hammering. It measures

HAMMER

This artifact ( #80, Fig. 2, b ) is a yellow-crusted stream pebble of
light gray andesite porphyry. The original tetrahedral shape of the
pebble is unmodified except for a battered edge at one end. It measures
105 >< 62 X 42 mm.
CORES

A polyhedral block of maroon Ali bates flint ( #51 ) the size of a
small fist evidently had a number of flakes removed from it by percussion. Two other fragments of maroon Alibates (#109, 6-12", and
# 135, 18-24") show percussion flaking.
MANOS

Twenty-one manos, only five of which are complete, may be sorted
into oval, rectanguloid, beveled, wedge-shaped, and unclassifiable
categories. As a whole they are small relative to the usual mano size
in this region ; only two or three approach medium size. Grinding
surfaces rarely show peck-marks. Materials are mainly sandstones
and gneisses. All materials are available locally: the sandstones occur
in bedrock and in gravels; the gneisses, other metamorphic rocks and
various igneous rocks occur in gravels. The finer-grained reddish
sandstones probably come from Permian or Triassic formations, the
coarser-grained grayish sandstones from Triassic or Tertiary beds.
Oval manos. Most of the manos ( 11 ) are of this type. Only two are
complete; the rest are end fragments, except for one longitudinally
split specimen. Most of these manos are small thick oval stream
pebbles, little modified except for more or less grinding on one or both
faces. The worn face is transversely convex, the convexity varying
from nearly flat to highly arched.
Six of the oval manos, all end fragments, are bifacially worn. One
fragment ( #84 ) represents the lar gest mano in the collection, approaching medium size for the region; it is a light gray to brown,
coarse-grained, hard gneiss pebble with one face slightly convex and
the other highly convex, the latter retaining a few peck-marks. Another ( #85) is light brown, fine-grained, medium-hard sandstone
with both faces moderately convex. Another ( #86) is a light gray to
reddish, fine-grained, hard gneiss pebble with both slightly convex

LAKE CREEK SITE

79

faces showing much wear. Another ( #119, 12-18") is brown, finegrained, hard sandstone with both frees moderately convex. Another
( #89 ) is light gray to brown, coarse-grained, medium-hard sandstone
with one face slightly convex, the other largely split away. The last
of the bifacially worn oval manos ( #111 , 6-12" ) is a red, mediumgrained, hard gneiss pebble with both faces moderately convex.
Five of the oval manos are unifacially worn. Two are complete,.
two are end fragments, and one is a side fragment. One of the complete
specimens ( #81 , Fig. 2, c) is a red, coarse-grained, hard gneiss pebble
with a slightly worn, slightly convex face; size is 105 X 61 X 42 mm.
The other complete specimen ( # 82) is similar except that it is a
reddish, fine-grained, hard andesite pebble ; it measures 95 X 62 X 37
mm. One of the end fragments ( #83 ) is a reddish, medium-grained,
hard gneiss pebble with a moderately worn, slightly convex face. The
other end fragment ( #102 ) is a light brown, fine-grained, hard andesite pebble with a slightly worn, moderately convex face. The side
fragment ( #87 ) is a light gray to brown, fine-grained, hard gneiss
p ebble with a well-worn , slightly convex face retaining a few peckmarks.
Thin manos. This group consists of one complete specimen and three
edge fragments which may represent a similar kind of mano. The
complete specimen ( # 30, Fig. 2, d ) not only is thinner th;m the oval
manos, but also is more rectangular and somewhat larger, approaching medium size for the region; it measures 108 X 78 X 30 mm. It is
a light brown, medium-grained, hard gneiss pebble. Both faces are
much worn, one slightly convex, the other moderately so, in such a
way that on both faces the crest of the convexity runs diagonally
across the long axis of the mano from upper left to lower right corners
(when either face of the mano is observed with the long axis in a horizontal position ) . The three edge fragments resemble this specimen in
thinness; size and shape are indeterminate. One ( #120, 12-18" ) is
light brown, fine-grained, medium-hard sandstone with two wellworn, slightly convex faces. Another ( #91) is similar except for light
gray color. Another (#90 ) is pinkish, medium-grained, medium-hard
sandstone with only one grinding surface, well-worn and slightly
convex.
Beveled manos. Two manos, one complete and the other essentially
so, are worn in a peculiar fashion. Both are small thick oval pebbles
of light gray to brown, medium-grained, hard sandstone. The complete
specimen ( #93, Fig. 2, e ) has one face steeply beveled toward both
e:ids by much grinding in such a way that a sharp crest runs diago-

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nally across the long axis of the mano from upper left to lower right
corners (with the specimen oriented as described above ) . It measures
94 X 61 X 54 mm. The damaged specimen ( # 31 ) has both faces
beveled in this manner, the form of the mano resembling that produced by cupping the left hand across the right hand. It measures
87 X 67 + X 38 mm.
Wedge-shaped manos. Two other manos also are worn peculiarly.
Both are small, squarish, made of brown, fine-grained, medium-hard
sandstone, and much worn bifacially so that one end is much thinner
than the other. One is complete, the other is a side fragment. The complete specimen ( #29, Fig. 2, f ) , measuring 84 X 83 X 41 mm., has
slightly convex faces with low crests running diagonally across the
long axis of the mano in the same direction noted for previously described manos. The side fragment ( #88 ), split from thick end to thin
end, has flat faces; it measures 85 X ? X 42 mm.
Unclassifiable mano fragments. A probable central fragment of a
mano is a small block of light brown, medium-grained, medium-hard
sandstone ( #112, 6-12" ) with one flat worn surface. A probable edge
fragment is a large chip of light gray, medium-grained, medium-hard
sandstone ( #92 ) with a flat worn surface.
Most of the manos from the Lake Creek site resemble those of
various non-ceramic complexes in the Panhandle more closely than
those of the Antelope Creek Focus, which are generally larger, thicker,
more rectanguloid in outline, and less aberrant in manner of grinding.
GRINDING SLABS

Ten grinding slabs are separable into thin and thick groups. The
thin slabs are sandstone, the thick are dolomite. Most of the specimens
are small fragments; only one is complete.
Thin slabs. Of the seven thin slabs, one is complete, three are edge
fragments , and three are central fragments. The complete specimen
( # 33, Fig. 2, g ) is rather small relative to the usual slab size in this
region, measuring 375 X 250 X 85 mm. It is brown, fine-grained,
medium-hard sandstone, oval in outline, with edges partly shaped by
chipping. Worn into one face is a long oval trough, rather deep and
narrow-140 mm. wide and 30 mm. deep. The trough has much
higher sides than ends, giving an open-ended effect. The rim of the
trough is worn flat near one corner of the slab. A slightly convex
portion of the opposite face also shows some wear.
The three edge fragments are worn more or less concavely on one
face only, and show no definite shaping of the roughly convex edges.

81

LAKE CREEK SITE

One (#97) is a large fragment 0£ a thin slab (maximum thickness
40 mm.) of light brown, fine-grained, hard sandstone. Its basin evidently was quite shallow. Another (#138, 18-24") is a smaller piece
of a somewhat thicker slab (maximum thickness 50 mm. ) which evidently possessed a deeper basin with a thin bottom. It is light gray,
fine-grained, medium-hard sandstone. Another (#96 ) is a small fragment of gray, fine-grained, soft sandstone. The slab was thin (maximum thickness 38 mm. ) , and the worn concavity suggests an openended trough like that of the complete slab described above.
Two of the three central fragments are worn on both faces. One
( # 32) is a very small piece of white, coarse-grained, hard sandstone
with one face worn deeply concave, the other worn flat; the bottom
of the basin evidently was very thin. Another (#98 ) is a large fragment of pinkish, medium-grained, medium-hard sandstone with both
faces worn very slightly concave. Another ( #94) is a small thin
fragment of light gray, medium-grained, medium-hard sandstone with
one flat-worn face.
These thin grinding slabs resemble those of various local non-pottery
assemblages.
Thick slabs. This type of slab is represented by a large end fragment,
a smaller corner fragment, and a very small central fragment. All are
white, fine, hard Alibates dolomite. The end fragment (#100, Fig.
2, h ) indicates a very thick slab of medium size ( ? X 220 X 105 mm.)
and subrectangular outline, with edges partly shaped by chipping.
The worn oval basin in one face evidently was more than 35 mm.
deep. The smaller corner fragment (#99 ) indicates a slab not quite
so thick with a basin not quite so deep. The very small central fragment (#95) has a worn and pecked concavity on one face, the other
being split away; it is grouped with the larger pieces because it has
the same composition.
The usual grinding slab of the Antelope Creek Focus resembles these
specimens in both form and material.
BoNE BEAD

A tubular bird bone bead (#140, 18-24") may be represented by
a weathered half-cylinder of thin bone, 17.2 mm. long and about 8
mm. in diameter, which appears to have been cut at both ends.
ANIMAL REMAINS

In the collection from the Lake Creek site are 21 unworked pieces
of animal material. Bison is represented by two teeth (#128, 12-18";

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

#141, 18-24" ); one limb bone fragment ( # 106, 0-6" ) ; six foot bones
( #14; #103; #127, 12-18" ; #142, 18-24" ; #143, 18-24" ; #152,
24-30" ) ; and two rib fragments ( #129, 12-18" ; #130, 12-18" ) .
Deer: one foot bone fragment ( #104 ). Jackrabbit: one tooth ( #144,
18-24"); one limb bone fragment ( #131 , 12-18" ) . A small unidentified rodent: one limb bone fragment ( #146, 24-30"). T errapin: two
shell fragments ( #147, 24-30"; #148, 24-30" ). Mussel: four shell
fragments ( #15 ; #126, three pieces, 12-18" ) .

Conclusions
The Lake Creek site made an uttractive camping place for small
groups of prehistoric Indians, situated as it is on a sm all bench very
close to spring water but well above flood level, in a sh eltered part of
a little valley with plenty of timber , game, and other r esources.
Present evidence indicates that the site was occupied long enough
for accumulation of an occupational zone about 1 foot thick; abandoned during deposition of about 1 foot of blow sand; and reoccupied
very briefly when the surface w as about as it is now.
The only items referable with much certainty to the latest occupation found at or near the surface of the test trench are a bit fragm ent of a snub-nosed end scraper, a bison limb bone fragment, and
som e burned rocks.
Found in the buried occupational zone in the test trench, and almost
certainly referable to the earlier occupation, are the following items:
eight corded sherds of Woodland ware; one plain sherd of Pecos valley
" brown ware"; one light triangular point; one medial fragment of a
light point; one heavy corner-notched point; one small ovate plain
knife; one tip fragment of a plain knife; one edge fragment of a plain
knife ; one graver; two flake knives ; six flake scrapers; one chopper;
two core fragments; one bone bead; two bison teeth ; four bison foot
bones; two bison rib fragments; one jackrabbit tooth; one jackrabbit
limb bone fragment; one small unidentified rodent limb bone fragment; two terrapin shell fragments; three mussel shell fragments; and
a quantity of unworked flint flakes and burned rocks .
It seems very likely that most of the rest of the collection, gathered
from the eroded edges of the site, also belongs to the earlier occupation,
although any particular item, of course, could as well represent the
later occupation. The surface finds could represent the Antelope Creek
Focus, or more broadly, the Panhandle Aspect, except for the following items which rarely or never appear in this complex: Woodland
sherds ; Pecos valley " brown ware" sherds; a light side-notched point

LAKE CREEK SITE

83

rather different from the usual Harrell point; corner-notched light,
medium, and heavy points; beveled and wedge-shaped manos; and
thin grinding slabs. Several traits most distinctive of the Panhandle
Aspect are lacking among the surface finds, chiefly Borger Cordmarked
sherds and ordinary Harrell points. The only artifacts in the entire
collection which have been considered diagnostic of the Panhandle
Aspect are the thick grinding slabs found on the surface.
Although it is not clear, therefore, whether the latest occupation
represents the Panhandle Aspect or some other complex, the conclusion seems inescapable that the earlier occupation represents a complex quite different from the Panhandle Aspect.
At present this complex, which may be designated the Lake Creek
Focus, seems to be characterized chiefly by a distinctive type of Woodland pottery associated with large to small corner-notched projectile
points. Full definition of the focus is not yet possible.
As for the temporal position of the focus , a few clues are available,
but much more work at the Lake Creek site, and at other components
elsewhere in the region, will be needed to establish the age of the
complex satisfactorily. The fact that the type component of the complex is buried under a foot of blow sand does not necessarily imply
much antiquity; many of the latest manifestations in the Panhandle
have a much thicker eolian overburden. Some light may be shed on
the age of the focus if further work at the Lake Creek site can determine the identity and age of the component which overlies the Lake
Creek component. Further work at the site probably would produce
enough organic remains for radiocarbon dating of the Lake Creek
component.
At present, perhaps the best indication of the age of the Lake Creek
Focus is provided by the definitely associated trade pottery from the
Pecos valley. According to Jelinek ( 1958 ) , the Pecos valley pottery
was being manufactured from aboc1t A.D. 950 to 1300.
A date well before A.D. 1300 is also indicated by trait similarities
of the Lake Creek Focus with complexes which are older than the
Upper Republican Aspect in the Central Plains and the closely related
Panhandle Aspect of the southern High Plains, since the Upper Republican Aspect is now thought to have originated as early as A.D. 1000
(Wedel, 1959: 570 ) , and the Panhandle Aspect as early as A.D.
1100 ( Suhm et al., 1954: 392). Similarities with the Woodland complexes which pre-date the Upper Republican Aspect are provided by
the corded pottery, which closely resembles Woodland ware in essential traits of surface finish, tempering material, and vessel shape, and
by the light to heavy corner-notched points. Similarities with certain

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

as yet undefined complexes of a late pre-pottery (late Meso-Indian
or Archaic ) stage of development which locally pre-date the Panhandle Aspect are provided by the points, and by the grinding implements.
Although Woodland pottery, and all other elements of the Lake
Creek Focus, are known from various sites in this region, nothing is
known as yet about the distribution of the particular complex 0£ traits
which constitutes the focus.
Use of local flint for most of the chipped stone artifacts suggests
that the Lake Creek Focus represents a group residing in this region
rather than one passing through it. All in all, the trait assemblage is
suggestive of a local complex which has passed from a late pre-pottery
(Meso-Indian or Archaic) stage of development into an early pottery
(Neo-Indian or Neo-American) stage, largely through the borro'<ving
of a Woodland tradition of pottery-making.
The general character of the pottery, the light triangular points,
and certain other traits indicate that the Lake Creek Focus ultimately
may be shown to have a place somewhere in the genealogy of the
Panhandle Aspect.
Perhaps the most significant discovery at the Lake Creek site was
the finding of Woodland and Puebloan sherds in clear association. This
is an important addition to the accumulating evidence of cultural exchange between the Plains and the Southwest at an early date.

References Cited
Green, F. Earl, and Jane Holden Kelley
1960. Comments on Alibates Flint. American Antiquity, Vol. 25, No. 3. pp.
413-414.
Grinnell, George Bird
1923. Bent's Old Fort and Its Builders. Collections of the Kansas State Hi storical
Society, 1919-22, Vol. 15, pp. 28-91.
Jelinek, Arthur J.
1958. Archaeological Materials from the Middle Pecos River, New Mexico.
Papers of the Michigan Academy ,of Sciences, Arts, and Letters, Vol. 43,
pp. 159-168.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 174.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
Canyon, Texas

The White Site: An Historic Indian
Burial In Yoakum County, Texas
DEE ANN SUHM

Introduction
In the summer of 1955, J. D. White, in the course of levelling a
freshly plowed field, uncovered objects of historical and archeological
interest. Unable to investigate the site himself, Mr. White reported
the find to H. C. Morgan who, along with several friends, undertook
limited excavation. Shortly thereafter, news of the discovery reached
the l\1useum at Texas Technological College. After an examination of
the site by William M. Pearce and A. A. Andretta, members of the
Tech Museum field school, under the direction of Jane Holden Kelley,
spent most of one day excavating what remained of the site.
The White Site lies in the southwestern portion of Yoakum County,
approximately seven miles west and two miles north of Denver City,
Texas. Since at the time of investigation the site had been badly disturbed-in fact, almost entirely destroyed-by deep plowing, the
exact structure and extent of the site is impossible to determine. The
limited data available, however, indicate that the artifacts were concentrated in a relatively small area, approximately 15 to 20 feet
square, and that they were not deeply buried.
In view of these circumstances, the analysis has necessarily focused
upon the objects recovered rather than the specific context of each
find . But, unfortunately, it is difficult to appraise the completeness of
the collection. The site was known to a number of individuals and,
consequently, it is quite possible that some of the artifacts are in private collections. At any rate, the materials examined represent, by
and large, a consistent and significant complex which, with reasonable
assurance, can be identified as an historic Indian burial. As relatively
few historic Texas Indian burials have been described in detail, the
White Site, in spite of the severe disturbance to the burial and the
possible incompleteness of the collection, merits reporting.
In writing this paper I am indebted to The Museum at Texas

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Technological College for generously making available the materials
they collected, as well as the objects from the site donated to them by
H . C. Morgan; to Jane Holden Kelley of Lubbock for her invaluable
cooperation and assistance; to Edward B. Jelks for the section on beads ;
to William W. Newcomb, Jr. , for his many helpful suggestions; to
Florence E. Petzel for analysis of the textiles; and, finally, to Chris
Jelks and Hal M. Story for the illustrations which greatly enhance
this report.

Objects Recovered
The more than 2,000 specimens from the White Site can generally
be sorted into two major categories: personal paraphernalia and horse
trappings. While this gross breakdown has some measure of validity
and utility, there are specific subgroupings, such as conchas, which
are not mutually exclusive, and others, such as buckles, which are
somewhat arbitrarily assigned to one or the other major category.
Fortunately, the excellent preservation of materials, especially when
used in conjunction with ethnographic observations, provides an unusually good opportunity to examine function. The main emphasis,
however, has been placed on a detailed description of the objects
collected from the site. Comparative materials have been introduced
whenever possible, although no attempt has been made to provide an
exhaustive account.

Human Skeletal Remains
All human bones recovered belong to a young child (Fig. 8, 0)
probably between one and three years of age at the time of death
(T . W. McKern, personal communication ) . Many of the bones have
traces of a greenish stain derived from the numerous metal objects
which accompanied the burial. Considering the age of the individual
and the disturbance caused by the plow, the skeleton is surprisingly
well represented. Specifically, those parts found include a humerus,
radius, ulna, two probable finger bones, a tibia fragment, a fibula ,
portions of the lower jaw, eight teeth, a number of rib and vertebra
fragments, part of a clavicle, a nearl y complete scapula, and slightly
less than a third of the skull.
Since the bones were scattered by the plow, none of the details of
burial can be determined. Thus, the possibility of establishing tribal
identity is rendered difficult on several counts: condition of the bones,
age of the individual, and lack of specific data on mode of interment.

WHITE SITE

87

However, it is interesting and significant to note that such copious
and valuable offerings (assuming that virtually all artifacts found
and described herein were intended as burial furniture) should be
placed in the grave of such a young child. It is, therefore, possible that
the child was a male member of an important and well-to-do family;
or that one or more adults were also buried at the site. The latter
hypothesis seems more in keeping vvith the richness of the offerings,
but is not-because of the circumstances of excavation?-supported
by actual skeletal remains .
Brass bells (Fig. 1, A, B). So-called hawk or morris b8lls (Quimby,
1938 ) are represented by 27 complete or nearly complete specimens,
and by 22 small, unrestorable fragments. Each bell is formed from
two hemispheres of sheet brass joined together by rolling of the joint
and/ or solder. Obvious clappers are lacking, although four of the
complete bells did contain poorly preserved pieces of calcite which
could have served as such. The calcite pebbles, however, are heavily
coated with iron sulfides of copper and may be fortuitous deposits
which collected in the bell interiors.
In spite of being similar in many ways, two kinds of bells can be
recognized. The most common type (Fig. 1, A ) -25 of the complete
specimens and probably most of the fragments- is almost a perfect
sphere: 21 mm. in diameter and 20 mm. in height. The upper or
proximal parts have centrally placed, thin ( 1 mm. in diameter) brass
wire loops or shanks which provided for attachment to cloth or leather.
The distal end of each bell has two narrow slits (2.5 mm. wide and
11 mm. long ) which intersect one another and form an equilateral
cross. The two hemispheres are joined together by slight overlapping
(or rolling) of the lower hemisphere over the upper one, and possibly
by the use of solder.
The second type (Fig. 1, B) is represented by two very poorly preserved bells. In general appearance they are squat: 21 mm. in diameter
and approximately 16 mm. in height (the latter dimension is not exact
because of the condition of these bells ) . Attachment loops are of
narrow (2 mm. ) sheet brass rather than wire. This type also differs
from the former in that the two halves were joined by soldering together two narrow (2 mm. ) rims and thus producing a small medial
shelf around the exterior of the finished bell. Since traces of a slit can
be detected on one of the distal ends, it is probable that both, like those
of the first type, had an equilateral cross cut into the base.
Hawk bells have a long history in Europe where, as the name suggests, they ·were attached to the feet of hunting birds. However, the

Personal Paraphernalia

®D
.

.

E

F
G
H

0

2

I

I

I

3

4

I

I

CM
Fig . 1. A, brass bell , type I; B, brass bell, reconstructed, type II ; C, finger ring ; D, glass
button ; E, E', Army button, type I; F, Army button, type II ; G, brass button back still attached
to cloth fragment; H, embossed copper disc; I, I' undecorated copper button ; J , J', copper
(?) jingles ; K, jingles attached to cloth fragment ; L, jingles attached to leather fragment .

WHITE SITE

89

bells from the White Site could not; since they are of sheet brass, they
may not date much before the beginning of the 19th century (Lathrop, 1936; Ford, 1943 ) . There are suggestions (Newcomb, 1955;
Wedel, 1959: 126-127; Woolworth and Wood, 1960: 282) that those
of type I are characteristic of the first part of the 19th century, while
those of type II appear in the latter half of that century.
Copper finger ring (Fig. 1, C). Only one ring was recovered from
the site. It is a simple undecorated band of copper which measures
2.5 mm. in width and 12 mm. in diameter. The ends of the band do
not join and, although considerable adjustment in the diameter is
possible, the ring seems much too large to have been worn on the
finger of the young child represented by the human skeletal remains.
Buttons (Fig. 1, D-G, I, I' ) . Although fairly numerous, the 27
buttons from the White Site can readily be sorted into three distinct
kinds: glass, copper, and brass. The two milk white glass buttons (Fig.
1, D) are mold-made, and are indistinguishable from those that can
be purchased in stores today. They are, consequently, impossible to
date. Both are plain, have four attachment holes, are biconvex, and
have a slight depression in one face. They measure 11 mm. in diameter, and 3 and 4 mm. in thickness. Identical buttons were found with
the Yellowhouse Canyon burial (Newcomb, 1955).
Undecorated copper, or possibly copper alloy, buttons (Fig. 1, I, I' )
are represented by 11 specimens, most of which are complete. They
are of uniform diameter, 26 mm., and thickness, .05 mm. A simple
ring-shaped brass shank (Fig. 1, I') brazed onto the back provided a
means of attachment. None bears a maker's mark, nor any indication
of having once been covered with some other material, such as cloth.
In general they have the appearance of having been cheaply made:
they were punched from thin sheet metal and the edges of the buttons
are not well smoothed. This, coupled with the large diameters, suggests
that they may have been expressly manufactured for Indian trade,
and that they may have been valued more as ornaments than as
buttons per se.
Although a precise date, or range of dates cannot be assigned to
the copper buttons, the manner in which they were manufactured
(i.e., stamped from sheets of metal ) was not utilized in the United
States until about the beginning of the 19th century (Ford, 1943 :
205-206). The stamping or punching of buttons depended upon the
rolling of a metal, a process first tried in Waterbury, Connecticut, in
1790 (ibid.). Previously all one-piece metal buttons (apart from the
shank) were cast.

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Of the 14 brass buttons (Fig. 1, E-F) eight are complete, or nearly
so, and five are small back fragments with shanks still intact. Although
two kinds can be distinguished, all are identifiable as Army uniform
buttons, probably types worn on the dress blouse (E. H. Davis, personal communication; Smith, 1960: 212 ) . One type (Fig. 1, F ) , perhaps characterized solely by a larger diameter ( 19 mm. ), is represented by two very poorly preserved specimens. Other features which
might differentiate this type from that described in more detail below
are-because of the condition of the two specimens- impossible to
observe.
Each of the 12 brass buttons of the second type (Fig. 1, E, E' ) bears
on the back or shank face the manufacture's name: "Scovills & Co.
Extra. " This company and the Horstmann Bros. & Co. were, during
the 19th century, the principal manufacturers of such objects. These,
like the first type, are two part buttons-a kind first developed in the
early 1820's (Ford, 1943 : 206). The front faces bear die-stamped
national emblems: a spread eagle clutching arrows in the right foot
and an olive or laurel (? ) branch in the left foot. (There are indications that the first type had a similar or identical design. ) Both front
and back pieces are made from thin sheet brass. The shanks, also of
brass, extend through the back faces and are bent backward (Fig. 1,
E'), as well as brazed, to insure firm attachment. Somewhat smaller
than the first type, these buttons measure 15 mm. in diameter and
6 mm. in thickness. The shanks are+ mm. across and extend out 5 mm.
from the back face.
Several coarse textile fragments , one with a back fragment still
attached and four with impressions that match the brass buttons,
indicate that these buttons were sewed onto a garment (Fig. 1, G ) .
Unfortunately , not enough remains of the garment to identify it more
precisely .
Similar Army buttons are common and have been reported from
late 19th century military sites (Smith, 1960: 212 ) . Two-part buttons,
on the other hand, could date as early as 1830 (E. H. Davis, personal
communication; Ford, 1943: 206).
Embossed disc (Fig. 1, H ) . A thin copper disc-23 mm. in diameter
- bears on the upper surface an embossed design which resembles the
seal of the State of Texas. In the center is a five-pointed star, and
between each point of the star are three embosses or dots: a large one
(3 mm. in diameter ) flanked by two smaller ones. About the edges of
the disc is a wreath apparently composed of olive branches. The negative design is visible on the reverse side. In addition, the back center

WHITE SITE

91

has traces of iron, perhaps remnants of a shank or a disc. A thick and
badly rusted iron disc, 20 mm. in diameter, found at the site fits fairly
well onto the back side. Thus, it is possible that the copper piece was
screwed on, or in some way attached to the iron disc.
Since the copper piece bears no maker's mark and appears to be a
very cheap product, it may have been designed for use as an insignia
on a Texas Republic or state militia uniform, or perhaps made specifically for trade to the Indians. At any rate, the close similarity to
the Texas seal suggests a connection with some phase of the Republic
or state government. Although there have been changes in the official
seal, the lack of comparative material makes it presently impossible
to precisely date this specimen. However, it was probably made after
1836, when the five-pointed star was first adopted as the seal of the
Republic of Texas.
Copper (or brass?) iingles (Fig. 1, J-L) . Small, spheroidal jingles
number 106, including 26 still secured to cloth and leather fragments.
They are of uniform size: 9 mm. in maximum diameter and 7 mm. in
height. Each consists of two components, a spherical-shaped front and
a disc-shaped back to which the shank is attached. The shanks or eyelets are small oval loops ( 5 mm. in diameter) of thin brass wire. The
ends of the shanks extend through the back faces and are bent backward to prevent them from being pulled out. None of the jingles bears
any decoration.
Those specimens still in place (Fig. 1, K, L) provide interesting
data on modes of attachment and use. All are arranged in either single
( 4 instances) or double ( 1 case) rows. Mounted in this fashion the
jingles served both as ornaments and as noisemakers. That they were
not solely desired as ornaments is further suggested by the looseness
of attachment. Instead of simply sewing them on with thread (as is
indicated for the buttons ) , small slits were made, at intervals of 6 to
11 mm., into t extile ( 1 example) or leather ( 4 examples) garments
( ?) . The shanks of the jingles were then extended through the slits
and a long, narrow piece of leather was passed through each shank.
Copper bangles or tinklers (Fig. 2, A , B). Each of the 20 bangles is
made from a narrow sheet of copper rolled into a cylinder or tube.
Edges of all bangles are flush rather than overlapping. Lengths of the
complete specimens range from 20 to 31 mm., diameters from 3 to
4 mm. Traces of leather within a number of the bangles suggest that
they were formed around ends of thongs which dangled as fringes.
Shell hair pipes (Fig. 2, C) . Fragments of 19 rather long, tubular
beads, which have come to be knov:n as hair pipes or wampum hair

TEXAS ARCH EOLOGICAL SOCIETY

gz

"O
<'.

<!'

1.tf$

0

K

~

>

2

~

4

6

CM

8

10

WHITE SITE

93

pipes, were recovered from the site. None is complete, but most, if not
all, were probably at least 20 or 40 mm. long. Outside diameters range
from 5 to 8 mm.; diameters of the longitudinal perforation, or fenestration, are about 3 mm. Exterior surfaces are badly weathered, but
once must have had a glossy polish.
In an extensive and most useful study of Indian hair pipes, John
Ewers ( 1957) notes that those of shell were first commercially
manufactured for the Indian trade in the latter part of the 18th century, probably between the years 1776 and 1798. Earlier forms were
made of either silver or glass. However, the development of the shell
hair pipes, which perhaps can be traced to John W. Campbell of
Pascack (now Park Ridge), New Jersey (Ewers, 1957: 42), provided
less expensive and more durable trade items. Thus, between the years
ca. 1800 and 1880-when the shell hair pipes began to be replaced by
the even more durable bone ones-these ornaments gained widespread
popularity among the Indians. Throughout most of this period, the
Campbell family nearly succeeded in controlling the manufacture of
shell hair pipes. Since the most common type was made from the lip
of the West Indian conch ( Strombus gigas), it is probable that those
from the White Site are from the same type of shell. Perhaps they
were even made by members of the Campbell family.
Shell hair pipes probably did not reach the southern Plains in any
appreciable number until about 1830. They did not, in fact, truly
become common in that area until after about 1850, when hair-pipe
manufacturing shifted from a hand to a mechanized operation (Ewers,
195 7: 74 ) . In keeping with the relative ease of acquisition, earlier
uses emphasized ear and hair ornaments, and necklaces and chokers;
while in the post-1850 period more extravagant ornaments appeared,
especially breastplates.
The hair pipes from the White Site, if the sample collected is reasonably complete, are hardly numerous enough to account for the
presence of a breastplate. Rather, il simple necklace, ch oker, or hair
ornament seems more likely. Since nwst of these uses continued up to,
or beyond 1880, a wide range of dates, ca. 1830 to at least 1880, is
possible.

Fig . 2 . A, B, coppe r bangles ; C, fragment of she ll hair pipe; D, D', w ide, stamped b racelet; E, na rrow , fragmentary stamped bracelet; F, leather pouch ; G, dressed skin fragment
w ith concha (? ) and b rass be ll impressions ; H, d ressed sk in with beads still intact; I, J ,
portion s of concha belt; K, undecorated bras s wi re brace le t; L-0, design s on brass wire
brace le ts. Sca le of D 1h t hat of othe r ob jects ; L-0 , tw ice that of other ob jects.

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Glass beads (Fig. 2, H) . These are characteristic of middle to late
nineteenth century trade beads in the southern Plains. Four forms
are present: ( 1) tiny, simple seed beads in a variety of colors; (2) tiny,
compound seed beads; ( 3) simple, hexagonal tubular beads; ( 4) one
simple, cylindrical tubular bead. 1 The dimensions, colors, and frequency of the glass beads are given in Table 1. The seed beads were
undoubtedly sewn on clothing, containers, and the like to form designs, while the tubular beads were probably strung into necklaces.
A small fragment of dressed skin (deer)-evidently part of a moccasin, coat, or other item of clothing-has a group of tiny, simple
seed beads still in their original alignment as part of a beadwork
design (Fig. 2, H). The beads are sewn on with fine sinew (?) by
means of a technique known as the lazy stitch; i.e., the beads are
strung on threads which are fastened to the hide of cloth at the ends
of short parallel rows (Douglas, 1951: 90). The design consists of a
band made by placing rows of beads side-by-side, each row containing
eight beads. The beads are arranged by colors to create alternating,
diagonal, colored stripes that slant across the band: first a stripe composed of opaque white beads, then a stripe of translucent dark blue
beads, next another stripe of opaque white, then a stripe of translucent
red, after which the same sequence was apparently repeated. Traces
of vermilion-probably stain from the spilled contents of a small
leather pouch (see below)-are visible at one end of the fragment
beside the beadwork.
In addition to the dressed animal skin, there are two fragmentary
leather scabbards (one may be an awl case) which have parallel rows
of tiny impressions unquestionably made by the seed beads (Fig. 5,
D). The beadwork design on these was probably similar to that in
Fig. 2, H.
Wire bracelets (Fig. 2, K-0). More or less oval-shaped, heavy
(2 to 3 mm. in diameter) brass wire bracelets are well represented
( 70) and include both decorated and undecorated specimens. Of the
more numerous ( 64) undecorated ones, 34 are complete, eight are
about three-quarters complete, and 22 are less than half complete.
All six of the decorated bracelets are incomplete. Most specimens
measure approximately 75 mm. across, although the extreme range
1
The tenns used here for classifying bead structure are those devised by
Duffield and Jelks ( 1961; 40- 41 ) . Beads made from one kind of glass are designated as simple; beads made from two kinds of glass are termed compound.
" Translucent Red/ Opaque VVhite" refers to a bead that has a core of opaque white
glass, over which is a veneer of translu cent red glass.

95

WHITE SITE

TABLE 1
Glass Beads
No.

Fonn

Tiny simple seed beads (diameter:
2--21/z mm.; length: from slightly
less than 1 mm. to 1 Yz mm.; diameter of perforation: less than
1 mm. ) , in various colors:
Opaque white
Opaque yellow
Translucent red
Translucent green
Translucent milky
Opaque ultramarine
Translucent turquoise
Translucent pale blue-green
Opaque chartreuse
Translucent medium
to dark blue
Translucent light blue
Tiny compound seed beads, Translucent Reel/ Opaque White ( diameter: 2- 21/z mm.; length: from
slightly less than 1 mm. to 1 Yz
mm.; diameter of perforation:
less than 1 mm. ) .

449
178

507
12
3
14
17
3
2

178
21
Glass is smooth, with no visible bubbles;
surfaces are unfrosted.

4

Simple hexagonal tubular beads
(diameter: approximately 5 mm. ;
length: 4-6 mm.; diameter of
perforation : 2--3 mm. ) in two
colors:
Translucent amber

Heniarks

Glass is smooth, with no visible bubbles ;
some specimens are frosted on the
exterior, probably due to weathering.

Ends were broken irregularly, then
lightly smoothed.

35

Translucent blue
Simple cylindrical tubular bead,
pale powder blue, fragmentary
(diameter: 8 mm.; length: indeterminate; diameter of perforation: 2 mm. )
TOTAL
11 ,425

These are patinated heavily on the surface and appear purplish-black to the
naked ey e. They must be broken and
held before a strong light before th e
amber color can be discerned.

96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

extends from 39 to 85 mm. With a few exceptions, the wire bracelets,
like the finger ring, are too large to have been worn by a child.
The decorated specimens bear simple, geometric designs (ty pical
examples are shown in Fig. 2, L-0 ) apparently made with a chisel
and a fine rasp. The layout of the decorations suggest that they were
produced before the wire was bent to form bracelets. Edges of both
the decorated and the plain bracelets were sometimes filed.
Since large rolls of heavy brass wire, as well as an assortment of
tools, were often traded to Indians (see Winfrey, 1950a, b ), it is
probable that the bracelets from the White Site are of native manufacture. Certainly, it would have been easy to cut an appropriate
strip of wire and to bend it into shape. Likewise, the simple decorations which appear on several of the specimens are probably of Indian
origin. Although easily made, the wire bracelets, especially when
large numbers were worn, made striking ornaments (see, for example,
the Comanche woman pictured by Wallace and Hoebel, 1952 : 110 ) .
As these bracelets enjoyed long-at least 18th through 19th century
-popularity among a variety of Indians, they cannot be precisely
dated, nor identified with any one tribe.
Stamped bracelets (Fig. 2, D , E ) . The most complete of the two
stamped bracelets is a handsomely decorated specimen made from a
wide (22 mm. ) strip of metal, possibly copper or a copper alloy. Four
rows of continuous, but individually stamped crescents or arches adorn
the entire outside surface (Fig. 2, D' ) . These rows are grouped into
two parallel sets with the arches which make up each set facing one
another. A single die stamp, which measured 3 mm. across, was u sed
to make the design.
The second bracelet (Fig. 2, E ) is about two-thirds complete. It is
made from a narrow ( 8 mm.) strip of metal which appears to taper
very slightly toward the ends. Although badly damaged, traces of a
design can be detected on the exterior surface. Elements visible include
small, engraved ( ?) dots and small, stamped triangles. These are
arranged into clusters, each one of which consists of two vertical rows
of stamped triangles (apexes facing one another) , flanked on each side
by two converging dotted lines. A single triangle appears at the point
of convergence of the dotted lines.
Although the origin of these bracelets remains uncertain, it is possible that they were made by Indians utilizing tools and metals obtained from whites. According to Frederic Douglas (1941 : 15 ) some
of the Plains Indians have been manufacturing metal jewelry since
about 1830. He also notes that:

WHITE SITE

97

Engraving is the old basic method of decoration. Among the Navajo almost
entirely and to some extent on the Plains it has b een replaced by stamping
with dies. Stamping began in the latter region about 1870 ( Douglas,
1941: 14).

Thus, if correctly identified as being of native origin, these bracelets
- and some or all of the other stamped metal ornaments described
below-may provide one of the latest dates (ca. 18 70 ) for the burial.
Such an age seems more in keeping with the number of perishable
objects recovered and, more importantly, with the degree of white
influence. However, the possibility that the bracelets were traded to
the Indians, or even made by a Mexican captive, cannot be denied or
ignored.
Metal conchas (Figs. 3, 4). A striking array-42 more or less complete and 55 unrestorable and unclassifiable fragments- of circular
metal plates or conchas, as they are broadly termed herein, was recovered from the site. Perforations, or fairly wide metal shanks
brazed onto the backs provided m eans of attachment. Most are of
copper or brass; three, however, are of silver, and several may be of
German silver. The latter metal is an alloy of copper, zinc, and nickel
which from about 1865 on was frequently worked by Plains Indians
(Woodward, 1938: 7; Feder, 1962: 66-68). When the complete or
nearly complete conchas are examined in detail, a variety of forms ,
which may in part reflect different uses, can be recognized. These are:
1) The most numerous group (Fig. 3, A, B) consists of 19 undecorated specimens which are pronouncedly convex (Fig. 3, A' ) and
which have two small perforations along opposing edeges of the
concha. The perforations were made by driving a sharp implement,
an awl or nail, through the metal from the underneath side. Jagged
edges of the perforations are still visible on the exterior surfaces.
Diameters of these conchas vary considerably, from 24 to 65 mm. One
is of silver (Fig. 3, A, A'); the remainder are of copper or copper
alloys. The copper conchas are of sheet metal, generally less than
1 mm. thick; the silver one is slightly thicker and could have been
made from a silver coin. The latter is distinctive in another respect: it
has a third perforation. This third hole is much smaller in diameter
( 1.5 versus 3 mm. ) and is placed next to one of the larger perforations.
2) A second, less numerous group-four nearly complete specimens
and fragments of at least another two--are distinguished by one, or
perhaps two centrally placed perforations and by rims bent downward (Fig. 3, C) . With one exception (Fig. 3, D) they are undecorated. Diameters are more uniform than for the first group with

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~\
fl;
.
·,
.

A
~"'>
A'

B'

c

D

F

H

K

J
c

2

4

6

8

CM

Fig. 3. Metal conchas. A, A', small silver conchas, type I; B, fragment of large concha,
type I; C, undecorated conchas, type II; D, decorated concha, type II; E, concha, type Ill;
F, G, conchas, type IV; H-K, conchas, type V.

WHITE SITE

99

a range of only 65 to 70 mm. The perforations are cut rather than
punched. Since none of these conchas is complete, the shape of the
large central perforations remains somewhat conjectural. However,
it can be narrowed down to two possibilities: ( 1) a single more or
less cresent-shaped perforation partially divided by a narrow projection; or (2) two hemispherical-shaped slits separated from one another
by a narrow strip or tongue 5 to 6 mm. wide. Either way, a projection
or a tongue provided, as in the case of modern saddle conchas, for
attachment. The one decorated specimen (Fig. 3, D ) bears a very
faint engraved design which consists of three to four concentric circles
of minute dots. This design is placed about midway between the
central perforation and the rim of the concha.
3) Two, possibly three, fragmentary conchas, like the above, are
made from thin sheet metal and have either a single large, somewhat
crescent-shaped hole, or two hemispherical-shaped perforations. However, unlike the above, the rims were not bent downward. The most
complete example (Fig. 3, E) measures 70 mm. in diameter. None is
decorated.
4 ) Three conchas have three small attachment holes placed in a
line across the diameter: one in the center and one on each edge. All
three specimens are decorated. Two have shallow notches, either engraved or filed, around the rims (Fig. 3, F ) . The third, and least complete, has a sloppily executed engraved design consisting of numerous
short dashes. Groups of these dashed lines are arranged into more
or less straight lines which intersect one another at right angles
( Fig. 3, G).
5) Six conchas have two small, centrally placed perforations (Fig.
3, H-K). Apart from this they exhibit considerable variation. Three
are rather small, about 36 mm. in diameter, are of sheet metal, and
are undecorated (Fig. 3, J). A fourth is somewhat larger in diameter,
43 mm., is made of thicker metal (German silver? ), and has faint
traces of a stamped design around portions of the rim (Fig. 3, I ).
The largest of the six, 65 mm. in diameter, is also of heavy metal,
perhaps brass or German silver. The edges of the rim are bent downward and bear a stamped design dominated by crescents and featherlike elements (Fig. 3, H ). The back side of this concha (Fig. 3, H' )
has two, apparently randomly-placed, stamped designs. Since the
same design appears on the exterior surface, it is probable that the
impressions on the back side are experiments. Except for the nature
of the attachment holes, this concha is much like those of the second
group. The last example of this group (Fig. 3, K ) is actually more
semilunar than disc-shaped. It measures 3 7 mm. long and 22 mm.

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B

c

,,, 1111 \\

D

E

E"
0

2

4

6

8

10

CM
Fig . 4 . Metal conchas . A, presumed interior surface of concha , type VI; 8- E, conchas,
type VII.

WHITE SITE

101

wide. Shallow notches along the edges constitute the only decoration.
There is some evidence to suggest that this specimen was mounted on
the flap of a small leather pouch (Fig. 2, F ).
6) The remaining three conchas with attachment holes cannot be
assigned to any of the above groups, nor do they have features which
link them closely to one another. Consequently, they are described
individually. The only complete one (Fig. 4, A ) has a fairly large
(5 mm. in diameter) , centrally-placed perforation. The presumed
exterior surface is slightly convex, although not as pronouncedly so
as the first group of conchas. The exterior surface is undecorated, but,
curiously enough, the back side bears die-stamped impressions immediately about the perforation (Fig. 4, A ). Since these would hardly
be of decorative value, they probably represent experiments with
stamps, perhaps even before the metal was fashioned into a concha.
The second concha, like the first, has a centrally-placed perforation.
However, the perforation is smaller, 3 mm. across, and was clearly
punched out by a sharp implement. The exact diameter cannot be
determined, but it was probably in the neighborhood of 60 mm. The
third and last of the miscellaneous conchas has a faint zigzag design ,
which simulates rocker-stamping, about the rim. Because of the fragmentary condition of this specimen the exact placement of the attachment hole is uncertain. This specimen proba hly measured about 40
mm. in diameter.
7) The remaining six conchas have (or had ), in place of attachment holes, sheet metal shanks brazed onto the backsides. Shanks are
still intact on two of the conchas, and are clearly indicated by solder
scars on the other four. Two conchas are of silver, three of copper, and
one possibly of German silver. The two silver ones are virtually
identical to one another. They are undecorated, but bear many striations from use or manufacture, and are 57 mm. in diameter and 1 mm.
in thickness. One (Fig. 4, D, D') still has portions of the shank-two
strips of metal 6 mm. wide and 22 mm. apart-soldered onto the back.
In addition, a piece of cloth to which the shank was attached has been
preserved (Fig. 4, D'). This, coupled with shank and textile fragments
still secured to a leather strap (Fig. 2, I ), strongly suggest that both
of the silver conchas were worn on a belt.
The two smallest conchas in this group are 43 and 50 mm. in diameter. Both are made of thin copper; one is undecorated, the other has a
zigzag design about the rim (Fig. 4, E), is larger in diameter, 65 mm. ,
has decorations on both the exterior and interior surface, and has a
well-preserved, continuous shank. The exterior has diagonal rows of

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

zigzags. These begin at the rim and continue for a distance of about 7
mm. They are placed about 4 mm. across and 7 mm. in length. The
decoration on the back-probably the result of an experiment-consists of a single row, 23 mm. long and 1 mm. wide, of another zigzag
design. The individual stamp impression, clearly recognizable in this
case, measures 5 mm. long and 1 mm. wide. The shank is made from
a strip of metal 33 mm. long and 6 mm. wide. The ends of the shank
are bent back for a distance of 6 mm.; it is these bent portions that are
soldered onto the back. The resultant loop is 5 mm. high and 20 mm.
wide (Fig. 4, E" ) .
The German silver (?) concha (Fig. 4 , C) is 70 mm. in diameter
and 1.5 mm. in thickness. The back side bears two solder scars, probably remnants of a shank much like the above. On the exterior surface
is a decoration consisting of a centrally-placed circle from which
radiate rows of zigzags. The circle is made of dots, perhaps engraved,
and is 25 mm. in diameter. The zigzag rows were made with at least
two different sized stamps, one being 3 mm. wide and 6 mm. long, the
other 4.5 mm. wide and 6 mm. long.
Although popularly thought of as being typically Navajo, circular
metal plates have long been knowi1_ to southern Plains Indians, particularly the Kiowa and Comanche, who preferred to wear them as
hair ornaments and to fasten them onto leather belts (Woodward,
1938: 5-7; Adair, 1946: 29-32; FedE:r, 1962: 55-71 ). Less frequently,
and perhaps later they appear as bridle ornaments (see section below ).
The latter use may reflect Mexican or Spanish influence.
The Kiowa and Comanche are reported to have learned the art of
working metals from displaced Shawnee and Delaware Indians in
the 1830's (Woodward, 1938: 5-7 ). Feder ( 1962) , however, has presented data to the contrary. Along 1hese lines it is interesting to note
that the Kiowa calendar records 1866 as the year of " flat metal (i.e ..
German silver) sun dance" (Mooney, 1898: 318 ) . According to
l\!Iooney:
It was so called because a trader brought th em at this time a quantity of
German silver, from which they made h eaddresses, belts for women,
bracelets, and other ornaments. GermEln silver is known to the Kiowa as
"flC1t metC1l," because it is furnished to them in sheets, which they cut and
hammer into the desired shapes. On both rnlendars the event is recorded
in the same way, by the figur e of a h ead pend ant with silver di sks placed
near the medicine lodge. Such pendants were attached to the h ead of the
scalplock, and consisted of a strip of buffalo hide reaching nearly to the
ground and covered along the whole length with a row of silver, copper,

103

WHITE SITE

or German silver disks, gradua lly decreasing in size toward the bottom,
which was usually finish ed off with a tuft of bright-colored horsehair....
This was not the first time the Kiowa had obtained German silver. In the
old days these ornaments were made for them, of genuine silver, by Mexican silversmiths near the present Silver City, New Mexico ( 1898: 318- 319).

Conchas belt (Fig. 2, I, J ) . Four leather fragments which represent
approximately two-thirds of a wide (3 7 mm. ) strap or belt have
vestiges and impressions of conchas. The best preserved example (Fig.
2, I ) ha s part of a metal shank still lashed onto the belt. Curiously,
a piece of cloth was placed between the concha and the belt. This
suggests that the large silver conch 2s of type VII were worn on this
belt. The strap fragments have numerous perforations as well as
circular impressions evidently made by conchas (Fig. 2, J).
Textiles (Figs. 1, G, H ; 5, E-G ) . With one exception (Fig. 5, G),
the 98 textile fragments are of weaves and fabrics (Table 2 ) which
indicate a commercial origin. Most are badly stained, and all are so
fragmentary that it is impossible to reco~'lstruct the kinds of garments
represented.
TABLE 2
Textiles
);1i.

Fnb1·ic

'Vea,·e

D ccorntion

4

cotton
cotton

plain
plain

none
non::

3

cotton

twill

none

cotton

plain

cotton
cotton
wool
wool

plain
plain
twill
plain

possibly
printed
none
printed
none
none

wool
wool

twill
twill

none
none

wool
wool
cotton, wool,
bast fiber

twill
twill

uncertain
none

twill

cotton dyed

of pieces

6
6
2

24

2

5
7

36

Hemarks

1 with jingles attached;
3 copper stained.
1 copper stained ;
1 with stitching.
Attached to dressed
animal skin fragment.
Stitching present
1 stitch ed
1 has leath er strip
attached, possibly used
to secure an ornament.
Have traces or
impressions of buttons

Probably of native
manufacture

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Although obtained from whites, presumably by trade, several pieces
show native modification. These include three pieces sewed onto
dressed animal skin, one fragment with jingles attached (Fig. 1, K) ,
and five pieces with traces or impressions of buttons (Fig. 1, G ).
The one fragment evidently of native manufacture (Fig. 5, G )
consists of a narrow band, blue and white striped, from which dangles
a fringe (the warp elements). The weft (horizontal elements) is of a
coarse cotton, while the warp (vertical elements) is of an unidentified
bast fiber. Only the weft has been dyed. Sewed onto the upper part of
this piece are bits of cotton and wool cloth, possibly indicating that it
was once attached to the base of a coat.
Leather pouch (Fig. 2, F). Thirty-one pieces of leather can be
identified as parts of a small pouch. Although it cannot be completely
restored, the larger pieces indicate that it was approximately 75 mm.
long and 60 mm. wide. Stitch holes around the edges of the pouch
and the flap vary somewhat in size and spacing, suggesting that it was
hand-sewn. On the flap are two perforations which contain traces of a
narrow strip of metal and which were evidently for the attachment
of a concha. In addition to these perforations, there are two holes in
the crease of the flap, probably for a piece of cordage or strip of leather
which was used to lash the pouch to a belt. Heavy vermilion stains on
the interior surfaces clearly indicate the former contents of the pouch.
Scabbards or leather cases (Fig. 5, C, D ) . Remains of four small
leather scabbards, one of which is nearly complete, were recovered.
Two are covered with parallel rows of impressions undoubtedly made
by tiny seed beads (Fig. 5, D ). The others apparently were undecorated. One specimen (Fig. 5, D ) still has intact portions of a wooden
handle and iron blade of a small, narrow knife or stiletto. The nearly
complete scabbard is 22 mm. wide and 65 mm. long. The others range
from 15 to 32 mm. wide; lengths could not be determined.
Dressed animal skin (Fig. 2, G, H). Besides the many textile
fragments from the site, there are 24· pieces of dressed hide, possibly
deer. Seven pieces are large enough to suggest that they were moccasin
or garment fragments. One of these (Fig. 2, H ), which is more fully
described above, still has attached a band of tiny, simple seed beads.
A second fragment (Fig. 2, G) has impressions made by a brass hawk
bell and, less certainly, a concha.
In addition to these fragments, there are 18 narrow, fragmentary
strips of dressed skin. Some may be from a fringe, while others
may have been used in securing objects to clothing and horse
paraphernalia.

105

WHITE SITE

8

D

c

F

0
I

zI

4
I

6
I

CM

Fig . 5. A, restored bugle; 8, silver name plate for bugle(?); C, nearly complete scabbard;
D, scabbard and stiletto fragment; E-G, textile fragments. Scale of A 1h that of other objects .

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Cordage. Three differents kinds of cordage are in the collection.
l\!Iost numerous-16 pieces- is two-ply, S-spun, Z-twist fiber cordage.
The other two types are both one-ply. One, represented by two fragments, is of fine hair, possibly human. It is S-spun. The other one-ply
cordage, also represented by two fragments, is S-spun and is made
from a soft fiber (cotton? ) .
Bugle (Fig. 5, A ). Probably a late 19th century military (infantry? ) instrument, this restored bugle, or more strictly speaking
trumpet, is made of light sheet brass. The mouthpiece is missing and
the bell is only partially complete. Without the mouthpiece, the bugle
is 83 cm. long. The tube, which curves twice, varies in diameter from
11 mm. to an estimated 120 mm. across the bell. Tiny bits of cloth still
adhering to the edges of the bell, as well as textile impressions visible
on the surface of the tube, suggest that the bugle was wrapped in a
blanket or piece of cloth when placed in the grave.
In addition to the bugle there is a small, curved silver plate (Fig. 5,
B) which fits the con tours of the tube and which may have been
intended as a name plate. However, it has no marking on it. Perhaps
the bugle was issued directly from a military store to an Indian.
Of the Southern Plains Indians, the Kiowa appear to have made
most effective use of the bugle. During one battle, for instance, a
Kiowa is reputed to have befuddled attacking soldiers by blowing
calls opposite from those of the troop bugler (Mooney, 1898 :
316- 317 ).

Faunal Remains
Since the White Site is primarily a burial site it is not surprising that
animal bones are not numerous. Only two forms , deer (or possibly
antelope ) and horse, can be recognized (Gerald Raun, personal communication ) . The deer ( ?) bones are few-at the most four-and may
be intrusive, or may be remains of a food offering. Horse bones,
largely vertebrate and rib fragments , are more common; none the
less, the skeleton is far from complete.
Although the horse is a contemporary species, there can be little
doubt that it was associated with the burial. Strong evidence for such
is derived from the many pieces of riding gear, especially saddle and
bridle fragments, found at the site. Sacrificing of horses and horse
trappings at the time of inhumation was a widespread Plains Indians
custom (Ewers, 1955: 286 ) . Specifically, in the southern Plains it is
reported for the Comanche, Kiowa, and Wichita (ibid. ). It is interesting to note that the horse was fairly young, probably between 2 and 3

107

WHITE SITE

years of age at the time of death. P erhaps a young animal, one similar
in age to the child, was intentionally selected for sacrifice.

Horse Trappings
Bit (Fig. 6, C). Although badly rusted and only partially complete,
this iron bit can easily be recognized. It is of the curb type; i.e. , the
mouthpiece is unjoined and has in the center a high port or curve.
The cheek-bars are not complete, b~1t still have attached fragments of
the curb chain-the strap which passed under the horse's lower jaw.
A similar, though not identical bit in the Texas Memorial Museum
collections (TMM-1-362-36 ) is identified as being of an Army style.
It is possible, perhaps even likely, that this one is also a military bit.
Other military items recognized in the ·w hite Site collection include
brass buttons and, less certainly, a bugle.
M etal rings (Fig. 6, A, B) . Nine, heavy iron rings, varying in
diameters from 35 to about 100 mm. , are very likely saddle and bridle
parts. Three smaller ones, 35 to 52 mm. in diameter, are probably rein
and ch eek-strap rings from the bridle. The larger ones, on the other
hand, may be from riggings on the saddle.
M etal buckles (Fig. 6, D ) . Three complete, but badly rusted iron
buckles were recovered. One is rectangular-shaped and two are nearly
D -shaped. The tongue in each case is attached to one end. Inside
m easurements vary from 15 to 20 mm., to 16 by 26 mm. These
buckles were probably attached to straps between 20 and 26 mm.
wide. They could have been part of the bridle, but, admittedly, could
also have come from a belt.
Saddle (Fig. 6, E-H ). Although for from complete, a saddle is indicat ed by a n umber of leather and wood fragments . Specifically, those
parts which can be recognized include the horn, wood from the tree,
bits-including tooled fragments- of leather from the sa ddle covering.
Other, less confidently identified parts, such as iron rings and strap
fragments, have been listed and described separately.
The horn is especially interesting, as it is capped with a thin sheet
of copper (Fig. 6, F ) . Edges of the copper sheet are bent down for a
distance of about 6 mm. around the horn. The copper cap was secured
by means of nails, one in the center and an undetermin ed number
(only one is still intact ) along the bent sides. The horn itself, which
consists of a poorly preserved wooden piece covered with leather, is
83 mm. in diameter.
All 5 pieces of wood from the tree are in poor condition, and none

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0
I

2
I

4
I

CM

6
I

8
I

WHITE SITE

109

can be assigned to a specific part of the saddle. The largest fragment
is illustrated in Fig. 6, E . The wood has not been identified, but it is
very soft. The more numerous leath er fragments ( 4 7 pieces) from the
saddh are also difficult to relate to specific parts. However, the 22
tooled pieces may be from the skirt or sweat guards. Undecorated ones
are more likely from the pommel and cantle. The tooled designs are,
in general, floral patterns. Typical examples are shown in Fig. 6, G, H.
In addition to the leather fragments there are two upholstery tacksone apparently of iron, the other of brass-and 12 small iron nails.
Both the tacks and the nails were probably used to attach the leather
padding and covering to the saddle tree. One nail (Fig. 6, J ), in fact,
still has bits of wood adhering to the shaft.
Rivets (Fig. 6, K, L ) . The six copper rivets range from 7 to 10 mm.
in length and from 10 to 12 mm. in diameter across the head. The
shafts are uniformly 5 mm. in diameter. Three rivets are still attached
to leather fragments, two of which are probable saddle straps (Fig.
7, A ). The third piece (Fig. 6, L) is more fragmentary, but may also
be from the saddle.
Nail and/ or rivet ornaments (Fig. 6, M ) . Seven disc-shaped specimens, all of lead, appear to have been hammered onto rivet or nail
heads and intended as ornaments . They are small in diameter, 11 to
13 mm ., and generally about 3 mm. in thickness. The upper surfaces
have stamped checkerboard-like decorations apparently produced by
a blunt implement. Impressions of rivet or nail heads appear as shallow, more or less circular depressions (about 8 mm. in diameter) on
the underneath sides.
Metal shank fragments (Fig. 6, N) . Thirty-six fragmentary strips
of sheet metal are remains of shanks or attachment loops which were
once soldered onto the back sides of conchas and strap ornaments.
They agree in every detail with the few found intact (Fig. 4, E', E" ) .
Most are of copper, although a few appear to be of brass. Ends are
always bent down and back so that the complete shank was rectangular-shaped. The sheet metal varies from 5 to 12 mm. in width.
Leather straps (Fig. 7, A-C, F , H ) . The numerous (68 ) pieces of
leather straps can be sorted into two groups. One group consisting of
45 specimens is narrow in width, 15 to 19 mm., and probably repre-

Fig . 6 . Horse t rapp ings . A, B, iron rings; C, bridle bit; D, iron buc kle ; E, wood fragment
from saddle tree ; F, saddle horn and coppe r cap ; G, H, too led leather from saddle ; I, upholstery tac k; J, iron na il; K, rive t; L, rivet still attached to leather frag m ent; M , ri vet o r
nail ornam ent ; N , sha nk fragm ent .

B

D

F

H

G

E

·.:; .. •)1;",1,.:,j,.t,,,,,;,i,lJ.,•/

-~

""',.-,.-,.-~

f
f.

"1~

t.~~­
f:
·i ·:
~.
f!@f,(,q,'iN!ll~V,~

..
''·'

'-1\J\

K
0
I

2
I

4
I

CM

Fig . 7 . leather straps and strap (bridle) ornaments.

6
I

8
I

WHITE SITE

111

sents bridle and rein fragments. A second type, varying in width from
25 to 35 mm., is more likely from the saddle girth and rigging straps.
Four specimens of the latter type are riveted together (Fig. 7, A );
this would seem to identify them further with the saddle. In addition,
four of the narrow straps have attached shanks or metal strips (Fig. 7,
6, F, H) which were used to affix them to metal strap ornaments.
Strap ornaments (Figs. 7, 8 ) . Among the most interesting and
elaborate objects recovered from the site are 22 metal, probably
German silver, strap ornaments. Although quite varied in form, each
one has, on the underneath side, solder scars to which shanks and/ or
strips of metal were attached. All but two of the ornaments bear
simple, presumably stamped decorations. On the basis of form, two
major types can be recognized. Twelve are narrow, about 25 mm.
wide, and have bent down lateral edges (Fig. 7, D, E, G, I-K ). The
remaining 11 are more difficult to characterize as a group, but, in
general, they are nearly flat and m ore or less rectangular in outline
(Fig. 8, A-H ) . The latter type, however, varies considerably in size.
The narrow strap ornaments can be further subdivided into three
groups, with four examples of each group:
1 ) L-shaped pieces with notched ends. These specimens are 74 to
76 mm. long and 65 to 75 mm. wide across the "L." In size and decoration they can be further sorted into two closely matched pairs. Decoration in all cases is restricted to the ends, with stamped zigzags and dots
predominating (Fig. 7, K ).
2) Slender, rectangular-shaped pieces which are notched and, with
0:1.e exception, decorated on only one end. In each case, the end opposite the notched one has soldered oPto the exterior surface a narrow,
tapered strip of metal, apparently intended only as adornment (Fig.
7, J). These four, like the ones above, can be divided into two pairs.
One pair is 101 mm. long and 22 mm. wide, and has two parallel rows
of vertically-placed zigzags on one end. The second pair is somewhat
shorter, 98 mm. long, and has two rows of horizontally-arranged
zigzags on one end. In addition, one member of the first pair has a
series of small, stamped zigzags around the metal strip.
3 ) Four specimens taper toward the presumed distal end, finally
terminating in a small crescent (Fig. 7, D, G, I ). Unlike the above,
these cannot be divided into pairs. All are similar in size: total length
of 115 mm., maximum width of 25 to 27 mm., and minimum width
( just above the crescent) of 4 to 6 mm. The crescents measure from
8 to 11 mm. across. The band-like decorations, usually confined to the
proximal ends, are unique in each case. One consists of two parallel

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rows of dots, another of two vertically-p laced rows of zigzags, a third
of a single row of contiguous circles, and the last of two rows of dots
between which is a row of circles.
Two pieces of narrow leather straps, one of which still has attached
a metal loop and another which has affixed a narrow metal strip, fit
perfectly into these strap ornaments. The manner in which the loops
were used is quite evident. The strips, however, are somewhat more
complicated, but were critical in attaching the strap to the ornament
because they prevented up and down movement. Both modes of attachment (see Fig. 7, E-H ) strongly suggest that the narrow ornaments
were used on a bridle, probably on the cheek straps.
Unlike the first type, the remaining 11 strap ornaments are more or
less rectangular-shaped plates. They are differentiated, perhaps arbitrarily, from the conchas largely on the basis of outline form. Metal
shanks, indicated by solder scars, were brazed onto the back sides and
provided the only means of attachment. All but two are decorated,
with stamped zigzags and dots being the most common elements. In
addition, most are partially or entirely notched around the edges. With
the exception of the two undecorated specimens (Fig. 8, G, H ) they
can also be divided into pairs. One pair (Fig. 8, A, B) is much longer
( 112 mm. ) than it is wide (maximum of 41 mm. ), is tapered slightly
toward the ends, and is notched along all edges. Another two specimens are somewhat similar to the above in outline, but are much
smaller ( 45 mm. long and 26 mm. vvide) , and have shallow notching
only along the lateral edges (Fig. 8, C) . A third, very closely matched
pair has rounded corners and a deep notch in the center of each edge
(Fig. 8, D). Less clearly paired are two specimens, one of which is a
rectangular plate with deeply notched ends (Fig. 8, E ) ; the other one
(Fig. 8, F ) tapers slightly toward the ends, and has a single deep notch
in the upper and lower margin, as well as numerous shallow notches
on both ends. One of the undecorated specimens (Fig. 8, G ) is almost
cross-shaped, with two wide ( 7 mm. ) but short (2 mm. ) projections
extending from opposing edges. The other undecorated specimen (Fig.
8, H ) is small, 44 mm. long and 26 mm. wide, and is tapered toward
the ends.
It seems probable that both types of strap ornaments were used on
a bridle. Similarly adorned Plains Indians (especially Comanche and
Kiowa) and Navajo bridles are well documented (Woodward, 1938:
36; Adair, 1946: 41-43; Ewers, 1955: Plate 6 a; Newcomb, 1955:
Plate 27; Feder, 1962: 71-73). However, when an attempt is made to
fit all 22 ornaments from the site onto a single bridle it becomes clear

11 3

WHITE SI TE

B

A

c

D

E

[]
.. ·.,

.

•

•.

=.

...
•

.

.

..

·:·

H

G

F
,

I

I

J

, '

K

L

M

N

4

6

8
I

CM
Fig . 8. A-H, metal strap (bridle) ornaments, type II ; J-K, arrow points ; L-N, dart points ;
0, portions of human skeleton .

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

that at least two complete sets are represented-a duplication not
observed in other horse paraphernalia. Careful matching of pairs even
permits a reasonably good sorting of the two sets. Thus, while the
precise arrangement is somewhat speculative, it is possible to reconstruct the general appearance of one bridle (Fig. 9 ) .

Fig . 9 . R>eonstruclion of bridle ornament.

115

WHITE SITE

Chipped Stone Artifacts
The seven flint artifacts and 21 flu.kes recovered from the site are of
unquestionable Indian origin. While they may have been intended as
burial offerings, it seems more likely, especially in view of the presence of flakes , that they are derived from a nearby-and probably
older-campsite. Most of the types represented, since they most often
occur in prehistoric sites, support this interpretation.
Arrow points (Fig. 8, I-K ) . The tbree arrow points are identifiable
as types Perdiz, Harrell, and Fresno. Only the Harrell point (Fig. 8, I )
is complete; however, fresher flake scars along the marginal edges
indicate that it was rechipped, possibly from the distal end of a dart
point or knife. It is triangular in outline form, has two side notches,
and a notched, concave base. It measures 29 mm. in length and 22
mm. in maximum width. The Fresno point (Fig. 8, J)-an unnotched
triangular form-has a pronounced concave base. It is 11 mm. wide
across the base. The distal end is missing, but the point must have been
approximately 30 mm. long. Least complete of the three is the Perdiz
(Fig. 8, K ) which lacks both barbs and the distal end. It probably
measured about 28 mm. in length and 20 mm. across the shoulders.
The stem is 8 mm. long and 6 mm. wide.
Dart points (Fig. 8, L-N ). Only one of the three dart points, an
Edgewood (Fig. 8, L ) can confidently be identified with a previously
established type. It has a slightly concave base, a triangular, convexedged blade, and an expanded stem. It measures 33 mm. in length and
21 mm. across the shoulders. The markedly expanded stem is almost
flush with the shoulders. One of the untyped dart points (Fig. 8, M )
has a convex-edged blade, barbed shoulders, and a parallel-edged,
indented base stem. It resembles Pedernales points, but is perhaps distinctive enough to reserve positive identification with that type. It is
44 mm. long and 24 mm. wide. The other unclassified dart point
(Fig. 8, N) is a large specimen, 55 mm. in length and 25 mm. across
the shoulders, chipped from quartzite. Edges of the blade are straight,
the shoulders lack barbs, the stem is faintly expanded, and the base is
slightly concave.
Flake scraper. The only other chipped stone artifact is a flake
scraper which has steep marginal retouching along both lateral edges.
It is 35 mm. long and 22 mm. wide.

Interpretation
The White Site, in spite of having been severely damaged by plowing, is among the richest nineteenth century Indian burials yet re-

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ported in Texas. In this respect it compares favorably with the Yellowhouse Canyon Site, a possible Comanche burial found near Lubbock,
Texas (Newcomb, 1955) . All objects recovered from the White Site,
with the probable exception of the chipped stone artifacts, are identifiable as personal possessions. They include a wide assortment of
jewelry, clothing, a horse, and horse trappings. Camp debris and
everyday domestic implements are conspicuous by their absence. This,
coupled with the concentration of material (within an area approximately 15 to 20 feet square ) , leaves little doubt as to the basic nature
of the site. The details of burial, however, are absent.
In view of the richness of the offerings, it is surprising and somewhat puzzling that the only human skeletal remains in the collection
represent a child, probably between one and three years of age at the
time of death. v'Vhile it is possible that other human remains from the
site are still in the hands of a private collector, the available evidence
-especially, the success achieved in the restoration of broken specimens-suggests that the child was the only individual buried at the
site. Since it was a common custom among Plains Indians for relatives
and friends to make offerings to a burial, all the objects recovered need
not have belonged to the child.
Almost all of the artifacts point to a middle to late nineteenth
century date for the burial. And, although specimens indicative of a
more specific age are lacking, it seems probable that the range can be
narrowed down to between 1860 and 1875. At least, the generally
excellent condition of perishable objects and marked extent of white
influence would seem to argue for a relatively late date, but one which
precedes the confinement of southern Plains Indians to reservations.
In the latter part of the 19th century, the Panhandle region was
dominated by the Comanche and the Kiowa, including their close
associates, the Kiowa-Apache. Either tribe could have made the burial.
The personal ornaments and horse trappings found at the site are of
types used by both groups (Fig. 10; Woodward, 1938; Wallace and
Hoebel, 1952; Newcomb, 1955; 1961 ) . Both also frequently sacrificed
one or more horses over the grave of a deceased (Yarrow, 1881: 99100; Wallace and Hoebel, 1952: 149-154; Newcomb, 1961: 172-174,
206 ) . On the other hand, the Comanche, as well as the Kiowa, preferred to bury their dead in high, inaccessible places, such as natural
caves or crevices. Perhaps in this case the urgency of disposing of the
body and the distance to the nearest relief in topography outweighed
tradition. At least, it does not seem sufficient evidence to indicate that
it was not a Comanche or Kiowa burial.

WHITE SITE

117

Fig. 1 0 . Photograph of young Kiowa boy, son of A'piatan, shows many of the personal
ornaments and horse trappings found at the White Site. Taken on the Kiowa Reservation in
Oklahoma in 1 893 by James Mooney. Photograph reproduced from Smithsonian Institution,
Bureau of American Ethnology Neg . 1 393 .

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Literature Cited
Adair, John
1946. The Navajo and Pue blo Silversmiths. University of Oklahoma Press.
Douglas, Frederic H.
1941. Main types of Indian Metal Jewelry. Denver Art Museum Leaflet, No.
104, pp. 14-16.
1951. Plains Beads and Beadwork Designs. Denver Art Museum Leaflet, No. 7374, pp. 90-96.
Duffield, Lathe! and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology
Series, No. 4.
Ewers, John C.
1955. The Horse in Blackfoot Indian Culture. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bull. No. 159.
1957. Hair Pipes in Plains Indian Adornment: A Study in Indian and White
Ingenuity. Anthropological Papers, No. 50, pp. 29-86'. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bull. No. 164.
Feder, Nonnan
1962. Plains Indian Metalworking with Emphasis on Hair Plates. American
Indian Tradition, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 55-76.
Ford, Grace Horney
1943. The Button Collector's History. Pond-Ekberg Company.
Lathrop, William G.
1936. The Development of the Brass Industry in Connecticut. Tercentenary
Commission, Yale University Press.
Mooney, James
1898. Calendar History of the Kiowa Indians. Seventeenth Annual Report of the
Bureau of American Ethnology, Pt. I , pp. 129-468.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1955. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 186-199.
1961. The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press.
Quimby, George I., Jr.
1938. European Trade Articles as Chronological Indicators for the Archaeology
of the Historic Period in Michigan. Papers of the Michigan Academy of
Science, Arts and L etters, Vol. 24, pp. 25-31.
Smith, Hubert G.
1960. Archeological Investiga tions at the Site of Fort Stevenson (32ML1 ),
Garrison Rese rvoir, North Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 19.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bull. No. 176, pp. 159-238 .
Wallace, Ernest and E. Adamson Hoebel
1952. The Comanches: Lords of the South Plains. University of Oklahoma
Press.
W edel, Waldo R.
195 9. An Introdu ction to Kansas Archeology . Bureau of Ameri ca n Ethnology,
Bull. 174.

WHITE SITE

119

V\Tinfrey, D orma n H., editor
1960a. T exas Indian Papers, 1844--1845 . Published by the T exas State Library.
1960b. T exas Indi an Papers, 1846-1859. Published by the Texas State Library.
V\Toodward , Arthur
1938. A Brief History of Navajo Silversmithing. Museum of N orthe rn Arizon a,
Bull. No. 14.
·wool worth, Alan R. and W. Raymond vVood
1960. Th e Archeology of a Small Trad ing Post (Kipp's Post 32MN1 ) in th e
Garrison Reservoir, North Da kota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 20.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bull. 176.
Yarrow, H . C.
1881. A Further Contribution to the Study of Mortuary Customs of the North
American Indians. First Annu a l Report of the Burea u of American Ethn ology, 1879-80.
Texas Memorial Museum
Austin, Texas

The Utilization of Archeological and
Ethnohistorical Data In Estimating
Aboriginal Population
1

HERBERT C. TAYLOR, JR.

Reliable estimates for most aboriginal North American groups are
difficult to achieve because the first governmental censuses were
normally performed after a radical though indeterminate populational
decline had occurred. In this article it is proposed to examine the
Mooney population estimates for the southern Northwest Coast (the
figures utilized by Kroeber in his Cultural and Natural Areas of Native
North America, 1939) in the light of a combination of available
archaeological and ethnohistorical data.
The area under discussion and termed, rather unfortunately, the
"southern Northwest Coast" (the only reasonable alternative seems to
be the lower Northwest Coast which is equally unfortunate) is meant
by the author to include the lower Columbia area, the Puget Sound
area, Coastal Washington, the Gulf of Georgia area and Vancouver
Island. Not included are: the Coast of Oregon below the mouth of the
Columbia, the Williamette Valley, and the mainland coast of British
Columbia above the Straits of Georgia . The delineation may seem
rather arbitrary. North of this region, however, Mooney, and hence
Kroeber, go in for rather large block estimates of territory; and while
there is some ethnohistorical material bearing upon these populations,
there is virtually no archaeological material. To the south one encounters a rather vexed question of where the long limp tail of the
1 The writer desires to express his gratitude to the Canadian Social Science Research Council, the University of British Colombia , and Messrs. Crawford, McLeod,
and Vance for financing the archeological and ethnological field trips incident to
this study. Research in the archives of the Hudson's Bay Company at Beaver House,
London, and the provincial archives in Victoria, British Columbia, and in the
Bancroft Collection of the University of California was made possible by Sabbatical
leave from \IV es tern Washington State College.
The author is indebted to the Governor and Committee of the Hudson's Company
for permission to reproduce material from their archives.

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Northwest Coast cultural dog ceases to exist and the California area
begins. In this connection it should be remembered that Kroeber, while
utilizing Mooney's estimates in all other areas of America north of
Mexico, used his own estimates for the population of California area
and discarded Mooney's. From a "tribal" or linguistic point of view,
therefore, this article is concerned with the aboriginal population of
the Kwakuitl, Nutka, Coast Salish (with the exception of the Bella
Coola north of this area and the Tillamook south of this area) the
Chinook and those two intrusive enc!aves of Athabascan-speakers, the
Tlatskanai and the Willapa.
Chart 1 shows Mooney's population figures for the base year 1780
adapted to Kroeber's cultural sub-areas. This chart is taken directly
from Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North-America, (Kroeber,
1939: 135-136) except that under the heading of Gulf of Georgia, the
term "Cowichan" has been substituted for the word "Cowlitz" (which
must have been what Kroeber meant ) .
Before beginning a critique of these population estimates in the
light of archeological and ethnohistorical data, a few paragraphs
would appear to be in order concerning the origin of estimates which
Kroeber employed in his monumental study and which have
subsequently approximated demographic Holy Writ to many
anthropologists.
In 1910 I ames Mooney published a very short article under the
title, "Population," in Frederick Webb Hodge's compendious Handbook of American Indians (Hodge, 1910: 286-287 ). Evidently a
longer article had originally been planned, but size and scope made
separate publication mandatory. The Handbook article notes (p. 287 )
that a separate issue of the Bulletin would be devoted to such a topic.
Mooney died in 1921 without completing his task. Only the section
on New England was entirely complete together with the textual (but
not the tabular ) material on New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. However, in the years 1908-1909, Mooney had prepared a
briefer statement giving a set of tables of population for all of America
north of Mexico. It is this brief statement and accompanying tables
which Swanton edited and published in 1928 (Swanton, in Mooney,
1928: 1, 2 ) .
In the course of his prefatory remarks, Swanton does not make clear
why this article was not published in Mooney's lifetime-one may
infer that Mooney wished instead to publish the longer definitive study
upon which he was at work. Nor does Swanton explain why seven
years elapsed after Mooney's death before the briefer completed article

123

ESTIMATING ABORIGINAL POPULATION

CHART 1
CULTUHE AHEAS
( Kroeber's 1939
numbering system

2a

2b

3

4

5

1

!!

TRIBES
( Kroe ber· s
1939 system )

POPULATION
( Mooney's est. for I i 80
adapted by K.roeber)

CENTRAL MARITIME, NORTHERN

Kwakiutl
CENTRAL MARITIME, SOUTHERN
Nutka
Makah, Quileute, Quinault
GULF OF GEORGIA SALISH
Comox, Pentlatch, Cowichan, LKung'en,
Seshelt, Squamish Lower Fraser
Nutsak, Lummi
Klallam, Chimakum
PUGET SOUND SALISH
Skokomish, Nisqualli, Twana, Puyallup,
Snoqualmi, Snohomish, Skagit
LOWER COLUMBIA
Tlatskanai
Lower, Upper Chehalis,
Owilapash, Cowlitz
Chinook

4,500 1
6,000
4,000

20,5002
800
2,400

6,000
1,600
1,200
22,000

Does not include IIaisla .
Of thi s fig u1·e, l\1ooney allots to southeastern Vancouver fsla nd 8,900.

was published. In any event, the net effect was that the article was
twenty years old when it first saw print. Even by today's publishing
standards this was a noteworthy delay . It goes without saying that
those same twenty years saw a rapid burgeoning of publications in
American ethnology whose utilization might have materially altered
population estimates.
Recognizing Mooney's charts as the first scholarly attempt to establish ord er where there had been demographic chaos before, A. L. Kroeber determined to utilize Mooney's figures in his own study on natural
and cultural areas (with the aforenoted exception of California ) .
Kroeber's manuscript was ready for publication in 1931 , but the Great
D epression delayed publication un til 1939. A reduction of the population section was published in the American Anthropologist in 1934.
In the 1939 publication Kroeber (pp. 171-181 ) includes a review of
literature concerned with aboriginal North American demography
from 193 1 to 1939, and in his earlier publication ( 1934) he cited a

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

number of works to which Mooney had not had access when he prepared his tables. However, it must be stressed that these later publications did not (save in the instance of California) affect the population
figures employed by Kroeber in 1939. He utilized the tables which
Mooney had prepared in 1908-1909.
The population estimates of Mooney were regarded by Kroeber and
by Mooney's posthumous editor, J. R. Swanton, as provisional in
character. It was anticipated that periodic changes would be made in
these estimates as more data were accumulated and more sophisticated
demographers addressed themselves to the problem of aboriginal
population.
In fact, nothing of the sort occurred. Mooney's estimates, and more
particularly Kroeber's population density studies employing Mooney's
estimates, almost universally are utilized to this day when questions
of aboriginal demography in America north of Mexico arise. (Thus
Mooney's figures are continually cited as the pre-contact population
data by Swanton, in his The Indian Tribes of North America, published in 1952.)

Archeological Data Bearing on Aboriginal Southern
Northwest Coast Population Estimates
While it is true that Kroeber utilized Mooney's estimates in formulating his own population density figures, he expressed considerable
reservations about the accuracy of Mooney's figures for the southern
Northwest Coast:
In the Oregon-Washington region, the Salish seem underweighted as
against the Sahaptin and Chinook. Thus, United States Salish on coast,
6,200; on Puget Sound, 6,800; in the interior, including Idaho and Montana, 8,700; total, 21,700; Sahaptin, 18,100 ; Chinook, 22,000; Yaquina,
Alsea, Sinuslaw, Kus, 8,000. The definitely greater heaviness of population
on the lower Columbia is indubitable, but perhaps not quite to the degree
implied. Also, the Sahaptin, with a smaller territory, are given more than
twice the population of the interior Salish in the United States.
In British Columbia, on the contrary, the Salish are favored: on the coast,
including 1,400 Bella Coola, 21,900; in the interior, 16,500; total, 38,400;
all Nutka, Kwakiutl, Tsimshian, Haida, 30,000. This makes 20,500 coast
Salish in modern British territory fronting on the Gulf of Georgia, as
against only 31,400 population on all the remainder of the coast of British
Columbia. Such a distribution would expectably have produced some
superior florescence of culture on the Gulf of Georgia. However, as dis-

ESTIMATING ABORIGINAL POPULATION

125

cussed below, Mooney's estimates pretty consistently put the great densities in the southern half of the Northwest Coast, which is not incompatible
with the view developed above a relatively recent seaward and northward shift of the climax of this culture (Kroeber, 1939: 133-134).
And later in his text Kroeber adds:
Even if Mooney's computations for the Chinook and Gulf of Georgia Salish
are taken as somewhat high, the generally greater density of the south as
against the north remains fundamentally unimpaired. On this point, too,
shore-line density would not invert the situation, the northerly areas
having the more irregular, indented shore, the ratio of which to the
already lighter population would go up faster even than their land areas.
The difference seems to lie in this: The northern groups were essentially
maritime, mostly lived fronting the beach, and made little use of the land
which they owned. The southern groups lived on river and tributary as
well as on the shore, perhaps more largely so, in fact, and often made
genuine use of their land holdings. Their habitat utilization and culture
remained more generalized and simpler; those of the northern groups
were more specialized and extreme. As in the Southwest, on comparison
of Gila-California with Pueblo sphere, the more generalized method in the
long run permitted of a heavier aggregate population (Kroeber, 1939:
156).
Kroeber in these passages advances three views which recent archeological survey work has tended to substantiate:

1. That Mooney underestimated relatively the coastal Salish population
in the Puget Sound area and on Washington's coast.
2. That quite possibly the Nutka, Kwakiutl, Tsimshian, and Haida have
been underestimated relative to estimates for the Gulf of Georgia Salish.
3. That even allowing for possible error in the above, Mooney is certainly
correct in assigning a much heavier populational density to the
southern portion of the Northwest Coast, since this was the area of
more generalized ecological adjustment emphasizing hunting, as well
as dependence upon the sea.
The last of these three assertions is the most easily verified. From
the southern entrance to the Gulf of Georgia, that is to say from a point
just south of the Canadian line and north of Bellingham Bay on the
mainland and from the southern tip of Vancouver Island, going north
to the northern extremity of the Gulf of Georgia at Cape Mudge, there
is a remarkably impressive proliferation of giant midden heaps. Virtually every bay or inlet which possesses or had possessed a fresh water
stream has one or more such archeological sites. In the main, however,
these sites are relatively small. Ruling out the seasonal or sporadically

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

occupied sites and dealing only with those sites which would appear to
have contained permanent villages, the surveyor is left with the impression that the median population of the villages would have been
well below 50.
North of Cape Mudge, on Quadra Island, and north of Campbell
River on Vancouver Island (that is to say, leaving coast Salish territory and going into what was circa 1840 Kwakiutl territory) one encounters far fewer villages. On the other hand, the villages which are
encountered are much larger, some of them surely housing as many as
300 people (Taylor, 1956: 53-55; Taylor and Duff, 1956: 56, 57, 6065). Thus Kroeber's view that a greater population density could occur in the south because of a more general or less specialized ecological
adjustment and au contraire, that to the north, in the "climax area,"
there were fewer people, more highly specialized, more truly committed to a maritime way of life, and with a more complex social organization, would seem to be substantiated by archeological evidence.
Further buttressing Kroeber's view that Puget Sound, coastal Washington, and the area about the mouth of the Columbia represented a
more generalized and older ecological adjustment, is the presence of
heavy concentrations of large land mammal bone in a number of the
archeological sites excavated and/ or tested in this region. In some
instances, notably in the San Juan Islands and in coastal Oregon immediately to the south of the Columbia, large land mammals evidently
supplied almost as much of the total caloric supply as did fish. (Living
ethnological informants and some ethnologists to the contrary notwithstanding, no salt-water aboriginal group in this area relied nearly as
heavily on fish as on shell fish. The aboriginal groups about Cape Flattery seem, on the basis of one test excavation undertaken there in 1955,
to have relied very heavily upon whaling.)
Perhaps even more significantly, a number of test excavations have
indicated that the incidence of heavy land mammal bone goes up relative to the incidence of fish bone and heavy wood-working equipment,
as one goes back in time. 2 This, of course, dovetails beautifully with
Kroeber's hypothesis that the southern area represented an older, more
generalized hunting tradition that had gradually adapted to a mari2 This phenomenon, so far as the writer is aware, has not been reported in print
heretofore. It was first observed by VVarrPn Caldwell, then teaching assistant at
the University of Washington, and the author in the course of excavations on Lopez
Island ( 1962--1953 ) . It was subsequently observed in a test excavation at Tillamook
in 1953. Our paper discussing the phenom~non was read by Taylor to the North west Anthropological Association in 1954.

E STIMATI N G ABORIGINAL POPULATIO N

12 7

time environment, while the northern area represented an highly
specialized maritime adjustment.
Turning to Kroeber's first assertion that Mooney underestimated
relatively the coastal Salish population in the Puget Sound area and
in the Pacific Coast of Washington, the following points may be noted:
a. The p attern of occupation, as r evea l ed by archeologica l survey, noted
for the Gulf of Georgia ar ea, ends a bruptly at the northern end of the
Gulf of Georgia . However, there is no su ch break to the south. The
Puget Sound area, the Stra it of Juan de Fuca area, and coasta l W ash ington h a ve a ver y high inciden ce of r elativel y sm a ll perman ent
villages and an even hi gh er incid en ce of seasonal or sporadica lly
occupied sites.
b . While the writer conducted no exca va tions in this survey of eastern
Vancouver Island, inspection of n a tural and a rtificia l cuts in the
midden deposits indica ted about th e sa m e frequen cy and distribution
of large l and mammal bone as had been previousl y noted for w estern
Wa shing ton.

The Gulf of Georgia and the Puget Sound area were both occupied,
during the contact period, by coastal Salish groups who were remarkably similar in socio-political organization and in econom y . Furthermore, these groups appeared to early investigators, and appear to
ethnologists today, to have been in possession of the area for a relatively long period of time. The physical environment of the two areas
is strikingly similar and they are contiguous. However, Mooney's
population estimates for the y ear 1780 show 23,700 inhabitants of the
Gulf of Georgia area and 6,000 inhabitants of the Puget Sound area.
Kroeber ( 1939: 142) computes that this yields a population density of
32.60 in the Gulf of Georgia area and 16.80 in the Puget Sound area
per one hundred square kilometers. The evidence of archeological survey and test excavation strongly supports Kroeber's objection that the
Puget Sound Salish have been underestimated.
Finally we turn to Kroeber's suggestion that the Nutka, Kwakiutl,
Tsimshian, and Haida have, perhaps, been underestimated relative to
population estimates for the Gulf of Georgia Salish. Here the author
has relatively little comment to make. He has done no field work in
the Tsimshian and Haida areas. An archeological survey of eastern
Vancouver Island in 1954 (Taylor, 1956; Taylor and Duff, 1956 ) and
a trip round the west coast of Vancouver Island in 1959 (Taylor,
1961 ), leads him to the view that Kroeber was right- at least for the
Nutka and Kwakiutl areas. While the incidence of village sites is much
lower, it is also true that northern villages appear to be much larger.

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Ethnohistorical Data Bearing on Aboriginal Southern
Northwest Coast Population Estimates
Kwakiutl. The total of 9,376 for the Kwakiutl population of Vancouver Island and adjacent small islands in and around Johnstone
Strait is taken from two censuses (one for the west coast of Vancouver
Island and one for the east coast) in the papers of Sir James Douglas. 3
Sir James lists a population of 920 for the Quatsino on the west coast
of Vancouver Island, 4,454 for the "Quakeeolth," and 4,002 for the
"Lay- 'coolaach at Point Mudge and other parts of Johnstone Straits"
(slave population included in each case).
Neither census is dated. The east coast census must have been taken
after 1840, since the Lekwiltok are shown in possession of Cape Mudge
and a Salishan-speaking group held that spot until that time (Taylor
and Duff, 1956). It is unlikely that this series of censuses was undertaken after 1846 for a variety of reasons. It seems probable that the
west coast census dates from about the same time as the east coast census. The writer is therefore inclined to set the dates 1840-6 for this
population figure.
Thus the censuses of the mid-nineteenth century show more than
twice as many Kwakiutl as Mooney estimated for 1780. Both figures
exclude the Haisla; however, the Hudson's Bay census rolls, evidently,
also do not include the Heiltsuk of the adjacent British Columbia
mainland.
The three most ready explanations for this discrepancy would
appear to be:
a. The Kwakiutl population doubled or even tripled, in the space of two
generations, between 1780 and 1845.
b . The censuses of Sir James Douglas are wildly inaccurate.
c. Mooney vastly underestimated the Kwakiutl population c. 1780.

The first explanation is quite unsatisfactory for several reasons. We
3 Douglas, Sir James, C. 1855 (Bancroft Collection) , Second Series, pp. 8 and 16.
The library catalog card notes that the First Series of Papers were copied from the
Victoria (British Columbia) Provincial Archives; the whereabouts of the originals
of the Second Series are unknown. To this the present writer would note that at
least several of the papers of the "Second Series" are in the archives in Victoria.
In at least one instance a clerical ( ?) error on a census in the Vi ctoria collection
appears also in the Bancroft Collection census but does not appear on the copy in
Beaver House, London. The writer therefore suspects that the Second Series was
also copied from the Victoria Archives. In truth, the Second Series is not a series
but a hodgepodge of Sir James' papers oovering almost two decades.

129

ESTIMATING ABORIGINAL POPULATION

CHART 2
CULTURE
AREAS
(Kroeber 's
1939

TRIBES

numbering

(Kroeber 's
1939 system )

system )

2a

2b

3

4

5

1

2

POPULATION

POPULATION

( Niooney·s est.
for 1780 adapled
by Kroeber)

( Censuses
from Hudson' s
Bay Papers)

CENTRAL MARITIME, NORTHERN

Kwakiutl
CENTRAL MARITIME, SOUTHERN
Nutka
Makah, Quileute, Quinault
GULF OF GEORGIA
Comox, Pentlatch, Cowichan, LKung'en,
Seshelt, Squamish, Lower Fraser
Nutsak, Lummi
Klallam, Chimakum
PUGET SOUND
Skiokornish, Nisqualli, Twana, Puyallup,
Snoqualmi, Snohomish, Skagit
LOWER COLUMBIA
Tlatskanai
Lower, Upper Chehalis,
Owilapash, Cowlitz
Chinook

4,500 1

9,376 2

6,000
4,000

7,093
Lack data

20,5003
800
2,400

9,4144
855
1,485 5

6,000

5,175

1,600

175

1,200
22,000

Lack data
2,585

Does not include Haisla.
Does not include Haisla or Heiltsuk.

3 Of this figure, :Mooney allots to southeastern Vancom·e1· Island 8,900.

4

5

Southeastern Vancouver I sland only.
Exel ud es th e Chimakum and two Ki a l lam tribes.

do not know of a North American Indian group which increased in
population during the first two or three generations after white contact. (Mooney, himself [in Hodge, 1910, Pt. 2: 286], makes this point
quite emphatically. ) In any event, smallpox and syphilis had begun
their work among the Kwakiutl by the end of the eighteenth centuryalbeit somewhat less virulently, one may assume from the documentary evidence, than the ravages of these diseases to the south. It is quite
likely that the territorial expansion of the Kwakiutl (at least the Lekwiltok), together with their increasingly aggressive and successful
slave raids, had led to a rapid rise of the slave population. Since Hudson's Bay officials always enumerated slaves (usually separately, but
in this instance, in lump ) this factor probably caused "Kwakiutl" population figures to decline less rapidly than their neighbors, but it can

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

scarcely have given rise to a phenomenal population increase. In order
to assume that an increase in slaves accounts for the discrepancy in the
two sets of figures we would be forced to the hypothesis that the Kwakiutl had more slaves than freemen. No case is known in which much
more than a quarter of the population of any tribe on the Northwest
Coast was slave. The Northwest Coast economy could have supported
no such distribution of population.
The contest then becomes one between acceptance of Mooney's estimates made from secondary sources three generations after the event
and the Hudson's Bay Company head count made on the scene. Unless
evidence can be adduced proving inaccuracy, willful or careless, on the
part of the Hudson's Bay enumerators, it would appear necessary to
accept the third explanation- viz., Mooney vastly underestimated the
Kwakiutl population c. 1780.
Southern Central Maritime. The Nutkan population figure of 7,093
is taken from the previously mentioned west coast Vancouver Island
census and thus probably dates from the early 1840's. 4 The census figures give breakdowns for men, women, boys, and girls. While the
Kwakiutl have a nearly normal distribution, the children's figures, of
both sexes, among the Nutka are very low- arguing, inferentially,
that in preceding generations the total Nutkan population figure must
have been much higher.
The discrepancy between Mooney's figures and those of Douglas are
not as great as the discrepancy in Kwakiutl figures (amounting to less
than twenty per cent ) . However, it must be remembered that Mooney's estimates date from nearly three generations earlier than the Hudson's Bay census. Since the child-adult ratio of the census constitutes
mute evidence to the rapid decline of Nutkan population and since the
Nutka were the first groups in contact with the white man on the
Northwest Coast, we probably must multiply the census figures by a
factor of two or three to arrive at a valid extrapolation based upon
Douglas' 1840-46 figure. This would indicate a Nutka population on
the order of 17,700 c. 1780.
If the Hudson's Bay census is assumed accurate, then Mooney's
estimate for 1780 must be much too low.
Gulf of Georgia Salish. Unfortunately, the writer cannot compare
all of the Gulf of Georgia Salish figures of Mooney with those of Hudson's Bay figures. Complete figures were only located for the Salishan
1
• Douglas, 1853: 16. Sir James lists the Quatsinio in the west coast census with
the Nutkan tribes. The figure for the Quatsinio has been deducted from the Nutkan
total here presented and added to the Kwakiutl total.

ESTIMATING ABORIGINAL POPULATION

131

of Vancouver Island. The figure 8,900 was not taken from Kroeber,
since he does not break down population for mainland and Vancouver
Island British Columbia Salishan. This 8,900 represents the total of all
the Vancouver Island Salish groups listed in Mooney's 1928 article. 5
Mooney's (1928: 28) estimate and the Hudson's Bay count are at
this point strikingly similar. However, it must, once again, be remembered that Mooney's figures are for 1780. The Hudson's Bay censuses
for this group were probably made c. 1840. Since the northern Coast
Salish had suffered population loss from at least three sources during
this period (disease, slave raids, and Kwakiutl [Lekwiltok] territorial
aggrandizement in the north), it is scarcely reasonable to assume that
population in 1780 on eastern Vancouver Island should be slightly
lower than for 1840. Once again, Mooney's estimate for 1780 would
appear to be low, although, in this instance, somewhat nearer the
mark.
Nutsak, Lummi. At this point, there is a curious difference between
Mooney's figures and those of Kroeber. Mooney gives a total of 1,000
for Nooksak, Lummi and Samish. Kroeber gives a total of 800 for the
"Nutsak" and Lummi alone. Since Kroeber's total figure for the Gulf
of Georgia group is 200 below that of Mooney and his total figure for
the Puget Sound area is 200 above Mooney's estimate, the writer has
assumed that Kroeber allowed a population of 200 for the Samish and
arbitrarily assigned them to the Puget Sound area-which is something of a geographic tour de force. Possibly Kroeber decided to lump
the Samish with the Skagit-a reasonably defensible position.
The figure 855 for the Nooksack and Lummi in the Hudson's Bay
census column is taken from the papers of Sir James Douglas (in which
the tribal designations are given as "Eusakk" and "Nholumie"). This
census (Douglas, 1853: 10-11) was very likely made after 1840-possibly as late as 1846 or 1847. Chart 3 is a section of this report and is
given here to illustrate the manner in which Hudson's Bay censuses
were returned on the Northwest Coast.
Once again, the actual count for a year in the 1840's is higher (in
this case by only about six per cent) than Mooney's estimate for 1780.
And, therefore, we must once more conclude that if the Hudson's Bay
census is correct, then Mooney's estimate is too low.
Klallam, Chimakum. The estimate of 2,400 for the 1780 population
of the Klallam and Chimakum contrasts with the Hudson's Bay census
''Douglas, 1853: 7. Douglas actually shows a total of 9.404 Salishan Indians on
eastern Vancouver Island; however, he (or a clerk ) made an error of 10 in adding
the adult female column. VVhen corrected, the total is 9,414.

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CHART 31
Heads o[
families

Ca noes

Guns

'Vomen

Sons

D aughters

Sla,·es

76
69
25
10

127
85
24
16

65
113
12
9

132
185
26
12

133
185
36
14

111
155
37
11

422
137
22
9

Skagit
Nholumie
Eusaak
Sanayamio

1
A portion of a cens us from th e pri,·ate papers of Sir James Douglas (Second Series ) , Bancroft copy,
pp. 10- 11.

report of c. 1845." This report seems to have been prepared at Fort
Victoria and therefore must have been done in the middle or late
1840's. Granted the notation that two "tribes" are missing from this
return and also granted that the Hudson's Bay reports make no mention of Chimakum (who were probably absorbed by the KlallamHudson's Bay reports note the Klallam around Port Townsend) , the
two figures appear reasonably compatible. Smallpox had been reported
on the south coast of the Strait of Juan de Fuca as early as 1792-on
the other hand, contemporary accounts do not appear to justify an assumption that their population decline was extraordinary for the
Northwest Coast. If we assume a population decrease of fifty per cent
from 1780 to 1845, then Mooney's estimate would appear to be quite
accurate.
Puget Sound Salish. The figure 5,175 in the Hudson's Bay census
column was obtained by subtracting from the Fort Nisqualli District
census of 1838-1839, the total for the Klallam and adding to the remainder the total for the Skagit (drawn from the HBC census mentioned in the section on the Nutsak and Lummi). 7
In another manuscript (Taylor, 1961) the writer has given his
opinion that the population of the Puget Sound area declined about
fifty per cent in the period from 1780 to 1840. He therefore thinks that
the figure for 1780 should be approximately 10,300 rather than Mooney's estimate of 6,000. In any event, it is difficult to reconcile a figure of
G Douglas, 1853: 14--15. The Hudson's Bay census for the Fort Nisqualli District for the year 1838-1839 showed a population of only 1262 Klallam. However,
it is relatively unlikely that this census included the westernmost Klallam groups.
7 The Fort Nisqualli census of 1838-39 here employed was furnish ed the writer
by the Governor and Committee of the Hudson's Bay Company from the archives
in Bea ver House, London. A copy is to be found on pp. 19-20 of the Private Papers
of Sir lames Douglas, Ms., (Second Series) , Victoria, B.C. A probable copy of this
copy is to be found on p. 23 of Douglas, op. cit. Both of the latter copies contain the
identical clerical error.

ESTIMATING ABORIGINAL POPULATION

133

6,000 for 1780 with an actual head count of 5,175 in 1839, when we
know that the Puget Sound natives had been repeatedly visited by
smallpox and syphilis was rampant among them. Evidently, the "intermitting fever" did not reach Puget Sound (Tolmie, 1883, under date
of Thursday, Nov. 14).
Tlatskanai. Of all the contrasted figures in Chart 2 the greatest proportional discrepancy is that between Mooney's estimate of 1,600
Tlatskanai for the year 1780 and Sir George Simpson's (in Merk,
1931: 170 ) estimate of 175 "Clatskaneyes" extant in 1825. It is quite
difficult to understand why Mooney gave such a large figure for the
Tlatskanai. After all they were an hunting and gathering Athabascanspeaking people, comparable in every way to their relatives the Owilapash. Each group was essentially alien to the Northwest Coast cultural
pattern; each group occupied a bloc of rough hill country (the two
areas were quite comparable in size) that was non-utilizable to the
Chinookan and Salishan groups around them. Yet Mooney lumps the
Owilapash together with three much larger Salishan tribes and assigns them a combined weight of 1,200 in contrast to the Tlatskanai's
1,600!
Probably, Mooney relied upon the Lewis and Clark estimate of
1,200 "Clack-star Nation" in 1805, and added one-third for presumed
population decrease in the quarter century between 1780 and the
Lewis and Clark vi~its. However, as Thwaites points out, this estimate
was "considerably enlarged" by William Clark after the Lewis and
Clark expedition had returned from the West Coast. In general, the
Lewis and Clark estimates for the areas they did not reside in are suspiciously large compared to their conservative estimates for the bands
they knew well (such as the Clatsop and Chinook.) 8
The Hudson's Bay report (Sir George calls it a rough estimate. although it includes a breakdown by sex for freemen and slaves ) is for
the year 1824-25 and thus predates the great "intermittent fever"
epidemics which began either in 1829 or 1830.
Granted that the Tlatskanai, along with the Chinook and Owilapash , were to all but vanish before the middle of the nineteenth century, there does not seem to be much evidence that they had suffered
much more than other southern Northwest Coast Indian s prior to 1825,
and probably had not suffered as much as tl1e Nutka .
The writer thinks an estimate of 400 for the Tlatskanai in 1780
more realistic than Mooney' s 1,600.
S Thwaites. 1905, Vol. VI: 116, 113-114. Also, see Coues, 1893, Vol. III: 1244-45 and 1249.

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Lower, Upper Chehalis, Owilapash, Cowlitz . The writer was unable
to locate Hudson's Bay census data for the Lower Chehalis, Upper Chehalis and Cowlitz. It can be observed, however, that Mooney's composite estimate of 1,000 for 1780 is amazingly low compared to his
estimate of 22,000 for the Chinook and 1,600 for the Tlatskanai.
(Mooney estimates the Athabascan Owilapash [Willapa] at 200, Kroeber lumps them with the Chehalis and Cowlitz for his figure of 1,200. )
Before the intermittent fever epidemic, the Cowlitz were reckoned a
large tribe by Hudson's Bay Company officials. For example, Sir
George Simpson says :
'iVhen I descended the Cowlitz, in 1828, there was a large population
along its banks; but since then the intermittent fever, which commenced
its ravages in the following year, had left but fe w to mourn for those that
fell. During the whole of our day's course, till we came upon a small camp
in the evening, th e shores w ere silent and solitary, the deserted villages
forming melancholy monuments of th e generation that h ad passed away. n
Merk, 193 1: 331. Letter from John M cLoughlin to the Gove rnor and Committee
of the Hudso n·s Bay Company dated 11 Oct. 1830. "Th e Intermitting Fever (for
the first time sin ce the trade of this D epartm ent was es tablished ) has appea red at
this place (Ft. Vancouver) ... " Douglas also gives 1830 as the first " Ague Summer."
Private Papers, S.xond Series, under date of April 24, 1840.

Sir James Douglas noted:
The inhabitants of the Cowlitz River were a t one tim e numerous; but
are now reduced to som ething l ess than 60 men principally occupied in
fishing: few of them evincing a desire to becom e hunters by courting the
noble el evating and more arduous exercises of th e chase.
The decrease of population cannot be clearly traced to any one cause
in parti cular- it with more probability proceeds from a union of evils.
The whites best acquainted with the former and present state of the River
and the Natives themselves, however, ascribe it with one voice to the
Ague. As it is only since the appeara nce of that incredibly destructive
visitation among them tha t they have wasted a way to a shadow of their
former numbers.
Plomondo says that in 1830 the first ague summer, the living sufficed
not to bury the dea d. But fl ed in terror to th e sea coast abandoning the
dead and dying to the birds and b easts of prey.1 0
" Simpson, 1847: 176. It is not entirely clear whether 1829 or 1830 was the first
year of the epidemic:
10 Dou glas, April 24, 1840 ( under marginal notation Cowelitz Statisticks ), in
Private Papers, Second S eri!!s (Bancroft Collection). The Plomondo here cited is
probably Simon Plomondon or Plomondeaux, Hud son's Bay Company voyageur.

ESTIMATING ABORIGINAL POPULATION

135

Counting women and children, the population of the Cowlitz c. 1840
may, therefore, be reckoned at 150 to 200. In fact, most reports of the
late 1840's and early 1850's written by British and American officials
other than Hudson's Bay Company show a larger population for the
Cowlitz. Sterling's estimate for 1852 was 200. Warre and Vavaseur's
report (returned in the House of Commons in the spring of 1849 )
showed a population of 500-but this probably included Taidnapam.
Assuming the death toll in the preceding decade to have amounted
to three-quarters of the population (a conservative estimate in the light
of the foregoing statements and John McLoughlin's estimate that in
the fint fever year of 1830, three-quarters of the Chinook in the vicinity of Fort Vancouver died in one summer), then the Cowlitz population of 1830 was on the order of 600 to 800. Assuming about the
same decrease for the Cowlitz for the period 1780-1830 as that adopted
for the Puget Sound tribes, then the population in 1780 would have
been on the order of 900-1200 in that latter year.
This checks rather well with Edward Curtis' description of eleven
villages of Cowlitz on the Cowlitz River. It should be remembered that
permanent villages became more numerous and individually smaller
as one proceeds south on the Northwest Coast, and that riverine economy would not support so large a village as would a maritime economy.
The Owilapash would have been a much smaller group-as an Athabascan hunting and gathering people occupying about the same type
and amount of land as the Tlatskanai, it would appear likely that they
had approximately the same population- about 400 c. 1780.
The Upper Chehalis were probably a smaller group than the Cowlitz
in 1780. Dart shows a population of 204 for the year 1851-but he evidently added the livestock into the total population figure (and added
wrongly to boot). The writer thinks that an estimate of 500 Upper
Chehalis for the year 1780 would not be too wide of the mark.
Concerning the Lower Chehalis (including the Copalis and the
Humptulips) it need only be noted that they were not enumerated at
all before the epidemics of the 1830's hit them and that they occupied
the shores of Gray's Harbor and northern Willapa Bay. This area includes some of the largest archaeological sites south of the Gulf of
Georgia-the population was reported to be numerous by John Work
on his original exploratory expedition of 1824. The writer is inclined
to estimate a population on the order of 1,800-2,400 for 1780.
Adding these estimates together, 4,000 is suggested as a more reliable estimate for the total group than Mooney's 1,200.
Chinook. Mooney gives a population of 22,000 for the Chinook on

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the lower Columbia in the year 1780. It will be noted that this figure is
a little larger than Mooney's estimate for the population of the whole
of the Gulf of Georgia region and represents approximately one-fifth
of his total for the Northwest Coast. 11 Sir George Simpson (in Merk,
1931: 170) gave a "rough estimate of the population on the Columbia
River from the Coast to the Cascade Portage as far as the influence of
the Tide is felt" for the year 1824-5. He listed 1, 140 free males, 950
free females , 395 male slaves and 275 female slaves for a total population of 2,760. This figure included 175 "Clatskaneyes." If we deduct
the Tlatskanais from the total, we have an estimated 2,585 Chinooks
resident on the lower Columbia in 1824--5. The discrepancy is, of
course, remarkable. Now a whole host of commentators, British,
French, and American, have remarked upon the rapid depopulation of
the Chinook in the 1830's due primarily to the ravages of "intermittent
fever." 12 Captain Wilkes' (in Gibbs, 1855: 435) estimate of population
of the lower Columbia in 1841 comes to only 519 and doubtless includes some non-Chinook groups. He lists only 219 under the heading
Chinook. Gibbs ( 1855: 435 ) shows for 1854 a total Chinook population
below the Cowlitz, and including the Chinook of Shoalwater Bay (Willa pa Bay) , of 116, noting that they are intermingled with the Cowlitz
and Chehalis.
The conclusion is inescapable from contemporary accounts and from
censuses that the Chinook virtually ceased to exist in the two decades
following the first appearance of "intermitent fever" at Fort Vancouver in 1830 (it is an almost overpowering temptation to observe in
modern vernacular that they were "decimated by over nine-tenths" ).
However, this demonstrable population reduction occurred after Simpson's estimate of 2,585 in 1824--25. It does not, at least at first blush,
aid us in understanding why Mooney gives a population figure nine
times greater than Sir George's 1824-25 estimate for the year 1780.
Normally, Sir George Simpson, in common with other west coast Hudson's Bay officials, was careful to note any sudden change in population figures. He makes no mention of a marked population decrease
precedent to his 1824-25 estimate.
If the reader will consult the bibliography of Mooney appended to
his 1928 publication he will note that only published standard works
on early Northwest Coast settlement printed before 1910 were cited.
11 Kroeber, 1934: 4. Chinook is used throughout this article to mean Chinookanspeaking peoples of the Lower Columbia. This conforms to Kroeber's 1940 usage.
12 Merk, 1931: 331 ; Dunn, 1844: 114--115; Tolmie, Diary, British Columbia
Archives, under date May 19, 1833.

ESTIMATING ABORIGINAL POPULATION

137

Several of these works estimate Chinook population decrease at between nine-tenths and eleven-twelfths without being very specific
about the base from whence they extrapolated.
Smallpox and syphilis had almost certainly appeared at the mouth
of the Columbia before the end of the eighteenth century. 1 3 However,
we know, or may infer, that smallpox had appeared at various other
points on the Northwest Coast at about this same time.
To sum up: the writer doubts that population decrease on the lower
Columbia was too much greater than that elsewhere on the Northwest
Coast before the mouth of the Columbia became the locus of western
European contact. The term "too much greater" is here used advisedly.
The Columbia and the Fraser served as aboriginal trade arteries and it
is quite probable that epidemics in advance of western European contact reached such areas with greater frequency than they did such
backwaters as the Puget Sound area or the Willamette Valley. Certainly, however, there is no evidence to support the view that the population of the Chinook area decreased by ten times while the population of the Puget Sound area remained constant and the population
of the west coast of Vancouver Island increased between 1 780 and
1830. Most of the observers who wrote the works Mooney consulted
visited Fort Vancouver in the late 1830's or during the 1840's and were
regaled with tales of depopulation in that area due to the current intermittent fever epidemics. These they printed and did not mention the
population in other areas from the Northwest Coast because they did
not have contact with these areas. Mooney therefore assumed an enormously greater rate of depopulation in the late eighteenth century and
early nineteenth century for this region than for others on the Northwest Coast.
If we accept Simpson's estimate for 1824-25 and assume a population decrease twice as great for the lower Columbia area than that assumed for Puget Sound from 1780 to 1840, we may estimate the Chinook population at 5,000 circa 1780. 14

Conclusions
On the following page the writer presents his own estimates based
1 3 Dunn, 1844: 114-115; Lewis and Clark, 1893, Vol. Z: 711-71Z; Mooney, 19Z8:
13-14.
14 The writer discusses population changes among the Cowlitz and Chinook at
greater length in an article entitled "The 'Intermittent Fever' Epidemic on the
Lower Columbia" by Taylor and Hoaglin, to be published in Ethnohistory, Spring,
196Z.

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

upon the material, here presented, as contrasted with those of Mooney,
for the year 1 780 (Chart 4 ).
In 1939, Kroeber observed in the course of his population density
studies that:
V\That is needed is, first a generally accepted classification of tribes or
ethnic groups; second, a more precise determination of their territories;
and third, a new series of estimates, both by local specialists and by those
interested in demographic problems as such, of the size of tribal populations. These studies will probably involve a number of workers and a
number of years. Only then can anything like reasonable reliability in
detail be expected .

The present writer would not pretend that this paper represents such
a step for the southern Northwest Coast, but does venture the hope
that it is a way-station toward reliable estimates.
In conclusion, the writer wishes to observe, that while Mooney's
figures for the southern Northwest Coast were in many instances quite
wide of the mark, considering the time at which he wrote, the preliminary character of his study, and the scanty materials available to
him, he did a remarkably creditable job.
Even more remarkable were Kroeber's trenchant comments upon
Mooney's figures for the southern Northvvest Coast-which would
seem in most instances to be admirably borne out by the data.
CHAR1 4

Tribe or group

i\'looncy's estinrnte
c. 1780

Kwakiutl
4,500 1
Nutka
6,000
Van couver Island Samish
8,900
Nooksack and Lummi
1,000 4
Klallam and Chimakum
Z,400
Puget Sound Salish
6,000
Makah, Quileute and Quinault 4,000
Tlatskanai
1,600
Lower, Upper Chehalis,
Willapa and Cowlitz
1,ZOO
Chinook
2Z,OOO
TOTAL
57,600
Excludes Haisla.
Excludes Haislu.
Excludes Hai sla an<l Ileiltsuk.

Inc ludes S<irn ish .
Excludes Chimakum and two Klallam tribes.

Taylor· s es timate
c. 1780

14,500 2
14,000
15,500
1.200
2.400
10,300
5,000
400
4,000
5,000
7Z,300

Hudson·s Bay l.o.
census or es timate
1825- 1846

9,3763
7,093
9,414
855
1,485 5
5,175

Lack data
175

Lack data
2,585

ESTIMATING ABORIGINAL POPULATION

139

While pausing to admire, however, we should not lose sight of the
fact that Mooney's estimates, at least for this region, are not the best in
the light of available data-and Kroeber's population density figures
are based upon Mooney's estimates.
Finally, the writer ventures to point out that it might be fruitful if
r egion al experts undertook to examine Mooney's estimates and
Kroeber's density figures for other culture areas.

R eferences Cited
Coues, Elliot (ed.)
1893. The Journals of L ewis end Clark (in 3 volumes-the 1814 Biddle edition
w ith commentary and notes by Cuues).
D art, Anson
1851. Unpublished p3pers (Micro film, State of Oregon Archives, Salem.
Oregon ).
Douglas, Sir James
1853. Private Papers of Sir James Douglas, K.C.B. (2nd ser., J anuary 3-25,
1853. Typed copy. Archiv es of Bt·itish Columbia ) .
Dunn, J ohn
1844. History of the Oregon T errito ry. Edwards and Hugh es, L ond on .
Gibbs, George
18 77. Tribes of vVestern W ashin gton and Northwestern Oregon. Contributions
to North American Ethnology. Washington.
Hod ge, Frederick Webb
1910. Handbook of America n Indians North of Mexico, Parts 1 and 2. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bull. 30. Government Printing Office, Washington .
Kro eber , A. L .
1939. Cultural and Natural Areas of N ative North America . University of California Press, Berkeley.
1934. N ati ve American Population . American Anthropologist, n .s ., Vol. 36,
pp. 1-25 .
Merk, Frederick
1931. Fur Trade and Empire. H arvard University Press.
Moon ey . James
1928. The Aboriginal Population of America North of Mexico. Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections, Vol. 80, No. 7. Preface by John R. Swanton.
W ashington, D .C.
Simpson , George
1847. An Overland Journey Round the World During the Yea r s 1841 and 1842.
Sea and Blanchard . Philadelphi a.
Swanton, John R.
1952. The Indian Tribes of North America. Bureau of America Ethnology,
Bull. 145. Government Printing Office, Washington.
T aylor, Herbert C., Jr.
1956. Survey of Eastern Van couver Islalld. Resear ch Stuilies of the State College

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of Washington, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 53-55. State College of Washington,
Pullman, Washington.
1961. Notes on the Aboriginal Population of the Puget Sound Area. Research
in Progress, Herbert C. Taylor, Jr. (ed. ), Western Washington State
College, Bellingham, Washington
Taylor, Herbert C., Jr. and Wilson Duft
1956. A Post Contact M·o vement of the Kwakiutl. Research Studies of the State
College of Washington, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 56-66. State College of Washington, Pullman, Washington.
Tay lor, H erbert C., Jr. and Lester L . Hoaglin, Jr.
1962. The Intermittent Fever Epidemic on the Lower Columbia. Ethn::ihistory ,
Vol. 9, No. 2.
Thwaites, Reuben Gold
1904--05. Original Journals of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, 1804-1806 (in 8
volumes ) . N ew York.
Tolmie, William Fraser
1832--33. Diary ( unpublished transcript of original c.liary). Copy in Provincial
Archives, Victoria , British Columbia.
Western Washington College
Bellingham, Washington

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of
Northeastern Texas, With a Preliminary
Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
LEROY JOHNSON, JR.

Introduction
The primary purpose of this work is to report upon the archeological remains recovered from the Fred Yarbrough and Manton Miller
sites, located on the western frontier of the eastern woodlands in
northern Texas. Both of these important sites contain early ceramic
and preceramic components. A second purpose is to compare these
two sites with related archeological materials from early sites in the
eastern parts of Oklahoma and Texas, and to define tentatively an
archeological complex of the Archaic Stage to be known as the "La
Harpe Aspect." The third purpose is to draw from several new developments in the field of artifact classification and nomenclature, and to
attempt an application of "variety," "tradition," and other concepts
to the analysis of lithic materials.
Only partial success has been attained in the present paper. and a
great deal remains to be done, even with the archeological data reported upon here. For one thing, the paucity of site reports in the area
under consideration precludes any full definition of the La Harpe Aspect. Also, the attempted use of the variety, tradition, and other constructs in analyzing lithic materials encountered difficulties, primarily
since related archeological materials have not been studied in a similar
fashion. Hence comparisons with extant site reports yielded somewhat
limited returns. In the long run, it is felt that the primary value of the
present paper will be as a source of comparative material for future
investigators. On the other hand, it is hoped that the present definition
of the La Harpe Aspect will stand the test of time and new data-with
some modifications, to be sure-and, furthermore, that valid varieties,
traditions , or similar classificatory units will be recognized in typologies of lithic materials.

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The writer wishes to express his thanks and appreciation to two individuals in particular: Mr. Edward B. Jelks, Executive-Director of
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, and Dr. T. N. Campbell,
Chairman of the Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas. It is these two persons, more than any others, to whom the
writer is indebted for his foundation in archeology. Both have given
encouragement and assistance in the present study, as well as in many
other instances. In addition, Mr. Jelks worked with the writer to a
considerable extent on the problem of artifact typology, and aided appreciably in applying the variety concept to the artifacts described in
this paper. Mr. L. F . Duffield and Dr. E. M. Davis, of The University
of Texas, also gave useful suggestions and assistance during the writing
of this paper.
Preliminary Statements. The Yarbrough site is located in Van Zandt
County, Texas (Fig. 1), and was excavated some 20 years ago by The
University of Texas and the Works Progress Administration, but not
reported upon in detail. This site contained materials representing both
preceramic and early ceramic occupations. Dr. Alex D. Krieger examined the artifacts from the site and made several initial observations, noting that a number of distinct cultural components were represented (Krieger, 1946: 172; Suhm et al., 1954: 177, 186 ). With
Krieger's observations in mind the writer decided to undertake an
analysis of the site and to report upon the materials found there.
Many difficulties were encountered while doing the study. The
original field notes and the artifacts themselves had become scattered
through the years. The field notes were frequently scanty and incomplete, and few maps and profiles had been made. Yet it was felt that
whatever information could be gleaned from these data would be of
some value, irrespective of the incomplete nature of the field records,
especially since until the past three years almost no archeological research has been carried on in the immediate region of the Yarbrough
site. Also, the large numbers of lithic artifacts which had been recovered seemed to promise an excellent opportunity to try out new theoretical achievements made in the field of artifact typology, but heretofore employed exclusively in the analysis of ceramic collections.
The Miller site is located within the proposed Cooper Reservoir in
Delta County, Texas (Fig. 1), and was excavated in 1959 by the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project of The University of Texas. Like the
Yarbrough site, the Manton Miller site contained archeological materials representing both ceramic and preceramic components. Although differing from the Yarbrough site in several significant ways,

143

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

delta

•~HE

I

MILLER SITE

1

I

van zandt

co.

\
I

I

- ·· - ·1.
I
•

I

!

·- ·-.I

I

.

~

_ _J

I

THE YARBROUGH ANO MILLER

•.

SITES, GENERAL

LOCATION

Fig . 1 .

the Miller site nevertheless relates to the former, and belongs in part
to the La Harpe Aspect. In spite of its small size and the rather limited amount of material obtained from it, some important information
relating to the La Harpe Aspect was acquired through the analysis of
the Miller site.
The La Harpe Aspect is defined for the first time in the present
paper, and represents an Archaic Stage culture, or closely related
groups of cultures, which existed over a broad geographic area and
which underwent a uniform historic development from early Archaic

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

times into the early ceramic period. It is characterized by an early
phase with expanding stem dart points, a later phase with contracting
stem dart points, and finally, simple, plain-ware ceramics of various
types. The La Harpe Aspect ended with the introduction into the
area of abundant arrow points and decorated pottery, heralds of a
more sedentary mode of existence. Sites belonging to this complex can
be traced, in a belt, from the vicinity of Houston, Texas, northward
into central Oklahoma. The Yarbrough and Miller sites are included
in this series of sites.
Environment. The Yarbrough and Miller sites are only 55 miles
apart and are in very similar natural environments.
The Fred Yarbrough farm is situated on the flood plain of the Sabine
River on the south side of the stream channel. This river flows in a
southeastern direction across northern Texas, bending southward just
below the city of Marshall, thence flowing more or less due south until
it empties into the Gulf of Mexico below Port Arthur, Texas. Near its
disemboguement the Sabine is a large and important river. In the
region of its headwaters-the region directly northwest of the Yarbrough site-it is a much smaller stream which often becomes dry or
nearly dry during periods of prolonged drought. Its flood plain, which
provides a considerable amount of arable land, is somewhat entrenched
and is bounded in all directions by rolling terrain.
The Manton Miller site is located on the flood plain of the South
Sulphur River, on the north side of the stream channel. This river is
one of the headwater branches of the larger Sulphur River, which flows
in an eastern direction across northeastern Texas into southwestern
Arkansas, where it empties into the Red River. In the vicinity of the
Miller site the river channel is rather deep, and its banks are bordered
by an irregular flood plain dotted with low erosional remnants of the
uplands and a considerable amount of underbrush and small trees. Beyond the flood plain are the uplands, which are sculptured into gently
rolling hills.
The Sabine and Sulphur drainages are confined to the Western
Coastal Plain physiographic province (Atwood, 1940: 25), a region
characterized by a system of low, undulating hills composed of sands,
gravels, clays, and marls. Geologically speaking, this plain is a vast
lowlnnd which, throughout past ages, has been alternately above and
below sea level. Structurally the area forms a large homoclinal plain
composed of overlapping formations which dip gently toward the Gulf
of Mexico, outcropping as a series of belts or low cuestas generally
parallel to the coast.
.
. .
:)

;

~

145

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

The Yarbrough site is located over the Rockdale formation of the Eocene Wilcox group and is approximately 11 miles east of the contact
area between the Wilcox and the younger Midway group. The average elevation of northern Van Zandt County is 500 feet above sea
level.
The Miller site is located approximately at the contact zone between
the Cretaceous Navarro group and the Midway group of the Eocene.
The average elevation of southern Delta County is 520 feet above sea
level.
A humid climate with high temperatures characterizes the Western
Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province (Blair, 1950 ) , in which are
located the two archeological sites in question. In the summer months
the humidity averages approximately 70 per cent for the entire province, with long intervals in which the temperature is over 100° F.
The summer winds are usually from the south, but they change frequently to northerly during the winter months, bringing cold interior
currents with them.
For the area around Van Zandt County and the Yarbrough site the
rainfall averages slightly over 40 inches. For instance, the weather
station at Wills Point, in Van Zandt County, reported an average annual rainfall of 40.8 inches for the period of 24 years ending July 1,
1957.
Although no permanent weather stations are maintained in Delta
County (in which the Miller site is located) , the average rainfalljudging from the adjacent counties of Hopkins and Hunt-should be
about 40 inches (U.S. Weather Bureau records, n. d., from the office of
the Weather Bureau Climatologist for Texas, in Austin).
The Yarbrough and Miller sites fall within the confines of the Texan
biotic province (Dice, 1943: 23-24 ) which extends from northern
Oklahoma southward across Texas to the Gulf of Mexico. It is bounded
on the west by the more arid Kansan and Comanchean provinces and
on the east by the humid Austroriparian province.
Rolling plains spotted with growths of hardwood trees are common
in the Texan province, and many grasses and perennial flowering
plants are to be found therein. The trees are, for the most part, hickories and oaks, the most common examples being the Texas hickory
(Carya buckleyi), the post oak (Quercus stellata), and the blackjack
oak ( Q. marilandica) .
Mixed pine-oak forests occur along the eastern margin of the province. Among the dominant species along this eastern region are the
shortleaf pine (Pinus echinata ), the post oak (Quercus stellata), black-

0I:Uce or
f1 ' '

. '

rne State Archeologist

.' Lib.rAJJ -

<

. ....... .... ~ - . • f~~

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

jack oak (Q. marilandica ) , and the sweetgum (Liquidambar styracifiua).
In recent years much of the timber has disappeared. The Eocene
soils on which the pine-oak vegetation grows are generally very infertile, and as a result the farms in the region tend to be located along
fertile creeks and upon the best of the uplands. Since ample fresh land
has previously always been available for clearing and farming, it has
been the practice not to conserve the fertility of the fields . Heretofore
the farmers cultivated their land as long as it was profitable to do so,
and when their old fields became exhausted, they were abandoned for
new ones. At the present time, however, the practice of agriculture is
declining sharply in the region, and many old fields have been overgrown with dense thickets of young pines, persimmon, and sassafras.
The animal life of the area is quite diversified. Many reptiles and
amphibians can be found along the drainage ways. The raccoon ( Procyon lot or ), and the opossum ( Didelphis sp. ) are among the most
common mammals, while the Texas red wolf (Canis rufus ), the fox
(Vulpes sp. ) , and the Texas lynx or bobcat (Lynx rufus ) , the armadillo ( Tolypeutes sp. ) , and the cottontail (Lepus sylvaticus ) may be
found in some numbers. Once hunted nearly to the point of extermination in the area, the white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus ) is now
quite common.
Ducks and geese enter the area from the north along with the first
" northers" in the fall of the year, congregating around the small lakes
and streams, then gradually moving southward as winter progresses.
Among permanent or nonmigratory birds are the turkey and numerous doves and quail.
Fish are common in most of the streams, as are several fresh-water
mollusks.
Ethnohistory of the Area. The Yarbrough and Miller sites lie on the
western fringe of the area which was inhabited at the time of Europ ean contact by various Caddoan tribes, and on the eastern margin of
the region held by several groups of Wichita-speaking Indians.
The first Europeans to come anywhere near this area were the members of the De Soto expedition, who in 1541 entered eastern Texas
under the leadership of Moscoso, the successor of the ill-fated De Soto.
Although the party entered eastern Texas, it is not known for certain
how deeply they penetrated the area. It was not until 1800 that close
contact was made with the area around the two sites, although by
shortly after 1700 strong European influence had been established in
southeastern and extreme northeastern Texas, where the Europeans

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

147

found many tribes of aborigines who can be classified as sedentary
horticulturalists. In the region of present-day Cherokee and Nacogdoches counties, on the Neches River and its principal tributaries, were
found the Nabedache, Neche, Nacanish, Anadarko, Nacogdoche, Nacono, Nasoni (Lower), Nacachau, and Hainai, all members of the
loosely-formed Hasinai Confederacy (Swanton, 1942: 8- 15 ) . To the
east of these were two independent Caddoan tribes, the Ayish and the
Adai. On Red River in Louisiana dwelt the Doustioni, Natchitoches
(Lower ), Washita, and the Yatasi (Lower) of the Natchitoches Con ·
federacy. Along the Red River in Arkansas and Texas were villages of
Cahinnio, Kadohadacho, Nanatsoho, Nasoni (Upper), Natchitoches
(Upper ), and Yatasi (Upper) of the Caddo Confederacy (ibid.: 8- 25 ) .
To the west of the sites, along the headwater area of the Sabine, the
upper Trinity, and the middle course of the Brazos, there lived less
sedentary tribes-the Taovayas, Tawakoni, Waco, Wichita proper,
Kichai, and Yscani-all referred to in early historic documents as the
norteiios. All of these groups, excepting the Kichai (who used a related
language ) , spoke Wichita, a language akin to the Texas Caddoan dialects, all belonging to the Caddoan family of the Iroquois-Caddoan stock
of the Hokan-Siouan phylum (Sapir, 1929: 138-141 ) . Swadesh ( 1959:
16 ) classifies the Caddo. on the basis of lexicostatistical studies, as a
secondary group of the Iroquois primary group.
There is good documentary evidence that many of the Wichitaspeaking groups migrated southward from the vicinity of the Arkansas River into Texas in 1757, and that they soon took up friendly relations with their distant kinsmen to the east, the Caddo (Harper, 1953:
268 ) . Recent archeological and documentary investigations, however,
have suggested the possibility that Wichita groups inhabited northcentral Texas long before the first half of the 18th century (Duffield
and I elks, 1960; Duffield, personal communication) . There is also
some evidence to suggest that the prehistoric archeological complex
known as the Henrietta Focus may be partially ancestral to the historic Wichita (Wedel, 1959: 583, 587). In spite of recent research, the
problem has not yet been resolved, and there remains the possibility
that this western area was occupied before 1720 by the Tonkawa. a
nomadic group of hunters and food-gatherers found in the central portion of Texas in later historic times. Data on this group are quite
scarce, however, and we can not be certain about their early history.
On the headwaters of the Sabine River in Rains County, twenty
miles to the west of the Yarbrough farm and thirty miles southwest of
the Miller site, the Tawakoni and Yscani maintained a village for a

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

short while which was visited by the Spanish in 1760 and 1761 (Johnson and Jelks, 1958). Farther to the northwest on Red River was the
large Taovayas town, the remains of which are known today as Spanish Fort, which was unsuccessfully attacked by the Spanish under
Colonel Parilla in 1759 (Allen, 1939 ) . Yet Spanish influence among
the Wichita groups was slight, and most of the trade which these peoples carried on was with the French who operated out of Louisiana.
The nucleus of Spanish missionary activity centered primarily in the
area som.e distance to the southeast of our two sites, where Christian
missions were maintained for the Hasinai from 1690 to 1693, 1716 to
1719, and again from 1721 to 1773.
In the year 1859, the remaining Caddo, decimated by war and disease, were removed from Texas; that same year the Wichita proper
(including the Taovayas ) , the Waco, and the pitiful remnants of the
Tawakoni and Kichai moved to a reservation near Anadarko, Indian
Territory. However, for all practical considerations, Indian activities
in north-central and northeastern Texas came to an end four years
earlier, in 1855.
In summary, we can say that near the sites in question were the
Hasinai to the southeast, the members of the Caddo Confederacy to the
north and east, and not far to the west the Wichita tribes. There were
some important cultural resemblances between these groups, particularly in an economic and material sense. All constructed thatched.
oval houses, lived in more or less permanent villages, were moderately
sedentary (the Caddo more so than the Wichita ) , farmed and cultivated maize, beans, and squash, and even shared common features in
language and social organization. It may be concluded, then, that a
rather consistent cultural pattern, although with a certain amount of
regional variation, existed for the area under study in late historic
times.
The Problem of Artifact Analysis and Typology. In the past few
years considerable progress has been made toward a more thorough
definition of typological concepts and their application to artifact analysis. The major portion of this endeavor, understandably, has been directed toward ceramic materials. and almost no attempt has been
undertaken to apply the new concepts and ideas to the classification of
non-ceramic artifacts. As stated earlier, one of the goals of this paper
is to classify the large sample of lithic artifacts from the Yarbrough
and Miller sites (referring here primarily to the projectile points ) and
to try to carry over into the realm of stone material certain concepts
developed by other workers in pottery analysis. Needless to say, the

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

149

usual descriptions and analyses included in site reports will also be
presented.
The main trend in typological theory has been toward a more intensive systematization so as to place artifacts in classificatory units
which can help to define archeological assemblages as precisely as possible. The most valuable result of this recent work, in the United States
and elsewhere, has been a drive toward crystallization and application
of the variety concept as well as several more inclusive concepts. In the
American Southwest, Wheat, Gifford, and Wasley (1958) defined the
variety and several broader concepts as they might be applied to the
ceramics of their region, and in eastern North America Phillips ( 1958)
has set forth his ideas on the type-variety problem and has also attempted to apply the concept to pottery in that region. Still more recent studies( Smith, Willey, and Gifford, 1960; Gifford, 1960) have
combined concepts from the theoretical taxonomic and typological systems as proposed for southwestern and eastern United States-making
certain significant modifications and additions-and have redefined
them so as to apply to pottery collections from the Mayan area, apparently with considerable initial success. In the light of these recent advances in the realm of theory, the time seems ripe to broaden the field
of attack in typology and to place lithic materials on the list of objectives. The Yarbrough site, with more than 1,300 projectile points, offers
a made-to-order test case for these new ideas, and to a lesser extent the
lithic material from the Miller site can be used. The amount of variation in the artifact collections from these sites is high, while the projectile point sample is large enough to provide some sort of statistical
security.
As a first step in the analysis, consideration must be given to the different attributes or traits which go to make up an artifact. The term
"attribute" is used here to mean a basic element of form which, associated in one artifact with other elements, combines with these others
to provide the artifact with its characteristic appearance. Thus various shapes or form variations in the stem, shoulders, base, blade, etc.,
of dart points are their attributes, and as such are the essence of any
larger classificatory grouping of artifacts. An attribute, the smallest
unit of study, need not be a purely functional trait, but can be artistic
or stylistic as well.
"Mode" is another extremely useful term, developed and elaborated
by Rouse in his study of Haitian archeological materials ( 1939) and
in his recent paper on artifact classification ( 1960). To quote from
Rouse (1960: 313):

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

By the term "mode" is meant any standard concept, or custom which
governs the behavior of the artisans of a community, and which they hand
down from generation to generation, and which may spread from community to community over considerable distances.

In this sense, then, a mode can be represented by a particular attribute of an artifact, or closely related group of attributes, which have
culturally or historically demonstrable meaning. To quote again from
Rouse (1960: 313):
Not all the attributes of the artifact are indicative of modes. Some attributes will instead express personal idiosyncracies of the artisans. A unique
design, which occurs only once, may be cited as an example. Other attributes fall within the realm of biology, chemistry, or physics rather than
culture.

In summation, an attribute which has been observed to occur
consistently in a number of artifacts, and which seemingly represents
the embodiment of a style concept which existed in the minds of the
manufacturers, can be called a mode or, speaking in more abstract
terms, the result of product of a cultural mode.
Let us turn now to the actual analysis as carried out in the laboratory. To begin with , all the artifacts of different classes (use categories: scrapers, projectile points, and so forth ) were placed into separate groups. Then a small card was prepared for each artifact, on
which was written the field catalogue number, the appropriate excavation square designation, and the depth at which the specimen was
found. These cards could then be assorted easily and arranged in any
desired order, and the technique lent itself very well to distribution
studies within the site, both of a vertical and horizontal nature.
In the typological study itself, attention was fixed on the various attributes of the particular artifacts and they were segregated into as
many small groups as possible. This was done in accordance with the
procedure recommended by Krieger ( 1944) , using care to include together only those specimens which were almost identical in form, i.e. ,
only those which showed essentially the same combination of attributes. This small number of attributes consistently occurring in all the
varieties constitutes the primary traits or attributes of a type, whereas
the secondary attributes are those which serve to distinguish the varieties from each other. Related groups or varieties go to make the type,
and the generally small number of attributes held in common by all
the varieties serve to set the limits of the type .
To summarize, if clusters (consistent combinations of attributes) oc-

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

151

cur within a given type, resulting in discrete groupings within it, we
may assume that varieties are represented. Inter- and intra-site distributional data may serve to corroborate the validity of the varieties,
but these are not at all necessary in setting them up.
In certain instances experience has shown that some difficulty may
be encountered in the use of the variety concept. The Alba arrow point
type at the l\!Iiller site, to give one example, shows a wide range of variation in blade form and size, shoulder and base form, etc., within certain limits. Yet the various attributes representative of the type do not
combine consistently with each other into clusters of homogeneous
small groups, that is, varieties. On the contrary, the attributes appear
to combine quite randomly with each other throughout the sample at
hand, and do not form consistent units within the Alba type. In cases
such as this, the division of the material into varieties is not feasible,
thereby illustrating that the nature of the cultural material itself must
determine whether types are divisible into varieties. In this example,
the Alba type can not be defined from the primary attributes held by
the varieties of the type, since no varieties could be established, but
must be defined on the basis of a comparison of the variation within the
group of points viewed as a whole.
The variety concept should be an important tool for the archeologist,
both on an intra- and an inter-site level of study. For accurate comparisons between the artifacts from different sites and diverse areas,
work on the variety level of organization is necessary if one wants to do
more than establish only general artifact resemblances and obtain general conclusions. For example, a carfeul comparison of strictly-defined,
tightly-knit varieties from two different archeological sites can reveal a
more exact picture of the proximity or distance, taxonomically speaking, between the two collections under consideration, and in more concrete terms, than can the usual comparison of types. In the present
paper very little comparison could be done on the variety level, since
no published reports exist which have used the variety concept in
describing lithic materials. Intensive comparative work will have to
await more site reports.
To summarize at this point, a type may be defined as a combination
of the most significant attributes which are held in common by the related varieties grouped together under it. Individual points, or artifacts not recognizable as belonging to any particular variety, but
nevertheless possessing a sufficient number of the major traits of the
type in question, should also be included within the type. In a case in
which almost no variation has been allowed in the manufacturing tech-

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nique, a type may be represented by only one variety. Yet determining
that the particular variety has no close relatives, and that it by itself
constitutes a complete type, is a significant accomplishment.
Above and beyond the type level of organization it is also possible to
see very general resemblances between artifact types, but here the
number of attributes which they hold in common-the number of cultural modes-is reduced to a very few. When resemblances are recognized on this level in analysis, usually only one or two important traits
or attributes can be emphasized. The typological or taxonmnic term
employed for this stage of classification is "tradition;" thus we have the
"cord-marking tradition," "shell-tempering tradition," and so on in the
field of ceramics. At the Yarbrough and Miller sites it seems that the
"contracting stem" dart points form one specific tradition, the "expanding stem" points another, and the "straight stem" points yet a third.
Comparison shows that these three traditions are represented at other
sites and in other areas, and comparative studies can be made easily on
this level of interpretation, although the dangers inherent are much
greater because of the larger personal or subjective element involved in
definition, particularly in respect to the selection of the attributes
which go to make up the group. Through the study of traditions much
of the data used in establishing uniform historic changes within the La
Harpe Aspect have been acquired. The concept of tradition is derived
from that of Willey and Phillips ( 1958: 37):
An archeological tradition is a (primarily ) temporal continuity represented by persistent configurations in single technologies or other systems
of related forms. The lack of specification in respect to the spatial dimension may be supplied by the use of qualifying terms, as in "regional tradition," "areal tradition," and so on.
The use of this term in the present paper, in respect to projectile point
stemming traditions, is more liinited or specific, in a certain sense, than
that quoted above, yet it falls within the Willey and Phillips definition
of a historical continuity, and is not a departure from their original
idea. These stem forms are only one possible kind of tradition, and it
is not intended to limit the usefulness of the term to this specific case.
Its uses and applications should be many.
In presenting the descriptions of artifacts which follow, under their
respective site headings, the order followed in the laboratory analysis
will be reversed. A tradition will be presented first, then its types, and
after each type its respective varieties, if any. This is looking at the
problem from the top down, hierarchically speaking, but gives the

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

153

reader the advantage that the conclusions of the analysis (in the form
of the resultant traditions and types) are given before the bulk of the
raw data (the varieties). Thus the reader has the opportunity to review the conclusions as the report progresses, and is not immediately
presented with an overwhelming body of data in the form of minute
variety descriptions outside their types and traditions.
One important problem of typology has not yet been touched upon,
the nomenclature to be followed in designating the traditions, types,
and varieties. On the tradition level of designation it seems best to employ a simple, descriptive term or simple combination of terms in
order to identify unmistakably the salient features or attributes which
have been selected to define the group of artifacts. Since, at this point
in the interpretation, the artifacts possess only a very small number of
commonly held attributes, which because of their cross-type occurrence we can safely say represent "modes," a descriptive term. is quite
in order if it accurately pictures the important feature, or traits, involved. The terms "contracting stem" and "expanding stem" for the
projectile point categories aptly depict the important features which
were used to define these groupings.
On the type level of interpretation the nomenclatural problem is not
so simple. Because of the larger number of important attributes which
have been used to group together the sundry varieties into one type,
the selection of a single feature such as "expanding stem" to be used
in the type name is completely unrealistic. I am in agreement with
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 16) when they explain the procedure
used in their study:
All qualifying terms have been dropped from projectile-point names, even
those which have previously been published. Thus, they are simply
"Nolan points," " Gary points," " Folsom points," etc. Qualifying terms
give too restrictive an idea of what variation may occur within a type.

Of course this is a departure from what is considered proper procedure in ceramic analysis, where such terms as "engraved," " plain,"
etc., are suffixed to type names. In ceramics, however, the problem is
somewhat different. These terms, with ceramics, can serve to stress
technique and technological traditions. Other workers, however, still
insist upon the qualifying suffixes in type names for projectile points;
at any rate, either method is workable and the difference in the two
practices should not be emphasized out of proper proportions.
In conclusion, then, a single name, printed in italics and beginning

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with an upper case letter* for ease in identification and recognition,
should be chosen for the type. This use of a single name is well established in most parts of North America and consists of selecting and employing the name of a locality in the area of occurrence of the artifact.
The procedure has been quite satisfactory in the past, but it should be
realized that the selection of a name- taken, for example, from a nearby city, village, or stream- is not meant to imply that this particular
city, village, etc., is the focal point of distribution for the type. It is
simply a convenient method for type designation which should not
carry unintended and undesirable implications.
Certain kinds of names should definitely be avoided in type designations. This point has been precisely put forth by Smith et al. ( 1960:
336 ) in reference to the ceramics of the Mayan region.
No two types or varieties should ever share the same place name as a
taxonomic label. In other words, once a geographical name has been
assigned as a type or variety name it should never be affixed to any other
type or variety . .. . No phase name should ever be used as a type or
variety name.

To illustrate a confusing practice, the characteristic ceramic type of
the Caddoan area Sanders Focus, Sanders Plain , has the same primary
name as its focus, and as a result some confusion has resulted because
it has been shown to occur in the Bryan, Wylie, and other foci as well.
The really big problem to be dealt with here is that of providing
workable designations for the varieties. A simple designation of varieties such as A, B, C, or 1, 2, 3, within a certain type, is certainly
functional, but it is difficult to work with such designations on a comparative, site-to-site basis. A better procedure is to provide names for
the varieties, as has been the practice with the types. The objection to
this procedure is that one type may end up with twenty varieties, each
with a different name, and that the resulting accumulation of names
might be somewhat bewildering. Fixed names should, however, exist
for ease of reference and to facilitate and standardize inter-site comparisons. It is further recommended that they be presented in italics
and begin with a lower case letter to distinguish them from type names
(e.g., the mabank variety of the Yarbrough type). To quote again at
length from Smith et al. ( 1960: 339).
On the face of it, and during the first applications of this method, there
may be those who are inclined to consider a large number of varieties,
• This procedure was recommended to the writer by E. B. Jelks, who is using a
similar printing style in his report on the Kyle site of Central Texas.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

155

each with a different name, as a disadvantage. But it will soon be observed
that by allowing all the variety units to be distinguished and named individually, the number of named type units is not in any way erroneously
increased (in fact this method tends to prevent the erroneous multiplication of named types). The types are the units most clearly reflecting
cultural phenomena; these are the units of cross-cultural comparison, the
units of synthesis, the units that are of greatest use to interested parties
in general (teachers and researchers alike). Types are most likely to be
committed to memory as the elements diagnostic of a ceramic complex [ or
lithic complex, in the case of the present study] within a phase. The
varieties are, by contrast, the units of basic laboratory analysis. Even
though they are meaningful units, they are tools of the specialist; they
are the fine breakdowns necessary at a certain level of research analysis.
But, and this is most important, it is not at all necessary for all workers
or for persons in allied fields to have them at tongue tip or even be
familiar with them. Varieties are of maximum use to the specialist. As a
consequence there should be no limitation on their number or on the
proliferation of variety names on this level of analysis.

The typological approach employed here is, then, different from that
heretofore used in Texas and adjacent areas; the older, and for that
time quite admirable, procedure consisted in delimiting the types in
an impressionistic manner without specific description of their respective variations.
It should be pointed out here that the concept which proved most
fruitful in the present study was the tradition. It was relatively easy
to do inter-site comparisons using the various dart point stemming traditions, and much useful information was acquired. It is hoped that in
the future the variety and other constructs will be of equal value. Their
extensive application, unfortunately, will have to await the publication
of detailed site reports, of which, at the present date, there is a great
lack.

THE FRED YARBROUGH SITE
The Fred Yarbrough farm is located approximately four miles
northeast of the town of Grand Saline, in Van Zandt County, Texas
(Fig. 1). In the files of The University of Texas the Yarbrough finds
have been designated as site 41 VN6. In truth, however, two adjacent
occupation areas have been grouped under this label: a primarily prepottery knoll located some 50 yards south of the Sabine River, and an
early ceramic site which was situated 300 yards to the south of the
knoll. In this paper the first will be called Area A, the latter Area B.
They and their artifacts will be described separately.

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Works Progress Administration, in conjunction with the Department of Anthropology of The University of Texas, began excavations at the Fred Yarbrough farm on April 1, 1940. This excavation
was known as Work Project 15409. The field party consisted of a crew
of local laborers, ranging in number from 17 to 20 men, and was under
the immediate direction of archeological foreman William A. Duffen.
Work at the site was terminated in September of the same year.
Before the knoll, Area A, was staked out in a grid system to be excavated, an extensive surface collection of artifacts was made and each
artifact recovered was labeled with an "S" to indicate its superficial
provenience. The knoll was then measured out in a 10-foot grid pattern and was prepared for excavation in the following manner. A
wooden stake was driven down near the east end of the knoll and was
designated "primary datum, stake 'O' " (Fig. 3). Rows of stakes were
then run north and south from this stake, and another row was run
westward across the long axis of the knoll. The entire rise was then
staked out in 10-foot squares which were numbered as follows. Each
square was given a two-part designation: the first number indicated
the distance of the square westward along the east-west line from the
primary datum point, stake "O," numbering consecutively from "O"
toward the west; the second part of the designation contained an "R" or
"L" to indicate location either to the right (north) or left (south) of
the east-west line, and a numerical appendage to show the correct distance right or left, beginning at the "O" stake and numbering 1 to 11
northward, and from 1 to 11 southward. Thus a typical designation
might read "11R7," a combination indicating that this square was the
11th 10-foot square west of "O" and the 7th to the north, the right
("R").
The vertical control methods used during the excavation of the
knoll were poor, to say the least. No attempt seems to have been made
to record the vertical provenience of artifacts in relation to any particular fixed reference point. Rather, the depth of both features and
artifacts was measured in inches from the surface of the soil, and since
no contour map exists for the site, the problem of determining stratigraphic relationships in the occurrence of particular artifact types has
been rather tedious, to minimize the difficulty.
Excavation with shovels was begun along the north-south line at the
eastern margin of the knoll and the entire eminence was excavated,
with work moving from the north-south line toward the west along the
whole structure. Each square, as it was reached, was dug down to the
clayey, sterile subsoil, and all of the artifacts recovered were labeled

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

157

with the appropriate square designations and their depth, in inches,
below the surface.
No excavating was done on the level area immediately around the
knoll, except for that at Area B, the area of charcoal-stained soil and
concentrated midden detritus which was approximately 300 yards
south of the knoll. In this area many potsherds and bone fragments
were recovered. At Area B neither vertical nor horizontal controls were
used during the excavations.

I. Area A (the Knoll) at the Yarbrough Site
Area A, the knoll or "mound," was a low, naturally-formed rise on
the Sabine flood plain capped with a midden deposit containing numerous lithic artifacts and a few potsherds (Fig. 2). It lay 50 yards south
of the stream channel. The structure was slightly elongate, the long
axis running east and west for a distance of 350 feet, the shorter running north and south 220 feet. It stood, before excavation, approximately 10 feet above the flood plain. According to the owner of the
land, Mr. Fred Yarbrough, the knoll was overgrown with timber when
first seen by him, and originally stood taller than at the time of excavation. Thirty years of cultivation had eroded and lowered it somewhat.
According to the local inhabitants, the area around the knoll is
flooded during periods of excessive rainfall, generally several times
each year. These informants did mention, however, that the top of the
structure was never completely covered by these inundations.
The knoll was composed of three mem hers: ( 1 ) a basal, mottled
brown and gray sand-the flood plain soil; on this (2) a sterile, yellowbuff clay which rose above the flood plain level; and upon this ( 3) a
surface midden deposit of dark sand, stained by humus (Fig. 3). The
midden zone was approximately 3.3 feet thick, but had been eroded
to a considerable extent on the slopes of the knoll so that the clay member was visible on the surface in several spots. The yellow-buff clay
member averaged 6.3 feet in thickness, and the basal sand extended
downward for an undetermined depth below the base of the clay. Soil
samples were not taken by the W. P. A. crew at Area A, and no grainsize, mineralogical, palynological, or other analyses could be attempted. It was likewise impossible to revisit the site for purposes of
collecting soil samples because the entire eminence was dug away.
A total of 2,696 artifacts, was recovered from the knoll (Area A) of
the Yarbrough site. This includes chipped stone material, ground stone
artifacts, ceramics, and bone and shell artifacts.

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOC I ETY

Fig . 2 . The Knoll , Area A at the Yarbrough Site l!oo kinq northeast; note automobile at
extreme left for scalel .

HORIZ .

SCALE

o'

20' 40' 60' eo' 100'
.._. .... M
M+j !wwl I

~

~:
4'

VE RT.

6'

a' SCALE

10'

I

11110 9

I I I I
I

.-.~

·,

- - - -

- - - -- -- - - -- -

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ; ....

A '.

°'Zll

Fig. 3. Plan and cross section of the Knoll, Area A, Yarbrough Site.

-

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1.

PROJECTILE POINTS

The projectile points at the Yarbrough site, Area A, fall into two
rather distinct categories. The first of these is a group of large, thick,
often quite heavy points, which because of their size and weight are
thought to have been employed on atlatl-propelled darts . Artifacts of
similar size and proportions have been recovered affixed to such implements in areas where perishable organic materials have been preserved, particularly in the dry caves of the American Southwest.
That the use of the atlatl was known throughout the southeastern
United States has been inferred primarily from the presence of atlatl
hooks in prehistoric archeological sites (W. S. Webb, 1939: Pl. 14 b;
W. S. Webb and DeJarnette, 1942: PI. 2241. , 3061.; Bell and Baerreis,
1951: Pl. 3) and the assumption that the group of large points from
Area A was used on such implements is therefore probably quite correct. There are also some historic data to support this supposition
(Krieger, 1956: 195-207 ) .
The other kind of projectile point is the arrowhead. It is distinguishable from the dart point in that it is lighter in weight and usually thinner-characteristics advantageous for the tip of the light arrow shaft.
There is so much long-accepted evidence to support this definition, both
of an archeological and ethnographic nature, that it hardly merits
repetition here.
These two use-categories furnish an extremely helpful archeological
tool, both for the establishment of types and for the hypothetical reconstruction of the life-way of the makers. Yet a word of caution is in
order regarding the rigid application of the function appellations. Primarily, these are intended to be classificatory, descriptive tools for the
archeologist, and one of their purposes is to assist him in "pigeonholing" artifacts for typological studies and comparisons; the uses to
which these specimens were put by the original possessors may, in
some cases, be a different matter. By way of example, several rather
small points (the hobson and col fax varieties of the Gary ty pe ) from
this site have been treated under the dart point heading because of their
resemblance to larger points in quality of workmanship, overall proportions, crudeness of manufacture, or even the general outline or
shape. Yet many of them, functionally speaking, would have served
equally well as arrow points.
The terminology to be used in describing the parts or sections of the
projectile points will be that suggested by Suhm et al. ( 1954: Fig. 7
opposite p. 531).

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

161

Dart Points
The dart points from Area A, including 1,342 specimens, belong
for the most part to three stemming traditions-the contracting stem,
straight stem, and expanding stem traditions. A few types, however,
represent stemless forms or intermediate forms which fall between the
major traditions. The W. P.A. field catalogue lists 74 projectile points
which were recovered from the excavations and which could not later
be found; these have been lost, discarded, or, more probably, were
originally mislabeled.
THE CONTRACTING STEM TRADITION. Of the 1,342 dart points and dart
point fragments found in Area A of the Yarbrough site, 548 belong to the contracting stem tradition, representatives of which occur in many parts of North
Ameri ca. Another five point fragments probably represent this tradition, but because of their fragmentary nature could not be described or properly classified.
They do not appear in the tabulations for the contracting stem tradition. The
Yarbm ugh site contracting stem specimens all represent the Garr type.

The Gary Type. The Gary dart point type (originally defined by Newell and
Krieger, 1949: 164-165, Fig. 57; see also Suhm et al., 1954: 430, Pl. 94) is represented by 328 relatively complete specimens which show a wide range of variation
within certain specific limits. In addition to the complete specimens mentioned
above, 211 dart point fragments probably belong to the Garr type, but because of
their fragmentary nature could not be assigned to any o.f the varieties. They do
not appear in the tabulations for the type. The diagnostic traits of the type are a
contracting stem, a roughly triangular blade, and (at this site), fair, but not
excellent workmanship--a trait governed probably by the poor quality of the chert
which was used in manufacture. Most of the varieties also have well develQped
shoulders, but lack true barbs.
The most common varieties are the kaufman and hobson, which, taken together,
form the "norm" for Garr at the Yarbrough site. The minor varieties include alsa,
runge, panna maria, kenedy, colfaz,.emory, and kemp.
The kaufman variety- 76 specimens (Fig. 4, A-C)
Blade : triangular, broad; edges straight or very slightly concave; shoulders prominent, four examples exhibiting true barbs.
Stem: one-third to one-half the length of the enti re point; contracting; edges
straight or slightly convex, frequently ground smooth; base pointed or very
slightly rounded.
Dimensions: length-average 42 mm., range of variation 34 to 77 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 32 mm., range 23 to 38 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 5 to 13 mm.
Workmanship: generally good, with some amount of secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 64 ), gray chert with sand
inclusions (9), homogeneous gray chert (2) , and petrified wood ( 1).
Remarks : The diagnostic attributes of the kaufman variety are its meclium size;
wide, triangular blade; prominent shoulders; triangular stem; pointed base; and
rather careful workmanship. This variety shows close affinity with the alsa

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

[J
,I

c

B

A

G

H

M

N

E

D

t
K

J

0

p

Q

L

s

R

x

w

y

v

u.

T

F

.·"
z

AA

BB

cc

DD

EE

FF

CM
Fig . 4 . Dart points of the Gary type . A-C , kaulman va riety ; D·F, a/so va riety; G-1 , hobson
variety; J-L, emory variety; M-0, runge variety ; P- 5, kemp variety; T-V, panna maria

variety ; W-Y , l1enedy va riety ; Z-CC, co/lox variety; DD-FF , miscellaneous Gary points .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

163

variety, although the alsa is heavier, cruder, and la cks the well developed shoulders of the kaufman variety. It strongly resembles the runge variety, particularly
in triangular blade form . The kenedy variety is practically a miniature reproduction of kaufman with, however, a proportionately longer stem.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961 ); Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960:
Fig. 4, Q); Scott (.Bell, 1953: Fig. 95, No. 4 from left in lin e 5); and Ha rroun
(Jelks and Tunnell, 195·9 : Fig. 15, A ) sites.
The alsa variety-17 specimens (Fig. 4, D-F)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight, slightly convex, or ( rarely) slightly
concave; shoulders well developed, without barbs, but somewhat out-flaring or
out-turned.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of th e entire point; short and contracting;
edges straight or slightly concave; base pointed .
Dimensions: length- average 50 mm., range of variation 30 to 55 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 35 mm., range 30 to 42 mm.; thickness-average 10 mm. ,
range 9 to 12 mm.
Workmanship: extremely crude; large flak es removed by percussion.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the alsa variety are its medium size, crude
workmanship, short, triangular stem, triangular blade, heavy weight, and great
thickness. The alsa points are similar in outline to the kaufman specim ens, but
are cruder, h ea vier, and have a somewhat shorter stem.
Known distribution : undetermined.
The hobson variety-144 specimens (Fig. 4, G-I)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight to slightly concave or slightly convex;
shoulders fairly prominent, lacking barbs.
Stem: about one-third to over one-half the length of the entire point; oontracting,
tending to be rounded; edges slightly convex to almost straight; base somewhat
rounded.
Dimensions: length- average 35 mm. , range of variation 22 to 58 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 20 mm., range 13 to 30 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm. ,
range 5 to 11 mm.
Workmanship: crude, although some examples show evidence of secondary pressure
flaking.
Materia ls: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (107 ) , homogeneous gray
chert (4), gray chert with sand inclusions (3), pink quartzite ( 14), homogen eous
gray-brown chert ( 11 ), novaculite (2), petrifi ed wood (2), and jasper ( 1) .
Remarks: Th e diagnostic, definitive characteristics of the hobson pionts are small
to medium size, short triangular blade, large and wide contracting stem. and
rounded base. The hobson variety resembles the kenedy variety. The latter, however, has a narrower, more pointed stem. Hobson also resembles the kemp
variety. Th e kemp points, however. can be distingui shed by their sharply pointed
bases. Likewise, a certain affinity can be discerned between the hobson and the
e mory varieties, although the latter has a distin ctively flat base which serves to
separate it from all others.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961 ); Harroun (Jelks and Tunnell. 1959:
Fig. 15, D ); Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 4, H, R, S ) ; Boat Dock ( Bell ,
o. 8 ) ; a nd Hogge Bridge
1958: Pl. 11 , E ) ; Sam (Proctor, 1957: Pl. 14,
(Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, Nos. 3 and 4 from left on line A ) sites.

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Th e runge variety-20 specimens (Fig. 4, M-0 )
Blade: triangular, moderately short; edges straight or slightly concave, sometimes
out-flaring at the shoulders; shoulders prominent, with slight barbs on a few
specimens.
Stem: approximately one-half the length of the entire point; long, na rrow, and
contracting toward the base; edges straight or slightly convex, a very few specimens have ground edges ; base pointed •o r somewhat rounded.
Dimensions: length- average 44 mm. , range of variation 31 to 52 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 28 mm., range 18 to 34 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.
Workmanship: genera lly quite good, although a few specimens show a poor quality
of flaking; many show second ary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (13), homogeneous light gray
chert (6), and white quartzite (1) .
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the runge variety are m edium size; long,
narrow stem; and relatively short blade. Because of its distinctive stem, this
variety stands apart rather w ell from the other varieties of Gary.
Known distribution: James (Ray, 1960: PL 14, No. 3); Ck-44 (Hall, 1954: PL 13,
Nos. 15-17); Davis (Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 57, H ); Hogge Bridge
(Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, Nos. 6, 7 and 8 from left on line A); and Sam
(Proctor, 1957: PL 14, No. 5) sites.
The emory variety-18 specimens (Fig. 4, J -L )
Blade: triangular or lozenge-shaped; edges straight, slightly concave, or convex; a
few points have blade edges which are concave near the shoulders, but convex
near the tip; shoulders fairly prominent, but lacking barbs.
Stem: about one-half the length of the entire specimen; relatively long and contracting; edges straight or slightly convex; base wide and tending to be
flattened.
Dimensions: length-average 33 mm. , range of variation 27 to 35 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 17 mm., range 14 to 24 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm. ,
range 7 to 9 mm.
vVorkmanship: generally good , most specimens show some secondary pressure
flaking .
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 15 ), pink quartzite ( 1), light
gray, homogeneo us chert ( 1), and novaculite ( 1).
Remarks: The distinguishing attributes of the emory variety are small size; relatively long, contracting stem; and flat base. It is much like the hobson variety,
but has a characteristic flat base which is lacking in hobson. It is also rather
closely similar to the col/ax variety, an ex tremely marginal Gary variety having
a less contracting stem that the emory.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961) and Davis (N ewell and Krieger,
1949: Fig. 57, B) sites.
The kemp variety-13 specimens (Fig. 4, P-S )
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight, very slightly concave, or slightly convex; shoulders prominent and protruding but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one-half the length of the entire point; long and contracting;
edges slightly convex; base pointed or very slightly rounded.
Dimensions; length-average 32 mm. , range of variation 29 to 40 mm.; width at

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

165

shoulders-average 15 mm., range 13 to 18 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 5 to 9 mm.
Workmanship: fair, most of the points show a little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 12 ), and pink quartzite ( 1) .
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the kcmp variety are small size; long, narrow
overall outline; long stem; and pointed base. The kemp points are quite similar
to those of the kenedy variety, but arc not as broad, and have a longer stem.
Strong similarities are also shown to the hobson and emory varieties, but the
kemp points stand apart as a result of th eir long stem.
Known distribution: Undetermined.
The panna maria variety-28 specimens (Fig. 4, T-V)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders indistinct,
lacking barbs.
Stem: one-third to one-half the length of the entire point; long and contracting;
edges straight to slightly convex; base pointed or slightly rounded.
Dimensions: length- average 51 mm ., range of variation 39 to 58 mm .; width at
shoulders-average 20 mm., range 15 to 28 mm.; thickness-average 11 mm. ,
range 7 to 18 mm.
Workmanship: fairly good, but most examples show little secondary pressure
flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (22), novaculite ( 1), yellow
jasper (1), and homogeneous gray chert (4 ) .
Remarks: The distinctive characteristics of the points of the panna maria variety
are medium size, indistinct shoulders, and long, narrow overall outline.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961); Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960;
Fig. 4, T ) ; Scott (Bell, 1953 : Fig. 95, No. 4 from left on line 1); and Ck-44 (Hall,
1954: Pl. 13, Nos. 8, 9 ) sites.
The kenedy variety- 4 specimem (Fig. 4, WY )
Blade: triangular; edges slightly concave; shoulders prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: between one-third and one-half the length of the entire point; sharply contracting; edges straight, or nearly so; one specimen has ground edges; base
pointed.
Dimensions: length-average 28 mm., range of variation 21 to 31 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 18 mm., range 15 to 23 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 7 mm.
Workmanship: moderately good, with some evidence of secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the kenedy variety are small size; small,
triangular stem; pointed base; very prominent shoulders; and diamond-shaped·
or lozenge-s haped outline. Although this variety stands well apart from the others
of the Gary type, it is close to the hobson variety, which, however, has a much
wider stem.
Known distribution: Davis site ( Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 57, C).
The colfax variety-8 specimens (Fig. 4, Z , AA-CC )
Blade: triangular; edges slightly concave, out-flaring at the shoulders; shoulders
prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: one-third to one-half the length of the entire point; slightly contracting, but
tending to be square; edges slightly convex, a few specimens have ground edges;

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

base flattened, with slightly rounded corners.
Dimensions: length-average 28 mm., range of variation 25 to 43 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 20 mm., range 14 to 23 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: fair. with some secondary flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The salient characteristics of the colfax vari e ty are small size, prominent
shoulders, short blade, and contracting but rather square stem with flattened base.
This variety stands apart, mainly, because of its almost square stem. It could
perhaps be considered as a variety marginal to the Gary type and the contractingstem tradition.
Known distribution: Undetermined.
Miscellaneous Gary Points
In add ition to the Gary points presented in the above varieties, another 10 speci·
mens (Fig. 4, DD-FF ) exhibit the salient attributes of the type but fit none of
those categories. These ten represent, perhaps, accid ental forms or individual idiosyncracies within the Gary type.
TYPES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN THE CONTRACTING STEM AND
STRAIGHT STEM TRADITIONS . Between the contracting stem tradition and
the straight stem tradition there are several types of projectile points which show
an intermediate position. The Wells points, for example, have long, almost straight,
but very slightly contracting stems, and though they show affinity with the contracting stem tradition. it was not deemed advisable to include them within it as a
legitimate member. The Kent type also falls within this category.

The W ells Type-28 specimens (Fig. 5, A- C)
Blade: roughly triangular or lanceolate ; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders
poorly to well developed, but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one- third the length of the entire point; extremely long,
slightly contracting; edges straight or slightly convex, about half the specimens
have ground edges; base convex.
Dimensions: length- average 60 mm. , range of variation 49 to 84 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 25 mm., range 18 to 31 mm.; thickness-average 10 mm.,
range 6 to 12 mm.
Workcanship: poor; large, uneven flake scars; almost no evidence of seconda ry
pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 14) , homogeneous gray chert
(10), petrified wood (2) , white quartzite (1), and jasper (1).
Remarks: The Wells points from the Yarbrough site fit very well the description of
this type given by Suhm et al. ( 1954: 488, Pl. 123). A certain close resemblance
is shown to panna maria variety of the Gary type, particularly in respect to general outline and overall proportions. The panna maria points, however, have a
much more sharply contracting and shorter stem. Resemblance is also shown to
that variety with regard to crudeness of workmanship.
In addition to this group of 28 points, six small fragme nts were recovered
which may represent this type, but because of their highly fragmentary nature
they are not included here. They likewise do not appear in the percentage tabulations for the type.

•1

;i'V, I
,J. .

A

H

J

N

T

D

c

8

K

p

0

u

v
Q

Q

w

?

~

x
4

y

~

?

F

E

y

~ 9
I

G

L

M

R

s

z

AA

19

CM.

Fig . 5 . Dart points : Wells, Kent, Bulverde, Morrill, and Elam types; miscellaneous straight
stem points . A-C, Wells type ; D-G, Kent type, phalba variety ; H-J , Kent type , quinlan
variety ; K-M, Bulverde type CM, barb fragments) ; N-P, Morrill type , s/ocum variety; Q-S,
Mo rrill type, san pedro variety; T-W, Elam type ; X-AA , miscellaneous points with straight
stems.

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Known distribution: Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 5, A-E); Boat Dock
(Bell, 1958: Pl. 11, F ) ; Hogge Bridge (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, Nos. 1 and 2
from left, line B) ; and Davis ( Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 58, P-W) sites.

The Kent Type. The Kent type dart point (Campbell, 1952: 66, Pl. 9, A-P; Suhm
et al., 1954: 432, Pl. 95 ), like Wells, shows transitional features between the
contracting stem and the straight stem traditions. This type is represented by
medium-sized points with triangular blades, prominent shoulders, and a short,
almost parallel-sided stem which, however, is slightly contracting. The Kent
type is represented at the Yarbrough site by two varieties: phalba and quinlan.
The phalba variety-11 specimens (Fig. 5, D-G )
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders fairly prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: one-third to one-half the length of the entire point; narrow, rather long;
sides more or less parallel; edges straight to very slightly convex; base flat or
slightly rounded.
Dimensions: length-average 40 mm., range of variation 35 to 44 mm.; width at the
shoulders--average 20 mm., range 14 to 25 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 5 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: poor, with little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (8), homogeneous gray chert
( 1 ) , and petrified wood ( 2).
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of this variety are medium size; narrow,
more or less parallel-sided stem; and flattish base. This variety resembles somewhat the colfax variety of Gary, but is longer, narrower, and has a less sharply
contracting stem. The phalba variety can be distinguished from the quinlan
variety of Kent since quinlan has a wider stem, a wider blade, and a somewhat
greater overall size.
Known distribution: Martin ( Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 6, A ) and Addicks
Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 36, U-W) sites.
The quinlan variety- 8 specimens (Fig. 5, H-J )
Blade: triangular; edges straight; shoulders prominent; three specimens have slight
barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point; sides almost parallel,
but contracting slightly; edges straight or slightly convex, a few specimens have
ground edges ; base flattened or somewhat rounded; a few specimens have a
ground base.
Dimensions: length-average 43 mm., range of variation 29 to 49 mm. ; width at
the shoulders-average 23 mm., range ZO to 26 mm. ; thickness- average 7 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.
Workmanship: poor, the relatively large flake scars indicate the percussion chipping
technique.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (7) and petrified wood (1) .
Remarks: The diagnostic, definitive attributes of the points of the quinlan variety
are medium size; heavy weight; wide, almost parallel-sided stem; and flattened
base. The quinlan variety is larger, broader, and heavier than the phalba, and
also has a wider stem. This variety resembles the colfax variety of the Gary type,
but the quinlan stem does not contract as much as that of the colfax.
Known distribution: Undetermined.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

169

THE STRAIGHT STEM TRADITION. A relatively small number of projectile
points belong to the straight stem tradition, which includes points with parallelsided stems having relatively flat bases. The Bulverde, Morrill, and Elam types are
its members at Area A. Four fragmentary points could not be properly described or
typed, but seem to represent the straight stem tradition. Because of the uncertainty
of this identification, however, they are not included in the general tabulations by
traditions.

The Bulverde Type- 10 specimens (Fig. 5, K-M)
Blade: triangular; edges straight or very slightly convex; shoulders prominent,
with moderately long barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third to one-half the length of the whole point; long,
straight; edges straight and tending to be parallel; base flat or slightly rounded
(convex ) .
Dimensions: length- average 48 mm., range of variation 43 to 58 mm.; width at
shoulders- average 32 mm., range 26 to 37 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm. ,
range 6 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: good, with some fine pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (3), homogeneous gray chert
( 4 ) , petrified wood ( 1), and novaculite (2).
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the Bulverde type are moderately large
size; relatively long, parallel-sided stem; flattened base, and well develop ed
barbs (Fig. 5, M, shows two large barb fragments ) . The ten specimens from Area
A fit the definition of this type given by Suhm et al. (1954: 404, Pl. 81). The
Bulverde point, although more characteristic of the central Texas area than eastern
or northeastern Texas, shows some resemblance to the Carrollton type of northern
Texas. However, Carrollton lacks the distinctive barbs of the Bulverde type.
Bulverde is also similar to the Travis type, but once again can be distinguished
by its prominent shoulders and barbs.
In addition to the 10 points described here, six basal fragments were recovered
which perhaps also belong to this type. Because of their fragmentary nature,
however, they are not included in any of the tabulations for the Bulverde type.
Known distribution: eastern Texas: Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 6, T, U )
and Davis (Newell and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 59, L-Q) sites.
The Morrill Type. The Morrill category (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 167, 168, Fig.
58; Suhm et al., 1954: 456, Pl. 107) is represented by two rather consistent and
uniform varieties, the slocum and the san pedro, both of which have relatively long,
straight-sided, wide stems. These points are quite large, and are therefore not easily
confused with the somewhat similar, though smaller, Yarbrough type dart points.
The slocum variety-13 specimens (Fig. 5, N-P)
Blade: long, but roughly triangular; edges straight to slightly convex; shoulders
prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point; straight and long;
edges straight; a few specimens have ground edges; base tends to be straight
with rounded corners.
Dimensions: length-average 65 mm., range of variation 55 to 72 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 32 mm., range 25 to 35 mm.; thickness-average 10 mm.,
range 7 to 12 mm.

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

VVorkmanship: fair, but with little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 12) and homogeneous gray
chert (1).
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the slocum variety are large size, long blade,
long, parallel-sided stem, and flattened base. The slocum variety is quite easily
distinguished from the san pedro variety of the Morrill type, in that the former
has straighter stem sides, a relatively flatter base, and more prominent shoulders,
while the shoulders of the latter variety are slight and somewhat rounded.
Known distribution: Davis (Newell and Krieger, 1949 : Fig. 58, I, K ) and Hogge
Bridge (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, No. 8 from left, line B) sites.
The san pedro variety- 20 specimens (Fig. 5, Q- S)
Blade: triangular to lanceolate; edges straight to convex; shoulders not prominent,
rounded, without barbs.
Stem: about one-fifth to one-third the length of the entire point; nearly straight,
but slightly contracting; almost as wide as the shoulders; edges straight or very
slightly convex, most of the specimens have ground edges; base slightly rounded,
ground on many specimens.
Dimensions: length- average 62 mm. , range of variation 48 to 77 mm.; width at
should2rs- average 25 mm., range 23 to 30 mm.; thickness- average 9 mm. ,
range 8 to 12 mm.
Workmanship: fair, but with very little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 19 ) and quartzite ( 1) .
Remarks: The distinctive attributes of the san pedro variety are great length,
slightly contracting, very wide stem, slightly rounded base, and indistinct
shoulders. This variety can be distinguished from the slocum variety by the
presence, on san pedro, of a wide stem, slightly rounded base, and indistinct
shoulders.
Known distribution: Undetermined.

The Elam Type-6 specimens (Fig. 5, T-W)
Blade: triangular; edges straight; shoulders prominent, two specimens have slight
barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third to one-half the length of the entire point; expanding very slightly toward the base; edges straight to somewhat concave; three
specimens have ground, smooth edges: base tends to be flat and straight, and
three specimens have a ground base.
Dimensions: length-average 28 mm., range of variation 26 to 35 mm.; width at
shoulders--average 21 mm., range 19 to 23 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.
Workmanship: fair, but without secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 4), homogeneous whitish-gray
chert (1) , and novaculite (1) .
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the Elam points (Crook and Harris, 1952,
1954: 11, Pl. 6, Nos. 6-12; Suhm et al., 1954: 420, Pl. 82) at the Yarbrough sne,
Area A, are rather small size; short blade; proportionately large, almost straight,
but very slightly expanding stem with ground edges; and a straight base.
These points of the Elam type resemble those designated as Ellis, with the
characteristics of the groups overlapping somewhat. However, the stem and blade
of Elam are more equal in size; the stem does not expand so sharply at the base,

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

171

and the size of Elam is consistently less when groups of points representing the
two types are compared.
Known distribution: Milton (Crook and Harris, 1954: Pl. 1, Nos. lZ, 13 ); James
( Ray, 1960: Pl. 14, No. 9); Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 5, J-M ) ; Limerick ( Duffield, 1961 ) ; and Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 39, K, L ) sites.

Miscellaneous Points with Straight Stems ( Fig. 5, X- AA ) . In addition to the points
described under the types and varieties of the straight stem tradition, anoth er 17
specimens can be assigned to this group; but these exhibit a great deal of variation
and can not be placed in types or varieties. No two points of this miscellaneous
group are alike. Most are of medium size, have triangular or subtriangular blades,
prominent shoulders, a parallel-sided stem , and a flat, concave, or convex base.
TYPES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN THE STRAIGHT STEM AND EXPANDING STEM TRADITIONS. Under this heading are described the Marshall
and Yantis types.

Th e Marshall Type-3 specimens (Fig. 6, A-C )
Blade: triangular; edges straight; shoulders prominent, with long, broad barbs.
Stem: approximately one- fourth the length of the entire specimen; very slightly
expanding; edges straight; base straight, slightly concave, or slightly convex.
Dimensions: length- specimen 1, 70 mm. (estimated ), specimen 2, 45 mm. (es timated ) , specimen 3, 45 mm. (estimated ) ; width at the shoulders- specimen 1, 47
mm.; specimen 2, 35 mm., specimen 3, 32 mm.; thickness- specimen 1, 7 mm.,
specimen 2, 7 mm., specimen 3, 5 mm.
Workmanship: good, with secondary pressure flaking on the blade.
Materials: homogeneous gray chert (2) and quartzite ( 1) .
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the Marshall type (originally defined by
Suhm et al., 1954: 444, Pl. 101 ), at Area A, are medium size, large barbs, small,
slightly expanding stem, and narrow base.
Known distribution: Undetermined.
The Yantis Typ e. This type, composed of two varieties-the cook and swan-is
characterized primarily by large size, crude workmanship , and short, indistinct
stem.
The cook variety- 7 specimens (Fig. 6, D-F )
Blade: uncertain because of the fragmentary nature of the specimens, probably
triangular; edges straight or nearly so ; shoulders prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth the length of the entire point (estimate); short,
and expanding very slightly; edges gently concave, expanding slightly toward
the base, and a few have ground edges; base slightly concave with pointed
corners.
Dimensions: length- average (estimated) 60 mm.; width at shoulders- average 31
mm., range of variation 28 to 35 mm.; thickness-average 12 mm. , range 11 to
13 mm.
Workmanship: crude, little evidence of pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (6) and white quartzite ( 1) .
Remarks: The definitive attributes of the cook variety are large size, crude workmanship, slightly expanding stern, and sligh tly concave base. The last two features serve to distinguish this variety from the swan variety.
Known distribution: Mart in site (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 5, G).

H

G

M

s

c

B

A

N

F

J

K

L

v

u

I?

E

p

0

T

D

~34

y\J
CM.

Q

w

R

x

?'?'il 19

Fig. 6 . Dart points: Marshall , Yantis, Yarbrough, Ellis, and Trinity types . A-C, Marshall
type; D-F, Yantis type,

coo .~

variety; G-1, Yantis type, swan variety; J-L, Yarbrough type,

/inda/e variety ; M-0, Yarbrough type, di!ce variety; P-R, Yarbrough type, mabank variety;
S-U, Ellis type ; V-X, Trinity type .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

173

The swan variety-9 specimens (Fig. 6, G-1 )
Blade: crude, more or less lanceolate; edges irregular, tending to be somewhat
convex; shoulders poorly developed.
Stem: about one-fourth the length of the entire point; short and almost contracting;
edges slightly concave, a few have ground edges; base flattened or very slightly
convex.
Dimensions: length-average 58 mm., range of variation 50 (estimated) to 65
mm.; width at shoulders- average 37 mm., range 31 to 43 mm.; thickness-average 12 mm., range 9 to 15 mm.
Workmanship: crude, lacking secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the swan variety are large size. crude
workmanship, and rather short, almost contracting stem with flattened base. The
last wo attributes serve to distinguish the swan from the cook variety.
Known distribution: Martin site (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 5, H).
THE EXP ANDING STEM TRADITION. The Yarbrough , Ellis, Trinity. Edgewood, Ensor, Wesley, Fair land, Palmillas, and Lone Oak types are the representatives of the expanding stem tradition at the Yarbrough site.
In addition to the points of these types, another 33 fragmentary points were
found which represent this stemming tradition, but which could not, because of
their incomplete nature. be placed in varieties and types.

The Yarbrough Type. This type accounts for most of the representatives of the expanding stem tradition at the Yarbrough site. The Yarbrough type (originally
defined by Newell and Krieger, 1949: 168, Fig. 57; see also Suhm et al .. 1954: 492,
Pl. 125 ) , with its three varieties (the Lindale, dike, and mabank ) is characterized
by relatively long, well made points with a slightly expanding and usually concavesided stem.
Aside from the points described under the different varieties 19 additional, frag mentary, points perhaps represent the Yarbrough type but because of their in completeness could not be assigned to the varieties and do not appear in the
tabulations for the type.
The Lindale variety-98 specimens (Fig. 6, J-L)
Blade: triangular or subtriangular; edges convex or almost straight, two specimens show opposed, bifacial beveling; shoulders very prominent but without
barbs.
Stem: one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire specimen; expanding slightly
toward the base; edges straight or nearly so, most of the specimens having ground
lateral edges; base straight or, rarely, slightly concave or slightly convex, most
of the specimens having a ground base.
Dimensions: length-average 58 mm. , range of variation 34 to 74 mm.; width at
shoulders- average 22 mm ., range 15 to 32 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm.,
range 4 to 12 mm.
Workmanship: moderately good with some pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (86), homogeneous gray chert
(9) , petrified wood (2 ) , and black flint (1).
Remarks: The definitive attributes of the Lindale variety are medium size, slightly
expanding stem with straight edges, and straight base. The Lindale is rather close

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to the dike variety, except that the dike has a longer stem, the edges of which are
noticeably concave instead of straight.
Known distribution: Martin (Davis and Davis. 1960: Fig. 6, G, I, J ); Davis (Newell
and Krieger, 1949: Fig. 57, W , X ); Boat Dock ( Bell, 1958: Pl. 11, H , J ); Scott
(Bell, 1953: Fig. 96, No. 6 from the left, line 6); and Addicks Reservoir (Wheat,
1953: Pl. 37, I , J) sites.
Th e dike variety-15 specimens (Fig. 6, M-0 )
Blade: lanceolate or almost triangular; edges slightly convex; shoulders prominent,
but without barbs.
Stem: one-third the length of the point; narrow near the shoulders, but expanding
considerably at the base; edges markedly concave, most of the specimens having
ground edges; base straight and fl at.
Dimensions: length-average 51 mm., range of variation 38 to 62 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 25 mm., range 23 to 30 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm., range
5 to 9 mm.
VVorkmanship: good , but with very little pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 12), homogeneous gray chert
(2), and p etrified wood ( 1) .
Remarks: The dike variety can be distinguished by great length (in relation to the
width); narrow, sharply expanding stem with concave edges; and flattened base.
Known distribution: Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 6, C- E) and Limerick
(Duffield, 1961 ) sites.
The mabank variety-46 specimens (Fig. 6, P - R )
Blade: lance:ilate or roughly triangular; edges convex or almost straight, one specim en with opposite edges beveled; shoulders moderately prominent, but without
barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth to one-third the l ength of the entire point; expanding slightly toward the base; edges generally concave, but at times almost straight:
base markedly concave.
Dimensions: length-average 48 mm., range of variation 37 to 54 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 20 mm., range 17 to 24 mm. ; thickness-average 7 mm.,
range 5 to 10 mm.
Workmanship: rather good , with some secondary pressure fl aking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 43) and homogeneous gray
chert (3) .
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the mabank variety are medium size,
lanceolate blade, narrow, expanding stem. and markedly concave base. The
mabank variety is quite like the dike except that the former has a lanceolate blade
and a concave base. Its concave base and concave stem edges likewise serve to
distinguish it from the lindale variety.
Known distribution: Hogge Bridge (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, No. 3 from the left
on line B) and Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 6, K) sites.

The Ellis Type-33 specimens (Fig. 6, S-U)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges straight to slightly convex; should ers prominent;
three specimens have short barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire specimen ;
sharply expanding and short; edges generally straight or very slightly convex;
base straight; a few specimens show grinding on the base.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

175

Dimensions: length-average 33 mm., range of vanatwn 21 to 41 mm.; widthaverage 22 mm., range 16 to 24 mm.; thickness-average 7 mm. , range 6 to
11 mm.
Workmanship: fair, but with little secondary flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (20), agate (1), petrified wood
(5) , white quartzite (5) , and homogeneous gray chert (2).
Remarks: The diagnostic characteristics of the Ellis points (originally defined by
Newell and Krieger, 1949: 166-176, Fig. 8; see also Suhm et al. , 1954: 422, Pl.
90) are short and broad proportions, expanding stem, and flattened base. The
Ellis points are somewhat similar to the Elam type, but are larger on the average
and have a stem which expands much more markedly at the base.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961 ) ; Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960:
Fig. 7, M-P); Wann (Sharrock, 1960: Pl. 4, E); Boat Dock (Bell, 1958: Pl. 11 ,
T, Y ) ; Ck-44 (Hall, 1954: Pl. 13, Nos. 36--40 ); Harroun (Jelks and Tunnell,
1959: Fig. 15, E ); Scott (Bell, 1953: Fig. 95, Nos. 7 and 8 from the left on line
1); and the Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 37, K ) sites.

The Trinity Type- 13 specimens (Fig. 6, V-X)
Blade: roughly triangular; edges irregular, straight to slightly concave or slightly
convex; shoulders prominent, but without barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point; expanding and
almost bulbous; edges irregular, many specimens having ground edges; base
rounded (convex ) or almost straight, many specimens with a ground base.
Dimensions: length-average 39 mm., range of variation 30 to 45 mm. ; width at
the sh oulders- average 20 mm. , range 16 to 26 mm.; thickness- average 8 mm.,
range 7 to 9 mm.
VVorkmanship: of poor quality with rather large flakes removed, presumably by
percussion; very little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (10 ) and homogeneous gray
chert (3).
Remarks: The most diagnostic attributes of the Trinity points (originally defined
by Crook and Harris, 1952, 1954: 3, Pl. 1, Nos. 5-9; definition changed considerable by Suhm et al., 1954: 486, Pl. 82; the present report follows the definition
of Suhm et al.) at the Yarbrough site are medium size and large, expanding,
bulbous stems.
Known distribution: Limerick (Duffield, 1961 ) and Trinity Aspect sites (Cro:.ik
and Harris, 1954: Pl. 1, Nos. 8, 9).
The Edgewood Typ e
The Edgewood type (originally defined by Suhm et al., 1954: 418, Pl. 88) is
characterized, at the Yarbrough site, by medium to large size; generally prominent
shoulders; short, expanding stem; and concave base. It is represented by three
varieties, the hooker, bull creek, and dixon.
The hooker variety-13 specimens (Fig. 7, A-B)
Blade: triangular or laurel leaf-shaped; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders
prominent, two specimens show short barbs.
Stem: one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire point; sharply expanding
and wide at the base; edges concave near the shoulders and straight near the base,
a few having ground edges; base concave, often as wide as the shoulders, corners
sharply pointed.

B

A

c

F

E

D

J

H

G

..
...
t~"t
-

II\.

,~

~~

....d

L

K

~

\

CJ
p

0

N

M

I

~,

r~

'

~\

""'\

Q

R

s

Lah
u

T

v

z

y

w

x

AA

BB

CM.
. L-~-- -

--

Fig. 7. Dar i points : Edgewood, Ensor, Wesley, Fair/and , Pa/mil/as , and Lone Oak types ;
miscellaneous expanding stem points, stemless dart points, miscellaneous dart points, and
points with one shoulder. A-B, Edgewood type, hooker variety; C-E, Edgewood type, bu//
creek variety ; F-H, Edgewood type, dixon variety; 1-J, Ensor type; K-M , Wesley type; N,
Fair/and type; 0-P, Pa/mil/as type; Q-T, Lone Oak type; U-V, miscellaneous expanding stem
points; W-X, sllemless dart points; Y-Z, miscellaneous dart points ; AA-BB, points with one
shoulder.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

177

Dimensions: length- average 37 mm. , range of variation 32 to 41 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 22 mm., range 18 to 24 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: moderately good with some amount of secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (9), petrified wood ( 1), and
homogeneous gray chert ( 3) .
Remarks: The definitive attributes of the hooker variety are medium size, relatively
long blades, expanding stems, and concave bases. The most important of these
attributes is the long blade.
Known distribution: Limerick site (Duffield, 1961 ) .
The bull creek variety-30 specimens (Fig. 7, C-E)
Blade: lanceolate, rarely triangular; edges convex or almost straight; shoulders
poorly develop ed and without true barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth the length of the entire point; expanding; edges
concave; base .narrow and deeply concave, many specimens having a ground
base.
Dimensions: length-average 47 mm., range of variation 31 to 73 mm.; width at
the shoulders--average 25 mm., range 16 to 29 mm.; thickness-average 9 mm. ,
range 7 to 13 mm.
Workmanship: crude, exhibiting percussion flaking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (21), homogeneous gray chert
( 4 ), pink quartzite ( 3), and petrified wood (2).
Remarks: The definitive characteristics of the bull creek variety are rather large
size; narrow, lanceolate blade; short, expanding stem ; narrow, concave base;
and crude workmanship.
Known distribution: undetermined.
The dixon variety-7 specimens (Fig. 7, F- H )
Blad=: roughly triangular; edges straight or slightly convex; shoulders prominent,
but lacking barbs.
Stem: approximately one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire point; sharp ly
expanding, very wide at the base ; edges deeply concave (or notched) ; base wide,
concave; corners distinctly blunted or turned up ; many of the specimens have a
markedly ground and smooth base.
Dimensions: length- average 37 mm., range of variation 24 to 45 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 20 mm., range 21 to 33 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 3 to 7 mm.
'\iVorkmanship: moderately good, with som e secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (3), jasper (2), and homogen eous gray chert ( 2) .
Remarks: The definitive attributes of this variety are comparatively wide blade ;
short, wide stem; and concave base with blunt corners. Th e stem form serves to
segregate this variety from others of the Edgewood type.
Known distribution: Undetermined.

The Ensor Type-2 specimens (Fig. 7, 1-J )
Blade: triangular; edges straight; shoulders fairly prominent, barbs absent.
Stem: approximately one-fifth the length of the entire point ; short and expanding;
edges concave; base straight or slightly concave; one specimen has a ground base.
Dimensions: length-specimen 1, 35 mm. , specimen 2, 46 mm.; width at the

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shoulders-specimen 1, 19 mm., specimen 2, 26 mm.; thickness-specimen 1,
6 mm. , specimen 2, 7 mm.
Workmanship: good, with some evidence of pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The original definition for the Ensor type (Suhm et al., 1954: 422, Pl.
90; see also Miller and Jelks, 1952: 172, Pl. 22, panel 2) is followed in the
classification presented here. Another approach, as opposed to calling Ensor an
expanding stem form, would be to consider it as a stemless point with side
notches on the blade.
Known distribution : Undetermined.

The Wesley Type-5 specimens (Fig. 7, K-M)
Blade: long and triangular; edges straight; shoulders not prominent.
Stem: approximately one-fifth to one-fourth the length of the entire specimen;.
expanding and wide; edges very slightly concave; base almost as wide as th e
shoulders and straight.
Dimensions: length-average 50 mm., range of variation 44 to 56 mm.; width at the
shoulders- average 23 mm., range 21to25 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm., range
7 to 9 mm.
Workmanship: good, with careful pressure flaking on four specimens.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 4) and pink quartzite ( 1).
Remarks: The definitive attributes of the Wesley type are medium size; long, triangular blade; short, wide, expanding stem; and straight base. The type resembles Trinity, but lacks the bulbous stem of that type.
Known distribution: Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig. 7, K, L) and Sam
(Proctor, 1957: Pl. 14, No. 15) sites.
The Palmillas Type-11 specimens (Fig. 7, 0-P )
Blade: triangular to laurel leaf-shaped; edges straight or convex; shoulders prominent, but lacking strong barbs.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire specimen; expanding and
bulbous; edges concave near the shoulder, convex near the base; base rounded
(convex) with non-angular corners.
Dimensions: length-average 43 mm., range of variation 34 to 51 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 23 mm., range 21 to 30 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm. ,
range 4 to 9 mm.
Workmanship: rather poor with little secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (8), novaculite (1) , quartzite
( 1 ) , and petrified wood ( 1 ) .
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the Palmillas type (named by MacNeish,
1958: 67, Fig. 24, Nos. 24--27; see also Suhm et al., 1954: 462, Pl. 110) at Area
A, are medium size, small bulbous stem, and convex base.
Known distribution: Undetermined.
The Lone Oak Type-5 specimens (Fig. 7, Q-T)
Blade: probably triangular, but uncertain because of the fragmentary nature of
the specimens; edges straight or very nearly so; shoulders prominent, with short
barbs on three specimens.
Stem: approximately one-third the length of the entire point; expanding, bulbous;
edges concave near the shoulders, convex near the base; base rounded (convex) .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

179

Dimensions: length-average 60 mm. (estimate): width at should ers-average 28
mm., range 26 to 31 mm.; thickness average 9 mm., range 7 to 10 mm.
vVorkmanship: crude, with almost no secondary pressure flaking.
Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the Lone Oak type are medium size, large,
bulbous stem, and convex base. The points of this type resemble rather closely
those of the Palmillas type, but are larger, cruder, and have proportionally
shorter stems.
Known distribution: Undetermined.

Miscellaneous Expanding Stem Points (Fig. 7, U-V). In addition to the points described under the types and varieties of the expanding stem tradition, 12 additional
expa nding stem specimens were recovered which do not coincide with any of the
afore-described categories. The variation shown in these 12 points seems to be
a lmost random and, perhaps, accidental. All examples are of medium to large
size, have triangular or lanceolate blades, a few have barbs, and show either straight
or concave bases.
MISCELLANEOUS STEMMED AND STEMLESS POINTS.

Stemless Dart Points (Fig. 7, W-X). Although rare at the Yarbrough site, a few
stemless dart points were recovered. These 26 specimens are, almost without exception, very crude and of an irregular form and general outline. Indeed, some
doubt exists that they actually served as projectile points. Although great variation
is found in the outline, most specimens tend to be either lozenge- or laurel-leafshaped, with rounded bases. A few approach the subtriangular in shape.
These specimens, varying in length from 24 to 43 mm., were manufactured from
reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions (15 specimens), petrified wood (8), homogeneous gray chert (1), and pink quartzite (2).
Because of their almost random variation in form, these stemless points could
not be grouped and described under variety or type categories.
Similar stemless points have been found at the Martin (Davis and Davis, 1960 :
Fig. 5, F ) ; Boat Dock (Bell, 1958: Pl. 11 , O) ; and Sam (Proctor, 1957: Pl. 15, No.
15 ) sites.
Miscellaneous Dart Points. Twenty-five crude, stemmed dart points were of an
irregular shape and could not be placed in types or varieties (Fig. 7, Y-Z) . Most of
these specimens (17), are of petrified wood, while the others, except for one large
point of whitish-gray chert, are of exceptionally poor quality reddish-gray chert.
The poor quality of the materials used in manufacture goes a long way in explaining the crudeness and heterogeneity of these specimens. Thirteen examples have
crude expanding stems, eight have straight stems, and four have slightly contracting
stems. Yet th eir stems are very crude and irregular, and it seems that the shapes
of the stems are almost random. For this reason these points have not been
included in the tabulations for the various stemming tradition s. Many of them,
particularly those made of petrified wood, are identical to specimens recently recovered at McGee Bend Reservoir in southeastern Texas (Jelks, personal communication).
Another interesting group of five miscellaneous dart points stands out because
only one shoulder occurs on the blade of each specimen (Fig. 7, AA-BB). On one
edge the blade joins directly to the stem, while the other blade edge terminates

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

just above the stem in the usual, prominent shoulder. Whether these artifacts
represent accidents, points reworked or resharpened only upon one edge, or a consistent style, can not now be determined. Among these there is a great deal of variation in stem forms, with two contracting, one bulbous, one straight, and one expanding stem represented. The expanding stem specimen is of petrified wood, but
the others are of local reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions. Their length varies
from 38 to 55 mm., the width at the shoulders from 18 to 26 mm., and the maximum thickness from 7 to 10 mm.

Unclassifiable Dart Point Fragments. One hundred fifty-five fragments of dart
point blades were found at the Yarbrough site, and these could not be classified into
varieties or types. It can only be said that no blade forms are present which do not
occur among the typed specimens.
Ninety-four fragments were recovered which are medial segments of broken
dart points. No type assignments can be made since these specimens lack their
bases.
POINTS OF POSSIBLE PALEO-INDIAN ORIGIN. A total of 19 projectile points
and projectile point fragments exhibit certain features which suggest their affinity
with Paleo-Indian artifact traditions or industries. In some cases the affinities and
resemblances are so patent that they allow for little doubt, while for other points
only general, non-specific resemblances can be noted to particular Paleo-Indian
point types.

The Clovis Type (Fig. 8, A-B). Two basal fragments of Clovis points were recovered at the site. Although these specimens are incomplete, a general lanceolate
outline can be inferred. Both are bifacially fluted and show ground lateral edges
and bases. The corners of the base turn out slightly- more so in one (A) than the
other (B). In outline, specimen A resembles very closely Clovis points from the
Miami locality of Texas (Sellards, 1952: 26, Fig. 9), while the base of specimen B
seems to flare out somewhat more than is common in points of this type. Specimen
A is of a brown, banded chert and specimen B of a homogeneous mottled gray
chert; both materials are presumably foreign to the immediate area of the Y arbrough site.
Dimensions: Specimen A-width at base 32 mm., thickness 5 mm.; specimen Bwidth at base 23 mm. , thickness 6 mm.
The Plainview Type (Fig. 8, C). One small basal fragment seems to have come
from a non-fluted, but Paleo-Indian point probably of the Plainview type. The sides
of this specimen are ground smooth, and its base is deeply concave and likewise
smoothed. The edges of the base flare out slightly. The base is 22 mm. in width.
and the maximum thickness is 4 mm. This point is made of pinkish-gray mottled
chert, presumably of non-local origin.
The San Patrice Type (Fig. 8, D-E). Two projectile points can be assigned to the
San Patrice type, originally defined by Webb (1946: 13-17, Pl. 1; 1948: 230-231 ) .
Although Suhm et al. (1954: 477) place the type in their Archaic Stage, there is
much evidence (general resemblance in outline to the Meserve type, smoothed
stems edges, etc.) to suggest a Paleo-Indian affiliation for these points.
The two specimens from the Yarbrough site, Area A, have a very short blade,
rather prominent shoulders, concave and ground stem edges, and a deeply concave,
thinned and ground base. Specimen E, of white quartzite, measures 34 mm. in

181

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

'·

... A

B

F

c

•

g
'

D

G

E

'

H

J

(tJ
K

L

M

R

N

s

,Q I ~ ~

u

T

1 ? fr ffi 'ii

p

0

v

19

CM.

w

x

y

z

Fig. 8. Dart points: Clovis, Plainview, San Patrice, Meserve, and Sandy Creek types;
miscellaneous Paleo-like points; arrow points; drills. A-8, Clovis type; C, Plainview type;
D-E, San Patrice type; F-H, Meserve type; 1-K, Sandy Creek type; L-P, miscellaneous Paleolike points; Q-V, arrow points; W-Z, drills.

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

length, 24 mm. in width at the shoulders, and is 6 mm. thick. Specimen D, of
milky quartz, is 30 mm. long, 27 mm. wide at the shoulders, and 6 mm. thick.
The stem of a possible San Patrice point (not illustrated), in contrast to D and E ,
is somewhat more narrow than the blade. This point resembles the Meserve type in
general outline, but lacks a beveled blade. The stem edges and base have been very
slightly smoothed by grinding. Its length is 35 mm., the width at the shoulders
22 mm. , and the thickness 5 mm. Moss agate was used in manufacture. and the general workmanship is quite good.
Similar points have been found at the Martin site (Davis and Davis, 1960: Fig.
4, F-G ) and in Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 38, M ).

The Meserve Type (Fig. 8, F-H) . Three medium-sized projectile points fit th e broad
definition of the Meserve type as presented by Suhm et al. (1954: 450, Pl. 104), although perhaps they do not agree in every detail with the original points recovered
at the Meserve site in Nebraska ( Schultz, 1932; Davis, 1953 ) .
Specimen F most closely resembles the Meserve site examples. It ha s a stem
with ground edges, which is somewhat wider than the blade. The edges of the blade
are slightly convex, and are beveled on the right side of both faces (orienting the
point with the base downward ). The concave base is also noticeably ground and
smoothed. This point measures 39 mm. in length, is 21 mm. wide at the base, and
has a maximum thickness of 5 mm. It is made of a pinkish-gray, mottled chert of
non-local origin.
Specimen G is similar to specimen F , but exhibits cruder workmanship and
general execution, probably because of the poor quality of the petrified wood from
which it was manufactured. Its blade is less noticeably beveled than that of specimen
F , but its concave base and the stem edges are well smoothed by grinding. This
point measures 33 mm. in length, 23 mm. in width at the base, and 6 mm. in
thickness. The petrified wood from which it was manufactured is of local origin.
Specimen H is much like the others, but is wider at the shoulders than at the
base and its edges are not ground. The workmanship exhibited on this specimen
is excellent, and an apparently non-local moss-agate was used in its manufacture.
This point measures 34 mm. in length, is 22 mm. wide at the shoulders, and has a
maximum thickness of 4 mm.
The Sandy Creek Type (Fig. 8, I- K ) . Three small stemless points are of very crude
appearance, and though somewhat irregular in outline, tend to be laurel leafshaped. They have concave bases and present an overall outline quite like that of
many Paleo-Indian points, particularly those found east of the Mississippi River.
The bases of two specimens, along with the lower part of the edges, have been
carefull y smoothed by grinding. The third point r esembles the others in general
form but lacks any evidence of grinding.
Specimen I measures 34 mm. in length, 18 mm. in width, and 7 mm. in thickness.
Specimen J measures 36 mm. in length, 20 mm. in width at the base ( which is the
widest part of the specimen) and 7 mm. in thickn ess. Specimen K is 31 mm. m
length, 15 mm. in width at m id-section, and 7 mm. in thickness.
Similar specimens were found at Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1953: Pl. 39, F ).
Miscellaneous Paleo-like Points (Fig. 8, L-P) . In addition to the aforem entioned
types, seven projectile points, which fit no defined types, show some relation in
form to points from the eastern U nited States having supposed Paleo- Indian affiliation.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

183

These seven specimens ex hibit a great deal of variation among them selves, though
all but three ha ve stems with ground edges and a ground base. Their blades are
short and ha ve very inconspicuous shoulders. One example has a triangular outline,
while th e others tend to be more lan ceolate in form. These points, although
·described together here, do not con st itute a homogeneous assemblage. The length
ranges from 29 to 37 mm. , the width at the shoulders from 15 to 24 mm., and the
thickness from 5 to 8 mm. Two were manufactured from petrified wood, three
from quartzite, one from rose quartz, and one from jasper.
A small segm ent of the ground base of another possible Paleo- Indian dart point
wa s also found. This has slightly con tra cting sides and a straight, thinn ed base.
The width at the base measures 8 mm., and the maximum thickness is 4 mm. It is
of a n on-local, mottled, siliceous stone.
A rrow Points
In contrast to the large number of dart points, only one complete a rrowhead
and eight fragments were obtained from the excavations. The complete specimen
(Fig. 8, T ), which is made of petrified wood, has a roughly triangula r but somewhat irregular blade, prominent shoulders, and a small bulbous stem. It is 29 mm.
in length, 16 mm. in width at the sh ould ers, and 3 mm. thick.
Three other specimens (Fig. 8, Q- S) , only slightly damaged, all h ave a triangular
blade and a short protrusion which serves as a rudimentary stem. Th e other five
specimens (Fig. 8, U-V) have lost their stems through breakage but show triangular
blades. The shoulders of two of th ese are square and have outflar ing barbs. The
length of th e fragmenta ry points ra nges from 21 to 32 mm. (estimate ), th e width
a t the shoulders from 14 to 23 mm., and th e thickness from 2 to 5 mm.
One of the fragmentary points is of a homogeneous gray chert, the others of
reddish-gray ch er l w ith abundant sand inclusions.

2.

BI FACIAL ARTIFACTS

A total number of 351 bifacial artifacts and fragments (excluding,
here, the projectile points) was recovered from the excavation of the
knoll, Area A. These generally crude and somewhat irregular artifacts
exhibit, except for a few exceptions mentioned below, at least one cutting edge prepared by the percussion flaking technique. Some have
definite points for piercing. while others have two cutting edges. The
distinctive feature of all is that they were worked from both faces, as
opposed to the scrapers which were flaked only from one face . Because
of their rather irregular shapes and the lack of comparative data of a
distributional nature, it is deemed best not to attempt t o classify these
artifacts into varieties and types for the present time. Rather, as many
as possible will be described in small, homogeneous groups which future research may show, it is hoped, to correspond to true varieties or
types. Here each group will be designated with Roman numerals.
Many of the bifacial artifacts were obviously intended to be used as
knives (they have clearly-distinguishable cutting adges ), while others,

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

though also worked from both faces, do not show such easily recognizable edges. The members of the first category will be called
"knives," those of the second, "Iniscellaneous bifacial artifacts."

Knives
Group I (Fig. 9, A-C ) consists of 28 knives which are lanceolate in
general outline (the edges are convex), and have approximately
straight bases which tend to contract. The workmanship shown on
these specimens is quite crude. Their length varies from 48 to 96 mm.,
the width from 21 to 45 mm. , and the thickness from 9 to 20 mm. Two
of the specimens were manufactured from ferruginous sandstone, 19
from reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions, six from petrified wood,
and one from homogeneous, gray chert.
Group II (Fig. 9, D-F) is made up of 20 rather small knives which
are triangular or subtriangular in general outline. Their edges are
straight or slightly convex, and the bases are very slightly rounded.
The workmanship is somewhat better than that exhibited by the Group
I specimens, but no pressure flaking was used. The length varies from
37 to 50 mm., the width (at the base ) from 27 to 36 mm., and the thickness from 6 to 13 mm. Four of these knives were manufactured from
quartzite, 11 from reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions, three from
petrified wood, and two from homogeneous gray chert.
Group III (Fig. 9, G-I ) consists of 32 medium-sized knives which
are ovate-acuminate in general outline. The edges are convex and the
base is rounded. The workmanship shown on these specimens is crude,
and the outline of many is irregular. The length varies from 40 to 66
mm., the width from 20 to 42 mm. , and the thickness from 8 to 18 mm.
Two were manufactured from quartzite, two from petrified wood, one
from a homogeneous light gray chert, and 27 from reddish-gray chert.
Group IV (Fig. 9, J-L) is made up of long, narrow knives with a
lanceolate outline. Their sides are slightly convex and their bases
flattened or somewhat rounded. The length varies from 53 to 125 mm.,
the maximum width from 25 to 35 mm. , and the thickness from 9 to
16 mm. These artifacts are somewhat better made than the previously
described groups, although only the percussion flaking technique was
employed in their manufacture. One was made from ferruginous sandstone, seven from reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions, one from
homogeneous gray chert, three from quartzite, and two from petrified
wood.
Group V (Fig. 9, M-P) is composed of 12 bi-pointed knives of medium size. Their edges are convex and contract at both extremities.

185

YARBROUGH AND MILL ER SITES

G

c

B

A

N

0

p

Q

v

'

L

K

J

H

F

E

D

R

w

5

x

" '

CM

Fig . 9 . Knives : Groups I-VIII. A-C , Group I; D- F, Group II ; G-1 , Group Ill ; J-L, Group
IV; M- P, Group V; Q-S, Group VI ; T- U, Group VII ; V-X, Group VIII .

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Here again the flaking is of the percussion type and quite crude. The
length ranges from 45 to 87 mm., the width (measured midway on
the edges ) from 22 to 29 mm. , and the thickness from 8 to 20 mm. One
is made of petrified wood, two from quartzite, one from ferruginous
sandstone, and eight from reddish-gray chert with abundant sand inclusions.
Group VI (Fig. 9, Q-S ) consists of 10 medium-sized knives which
have an ovate outline. The edges are convex and the extremities
rounded. The workmanship is quite crude. Their length ranges from
45 to 63 mm., the width (measured midway on the edges) ranges from
29 to 40 mm. , and the thickness from 7 to 16 mm. One specimen was
made from a black flint, while the remaining nine are of a reddishgray chert with sand inclusions.
Group VII (Fig. 9, T-U) is made up of 13 large, thin sheets or slabs
of petrified wood which hnve been worked bifacially along one side to
form a cutting edge. The outline of these specimens is very irregular
because of the poor quality of the stone. The maximum diameter varies
from 50 to 95 mm. and the thickness from 4 to 14 mm. This group has
been recognized in the lower Neches River area in McGee Bend Reservoir by Edward B. Jelks (MS ), who has designated them "Harvey
Blades. "
Group VIII (Fig. 9, V-X) consists of 27 medium-sized knives, all of
petrified wood, which are crudely formed into an approximate triangular or subtriangular outline. All of these specimens have one
pointed end, and several show flaking on one or both edges. The base is
generally flat and unworked, although slightly rounded in a few examples. The length ranges from 40 to 60 mm., the width from 24 to 50
mm., and the thickness from 6 to 22 mm. This distinctive group of
knives has also been recognized in the McGee Bend Reservoir area by
I elks (MS), who has called them "Bronson Blades."
Group IX (Fig. 10, A-C) is a residual category composed of 154 irregular, fragmentary, or unusual specimens which could not be placed
in any of the eight groups. It would be a great mistake to consider the
examples of those eight groups as typical of the knives from the Yarbrough site. On the contrary, almost half of the knives (the 154 specimens of Group IX) are irregular, crude, and unclassifiable. Round,
flat, and concave bases and all sorts of edges and tips are represented
in this group, but practically no two examples are alike. In fact, many
appear to represent stones which were slightly worked only on one
small portion of the specimen.

c

8

A

E

D

••

F

H

G

L

M

J

K

N

p

0

;.---,

'

J'

--,

' t

· ~-----

•' .

s

R

u

~~]

]

·.,,.·___ - - -

T

, -\
\

\

__
v

Q

l
I

w

x

Fig . 10. Kn ives (Group IXI, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts (Groups 1-V) , Mineola end
scrapers, triangular end scrapers, and side scrapers . A-C, knives , Group IX ; D-E , miscellaneous

bifacial ar!ifacts, Group I; F-H, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts , Group II ; 1-K, miscellaneous
bifacial artifacts, Group Ill; l-N, m iscellaneous bifacial artifacts , Group IV ; 0-0, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts , Group V ; R-T, Mineola end scrapers ; U-V, triangula r end scrapers ;

W-X , side scrapers.

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In sharp contrast to the others, one interesting specimen of this residual category is a long, thin, well-made knife which has the outline
(lanceolate blade and concave base ) of an Angostura point (Fig. 13,
G). This specimen has been made very thin by the removal of wide,
shallow flakes , and the edges have beer, evenly retouched by pressure
flaking. It was found at a depth of 18 in. in Analysis Unit 1, in the pottery zone. It is of a compact, gray chert, measures 125 mm. in length,
28 mm. in width, and 6 mm. in thickness.
In Group IX are 110 knives of reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions, 22 of petrified wood, 11 of quartzite, nine of homogeneous gray
chert, one of ferruginous sandstone, and one of agate.

Miscellaneous Bifacial Artifacts
Group I (Fig. 10, D-E ) is composed of five medium-sized, thick
bifacial artifacts with a circular outline. The workmanship shown on
these specimens is very crude, and only percussion flaking was used
in their manufacture. Their maximum diameter ranges from 35 to 51
mm. and the thickness from 14 to 25 mm. All are made from the local
reddish-gray chert.
Group II (Fig. 10, F-H) is made up of five thick, bifacial artifacts
with a circular outline which, apart from their much smaller size, are
equal to the specimens described under Group I. The workmanship
here is likewise very crude and only the percussion technique seems to
have been used in their manufacture. The maximum diameter ranges
from 2 7 to 33 mm. and the thickness from 9 to 14 mm. One example is
made of a homogeneous light gray chert; the other four are of reddishgray chert.
Group III (Fig. 10, I-K) is composed of 15 very small, crudely-made
artifacts with a lanceolate outline. A great deal of irregularity and
variation is shown by the members of this group. Were it not for their
relatively great thickness, crude workmanship, and rather irregular
outline, these artifacts might be considered projectile points. Their
length varies from 26 to 35 mm., the width from 16 to 24 mm., and the
thickness from 7 to 11 mm. All 15 specimens are made from reddishgray chert.
Group IV (Fig. 10 L-N) with its eight members, is identical to
Group III except that the general outline of the artifacts is subtriangular rather than lanceolate. The base is slightly rounded and the edges
somewhat convex. The maximum length ranges from 30 to 39 mm. ,
the width from 19 to 26 mm., and the thickness from 8 to 12 mm. All

189

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

of these specimens are made of the local reddish-gray chert with abundant sand inclusions.
Group V (Fig. 10, 0-Q) is composed of ten pointed artifacts which,
in all but their small size, resemble fist-axes. These were made from
small river or gravel pebbles and cobbles which were worked bifacially
near the point, but the lower half, still exhibiting the original cortex
patina, was left unmodified. Their general outline is ovate-acuminate
in shape. The typical base is rounded and the edges, although somewhat irregular, tend to be straight. The length ranges from 31 to 60
mm., the maximum width from 24 to 33 mm., and the thickness from 9
to 25 mm. Three examples were made from petrified wood and the
other seven from reddish-gray chert.

3.

SCRAPERS

Mineola End Scrapers (Fig. 10, R-T ) . Thirty-seven medium- to
large-sized end scrapers form an easily recognizable and discrete
group, here designated "Mineola end scrapers." All of these specimens were manufactured from slabs of petrified wood, generally have
a square or rectangular outline, and are flat on both faces. Chipping of
the percussion type was done on the bit end, frequently on the two
sides, and rarely on the base, but only from one face. The bit itself is
very steeply beveled and is concave on six specimens, forming a
"gouge" bit, is straight on 24 specimens, and is slightly convex on
seven examples. When more comparative data are available it may be
possible to group the various bit shapes into distinctive varieties, but
not enough is known at the present about the extra-site occurrence of
these artifacts to justify such division. Their length ranges from 40 to
70 mm. , the maximum width from 24 to 52 mm., and the thickness
from 6 to 13 mm.
It is quite probable that the rectangular form of these scrapers is a
function of the fracturing qualities of petrified wood. Since the flakes
removed by percussion tend to fracture in parallel planes, it would be
very difficult, with this material, to produce the usual triangular shape
found frequently on end scrapers. Parallel sides can be produced much
more easily and effectively when working with petrified wood.
Triangular End Scrapers (Fig. 10, U-V). A total number of 17 end
scrapers with an approximate triangular or subtriangular outline was
recovered from the excavation in Area A . These specimens have a
somewhat wide, convex bit and straight, slightly concave or slightly
convex edges. The base tends to be pointed on ten specimens and flat

190

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

or blunt on the remaining seven. These latter seven examples may represent specimens with broken bases. Although the artifacts were
roughly shaped by percussion flaking, careful secondary pressure
knapping was used to sharpen the bit, sides, and occasionally the
pointed base. In cross section a majority are plano-convex, with almost
all the chipping occurring on the convex side. Three scrapers, however,
are concavo-convex in cross section. In all cases the end scrapers are
thickest at the bit end and considerably thinner toward the base. The
angle of the bit is quite steep.
It appears that practically all these scrapers were manufactured
from large flakes struck from prepared platform cores. The bit was
fashioned on the end exhibiting the hinge fracture, while the base invariably shows a positive bulb of percussion on the flat or concave face
of the artifact.
Six of these scrapers were manufactured from a homogeneous whitish-gray chert, six from a homogeneous dark gray chert, one from
black flint, three from reddish-gray chert, and one from agate (a variety called "Quitaque flint" from Briscoe County in the Texas Panhandle).
Side Scrapers (Fig. 10, W-X). Thirty-five side scrapers, showing a
great deal of variation, were recovered. All of these show fine secondary pressure flaking. Fifteen have an approximately rectangular or
subrectangular outline, are worked from one face on only one of the
long edges, and are relatively flat on both faces. Another five show the
same general outline and are identical to the aforementioned scrapers,
but are worked on two adjacent edges.
Fifteen side scrapers have an approximate triangular outline, with
two long edges and one shorter edge. The two long edges, which come
together to form a prominent point, are both worked from only one
face, while the base is usually unmodified. The members of this last
group are usually plano-convex in cross section but not very thick.
Secondary pressure flaking was used to form the scraping edge of all
examples.
Since all these artifacts show a uniform size range, their dimensions
will be given together. Their length varies from 22 to 61 mm., the
width from 21 to 55 mm., and the thickness from 3 to 11 mm.
Two were manufactured from ferruginous sandstone, six from petrified wood, seven from homogeneous whitish-gray chert, 13 from homogeneous dark gray chert, four from reddish-gray chert with sand
inclusions, one from quartzite, one from agatized dolomite ("Ali bates

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

191

flint"), one from black flint, one from brown striated chert, and one
from an unidentified blue-white stone.
Miscellaneous Scrapers. Six medium-sized, irregular scrapers could
not be placed in any of the above categories. Three are plano-convex
(Fig. 11, A, C, F) , worked by pressure flaking from the convex face,
and are roughly circular in outline. The edge is worked around a
greater part of the circumference of these artifacts. One is of a pink
quartz, one of a light gray and the other of a dark gray chert. They
range from 28 to 40 mm. in diameter, and from 3 to 8 mm. in thickness.
Another specimen (Fig. 11 , B) is plano-convex in cross section, bipointed, and chipped by pressure flaking around the entire circumference of the convex face. It was made of reddish-gray chert with sand
inclusions. Its maximum length is 50 mm. and the thickness is 10 mm.
Another specimen (Fig. 11, D ) is a small, flat flake (20 mm. long and
4 mm. thick) of a very irregular outline which is worked around approximately half the circumference. It is made from banded gray
chert.
The last specimen is a thick scraper with a subtriangular outline
(Fig. 11 , E). It represents the initial flake struck from a large core, the
rounded cortical surface being unmodified while the other surface was
percussion flaked around the entire circumference. This unusual specimen is made of reddish-gray chert. The length is 48 mm., the maximum width 42 mm., and the thickness 15 mm.
4.

CLEAR FoRK GouGEs

Thirty-five complete artifacts and 15 fragments belong to the various varieties of the Clear Fork gouge described by Cyrus N. Ray
( 1941: 152- 162) . These were manufactured, without exception, from
ferruginous sandstone. Thirty of these (Fig. 11, G-I) belong to Ray's
Variety 1 ( 1941: 153-154, Pl. 27, Nos. 1, 2, 6, 11 ) . The specimens of
this group found at the Yarbrough site are triangular or subtriangular
in general outline and biconvex in cross section. The bit is deeply
concave on 10 specimens, straight or very slightly concave on 11 specimens, and slightly convex on nine. Crude percussion flaking was used
around the entire circumference of the specimens, and the underside
was ground smooth and shows extreme wear. Their length varies from
50 to 82 mm., the width (at the bit) from 34 to 45 mm., and the thickness (at the bit) from 12 to 15 mm. The thickness, however, decreases
considerably toward the base.

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

'·

.)

c

B

A

E

D

: , t;___--,

,-----1

__

F

_____

• rJ

H

G

/

,,

L

/

K

J

N

-----,

-----~

-----p

0

L__,
R

Q

v-L _ ,' ____.___._
' CM5

f

'?. !

'

Fig. 11 . Scrapers, gouges, and gravers . A-F, miscellaneous scrapers; G-1, Clear Fork
gouge , Variety 1; J-K, Clear Fork gouge, Variety 3; L-0 , gravers; P-R, Clear Fork gouge,
Variety 4 .

193

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

Although no specimens of Ray's Variety Z are present (although a
few Mineola end scrapers resemble them strongly), two basal fragments (Fig. 11, J-K) probably represent Variety 3 (Ray, 1941: 157,
Pl. 28, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6).
Variety 4 (Ray, 1941: 157, Pl. 28, Nos. 7, 10) is represented by four
specimens (Fig. 11, P-R) that are rectangular in outline, plano- or
biconvex, and have bits at both extremities. Their length varies from
36 to 60 mm. , the width from 25 to 50 mm., and the thickness from 1Z
and 22 mm.
The only real difference between the specimens discussed here and
those described by Ray is in the use-polish shown on the underside of
the Yarbrough site specimens. However, the hard flint from which
Ray's gouges were manufactured may account for the lack of polish on
his speciments.

5.

DRILLS

Three complete drills and three fragmentary drill bits were recovered from the knoll (Fig. 8, W-Z) . One of these, measuring 31 mm. in
length, has a short, narrow bit with a maximum thickness of 5 mm.,
and an irregularly shaped base 11 mm. wide. This artifact was made
from petrified wood by means of pressure flaking.
The other complete specimens arc short, broad, bi-pointed drills
made of reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions. The first measures
21 mm. in length and has a maximum width of 7 mm. The second
specimen measures ZO mm. in length and 9 mm. in width. Both were
shaped by pressure flaking.
The three fragments represent medial sections of bits ranging in
maximum thickness from 6 to 9 mm. Two were made from light grayish-brown chert and one from black flint.
6.

GRAVERS

Eleven gravers were recovered. These are rather small artifacts
which have a protruding beak or bit which was presumably designed
to serve for incising bone, ceramics, or other artifacts (Fig. 11, L-0).
The general outline of these specimens is irregular, with the maximum
diameter ranging between Z1 and 50 mm. All of the gravers except one
were worked by percussion flaking from only one face. The other specimen was worked bifacially. Two small concavities or notches were
made on one edge by means of pressure flaking; the protruding section remaining between the two concavities served as the bit of the

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

graver. Two of the gravers were made from petrified wood, two from
homogeneous light gray chert, one from quartzite, and six from reddish-gray chert.
7.

MISCELLA NEOUS CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

In addition to the artifacts described above, the following specimens
were recovered: a large fi st-axe, two small choppers, a spokeshave, a
small chipped hammerstone, a stemmed knife with crescent-shaped
blade, an unusual oval flint with numerous notches, two chipped
quartz crystals, and a slightly worked obsidian flake.
The large fist-axe (Fig. 12, C), made of ferruginous sandstone, was
crudely worked into a subtriangular outline by percussion flaking on
both faces. The end oppo ite the point is broad and was left unmodified.
This specimen measures 116 mm. in length, 100 mm. in width at the
base, and 45 mm. in maximum thickness.
The two small choppers (Fig. 12, D-E ) are flat pebbles of reddishgray chert which have been bifacially chipped along one long edge.
The percussion method was employed in their manufacture. The first
of these specimens measures 45 mm. in length, 32 mm. in width, and
11 mm. in thickness. The second is 60 mm. long, 35 mm. wide, and
13 mm. thick.
The spokeshave (Fig. 12, F ) is an irregular flake of gray chert
worked unifacially around the circumference by pressure flaking. On
one edge a concavity or notch, 7 mm. wide and 4 mm. deep, was
formed . The maximum diameter of this artifact is 41 mm.; the maximum thickness is 5 mm.
The hammerstone (Fig. 12, G) is a rectangular piece of petrified
wood, 55 mm. long, which has been percussion flaked from both faces ,
but only at one end. This worked end has been battered quite smooth,
presumable from repeated use.
A stemmed knife (Fig. 12, H ) of petrified wood was also found. This
artifact has a flat base, deep side notches just above the base, and a
broken but originally crescent-shaped blade. Though worked bifacially
by the percussion technique, one face shows a great deal more modification than the other. The original length cannot be accurately estimated, but the width at the base measures 34 mm., and the maximum
thickness 8 mm.
Little can be said about the oval artifact with numerous marginal
notches. The photograph (Fig. 12, I ) provides a much better impression than a description. It is made of a light gray chert, is 31 mm. long,

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

195

c
A

CM.
0 2 4 6 8 iO

I
F

E

...
/

H

'

O!

M

IA•

~

'• ;J

\~~

~

.....

K

J

~
L

CM.
23456789 10

0

N

CM.

Q \ 5 ~ 4 ~ q ? Sl ~ 19
Fig . 1 2. Miscellaneous chipped and g round stone a rtifacts . A-B , milling stone s; C, fi st
Axe; D-E , choppers; F, spokeshave; G, hammerston e; H, ste mmed knife; I, notched art ifact;
J -K, quartz crystals; L, obs id ian flake ; M-N, g round axes ; 0 - P, ch ipped a xes .

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

19 mm. wide, and 5 mm. thick. Four deep notches occur on each lateral
edge.
The two quartz crystals (Fig. 12, J-K) and the obsidian flake (Fig.
12, L ) show only very slight and indefinite indications of flaking.
8. AxEs
One complete axe and three fragments were recovered from the
knoll. The complete specimen (Fig. 12, M) is full-grooved, has a wide
blade and a rather small, rounded poll. It appears to have been worked
first by the percussion chipping technique and then ground smooth
with an abrader. Although the blade and bit are well ground, the poll
still shows rough flake scars. The length (poll to the bit ) is 75 mm., the
maximum width of the blade is 66 mm. , and the maximum thickness
is 35 mm. The groove is approximately 16 mm. wide and 6 mm. deep.
One of the fragments (Fig. 12, N) appears to represent a fullgrooved axe quite similar to the complete specimen described above,
but some differences are found. The poll of this fragmentary axe is approximately the same width and thickness as the axe blade. Many
small peck marks can be seen over the entire surface; and although it
was well ground, this axe was not thorough I y smoothed like the first
specimen. The complete axe shows no indications of the pecking technique, but rather exhibits percussion flaking. The maximum width of
the fragmentary axe is 79 mm. and the maximum thickness 35 mm.
The groove is approximately 14 mm. wide and 4 mm. deep.
The two remaining fragments represent the blade portions of axes.
One of these (Fig. 1Z, 0) was worked by the removal of large flakes by
the percussion technique and was then ground slightly on both faces ,
but not so thoroughly as to remove all traces of the flake scars. Whereas
the bit of the complete axe was slightly convex in profile, that of this
specimen is extremely rounded. It can not be determined whether this
fragment was fully grooved originally. There is some slight trace of
notches at the top and bottom edges like those occurring on the typical
Fourche Maline chipped stone axes (Bell and Baerreis, 1951 : Pl. 4, No.
9). The maximum width of the blade is 75 mm. and the thickness is
34mm.
The last fragment (Fig. 12, P) represents a blade much like the one
described above, except that it is flatter, more crudely chipped, and has
very little indication of grinding. Only the forward portion of the bit is
present. It is 80 mm. wide and 14 mm. thick, and resembles Fourche
Maline chipped axes.

197

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

All four axes were manufactured from reddish-brown ferruginous
sandstone.

9.

SINKER STONES

Four medium-sized stone artifacts were recovered which presumably were intended to function as weights, or as bolas stones. Three
are oval in outline, having a thickness somewhat less than the width.
Two of these (Fig. 13, C-D ) have shallow notches at both extremities,
while the other (Fig. 13, A ) has a shallow, almost V-shaped groove
around its longitudinal circumference. Presumably a string or thong
could be passed around the artifacts and held secure by means of the
end notches or the groove. The three were manufactured from ferruginous sandstone of a reddish-brown color. The maximum lengths of
the two end-notched specimens are 50 and 40 mm., their widths 31 and
29 mm. , and the thickness 21 and 20 mm. The longitudinally grooved
artifact measures 53 mm. in length, 37 mm. in width, and 27 mm. in
thickness.
The fourth of these artifacts (Fig. 13, B), made from a basaltic
stone, is cylindrical in form and has rounded ends. A shallow concave
groove runs around its latitudinal circumference. The length is 41 mm.
and the diameter averages 33 mm.
All four specimens appear to have been shaped by pecking and then
smoothed by grinding with an abrader.
10.

GoRGET FRAGMENT ( Fig.

13, E )

The rounded corner-section of a thin, perforated stone gorget was
made from a very fine-grained sandstone. Both faces are ground flat
and smooth, and the only corner which is present is rounded. The
single perforation was accomplished by drilling from both faces. The
maximum thickness of the gorget fragment is 5 mm., and the diameter
of the hour glass-shaped perforation measures 3 mm. at the narrowest
place.
11.

STONE PALETTE ( Fig.

13, F)

A small, concavo-convex, ferruginous sandstone artifact with a
square outline could easily have served as a small palette for mixing
and applying ochre pigments. It is 47 mm. in diameter and 7 mm.
thick. The concave face shows evidence of pecking and has a low,.
turned-up rim. The convex face is smooth.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

198

c

B

A

E

D

F

- - ~ ::J

LLLl • "

~ 1

a s

10

':~/

G

J
H

K

l

Fig. 13 . Ground stone artifacts and chipped knife. A-D, sinker stones; E, gorge! fragment ; F, palette; G, knife ; H-J, monos ; K, pitted mano; L-M , pitted stones.

199

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

12.

GRINDING SLABS

(Fig. 12, A-B )

Ten slabs of ferruginous sandstone have one or both surfaces (faces)
ground concave. These were apparently used, with manos, to crush
and pulverize plant parts. One specimen is quite large ( 18 X 24 X 6
cm. ) and has a roughly rectangular outline. One surface is deeply concave, evidencing a rotary grinding action, while the other is flat and
exhibits several grooves which presumably were used for abrading purposes. Another large specimen is roughly circular in outline (20 X
6 cm ) and is worked on only one face . Its face is concave and ground
fairly smooth, although peck marks can still be discerned on its surface. A third large stone is oval in outline (22 X 16 X 60 cm. ) and
concave on both faces. The surface concavities were pecked out, but
very little grinding was done on this stone subsequent to the original
shaping.
Four smaller grinding slabs are roughly rectangular in outline. and
are bifacially ground. Their surfaces are concave and still show indications of the pecking technique used to rough-shape the surfaces.
Their diameter ranges from 11 to 24 cm. and the thickness from 3 to
5cm.
Another group of three small grinding slabs is identical to the four
described immediately above, except that one of the faces has been left
unworked. The other face is concave and shallow. The diameter of
these grinding slabs varies from 10 to 16 cm. and the thickness from
5 to 9 cm.
All 10 specimens were made from locally acquired, reddish-brown
ferruginous sandstone.
13.

MANOS

A total of 40 manos-the small hand stones used with the grinding
slabs-was recovered from the knoll, Area A. These may be divided
into ( 1) those having two grinding surfaces, and ( 2) those showing
only one grinding surface.
Among those with only one ground surface, nine have rather irregular outlines, although several tend to be circular (Fig. 13, H). They
were manufactured from sandstone and quartzite cobbles. Their diameter ranges from 7 to 13 cm., and their thickness from 5 to 7 cm.
A few of these show slight modifications around the edges caused by
pecking. The grinding surfaces of all the manos are flat, or else very
slightly convex.

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Seven manos have only one grinding surface, are subrectangular in
outline, and were fashioned from reddish-brown ferruginous sandstone. The grinding surfaces of these specimens are flat, slightly concave, or sligthly convex. Their diameter varies from 6 to 10 cm. and
their thickness from 3 to 5 cm.
Three manos, also showing only one grinding surface, are like those
described immediately above except that they are irregular and
crudely-shaped, lacking the rectangular outline of the others. These
range from 5 to 10 cm. in diameter and from 3 to 4 cm. in thickness.
They, too, are of the reddish-brown ferruginous sandstone.
The remaining 19 manos all show two opposed grinding surfaces.
Seven of them, made of thick sandstone cobbles, tend to be round in
outline, and show considerable modification by pecking on the edges
and on the surfaces. These range in diameter from 7 to 11 cm. and in
thickness from 3 to 7 cm. Nine additional specimens have subrectangular outlines and were manufactured from reddish-brown ferruginous
sandstone (Fig. 13, I-J). Their diameter ranges from 6 to 11 cm. and
their thickness from 3 to 5 cm. A few show some slight indications of
grinding on the sides as well as on the surfaces. Three manos are identical to those described immediately above, but are highly irregular in
outline. They are of the same ferruginous sandstone and range from
7 to 9 cm. in diameter and from 3 to 4 cm. in thickness.
The surfaces of all the examples which have two grinding faces are
flat, slightly convex, or rarely slightly concave.
Almost all of the manos appear to have been used with a circular
grinding motion. Only a few of the rectanguloid specimens could
possibly have been used with a back and forth movement. The circular, concave basins commonly found on the grinding slabs also suggest
that manos were used with rotary motion.

14. PITTED STONES
In addition to the manos described immediately above, another 44
manos were found which show small pits or depressions on their
surfaces. An additional 35 irregular stones (not ground) also show one
or more of these pits. Heretofore, such artifacts have been called
"nutting stones" or "nut stones," but it has recently been suggested
(Honea, MS) that they were used as anvils or base stones in the
bi-polar flaking technique.
Of the pitted manos (Fig. 13, K), 21 have one pit on each grinding
surface (all of these manos are bifacially ground). Nine are irregular
in outline, eight are subrectangular, and four tend to be circular.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

201

Another group of 18 manos exhibit a single pit on only one grinding
surface. Of this group, nine are irregular in outline, two are subrectangular, and seven are almost circular. In addition to these, one
irregular mano has one pit on each face and on two of the sides as
well. Another shows three pits on one face and none on the other,
while yet another specimen has two elongated pits or channels on
only one face. A rather unusual modified mano has one elongated pit
or channel on each surface, one of which is crossed at right angles by
a narrow, V-shaped groove.
Thirty-five stones, which are not ground as were the manos, also
show one or more of these depressions or pits. All these specimens are
irregular in outline and were very roughly shaped by hammerstone
percussion. Seventeen of these have a pit on only one surface, 16 have
a pit on both surfaces, one has four pits on one surface and two on the
other (Fig. 13, L), and the last specimen has five on one surface and
four on the other (Fig. 13, M ) .
All the pitted stones, both those made from manos and those which
show no grinding facets , are of red ferruginous sandstone. Since the
size range is rather consistent throughout the different groups, only one
set of dimensions will be given for the entire lot of 79 artifacts. Their
maximum diameter ranges from 7 to 15 cm. and the thickness from
25 mm. to 7 cm. The diameter of the pits themselves varies from 2 to
4 cm. and their maximum depth from 2 to 9 mm. The pits occurring
on the manos are shallower than those on the other stones, and their
interiors are frequently smoothed by grinding. The pits on the irregular stones, however, are deeper, and their interiors show evidence
of pecking.
15 . CERAMICS
A total of 65 7 potsherds was recovered from Area A. In describing
the potsherds the usual presentation by types will not be followed.
This deviation from standard procedure is necessitated by the relatively small number of specimens and by the scarcity of complete
vessels. The sherds will be described and grouped primarily on the
basis of the techniques used in applying surface decoration ( engraving, punctating, brushing) . Of course the use of the term "decoration"
here is not quite correct, since several of the alterations made on the
vessel surfaces may have had a functional rather than an aesthetic
value (e.g., brushing, which could aid in firmly grasping greasy cooking vessels). Nevertheless, an effort has been made, when possible, to
show type affiliations or resemblances. In certain cases, however,

202

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sherds of different descriptive groups may conceivably represent the
S3me type.
Later, in the description of the ceramics from Area B-the small
occupation area 300 yards distant from the knoll, it will be possible to
follow a more orthodox presentation by types, since we have a larger
number of sherds and several reconstructed vessels from that area.
INCISED POTSHERDS. A total of 36 incised sherds was recovered from the knoll.
In this report the term "incised" is reserved for pre-firing incising, while the term
"engraved" is used for post-firing incising. Twenty-two specimens are rim or neck
sherds, apparently from large jars or deep bowls. Of these, 14 represent the high,
somewhat everted rims of the Maydelle Incised type of the Frankston Focus. Two
of the Maydelle sherds have parallel lines running diagonally toward the right and
downward from the lip (Fig. 14, A). Another six (Fig. 14, B) have parallel lines
running diagonally to the left and downward from the lip, two have almost vertical
parallel lines, and four (Fig. 14, C) have grids of crossed diagonal lines. The general
shape of these high rims is concave (viewing the outside surface) and the lip is
either rounded and everted, or flat and everted. Most of these potsherds fractured
along horizontal coil lines at the point where the rim joined, at a sharp angle, the
presumably globular body of the pot (see Suhm et al. , 1954: 324, Pl. 46). Another
rim sherd exhibits the same shape, but has horizontal parallel lines which do not
occur, so far as is known, on Maydelle vessels. This sherd can not be assigned to
any established type.
The remaining seven rim sherds appear to represent vessels affiliated with the
Gibson Aspect. These sherds are straight-walled and have the characteristic flattened
rims of Gibson Aspect ceramics, particularly those of the Alto and Sanders foci. Two
of these (Fig. 14, D-E), with parallel lines running diagonally to the left and
downward from the lip, are clearly of the Canton Incised type of the Sanders Focus.
Two of the remainder show crossed diagonal lines and another two have rather
random and wandering lines. These last four sherds can not be assigned to any
recognized types.
Fourteen sherds show parallel incised lines which can not be oriented. They
represent body sherds or perhaps rim sherds without the lip. No type designations
can be made for them.
The paste, thickness, and color of the various incised sherds varies uniformly
from one group to the next, hence all the specimens will be described as a single
unit. Their wall thickness ranges from 5 to 9 mm., the surface color from cream,
to brownish-black, to reddish-brown. The core is invariably darker than the surface
color, and is usually dark brown or black. One cream-colored sherd, however, has a
light brown core. Small lumps of clay and, rarely, ground potsherds were used as
tempering agents, lending a very granular appearance to the paste. The surface of
most of the specimens has been smoothed but not polished, and its hardness varies
from 3 to 4.5 according to Moh's scale.
BRUSHED POTSHERDS: Ninety brushed body sherds were recovered. A majority
of these are apparently from large pots or deep bowls, and may be assigned to the
Bullard Brushed type (Fig. 14, F-G) of the Frankston and Titus foci (Suhm et al.,
1954: 252, Pl. 9). Since many of these specimens fractured along horizontal coil

A

c

B

H

G

~

3~

~

~

J

L

N

M

~

~~
- · #

p

0

T

Q

------'
u

R

s

v

Fig. 14. Potsherds: Maydelle Incised, Canion lncise'1, Bullard Brushe'1, Sanders Engraved,
Poyne r Engrave::/, Sanders Plain, cmd Williams Plain types; punclaled, engraved, plain, and
sand-·:emi:erad sherds. A-C , Maydelle Incised ; D-E, Canion Incised; F-G, Bullard Brushed;
H-1, punclatecl sherds; K, N, 0, Sanders Engraved; L-M , Poynor Engraved ; P, engraved potsherd; Q, plain potsherd; R, Sanders Plain ; S, sand-temFered pla in slierd; T-V , Williams
Plain.

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lines, it is possible to or ient them correctly and to determine that the brushing wa s
applied vertically. The brushed lines tend to be fine , although some incisions are
deeper and heavier than others. Although generally parallel, some of the lines cross
each other and wander randomly. The main impression, however, is one of vertical
brushing. Perhaps a corn cob, bundle of grass, or straw was used to produce these
closely-spaced, fine lines. This type of brushing can be easily distinguished from
the circular brushing found on vessels of the Clements Brushed type.
The surfaces of the brushed sherds are porous and rough, and of a cream, light
brown, or reddish-cream color. The paste is coarse and tempered either with clay
lumps ( 70 specimens) or with ground bone combined with clay lumps (30 specimens ) . Th e core is either of a light cream or dark brown color, the latter indicative
of incomplete oxidation during the firing process. The wall thickness varies from
5 to 9 mm. and the hardness from 1.5 to 3 according to Moh's scale.
PUNCTATED POTSHERDS. Thirty -om sherds recovered from Area A have
punctations on their surfaces. These punctations were executed in three different
styles. The first of these, represented by 23 specimens, consists of a small and rather
deep groove which, viewed from above, has the outline of a half circle ( Fig. 14, H ).
Thes2 punctations are deepest at the straight side, where the clay was mounded up
and pushed back, generally causing the formation of a small node. These marks
were probably made by angular gouging with a circular stick or section of cane,
although this type has usually been designated as "fingernail-punctating. " Of these
23 sherds, five are rim sherds with a row of punctations just under the lip, and 18
are body sherds with apparently random surface punctations. Of this last group of
18, three show a certain amount of surface smoothing after the punctating was
done, which partially eliminated the nodes; the r emainder lack this trait.
The second kind of punctation, found on six body sherds ( Fig. 14, I ), consists of
short, narrow grooves or short incisions applied randomly over the vessel surface.
The two remaining sherds, which constitute the third style ( Fig. 14, J ), show long,
narrow gashes applied over the surface.
The paste, color, and other characteristics of all these sherds are rather consistent,
h ence a single description will suffice for the whole group. The wall thickness ranges
from 5 to 9 mm., and the surface color from cream to orange to grayish-brown. The
core of all the examples is a dark brownish-black, indicating an incompletely oxidizing firing atmosphere. The paste is coarse and granular, with 17 sh erds having,
as temper, small clay lumps (possibly including some ground potsherds ) and 14
having clay lumps plus ground bone. The surface hardness ranges from 3 to 3.5.
Rims d ecorated with rows of punctations have been found on vessels of Bullard
Brush'!d ( Suhm 1'! t al., 1954: 252, Pl. 9, B ) and on many miscellaneous vessels of
utilitarian ware, with both plain and punctated b:dies. of th2 Fulton Asp ect. Although this group of 31 sherds can not be assigned to definite types, it can safely be
ascribed to the Fulton Aspect.
ENGRAVED POTTERY. Fourteen engraved sherds were recovered during the
excavations, five of which are related to the Poynor Engraved type (Fig. 14, L, M )
and seem to represent the rims of squat bowls with rounded body and slightly
everted, rounded lips. The surface decoration consists of blank areas set off by ma sses
of closely spaced parallel lines, running either vertically or diagonally. Two of the
specimens in question, however, are slightly different from the Poynor bowls described by Suhm et al. (1954: 342, Pl. 55 ) in that parallel horizontal lines occur

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

205

below the lip. These horizontal lines are known, however, on bottles of this type
(ibid.: Pl. 56, A, B, G). The thickness of these sherds ranges from 5 to 8 mm. The
surface, which has been smoothed but not polished, is reddish-brown and the core
dark gray. The paste is coarse and granular and rather large clay lumps were employed as a tempering agent. The surface hardness varies from Z.5 to 3.
The six sherds of Sanders Engraved (Fig. 14, K, N, O; Fig. 15, A ) show small
triangles filled with somewhat crudely executed, cross-hatched lines. One represents
a straight-walled rim sherd with rounded lip, one a bottle fragment , and the remaining four are probably from carinated bowls. These last four come from the
area of the vessel where the rim joins the body. Similar vessels have been found
at the Sanders site (Krieger, 1946: Pl. Z7, C, D). The thickness of these sherds
ranges from 4 to 6 mm., and the exterior and interior surface colors range from
dark brown to grayish-black. The core is dark gray or black and the paste is coarse,
with clay lumps serving as the tempering agent. The surface hardness varies from
2.5 to 3.5.
The remaining three unidentifiable engraved sherds represent vessels with rims
which join the body at a sharp angle. Their engraving consists of rectilinear designs
fill ed with diagonal lines (Fig. 14, D ) such as is found in the Barkman Engraved
and Friendship Engraved types of northeastern Texas. The thickness varies from 5
to 7 mm., and the surface color ranges from brownish-gray to red. The color of the
core is the same as that of the exterior in all three cases. The paste is coarse and
clay lumps were used for tempering. The average hardness is Z.5 according to Moh.
PLAIN POTSHERDS. A total of 482 undecorated potsherds was recovered from
Area A. Most of these represent the same paste and manufacturing traditions represented by the previously described ceramics. Rather surprisingly for such a large
number of sherds, only 10 basal and nine rim sherds were found. This fact suggests
that a majority of these plain specimens represent the undecorated portions of
vessels belonging to Sanders Engraved, Maydelle Incised, and other types which
are generally decorated only along the area near the rim.
Four hundred seventy-six sherds are of the typical "Cadcloan" ware or paste, to
which the previously described types belong. Eight of the basal sherds, all quite
flat and varying from 7 to 10 mm. in thickness, and five of the rim sherds pertain
to this group. Three of the rim sherds have straight walls and slightly rounded lips
and are of Sanders Plain type (Fig. 14, R ) . The two remaining rim sherds are
concave and have rounded, everted lips (Fig. 14, Q). Although they are typical
of the form popular throughout the Fulton Aspect, no specific type assignment can
be made for them. Nine small sherds have vestiges of a dark reel wash or slip of
ochre which was applied to their interior and exterior surfaces; they represent
bottle and bowl fragments of the Sanders Plain type. One basal and two rim sherds
occur among these nine. One of the rim sherds is straight-walled with a rounded lip
and probably represents a simple bowl. The other, also from a bowl, has a depression
or channel just below the rim on the exterior surface, which lends to their rounded
lip an everted appearance. On the interior surface there is a marked thickening or
flange extending from the lip for a distance of 17 mm. downward toward the base.
This feature has been reported on other Sanders Plain vessels. The base shercl is flat
and moderately thick.
The remainder of the 476 specimens represent body sherds, mainly from large
bowls and jars. The following description applies to the entire group of 476 "Cad-

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

doan ware" plain sherds. Their wall thickness ranges from 5 to 8 mm., and the
surfa ce color from cream to reddish-brown to gray-brown. These differen ces or
variations in surface color do not appear to be important or intentional, however.
Indeed, most of the vessels were fired unevenly, with many smoke clouds and color
variations resulting on the same vessel. The core of these sherds is gener ally gray
and frequ ently darker than the interior and exterior surfaces. The paste is granular
and the following tempering agents and combinations were u sed: small clay lumps
(357 sh erds) , clay lumps plus sand (57), clay lumps and ground bone (44) , clay
lumps with sand and ground bone (18 ). The surface hardness varies from 2 to 3.5.
The remaining seven plain sherds are rather different from those described above.
One of these (Fig. 14, S) is the sharply rounded base sherd of a heavily sandtemp ered ware which has been reported at the D avis site (Newell and Krieger,
1949: 130-1 33) and at several sites of the McGee Bend Reservoir (Jelks, MS ) . The
surface and core color of this sh erd is a dark brownish-black and it m easures 12
mm. in thickness. The surface h ardness ranges between 3.5 and 4.
The other six sherds (Fig. 14, T-V) ar e of a thick-walled ware known as Williams Plain (Bell, 1953: 328-330; Proctor, 1957: 72-77). One of the rim sherds
represents a globular jar with a tall, constricting, con cave rim with flat lip. The
other rim sherd is from a large bowl which has a slight suggestion of a shoulder;
the rim is flat, as in the case of the first specimen. The two basal sherds are very
thick (m easuring 11 and 17 mm., respectively) and are flat, but are thicker in the
center than at the edges. The thickness of the rim and body sh erds is 9 mm. The
interior and exterior smface color is a dark brownish-bla ck, and the core is of the
same color. The paste is exceedingly coarse and granular, with clay lumps (5
sherds ) and clay lumps plus ground bone (1 sherd) being used as tempering agents.
The surface is smooth and has a hardness of 2 to 2.5.
MISCELLANEOUS POTSHE RDS. Four potsherds were found which do not fit
any of the previously described groupings. One of these, a concave rim sh erd with
slightly everted lip, is of the Frankston Focus type La Rue Neck Banded (Fig. 15,
A ) . This sherd shows three tiers of flattened neck coils. The wall thickness is 5 mm.
and the surface color is a light brown but the core is gray. The paste is coarse and
sm all clay lumps were used as temper ; the surface hardness is 2.5.
One strap-handle sh erd comes from a vessel decorated with vertical rows of
pinch-ma rks done in the style of Killough Pinched (Fig. 15, C). The rim is concave
and exhibits a rounded lip. The wall thickness is 5 mm., the surfa ce and core color
is a dark gray-black, and the core is coarse and temp ered with clay lumps plus
ground bone. Its surface hardness is 2.5.
The two remaining sherds (Fig. 15, D-E) show parallel diagonal incisions
bounded by rows of small punctations. These incised-punctated sherds are of the
Maydelle Incised typ e and possess the same general specifications as the incised
sherds of that type.
PIPE FRAGMENT. One ceramic pipe stem fragment (Fig. 15, F ) was recovered
from the surface of the knoll. This represents the forward portion of the stem just
behind the bowl. The surface and core color is a light orange-brown. The paste is
somewhat coarse, and is tempered with ground clay lumps combined with a small
amount of pulverized bone. The outside diameter of the stem is 11 mm. and the
inside diameter m easures 4 mm. Similar pipes occur at the Sanders site in Lamar
County, T exas (Krieger, 1946: 324, Pl. 22, G ).

207

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

c

B

0~·-10

~-

E

01 2 3 4 5

e

7

F

a

9 !O

CM .

I

I
G

I I I
0

2

I

I
3

4

•I

1:

5

CM.

K

' M
0 I 2 3 4 · 5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.
Fig . 1 5 . Potsherds (Sanders Engraved, La Rue Neck Banded, Killough Pinched, and
Maydelle Incised); pipe fragment ; beads ; and knife. A, Sanders Engraved potshe rd ; B, La
Rue Neck Banded potsherd; C, Killough Pinched potsherd; D-E , Moydelle Incised potsherds ;
F, pipe fragment ; G, ceram ic beads ; H-0 , kn ives from cache.

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CERAMIC BEADS. Fifteen small, tubular ceramic beads (Fig. 15, G) were found
at the neck of the skeleton of Burial 3. These are all of an untempered, compact
clay of a light grayish-brown color. The hardness of the surface of the beads varies
from 2.5 to 3.5, about that of most of the ceramic vessels from the site. The length
of the beads varies from 4 to 9 mm., the exterior diameter from 3 to 4 mm., and
the interior diameter from 1 to 2 mm. Their apertures are straight-sided and do not
appear to have been made by drilling; rather, the apertures were most likely
formed by molding the clay around a twig or some other smooth object, which was
later extracted. One end of eight of the beads is flat or somewhat rounded while the
other shows a marked concavity. The remaining seven, however, are flat or rounded
at both ends.
PROVENIENCE AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE ARTIFACTS FROM AREA A

Certain difficulties were encountered in attempting to plot the vertical distribution of the artifacts recovered from the knoll. First, the
depth of the artifacts had been recorded in relation to the surface and
not in relation to any fixed elevation points. Second, there exists no
contour map for the knoll, which fact increased the difficulty in
correlating the artifact stratigraphy from one 10-foot square to
another. A relatively reliable analytical procedure, however, was
finally decided upon, which is as follows. The occurrence of artifacts,
according to depth below the surface, was plotted for each square and
the data from adjacent squares were then compared. If alike or closely
similar, these squares were combined for analytical purposes. As a
result of this process of combining squares, two large analysis units
consisting of numerous squares were established for the knoll, Area A.
Substantial validity was given to these analysis units by the horizontal
distribution of the artifacts. When plotted horizontally on a plan of
the site, the artifacts fell naturally into two areal groupings which
corresponded very closely to the two analysis units established by
means of the vertical comparisons between squares. The location of
these units appears in Fig. 16. Although they account for a majority
of the artifacts found in the knoll, other implements were recovered
from several 10-foot squares which could not be combined with these
analysis units. The number of artifacts, by classes and types, occurring in Analysis Unit 1, in Analysis Unit 2, on the surface of the
knoll, and in squares outside the analysis units is presented in Table 1.
Analysis Unit 1 (Fig. 16) was composed of 60 10-foot squares in
the center of the knoll, and had rather good, clear-cut, vertical differentiation in the distribution of artifacts, particularly in the dart point
group. This part of the knoll had not been seriously eroded or disturbed. Unit 2, made up of 58 ten-foot squares (Fig. 16), was located

209

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

~.,

~. ~~~~: G 7 8 9 I0 II
I I I II II I II

11 10 9 6 7 6 5 4 3 2 I I 2 3
_I

£._
~

4
5
6
7
8

I I I I I I I I I I I

•

ANALYSIS
UNIT

L
10
_II
12
@__
14
~
16
17
18

~
20
21
22

2d
24
25

26
27
26
29
Fig. 16. Analysis Un its 1 and 2 , the Knoll , Area A, the Yarbrough Site.

on the western slope of the knoll and has a confused and mixed artifact
stratigraphy. It seems that artifacts and soil eroding from the slopes of
the knoll, particularly in late prehistoric and recent time, gradually

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

filled in this area , thereby causing a considerable mixture of artifacts
which represent diverse periods in the history of the site. Therefore a
major part of the emphasis in the stratigraphic and distributional
studies will be placed on Unit 1, although it is also possible to see, in
some instances, some valid but extremely gross stratigraphic differentiations in the distribution of the artifacts from Unit 2. The occurrence
of the artifacts of Unit 1 is presented in Table 2, those of Unit 2 in
Table 3.
TABLE 1
Provenience of the Artifacts, Area A

Analysis
U nit I

Gary kaufman
alsa
runge
panna mana
kenedy
colfax
hobson
emory
kemp
Misc. Gary
Wells
Kent phalba
quinlan
Bulverde
Morrill slocum
san pedro
Elam
Misc. Straight Stem
Marshall
Yantis cook
swan
Yarbrough lindale
dike
ma bank
Ellis
Trinity
Edgewood hooker
bull creek
dixon
Ensor
Wesley
Fairland

20

Un it II

Surface

Units

15

14
7
2
3
4
4
57
3

27
4
4
17
0
0
23
8
3

5
10

5
0
3
35

5
3
2

5
4

5
3

5
9
2

5
0
2
1
33
4
15
8
2
2
11
4

5' Sq 's .
Outside
Analysis

Analysis

4
3
0
29
2
2
13
0
1
3
0
2
3
6
0
1
2
23
5
12
6
5

5
6
1
0
2
0

5
6
3
3
2
0
2
3
1
0
0
2
2
14
3
2
8
2
2

5
2
0
0
0

7
4
0
4
6
6
0
6
3
2
4
28
3
17
11
4
4
8
0
1
2
0

T otals

76
17
20
28
4
8
144
18
13
10
28
11
8
10
13
20
6
17
3
7
9
98
15
46
33
13

13
30
7
2

5
1

211

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 1-Continued
Provenience of the Artifacts, Area A
5' Sq ' s.

Palmillas
Lone Oak
Misc. Expanding Stem
Steml ess Points
Misc. Dart Points
Clovis
Plainview
San Patrice
Meserve
Sandy Creek
Misc. Paleo-like Points
Arrow Points
Knives Group I
Group II
Group III
Group IV
Group V
Group VI
Group VII
Group VIII
Group IX
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group I
Group II
Group III
Group IV
Group V
Mineola End Scrapers
Triangular End Scrapers
Side Scrapers
Misc. Scrapers
Clear Fork Gouges
Drills
Gravers
Small Ch-0ppers
Chipped Hammerstone
Fist Axe
Axes
Spokeshave
Sinkers
Gorget
Stone Palette

Outside
Annh·sis

Anah·sis
Unii J

Analysis

Unit II

Surface

Uni'ts

Total s

2
0
2
3
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
10
6
10
7
3
5
3
10
44

2
2

4
0
5
13
8
0
0

3
3
4
3
6
0
0

11
5
12
26
30
2
1
2
3
3

2
1
0
1
2
8
5
13
2
13
0
2
0
1
0
2
0

7

6
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
3
3
2
4
7
40

1
2
4
3
19
5
9
1
8
2
2
1
0
2
1
2
0
0

1
1
3
8
2
8
4
0
5
4
29
1
3
9
3
0
8
5
5
0
11
4
6
1
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
0
3
0
6
7
8
3
2
3
6
41
1
0
4
0
5
2
2
8
3
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

7

8
28
20
32
14
12
10
13
27
154
5
5
15
8
10
37
17
35
6
35
6
11
2

4
4
1

212

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 1-Continued
Provenience of the Artifacts, Area A
5' Sq 's.
Outside

Grinding Slabs
Manos
Pitted Stones
POTSHERDS
Williams Plain
Sanders Plain
Sanders Engraved
Poynor Engraved
Bullard Brushed
Maydelle Incised
La Rue Neck Banded
Misc. Incised
Punctated
Misc. Engraved
Misc. Plain
Sandy \IVare
Canton Incised
TOTAL

Surface

Ana lys is
Units

Totals

1
6
6

8
29
64

0
2
7

10
40
79

1
0
0
0
12
2
0
1
5
0
33
0
0

2
3
4
3
71
13
0
12
25
2
376
0
2

1
7
0

6
12
6
5
90
17
1
21
31
3
442
1
2

Analysis
Unit I

Analysis
U nit II

1
3
2
2
2
2
1
3
2

1
33
1
0

4
0
0
7
0
0
22
0
0

2,124

A total of 572 fragm ent<iry and unclassified artifocts do not appea1 · in this tabulation. Includin g these 1
the grand total of artifacts from Area A is 2,696 .

Viewing the artifact sequence as a whole, we can discern an early
and stratigraphically low period of occupation represented by specific
dart point types, styles of knives, scrapers, and other implements. In
the upper levels most of the early styles of artifacts continued (although their late occurrence may conceivably result from a partial
mixing of the deposits ), but ceramics, arrow points, and new forms of
dart points, knives, etc., made their appearance. This gradual addition
of new artifacts to the older assemblage represents several later periods
in the history of the site. It should be understood that this periodification is intended to be used in a very specific, local way, and that these
periods are not designed for broad areal studies. The periods themselves are based ( 1) on stratigraphic data from the Yarbrough site, and
(2) on pertinent chronological data from related archeological sites.
To deal now with Period 1, we have some evidence in the way of
projectile point styles for brief occupations of the site by the big game
hunters of the Paleo-Indian, or Lithic, Stage of the late Pleistocene.
Regrettably, these early points were found either in Analysis Unit 2

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

213

(the mixed area), or in squares outside the areas embraced by the
analysis units, and can not, therefore, be clearly related to the artifact sequence defined on the basis of Unit 1. In Unit 2 these Paleo
and Paleo-like points occurred, in certain cases, in the same levels with
dart points characteristic of the Archaic Stage, and in some instances
at depths in which potsherds were encountered, albeit rarely. The
fact, however, that one Clovis point was found resting on the deep,
sterile clay member underlying the midden soil suggests considerable
antiquity. The practice of explaining away the Paleo-Indian points
found so frequently in Archaic sites of the region as material picked
up and reused by later cultures is unrealistic and unsatisfactory.
Although there is considerable evidence for stratigraphic mixing in
Unit 2, all the Paleo points, except one specimen, occur in the lower
deposits below a depth of 22 inches. Yet the Paleo materials at the site
do not indicate a single occupation by one people. Rather, the diversity
of types-Clovis, Plainview, Meserve, and San Patrice,-suggests that
the site was used as a brief camping spot throughout a long segment
of prehistoric time.
Period 2 (turning now to the Archaic materials) represents, in the
main, a preceramic gathering-hunting culture or cultures whose artifacts occur below a depth of 36 inches in Analysis Unit 1 (Figs. 17, 18).
The dart points which are well represented are the lindale and mabank
varieties of Yarbrough; Ellis; the bull creek and dixon varieties of
Edgewood; and the san pedro variety of Morrill. All of these points
but Morrill (which has a straight stem) represent the expanding stem
tradition (Table 2).
Period 3, which owing to the small numbers of artifacts grouped
therein is an extremely hypothetical and tentative construct, consists
of contracting stem points represented primarily by very small numbers of the runge variety of the Gary type. Yantis points also occur in
Period 3, while the types and varities of the previous period continue.
The 30-36 inch depths may be assigned to Period 3.
Several of the knife styles (Groups I, II, III, VIII, and IX) occur
in significant numbers in all periods, as do Mineola end scrapers,
triangular end scrapers, side scrapers, Clear Fork gouges, and fullgrooved axes. The only grinding slab found in place is from the lowest
levels of Unit 1.
Period 4, represented by the artifacts occurring above 30 inches
beneath the surface (Fig. 17, 18), represents a somewhat arbitrary
division in the stratigraphic continuum which, however, announces
the appearance of several new artifact classes and types. We do not

214
DEPTH
(INCHES)

0 - 6

7- 9
10 - 12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(NO)

POTSHER OS (•4)

21 - 79

3

-

10

13 - 15

6

16 - 18

5

19 -21
2

20-30

••
•

ARROW
(NO) POINTS (9.4)

I

I

DART
(NO.) POINTS(%)

4

5 . 18

50

3-50

28
24

I

14

I

I4
13

26

-72

18

-72

31 - 8 4

I

4

22

I

9

20

I

4

I

4

114

25

-

96
91
92

22

96

31-33

18

100

34-36

14

100

37- 39

10

100

6

100

5

100

43-45

100
1-100
52-54

100

Fig. 17. Area A, Analysis Unit 1, relative percentages of potsherds, arrow points, and
dart points.

have evidence, however, for a large population change from period to
period. Rather, we seem to have the gradual addition of new elements,
new kinds of artifacts, to the existing assemblage or artifact matrix.
The only other possible interpretation that occurs to me is that, due to
the absence of clearcut geologic strata at the site, the artifacts of dis-

215

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES
DEPTH
(INCHES)

CONTRACT I NG

(':°)

STU.. TRAD.

f:b

STRAIGHT

EXPANDING
STEM TRAD.
(NOJ
(%)

(NO.)STEM TRAD .(%)

0 - 6

I .20

7 - 9
10- 12

I
14

58

13-15

12

16 -16

20

71

19- 21

10

56

22-24

10

-•
3-

28-30

4

31-33

3 . 23

37 -39

33

2.2

I

5

•
I

I

6

I

I

4

7

-29

••
8-44
3

16

19

7

25

6

-31

.24

9 - 43

5 -28

9-50

3 .23

7

1111

40-42.

54

7

• • • 70

7

• • • 78

6 • • • • • • 100

43-45
46-48

67

12

30

II

2

33

3.

53

7

34-36

3

75

25-27

-

5 • • • • • • 100

• • • • • • 100

49-51

• • • • • • 100

!12-54

• • • • • • 100

Fig. 18 . Area A, Analysis Unit 1 , relative percentages of three dart point stemming
traditons .

tinct peoples or cultures became mixed together as the site grew up
slowly over a long period of time.
In Period 4, potsherds make their appearance (although 1 sherd
occurs in the Period 3 level), are rare at first, but increase in numbers
through time (Figs. 17, 18 ; Table 2 ) . Arrow points, although never
present in any quantity, also occur. Judging from studies carried out
in other areas, the ceramics from the knoll do not all represent the
same cultural complex. Those of the Williams Plain type, and perhaps Sanders Plain as well, will be included, on the basis of data from
other sites, in Period 4, while the sherds of Sanders Engraved, Poynor

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Engraved, Bullard Brushed, and Maydelle Incised will be placed in
Period 5 (Area B at the Yarbrough site belongs entirely to Period 5 ) .
Although representing several distinct periods of time, the materials
of Periods 4 and 5 occur as a single stratigraphic unit in the knoll.
Turning to the dart points of Periods 4 and 5, the types and varieties
of Periods 2 and 3 continue, but diminish in relative abundance with
the increase in popularity of contracting stem points, which appeared
at the end of Period 2 but were not abundant. The most important dart
points of Periods 4 and 5 (the upper 30 inches of Analysis Unit 1) are
the kaufman and hobson varieties of the Gary type; the phalba and
quinlan varieties of Kent; and the slocum variety of Morrill. Various
minor types and varieties occur in Periods 4 and 5, but many of these
can also be found in earlier periods (consult Table 2 ) .
TABLE 2
An alysis Unit 1, Area
Depth in inches
be low surface

T otal P otsherds
' Villiams Plain
Sanders Plain
Sanders Engraved
P oynor Engraved
Bulla rd Brushed
M aydelle Incised
La Rue Neck Banded
l\1 iscellanco us Incised
P unctated
l\Ji scell aneous Engraved
l\1i scellaneous Plain
Sand y \ Vare
Arrow Points

0-6
(21)

7-9 10- 1213-15 16-1 S I 9-2 1 22-24 25-27 28-30 3 1-33 3-~ -36 37-3940-42 43-45 +G-+8 +9-51 52-54
(3) ( 10)

(6)

(5)

( 1)

(2)

( 1)

( 1)

2

13

2

2

4

1

1

T ota 1 Dart Po in ts
Contrac tin g Stmn

( 5)

Points (Gary)
Gary, Kaufman
Ga ry, Al sa
Gary, Run ge
Gary , Panna Maria
Gary, Kenedy
Gary, Colfa x
Gary, Hobson
Gary, Emory
Ga ry, Kem p
Gary, I\1isc. Gary
Intermediate ContractStraight Stem
W ells
Kent, Phalba
Kent , Quinlan
Straight Stem Points
Bul verd e

(4 )

I
1
(3) (26 ) ( 13 ) (3 1) ( 22 ) (20) (25 ) (20 ) ( 13) ( 14 ) ( 10 )
( !+) ( 12 ) (20) ( 10 ) ( 10)
4
2
3

( 7)

(4 )

(3)

(3)

2

2

( 1)

(2)
2

(6)

(5 )

( 1)

( 1)

4

3
2
2

3

( 1)

( 1)

(3)

6

II
2

+

(2)

(!)

(2)
1

1
(!)

1
( 1)

2

( 1)

( 1)

(2 )

1

(3)

1
(5)

(5)
1

1
1
(3)

( 1)

( 1)

( 1)

(!)

( 1)

217

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 2--Continued
Analysis Unit 1, Area
Depth in inches
below surfa ce

0-6

7-9 10-12 13-15 16-1819-21 22 -24 25-2 7 28-30 31-33 3+-36 37 -39 40-4243-45 46-+8 49-51 52-54

i\ lorrill, Slocum

l\!Iorrill, San Pedro
Elam
::\1isc. Straight Stem
Intermediate StraightExpanding-Ste m Pts.
Yanti s, Cook
Yantis, Swan
Expanding Stem Points
Yarbrou gh : Lindale
Yarbrough , Dike
Yarbrough, lVJabank
Ellis
Trinity
Edgewood, Hooker
Edgewood, Bull Creek
Edgewood , Dixon
Ensor
"Wesley
Fairland
Palmillas
Lone Oak
i\1isc. Expanding
Stem Points
Stemless Dart Points
]'Vlisc. Dart Points
Total Knives
Knives, Group l
Knives, Group II
Knives , Group III
Knives, Group IV
Knives, Group V
Knives, Group VI
Knives, Group VU
Knives, Group Vlll
Knives, Group IX
Total :Miscellaneous
Bifacial Artifacts
lVlisc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group I
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group II
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group III
~1isc. Bifacial A.rtifacts
Group IV
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group V
Total Scrapers
Mineola End Scrapers
Triangular End Scrapers
Side Scrapers
1'1iscellaneous Scrapers
Clear Fork Gouges

2

2

2

( 1)
1
( 1)

(2)
2

(i )

4

(3)
2

( 7)
4

2

(8)
3

(6)
2

(9)
3

2

(2)
1
1
(9 )
4

(7)

3

2

(7)

( 7)

2

(6 )
3

(5 )
2

( 1)

2

2

2

3

2
2
1

(6 )

1
( 10)
1

2

(4 ) ( 14)
l

1
3

2

( 8) (11 )
1

1
2
(7) (1 4 )
3

1
(5)

1
(6)
2

(6)

(2 )

(3)

2

2

2

2

( 2)

(4)

(2)

(6)
2

2
2

2

2
2

1
3

2
2
2
(I)

2

2

3
(2 )

(I)

(2)

1

( 1)

(2)

(3)
2

(2)

( 1)
l

(5 )

2
2

2
3

4
4

2
3

3
2

( 1)

(1)
1

218

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 2--Continued
A naly sis Unit 1, Area
Depth in in ch es
below s nd ace

0- 6

7.9 10- 121 3-151 6 -1 8 19-2122-2+ 25-2728-30 3 1-333+-3637 -39 +0-+2+3-+H6 -+8 49-51 52 -54

Drills
Grrt,-crs
C hi pped 1Ta111mcrsto 11 c
Axes
Si nkers
Gorge t
Stone P ale tte
Grinding Slabs
l\ Ia nos
P itted Stones
( ) = Totnl s.

TABLE 3
Analy sis Unit 2, Area A
De pth in in cl ies
be low sul'f<t cc
T otal P otsherds
' Villia m s P lnin
Bulla rd Ill'ushed
I\ la yde ll e Incised
l\ Iiscellaneons I ncised
Punctatcd
l\1i scellaneo us P la in
A rrow P oints
T otal D art Points
Con tra cting Stem
Poin ts ( Gil ry )
G ary, Kau fman
Ga r y , A lsa
Gary , Run ge
Gary, Pamia }.far ia
Gary, H obson
Gary, E mory
Gary, Kem p
Ga ry , Colfax
1\ Iiscellaneous Gary
Interm edi ate ContractStraigh t Stem
W ells
Kent, Quin lan
Straight Stem Poin ts
Bulverde
l\Ion:ill, San Pedro
Ela m
l\Iisc. Straigh t Stem Points
lntennediat e Str a ig ht ~
Expand ing Stem Poin ts
Ya nt ls, Cook
Ya n tis, Swan
Expanding Stem Points
Ya r brough , Lindale
Yar brough , D ike
Yar brough , l\ Iabank

0-6

( 15 )
l
2

7.9 10- 12.13- 15 16-18 19-2.122-24 25 -27 28-30 3 1-33 34 -36 3 7-39 40-4243-'Vi +G-48 49-51 52-54
( 1) ( 10)

( 6)

(4)

4

4

4

(5 )

( 3)

3

2

2

(4)

( 3)

( 3)

1
3

2

2

( 7)

1
( 20 ) ( 27) (22 ) ( 19 ) (22) ( 17 ) ( 1 1) ( 10 )

( 3)

( 10)

3

( 5)
3

( 8)

2

(4 )
1

(5 )
2.

(4 )
1

(3)
1

( 5)

2

1
3

2

2

2

3

2

2

2

(3)
3

(1 )
1

(2)
2

(3)

( I)

(2 )

( 1)

(2)
1
1
(2)

3

2

(4 )

(5 )
2

(!)

( 8 ) ( 12)

(3 )

(2)

( 3)
1

(4 )

( 2)

2

3

1

(1)

( 1)
1

(!)

( I)

( 1)

1
(9)
3

1
1
( 3)
1

(8)

3
1
2

2

(1 )

2
(2)

( 7 ) ( 10 )
3
3

1

( 1)

( 1)

2
2

( 3)
1

(9)

(9)
3
2

(4 )
1
2

(! )

(5 )

(3 )

2

(1 )
1

219

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 3-Continued
Analysis Unit 2, Area A
Depth in inches
belo'v surface

0-6

7-9 10-12 13-15 16-18 19-2122-2425-27 28 -30 31-33 34-36 37 -39 40-4243-45 46-48 49-51 52 -54
2

Ellis
Trinity
Edgewood, Hooker"'
Edgewood, Bull Creek
E dgewood, Dixon
\Vesley
Palmillas
Lone Oak
l\1iscellaneous Expanding
Stem Points
Stemless Dart Points
Misc . Dart Points
Clovis
Plainview

2
2

2

2

z

~VIeserve

Sandy Creek
Misc. Paleo-like Points
Total Points
Knives, Group I
Knives, Group II
Knives, Group III
Knives, Group IV
Knives, Group V
Knives, Group VI
Knives, Group VII

2
(3)

1
(5)

(4) ( 10) (10) ( 12)
2
2
2

( 9)

1
(5 )

1
(2 )

( 1)

(8 )
2

(1)

2

4

1
6

(3)

( 1)

Knives, Group VIII

Knives, Group IX
Total l\ liscellaneous
Bifacial Artifacts
l\1isc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group I
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group II
Misc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group III
::'vfisc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group IV
l\1isc. Bifacial Artifacts
Group V
Total Scrapers
:;VJineo1a End Scrapers
Triangular End Scrapers
Side Scrapers
:i\1iscellaneous Scrapers
Clear Fork Gouges
Drills
Gravers
Small Choppers
Spoke-shave
Fist Axe
Sinkers
Grinding Slabs
!vlanos
P itted Stones
Axes
()= Totals.

(4)

3

6

1
3

6

1

( 1)

( 2)

( 2)

( 1)

(1)

( 1)

( 2)
1

2

( 3)
1

1
( 3)

(5 )
2

1

1

( 7)

(6)
6

2

2
3

2

z

2

3

( 2)

2

(4)
2

(! )

( 1)

(1)

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Many other artifacts from Periods 2 and 3 continue in Periods 4
and 5: knives from Groups I, II, III, IV, VIII, IX, and the various
scrapers and Clear Fork gouges. Three knife groups-V, VI, and VII
-occur only in Periods 4 and 5, however, as do all of the groups of
the miscellaneous bifacial artifact category. Minor artifacts include
gravers, the gorget fragment, the small stone palette, manos, and
pitted stones. These last artifacts occur only in very small numbers
in the strata of Periods 4 and 5 and we certainly can not say, with our
statistically small sample, that these artifacts were not also in use in
the area during Periods 2 and 3.
As mentioned earlier, the artifacts from Analysis Unit 2 appear to
be extremely mixed, and therefore do not coincide with the pattern
of distribution which we have from Unit 1 except in the most general
and gross way.
In addition to the stratigraphic (vertical distribution) studies, the
horizontal distribution of each artifact type, class, variety, etc., was
plotted on plans of the site. In almost all instances the distribution of
types, etc., followed the general distribution of artifacts for the site,
i.e., they clustered almost equally in two areas: Analysis Units 1 and
2. Only two exceptions were noted: most of the Sanders Focus potsherds occurred in Unit 1 and the Paleo and Paleo-like projectile
points in Unit 2. This gives some substantiation to the idea that the
Paleo points represent separate occupations, and would suggest that
the Sanders Focus pottery, because of its clustering in one area, represents an occupation distinct from that represented by the Frankston
Focus potsherds.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES IN AREA A

The Burials
Eight burials were discovered in the knoll, Area A, all of which
were single interments (Fig. 19). The skeletal remains were generally
in very poor condition and were not collected for osteometric study.
However, general observations on age groups were made while in the
field.
Burial 1 was a tightly flexed adult burial encountered at a depth of 10 inches in
Square 16R2 in the sandy midden soil. The long axis of the skeleton was oriented
north-south with the head toward the south, and it rested on its left side. No associated artifacts were found.
Burial Z represents a highly fragmentary skeleton found at an unrecorded depth
in Square 18R2. Very few bone fragments were encountered, and although the head
seemed to be oriented to the northwest, it could not be determined whether the
burial was flexed or extended. No burial furniture was found therewith.

221

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

R
5

6

4

2

3

L

~o

I

I

~Q)

16

(I)

17

(2) ~;/

@

18

....

/1

7'-- 0
19

(3)

(4)

(ff/})

(7)

A

--

2c
'
(5)
~
~
t;)

2I

~

Cb_ (8)

22

~
~z

-

Fig . 19. Location of the bu rials , Yarbrough Site .

Burial 3 was a tightly fl exed adult interment encountered at a depth of 42 inches
resting on top of the red clay member of the knoll in Squares 18R2 and 19R2.
Although the skeletal material was extremely fragmentary, it could be determined
that the orientation was north -south with the head to the south. The skeleton rested
on the right side. Fifteen very small, tubular ceramic beads (Fig. 15, G) were found
in the neck region.
Burial 4 represents a few skull and teeth fragments found in the disturbed surface
soil in Square 19R6. The skeleton had been scattered and broken up by plowing and
the orientation of the remains could not be determin ed. No artifacts were found in
association.
Burial 5 (Fig. 20) consisted of a tightly flexed juvenile skeleton found in Squares
20R1 and 21R1 at a depth of 12 inches in the dark midden soil. The long axis of the
skeleton was oriented northeast-southwest with the h ead to the southwest; it rested

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 20 . Burial 5 , Yarbrough Site.

on the right side. The knees had been drawn up to the chin, and the arms were
extended downward with the hands at the pelvis. No associated artifacts were
recovered.
Burial 6 contained the badly broken skull fragments and shattered long bones of
a child. These were found at a depth of 24 inches below th e surface in dark midden
soil in Square 21R2. Because of the highly fragmentary nature of the remains it
could not be determined whether the skeleton was flexed or extended. Likewise, the
orientation was uncertain, although there is some indication that the head may have
been to the north.
Burial 7 (Fig. 21) was a tightly flexed adult burial in dark midden soil in Square
20R 1. It was found at a depth of 33 inches be1ow the surface. The orientation of the
long axis of the skeleton was northwest-southeast with the head to the southeast.
The skeleton rested on its back with the knees above the body and pulled up under
chin. The skull had fallen over slightly to one side, to the southeast. The position of
the upper limbs was not recorded by the field crew. No burial furniture was found in
association.
Burial 8 consisted of an incompletely flexed adult found at a depth of 30 inches
in dark midden soil, in Square 22L1. The skeleton was oriented northeast-southwest
with the head to the northeast. It lay on its back with the knees extending outward
to one side (the southeast) , forming a right angle with the long axis of the body.
The feet were drawn up against the pelvis. No burial furniture was found .

Unfortunately, the outline of the burial pits could not be discerned
by the field crew, and we do not know, therefore, from which levels
the burials were dug. The general absence of associated artifacts (a
trait of many burials in northern Texas dating from preceramic times )
and of ceramic vessels in the burials speak favorably for a preceramic

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

223

Fig. 21. Burial 7, Yarbrough Site.

date for most of the interments. Of the eight burials, seven occurred in
the area comprising artifact Analysis Unit 2 (Burials Z--8 ) making a
rather tight clustering: three below the lowest depth at which potsherds were fom1d (Ilurials 3, 7, 8), one at the lowesl level of the sherds
(Burial 6) , and two (Burials 4 and 5 ) in the upper levels and well
above the lowest occurrence of pottery. Burial 1, found outside the
analysis unit, was also in a pottery zone, and one potsherd was found
very near the bones. Still, it is safe to estimate that a majority of the
burials are preceramic in age, while the others date, perhaps, from the
period in which pottery was first being introduced into the site. Although ceramic beads were found with Burial 7, these do not occur, as
far as is presently known, in the later ceramic sites of the area, and the
burial probably belongs to the preceramic occupation of the site. Also,
the paste of these beads is more homogeneous than that of the late
ceramic vessels, lacking bone or other readily discernible tempering
agents. They could easily have been manufactured by people ignorant
of ceramic cooking vessels.
In summary, all the burials except Burials 2 and 6, which were very
fragmentary and badly disturbed, were flexed, four had the head to the
south or approximate southern direction, and the skeletons generally
rested on the right side. Burials 7 and 8, however, were in a supine
position, Burial 2 had the head to the northwest, and Burial 8 had the
head to the northeast.

224

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Knife Cache (Fig. 9).
In square 17L2, at a depth of 23 inches below the surface, a concentration of 10 knives was encountered (Fig. 15, H-0). This group of
artifacts seemingly represents a cache, since the knives were found in
close association five inches down into the sterile clay member of the
knoll. Unfortunately, the field notes do not record the level from which
the feature was dug.
Specimen 1 (Fig. 15, H) is a large stemmed knife or spear point with a lanceolate
blade, expanding stem, and deeply concave, bifurcating base. This specimen is of
gray but mottled compact chert which was well flaked by the percussion and
pressure techniques. The edges of the stem and the base have been ground quite
smooth. The length of this specimen is 161 mm., the maximum width 43 mm.,
and the thickness 12 mm. The workmanship shown on this knife is of a very high
quality.
Specimen 2 (Fig. 15, 1) is a stemmed knife or spear point much like specimen 1
in outline, but of a smaller size. Its blade is lanceolate, but serrated just above the
stem . The stem itself is expanding and bifurcating, and has a "fishtail" appearance.
Both the edges of the stem and the concave base are well ground. The flaking of
this specimen, made of a gray-brown mottled chert, is extremely good, with long,
shallow flake scars extending from the blade edge to the center of the specimen.
Long flakes were probably removed by some kind of indirect pressure. The length
of specimen 2 is 102 mm ., the maximum width 34 mm. , and the thickness 8 mm.
Specimen 3 (Fig. 15, J) is a narrow, stemless knife with a straight, notched base.
The flaking shown on this specimen is inferior to that of the preceding two, and it
appears only to have been worked by the percussion knapping technique. A coarse,
sandy agate was used in manufacture. The maximum length is 89 mm., the maximum width (at the base ) is 27 mm., and the thickness 10 mm.
Specimen 4 (Fig. 15, 0 ) , made from a white chert, is a medium-sized knife
belonging to Knife Group III, and Specimens 5 and 6 (Fig. 15, K, N ) belong
to Group IV. The reader is referred to the section on knives for a description of
these artifacts. Specimen 4 is 81 mm. long, 37 mm. wide, and 9 mm. thick. Specimen 5 measures 77 mm. long, 32 mm. wide, and 9 mm. thick, while specimen 6 is
74 mm. by 29 mm. by 8 mm. Specimens 5 and 6 are of a dark gray chert.
Specimens 7 and 8 (Fig. 15, L , M ) are simple knives with more or less lanceolate
blades which, unfortunately, lack their bases and can not therefore be assigned to
any of the knife groups. Specimen 7 measures 65 mm. in length (estimate ), 39 mm.
in width, and 7 mm. in thickness. Specimen 8 was approximately 75 mm. long
(estimate) , measures 31 mm. in width and 9 mm. in thickness. Both are of a gray ,
homogeneous chert.
Unfortunately, Specimens 9 and 10 have been lost since their exhumation in
1940, but judging from field drawings, both examples were of Knife Group I.

II. Area Bat the Yarbrough Site
The small midden located 300 yards to the south of the knoll has
been designated as Area B. This consisted of a small area, approx1-

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

225

mately 20 feet in diameter, of dark humus-stained midden soil containing many potsherds and bone scraps. The area was thoroughly
excavated by the W.P.A. field crew using shovels and trowels. Unfortunately, however, the provenience of the artifacts was not recorded, and it is therefore impossible to attempt distribution studies
within the area. It is also not known to what depth the excavation
penetrated, although the field notes indicate that this entire midden
area was troweled down to red, clayey subsoil. No occupation features
(hearths, post molds, etc.) were recognized, and although 612 potsherds, 8 reconstructable ceramic vessels, and several bone tools were
found, only two items of stone were recovered-a small ground piece
of ferruginous sandstone and a nondescript flint core.
From the meager field data it is hard to determine the kind of
feature Area B represented. The best guess, I think, would be that it
was a small habitation area of one, or at the most, two houses. The
lack of post molds may be due to the black color and homogeneous
composition of the soil, or to the gross excavation procedures employed
at the site. To support this hypothesis there are two pieces of wattleimpressed daubing such as is frequently found at house sites in the
Caddoan area. At any rate, the ceramic materials are all extremely
uniform and homogeneous, all representing the Sanders Focus of the
Neo-American (or Formative) Stage. The fact that only one unit is
represented at Area B, along with its small extent, allows us to suppose
a very brief occupation.
As mentioned above, the W.P.A. laboratory at San Antonio was
able to reconstruct eight vessels from the potsherds which were recovered. This relatively large number of pots is somewhat surprising
considering the small amount of sherds, and leads one to wonder
whether they represent furniture from graves or other features which
could have been destroyed by repeated agricultural cultivation of a
recent date. The insufficient field data, however, only serve to bring
up such possibilities and problems, and do not solve them.
THE CERAMICS

The 612 potsherds and eight reconstructed vessels from Area B
present a picture of uniformity and homogeneity. All are of typically
"Caddoan" paste and represent only Sanders Focus types: Sanders
Plain, Canton Incised, and Sanders Engraved. The paste, wall thickness, color, etc., vary uniformly from type to type, and one description of these characteristics will suffice for the whole collection. The
surface color varies from cream to light brown and (rarely) to black.

22.6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The paste is lumpy, with clay particles (possibly including some
amount of ground potsherds), clay lumps combined with pulverized
bone, and very rarely, shell, being used as tempering agents. The core
is either the same color as the surface or is slightly darker, the latter
condition indicative of an incompletely oxidizing firing atmosphere.
The wall thickness ranges from 5 to 8 mm. and the surface hardness
from 2.5 to 3.5 according to Moh's scale of hardness.
These sherds and vessels correspond well to those reported upon by
Krieger (1946: 185-192) from the Sanders site on Red River, with
one notable exception. The execution of the design motifs and elements themselves is much more careless and crude on the Yarbrough
site specimens than on the Sanders site examples. Also, the most
elaborate wares and types of the Sanders site are not present at Yarbrough. Otherwise the two collections resemble each other very
strongly.
The Canton Incised Type.
One reconstructed vessel and 126 rim and body sherds could be identified as the
Canton Incised type (originally defined by Krieger, 1946: 185-192; see also Suhm
et al., 1954: 254) . Of these, 71 sherds were tempered with small clay lumps and 55
with clay lumps combined with ground bone.
The one reconstructed vessel of this type (Fig. 22, B ) is cylindrical, round, and
has a flat rim and circular, concave base. Its oral diameter is 13 cm., the average
wall thickness is 5 mm., and the height 19 cm. The surface color is of a rather dark
reddish-brown, and ground clay lumps were employed as the tempering agent.
The decoration consists of a band of crossed, diagonal incised lines located on the
exterior surface just below the rim.
Sixty sherds represent cylindrical vessels with similar crossed diagonal lines
below the rim (Fig. 23, A, B) . Of these, about half the rim sherds have rounded,
and the remainder flat, lips. Another five sherds, two with flattened rims and three
with rounded lips, have alternate panels filled with diagonal lines running in
different or opposite directions; these are located just below the rim.
Seven sherds (Fig. 23, C) have vertical incised lines below the rim. Six of these
are from a small carinated bowl with flat lip, the other from a cylindrical vessel
having a l:'Ounded and very slightly everted lip.
Fifteen of the 126 Canton sherds (Fig. 23, P-E) have punctations combined in
various ways with incisions below the rim of cylindrical, presumably straightwalled vessels. All of these have flat lips except for one specimen the lip of which
is somewhat rounded. The design consists either of alternate panes of diagonal
incisions and punctations, or of diamonds formed by crossed diagonal lines and
filled with punctations.
An interesting group of 27 sherds (Fig. 23, F) represent flat-lipped carinated
bowls with parallel, diagonal incisions in a band around the rim. These lines run
downward and to the left from the rim. This group is particularly interesting since
the design and vessel shape are characteristic of the Sanders Engraved type. Here
we have the very same thing, but with incised instead of engraved lines.

227

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SI TES

A

c

B

'"'"'--,
. '..\

'·

;

}

D

Q

I 2

3

4

5 6 7
CM.

~

?

~

Fig. 22 . Ceramic vessels, Area 8, Yarbrough Site. A, Sanders Engraved; B, Canion Incised; C-G, Sanders Plain.

Another 11 incised body sherds probably belong to the Canton Incised type.
These are very small and the position of the parallel incised lines can not be
oriented with respect to position on th e vessel.
The Sanders Engraved Type
One partially reconstructed bowl and 45 body and rim sherds belong to the
Sanders Engraved type (originally defined by Krieger, 1946: 185-192; see also

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

\

/

_

'

_.;,..._, \

\ _,.-

-----,-

I-':

--- --- -- - --

c

B

A

]

____
D

G

E

F

7
L

K
()

'
Fig . 23. Potsherds . A-F, Canton Incised; G, Sanders Engraved; H-L, Sonders Plain .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

229

Suhm et al. , 1954: 352). Of these sherds, 34 were tempered with clay lumps and 11
with clay lumps combined with pulverized bone.
The partially reconstructed vessel (Fig. 22, A) is of the typical "Caddoan" paste,
and has a reddish-brown surface color. Clay lumps were employed as the tempering
agent. The bowl has a flat base, is carinated, and has a flat lip. Small, contiguous
engraved triangles filled with crossed diagonal lines form a band around the outside of the r im. The oral diameter is 117 mm ., the basal diameter 67 mm ., and the
height 62 mm.
Sixteen sherds, priobably representing a single vessel, are from a bottle of undeterminable dimensions and shape which was decorated with circles of crudely
made, indistinct triangles. These decorations were located on the body just below
the place where the neck was connected. In addition to the bands of triangles,
several apparently random zigzag and irregular lines occuned on parts of the
vessel body.
Another 11 sherds (Fig. 23, G) also show triangles filled with cross-hatching or
with parallel diagonal lines. Four of these come from bottles and seven from bowls.
In this last group, six rim sherds are represented, three with flat and three with
rounded lips.
Twelve rim sherds have parallel diagonal lines around the rim in place of
triangles. Three flat lip and two rounded-lip rim sherds are present in this group.
Another five potsherds, forming a miscellaneous engraved group, are small body
sherds with small patches of random engraving on th eir surlaces. These most likely
represent the Sanders Engraved type, but we cannot be certain about the.
identification.
The Sanders Plain Type
Seven reconstructed vessels and 89 rim and body sh<>rds could be identified as
the Sanders Plain type (originally described by Krieger, 1946: 185-192; see also
Suhm et al. , 1954: 350). Of these, 63 sherds were tempered with small clay lumps
and 26 with clay lumps combined with ground bone.
The reconstructed vessels will be described first. Vessel 1 (Fig. 23, I ) is a partially
reconstructed large, flat bowl of the type which has been found at the Sanders site
on Red River (Kri eger, 1946: PL 25 D). The lip is fl at and notched, and a small
rudimentary flange occurs on the interior just below the lip. Unfortunately, no
basal sherds of this vessel were recovered. The original oral diameter is estimated
at 10 cm. The surface is of a rather dark , r eddish-brown color and ground clay
lumps were employed as the tempering agent.
Vessel 2 (Fig. 22, C) is a small, simple bowl with a somewhat flattened base,
convex walls, and a rounded lip. Its oral diameter is 14 cm., the average wall
thickness is 5 mm., and the height 4 cm. The surface color is dark brown, and
ground bone along with small clay lumps were employed as tempering agent.
Vessels 3 (Fig. 22, E) is a rather small cylindrical vessel or cup having a
circular, concave base, relatively straight walls, and a slightly fl attened lip. Its
average oral diameter is 8 cm., the average wall thickness 5 mm., and the height
105 mm. The surface color is a mottled reddish-brown, and ground clay lumps were
used as the tempering agent. The smooth surface evidences vertical striations which
probably indicate polishing with a pebble or similar implement.
Vessel 5 (Fig. 22, D ) is a medium-sized, low, shouldered bowl having a small
flat base and a near vertical rim. The lip itself is rounded and somewhat inverted.
The oral diameter averages 18 cm., the height of the rim 35 mm. , the complete

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

vessel height 8 cm., the average wall thickness 9 mm., and the basal diameter 75 mm.
The surface is of a lustrous brownish red color and is well polished, seeming to
indicate the surface floating technique of finishing. Small fragments of hematite,
ground bone, and small clay lumps were employed as the tempering agents.
Vessel 6 (Fig. 22, G) is a large bottle with an elongated, gourd-shaped body and
a straight-walled but slightly contracting neck. The base is somewhat convex and
the lip is rounded. The oral diameter is 35 mm., the maximum diameter of the body
15 cm., the height of the body 17 cm., the height of the rim 9 cm., the total height
26 cm ., and the average wall thickness 7 mm. The surface color varies foam light
reddish-brown to dark black, the latter color evidently caused by fire after breakage
occurred. The surface is weU smoothed but not polished, and small clay lumps were
used as the tempering agent.
Vessel 7 represents the partially reconstructed lower section of a squat, shouldered
bottle, the bottom half of which is hemispherical in shape and the top half conical.
The base tends to be flat. Unfortunately the upper parts of the vessel are missing
and we can tell nothing about its neck and rim shape. The maxmium body diameter
is 16 cm., the diameter of the base 8 cm., and the thickness of the wall sherds 5 mm.
The surface exterior is quite rough and is of a purplish-red color. Small clay lumps
appear to have been used as the tempering agent.
Of the 89 potsherds definitely of the Sanders Plain type, 33 are from bottles of
the form represented by vessel 6 (Fig. 23, H ) . The remaining sherds are from
bowls or beakers (cylindrical pots) (Fig. 23, J, K).
Sixteen sherds with flat lips and 14 with rounded lips are from medium to large
size cylindrical vessels probably like Vessel 1. Another 15 sherds belong to one or
more large, flat bowls, have lips notched on the outside, and exhibit a prominent
thickening of the interior wall surface immediately below the lip.
Two sherds with flat lips (Fig. 23, L) belong to a medium-sized carinated bowl.
Another three sherds represent vessels with concave, or "recurved," rims and an
everted rounded lip. The remaining two sherds of Sanders Plain are from simple,
medium-sized, convex-wall bowls with rounded lips.
Miscellaneous Potsherds
In addition to the above-described types, various sherds were recovered which
belonged to other categories. One of these is a punctated strap handle of a vessel of
Monkstown Fingernail Punctated (Krieger, 1946: 185-191; see Suhm et al., 1954:
330). Another nine are body sherds covered on one or both surfaces with a bright
red och re wash. T hese could have belonged to Maxey Noded Redware, Sanders
Plain, or Sanders Engraved vessels.
Nineteen miscellaneous punctated body sherds could not be assigned to any type,
nor could 28 flat basal sherds.
Of some interest are 10 undecorated body sherds which, except for their shell
tempering, are like the other ceramics from the Yarbrough site. Although Krieger
does not report shell tempering in Sanders Focus ware, several vessels tempered
with shell and having a Sanders appearance have been reported from Spiro, Oklahoma (Duffield, personal communication).
A group of 392 miscellaneous body sherds could not be typed. These represent
undecorated potsherds which come, most likely, from Sanders Plain vessels and
from the undecorated part of vessels of the decorated wares. Of these, 263 have
clay lump tempering and 129 have ground bone combined with clay lumps.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

231

BONE IMPLEMENTS

Fourteen bone and antler implements, all of deer, were recovered
in Area B. Seven of these implements (Fig. 24, E-G ) represent worked
tips of antler, and were apparently used as awls or, perhaps, as
punches. Although similar specimens have been designated as pressure
flaking tools in other areas, a certain amount of doubt exists about this
identification. For example, the tips of these specimens are quite
smooth and do not show gouges, scratches, or mutilations which would
presumably be caused by flaking.
Six deer ulnae (Fig. 24, A-C) show modification of the forward
sections. Although these specimens are extremely fragmentary, it
seems likely that they were employed as awls or smoothing tools. A bit
was fashioned on the two nearly complete specimens.
One large section of antler (Fig. 24, H), although not otherwise
modified, has a small drilled hole which penetrates half the diameter.
The remaining bone artifact was manufactured from a segment of
long bone. This implement (Fig. 24, D) has been considerably
smoothed and one end has been ground from both faces into a narrow
bit. Similar implements found on the Plains have been identified as
fleshing tools.
AREA B, SUMMARY STATEMENT

In conclusion, it is possible to say that Area B was a small occupation area representing the Sanders Focus of the Neo-American (Formative) Stage. The material found here corresponds to Period 5 of the
knoll, Area A. The people who lived here were potters, making cylindrical vessels (beakers), cups, large flat bowls, both simple and carinated bowls, and large vessels, which were decorated by incising or
engraving, by punctating, or by applying a red wash. The only other
tools encountered were awls of deer ulnae and antler tips, and a longbone implement which may have served as a flesher. The absence of
arrow points, scrapers, and other lithic tools is rather surprising, but
perhaps reflects poor excavation techniques more than anything else.
THE YARBROUGH SITE-SUMMARY

The preceding site description and artifact analysis, as well as the
studies of artifact provenience and distribution, enable us to make certain general statements about the aborigines who inhabited the Yarbrough site, and to comment upon the general history of the site.
To deal first with history, the deep stratigraphic columns from Area

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

- -~-

...

B

~--~

• .<

"' :-.--·

- -~-~-::.2J
.,.

.
"'
'
"- ~·-- ..t ,.4 «
~
~-~ -- . .
-

\..

,, '
.;;_ _

-

0

E

c F.:J
,,

0

)

~

.,.

2

3

G

4

5

6

7

8

9

CM.
Fig . 24 . Bome implements. A-C , deer ulnae awls; D, long-bone artifact ; E-G, antler
implements; H, drilled antler segment.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

233

A give us evidence for various Paleo-Indian occupations of the site
(Period 1), and for three "periods" (Periods 2, 3, 4) of occupation during the Archaic Stage. The uppermost excavation levels of Area A, and
all of the artifacts from Area B, represent later occupations of the
site by peoples of the Neo-American, or Formative, Stage (Period 5).
The Paleo-Indian materials, unfortunately, all come from an area of
the site where the stratigraphy of the various artifact types is considerably mixed and confused. However, because of their stylistic peculiarities, the Paleo projectile points (representing Clovis, Plainview,
Meserve and other types) could be factored out of the collection. In
view of the numerous occurrences of Paleo-Indian points in archeological sites in eastern Texas and adjacent areas, I do not hold to the
oft-cited idea that these artifacts merely represent materials which
·w ere collected and reused by later groups of aborigines. It seems much
more reasonable to assume that they are the product of various brief
occupations of these sites by highly nomadic Paleo-Indian peoples.
To deal now with the Archaic artifacts, there is good evidence in the
lowest levels of the Yarbrough knoll that expanding stem dart points
were the most popular early form. This early Archaic material has
been designated at Period 2. There is some evidence (corroborated by
data from the Manton Miller and other sites) for a third period representing the introduction into the area of contracting stem dart points.
Unfortunately, the data on the straight-stem tradition does not allow
it to be placed within any particular single period. Rather, the straightstemmed points are found scattered throughout the vertical distribution
column in small numbers. In Period 4 contracting stem dart points
were the most common form, and simple, plain-ware ceramics made
their appearance (Williams Plain and, perhaps, Sanders Plain). The
peoples who belonged to the various periods of the Archaic Stage made
and employed, in addition to dart points, other stone implements such
as gouges, axes, grinding slabs, manos, flint scrapers, etc. All of these
tools are characteristic of a hunting-gathering society. Polished stone
artifacts, as opposed to those made by the knapping technique, were
never popular at the Yarbrough site. In sharp contrast, at many sites of
similar age and developmental position located farther to the east in
Norh America, abundant polished stone artifacts occur in great numbers.
Finally, the data we have from the Yarbrough site (Area Band the
uppermost levels of Area A) give evidence of an important change
which took place in the region, namely, the shift from a vigorously
nomadic or semi-nomadic mode of existence to a more settled way of

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

life (Period 5), the latter represented by arrow points and an abundance of highly developed, complex, decorated ceramics. This is the
Neo-American or Formative Stage.
The stratigraphic differentiation between Period 4 and the later
Neo-American stage is not good at the Yarbrough site, but conclusive
corroborative evidence for this break exists at other sites in the area.
Speaking now in terms of archeological taxa, the Archaic materials
at the site (including most of the plain-ware potsherds) belong to the
La Harpe Aspect, whose definition is presented later in this report. The
arrow points and more elaborate ceramics seemingly represent the
Sanders Focus of the Gibson Aspect, as well as one or more foci of the
later Fulton Aspect.

THE MANTON MILLER SITE
Location and Description
The Manton Miller site (University of Texas No. 41DT), which is
located within the proposed Cooper Reservoir in south-central Delta
County of northeastern Texas, was excavated in 1959 as part of the
Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program. The site occupies a knoll
on the northern flood plain of the South Sulphur River. Over the surface of the knoll is scattered a large quantity of cultural refuse, including both ceramic and lithic artifacts.
The Miller site lies 3.5 miles south of the town of Cooper, Texas,
adjacent to and on the east side of the Cooper-Peerless county road
(Fig. 25). The site covers an area of approximately 4 acres on the
summit and southern slope of the small knoll mentioned above, an
erosional remnant situated approximately 750 feet north of the stream
channel. This knoll, which is roughly 150 feet in diameter at the top,
stands 15 feet above the level of the flood plain and is not seriously
affected by the periodic inundations that occur in this area.
Two concentrations of cultural debris were located and partially excavated (Fig. 25). The first of these, designated as Area A, is located
on the highest part of the knoll, while the second, Area B, is a small
midden on the southern slope of the knoll, approximately 150 feet
southwest of the summit and 6 feet lower in elevation than Area A.
A long river levee encroaches upon the eastern margin of the site,
beginning on the eastern slope of the knoll and extending southeastward for a distance of a mile, in part paralleling the river. As far as
could be determined, the construction of this levee did not appreciably

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

235

0

<
0

4

,...~
MA'5~ETIC

~
Fig. 25. Manton Miller Site, contour map .

damage the site. In addition to the levee, the eroded remains of two
modern artificial contour terraces could still be seen around the western and southern margins of the knoll. These followed the 92 and 96

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

foot contours respectively (Fig. 25, 26). They were constructed, perhaps, in conjunction with the building of the levee or as an aid in contour farming. Unfortunately, they resulted in the utilization and removal of a great deal of the topsoil from the summit of the knoll,
Area A.
During the first half of the present century the area covered by the
site was cultivated intensively, but at the time of excavation it had
been allowed to grow up in grasses and weeds. It appears that cultivation, along with rainfall and terrace construction, has taken away an
appreciable quantity of soil from the surface of Area A. A burial (No.
1) in very poor condition was found eroding out of the surface of the
knoll, as well as a rather large quantity of artifacts and occupational
detritus.
Geologically speaking, the internal structure of the site is relatively
simple. In Area B, the thin surface zone is a layer of midden soil composed, for the most part, of black, humus-stained sand that contains a
considerable quantity of cultural refuse. This zone, which is entirely
lacking on the eroded knoll, Area A, has a maximum thickness of 1.5
feet in Area B. The upper part of this stratum has been considerably
disturbed by plowing. Below the dark, implementiferous midden soil,
occurs a yellow and generally sterile, clayey subsoil, extremely hard
and compact, which extends downward for an undetermined distance
below the midden zone. In Area A this body has been exposed by
erosion, and all of the cultural debris is confined to the plow zone.
The area between the knoll and Area B yielded very little cultural
material, and appeared to be considerably eroded. In many spots the
clayey subsoil was visible, and two burials (Nos. 2 and 3) were found
eroding out of this area.

Discovery and Excavation of the Site
The Miller site was first discovered and recorded during the vvinter
of 1951 by Edward B. Jelks and Edward H. Moorman while conducting a preliminary archeological reconnaissance of the Cooper Reservoir
area (Moorman and Jelks, 1952). The survey was carried out by the
Austin Office of the River Basin Surveys of the Smithsonian Institution. However, the planned construction of the dam and reservoir has
been delayed several years, and although work on the dam is scheduled to begin in the near future, the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers
reports that the exact specifications for the reservoir are still indefinite.
In order to re-evaluate the sites located during the 1951 survey,

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

237

L. F. Duffield and W. A. Davis made a brief visit to Cooper Reservoir
in May of 1959, examining the sites reported by Moorman and Jelks
(Duffield, 1959a ). Since both the 1952 and 1959 survey reports emphasized the importance of the Manton Miller site as a potential source of
valuable archeological data , and since the site is scheduled to be completely submerged by the Cooper Reservoir, steps were taken to provide
for salvage excavations prior to its inundation.
In October, 1959, under terms of a contract (No. 14-10-333-528)
between The University of Texas and the U.S. National P ark Service,
a field crew of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project was dispatched
to the Miller site to carry out the rerommended excavations. Work
was carried on from October 12 to November 9, under the direction of
Edward B. Jelks , Executive-Director of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project. In addition to Jelks, the field crew consisted of L. F. Duffield and C. D. Tunnell, archeologists, and the following assistants :
Richard E. Ross, John Ruegenberg, Chester Rogers, and W. C. Jones.

Excavation and Recording Methods
The excavation and recording procedures utilized at the Miller site
were those generally employed by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project. A grid system, oriented on magnetic north and using 5-foot
squares as excavation units, was imposed over the site (Fig. 26). A
horizontal reference or control point was set up to the southeast of the
site and was designated NO-WO, and all points on the site were measured from this datum. Each square in the grid was designated by the
coordinates of its southeastern corner measured from the datum. For
example, stake N350-W500 was located 350 feet north and 500 feet
to the west of the horizontal control point; the 5-foot square with that
stake at its southeastern corner was labeled Square N350-W500.
A large nail in the base of a telephone pole at the southern edge of
the knoll was selected to serve as a vertical control point. This was assigned an arbitarary elevation of 100 feet. and the surface of the site,
occupational features, and trench and pit floors were all recorded relative to this vertical control datum. No U. S. Geological Survey bench
markers were located in the immediate vicinity, and it was not feasible
to relate the arbitrary elevation system used at the site with sea-level
elevation.
To seek any occupational features which might be present and to
determine the stratigraphic composition of the site, test trenches were
run through Areas A and B.

238

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D

AREA

A

~AL*3

0

D

D

AREA B

0
,;',,,,. ~ --

'

\

I

I

I

I
I
I

~ ' / / tlOO
_,
POTHOL.£5

\

I
I

:.,._/"

/

_,.100
lt

Fig. 26. Manton Miller Site, plan of excavation, showing Areas A and B.

In Area A-the top of the knoll- trenches 2.5 feet in width and of
varying lengths w ere run east-west along the N350, N375 , and N400
lines, and north-south along the W475 and W500 lines (see Fig. 26 for
dimeri_sions and extent of the excavations) . At every spot where the

239

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

presence of occupational features (hearths, post molds, burials, etc.)
was suspected, the trenches were enlarged to expose them. As a general rule, the soil removed from the test trenches was not passed
through screens, since the primary purpose of these initial excavations
was to locate occupational features. In addition to the test trenches, a
large block of 5-foot squares was excavated in Area A a short distance
to the northeast of the trenches (Fig. 26). The soil removed during
the excavation of these squares was passed through screens of halfinch mesh.
In Area B, a test trench 2.5 feet wide was dug in an east-west direction along the N150 line (Fig. 26). Since the purpose of the trench was
primarily exploratory, the soil removed was not passed through
screens. After the test trench was completed, a row of 5-foot squares
was excavated both northward and southward from N150, following
the W550 line which crossed the approximate center of the Area B
midden. Several additional 5-foot squares were also put down in the
midden area, both to the east and west of the W550 line, in places
where further excavations were deemed advisable (Fig. 26).
All excavating was done in arbitrary half-foot vertical intervals
and the artifacts recovered were bagged by their respective levels. In
both areas, all the soil from 5-foot squares outside the test trenches was
passed through screens having a half-inch mesh and the "floors" of all
the half-foot levels were carefully troweled to facilitate the detection of
features. The excavations in Area A did not penetrate more than
1 foot below the surface of the soil; those in Area B did not go beyond
a depth of 2 feet.

Occupational Features
Four human interments, each containing one individual, a dog
burial, three pits of medium size, and seven earthen hearths were encountered in various parts of the site (see Fig. 26 ) during the excavations. Neither post molds nor house patterns were found.
Dr. T. W. McKern, physical anthropologist at The University of
Texas, examined the skeletal material from the Miller site and, where
possible, made appropriate measurements and observations. Because of
the fragmentary nature of the material and its poor state of preservation , he was only able to work vvith the skeleton from Burial 4.
BURIALS

Burial 1. This was encountered below the N365-W510 stake in Area A at a depth
of 0.2. fee t below the surface of the soil. A few bon e fragments, however, could be

240

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

seen eroding from the surface. The skeleton lay within the plow zone and rested
on the sterile clayey subsoil. Because of its location near the surface, the bone
material was badly broken and scattered by plowing; it was, therefore, not possible
to determine with any accuracy the original orientation and position of the skeleton.
Although most of the skull was missing, the mandible was found directly to the east
of the main bone mass, suggesting an east-west orientation of the burial with the
head toward the east. It appears that the skeleton rested on its right side and was
tightly flexed, although the fragmentary nature of the skeleton precludes any
certainty regarding the position.
Although the grave outline could not be traced accurately, the grave fill itself
was black, humus-stained soil which was distinct from the brownish sandy soil into
which the burial had been dug. No artifacts were found in association with the
remains.
Burial 2. This burial consisted of an extremely fragmentary and badly disturbed
human skeleton in Square N255-W465 , in the eroded section of the site between
Areas A and B. These skeletal remains, occurring just below the surface and extending to the base of the plow zone, were so thoroughly demolished by plowing
that neither their orientation, position, nor the dimensions of the grave outline
could be determined. Several small potsherds and animal bone fragments, obviously representing intrusive midden debris and not grave furniture, were found
scattered among the human remains.
Burial 3. This burial consisted of another highly fragmented skeletal find encountered in Square N250-W510, between Areas A and S. Most of the burial was at
a depth of 0.3 feet below the surface, although a few bone scraps were observed on
the surface itself. This burial was also within the plow zone and had been almost
completely destroyed, so that only a few skull fragments, one tooth, a few
phalanges, and other small scraps remained. The original position of the skeleton,
its orientation, dimensions, etc., could not be determined. Although one Gary type
dart point and a plain potsherd were found among the bone scraps, they appear
to represent only fortuitous midden debris.
Burial 4 (Fig. 27). This burial, a single human skeleton in an excellent state of
preservation, was encountered in Square N130-W545, Area B, at a depth of 1.5
feet below the surface. The skeleton was semi-flexed with the hands drawn up
toward the head, rested on its right side, and was oriented northeast-southwest with
the head to the southwest. The long axis of the grave (northeast-southwest)
measured 5 feet and the short axis, at the shoulders, 3.6 feet. Apparently the burial
pit was dug from the base of the plow zon2 or higher. The grave fill itself was of a
slightly darker, more humus-stained soil than the gray, compact sand into which
the grave had been dug. No burial furniture was found in association with the
skeleton remains; one plain potsherd found in the grave fill represented a seemingly
accidental inclusion.
The following observations on the bone material from Burial 4 were made by
Dr. T. W. McKern:
The skeletal remains, Bur. 4, from the Miller site are those of a fairly young and
robust American Indian female of approximately 17 years of age. The skull is dolichocranic (71.9 mm.) with narrow facial and nasal dimensions. The cranial contour
in normal verticalis is ovoid, parietal bosses are pronounced, the vault is keeled,
and the mastoids are large for a female. The cranial contour in norma lateralis is
distinguished by a pronounced occipital bun. Stature is approximately 5' 4".
The dental arcade is hyperparabolic, the gonions everted, and both genial spines
and mylo-hyoid ridges are pronounced.

241

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

MILLER StTE'
41 DT 1·
BURtAL-4
OCT 28 59

Fig. 27 . Burial 4 , Manton M ille r Site.

D ental wear is pronounced for the indicated age but not unusually so when
compared to known prehistoric Indians of the area. With the exception of an
impacted lower left third molar, the general condition of the teeth is good.
Other than slight lipping of the anterior borders of the lumbar centra, there is
no evidence of general or local pathology .
In addition to the human interments described above, one dog burial was found
(Fig. 28 ) . This was located in Area B, in the western edge of Square N155-W550
and extending into the eastern part of the square N155-W555, at a depth of 1.8 feet
below the surface. The skeleton was oriented north-south with the head to the
north, and rested on its right side facing >vest. These r emains lay in the humusstained midden soil just above the zone of contact with the clayey subsoil, and
thus had not been disturbed by plowing. Although a grave outline could not be
discerned, the remains nevertheless seem to represent a deliberate interment judging from the well-articulated skeleton and its neat placement. According to an
identification made by the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory of The University
of Texas, this animal is a domesticated dog. It was not passible to determine
whether the dog burial dates from the aboriginal or the recent Anglo-American
occupation.
PITS

The outlines of three medium-sized pits were encountered during the course of
the excavations. The fill removed from the pits contained nothing but the usual
midden debris and, from the limited evidence at hand, the use for which they were
intended can not be determined.

242

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig. 28 . Dog burial, Manton Miller Site.

Pit 1. Located on the top of the knoll, in Square N375-W495, Pit 1 was a roughly
basin-shaped, oval excavation having a maximum diameter of 3.5 feet. The pit was
apparently dug from the plow zone or above, and penetrated the clayey subsoil.
No ashes or other evidences of fire were encountered in or about the pit; thus the
possibility that it served as a hearth for cooking purposes can be eliminated. Perhaps
the purpose of the excavation was to acquire clay for the manufacture of ceramics
or, when lined with a hide, the pit could conceivably have been used in the stoneboiling technique of cooking. The fill yielded only three dart point fragments, a
knife, a few flint spalls, and several animal bone fragments-all common items of
midden refuse.
Pit 2. This pit, located in Square N375-W520, Area A, was oblong in shape, with
a maximum length of 2 feet, a maximum width of 1.51feet, and measuring 1.5 feet
in depth from the present surface of the site. The outline of the pit indicates that it
was dug from the base of the plow zone or from above. Unlike Pit 1, which was
more or less basin-shaped, Pit 2 had a flat bottom and relatively straight and vertical
walls. In the fill removed from the pit were found four potsherds, three resembling
the Williams Plain type, one unidentified; miscellaneous flint fragments; shells; and
animal bone fragments.
Pit 3. This was found in the Area B midden, in Square N150-W570. This pit was
basin-shaped, had a maximum diameter of 1.5 feet and reached a maximum depth
of 2.5 feet below the present soil surface. Although the outline of the pit was
easily discernible in the clayey sub-soil, it could not be followed clearly in the

243

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

overlying dark midden soil; h ence the level from which th e pit was dug could not
be determined. In the pit fill a bone awl, one Kent type dart poi nt, two unclassifiabl e anow points, an abundance of bone and shell fragmen ts, and a few pecan
hulls were found. This feature, like the twc: pits found on the knoll, evidenced no
ash or other indications of fi re.
HEARTHS

Seven shallow, basin-shaped hearths were found during the excavation of the
site. They were simple, sh allow depressions without linings of clay, stone, or other
materials. The internal struc ture of the hearths was very consis tent throughout
the group, h ence the detailed description of one (Hearth 3 ) should suffice for the
entire group. Only general dimensions and location will be g iven for the other
6 hearths.
Hearth 3, encountered in th e trench wall running from N125 to N130 along the
W555 lin e, consisted of a shallow basin 1.5 feet in diameter and 0.2 feet thick at
the center, thinning considerably , however, toward the edges. The top portion of
the h earth was composed of the lumps of clay of a bright orange color, presumably
the result of h eat. Beneath this was found a very light gray ash , which lined the
bottom and edges of the h earth. The top of this feature was encountered 0.5 feet
below the present surface of the site; the bottom at a depth of 0.7 feet. The other
six hearth s had a similar internal structure with burned clay overlying a layer of
almost white ash . Some of the hea rths showed other minor len ses, but nevertheless
retained the main compositional characteristics of H earth 3.
H ea rth 1 was located in Square N140-W550. It was approximately 3 feet in
diameter, reachf'fl a maximum thickness of 0.5 feet, and occurred between th e 1
and 1.5 feet depths below the surface.
H earth 2 was found in Square N110-W550. It measured 2.5 feet in diameter and
0.5 feet in maximum thickn ess, occurring between 1.8 to 2.3 feet below the surface
of the site.
Hearth 4, on ly half of which was uncovered, was discovered in Square N105W550. Since the whole feature was not exposed, its diameter and maximum thickness could not be determined. The top of the hearth, however , was enoountered at
a depth of 0.7 feet below the soil surface.
Hearth 5, in Square N140-W 550, was likewise only partly uncovered and its
complete dimensions were not determined; its top portion was encountered at a
depth of 1.4 feet below the surface.
Hearth 6 w as located on the N120 line between W551 and W553.3. It measured
3.5 feet in m aximum diamet er, but its thickness was not recorded. The top portion
of this hea rth was encountered at a depth of 1.5 feet below the surface of the site.
H ea rth 7, encountered at a depth of 0.5 feet below the surface, was located on
the N130 line between W 545 and W548 . The entire surfa ce of this hearth was
exposed by excavation; its average diameter was 2.5 feet. H earth 7 was like the
others, except that it oontain ed a larger amount of ash, charcoal, animal bones,
and shell fragm ents.
No post-mold patterns were found surrounding the hearths to suggest that th ese
features might h ave been located inside houses or other structures. Except for
several fired daub particles, no indications of house structures were encountered at
the Miller site. If the h earths were used for cooking purposes (and the bone and

244

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

other refuse in and about them would suggest this) cooking was probably done in
the open.

Description of the Artifacts
A total number of 1,046 artifacts was recovered from the Manton
Miller site; this includes the following categories : chipped stone artifacts, ground stone artifacts, ceramics, bone artifacts, and shell
artifacts.
CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

1. Projectile Points
In the following presentation of the projectile points recovered from
the Manton Miller site, the usual references and descriptions will not
be given for types and varieties which appear in the section of this
paper dealing with the Yarbrough site artifacts. Rather, in as many
instances as is possible, reference will be made back to the Yarbrough
site descriptions. Dimensions, however, will be given in all cases.
DART POINTS
Like those from the Yarbrough site, the dart points from the Miller site belong
to three stemming traditions-the contracting stem, straight stem, and expanding
stem traditions.
THE CONTRACTING STEM TRADITION. Of the 144 dart points and dart point
fragments recovered, 119 belong to the contracting stem tradition, which has been
recognized in many parts of North America. The Miller site contracting stem specimens are all of the Gary type.

The Gary Type. The Gary point type, represented by 71 relatively complete specimens and 48 fragments, represents a wide range of variation within certain specific limits. The diagnostic attributes of the type are a contracting stem, roughly
triangular blade, fair, but not excellent workmanship (at this site)-a trait governed
probably by the poor quality of the chert which was used in manufacture-and well
developed shoulders without barbs.
At the Yarbrough site nine varieties of the Gary type were recoginzed and
named. The most common were kaufman and hobson, while the minor varieties
were alsa, runge, panna maria, kenedy, colfax, emory, and kemp. In the Miller site
artifact collection, the following varieties could be recognized: kaufman, alsa, hobson, runge, colfax, emory, and k&mp.

Fig. 29 . Dart points and arrow points. Gary type: A-B, kaufman variety; C-D, a/sa
variety; E-F, runge variety; G-H , co/fax variety; 1-J, hobson variety; K-L, emory variety;
M-N, kemp variety. 0, Yarbrough type. P-Q, Yantis type, cook variety. R, Trinity type. S-T,
Pa/mil/as type . U, Morrill type, san pedro variety . V, We/ls type. W-X, Kent type, phalba
variety. Y-Z, Alba type. Fresno type: AA- CC, odas variety; DD-FF, fairlie variety. GG-HH ,
Talco type. II-MM, Minier type. NN-00, Scallorn type. PP-RR, Type X arrow points.

245

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

The kaufman variety-14 specimens (Fig. 29, A-B)
Dimensions: length-average 40 mm., range of variation, 37 to 56 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 36 mm., range 26 to 40 mm.; thickness-average 8 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.

A

B

H

G

DD

Q

x

EE

D

J

p

w

c

i

K

GG

0

M

L

s

R

y

FF

E

HH

JJ

BB

cc

KK

LL

00

MM

.

23 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

~

CM.

NN

v

u

AA

II

0

N

T

z

F

PP

OG

RR

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Material: reddish-gray chert with sand grain inclusions.
Remarks: In all other particulars the Miller site specimens of the kaufman variety
are like those recovered from the Yarbrough site.
The alsa variety-9 specimens (Fig. 29, C-D )
Dimensions: length-average 46 mm., range of variation 42 to 48 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 29 mm. , range 24 to 34 mm. ; thickness-average 10 mm.,
range 8 to 15 mm.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: In all other particulars, the Miller site alsa points are like those from
the Yarbrough site.
The runge variety-9 specimens (Fig. 29, E-F)
Dimensions: length-average 48 nun., range of variation 35 to 65 mm. ; width at
the shoulders-average 25 mm., range 21 to 33 mm.; thickness-avera ge 7 mm.,
range 6 to 10 mm.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand grain inclusions. Remarks: In all other
particulars the Miller site runge points are like those from the Yarbrough site.
The colfax variety-3 specimens (Fig. 29, G, H)
Dimensions: length-Specimen 1, 30 mm. , Spec. 2, 30 mm., Spec. 3, 36 mm. (est.);
width at shoulders-Specimen 1, 19 mm., Spec. 2, 19 mm., Spec. 3, 21 mm.;
thickness- Specimen 1, 5 mm., Spec. 2, 6 mm., Spec. 3, 6 mm.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: In all other particulars the Miller site specimens of this variety are like
those recovered from the Yarbrough site.
The hobson variety-21 specimens (Fig. 29, I-J)
Dimensions: length-average 34 mm., range of variation 30 to 45 mm.; width at
shoulders-average 18 mm., range 16 to 25 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 8 mm.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand grain inclusions (20), petrified wood ( 1) .
Remarks: In all other pertinent particulars the Miller site specimens of the hobson
variety are like those recovered from the Yarbrough site.
The emory variety-9 specimens (Fig. 29, K-L)
Dimensions: length-average 40 mm. , range of variation 20 to 42 mm., width at
the shoulders-average 21 mm., range 20 to 23 mm.; thickness-average 6 mm.,
range 5 to 7 mm.
Material: r eddish-gray chert with sand grain inclusions.
Remarks: In all particulars the Miller site specimens of the emory variety are like
those from the Yarbrough site.
The kemp variety-6 specimens (Fig. 29, M -N )
Dimensions: length- average 31 mm. , nnge of variation 28 to 33 mm. ; width at
shoulders- average 6 mm. , range 15 to 17 mm.; thickness-average 5 mm. ,
range 5 to 6 mm.
Material: reddish-gra y chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: In all particulars these kemp dart points are like those recovered from
th e Yarbrough site.
Miscellaneous Gary Fragments

In addition to the points described above, 48 broken points were found which also
seem to repnsent th e Gary type, but which could not be assigned to any of the

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

247

varieties because of their incompleteness. However, there do not seem to be any
unusual forms present in the sample that do not also occur in the recognized
varieties. Forty-six were made of the locally acquired reddish-gray chert, one of
light gray chert, and one of pink, mottled novaculite.
TYPES INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN THE CONTRACTING
STEM AND STRAIGHT STEM TRADITIONS

The Wells Type. One fragment of a W ells point (Fig. 29, V ), including the medial
and basal portions, was found. This specimen has well developed shoulders, but
lacks true barbs. Its stem is long (26 mm.), contracts slightly, and has a flattened
base. The edges of the stem have been well smoothed. The width at the shoulders
is 20 mm., and the maximum thickness is 9 mm. The material used in its manufacture is local reddish-gray chert.
The Kent Type. Two crude examples of the phalba variety of the Kent type (Fig.
29, W-X ) were recovered during the excavation of the Miller site. These have
triangular blades (although that of Specimen 1 is broken and appears to have been
reworked), shoulders without barbs, and approximately straight stems with convex
bases. Specimen 1 measures 35 mm. long, 19 mm. wide at the shoulders, and has a
maximum thickness of 9 mm. Specimen 2, whose blade is beveled on alternate sides,
measures 40 mm. in length, 20 mm. in width, and 5 mm. in thickness. Both are of
locally-acquired reddish-gray chert.
THE STRAIGHT STEM TRADITION

The Morrill Type. An incomplete Morrill point of the san pedro variety (Fig. 29,
U) is made of local reddish-gray chert, has slight shoulders, a long stem with more
or less straight sides and an irregular base. The width at the shoulders measures
23 mm. , and the maximum thickness is 9 mm. The workmanship is quite crude.
TYPE INTERMEDIATE BETWEEN THE STRAIGHT STEM
AND EXPANDING STEM TRADITIONS

The Yantis Type . Two specimens of the cook variety of the Yantis type were recovered at the Miller site (Fig. 29, P , Q). These rather crude specimens represent
the medial and basal portions of points which have very sharply expanding stems
with concave sides and flat bases. Specimen 1 is too fragmentary for accurate
measurement. Specimen 2 has a maximum thickness of 8 mm. and a basal width of
21 mm. Both are made of a local, mottled gray chert that has abundant sand
inclusions.
THE EXPANDING STEM TRADITION

The Yarbrough Type. One fragmentary Yarbrough point (Fig. 29, 0) cons1stmg
of the basal and medial portions was recovered from the site. It appears to be of the
lindale variety that has been established at the Fred Yarbrough site. Its shoulders
are strong but lack barbs; the stem expands slightly and has straight sides, and the
base is straight. The shoulder width is 24 mm., and the basal width 20 mm.; the
maximum thickness is 8 mm. It is made of locally acquired reddish-gray chert.
The Trinity Type. One specimen of the Trinity type was found (Fig. 29, R). This
small specimen has a short, triangular blade with straight sides, and slight, barbless

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shoulders. The stem is half the length of the entire specimen, expands quite
sharply, and has concave sides and a flat base. The length is 30 mm., the width at
the shoulders is 16 mm., the basal width 20 mm. , and the maximum thickne>s
measures 7 mm. This artifact was made from an impure variety of jasper.

The Palmillas Type. Two fragmentary Palmillas points (Fig. 29, S-T) (medial
and basal segments ) were found. These crude specimens, both made of a local,
impure gray chert, have well-developed, barbless shoulders and expanding, bulbous
stems with convex bases. Specimen 1 has a width (at the shoulders) of 23 mm.
and a maximum thickness of 8 mm. Specimen 2 measures 25 mm. wide at the
shoulders and has a maximum thickness of 18 mm.
Fragmentary Dart Points. In addition to the dart points described under the preceding categories, 81 dart point fragments were recovered. Fifteen are blades and
medial sections lacking the base and stem, thus precluding any typological identifications. All but two of these fifteen were manufactured from impure, reddish-gray
cert. The two exceptions are of petrified wood. Another 66 are tips, or distal fragments, of dart points and are made of reddish-gray chert.
SUMMARY STATEMENT CONCERNING DART POINTS

A great majority of the dart points recovered from the Miller site are representatives of the contracting stem tradition and, more specifically, of the Gary
type. The most common varieties of this type at the site are kaufman and hobson.
The few examples of the expanding stem tradition include the Yarbrough, Trinity,
and Palmillas types. Only one type of the straight stem tradition (the Morrill type ),
and a small number of types intermediate between the various traditions were
found .

ARROW POINTS
A total of 109 arrow points and arrow point fragments was recovered from the
surface and from the excavations at the Miller site. Both stemmed and unstemmed
forms are represented. Many of these do not fall into existing arrow point types,
hence it will be necessary to present several new typ e and variety names which,
for the present, are to be considered tentative.

The Alba Type-48 specimens (Fig. 29", Y-Z)
Blade: varying from subtriangular to triangular to lanceolate; edges straight, concave, or convex; also present is the so-called "recurved" blade shape frequently
found cm points in the Caddoan Area which are convex near the tip and concave
immediately above the shoulders; shoulders well developed and frequently outflaring; a few have slight barbs and many of the out-flaring shoulders terminate
either in a sharp point or are blunt and "square."
Stem: approximately one-fourth the length of the entire point ; subrectangular or
expanding very slightly, although the overall outline tends to be somewhat
bulbous; edges straight to slightly convex; base straight or convex with rounded
corners.
Dimensions: length-average 26 mm., range of variation 16 to 32 mm.; width at
the shoulders-average 18 mm. , range 13 to 22 mm.; thickness-average 4 mm.,
range 3 to 5 mm.
Workmanship: fair, with pressure flaking.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

249

Materials: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions ( 46), homogeneous gray chert
(2.).
Remarks: In using the name Alba to describe this group of 48 points the original
definition by Newell and Krieger (1949: 161-162., Fig. 56, A-H) has been
followed. As mentioned earlier, a great deal of variation occurs within the
sample of Alba points from the Miller site, yet the diverse attributes do not
cluster consistently together forming varieties-as is the case within other types
having even less internal consistency-but occur quite randomly throughout the
sample. The diagnostic attributes of the Alba type as defined in this paper are
triangular or "recurved" blade, sharp shoulders sometimes with slight barbs, and
a rectangular or very slightly expanding stem.

The Fresno Type. The 13 points of the stemless, triangular type known as Fresno
(Suhm et al., 1954: 498, Pl. 128 ) fall into two rather discrete groupings, which are
here provided with tentative variety names. Lest the reader be alarmed at our
setting up varieties on such a small number of specimens, it should be stated that
several collections of artifacts from related sites were reviewed , and that the two
Fresno varieties are recognizable in other areas.
The odas variety-7 specimens (Fig. 2.9, AA-CC )
Shape: roughly triangular.
Edges: straight to slightly convex, or rarely concave.
Base: wide, convex with rounded corners.
Dimensions: length-average 2.6 mm., rar;ge of variation 2.0 to 30 mm.; width at
the base--average 17 mm., range 15 to 2.0 mm.; thickness-average 5 mm.,
range 3 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: rather crude with little evidence of pressure flaking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with abundant sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of this variety are its wide, convex base and
crude workmanship. The fairlie variety of Fresno is relatively longer and has a
straight base.
The fairlie variety-6 specimens (Fig. 2.9, DD-FF)
Shape: triangular to subtriangular.
Edges: straight or somewhat convex.
Base: relatively narrow and straight.
Dimensions: length-average, 2.5 mm., range of variation 18 to 30 mm.; width at
base- average 15 mm., range, 11 to 17 mm. ; thickness-average 6 mm., range
3 to 8 mm.
Workmanship: fair; better than for the odas variety.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: The diagnostic attributes of the fairlie variety are its straight and relatively narrow base.
The Talco Type-3 specimens (Fig. 2.9, GG-HH )
Shape: subtriangular.
Edges: concave.
Base: concave.
Dimensions: length-Specimen 1, 18 mm.; Spec. 2., 2.1 mm.; Spec. 3, 2.5 mm.
(estimate); width at base-Specimen 1, 16 mm.; Spec. 2., 14 mm.; Spec. 3, 15
mm.; thickness-Specimen 1, 3 mm.; Spec. 2., 3 mm.; Spec. 3, 3 mm.
Workmanship: good, with long transverse flakes removed , apparently by pressure.

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Materials: novaculite ( 1), reddish-gray chert with sand (2).
Remarks: These points fit well the description of the type given by Suhm et al.
( 1954: 508, Pl. 133, A, B, C). Their definitive characteristics are concave lateral
edges and concave base.

The Scallorn Type- 4 specimens (Fig. 29, NN-00 )
Blade: triangular; edges straight to very slightly concave; shoulders barbed.
Stem: one-fourth to one-fifth the length of the entire specimen; short and sharply
expanding; edges straight to concave; base straight to slightly concave.
Dimensions: length-average 27 mm., range of variation 23 to 30 mm.; width at
the shoulders- average 15 mm., range 13 to 16 mm.; thickness- average 3 mm.,
range 2 to 4 mm.
Workmanship: very good, with evidence of secondary pressure flaking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: These four examples conform well to the type description given by
Suhm et al. ( 1954: 506, Pl. 132, A, B, C) .
The Minter Type-16 specimens (Fig. 29, II-MM)
Blade: irregular, but approaching subtriangular; edges irregular, at times concave
or convex; shoulders prominent, but lacking barbs.
Stem: one-fourth to one-sixth the length of the entire specimen; wide, short and
extremely rudimentary, sometimes expanding slightly; edges irregular, but frequently straight or concave; base irregular, approaching straight or convex.
Dimensions: length- average 23 mm., range 16 to 30 mm.; width at the shoulders
-average 18 mm., range 14 to 22 mm.; thickness-average 4 mm., range 2 to
5mm.
Workmanship: extremely poor; the small amount of pressure flaking is crudely
executed.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: These 16 points are representative of a type which has been recognized
elsewhere in north-central and northeastern Texas, but not heretofore named.
The most salient attributes of the Minter type are tlle irregular shape, resulting
from poor and careless knapping, and the wide, short, irregular stem.
Type X-4 specimens (Fig. 29, PP-RR)
Blade: triangular or subtriangular; edges slightly concave; shoulders protruding
and pointed, but lacking barbs.
Stem: one-fourth to one-third the length of the entire specimen; shape contracting;
edges ooncave; base pointed or slightly rounded.
Dimensions: length-range of variation 18 to 23 mm.; width at shoulders-range
11 to 20 mm.; thickness-range 3 to 5 mm.
Workmanship: poor, with little evident pressure flaking.
Material: reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Remarks: This small group of contracting stem arrow points has not been given a
type name here because of uncertainty regarding its affiliations. It is most likely
that when more evidence is available these specimens can either be given a
proper name or included within an existing type. There are certain strong resemblances, for example, to the Perdiz, Livermore, and Cliffton types.
Fragmentary Arrow Points. In addition to the above-described types and varieties,
50 arrow points were recovered from the surface and from excavations which,

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

251

because of their fragmentary condition, could not be assigned to any of the established categories. Most of these seem originally to have had expanding stems. They
fall within the normal dimensions of the major types described in the present paper
and, except for two of them, are all of locally-acquired impure reddish-gray chert.
One of the exceptions is of milky quartz and the other of a light gray-brown
homogeneous chert.

2. Bifacial Artifacts

A total of 68 bifacial artifacts (other than the projectile points) was
recovered from the Manton Miller site. These generally crude and
somewhat irregular artifacts exhibit, except for a few examples, at
least one cutting edge prepared by the percussion flaking technique.
Some of them have definite tips, probably for piercing, while others
may have two well-defined cutting edges. The most distinctive feature
of all is that they were worked from both faces, as opposed to the
scrapers which were usually worked from only one face. Because of
diverse shapes and the lack of adequate inter-site comparative data, it is
deemed best not to attempt to classify these artifacts into named types
at the present. Rather, the designation system established for similar
materials at the Fred Yarbrough site will be employed. This consists of
small, homogeneous groups labeled with Roman numerals. Future research, it is hoped, may show that these correspond to varieties and
types.
Many of the bifacial artifacts were obviously intended to be used as
knives (they have clearly distinguishable cutting edges), while others,
though also worked from both faces, do not show such easily recognizable edges. The members of the first category will be designated as
"knives," those of the second, "miscellaneous bifacial artifacts."
KNIVES

Group I knives were not found at the Miller site.
Group II (Fig. 30, A-B) is made up of five medium-sized knives
which are trianguar or subtriangular in general outline. The edges are
straight or slightly convex, and the bases are very slightly rounded
(convex). The workmanship is rather crude, and no pressure flaking
was used. The length varies from 32 to 55 mm., the width (at the
base) from 23 to 40 mm., and the thickness from 8 to 15 mm .. All of
these knives were manufactured from locally-acquired impure, reddish-gray chert.
Group III (Fig. 30, C-D) consists of two medium or small-sized
knives which are ovate-acuminate in general outline. The edges are
convex and the bases rounded. The workmanship shown on these speci-

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

B

D

F'

E

H
j

K

p

0

M

L

N

R

.\

Q

~T

v

u

'~·
0

w

x

z

cc
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
GM.

Fig . 30. Chipped stone artifacts and cell . Knives : A-B, Group II; C-D, Group Ill; E, Group
IV; F-G, Group V; H-1 , Group VI ; J, Group VIII. K-L, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts, Group I.
M-N , Knives, Group IX . 0-P, miscellaneous bifacial artifacts , Group II. Q , Knife , Group IX.
R-S, drills . T-V, spokeshaves . W-X , side scrapers. Y-Z, end scrapers. AA, stemmed scraper.
BB, graver. CC , worked nodule. DD, cell.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

253

mens is crude, and their shape tends to be somewhat irregular. Specimen 1 measures 32 mm. in length, 22 mm. in width, and has a maximum thickness of 8 mm. Specimen 2 is 38 mm. long, 22 mm. wide, and
10 mm. thick. Both are of local reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Group IV (Fig. 30, F) is made up of three long, slender knives with
a lanceolate form. Their sides are slightly convex and the bases are
flattened or somewhat rounded. The length varies from 47 to 55 mm.
(estimates) , the maximum width from 25 to 27 mm., and the thickness
from 10 to 13 mm. These artifacts appear to be somewhat better made
than several of the aforementioned groups, although only the percussion technique seems to have been employed. All were made of local
reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Group V (Fig. 30, F-G) is composed of two bi-pointed knives of
medium size. The edges are convex and contract .at both extremities.
Here again the flaking is of the percussion type and quite crude. The
length of these two specimens is 51and49 mm. , respectively, the maximum width 26 and 22 mm., and the thickness 14 and 11 mm. Both are
of reddish-gray chert with sand inclusions.
Group VI (Fig. 30, H-I ) is made up of four medium-sized knives
which have an ovate outline. The edges are convex and the extremities
rounded. The workmanship is quite crude. Their length ranges from 35
to 44 mm., the width (measured midway on the sides) from 19 to 25
mm. , and the thickness from 5 to 10 mm. All are of local impure, reddish-gray chert.
Group VII knives were not found at the Miller site.
Group VI II (Fig. 30, J) consists of two medium-sized knives (one of
silicified wood, one of reddish-gray chert ) which are crudely formed
into an approximate triangular or subtriangular outline. Each of these
specimens has one pointed end and shows flaking on one or both edges.
The bases are straight to slightly rounded. The length of specimen 1 is
54 mm., the width 29 mm., and the maximum thickness 24 mm. ;
specimen 2 measures 56 mm. by 31 mm. by 20 mm.
Group IX (Fig. 30, M-N) is a residual category composed of 48 irregular, fragmentary, or otherwise unusual specimens which could not
be placed in the above-described groups. It is well to point out that it
would be a mistake to consider the examples of Groups II-VIII as the
major kinds of knives from the Miller site. On the contrary, 48 of the
knives-Group IX-are irregular, crude, and unclassifiable in respect
to geometric form, as opposed to the other groups. Among this group
round, concave, and flat bases and all sorts of edges and tips are represented, but practically no two examples are alike. Many appear to be
stones which were worked only slightly on one small portion of the

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

specimen. One interesting and unusually well made example of this
residual category is a long, thin, fragmentary knife (Fig. 30, Q) with a
rounded end and almost parallel sides.
MISCELLANEOUS BIFACIAL ARTIFACTS

Group I (Fig. 30, K, L) is composed of two medium-sized, thick, bifacial artifacts with roughly circular outlines. The workmanship
shown on these specimens is very cn1de, only percussion flaking having
been used in their manufacture. Maximum diameter ranges from 51
mm. (Specimen 1) to 56 mm., and the thickness from 22 mm. (Specimen 1) to 32 mm. Both are made from the local reddish-gray chert
which has numerous sand inclusions.
Group II (Fig. 30, 0-P) is made up of five thick bifacial artifacts
with circular outlines which, apart from their much smaller size, are
like the specimens described in Group I. The workmanship here is likewise very crude and only the percussion knapping technique seems to
have been used. The maximum diameter ranges from 20 to 39 mm.,
and the maximum thickness from 7 to 16 mm. All are made of reddishgray chert.
3. Scrapers

End Scrapers. Eight triangular, snub-nosed end scrapers (Fig. 30,
Y-Z) were recovered which have irregular, triangular outlines and
which are plano-convex or concavo-convex in longitudinal cross-section. The bit, the thickest part of these artifacts, is located on the side
opposite the apex. The bit itself varies from convex to almost straight
and the sides are slightly convex. The sides are worked by pressure
chipping on six of the eight scrapers. Six were made from impure
reddish-gray chert, one from jasper, and one from agate. Their length
ranges from 21 to 35 mm., maximum vvidth at the bit from 14 to 28
mm. , aud the maximum thickness at the bit from 2 to 9 mm.
Side Scrapers. A group of 96 side scrapers (Fig. 30, W-X ) is composed of irregular flakes which show small flake scars along one or
more si<les on one face of the specimen. The flakes themselves range
from large, wide, crude flakes to-more commonly-thin, long flakes
which may have been struck from prepared platform cores. Many of
the latter have very faint flake scars along their edges, and experiments made in the laboratory have shown that unmodified flakes
u sed for scraping wood easily develop identical small flake scars. On
the other hand, several of the larger side scrapers have deliberate pres-

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

255

sure flaking on their edges. These specimens vary from 20 to 53 mm. in
length, from 12 to 35 mm. in width, and from 4 to 10 mm. in thickness. All but two specimens were manufactured from the local, impure
reddish-gray chert. The two exceptions are of a light gray, homogeneous chert probably foreign to the immediate area of the site.
4. Drills.

Two small, irregular drills were found (Fig. 30, R-S). The bits of
these elongated, slender specimens are diamond-shaped in cross section and are rather noticeably beleled on both faces. These drills, apparently worked by pressure flaking, measure 37 and 31 mm. m
length, respectively, 10 and 12 mm. in width, and 6 and 4 mm. m
thickness. Both are local, impure, reddish-gray chert.

5. Spokeshaves
Three thin and irregular flakes (Fig. 30, T-V) of impure, reddishgray chert have marked concavities formed by pressure flaking on one
edge, hence the name "spokeshaves." The diameter of these specimens,
although irregular, falls between 21 and 31 mm., and the thickness
between 5 and 7 mm.

6. Gravers
Two irregular flakes of impure, reddish-gray chert have short projections on one edge which seem to have been shaped by pressure flaking (Fig. 30, BB). The diameters of these gravers are 27 and 22 mm.;
their thickness is, respectively, 8 and 4 mm.
7. Stemmed Scraper or Bunt

One small artifact (Fig. 30, AA) seems to be a stemmed scraper. The
blade is short, wide, and has a rounded distal edge; the stem is narrow
and moderately expanding; the base is convex. Although worked bifacially, the longitudinal cross section is plano-convex, hence the designation "scraper." Similar specimens, however, have often been called
"bunts" and are presumed to have been used as projectile points. Made
of reddish-gray chert, this artifact measures 25 mm. in length, 24 mm.
in width, and 6 mm. in thickness.
8. Worked Nodules

A group of eight nodules all retain much of their surface cortex
(patina). Apparently most of these are residue from knapping for the
purpose of obtaining small flakes. However, several show some amount

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of use after flaking. Four have battered edges and were employed most
likely as choppers or hammerstones, and one specimen (Fig. 30, CC )
has a well defined gouge bit on one edge. The remainder do not appear
to have been utilized after flakes were struck from them. Their diameters range from 40 to 76 mm.; and all were made of local, impure, reddish-gray chert.

9. Celt
One polished stone celt was found (Fig. 30, DD ). This specimen has
an irregular, polished bit which was worked bifacially, while the rest
of the artifact surface shows small depressions made by the pecking
technique. The length of this celt is 77 mm. , the width of the bit 42
mm. , and the maximum thickness 34 mm. It is made of a light-colored,
non-siliceous, igeneous stone.

10. Grinding Slab
One multifaced grinding slab (Fig. 31, Q) , made of sandstone, was
recovered from the Miller site. This irregular ';lrtifact has one flat
grinding surface on each face as well as a beveled grinding surface on
one edge. The maximum diameter of the slab is 173 mm. , and the
maximum thickness measures 61 mm.

11. Manos.
Three rather crude manos or hand stones were recovered ( Fig. 31,
R ). The smallest of these, which is fragmentary, is a utilized quartzite
cobble with grinding surfaces on two sides. Each of the two complete,
larger specimens, which measure 128 mm. and 111 mm., respectively,
in maximum diameter, has only one grinding surface. Both were made
of sandstone. All three of the manos appear to have been u sed with a
rotary grinding motion.
12. Pitted Stones
Two bifacial manos were found in addition to the three described
immediately above, both of which have small, pecked pits, or depressions in the center of their grinding surfaces (Fig. 31, S) . Heretofore
such artifacts have been called "nutting stones" or "nut stones" in
various parts of eastern North America, but it has recently been suggested (Honea, MS) that they were used as anvils or base stones in the
bipolar flaking technique, which has been defined archeologically in
Africa and elsewhere.

257

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

••
••
B

G

C

\

H

0

K

0

l

2 3 4 5 8 7 8 9 ID
CM.

\l!23i1l-J LU
CM

Fig . 31 . Miscellaneous artifacts. A-D, punctated potsherds; E, pipe fragment; F, clay
object; G-H , punctated potsherds; 1-J, wattle-impressed daub ; K, long -bone awls; L-M ,
deer ulnae awls; N-0, antler awls ; P, shell button ; Q , grinding slab ; R, mano ; S, pitted
stone.

258

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

13. Pebbles and Cobbles
Twenty-seven river-turned pebbles and cobbles were recovered
which, judging from their general absence from the local soils, we may
assume to have been picked up and brought into the site by the aborigines. Such stones were used, we know from ethnographic accounts,
for smoothing pottery vessels and for other purposes such as the stone
boiling technique of preparing food. One of these specimens shows
slight modification by pecking, but the others do not appear to have
been intentionally altered. Two are of sandstone, 22 of quartzite, and
three of other stones.

14. Ochre
Sixty-one fragments of ochre were found. This number includes 35
unmodified fragments of red ochre (hematite) , 15 fragments of red
ochre which have facets resulting from grinding, 10 unmodified fragments of yellow ochre (limonite), and one faceted fragment of yellow
ochre.
15. Ceramic Materials
A total of 500 potsherds was recovered from the Manton Miller site.
This number excludes, however, scores of extremely small sherds
measuring 4 mm. or less in diameter which, because of their size,
could not be accurately classified.
In describing the potsherds the usual presentation by types will not
be followed. This deviation from standard procedure is necessitated by
the relatively small number of specimens and by the absence of complete or reconstructable vessels. In view of these limitations, the sherds
will be described primarily on the basis of the technique of surface
treatment (engraving, punctating, plain surface, etc.). Nevertheless,
an effort will be made in as many cases as is possible to show type
affiliations or resemblances.
PLAIN POTTERY. The 449 undecorated potsherds form a very interesting, but in
a certain sense confusing, group. The most difficult problem brought up by this
material is that of typology. Many have paste, form, and other characteristics of
the Williams Plain type (Fig. 32, A-C) of the Oklahoma Fourche Maline Focus
(Bell, 1953; Proctor, 195 7), while others appear to be fairly representative sherds
of the Sanders Plain type (Fig. 32, D-E). Yet there is complete and uniform gradation between these two extremes (the coarse, thick Williams Plain and the thinner
Sanders Plain with more compact paste) and it would be completely artificial and
arbitrary to draw a line between the two groups, so complete is their intergradation
at the Miller site. What we actually seem to have is a single ware which ranges in

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

259

form, thickness, and other characteristics between two polar con cepts represented
by what h eretofore have been called the Williams Plain and Sanders Plain ty pes.
Of the plain sherds, 32,5 are tempered with lumps of clay and, rarely, with
ground potsherds. Another 117 have considerable quantities of ground bone in
addition to the tempering agents mentioned above, while seven show numerous
ground sh ell particles.
Those sh erds h aving only clay lumps or pulverized potsherds as t empering agents
have exterior surface colors ranging from brownish -black to light cream or tan,
depending on the amount of surface oxidation during fir ing. The interior surfaces
are generally the sa me color as the ext erior surfaces, or of a lighter shade of that
color, while the cores t end to be a dark brown or black, indicating an incompletely
ox idizing firing atmosphere. The cores are likewise granular and frequently porous.
The surface texture is quite fine and uniform, but small cracks appear on several
specimen s, and 34 of this group have well bur nish ed surfaces with a compara tively
high luster; four additional sherds show a reel slip on both surfaces. Thickness
ranges from 5 to 14 mm. , and, as has been pointed out before, the thinner sh erds
would be generally classified as Sanders Plain and the thi cker specimens as
Williams Plain. The surface hardness i"anges from 2, to (rarely ) 4 according to
Moh's scale.
The plain sherds t empered with bone (117) and shell ( 7) are like the above
specimens in all particulars except their tempering materials.
Looking a t this group of plain body sherds as a whole, we can get some idea of
the vessel sh apes represented by examining, par ticularly, basal and rim sherds.
The most common vessel form of which we can speak with asurance is the so-called
" flower pot" sh ape commonly found in the Williams Plain type. This typically ha s
a very heavy base with a thickened outer area where the body is attached, slightly
expanding walls, and a very moderately everted or straight n eck with slightly
rounded or fl attened lip.

DECORA TED POTTERY. Fifty-one potsherds bear some form of surface decoration. Among the different techniques represented are incising, engraving (postfiring
incising), punctating, and punctating combined with incising. Except for specific
instances which will be mentioned, all of these sh erds have the paste characteristics,
surfa ce texture, and color range of th e plain potsherds. However, the thickness of
the decorated specimen s, varying from 4 to 9 mm., is somewhat l ess than the ran ge
given for the plain sherds.
Among the 17 incised sherds, two (Fig. 32,, F) are of special interest because
they show the grooved lip and inverted rim form characteristically encountered on
vessels of Coles Creek Incised and Chase Incised types of the Mississippi Valley
(Phillips et al., 1951: 96; Cotter, 1952,). The paste of these two sh erds is fine-grained
and contains small amounts of sand. The surfaces are well polished and have a
hardness of 4.5, which is considerably harder than most of the sherds from the
Miller site. The lips of these two sherds are flat; wide, parallel, horizontal incised
lines occur just below the rims on the exterior surface. The incised lines, however,
are not " over-hanging" as in the case of Coles Creek Incised. One of the sherds
shows traces of diagonal parallel lines below the horizontal lines, a trait not found
on Coles Creek Incised.
Twelve of th e incised sherds (Fig. 32,, G, H ) are, for the most part, body sherds
with widely spaced parallel lines, which ca n not be assigned to any specific ceramic

260

TEXAS ARCHEOL OGI CAL SOCIETY

r -·-f

c

8
A

[

K-----

'-

__

D

E

J

H

M

N

s

R

0 12 3 456 7 89

GM.
Fig . 32 . Potsherds: A-C, Williams Plain ; 0-E, Sanders Pla in ; F, Coles Creek-like incised
sherds ; G-H , incised sherds ; 1-K, engraved sherds; L, Sanders Engraved sherd; M-0, Penninglon Puncrared-/ncised (?l potsherds ; P-R, Crockett Curvilinear-Incised sherds ; S-T, punctated sherds.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

261

types. Two of these have bone temper, ;ind one contains a large amount of sand
particles.
The nine specimens with engraved surfaces (Fig. 3Z, 1-K) are small, nondescript
body sherds about which very little can be said. The engraved lines are parallel to
each other on all specimens, and are straight on six specimens and slightly curved
on the remaining three. The width between the lines ranges from Z to 6 mm . One
of these (Fig. 3Z, L ), a rim sherd with rounded lip, has a diagonal orientation of
its parallel lines, and could easily represent the Sanders Engraved type. The paste
and color ranges of the engraved sherds are like those given for the plain pottery
above. Four have bone temper, whereas the others have only the usual clay lumps.
Three sherds having panels of small, circular punctations bounded by incised
lines (Fig. 3Z, M-0 ) could well represent the p,,mnington Punctated-Incised type
of the Alto Focus. The surface of these sherds is well polished and hard, ranging
from 3.5 to 4 on Moh's scale of hardness. The surface color, although brown, has
the typical reddish hue commonly found on Alto Focus sherds from the George
C. Davis site.
Three additional incised sherds (Fig. 3Z, P-R ), all from one large vessel, appear
to be of the Crockett Curvilinear-Incised type or, if not, they are at least very
closely related to it. These sherds are black, represent the carinated bowl form , and
have triangular panels filled with slightly curved, equally-spaced lines. The surface
is fairly well smoothed, but not highly polished.
A total of 19 punctated sherds exhibit several different techniques of surface trea tment. Ten body sherds and one rim sherd (Fig. 3Z, S-T) show the so-called "fingernail" punctation which is crescent-shaped and sometimes has a ridge of clay on the
flat or concave side of each punctation where the clay was pushed back and mounded_
The arrangement of the closely-spaced punctations themselves is random with the
exception of two potsherds on which they are arranged in a crude linear pattern.
Of the remaining punctated sherds, five have random, closely-spaced triangular
punctations (Fig. 31, A-C ), one has round punctations (Fig. 31, D ) , and two have
rows of short punctations formed by short incisions in the surface (Fig. 31 , G-H ).

MISCELLANEOUS CLAY OBJECTS. Twenty-eight pieces of fire-hardened, wattleimpressed daub (Fig. 31, 1- J) were recovered. These are relatively small specimens,
averaging about Z to 3 cm. in diameter, and for the most part appear to be well
oxidized by firing. Many of them are concavo-convex in cross-section, with the
concave surface relatively smooth and the convex face rough and covered with many
small impressions, probably of twigs or grass. We may assume, in construction of
houses, that the smooth inside surface was formed by pressing the clay against fairly
large, smooth poles, after which thatching was pressed into th e outside of the clay.
Perhaps thatch was held on in this manner.
One small, cylindrical clay object with one closed and on e open end was found
(Fig. 31, E ) . It is thought that this is a projection from the heel of a pipe bowl.
The outside diameter is 8 mm., and the diameter of the aperture measures 6 mm.
The closed end is flat, and the surface has been well smoothed , producing a noticeable luster. Similar pipe fragments, presumably belonging to the long stem variety·
of pipe, have been reported from the Texarkana Reservoir area (Jelks, personal
communication).
The last clay object to be described is a large piece of fired clay (Fig. 31, F)
which has on one side the impression of the inside surface of a bowl. Most likely·
this object r epresents potters clay (as yet untempered ) which was stored inside a.
ceramic vessel and was later fired, perhaps by accident.

262

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

16. Bone and Antler Artifacts
In all, 43 fragments of worked bone and antler were recovered from
the Manton Miller site. This number includes 16 small awl or needle
fragments made from the long bones of very small mammals. These
specimens (Fig. 31, K ) range in length from 7 to 10 cm. and from 5 to
15 mm. in thickness or diameter. One end of all these artifacts has been
cut down into an easily-recognized point which generally shows considerable smoothing and some evidence of use-wear.
Sixteen antler tips or tines (Fig. 31, N-0 ) show modification by
man. These specimens for the most part have been rounded and
blunted on one end. Although the sides of most are smooth, four show
cuts and gashes suggesting use as flakers in flintknapping.
Eleven deer ulnae (Fig. 31, L-M) have also been considerably modified and were presumably used as awls or punches. Their distal ends
have been removed and the shaft of the bone cut down and made
smooth. Two have a sharp piercing end, while the remainder have
blunt, rounded tips.

17. Worked Shell
One thin shell disc. or button (Fig. 31, P), about 12 mm. in diameter
and 1 mm. thick, has a small perforation near its center. It appears to
be made from mussel sh ell. This is the only shell artifact found at the
Miller site.

Provenience of Artifacts
As a first step in the distributional analysis, the provenience of all
the artifacts obtained from excavations at the Miller site was plotted by
levels on a large graph according to individual 5-foot squares. However, since no stratigraphic differentiation in the occurrence of the
various artifact categories was observed, the artifacts were then
grouped together into three units representing those recovered from
Area A, Area B, and from the surface (Table 4). The lack of cultural
stratigraphy in Area A is not at all surprising because this area has
been extensively eroded and excavation did not exceed one foot in
depth. In Area B, however, where excavation and cultural debris
reached a depth of two feet, there was, somewhat surprisingly, no discernible superposition of artifact types. Although most of the artifacts
came from the upper one foot of soil in Area B, a few potsherds, dart
points, and arrow points were recovered from the lower foot of the

263

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 4
Provenience of the Artifacts, The Miller Site

Surface

Garr, Kaufman
alsa
runge
col fax
hobson
emorr
kemp
misc.
Yarbrough
Morrill, s. ped.
Wells
Kent
Yantis, cook
Trinity
Palmillas
Alba
Fresno, odas
fairli&
Talco
Scallorn
Minter
TypeX
Knives, group II
group III
group IV
group V
group VI
group VIII
group IX
Misc. bifacial artifacts,
group I
group II
End scrapers
Side scrapers
Drills
Spoke shaves
Gravers
Stemmed scrapers
Worked nodules
Celt
Grinding slab
Manos
Pitted stones

7
2
7

2
10
2
2
19
0
0
0
1
0
0
13
0
1
3
1
0
3
4
2
0
2
21

4
14
1
0
0
0
2
1
0
0

Are<:1 A

3
4
1
0
5
1
0
15
1
0
1
0
0
1
2
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
6

0
0
0
8
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0

Area B

4
2
1

1
3
6
3
14
0
0
0
0
0
1
28
5
5
0
2
15
1
0
2

1
16

4
4
69
1
3

2
1

5
0
0
2

Unknown
proyen.ience

0
1
0
0
3
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5

0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

Totals

14
9
9
3
21
9
6
48
1

2
2
1
2
48
7

6
3
4
16
4

5
2
3
2
4
2

48

2
5
8
96

2
3

2
1
8
1
3

2

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 4--Continued
Provenience of the Artifacts, The Miller Site

Surface

Plain potsherds,
clay temper
123
bone temper
48
shell temper
0
Coles Creek-like
incised ware
0
Crockett-like
incised ware
1
Misc. incised
3
Sanders Engraved
0
Misc. engraved
5
Pennington Punct . Incised
2
Misc. punctated
6
Daub
2
Pipe stem
0
Clay lump
0
Long-bone awls
0
Antler tips
0
Ulnae, worked
0
Shell bead or button

Area A

Area B

11
1

171
57

0

Unkno\.vn
provenience

Totals

6

21
12
1

226
118
7

0

2

0

2

0
0
0

2
8
1
2
2
13
21
1

0

3
12

1
0
0

2
0
0
0
0
0
0

1

15
14
11
0

1
0
0
0
0

3
0
0

2
0
0

8
4
19
28
1
16
16
11

midden. These, however, were of the same types that occurred in the
upper part.
In spite of the lack of vertical differentiation, a comparison of the
artifacts from Areas A and B provides concrete evidence that there
were at least three major components, or occupations, at the site. The
most marked differences between the artifact assemblages from the
two areas can be summarized as follows: ( 1 ) Alba and Minter arrow
points-the two most numerous types-are confined almost exclusively
to Area B; (2) a great majority of the potsherds for which there were
provenience data (264 of 277) occurred in Area B; and (3) practically
all of the wattle-impressed daub particles come from Area B. Conversely, most of the dart point types, and the other artifact classes as
well, were more or less evenly distributed over both areas.
From this evidence, then, and from various comparisons with related archeological sites which will be dealt with somewhat more fully
later, we may safely assume that an early occupation by a non-ceramic
society is represented by Area A. This corresponds to Period 3 at the
Yarbrough site. The most common items to be included on the trait list

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

265

for this component are Gary points of the various varieties given in
Table 1, knives belonging primarily to Group IX, and side scrapers.
That this occupation represents, most likely, a single people may be
inferred from the presence of only one main dart point type, Gary, and
from the relative homogeneity of the artifact sample. Because of evidence which is to be presented in the following section, this component
is thought to represent the later part of the Archaic Stage.
The artifacts from Area B pose something of a problem. Here we
have the same artifacts found on the knoll, Area A, mixed with obviously later artifacts such as ceramics and arrow points. The question,
then, is whether we are confronted with the survival of late Archaic
stage elements in a later culture, or with a case of admixture--caused
by erosion, plowing, etc.-of two separate and discrete components.
The evidence at present is too inconclusive to allow for a definite answer to this question, but because of data from similar sites (Yarbrough, Davis, Limerick, Sam, Scott, and others) I am inclined to believe that Archaic elements survived into a later complex.
The Alba and Minter arrow points and the Williams Plain-Sanders
Plain pottery occur in Area B. For reasons to be given in the succeeding
chapter, this is thought to represent the late part of the Archaic Stage
and the early Gibson Aspect of the Neo-American Stage.
Also occurring in Area B are potsherds of Coles Creek Incised,
Crockett Curvilinear-Incised, Sanders Engraved, and Pennington
Punctated-Incised types, as well as shell-tempered pottery and triangular arrow points.

Bone Refuse
From the surface of the site, from Area A, and especially from Area
B, a great many animal bone fragments were found, which presumably represent general midden refuse (Table 5). These bones were
identified by C. D. Tunnell, who used the collections of the Vertebrate
Paleontology Laboratory of The University of Texas. The most common animal represented is deer, with several examples of ferret or
weasel, skunk, raccoon, opossum, dog, various hares, bird, and fish. In
all, 1,008 bone fragments were recovered, representing a minimum
number of 227 individuals.

The Miller Site- Conclusions
The preceding description and analysis of the Manton Miller site
allows us to draw certain limited conclusions regarding the cultural

266

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLF. 5
Bone Identifications, The Miller Site
Genus/species

Odocoileus sp. (deer )

Mustela sp.
Scluridae (ferret )
Mephitis sp.
Geomyidae (skunk)
Procyon sp. (raccoon)

Didelphis sp. (opossum )
Canis sp. (dog )

Terrapene sp.

Sylvilagus sp.
(cottontail )

Elements presen t

hoof
astragalus
calcaneum
medapodial
phalanx
mandible
maxilla
molar
aud. bulla
carp./ tars.
antler frag.
vertebra
scapula
rib
pelvis frag.
ulna
premax.
humerus
tibia
femur
radius
nav./cub.
mandible
mandible
mandible
mandible
mandible
maxilla frag.
molar
mandible
maxilla
mandible
carnassial
tibia
plastron frag .
carapace frag.
carapace
mandible
maxilla
femur
u lna
scapula
pelvis frag.

~J i n.

no. indi v.

2
12
10
10
10
22

8
8
11

8
3
5
4
1
2
1
5

8
1
9
6
3
2

10
3

Total

9
23
20
41
46
43
15
39
22
25
9
39
7
9
2
4
2
10
16
2
17
12
5
4
1
23
5
4
2
2

1
ca. 8
ca.20
1

1
30
261

8

16
1
2
1
4
3

2
1

267

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

TABLE 5-Gontinued
Bone Identifications, The Miller Site
Genus/species

L <!pus sp. ( hare)

fish
bird (turkey? )
unidentified bone scraps
TOTAL

Elements presen t

mandible
maxilla
misc.
misc.

l\rlin. no. in<liY.

Total

2
1
1
8
227

5
34
185
1,008

affiliations of the site and its temporal position in relation to general
prehistoric trends in the region.
Three main occupational components seem to be present at the site,
although the data for the last two are not particularly strong; however,
supporting data occur at other sites in the area.
The first component consists of the Archaic materials from Area A.
The virtual absence of expanding stem points in Area A excludes an
early Archaic date, while the large number of contracting stem points
(Gary ) and the virtual absence of pottery and arrow points speak
favorably for a late Archaic date corresponding to Period 3 at the Fred
Yarbrough site. In fact, the presence of a more or less pure Gary component without ceramics at Miller gives support to the rather weak evidence for Period 3 (the pre-pottery Gary horizon) at the Yarbrough
site.
The next two components occur mixed together in Area B of the
Miller site, and are here separated on the basis of information from
other sites (see discussion of the Scott, Sam, and Wann sites, in the following section ). The first of these is thought to represent the terminal
Archaic Stage in the area, and is characterized by crude, plain ceramics of Williams Plain type. Williams Plain is the earliest known
ceramic type in parts of Oklahoma, where it apparently was adopted
by local Archaic peoples at the Scott (Bell, 1953), Sam (Proctor,
1957 ), and Wann (Sharrack, 1960) sites of the Fourche Maline Focus.
The second and later ceramic component is represented, it is believed,
by sherds of Coles Creek Incised and Crockett Curvilinear-Incised
pottery and, most likely, by the Alba and Minter arrow points from the
site. Of course there is no way to be certain that these arrow points belong with this group of potsherds, rather than with the Williams Plain
type, but it has been shown elsewhere (Newell and Krieger, 1949)
that the Alba point generally belongs with the Gibson Aspect of east-

268

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ern Texas and adjacent areas, which supposedly postdates Williams
Plain. In addition, at the Scott site (Bell, 1953) Williams Plain is definitely shown to antedate arrow points.
The non-ceramic component at the Miller site corresponds, as mentioned above, to Period 3 at the Yarbrough site, while the early ceramic
component at Miller (represented by Williams Plain ) corresponds to
Period 4 at Yarbrough, and both of these components may be assigned
to the La Harpe Aspect of the Archaic Stage. The remaining component, separated from the Williams Plain material by means of extrasite evidence, belongs to the early part of the Neo-American Stage, the
Gibson Aspect-Period 5 at Yarbrough.
Turning now to traits other than projectile points and ceramics,
evidence of house structures or other occupational features at the site
is lacking, but because of the eroded nature of the site we can not
rule out the possibility of their former existence. It can not be definitely
determined whether the flexed burials found at the site belong to the
pre-ceramic component, but the absence of ceramic or other grave
furniture, as well as a similiar pattern for burials at related Archaic
sites, suggests that some or all of the burials derived from the Archaic
occupation.

THE LA HARPE ASPECT
The comparatively deep stratigraphic column from the Fred Yarbrough site, as well as some of the archeological data from the Manton
Miller site, provide excellent examples of several changes in artifact
styles which occurred over a long period of time in a rather broad geographical area. On the western frontier of the eastern woodlands, in a
belt reaching from the vicinity of Houston, Texas, into east-central
Oklahoma, the following uniformities in prehistoric culture change
during the Archaic can be recognized. ( 1) At the beginning or early
part of the Archaic Stage there was a marked numerical prevalence of
expanding stem dart points over those of other stemming traditions.
(2) This was followed by a growth in the popularity of contracting
stem dart points (represented principally by the Gary type), which
development slightly preceded (3) the appearance of pottery vessels
of various plain and often crude wares. For purposes of the present
study, the Archaic Stage may be said to terminate in the area under
consideration with the introduction of numerous arrow points and
abundant decorated pottery, which accompanied, it is believed, the
introduction of maize agriculture and a more sedentary mode of existence.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

269

The Archaic culture or complex mentioned above we propose to label
the "La Harpe Aspect," thus following the McKern system of nomenclature, which is well established in the literature dealing with this
area. The term "East Texas Aspect," which has often been applied to
much, but not all, of the material included within the La Harpe Aspect,
has been rejected here because of its geographic limitations, particularly since components of the La Harpe Aspect are known to occur in
Oklahoma and may be expected to be found in western Louisiana and
southwestern Arkansas as well.
What we seem to have, then, in the La Harpe Aspect, is a rather
far-flung Archaic Stage culture, or group of related cultures, which
borders the western fringe of the eastern woodlands. The most salient
material traits of this aspect are ( 1) flexed burials, usually without
accompanying furniture; (2) pitted manos; (3) expanding stem dart
points (early phase); ( 4) contracting stem dart points (later phase);
(5) plain ceramics (terminal La Harpe Aspect); and (6) various
polished and ground stone artifacts (axes, gorgets, etc.) which vary
considerably in style and in abundance from locality to locality within
the La Harpe Aspect area.
It seems probable that this culture complex should be divided, some
day, into several foci on the basis of areal and temporal distributional
data. All that we can safely do at this point, however, is to recognize
three broad areal divisions of the La Harpe Aspect: (1) the Oklahoma
Fourche Maline Focus; (2) a central area represented, in Texas, by
the Yarbrough, Martin, Miller, and Limerick sites, and in Oklahoma
by the Boat Dock and James sites; and (3) a southern area represented
by the Sawmill site, the E. E. Runnells sites 1 and 2, and the Doering,
Kobs, and Gris bee sites.
In spite of the fact that the temporal sequence of the various projectile point stemming traditions is uniform over the entire La Harpe
Aspect area, some of the classes, types, and varieties of artifacts that
make up the complex have much more limited areal distributions.
Hence the Fourche Maline Focus is characterized by certain traits
which do not occur as frequently (or not at all) in the remainder of
the La Harpe Aspect: polished stone celts, Williams Plain pottery
(later part of the aspect), stone gorgets, boat stones, double-bitted
chipped stone axes, shell gorgets, bone atlatl hooks, and corner-tanged
knives. The central area shows certain traits which can be found in the
Fourche Maline Focus (double-bitted axes, triangular and oval knives,
small stemmed drills, and triangular end scrapers) , but has certain
distinctive traits of its own: large numbers of gouges, full-grooved

270

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

axes, many pitted manos and grinding slabs, and a scarcity of polished
stone artifacts. In the southern area of the La Harpe Aspect, the early
pottery is a distinctive plain, sandy ware, and knives and scrapers are
crudely fashioned from pieces of petrified wood. Polished stone artifacts are rare in this area.
The inter-site comparative treatment to be given in this report will
limit itself primarily to dart point stemming traditions, and to the
early ceramics of the area. The sites of the Fourche Maline Focus to be
dealt with here are the Sam, Scott, and Wann sites. Those belonging
to the central area are the James and Boat Dock sites in Oklahoma, and
the Limerick and Martin sites of Texas (the Fred Yarbrough and Manton Miller sites also belong to the central group). In the southern area
the Sawmill, Runnells No. 1, and Runnells No. 2 sites at McGee Bend
Reservoir, and the Doering, Kobs, and Grisbee sites at Addicks Reservoir will be considered.
The geographical limits of the La Harpe Aspect can not be set with
any great degree of certainty, although as previously mentioned the
constituent sites fall within a belt running northward from the city of
Houston into east-central Oklahoma. The western boundary of the
aspect is more distinct than the eastern, being set off by the Archaic
cultures of central Texas and by the Great Plains area in Oklahoma.
However, in the region of Tarrant and adjacent counties in Texas, we
encounter difficulty in setting our limits, for the Carrollton and Elam
foci of the Trinity Aspect seem to be intermediate, typologically and
stylistically speaking, between the La Harpe Aspect and the Archaic
of central Texas. The Elam Focus, particularly, might be included
within our aspect, although this has not been done in the present paper.
However, we should keep the door open, and when better data for the
Elam Focus become available it may be advisable to include it.
A similar problem is encountered in northeastern Oklahoma with
the Grove Focus (Baerreis, 1951; Shaeffer, 1957 ). This archeological
unit, although it seems to show several of the developmental trends
used to define the La Harpe Aspect, exhibits strong ties with Archaic
complexes of Missouri, Tennessee, and Kentucky.
If the task of delineating the complex geographically seems difficult
on the western front, the problem on the east is even more difficult. So
little is known about the Archaic cultures of northwestern Louisiana
and southwestern Arkansas that we are left with very little with which
to work. On the Ouachita River in Arkansas, Harrington (1920: 103110) reported a long Archaic occupation at the "Deep Deposit, Site
No. 1, Hot Springs." The comparatively small number of contracting

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

271

stem points at this site, however, as well as strong stylistic peculiarities,
leaves some doubt as to whether it should be placed in La Harpe Aspect.
Of course, when we go far enough eastward, we finally reach sites such
as Poverty Point, sites belonging to the Archaic of the Tennessee Valley, and complexes which are very different from La Harpe.
The sites which have been placed in the La Harpe Aspect will now
be reviewed briefly, and specific comparisons will be made between
these and the Fred Yarbrough site. In view of the fact that the Y arbrough site stratigraphic column (Fig. 16) is one of the longest, most
complete, and clearest for the entire complex, it furnishes an excellent
referential base for La Harpe.
Scott Site. Located in Le Flore County, Oklahoma, the Scott site
(Bell, 1953 ) represents both ceramic and pre-ceramic components of
the Fourche Maline Focus. At this site Bell found a deep, non-ceramic
level at the very base of the occupation zone (Fig. 33, A ) , represented
by a few miscellaneous, unclassified dart points. This is followed by
the introduction into the site of simple ceramics (Williams Plain) and,
near the surface, by arrow points and more complex ceramics. Although the numbers are somewhat statistically unreliable, expanding
stem dart points are slightly more prevalent in the lower levels of the
site (Fig. 33, B), while contracting stem points gain in popularity in
the upper part of the stratigraphic column. The Scott site--up until
the introduction of arrow points and complex ceramics-may be assigned to the La Harpe Aspect.
Sam Site. The Sam site (Proctor, 195 7), also belonging to the
Fourche Maline Focus and located in Le Flore County, Oklahoma,
presents the same general picture as the Scott site, except that it has its
beginning somewhat later in time than Scott. Dart points without ceramics are found only in the lowest level, but dart points are numerically more abundant in the lower and middle levels than in the upper.
Potsherds increase in abundance near the surface, and arrow points
are introduced into the site somewhat later than pottery (Fig. 34, A ) .
In respect to dart point stemming traditions, we have the same popularity trend found at Yarbrough, Doering, the Sawmill, and Runnells
No. 1 sites, with the expanding stem most prevalent in the lower levels,
and losing ground to the contracting stem tradition near the surface.
Like the Scott site, the middle and lower levels of the Sam site may be
assigned to La Harpe Aspect.
Wann Site. The Wann site (Sharrock, 1960 ) , also located in Le
Flore County, Oklahoma, and belonging to the Fourche Maline Focus,
exhibits a stratigraphic sequence very similar to the middle levels of

RELATIVE
NO. 0
SPEC.1

PERCENTAGES

, ,2,5, , , ,510,', ,1,5

I

ioo

6"LEVEL..S

187 ,..........._,__<--L..-L-L-L.-L-~..,1.-----__.l:.W..:.W~

I

79 t-'---'--'-+---------__J~.:..:..:..::.:.~

2

86

3

76

4

56

5

59

6

31

7

27

8

27

9

13

10

7

11

4

12

A.
NO. 0
SPEC. I
37

I

PROJ. PTS. IZZZl, WILLIAMS PLAIN
SHER DSc::::J,SHELL-TEMP. AND
SANDERS PLAIN SHERDS!:;.;.;.;;·:!
I

I

I

25
I I

I

I

I

50
I I

75
I

I

11

6 LEVELS
I

6

2

10

3

21

4

20

5

15

6

18

7

12

8

20

9

4

10

II
8. DART PTS.: CONTRACT. STEM TRAD.IZZZl,
STRAIGHT STEM TRAD};\;.;.;·:l,EXPANDING STEM
TRADITION c:=:J, ARROW POINTS -

273

YARBROUGH AND M I L L E R SITES

RELATIVE
25

NO. 0
SPEC.

PERCENTAGES
50

75

100 6" LEVELS

945

862

2

220

3

70

4

6

5

A.

DART POINTS !lZ2l
POTSHERDS
C::=J
ARROW POINTS R·::t·.::;.;1

RELATIVE PERCENTAGES
NO 0
25
50
75
100 II
sp Ec..i.J_J____J__Jl__l•---1.1__._.---'-'_JIL_1,__,_1--L'_,l__J,.___.J1L_11_._,_._,__.__,_.,__.1 6

LE v E Ls

502

I

461

2

175

3

59

4

6

5

8.

DART PTSI CONTRACTING STEM
TRADITIONITZI, STRAIGHT 5TEM
TRADITION~.!. EXPANDING
STEM TRADITluN l::\":~:·.::I

Fig . 34. Sam Site : A, relative percentages of dart points, potsherds, and arrow points ;
B, relat ive percentages of the dart po int stemming traditions .

the Sam and Scott sites. In the lower levels of the Wann site dart points
are more common th an in the u pper, while ceramics are more abundant near the surface (Fig. 35, A ) .
Turning to dart point stemming traditions (Fig. 35, B), contracting
stem points lose a little in relative popularity in th e lower levels, and
Fig . 33 . Scott Site: A, relative percentages of projectile po ints and pots herds; B, relative
percentages of dart point stemm ing traditions.

274

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the expanding stems increase at the bottom, but not markedly so. My
opinion is that the Wann site represents only a brief segment of the
stratigraphic columns from the Yarbrough and Scott sites, and should
be correlated with their middle levels, representing late La Harpe
Aspect.
Limerick Site. Located in Rains County, Texas, on the upper Sabine
River, the Limerick site (Duffield, 1961) has both ceramic and preceramic components . T he cultural affiliations suggested by the assemblages of dart points and other artifacts in the lowest levels (Area C)

NO.

RELATIVE
25

o

SPEC.l

PERCENTAGES
50
75
100

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

11

I

I

I

I

I 6 LEVELS

973

I

1108

2

685

3

173

4

A. DART

POINTS
POTS HER OS

RELATIVE

IZ'.ZZ1

C=:J

PERCENTAGES
50
75
100

NO. O
11
S PE C. L-I. . . . .__._.....__L-L--L......L......J.__.__.__.__..__.__.__.__.'--'-_,.__.I 6 LEVE LS
205

I

264

2

283

3

71

4

8.

DART POINTS: CONTRACTING
STEM TRAOITIONIZZZJ. STRAIGHT
STEM TRAD.c::J. EXPANDING STEM
TRADITION ~:":·:·:.:,

Fig . 35 . Wann Site : A, relati ve percen tages of da rt po ints and potsherds ; B, re lative
pe rcentages of dart po int stemm ing t raditions .

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

275

have been thought to be primarily with the Elam Focus of the Trinity
Aspect. Whereas the Elam point, Gary dart points, leaf-shaped knives,
straight-edge gouges and "turtle-back" scrapers are present in these
lowest levels, arrow points and pottery are lacking. Since a majority of
the dart points from this early occupation are of the Gary type (which
is relatively late in the Yarbrough site sequence, barely antedating and,
later, occurring contemporaneously with ceramics), my own feeling is
that the early material at the Limerick site is closer to the middle section (Period 3 ) of the Yarbrough column and Area A of the Miller site
than to Elam. If this observation be correct, then we can include the
lower levels of Limerick with La Harpe Aspect.
The other archeological materials at the Limerick site seem to represent several late components. This material includes Alba, Minter (my
identification) , Bonham, Cliffton, and Perdiz arrow points as well as
potsherds of the Sanders Plain, Canton Incised, and Sanders Engraved
types. The plain pottery may well represent late La Harpe, comparing
favorably- with regard to general composition-with the upper levels
of the Yarbrough site (Area A) and Area B of the Miller site.
Jake Mart in Site. The Martin site (Davis and Davis, 1960 ) is located
in Upshur County, Texas, at the edge of the valley of Cypress Creek.
This site is entirely pre-ceramic, pre-arrow point in composition, containing, in a thin occupation zone, Pal eo-Indian projectile points of the
Meserve and San Patrice types (representing five per cent of the total
dart point sample), numerous expanding stem points primarily of the
Yarbrough type (representing 56 per cent), a few contracting stem
or semi-contracting stem or related points (Gary and Wells, 17 per
cent), a small number of straight stem forms (Elam, Carrollton,
Bulverde, Morrill, and Kent, six per cent), and various types intermediate between the straight and expanding stem traditions ( 16 per
cent).
Davis and Davis follow Suhm et al. ( 1954: 492 ) in assuming that
the Yarbrough and Yarbrough-like points constitute a late Archaic
type, this partly because they are sometimes found in ceramic sites.
Thus Davis and Davis assume that their dominance at Jake Martin
indicated that the site falls in the late Archaic. On the other hand, the
new evidence from the Yarbrough site indicates to me that Yarbrough
points and other expanding stem forms occur consistently earlier than
Gary points, ceramics, and arrow points, although they admittedly
may survive in very reduced numbers into later times (Newell and
Krieger, 1949: 168 ). To reiterate, the picture we have at the Yarbrough
site is that of ( 1) an early Archaic phase or period with Yarbrough
and other expanding stem dart points, (2) a later Archaic phase char-

276

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

acterized by Gary, (3) with the latter type continuing to increase in
relative abundance during early ceramic (terminal Archaic) timestoward the end of the La Harpe Aspect. An early Archaic date for the
Martin site-supported by the Yarbrough site stratigraphic column,
and the early occurrence of expanding stem dart points in Addicks
Reservoir and McGee Bend-agrees, I think, with the presence at
Martin of Meserve and San Patrice points, as well as with the complete
absence of pottery and arrow points at the Martin site (Davis and
Davis, 1960: 58) . The small Gary points at Martin, which are definitely Late Archaic, can be easily explained as representing a much
later component or occupation.
A comparison of the Yarbrough site and Martin site by types and
varieties of projectile points allows for a more specific dating of the
latter than was possible at the time when the Martin site was originally
analyzed. From all indications the main components represented at
the Martin site are of an early Archaic date, comparable to the lowest
levels (Period 2) of the Yarbrough site, Area A. The most significant
items supporting this assessment are the following: ( 1) the prevalence
at Martin of expanding stem dart points, as in the lower levels of the
Yarbrough site, (2) the presence of San Patrice and Meserve points,
which probably appear early at the Yarbrough site, (3) the presence
of stemless (Catan) points at Martin (although in small numbers)
which are very early at Yarbrough, (4) the presence of Bulverde
points at Martin, which are early at Yarbrough, and finally, ( 5 ) the
presence of the Yantis type at Martin (ibid.: Fig. 5, C), which is likewise early at the Fred Yarbrough site.
In summary, the Jake Martin site, which is primarily early Archaic,
apparently belongs to the early part of the La Harpe Aspect.
Boat Dock Site, The Boat Dock site (Bell, 1958), situated in Marshall
County, Oklahoma, has been assigned to the Bryan Focus, although
materials suggestive of the Carrollton and Elam foci were recovered
also. However, the exact cultural affinity of the site is still unsettled.
Simple shell-tempered pottery (Woodward Plain) and several sherds
of the Sanders Plain type clustered in the upper levels of the site, as
did arrow points and contracting stem dart points (Gary). Expanding
stem dart points occur in approximately even numbers throughout the
various levels. According to Bell ( 1958: 47) many different occupations are present at the site (ranging from Paleo-Indian through Historic Chickasaw) and, assuming that the site built up slowly over a
period of many years, we can understand the apparent mixture or
lack of good stratigraphic differentiation in the various artifact classes

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

2,77

and dart point stemming traditions. The site seems to represent the
middle part of the La Harpe Aspect, as well as several later cultural
units as well.
James Site. The James site (Ray, 1960 ) is located in Bryan County,
Oklahoma, and has been assigned to the late Archaic and Early Bryan
Focus. At this site Gary dart points constitute the major type, and begin in the lowest levels, increasing in popularity near the surface. Pottery, mostly of simple types, begins slightly later than Gary at the site
while, in the upper levels, arrow points make their appearance. Because of the lack of numerous expanding stem dart points, we may
correlate the James site with Periods 4 and 5 of the Yarbrough site
stratigraphic column, representing the La Harpe Aspect in part.
Sawmill Site. Located in McGee Bend Reservoir, on a sandy ridge
overlooking the Angelina River, San Augustine County, Texas, the
Sawmill site (Tunnell, 1961 ) has components dating from Archaic to
Neo-American times. The lowest levels of this site contain large percentages of various expanding stem dart points (as is the case in the
lowest levels at the Yarbrough site) , while Gary points (represented
by only five specimens), arrow points, and potsherds are confined almost exclusively to the middle and upper zones. There is also some
indication that ceramics were introduced into the site before arrow
points, and that the percentages of sand-tempered potsherds (an early
ty pe ) , compared to the decorated clay-tempered sherds, increase with
depth. This agrees with the general finding that late La Harpe Aspect
ceramics are simple and almost crude in appearance. The whole sequence at the Sawmill site, then, up to the introduction of arrow points
and abundant ceramics, is typical of the La Harpe Aspect.
Runnells Sites 1 and 2. The E. E. Runnells sites (Tunnell, 1961 ) are
located in San Augustine County, Texas, not far from the Sawmill site,
in McGee Bend Reservoir. At E. E. Runnells No. 1 we have a picture
much like that presented by the cultural stratigraphy of the Sawmill
site. Expanding stem dart points (representing a relatively early Archaic date ) are common in the lowest levels of the site, decreasing in
relative popularity toward the surface. Contracting stem projectile
points (Gary) begin in the middle zones and increase in numbers toward the top of the column, as does the simple, sand-tempered pottery.
Both clay-tempered (more complex) pottery and arrow points make
their appearance later. This site, up until the introduction of arrow
points and the abundant and rather advanced clay-tempered pottery,
belongs to the La Harpe Aspect. Runnells site No. 2, seems to be identi-

278

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cal to No. 1, but lacks adequate depth to allow for the meaningful
stratigraphic differentiation presented above for site No. 2.
Doering, Kobs, and Grisbee Sites. The Doering site (Wheat, 1953 )
and certain materials from the Kobs and Grisbee sites. represent the
La Harpe Aspect. These sites are situated in Harris County, Texas,
near the city of Houston, in Addicks Reservoir. At the Doering site,
which has a relatively deep stratigraphic column representing a comparatively long time period, Wheat found that dart points are strongly
represented in the lower excavation levels, while pottery is rare and of
the simple, sand-tempered type (Fig. 36, A ) . In the upper levels, however, the relative number of dart points decreases, pottery gains in
popularity, and arrow points appear. In respect to dart point stemming
traditions, expanding stem points are popular in the lower levels (Fig.
36, B) while contracting stem points (Gary and related types ) are
more popular in the middle and upper levels. Both the level-by-level
change in the relative popularity of dart points, potsherds, and arrow
points, and the popularity of the stemming traditions at various depths,
agree with the column obtained from the Fred Yarbrough site. Hence
the Doering site, up until the introduction of arrow points and numerous decorated potsherds, may be considered as La Harpe Aspect.
The Kobs and Grisbee sites present the same general picture except
that they begin after the introduction of ceramics and have, in their
upper zones, an abundance of arrow points and non-La Harpe elements. Their lower levels, however, may be assigned to this aspect, and
agree in composition with the Doering site.

The La Harpe Aspect-Summary Statement
The above-mentioned archeological sites from Oklahoma and Texas
have been grouped together under the La Harpe Aspect because they
show all, or part, of a common sequential, prehistoric development
which occurred on the western fringe of the woodland area from early
Archaic Stage times (excluding h ere Meserve and San Patrice from
the Archaic on stylistic grounds) to the time of extensive settlement
with abundant ceramics and arrow points. This whole complex fits
Willey and Phillips' (1958: 104- 143) "functional " definition of the
Archaic but, according to the classificatory system proposed by Suhm
et al. ( 1954), would likely be classified in its latter phase as early NeoAmerican stage.
The present definition of the La Harpe Aspect constitutes only a
rudimentary beginning at organizing this Archaic archeological ma-

279

YARBROUGH AN D MILLER SITES

RELATIVE

PERCENTAGES

o.__..__.____.____._2~5_._~......__,50___.__.____.____._1L5-'-.__.._~10~0 I) tM.LEVELS
SNo.c.
PE
25
I
53

2

58

3

69

4

69

5

53

6

~

7

5

8

A.

DART POINTS !Z2=Zl
ARROW POINTS ~:··:·:-:-::·. I
POTSHERDS C:::::J
RELATIVE

NO. 0
SPEC.

25

PERCENTAGES

50

75

100 l.tc.rM. LEVELS

7

I

30
37

2
"3
:·:·:::.: :

54

4

61

5

49

6

29

7

4

8

8.

DART PTS.: CONTRACT. STEM
TRAD. ·u::Z:.J,STRAIGHT STEM
TRAD.c=:J,EXPANDING STEM
TR AO. 1:::::;.::;.: I

Fig. 36 . Doering Site : A, relative percentages of dart points, arrow points , and potsherds; B, relative percentages of the dart point stemming traditions.

terial. l\1any problems remain to be answered, sm aller taxonomic units
remain to be defined, and typologies want definition. The dearth of
site reports precludes any further, meaningful elaboration at this time,

280

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and we can now only point out certain problems and possibilities along
which lines future investigators may wish to channel their energies.
For one thing, it will eventually be possible to subdivide La Harpe
along two lines, one temporal, the other areal. Even in a brief treatment such as that embodied in the present paper, one can see certain
specific differences between the materials found in Oklahoma, the
central area (northern Texas) , and the southern area (the sites near
Houston and those from McGee Bend). It will probably be possible, at
some future date, to recognize these areal differences by naming new
foci within the La Harpe Aspect.
On a temporal level, it may be possible to express the differences
between the early part of the La Harpe Aspect (with many expanding
stem dart points ), late La Harpe (with its contracting stem dart
points), and terminal La Harpe Aspect (with plain-ware ceramics)
by means of new taxonomic units. At the present state of knowledge,
however, it seems most advisable to delay this breakdown until more
data can be acquired. And this can only come about through a more
determined campaign of field work in the area.

References Cited
Allen, Henry Easton
1939. The Parrilla Expedition to the Red River in 1759. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vol. 43, July. Austin.
Atwood, Wallace W.
1940. The Physiographic Provinces of North America. Boston.
Baerreis, David Albert
1951. The Preceramic Horizons of Northeastern Oklahoma. Anthropological
Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 6. Ann
Arbor.
Bell, Robert E.
1953. The Scott Site, Le Flore County, Oklahoma. American Antiquity, Vol. 18,
No. 4, April, pp. 314-331. Menasha.
1958. Archaeological Investigations at th e Boat Dock Site, Ma-1, in the Lake
T exoma Area, Marshall County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 6, March, pp. 37-47. Oklahoma City.
Bell, Robert E. and David A. Baerreis
1951. A Survey of Oklahoma Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 7-100. Lubbock.
Blair, Frank W.
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2. No. 1,
pp. 93-117. Austin.
Campbell, T. N.
1952. The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. Bulletin of

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

281

the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
Lubbock.
Cotter, John L.
1952. The Gordon Site in Southern Mi~sissippi. American Antiquity, Vol. 18,
No. 2, October, pp. 110-126.. Menasha.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeofogical and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 7-38. Lubbock.
1954. Traits of the Trinity Aspect Archaic: Carrollton and Elam Foci. The
Record, Publication of the Dallas Archaeological Society, Vol. 12, No. 1,
February, pp. 2--16. Dallas.
Davis, E. Mott
1953. Recent Data from Two Paleo-Indian Sites on Medicine Creek, Nebraska.
American Antiquity, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 380-386. Menasha.
Davis, W. A. and E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir
Area, Northeastern Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 3, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas. Austin.
Dice, Lee R.
1943. The Biotic Provinces of North American. Ann Arbor.
Duffield, Lathe! F.
1959. Archeological Reconnaissance at Cooper Reservoir, Delta and Hopkins
Counties, Texas, February, 1959. Report to the U. S. National Park Service
by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Austin.
1961. The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, T exas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, for 1959 (in press ) . Austin.
Duffield, Lathe! F. and Edward B. Jelks
1960. The Pearson Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 4. The University of Texas. Austin.
Gifford, Jam es C.
1960. The Type-Variety Method of Ceramic Classification as an Indicator of
Cultural Phenomena. American Antiquity, Vol. 25, No. 3, January, pp.
341-347. Salt Lake City.
Hall, Roland Scott
1954. Ck-44: A Bluff Shelter Site from Northeastern Oklahoma. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthmpological Society, Vol. 2, March, pp. 49-67. Oklahoma
City.
Harper, Elizabeth Ann
1953. The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade and Diplomacy, 1779-1835.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Review. Canyon, Texas.
Harrington, M. R.
1920. Certain Caddo Sites in Arkansas. Indian Notes and Monographs, Museum
of the American Indian, Heye Foundation, Vol. 10. New York.

282

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Honea, Kenneth H .
1960. Pitted Stones and the Bipolar Flaking Technique in East T exas. Manuscript.
Jelks, Edward B.
1957. Excavations at McGee Bend Reservoir, Southeastern Texas. Manuscript.
Jelks, Edwa rd B. and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959. The Harroun Site: A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, T exas. Archaeology Series, No. 2, Department of Anthropology, The University of T exas. Austin.
J oh nson, LeRoy , Jr., and Edward B. J elks
1958. The T awakoni-Yscani Village, 1760: A Study in Arch eologi cal Site
Identification . The T exas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, D ecember,
pp. 405-422. Austin.
Kelley, J. Charles
1947. The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah, Uvalde, and
Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the T exas Arch eological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 18, pp. 115-128. Lubbock.
Krieger, Alex D .
1944. The Typological Concept. American Antiquity, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 271-288.
Menasha.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publica tion No. 4640. Austin.
1956. Historic Survival of the Atlatl in the Lower Mississippi Region. Bulletin
of the Texas Arch eological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 195-207. Austin.
MacN eish, Richard S.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de T am a ulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, n .s., Vol. 48,
Pt. 6. Philadelphia.
Miller, E. 0. and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archeological Excavations at the .Belton Reservoir. Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 168-217. Lubbock.
Moorman, Edward H . and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of the Cooper Reservoir, Delta
and Hopkins Counties, Texas. River Basin Su rveys, Smithsonian Institution, Texas Area. Austin.
Newell, H. Perry and Al ex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. D avis Site, Cherokee County, T exas. Memoir No. 5, American Antiquity , Vol. 14, No. 4, Pt. 2, April. M enasha.
Phillips, Philip
1958. Application of the vVheat-Gifforcl-Wasley T axonomy to Eastern Ceramics.
American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 2, October, pp. 117- 125. Salt Lake City.
Phillips, Philip, James A. Ford and James B. Griffin
1951. Archeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Alluvial Valley, 19401947. Papers of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and
Ethnology, H arvard University, Vol. 25. Cambridge.

YARBROUGH AND MILLER SITES

283

Proctor, Charles
1957. The Sam Site, Lf-Z8, of Le Flore County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 5, March, pp. 45-91. Oklahoma
City.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1941. The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. Bulletin of the Texas
A:rcheological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, pp. 15Z- 16Z. Abilene.
Ray, Max A.
1960. The James Site, Br- 11 , An Archaeological Site in Bryan County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 8, April,
pp. 53-74. Oklahoma City.
Rouse, Irving
1939. Prehistory in Haiti: A Study in Method. Yale University Publications in
Anthropology, No. Z1. New Haven.
1960. The Classification of Artifacts in Archaeology. American Antiquity, Vol.
Z5, No. 3, January, pp. 313-32.3. Salt Lake City.
Sapir, Edward
19Z9. Central and North American Indian Languages. Encyclopaedia Britannica,
14th Edition, Vol. 5, pp. 138-141. London.
Schultz, C. Bertrand
193Z. Association of Artifacts and Extinct Mammals m Nebraska. Nebraska
Museum, Bulletin 33, Vol. 1, pp. 171-183. Lincoln.
Sellards, E. H.
195Z. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. Austin.
Shaeffer, James B.
1957. The McCarter Site, A Late Archaic Occupation at Muskogee, Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. Z8, pp. Z40-Z68. Austin.
Sharrock, Floyd W .
1960. The Wann Site, Lf-Z7, of the Fourche Maline Focus. Bulletin of the
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 8, April, pp. 17-47. Oklahoma
City.
Smith, Robert E., Gordon R. Willey, and James C. Gifford
1960. The Type-Variety Concept as a Basis for the Analysis of Maya Pottery.
American Antiquity, Vol. Z5, No. 3, January, pp. 331-340. Salt Lake City.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. J elks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology . .Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. Z5. Austin.
Swadesh, Mauricio
1959. Mapas de Clasificaci6n Linguistica de Mexico y Las Americas. Cuadernos
del Instituto de Historia, Serie Antropol6gica No. 8. Mexico, D. F.
Swanton, John R.
1942.. Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 13Z. Washington.
Tunnell , Curtis D.
1961. Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites in the McGee Bend

284

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Reservoir, San Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, for 1959 (in press). Austin.
Webb, C.H.
1946. Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts from Northwest Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 17,
pp. 9-17. Abilene.
Webb, William S.
1939. An Archaeological Survey of Wheeler Basin on the Tennessee River in
Northern Alabama. Bureau of American Ethnology. Bulletin 122.. Washington.
Webb, William S. and David L. DeJarnette
1942.. An Archeological Survey of Pickwick Basin in the Adjacent Portions of
the States of Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 129. Washington.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 174. Washington.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154, No. 4, pp. 143-2.52.. Washington.
Wheat, Joe Ben, James C. Gifford, and William W. Wasley
1958. Ceramic Variety, Type Cluster, and Ceramic System in Southwestern
Pottery Analysis. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 1, July, pp. 34--47.
Salt Lake City.
Willey, Gordon R. and Philip Phillips
1958. Method and Theory in American Archaeology. Chicago.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect
Site In Northeastern Texas
J. DAN SCURLOCK

Introduction

The Culpepper site is located in the southwestern or Texas portion
of the Caddoan Area, an area which includes northwestern Louisiana,
southwestern Arkansas, southeastern Oklahoma, and northeastern
Texas. As defined by Webb (1960: 35), the Texas portion of the Caddoan Area extends from the Louisiana-Texas boundary westward to
the Trinity River and from the Red River southward to about the latitude of Jasper, Texas.
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 16-21 ) have recognized four stages
of cultural development in northeastern Texas-Paleo-American, Archaic, Neo-American, and Historic. The Paleo-American Stage is
poorly known and is represented primarily by surface finds of early
styles of dart points, such as Plainview, Meserve, and Scottsbluff. For
the Archaic Stage an East Texas Aspect has been defined (ibid .: 148151) , but not on the basis of published excavations. However, since
1954 one Archaic site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir has been excavated and published (Davis and Davis, 1960 ). The Neo-American
Stage in northeastern Texas is much better known and represents a
series of occupations by Caddoan peoples in prehistoric and early historic times. Two aspects, Gibson (earlier) and Fulton (later) have
been recognized, each being divided into foci representing regional
variations. For the Caddoan Area as a whole, five foci have been defined for the Gibson Aspect (Alto, Gahagan, Spiro, Haley, and Sanders ) and ten for the Fulton Aspect (Bossier, Frankston, Titus, Texarkana, Belcher, McCurtain, Turkey Bluff, Mid-Ouachita, Allen, and
Glendora).
The Culpepper site, which is the subject of this study, appears to
have been occupied during two stages-Archaic and Neo-American,
with the Neo-American occupation attributable to the Titus Focus of

286

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Fulton Aspect. The Titus Focus was originally defined on the
basis of lithic and ceramic collections from sites that were not explored
by carefully controlled excavations. Since 1954 five Titus Focus sites
have been excavated: Harroun (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959), McKinney
(Davis and Golden, 1960 ), Whelan (Davis, 1958 ), Segal (Davis and
Davis, 1961 ), and Dalton (Davis and Gipson, 1960 ), with the result
that the Titus Focus trait list has been expanded. The Culpepper site
is significant, not so much because it adds new Fulton Aspect traits, but
because its ceramic complex throws light on the time range of certain
key pottery types of the Fulton Aspect and suggests that the Titus
Focus extended into the historic period.

Excavations at Culpepper Site
This site is located on the H. L. Culpepper farm five miles south of
Saltillo, Hopkins County (Fig. 1) . This open burial site is associated
with a sandy knoll located on the south bank of Stouts Creek (Fig. 2).
It has had three site number designations, ET-34, 19D7-1, and 41HP1 ,
the last being the currently used site number. It was excavated during
the period of May 15 to May 19, 1931, by The University of Texas
under the field direction of A. T. Jackson. Excavation was financed
with funds from the Rockefeller Foundation. During the course of
excavation eight burials were uncovered that contained 34 complete or
restorable vessels, three arrow points, and one celt. Approximately 85
feet southwest of the burial area is a midden that probably represents
a village. Excavation in this midden yielded a mano. a metate, five
projectile points, and a flint knife. Various other lithic and ceramic artifacts were found on the surface and in exploratory digging in the
vicinity of the burials.
Thirty years prior to these excavations human skeletons and pottery
vessels were exposed by an overflow of Stouts Creek. Thereafter collectors dug at the site periodically. They are reported to have excavated
14 burials and 25 complete pottery vessels. In the fall of 1930 A. T .
Jackson purchased 17 specimens from B. F. Perkins of Weaver, Texas,
and this collection reputedly contains some artifacts from the Culpepper site.
The field notes on the Culpepper site are sketchy and inadequate by
present standards. Texas archeology was in its infancy at that time and
more emphasis was placed on collecting and displaying artifacts than
on scientific analysis and interpretation. The collection and the field
notes are at the Department of Anthropology of The University of

287

CULPEPPER SITE

OKLAHOMA

\
I

\

ARKANSAS

Caddo
Lake

LA.

TEXAS

l"'"

Fig. 1 . Map showing location of the Culpepper site.

Texas. An artifact inventory is included in the field notes , Nos. 1 to 71
being given to artifacts found in the burials and in general digging.
However, there are artifacts in the collection which have numbers
higher than 71, and these are not listed in the field notes. The highest
numbered artifact is No. 101.

288

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Burial Area
A total of eight single, extended burials was found in the low sandy
knoll adjacent to Stouts Creek. All of the skeletal material was in a
poor state of preservation, and in some cases only teeth and traces of
bone were found. Thus no data could be obtained on age, sex, or pathology. All of the burials contained artifacts.
According to local reports, 14 burials were removed from this site
prior to excavation by The University of Texas. Burials 2, 3. and 7
showed disturbance by previous excavators, and Burials 4 and 8 had
been disturbed by plowing. The burials were found at depths ranging
from three to 31 inches below the surface. In seven of the eight burials
the skeletons appear to have been oriented along an east-west axis,
with head to the east. This is open to question, however, because most
of the burials had been disturbed and were in a poor state of preservation. Burial 7 was definitely oriented northwest-southeast, with head
to southwest.
The greatest number of pottery vessels was found in Burial 6, which
contained seven. Most of the vessels were placed around the head and
shoulder regions of the body. Only Burials 5 and 6 contained bottles, a
Taylor Engraved bottle in Burial 5 and a Hodges Engraved bottle in
Burial 6, both spool-necked. Burial 1 contained a celt, and Burials 4, 6,
and 8 contained projectile points. No pipes accompanied any of the
eight burials.
Burial 1. Portions of this burial had been washed aw ay by flooding of Stouts
Creek. A total of six artifacts accompanied this burial, which lay at a depth of 30
inches and contained only a trace of skeletal m aterial. Th e h ead was oriented
toward the east.
Five pottery vessels (Nos. 1-5) and a celt (No. Sa) were grouped n ear traces of
the skull. F our of the vessels lay at the h ead of the grave and were arra nged in a
straight lin e that ran north-sou th. A fifth vesse l lay to the left of the skull and a
celt just south of this vessel. No record wa s made of the specifi c locations of individual vessels in any of the eight graves excavated. Specimens 3 and 5 are now
missing from the collection.
Three of the vess zls are bowls and two are pots (missing specimens identifiable
in field sketch es) . Vessel No. 1 is of type Simms Engraved, Vessel No. 2 is Ripley
Engraved, and Vessel No. 4 is L a Rue Neck Banded.
Burial 2 ( Fig. 3) . Burial 2 was found at a depth of 19 inches below the surface
and was 15.5 feet east-southeast of Burial 1. It had been disturbed by previous
excavators. The skeleton was fully ex tended on its back w ith h ead to the east. In
additi on to the sku ll, eight teeth and fragments of th e arms, pelvis, and legs were
identifiable.
Six vessels (Nos. 17-22) were associated with this burial , four pots and two bowls.
T hey wer e all placed east and north of the skeleton, three being arranged at the

289

CULPEPPER SITE

1
N

/

/
/
/
/
/
/
/

/
/
/
/
/

/
/
/

/
/

/
/

.......

I I I I I I I \

\

\\

'

'

Fig . 2 . Location of burials in the sandy knoll at the Culpepper site .

head of the grave in a north-south line, the fourth just to the right of the skull,
the fifth to the right of the pelvis, and the sixth near the right knee. Two vessels
are of Ripl ey Engraved type, one La Rue Neck Banded, and the remaining three
of unknown t ypes. Two flint flakes were noted near th e pelvis.
Burial 3. This was located 33 feet south-southwest of Burial 1 and at a depth of
18 inches. No skull was present, and only small fragments of leg bones could be

290

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 3 . Burial 2 at the Culpepper site .

identified. As this burial had been disturbed by previous excavation, orientation
is uncertain. Three bowls and a pot (Nos. 24-26) were associated with this burial.
Vessel Nos. 23, 24, and 26 are of Ripley Engraved type, and Vessel, No. 25 is of
La Rue Neck Banded type.
Burial 4. This burial, which con tained on ly fragments of the skull and leg bones,
was found 8.5 feet southwest of Burial 2 at a depth of three to five inches. I t was
badly disturbed by plowing and also by floodwater erosion. Although the field notes
state that only two badly crushed vessels were found, vessels n umbered 27, 27a,
and 27b are listed as coming from this burial. The three vessels are identifiable
respectively as Taylor Engraved, Hodges Engraved, and Nash Neck Banded. Field
records do not indicate where these vessels were located with respect to the skeleton.
Three arrow points accompanied this burial, but only one, a Talco point ( No. 28),
survives in the Cu lpepper collection. Although the points numbered 29 and 30 are
missing, outlines drawn in the fie ld notes indicate that they are also of Talco type.
Burial 5. This was located 73 feet southeast of Burial 1 and lay at a depth of 23
inches. The field record states that this burial was oriented east-west, with head
toward the east; but this is questionable, 1-ince the record also states that only a trace
of bone could be observed .
Five vessels ( Nos. 31-35, none complete) were found in this burial. One of these
is of Ripley Engraved typ e (No. 31), a second is a Taylor Engraved bottle (No. 32),
and a third is an Avery Engraved vase (No. 35). Vessel No. 33 is missing from
the collection and No. 34 is of unknown type.
A fi eld sketch of the burial shows a vessel placed on each side of the presumed
neck region, two on the chest, and another near the left hand. Two flint flakes
were noted near the feet.
Burial 6 (Fig. 4). Bu rial 6 was loca ted 7.5 feet southwest of Burial 5 and lay at
a depth of 29 inches below the surface. It was oriented northeast-southwest, with
head to the northeast. Th e only skeletal remains consisted of 12 teeth.
Seven vessels were associated with this burial ( Nos. 36--42), only one of which
was complete ( No. 36) . These includ e one vessel of Taylor Engraved, one of
Hodges Engraved, two of Womack Engraved, one of Simms Engraved , one similar

291

CULPEPPER SITE

Fig . 4. Bu ri al 6 at the Culpepper site .

to Avery Engraved, and one of unknown type. Three of these vessels were at the
head of the grave in an almost north-south line, two were on opposite sides of the
12 teeth, and the remainder were on the right side of the body area. Two projectile
points of Gary type (Nos. 43 and 44) were near the presumed knee region.
Burial 7. This disturbed burial was found about 32 feet northwest of Burial 6 at
a depth of 31 inches. Its axis was northwest-southeast, with head to the southeast.
Five broken vessels (Nos. 45, 45b, 46-48) were present, all of Ripley Engraved
type except No. 46, which is missing from the collection, and No. 48, which is of
Nash Neck Banded type. A small quantity of clay was found inside one of the bowls
(specific bowl not identified in field record).
Burial 8. This was found 16 feet southwest of Burial 1 at a depth of 8 inches
(shallowness due primarily to erosion and plowing). The head was to the east,
the feet to the west. About half of the skull, most of the teeth, and miscellaneous
leg bone fragments were present. vVith this burial four incomplete vessels were
associated (Nos. 59a, 59b, 60, 61 ), one of Taylor Engraved type (No. 59b), two of
Ripley Engraved type (5 9a, 60 ), and one of unknown type ( No. 61 , missing from
collection). Positions of these vessels in the burial are not recorded.

292

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Test Trench
A test trench (no dimensions recorded) was dug in the midden
southwest of Burial 6, and this yielded a metate (depth 18 inches), a
mano (depth 20 inches ) , a scraper (depth 23 inches), and some five to
eight projectile points at various depths ( 12, 14, 20, and 37 inches
specified) . The projectile points from this test trench cannot be identified in the collection.

Pottery Vessels
A total of forty-nine pottery vessels, complete and incomplete, is
now in the collection from the Culpepper site (see Table 1). Thirtyfour of these were found in association with burials. They vary greatly
in type, form, and shape. Only three bowls are of the true shouldered
type (Fig. 5, C, G, J) described by Krieger ( 1946: 226). Most of the
bowls are carinated, having steep sides and vertical rims. Two bottles
were found in burials, both having short spool necks.
Nine purchased vessels are included in the collection. Five of these
are Ripley Engraved, two are Tay lor Engraved, one is A very Engraved, and one is a Keno Trailed bottle, the only vessel of this type
in the collection.
Most of the vessels are engraved ( 78 %) , and the majority are either
of Ripley Engraved (39%) or of Taylor Engraved ( 15%) type. The
scroll or spiral is the most common decoration motif, and designs are
commonly repeated four times around the rim. Four vessels are neckbanded with applique design. Incising is rare and brushing is absent.
The majority of the vessels are clay or sherd tempered. Only one
(No. 17 ) is shell tempered, and it is incomplete and of unidentifiable
type. Buff is the most common color, but 16 vessels are red filmed. Most
of the vessels are thick and quite heavy, and most of the designs are
crude and poorly executed.
Ripley Engraved. The collection includes 19 vessels of Ripley Engraved type, 1Z
of which are from burials, all of the burials except Burial 4 and Burial 6 containing
at least one vessel. Ten of these 19 vessels are red filmed. All are carinated bowls
except for one shouldered bowl (purchased) and one small jar. Only the rims bear
decoration, and all of the lips are rounded. The paste is compact in all of these
vessels.
These Ripley Engraved vessels have been divided into three size groups: (1)
small, with oral diameter not greater than 15 cm. or height greater than 10 cm.;
(2) medium, with oral diameter between 15 and 20 cm. and height between 10
and 15 cm.; and (3) large, with oral diameter between 20 and 25 cm. and height
between 15 and 20 cm.

293

CULP E P PER SI TE

A

c

B

D
E

F

H

G

J

Fig. 5. Pottery vessels from the Culpepper site . A, Ripley Engraved (height 8.2 cm . I;
8, Ripley Engraved (height 9 .75 cm.); C, Ripley Engraved (height l 0 .25 cm.I; D, Ripley
Engraved ( height 7 .96 cm . ); E, Ripley Engraved (height 16.6 cm . ); F, Ripley Engraved
(height 15 .2 cm.I; G, Simms Engraved (height 6.5 cm.I; H, Womack Engraved (height 14 .2
cm.I ; I, Womac k Engraved (height 15 .3 cm.I ; J , Simms Engraved (height 9 .7 cm.I.

294

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE
Provenience of Pottery Vessels in the Culpepper Collection

-~

ii

Ripley Engraved
Taylor Engraved
Womack
Engraved
Simms Engraved
Hodges Engraved
A very Engraved
AYery-like
Engraved
La Rue Neck
Banded
Nash Neck
Banded
Keno Trailed
Other Engraved
Miscellaneous
Totals
3

""§

~

·-u
ii

2

3

"u

'-"

.,,.

Cl

~

r:

.;s

ii

~

ii

"

"'

3

"

a

u

;3

§.:

~

"'~

·- >

l

~ g
0 -"
u c
c. ~ c.

5
2

2
1

2

0

tll

5
~

~

"
19
7

39
15

3
2
2
2

6
4
4
4
2

2
6

4

3

4

7

4

3

2
4

9

3

6

2
1
3
4
49

4
2
6
8
100

(1) Small group (Fig. 5, A, B, D; Fig. 6, A , B; Fig. 9, A , B, D). Six specimens.
Shape- carinated bowls (4 specimens ) , a sbouldered bowl, and ·one jar. Decoration
- two with excised triangles between two parallel lin es on rim (almost identical
in size; both red filmed, one each found in Burial 1- see Fig. 5., A, and Fig. 6, Aand Burial 2 ) ; stylized scroll (Fig. 6, B) and use of excised hour-glass symbols.
Average rim thickness-4.7 mm. Provenience-four from burials; two purchased.
(2 ) Medium group (Fig. 5, C; Fig. 6, C; Fig. 9, E- G ). Seven speciments. Shapecarinated bowls (Fig. 9, E-F ) . Decoration-stylized scrolls with excised hour-glass
figures (three are red filmed )-see Fig. 6, C. Average rim thickness- 6.2 mm.
Provenience-five from burials, one of unknown provenience, one from surface.
(3 ) Large group (Fig. 5, E-F; Fig. 6, D; Fig. 9, N ) . Six specimens. Shapecarinated bowls (Fig. 9, N ) . Decoration-stylized scrolls and hour-glass (one red
filmed ) ; conventionalized scroll of parallel lines with hooked arms at the ends,
repeated three times around the rim (one specimen ) -s2e Fig. 6, D. Average
r im thickness- 6 mm. Provenience-two from burials, three purchased, one of unknown provenience. Remarks- two bowls have unusual shapes; one is illustrated by
Suhm et al. (1954: Plate 58, D ) ; the other is a very high ( 16.6 cm. ) , steep-walled,
red-filmed vessel that tapers to a small base.
Two additional vessels, r epresented by red-filmed sherds decorated with engraved
scrolls, were found in Burial 8. The sherd thicknesses average 7.5 mm.
Taylor Engraved. The collection includes seven Taylor Engraved vessels, four of
which are bottles, three having bulbous n ecks (the neck of the fourth vessel is
missing ) . Two other vessels are small, r ed-film ed jar s, and the seventh vessel is a

295

CULPEP PER SITE

A

W[(~~~l(
B

J(~lC
c

D

0

I

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10
~

CM.

Fig. 6. Designs from pottery vessels at the Culpepper site . A-D, Ripley Engraved ; E,
Womack Engraved .

296

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

steep-walled bowl. All vessels are decorated with scrolls or spirals with their centers
containing one, two, or three hooking arms. All have well-finished surfaces, and the
bottles show evidence of having been polished. The paste is dark and compact.
( 1) Bottles (Fig. 7, A ). Four specimens. Shape---globular bodies, bulbous necks.
Lip--11aring widely on two vessels, rolled out slightly on another. Decoration- walls
bear tight spirals with hooking arms in center; red pigment in the engraved lines
of the two flaring lip bottles; difficult to determine whether the design on one black
bottle was incised or engraved-this vessel has two complete scrolls on its base;
fourth bottle (incomplete) also black in color. Dimensions-height ranges from
15 to 18 cm.; oral diameter from 2 to 4.6 cm.; neck length from 4 .9 to 5.75 cm.
Provenience-two bottles purchased; two found in burials.
(2) Jars (Fig. 8, A; Fig. 9, H ) . One of the two jars has been restored and is
illustrated in Suhm et al. (1954: Plate 65, D ) ; the other is incomplete and only
partially restored. Shape-steep-sided jars, rim flaring out slightly, lip rounded
(see Fig. 9, H ) . Decoration- red filmed, tight scrolls engraved on rim with two
arms hooking toward one another in center· of the scrolls; white paste exposed by
engraving contrasts sharply with the reel filming. Dimensions of restored vesselheight 9.25 cm.; oral diameter 11.2 cm.; wall thickness 3 mm. ·wall thickness of
unrestored vessel-6 mm. Provenience---found in burials.
(3) Bowl (Fig. 8, A ) . Condition-restored but still incomplete. Shape-steepwallecl carinated bowl. vertical rim, rounded lip. Decoration- tight, negative scrolls;
hooking arms in center of scrolls; scrolls set between two parallel lines encircling
rim (see Fig. 8, A ) . Dimensions-height 14.25 cm.; oral diameter 29 cm.; wall
thickness 6 mm.
Womack Engraved (Fig. 5, H-I; Fig. 6, E; Fig. 9, I-J ) . Three vessels have been
identified as Womack Engraved on the basis of definition by Duffield and Jelks
(1961: 36-38). This type resembles Hodges Engraved and is commonly associated
with protohistoric and historic sites in north central and northeastern Texas. Two
of the vessels are heavy, squat bowls, while the third is a miniature duplicate of the
larger two. The paste is gray, compact, and tempered with clay.
Shape---squat, iim incurved, walls slightly concave between base and rim,
shoulder area rounded. base flat (see Fig. 9, I-J ) .
Decoration-engraved, negative meandering scrolls set between two ho1izontal
lines that encircle the vessel, one at the lip, the other just below the shoulder (see
Fig. 6, E ); red pigment present in scrolls; vessel gray and shows firing clouds;
area between scrolls filled in with arched parallel lines .
Dimensions- Height: large bowls, 14.2 and 15.3 cm.; small bowl 8.7 cm. Wall
thickness: large bowls, 7.5 and 5 mm.; small bowl, 5 mm.
Remarks- Included with the two large bowls in Bmial 6 were a Taylor Engraved
jar, a Simms Engraved bowl, an Avery-iike Engraved bowl, a Hodges Engraved
bottle, a very unusual squat bowl with a wide flaring rim (to be discussed later),
and two Gary points. The presence of these Womack Engraved vessels with Titus
Focus and Texarkana Focus ty pes indicates that perhaps th ese foci continued into
priotohistoric and perhaps even historic times. The presence of two Gary points may
also be significant in extending the temporal range of this projectile point type
further into the Neo-American Stage.
Simms Engraved (Fig. 5, G, J; Fig. 9, K- L). This type is represented by two
vessels, one a miniature bowl, the other a small bowl. Both are dark gray in surface
color and have a dark paste.

B

c

A

E

D

F

H

G

J
Fig. 7 . Pottery vessels from the Culpepper site. A, Taylor Engraved ( height 15 cm.I; B,
Hodges Engraved (height 15 .9 cm.); C, Keno Trailed (height 11.7 cm.I; D, Avery Engraved
!height 20.1 cm.I; E, pipe (height of bowl 7 . 1 cm .); F, Avery-like Engraved (height 15 cm .);
G, engraved vessel ( height 7 .5 cm.I; H, pipe (height of bowl 5 cm.); I, engraved vessel
{height 12.2 cm.I; J, engraved vessel (height 9 .7 cm.I.

298

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Shape- steep-walled, shouldered bowls with incurving rims (see Fig. 9, K-L); the
small bowl has an incurved rim that turns back upward in a vertical position.
Decoration- engraved lines on rim; use of ticked lines; small bowl has red pigment in the engraved lines; both ha ve a ticked lip.

A

B

c
0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

CM .
Fig . 8 . Designs o n pottery vessels from the Culpepper site . A, Taylor Eng rave d ; 8-C, unide ntified e ngraved .

Dimensions-Height: small bowl, 6.5 cm.; large bowl, 9.7 cm. Oral diametersmall bowl, 8.1 cm.; large bowl, 13.5 cm. Wall thickness-small bowl, 3 mm.;
large bow1, 6 mm.

CULPEPPER SITE

299

Provenience- small bowl from Burial 6, large one from Burial 1.
H odges Engraved. Only one of the two vessels, a bottle, is complete. The other is
represented by Z6 decorated sherds, part of the base, and po·r tions of the rim.
( 1) Bottle ( Fig. 7, B) . This polished gray bottle is quite light in weight and
appears to have been temp ered with shell, which has been lea ched out. leaving a
pitted surface. Shape-spool-shaped neck, fl aring lip, globular body, pedestal base.
Decoration-negative scrolls filled in with engraved cross-hatching cover entire
body; space around scrolls blank. Dimensions: h eight 15.9 cm.; height of neck 6 cm.;
oral diameter 4.5 cm.; neck wall thickness 3 mm. Provenience-Burial 6.
(Z) Sherds of second vessel ( Fig. 9, M; Fig. 10, E). Shape-appears to have been
a steep-sided bowl with slightly outcurving rim and lip (see Fig. 9, M ) . D ecora tion
- scrolls filled with engraved cross-hatching; lip scalloped. Color-gray to buff.
VVall thickness-4 mm. Provenience-Burial 4.
Avery Engraved ( Fig. 7. D ; Fig. 9, 0 ). This type is represented by two redfilmed vessels, a large vase found in a burial and a purchased carinated bowl.
Both have compact black paste.
(1) Vase (Fig. 7, D ) . Condition- restored and nearly complete. Shape-steepwalled vessel with flaring rim and lip; mouth much wider than body; lip rounded
(see Fig. 9, 0 ) . Decoration-wide engraved lines cut into white paste, contrasting
sharply with red filming; design consists of semicircular motifs with ticked lines
and spirals set in between. Dimensions: height Z0 .1 cm.; oral diameter Z7 cm.;
wall thi ck ness- 6 mm. Provenience- Burial 5.
(Z) Bowl (illustrated by Suhm et al., 1954, Plate 1, F). Shape-heavy, squat;
very similar to the two large Womack Engraved bowls; rounded shoulder and
s li ghtly concave body walls. Decora tion-engraved semicircular motifs repeated
five tim es around rim and set between two parallel horizontal lines, one encircling
rim at the lip, the other just below the shoulder of the bowl; background filled with
parallel lines. Dimensions: height 15.4 cm.; oral diameter Z3.3 cm.; wall thickness
5.5 mm .
Avery-like Engraved (Fig. 7, F; Fig. 9, C). In Burial 6 was found a steep-sided
bowl decorated with oblique straight lines and semicircles set between two parallel
lines that encircle the rim. The rim slants in slightly and the lip outward (see Fig.
9, C). Th e core is buff, and the vessel is tempered with large bits of clay. Dimensions: height 15 cm.; oral diameter 17.7 cm.; rim thickness 6 mm.
Keno Trailed (Fig. 7, C). This purchased vessel, which is the only representative
of Keno Trailed type in the collection, has been illustrated by Suhm e t al. ( 1954:
Plate 39. M ) . It is gray in color, polished, and shows excellent execution of design.
Shape-globular body, spool neck, rounded lip, short pedestal base. Decorationentire body covered with wide, shallow trailed lines consisting of parallel arcs and
parallel horizontal lines. Dimensions: height 11.7 cm.; length of neck 3.4 cm.;
maximum diam eter of neck 3.6 cm.; oral diameter 5.Z cm.
La Rue Neck Banded ( Fig. 9, P; Fig. 10, A). This type is represented by three
incomplete, unrestored vessels. All are gray in color and have the characteristic
crud e ne ck banding. Two of the vessels have short, vertical fillets on the rim, one
in a pair, the other in sets of three. One of these also has fillets set obliquely on the
body. All have vertical rims (see Fig. 9, P ). Average wall thickness is 6 mm.
Provenience-one each in Burials 1, Z, and 3.
Nash N eck Banded (Fig. 9, R; Fig. 9, Q; Fig. 10, C, D ) . This type is represented
by two vessels that are incomplete and unrestored. Both are gray-brown in color.

A

c

E

D

G

F

B

M

L

K
H

R

Q

s
0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

CM.

N

0

p

Fig. 9 . Rim profiles of pottery ve ssels from the Culpepper site . A-B , D, Ripley Engraved
(smalll ; C, Avery-like Engraved ; E-G , Ripley Engraved (med ium) ; H, Taylor Eng raved ; 1-J ,
Womack Engraved; K-l, Simms Engraved; M, Hodges Engraved ; N, Ripley Engraved llargel ;
0 , Avery Engraved ; P, La Rue Neck Banded; Q-R , Nash Neck Banded; S, unidentified engraved vessel.

301

CULPEPPER SITE

One vessel has a sharply flaring rim (Fig. 9, R) width a node set just under the
lip and repeated four times around the rim. Just below each node at the body-rim
junction is a vertical fillet running down the wall (see Fig. 10, D). Wall thickness
is 6.5 mm.
The second vessel has a flaring rim and rolled lip (Fig. 9, Q). The rim is
decorated with four parallel lines formed by elongated and slightly oblique punctates (see Fig. 10, C). Wall thickness is 5.5 mm.
Other Engraved Vessels. In this group are two jars and one bowl.
( 1) Jar (Fig. 7, J; Fig. 8, B; Fig. 9, S). This vessel appears to be unique in the
Caddoan area. Its design shows some similarity to the designs of Barkman Engraved,
but it cannot be classified as Barkman Engraved. Its shape cannot be duplicated in
known Caddoan vessel forms. The paste is laminated and appears to have been
tempered with shell, now leached out. The vessel is red filmed, and the engraved
lines contrast sharply with the red film. Shape-squat, globular body; rim flares
out almost horizontally (see Fig. 9, S). Decoration-combination of single engraved
lines with cross-hatched panels, repeated four times; lip notched; slightly polished.
Dimensions: Height 9.7 cm.; oral diameter 12.6 cm.; wall thickness 3 mm. Provenience-Burial 6.
(2) Jar (Fig. 7, I). Condition-incomplete. Shape- round body; high concave
rim with scalloped lip; three-fourths of rim missing. Decoration-single engraved
line encircling rim just below lip, another at junction of rim and body; extending
down alternately from the lower line, and repeated four times, are an engraved
triangle filled in with lines and a set of three parallel lines (these extend almost to
base); vessel red filmed. Dimensions-height 13.2 cm.; oral diameter 10.8 cm.; wall
thickness 5 mm. Provenience-Burial 2.
(3) Bowl (Fig. 7, G; Fig. 8, C). Shape-squat, carinated bowl rim slants inward
slightly; lip rolled out and rounded. Decoration-engraved; stylized scroll filled in
with cross-hatching, repeated three times on rim; red pigment in engraved lines
(see Fig. 8, C). Dimensions: height 7.5 cm.; oral diameter 13.9 cm.; rim thickness
6 mm. Provenience-Burial 5.
Miscellaneous Vessels . Three vessels are represented by plain gray body sherds
or incompletely restored vessels. The missing rims and absence of design render
them unidentifiable as to type. A fourth vessel has applique work on the body, but
its rim is also missing. The sherds of a fifth are unusually light in weight and have
a peculiar orange color. Sherd thickness in these five vessels ranges from 5 to 7 mm.

Potsherds
A total of 94 potsherds was collected at the Culpepper site. Of these,
43 were found in the midden, but the remaining 51 are of unknown
provenience. These sherds are clay or clay-grit tempered, some of the
clay being white in color (probably kaolinite) . Paste color ranges from
buff to black (four sherds bear a red film). Design techniques include
engraving, incising, appliqueing, punctating, and brushing. The
sherds have been grouped on the basis of design technique and will be
described under each of these headings.

302

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(
D

G
E

F

Fig . 1 0 . Rim sherds ( with profiles) and pottery figure from Culpepper site. A, La Rue Neck
Banded; B, Coles Creek Incised ; C-D , Nash Neck Banded; E, Hodges Engraved ; F, Nash Neck
Banded; G, dog (?) effigy from pottery vessel .

Plain Sherds. Among the 55 p lain sherds are 40 which range in color from buff
to red (five from midden, remainder of unknown provenience) . These range in
thickness from 5 to 13.5 mm. (one is a basal sherd). The reamining 15 sherds
ran ge from gray to black in color (11 from midden, remainder provenience unknown). One of these is a rim sh erd (from the midden) with slightly flaring lip.
Engraved Sherds. These number 2-9, of which 11 are rim sherds from t he midden,
the remainder being body sherds of unrecorded provenience. Eight of the 11 rim
sherds are of Ripley Engraved type (two are red fi lmed). All lips are rounded and
either continuous with the rim or slightly flaring. One of the three remaining
engraved rim sherds is decorated with two inverted chevrons that extend downward
from the lip. The rim sherds range in thickness from 5 to 9 mm.
Two of the 18 body sherds are red fi lmed, si x are dark gray in col1or, and the
remainder buff. Six sherds are of Taylor Engraved type and one is Ripley Engraved.
Thickness ranges from 4 to 8 mm.
Applique Sherds. Three body sherds bear a single applique fill et ( two of these
are from the midden) . Two are cream in color, the third dark brown. The creamcolored sherds both have thickness of 7 mm., the brown sherd a thickness of 6.5 mm.

303

CULPEPPER SITE

Punctate Sherds. One punctate rim sherd, found in the midden, is gray in color
and has a thickness of 8 mm. The lip is rounded at junction with the rim and flat
across the top.
Incised Sherds. A single deeply incised body sherd, brown in color and 7 mm.
thick, came from the midden. It bears a pattern of several intersecting lines that are
almost perpendicular. Four deeply incised gray rim sherds, all from the same
vessel, were found in the general trenching. The rim is thicker ( 7 mm.) than the
body (5 mm.), giving the rim an overhanging effect. The lip is flat, and three
parallel incised lines encircle the rim. The~e rim sherds appear to be of a Lower
Mississippi type, probably Coles Creek Incised (see Fig. 10, B ) . The sherds are
clay tempered.
Brushed Sherds. One body sh erd, provenience unknown, is buff in color and has
a thickness of 7 mm. The brushing technique may be characterized as two directional and overlapping.

Summary. The majority of the decorated sherds are of Ripley and
Taylor Engraved types. Brushing, applique, punctating, and incising
occur in minor quantities. Red filming is rare ( 4.4%) and does not
parallel the red-filmed vessel percentage (27.5 % ) . However, the sherd
sample is too small to be of much consequence. Over half (61 %) of
the sherds from this site are undecorated. Most of these are light in
color and appear to be from vessels that were fired in an oxidizing
atmosphere.

Clay Pipes
Two ceramic pipes, both purchased, are in the Culpepper collection.
One (No. 1) is a low, massive elbow pipe; the other (No. 2) is a highbowled, short-stemmed elbow pipe. Both are clay tempered and gray
in color.
(1) Pipe No. 1 (Fig. 7, H). Shape-squat bowl; thick stem that
curves up and grades into bowl. Decoration-combination of fine engraved triangles and encircling lines around both stem and bowl; triangles filled in with two lines; surface lightly polished. Dimensionslength 8.8 cm.; stem width 5.3 cm.; bowl diameter 5.8 cm.; bowl
height 5.3 cm.; bowl wall thickness 8 mm.
(2) Pipe No. 2 (Fig. 7, E). Shape-high, narrow bowl; short stem;
bowl makes about a 100 ° angle with stem, bulges near its base, and
tapers at the rim and lip. Decoration-slightly polished. Dimensionsstem length 3.6 cm.; stem width 2.7 cm.; bowl diameter 1.4 cm.; bowl
height 7.1 cm.; bowl wall thickness 5 mm. Remarks-a pipe of this
same form, but made of Ouachita sandstone, was found at the Sanders
site in Lamar County (Krieger, 1946 : 325;Plate22,F).

304

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Zoomorphic Figure of Clay
A ceramic figure (Fig. 10, G), probably representing a dog, is among
the purchased specimens. The figure, whose head is turned to its right,
is standing on a platform that evidently projected from the lip of a
pottery vessel. Such vessels have been found at various sites in northeastern Texas (Suhm et al., 1954: 277; Plate 22, A, D, F, H). This
specimen is clay-tempered and gray in color. It has a length of 5.9 cm.
and a maximum height of 4.8 cm.

Projectile Points
At the Culpepper site 46 chipped stone projectile points were found,
and of these 43 specimens have been located and described (the remainder are missing from the collection). This series includes 40 dart
points and three arrow points. The dart points represent two stem traditions-contracting stem (Types Gary, Wells, and Kent) and parallel-sided to slightly expanding stem (Types Yarbrough, Carrollton,
Trinity, Castroville, Pontchartrain, Edgewood, and Fairland-like).
The arrow point types represented are Talco and Catahoula.
Gary Points (Fig. 11 ) . At the Culpepper site 23 Gary points wei-e collected (1Z
from the surface, nine from trenches, and two from Burial 6 ), and within this
series five distinct varieties can be recognized on the basis of size and shape.
Variety 1 consists of nine specimens ( Fig. 11 , A-G ) that are diamond-shaped,
the shoulders, which are slight and rounded, occur just below the mid-section.
Overall size: small to medium. Blade: triangular in outline, with convex edges in
six specimens, slightly concave in three specimens. Stem: length one-third to threeeighths the length of the point, lateral edges convex to straight, and base rounded
to slightly pointed. Dimensions: length 3.2 to 5.7 cm.; width at shoulders 1.8 to
2.6 cm.; thickness .5 to .8 cm. Remarks: roughly flaked, but better flaked than
Variety 2.
Variety 2, represented by three specimens ( Fig. 11, H-I ), is similar to Variety 1
in outline. but the shoulders are rnor2 prominent and occur about four-fifths of the
way down to the base from the tip. Overall size : medium to large. Blade: triangular
in outline, with concave edges. Stern: length is one-fourth to one-third the length
of the point, edges range from convex (in two specimens ) to concave, and base is
rounded. Dimensions: length 4.5 to 7 cm.; width at shoulders 2 to 2.7 cm.; thickness
.8 to 1.2 cm. Remarks: roughly flaked , asymmetrical in outline; one found in
Burial 6.
Variety 3 consists of four specimens (Fig. 11, J-L ) that are uniform in size and
outlin2. They are large, have prominent shoulders, and the stems contract to a
point. Blade: triangular in outline with straight lateral edges. Stem: length is onefourth the length of the point, the lateral edges are slightly convex, and the base
is a rounded point. Dimensions: length 6 to 7.8 cm.; thickness 2.5 to 2.9 cm.
Remarks: better flaked than Variety 2 or 3; shoulders quite prominent; lenticular
in cross-section.

A

E

B

F

G
H

J

L

K

0
0

p

M

Q

N

R

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.

Fig . 11. Gary projectile points from the Culpepper site. A-G, Variety l; H-1 , Variety 2;
J-l, Variety 3; M-0 , Variety 4; R, Variety 5. J-l not to scale; l approximately the same
length as I.

306

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Variety 4, represented by six specimens (Fig. 11 , M-Q ), includes small points
with triangular blades, prominent shoulders, and narrow, tapering stems. Blade :
triangular in outline with lateral edges ranging from slightly convex to slightly
concave. Stem: length is one-fourth to one-half the length of the point. the lateral
edges are convex, and the base is rounded. Dimensions: length 3.2 to 4.4 cm.; width
at shoulders 2.8 to 4.9 cm.; thickness .6 to .9 cm. Remarks: roughly flak ed; tend to
be asymmetrical in outline; shoulders usually at right angles to the longitudinal
axis; one found in Burial 6.
Variety 5 consists of a single point (Fig. 11 , R) which is small and has moderate
shoulders with a wide stem and rounded base. Blade : triangular in outline with
straight edges. Stem: length is three-eighths of total length of the point; lateral
edges are straight and parallel ; base rounded. Dimensions: length 3.6 cm.; width
at shoulders 1.8 cm.; thickness .7 cm . Rema rks: a similar point, but with larger
stem, is shown by Duffield (1961: 63; Fig. 3. L ) .
Wells Points (Fig. 12, A-B). Two points of this type were found at the Culpepper site, one on the surface and the othe!· in the general trenching. One of these
(A) is of medium size, has a triangular blade with straight lateral edges; a long
stem (one-half total length of point) with convex lateral edges, and a rounded base;
and the following dimensions: length 5.5 cm., width at shoulders 1.7 cm., thickness
.9 cm. The other (B), which is made of chert, is asymmetrical in outline. has pronounced shoulders, and is roughly flak ed. Somewhat shorter than A, it has a triangular blade with one lateral edge concave, the other convex. The stem is about
five-eighths the total length of the point and has a rounded base. Its dimensions
are: length 4.1 cm.; width at shoulder, 1.8 cm., thickness .7 cm.
Kent Point (Fig. 13, A). One Kent point was found in trenching, a mediumsized specimen having a triangular blade with uneven edges, a fairly short stem
(one-third total length of point ) with straight lateral edges contracting to a convex
base, and the following dimensions: length 5.5 cm.; width at shoulders 2.3 cm. ;
thickness .9 cm.
Yarbrough Points (Fig. 12, C-F ) . The five points of this type all have slight
shou ld ers, slightly expanding rectanguloid stems, and some degree of basal grinding.
In size they range from small ( 1 specimen) to large ( 4 specimens) . The blades
are triangular and have slightly convex edges in most cases. The stems range
from one-fourth to three-eighths the total length of the points, have latera l edges
that range from concave to straight, and have bases that are slightly convex. The
dimension ranges are: length 3.5 to 5.3 cm.; width at shoulders 1.8 to 3 .1 cm.;
thickness .7 to 1 cm. Three of the Yarbrough points were coll ected from the surface;
the remaind er come from the trenches.
Carrollton Points (Fig. 13, B- C ). Of the two Carrollton points, one (C ) is small
in size. the other (B) medium in size and shows basal grinding on the stem. Both
have blades that are equi laterally triangular in outline, the lateral edges being
slightly concave. The stems, which represent about one-half the total length , have
straight lateral edges and bases that are strn ight to slightly convex. Their dimensions are as follows: lengths 3.5 and 4.1 cm.; widths at shou lder 2 and 3.25 cm.;
thicknesses .85 to .9 cm. One Carrollton point was found in trenching; the other is
of unknown provenience.
Trinity Points (Fig. 13, D- E ) . These two points have triangular blades with
convex edges and bulging stems with convex lateral edges and convex bases. Stem
lengths are about one-fourth the total length of the point in each case. Dimensions:

307

CULPEPPER SITE

t

c

B

A

G

F

K

-L

E

D

'

J

H

M

q I ? i 1 99 ? ~

N

0

~ 1,0

CM.
Fig . 12. Projectile points , gouges , and knives from the Culpepper site . A-8, Wells points;
C-F, Yarbrough points; G, Talco point; H, unidentifiable point; I, Catahoula point; J-K,
gouges ; L, shouldered knife; M, knife shaped like a Gary point; N-0 , oval knives .

length 5 cm. in both, w icfth at shoulders 2.2 and 2.5 cm.; thickness .8 to .85 cm.
Both specimens are tram the trenches.
Castroville Point ( Fig. 13, H ) . This single specimen from the surface collection
has a triangular blade with convex edges and moderate barbs. The stem is short
(one-fifth total length), has straight and slightly fla ring lateral edges, and bears a
straight base. This point has a length of 7.5 cm., a maximum width of 3.7 cm., and
a thickness of .8 cm.
Pontchartrain Point (Fig. 13, I ) . One specimen, which is made of gray flint,
appears to fa ll within the Pontchartrain type as described by Ford and Webb
( 1944: 54-55). It is rather narrow and one face bears a longitudinal ridge that

308

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

0

F

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

..

CM.
Fig . 1 3. Projectile points from the Culpepper site. A, Kent point; B-C, Carrollton points;
D-E , Trinity points ; F, Edgewood point; G, Fairland-like point; H, Castroville point; I, Pontchartrain point. H-1 not to scale; I slightly longer than G.

extends from the shoulders to the distal tip. The stem appears to have been broken
off squarely near the base. The narrow, triangular blade has straight lateral edges,
as does the rectanguloid stem. The lateral edges of the stem have been ground.
Dimensions: length 7.3 cm.; width at sho ulders 2.25 cm.; thickness .9 cm. This
point was found in trenching.
Edgewood Point (Fig. 13, F ) . One m edium-sized Edgewood point has a triangular
blade with con vex edges and a short (one-third total length ), flaring stem with
concave base. Dimensions: length 3.6 cm.; w idth at shoulders 2.5 cm.; thickness .8
cm. This point was found in the trenches.
Unidentified Dart Point (Fig. 13, G). This large point, which came from the
tren ches and resembles some variants of Fairland type, has a blade with strongly
convex, serrated edges. The stem, which is fairly short (one-fourth total length of
point), has fl aring, concave latera l edges that have been h eavily ground. The base
is deeply concave.
Talco Point (Fig. 12, G ). This point was found in Burial 4 with two additional
points that also appear to h ave been Talco points, judging from sketches in the

309

CULPEPPER SITE

field notes (these two specimens cannot be located). The surviving specimen, which
is made of light brown flint, has lateral edges that are slightly recurved. Dimensions: length 2.4 cm.; maximum width 1.7 cm.; thickness .2 cm.
Catahoula Point (Fig. 12, I). The single specimen of Catahoula type (collected
from the surface) is a very small point that has a triangular blade with concave,
slightly serrated lateral edges and barbs that are broad and squared at the tips.
The short stem, which is damaged, is about one-fourth the total length of the
point and has concave lateral edges and a convex base. Dimensions: length 2.2 cm.;
width across barbs 1.9 cm.; thickness .2 cm. This point is very similar to several
illustrated by Bell (1960: Plate 8, E-F ) .
Unidentifiable Arrowpoint (Fig. 12, H) . This small point from the general
trenching has a long triangular blade with straight, serrated lateral edges. The
short stem (one-fifth total length of point) has straight lateral edges and a convex
base. Dimensions: length 3 cm.; width at shoulders 1.3 cm.; thickness .3 cm.

Knives
Three fonns of chipped stone knives, all made of chert or quartzite,
occur at the Culpepper site. Five knives are oval in outline (Fig. 12,
N-0), have large flake scars, and appear to have been chipped by the
percussion technique. In length they range from 5.1 to 7.6 cm.; in
width from 2.6 to 3.7 cm.; and in thickness from .8 to 1.1 cm. A sixth
knife (Fig. 12, M) is diamond-shaped in outline and resembles Variety
1 of the Gary type projectile point. It bears large flake scars that indicate percussion chipping. It has a length of 7.9 cm.; a maximum width
of 4.5 cm.; and a thickness of 1 cm. The seventh knife is shouldered
and has a stem that is approximately one-fifth the total length of the
knife (Fig. 12, L). It has a triangular blade (the tip is missing) with
moderate shoulders, and the base is straight. The large flake scars also
indicate percussion flaking. Of the seven knives from this site, six were
found in trenching; the seventh was collected from the surface.

Gouges
Two gouges were found on the surface, one of large Clear Fork type
(Fig. 12, K) made of hematite, the other (Fig. 12, J) of small triangular form and made of quartzite. In both specimens the bit was formed
by unifacial beveling. Dimensions: length 7.6 and 3.1 cm.; width 3.5
and 2.4 cm.; thickness 2 and 1 cm.

Celts
Three celts (Fig. 14, B-F) were obtained at the Culpepper site and
three additional specimens were purchased. All of these celts are peta-

310

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

D

B

c

F

E
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
CM.

Fig. 14. Grooved axe and cells from Culpepper site. A, full -grooved axe ; B-F, cells .
B-C not to scale ; both approxi mately same s ize as A.

loid in form, and all show evidences of pecking. One of the purchased
celts is made of a dark green stone, is lightly polished, and shows 15
different planes of abrasion. The celts range in length from 8 to 10.5
cm.; in width from 3.1 to 4.9 cm.; and in thickness from 2.5 to 3.6 cm.
One celt ( Fig. 14, C) was found in Burial 1; the remaining two collected at the site are surface finds.

Stone Axes
Two grooved stone axes were purchased. One is large and well made,
the other ( Fig. 14, A ) small and poorly made (the stone is badly
pitted). Both axes are made of reddish-black h ematite. Dimensions:
lengths 13.4 and 10.1 cm.; widths 8.2 and 6 cm.; thicknesses 4.1 and
2.2 cm.

Comparisons
Although recent excavations by The University of Texas at the Iron
Bridge and Ferrell's Bridge reservoirs have helped to clarify the Ar-

CULPEPPER SITE

311

chaic and Neo-American stages in northeastern Texas, the archeological picture is far from being clear. A number of factors make it difficult
to evaluate the materials from the Culpepper site-the relatively small
amount of published field work in the area, the scarcity of sites that
span the transition from Archaic to Neo-American, and the complexity of the Culpepper ceramic collection itself.
The Archaic artifacts from the Culpepper site, that is, most of the
dart points, the stone axes, the knives, and the gouges, occur on the
provisional list of traits given for the East Texas Aspect of the Archaic
Stage (Suhm et al., 1954: 149-151 ). Present in the Culpepper collection, and included in the East Texas Aspect trait list, are an abundance
of Gary points (59%); Yarbrough, Wells, and Kent Dart points;
gouges; full-grooved axes; a milling stone and a mano. Two common
lithic traits listed for the East Texas Aspect, but absent from the Culpepper collection, are T-shaped drills and scrapers. As the Culpepper
sample is small, these absences are probably not especially significant. The presence of Gary, Yarbrough, Edgewood, and Wells points
suggest a late Archaic occupation at the Culpepper site (Davis and
Davis, 1960: 51-52). At the Limerick site, a late Archaic-early NeoAmerican site in Rains County located 40 miles southwest of the Culpepper site, Gary points were abundantly found in association with
Yarbrough, Edgewood and Trinity points (Duffield, 1961: 51-116).
However, the pottery from the Limerick site is attributable to the
Sanders Focus of the Gibson Aspect and is different from the pottery
from the Culpepper site.
As two Gary points were found in Burial 6, it is possible that not all
Gary points are associated with the Archaic occupation. This point type
may have survived into late Neo-American times and possibly even
into the historic period. This question has been discussed recently by
Krieger ( 1955: 195-207 ). As the field notes are none too clear. it is also
possible that these two points were in the fill of Burial 6.
The pottery in the Culpepper collection indicates a late Titus Focus
occupation. Thus far only two Titus Focus sites have been excavated
and published- the McKinney site (Davis and Golden, 1960 ) and the
Harroun site (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959) , both situated some 50 miles
southeast of the Culpepper site. Three burials from the McKinney site
yielded 18 Ripley Engraved vessels and seven Taylor Engraved vessels (25 out of a total of 32 vessels found). These frequencies (53%
and 32% respectively ) are comparable to the Ripley and Taylor frequencies at the Culpepper site (39% and 15% ). However, the McKinney site is a "classic" Titus Focus site, for Harleton Applique, Bailey

312

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Engraved, and Wilder Engraved vessels occurred in association with
Talco points and Ripley and Taylor Engraved vessels. No Harleton
Applique, Bailey Engraved, or Wilder Engraved vessels or sherds were
found at the Culpepper site, and the Ripley vessels were not "classic"
in shape or design as a whole (Suhm et al., 1954: 346-359 ). By "classic" Titus Focus sites and "classic" Titus vessels I mean those sites and
vessels which conform to those traits and vessel types listed for the
Titus Focus in the Handbook (Suhm et al., 1954: 189-195). This involves the association of Ripley Engraved, Taylor Engraved, and Harleton Applique vessels with Talco points. Early Titus Focus sites may
be recognized by the presence of Pease Brushed-Incised, a carry-over
from the Haley Focus, mounds over burned houses, mounds over
burials, and Perdiz points (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959). The ceramic
component at the Culpepper site, in my opinion. represents the late
Titus Focus and is probably protohistoric in age. This is indicated by
the presence of Womack Engraved, Simms Engraved, and Keno
Trailed pottery types, all believed now to be late in time.
At the Harroun site only two vessels were found, and both of these
are of Ripley Engraved type and occur in a mound burial (Jelks and
Tunnell, 1959: 59). Identifiable potsherds showed Pease BrushedIncised and Bullard Brushed to be the dominant types, with Ripley and
Taylor occurring in minor quantities. Pease Brushed-Incised is an
early Titus Focus trait, as shown at the Harroun site (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959: 59). No Pease Brushed-Incised vessels or sherds were
found at the Culpepper site.
At the Pearson site in Rains County, 40 miles southwest of the Culpepper site and near the previously mentioned Limerick site, sherds of
"\Vomack Engraved type were found on the surface (Duffield, 1961).
Also found were 86 dart points, attributed to an Archaic occupation,
the majority being Edgewood (7 specimens), Trinity ( 16), and Gary
( 101) types. The Pearson site yielded many European artifacts, most
of them coming from the surface, and this site has been placed in the
recently defined Nortefio Focus, representing the historic southern
Wichita tribes (Duffield and Jelks, 1961).
The presence of trade ware (Simms, Hodges, Avery, and Nash) in
the Culpepper collection denotes contact to the east or north with the
Texarkana and McCurtain foci. These types have been found in protohistoric and historic sites. The Womack Engraved type and the Keno
Trailed type, both represented in the Culpepper collection, are protohistoric or historic in age. The Womack type suggests trade with Nortefio Focus sites to the southwest or to the north. It is important to note

313

CULPEPPER SITE

that two Womack Engraved vessels were found in Burial 6 with two
Gary points, an Avery-like engraved vessel, a Taylor Engraved vessel ,
a Hodges Engraved vessel, and a Simms Engraved vessel, suggesting
contemporaneity.
In summary, it may be said that the lithic materials in the Culpepper
collection represent a late Archaic occupation, and that the ceramic
materials represent a later occupation by peoples of a later or protohistoric Titus Focus origin.

Summary and Conclusions
The Culpepper site is primarily a late Fulton Aspect site located on
Stouts Creek in Hopkins County, northeastern Texas. It consists of a
midden that appears to represent a small Caddoan village and cemetery area. Sixty-five stone artifacts, mostly of types attributable to
the late Archaic period of eastern Texas, were found scattered throughout the site.
Eight single, extended burials were found, all containing pottery,
the dominant types being Ripley Engraved and Taylor Engraved. One
vessel of Womack Engraved type came from the midden. Of 40 vessels
found at the Culpepper site, 14 were of Ripley Engraved type and five
were of Tay lor Engraved type. Less common were vessels of Avery
Engraved (2 ), Hodges Engraved (2 ), Simms Engraved (2 ), Womack
Engraved (3 ) , La Rue Neck Banded (3 ) and Nash Neck Banded (2 ).
The use of red slip was common, especially on Ripley Engraved vessels. A common feature is the repetition of the design four times around
the vessel.
Nine vessels were purchased and are believed to have come from the
Culpepper site. These vessels are of the same types as those found in
the burials. with the exception of a Keno Trailed bottle. Since the provenience of the Keno vessel is not certain, its significance is open to
question. Of the eight other purchased vessels in the collection, five are
of Ripley Engraved type, two are of Taylor Engraved ty pe, and one is
of A very Engraved type. Also purchased were three celts, a grooved
stone axe, two elbow pipes (one is engraved ), and a ceramic figure ·
possibly representing a dog.
Of the 94 potsherds found at the Culpepper site, 43 came from the
midden , but the others are of unknown provenience. Twenty-nine
sherds were engraved, three appliqued, five incised, one brushed, and
one punctated. Nine of these are identifiable as Ripley Engraved and
six as Taylor Engraved.

314

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Out of a total of 43 projectile points, 22 are of Gary type. Most of
the Gary points were found in general trenching or on the surface, but
two were found in Burial 6. Seventeen other points are identifiable as
Carrollton (2 ) , Castroville ( 1) , Edgewood ( 1), Fairland-like (1), Kent
( 1) , Pontchartrain ( 1), Trinity ( 2 ), Wells ( 2 ) , Yarbrough ( 5 ) , and
Talco ( 1). The Talco point was found in Bureal 4. Two additional
points, now lost, were associated with this burial, but field records
indicate they are also of Talco type.
One petaloid celt was found in Burial 1, and two additional specimens were found on the surface. Three celts and a grooved axe were
purchased. Seven bifacial knives were found , six of them in general
trenching and one from the surface. Two gouges were also found on
the surface. No post molds, fire pits, or other such features are reported
in the field notes.
The Culpepper site can be assigned to the Titus Focus of the Fulton
Aspect. Talco points and an abundance of Ripley Engraved and Taylor Engraved pottery are diagnostic of the Titus Focus. The methods of
pottery decoration- engraving, incising, repetition of designs, and use
of red slip-are other traits common to the Titus Focus, although not
confined to that focus.
The remainder of the lithic material from the Culpepper site appears
to represent an earlier pre-ceramic occupation, or more precisely the
East Texas Aspect of the Archaic Stage. However, it is believed that
Gary, Wells, and Yarbrough projectile point types may have survived
into the Fulton Aspect of the Neo-American Stage see Suhm et al.,
1954: 193, 430, 488, 492). The presence of two Gary points in a burial,
along with the high frequency of Gary points, suggests that the Titus
Focus people were still making or using Gary points. On the other
hand, if all of the lithic material represents a pre-ceramic occupation,
and if a Titus Focus group later occupied the site, then the two Gary
points may have been in the burial as part of its fill. No definite associateion of pottery with dart points in the midden is noted in the field
notes.
The occurrence of pottery types Avery Engraved, Hodges Engraved,
Simms Engraved, and Nash Neck Banded indicates trade outside the
Titus Focus area. These types are associated with the McCurtain and
Texarkana foci of the Caddoan area. The Womack Engraved vessel
suggests trade with the newly defined Norteiio Focus. However, this
type might have had its origin in the late Titus Focus.
The Culpepper site represents primarily a late Titus Focus occupation during protohistoric or early historic times. The high, steep-walled

315

CULPEPPER SITE

bowls with incurving rims are absent from "classic" Titus Focus ceramics. However, such bowls are found at the Hunt site in Cass County
and at the Womack site in Lamar County. Both of these sites yielded
European objects, but no European objects were found at the Culpepper site. It is significant that no Pease Brushed-Incised or Harleton
Applique pottery was found at the Culpepper site. The former is an
early Titus Focus type, and the latter is a "classic" Titus Focus type.

Acknowledgments
In the preparation of this report I have received assistance from a
number of individuals. Special thanks are due to Dr. E. Mott Davis and
Dr. T. N. Campbell for their suggestions, criticism, and advice; to
Molly Hays for typing the rough drafts of this report; and to Edward
B. Jelks, Lathel F. Duffield, and W . A. Davis for their many helpful
suggestions and comments.

References Cited
Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, No. 1.
1960. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, No. Z.
Davis, E. Mott
1958. The Whelan Site, A Late Caddoan Component in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir, Northeastern Texas. Technical report to the National Park
Service from the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of
Texas.
Davis, E. lVlott, and Bernard Golden
1960. The Ben McKinney Site, A Titus Focus Site in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir Area, Northeastern Texas. Technical report to the National
Park Service from the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Davis, E. Mott, and Jules R. Gipson
1960. The Dalton Site, A Late Caddoan Mound Site in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir Area, Northeastern Texas. Technical report to the National
Park Service from the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Davis, William A.
1961. The Isadore Segal Site at Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir, Northeastern Texas.
Technical Report to the National Park Service from the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Davis, William A., and E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir

316

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Area, Northeastern Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Archaeology Series, No. 3.
Duffield, Lathe! F.
1961. The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959 ), pp. 51 - 116.
Duffield, Lathe! F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas,
Archaeology Series, No. 4.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Part 1.
Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959. The Harroun Site: A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Archaeology Series, No. 2.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University of
Texas Publication, No. 4640.
1956. Historic Survival of the Atlatl in the Lower Mississippi Region. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 195-207.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25 .
Webb, Clarence H.
1960. A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. Vol. 29 (for 1958 ), pp. 35-62.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and
the Burned Rock Middens of Texas
KENNETH II. HONEA

The purpose of this paper is to present a particularly striking example of a
phenomenon that has resulted from convergent cultural evolution in two widely
separated areas of the Old and New Worlds, between which any possibility of
cu lture contact is precluded both by space and time. vVe refer to arti fi cial accretions
or accumulations of thermally fractured hearth-stones and assorted cultural debris.
Known from many areas of the world, they are variously referred to as kioekkenmoeddinger, kitchen middens, burned rock mounds or middens, or simply middens.
W e shall present data on two specific forms of such middens that occur in quantity
in Algeria, Tunisia, and Moriocco of northwestern Africa and in the central and
Trans-Pecos areas of Texas.
In northwestern Africa middens of this type are called rammadiya (plural form:
rammadyat) in Arabic and escargotiere in French. They are typical open camp
sites of the predominantly Mesolithic Capsian industry, which is distinguished by
the production of lamellar blades and certain highly specialized tools made on such
blades (Balout, 1955: 391; Honea, 1958: 20 ) . Rammadyat have a more m less
flattish top, are oval to circular in outline and, as a rule, show considerable variation in size. Pond (1938: 95 ) estima tes the diameter to range from 40 to 300 feet
and the height from 2 to 15 feet. They are most commonly situated on ridges o,r
hill tops in close proximity to a spring, stream, or lake.
Excavations have shown that an average rammadiya is composed, in descending
order of frequency, of burned, broken h e~rth-stones; snail shells; mussel shells;
animal bones; stone tools and debitage (waste flakes, cores, etc.) ; ashes and
charcoal; and soil. Gobert (1937: 644) , who has analyzed a large number of
rammadyat, concludes that they are incidental refuse heaps and were accumulated
through repeated use of one loca tion as a camping site through a period of time.
The proportional volumes of snail shells, mussel shells, and certain kinds of animal
bones are thought to reflect the relative importance of each food item in the diet of
the makers of the rammadyat.
Burials are occasionally found in rammadyat. The greater part of these burials
are not in primary association and often date from the Neolithic period, as is shown
by the presence of potsherds in the grave fill. In some cases only skeletal fragments
are found, and Pond (1938: 105 ) interprets these as resulting from abandonment
of dead bodies at the campsite. In his view, predatory animals fed off the bodies,
leaving the skeletal fragments to be covered by some natural agency.
Detailed studies of rammadyat profiles indicate that they are composed of
numerous , relatively small, component middens "which have been moulded into

318

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a single symmetrical unit by the wind and rain of many centuries" (Pond , 1938:
95; Balout, 1955: 39Z) .
The presumed method of accumulation of a rammadiya may be stated as follows.
Initially, a small. saucer-lik e depression was scooped out of the earth, and in this
depression were placed alternating layer s of firewood and flat rocks . Afte r the fire
h ad burned down , the h eated stones wen'! cleared of ashes; then snails, mussels,
meat, and edible roots and tubers were laid on the stones to bake or steam.
Successive firings of the hearth -stones eventually caused them to crack into smaller,
less useful fragments, for which reason they were thrown onto an adjacent refuse
h eap, along with bones, shells and other vvaste . When the supply of game, snails,
and mussels was depleted in the area, the site was abandoned for a tim e. Such sites
thus represent seasonal camps. Assuming continuous or intermittent u se of the same
area for camping purposes, even a small rammadiya would soon develop a certain
height above the natural level of th e ground. Being of a porous nature and
therefore well drained. it mad e a ch oice camping spot, particularly during rainy
weather, or if loca ted in a marshy area. Subsequent groups of campers would
simply scoop out a depression on top of the existing rammadiya, prepare a hea rth and
fire, and proceed to cook their food in th e manner described above. Th eir discarded
h earth-stones and other items of refuse Wff2 thrown nearby until another heap
was formed. In still later encampments, the process of individu al component midden
accumulation continued, so that over a period of time a fairly e xtensive area was
covered with a series of superimposed and intersecting hearths and camping floors.
As pointed out above, these would then be eroded into a seemingly uniform unit by
th e elements.
There has been some speculation as to the origin of the small holes found in
snail and sometimes mussel shells that occur in rammadyat. Pond (1938: 95 ) offers
a reasonable explanation for these holes:
... heat from the stones on which the snails were cooked burned the small part of
the shell in contact with the hot stones. This burning weakened the shell or made
that small area soluble so that a little weathering would produce a small hole .
Others have suggested that all such holes in the shells were produced by a bone
point used to extract the snail for eating. In as much as these openings are quite
often in positions n ot in line with the natural opening of the shell, "weakened by
fire" explanation seems more logical.
The makers of the rammadyat occasionally manufactured their stone and bone
tools at their camps, as is evidenced by the presence of hammerstones, cores and
waste flakes in the deposits. The presence of tools and industrial debris, which
marks a factory site, can be very useful to the archeologist in determining the
cultural affiliations of the makers of the camp. It does not follow, of course, that all
the component middens within a rammadiya must of necessity represent factory
sites; some may, others may not.
Pond ( 1938: 99-100) has suggested a method for identifying individual camping
floors and component middens. During occupation snail and mussel shells were
broken on the "floor" of the camping area, and this shell debris, along with ash and
soil, would accumulate in low places and become consolidated by rainfall after
abandonment of the camp. Hence bands of ash, crushed shell, and soil that appear
in rammadyat profiles may be interpreted as specific occupations. Although int erpretation of the stratigraphy in a rammadiya is extremely difficult in view of
the nature of the accumulated deposit, it may be possible for the archeologists, with

RAMMADYAT AND TEXAS ROCK MIDDENS

319

the above in mind, to work out the different floors and component middens and
perhaps ascertain whether the individual units are due to groups of campers who
share the same or dissimilar culture traits. As Pond states ( 1938: 107):
From the way these mounds are built up one would expect to find as much
difference between any two sides as between top and bottom. The writer's experience seems to indicate that the [rammadyat] are each the product of one
cu lture-bearing people although in a given region different mounds are often of
different cultures.
Of great importance in the interpretation of rammadyat is the fact that at least
two groups of people presently living in northwestern Africa still make them. One
group consists of the Takrounian Berbers, who live in the Sahel region of Tunisia;
the other is an unidentifi ed Berber group living near Gafsa, also in Tunisia
(Balout, 1955: 392; Choumavitch, 1949: 19-20; Gobert, 1937: 644). The composition of the rammadyat of these groups is very similar to that of th e rammadyat of
the Mesolithic Caspian peoples, even clown to the identical species of snail consumed (the artifacts, of course, are different). These modern Berber gro ups not
only bake foods directly on hearth-stones but they also boil or stew certain foods
in wooden vessels placed between hot hearth-stones. Since the heated stones retain
their warmth for a period of time, the campers cluster around the hearth ar ea
during the cool months of the years.
Practically all that has been said of the rammadyat of northwestern Africa can
be applied, remarkable as it may seem, to the burned rock middens that occur in
such great numbers in central and sou thwestern Texas. Kelley and Campbell
(1942 : 320) h ave succinctly described burned rock middens as "a complex
assemblage of superimposed and intersecting hearths." As in Africa, they are made
up of thousands of thermally fractured fragments of limestone or other available
country rock. In addition, they contain varying quantities of charcoal, ash, snail
and mussel shells, soil, animal bones, stone tools and clebitage and, occasionally,
human burials. Either oval or circular in outline, they may cover areas ranging in
size from a few square yards up to several acres, and they sometimes attain a
height of six to eight feet. The burned rock middens are usually situated near some
source of water, such as springs, or on alluvial terraces along major or minor
streams. The presumed method of accumulation of such middens, as described by
Kelley and Campbell (1942: 320), is essentially the same as described by Pond,
Balout, Gobert, and others for the rammadyat of northwestern Africa.
In view of these striking similarities, we suggest that it may prove of considerable interest to attempt interpretation of the burned rock middens of Texas
along the lines cited for their African counterparts. Specifically, someone should
determine whether or not the bands of soil and ash found in T exas middens
represent camping floors of individual component middens. Are some of the component middens within a burned rock midden factory sites and others not? Are
there differences in the types of food remains in the component middens? Are the
snail and mussel shells associated with a given component of fairly uniform size,
indicating preferences in collecting, or are they variable in size, pointing to the
collection of everything that was available? Do all the component middens of a
burned rock midden contain the same types of food remains, or are there indications
of differential preferences? Are there differences in the total lithic assemblages of
the component middens within a single burned rock midden, indicating the involvement of different cultural groups, or are the various assemblages within a given

320

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

burned rock midden representative of a single cultural unit? Lastly, can woodworking tools, such as gouges or adzes, be interpreted as tools for making wooden
vessels?
Answers to the above questions may be helpful in interpreting the burned rock
middens of Texas and the cultures associated with them. In closing, we would like
to point out that a knowledge of the excavation techniques used by archeologists
on the African rammadyat might prove useful to T exas workers.

References Cited
Balout, L.
1955, Prehistoire de l 'Afrique du Nord. Paris.
Choumavitch, W.
1949. Chasse aux pores-epics et pierre chauffees. Bulletin de la Societe des
Sciences Naturelle de Tunesie, Tome II.
Gobert, E.
1937. Les escargotieres. Le mot et la chose. IIIem e Congress de la Federation
des Societees Savants de l'Afrique du Nord, Tome II. Constantine, Algeria.
Honea, K.
1958. A Contribution to the History of the Hamitic Peoples of Africa. Acta
Ethnologica et Linguistica, No. 5. Vienna.
Kelley, J.C., and T. N. Campbell
1942. What Are the Burnt Rock Mound; of Texas? American Antiquity, Vol. 7,
No. 3, pp. 319-322.
Pond, A.
1938. Prehistoric Habitation Sites in the Sahara and North Africa. Logan
Museum Bulletin, No. 5. Beloit.
The University of Texas
Austin, T exas

Scored Pottery of the Texas
Coastal Bend
C.A.CALHOUN

Many campsites in the Coastal Bend region yield sherds and vessels of Rockport
ware and Goliad ware that bear striae, or scoring, in varied degrees of prominence.
These striae appear on the interior surfaces, the exterior surfaces, and occasionally,
on both surfaces. They are usually horizontal, but are often diagonal, and sometimes
rows of them crisscross, forming a grid pattern. Scored sherds of Rockport ware
occur in sites from Carancahua Bay to Corpus Christi Bay. They are apparently
uncommon around Baffin Bay in Kleberg County, which is well outside the range
of distribution of Goliad ware, and which is tentatively designated as the most southerly area in which Rockport ware was manufactured.
Few explanations have been offered for this feature. Potter ( 1930: 42) states that
the "small grooves and ridges on the surface" of some specimens of Rockport ware
were "probably made to reduce the slipperiness of the vessel and thereby lessen the
danger of breakage." However, the scoring is more often observed on the interior
surfaces rather than on the exterior. Also, vessels that were coated with asphaltum
(a common feature of indigenous pottery of this region, shared by both Rockport
and Goliad wares) might reasonably have been intentionally scored so as to provide
a surface that would improve adherence ::if the asphaltum to the walls of the vessel.
But this mechanical advantage was apparently unknown to,, or generally ignored
by, the aboriginal potters, since sherds displaying scored surfaces in combination
with asphaltum coatings are in the minority among asphaltum coated sherds of
both Rockport and Goliad wares. Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 382) suggest
that the scoring was produced by scraping with coarse grass or twigs.
It is the purpose of this brief paper to present evidence indicating that such
scoring, whether fortuitously or by design, is the direct result of the utilization of a
shell of a ribbed marine bivalve as an :implement in the manufacture of many
vessels of Rockport ware and Goliad ware.
Such shells are quite common in campsites along the Coastal Bend littoral, the
animals having been collected for food from the shallow bays and nearby Gulf of
Mexico. Generally speaking, the most abundant of the shells are those of the
Ponderous Ark (Noelia ponderosa ), the Scallop ( Pecten gibbus amplicostatus),
and the Great Heart Cockle (Dinocardium robust um ) . Examples of these shells are
shown in Fig. 1 at A, B, and C. Other ribbed types frequently represented are the
Angel's vVing (Barnea costata ) and the Bent Mussel (Mytilus recurvus ), but their
use as tools seems doubtful considering their fragility.
The advantages of such an implement are basic. They were readily ava ilable,
they w ere efficient, they were durable, and they required no modification. The

322

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

r ibbed surface prevented build-up of excess paste ahead of the tool (especially if
moistened ) in a spreadin g or smoothing stroke. The con vex surface of the shell
made an e ffi cacious trowel for evenly distributing the lumps or coils of clay, and
the margin was adaptable for scraping and removing excess paste to attain a more
uniforrn thickness and even surface.
The scoring itself, almost without excepti on, consists of units of multiple rows of
n eatly parallel ridges and fu rrows, each ridge the sam e width as the ones adjoining
it. and each furrow or groove the sam e width as the next in its series. Th e width
of the ridges and the width of the furrow s is not n ecessarily always the same, i.e ..
the fur-rows may be wider th an the r idges. Nor is the depth of the furrow s and the
h eight of the ridges uniform within their series, either transversely or longitudinally, the later al grooves and ridges being less pronounced generally than the
m edial on es. All this supports the probability that th e scoring represents sca rs left
by th e curved margin of a ribbed ma rin e shell tool.
At the site of Mission Nuestra Seilora del Rosario, abo ut 2.5 miles w es t of
present-day Goliad on the San Antonio River, are found sherds of Goliad ware
and , in lesser numbers, sh erds of Rockport ware. Many of the sherds recovered
h ere are scored. This feature appears on sherds of both series of pottery types. The
scoring appea rs to be identical wi th that exhibited by sherds occurring in sites
n earer to and along the coast proper. Onl y two types of marine shells are thus far
r epresented in th e materi al from Rosario. One of these is the Panama Shell or
L ettered Olive (Oliva sayana). Most shell s of this ty pe displa y workmanship indica ting that they wer e used for ornaments. The other ma r ine shell found h ere is
the Great Heart Cockle or Heart Clam (Dinocardium robustum Solander), a
rather large ribbed shell averaging between 5 and 14 cm. in length, with about 35
r obust fl at ribs, r egularly a rra nged, and with a serra t e m a rgin. None of the unbroken valves of the Cockle, or fragments therefrom , sh ow any workmanship or
attempt at modification in any manner.
Recently this writer r estored a vessel of Goliad Plain from Rosa rio . The sherds of
this vessel display light scoring on both exterior and interior surfaces. The interior
scoring is horizonta l, and the scoring on the more evenly fini shed ex terio·r forms a
grid pattern of horizontal and diagonal strokes. Some areas of the vessel indicate
that at one stage of its manufacture it mny have home h eavier scoring that was
practically obliterated at a few points by further finishing with a smooth object,
possibly the moisten ed fingers and palms of the m anufa cturer. The tool selected
for use as a spatula and trowel in this restoration work was the shell of a Great
H ea rt Cockle. The shell was a small (5.5 cm. length ) fresh one. The small shell
was employed simply because it was more convenient to work with in conforming
to contours rigidly dictated by the original vessel shape and dimensions determined
by projection from the existing sections. A ; the void areas were reconstructed , and
while the plaster wa s still formative , the surfaces were finished by gentle rubbing
with water -moistened fing ers, thus lowering the ridges and filling in the furrows
somewhat. The lightly scored appearance of the reconstructed surfa ces is strikingly
similar to that of the sherds composing the original section s of the vessel
(Fig. 1, E ) .
Fig . 1. Scoring on pottery from the Coastal Bend region of Texas . Marine shells used to
produce scoring, A-C; scored sherds of Rockport ware, D, F- 1; scored sherds of Goliad ware,
E, J-K; plaques of modeling clay showing scoring produced by ribbed marine shells , G'-K'.

A

c

D

F

E

F'

G

H

G'

I'

J'

J

K

0I

I 2I 3I 4t 5I 6I 7! 8I 9l ID
I

l

SCALE

IN

CMS .

K'

32.4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

At the Kirchmeyer site, on the west bank of Oso Creek, in Nueces County, are
found hundreds of sherds of Rockport ware. A high percentage of these sherds bear
one or more scored surfaces in degrees varying from quite light to very heavy.
One small body sherd deserves at least a brief mention here. This sherd is typical
Rockport ware, brown in color, with a trace of asphaltum clinging to the exterior.
The paste is fine, with tiny white inclusions (probably bone ) and is very hard and
unweathered, even though it is a surface find. It is approximately .5 cm. in thickn ess and 2 cm. in diameter. The exterior is smooth, but the interior is scored. This
scoring consists of two series of striae at slightly different angles to each other.
They are separated by a subtly curved dentate pattern which extends completely
across the surface of the sherd. It was produced by depressing the margin of a ribbed
marine shell about .1 cm. into the plastic clay and moving the concave side of the
shell forward. This action resulted in a scalloped perpendicularity, forward of
which the surface of the sherd was scored ( Fig. 1, D ).
In an effort to determine just what type of shell was used as a tool in manufacturing the vessel represented by the Kirchmeyer sherd, several marginal impressions of each type of ribbed shell that has been found on the site were made on
modeling clay. The shells involved were the Ponderous Ark, the Great Heart
Cockle, and the Scallop. There are certain minor, yet distinct differences between
the margins of these three shells. The Ark was quickly eliminated, and after close
examination and comparison of the sherd and the impressions, it became quite
apparent that the tool which produced the scoring on this sherd was that of a
Scallop shell ( Pecten gibbus amplicostatus Dall) , 4 cm. or less in diameter.
Plate 1, F, is a sherd of Rockport Black-on-Gray belonging to Mr. V. C. Branch
o.f Victoria, who collected it from the surface of a campsite on the north shore of
Copano Bay, in Refugio County. Under a low-power magnifying lens the more
outstanding groups of striae, representing single strokes of the tool, are seen to
overlap and pass through one another distinctly enough to establish the sequence of
the strokes. To illustrate this more clearly, a line drawing (Plate 1, F') was made
and the consecutive strokes numbered 1 through 4. Feature 5 is an area of smoothing, wherein the striae, including those of stroke 4, are effected . Feature 6 is
clearly a dentate imprint produced by the margin of a shell tool. This imprint is
not so prominent as the one displayed by the sherd described above from the
Kirchmeyer site. It was impossible to determine exactly where the stroke associated
with this imprint belongs in the sequence; however, it appears to have begun at
the upper right and swept diagonally towards the left, the imprint occurring at the
termination o.f the stroke. It closely parallrls stroke 3, though prior to it, and was
made with the concavity of the tool (interior of the shell) forward. The spacing and
shape of the "teeth" of the shell tool suggest that it was that of a Scallop (ventral
margin), but the pattern is neither sharp enough nor complete enough to permit
stating this with complete confidence.
Fig. 1, G-K, illustrates several typical scored sherds. To the right of each sherd
is a small plaque of local clay, upon which the general characteristics of the striae
represented on each sherd are duplicated by use of marine shell tools. No attempt
was made to produce an exact replica of each sherd. However, by variance of the
pressure applied to the tool, number, direction, and length of the strokes, the
scored features of each sherd seem satisfactorily paralleled. Fig. 1, G, is a fine
example of scored Rockport ware (from Oso Creek, Nueces County). Only the
interior is illustrated. The exterior is very lightly scored. Fig. 1, H , is also Rockport

SCORED POTTERY FROM TEXAS COAST

325

ware (from Copano Bay, Refugio County), the interior of the sherd being shown.
The exterior is quite smooth. The two dark areas are asphaltum. The single striae
displayed on the sherd were reproduced on the plaque by breaking a Scallop valve
(pedi cle ) in half longitudinally and employing the exterior surface of the rib
adjacent to the fracture. Fig. 1, I, is Rockport ware with a coarser sand temper
(from Lavaca Bay, Calhoun County ) . The exterior is also scored, but not as heavily
as the interior. The grooves on this sherd are V-shaped in cross section. They were
reproduced with the angular ribs along the posterior margin of a Cockle shell tool
(see left side of Fig. 1, C), or the "side" of the tool. Fig. 1, J, is a sherd of Goliad
ware (from Mission Valley, Victoria County) tempered with fine sand and, presumably. bone. Fig. 1, K, is the exterior of the same sherd. The scoring on the
exterior appears to have been "paddled" rather than stroked into a previously
smoothed surface.
It is not meant to imply that all vessels of Rockport ware and Goliad ware were
fashioned in this manner, using a shell tool as an accessory. Such specul ation would
be unfounded and presumptious. More credible evidence of the relationship of
scored vessels of the aforementioned types, and a ribbed marine shell tool, would
possibly be the retention of residue paste by such a tool. It would have to be subjected to a high temperature for the paste to end ure, and the heat of a fire would
probably calcine the shell, or at least fracture it badly. Hence it is unlikely that a
ribbed marine shell will be found with paste still adhering to its edge.
It is possible that the utilization of such shell tools was not confined to the Coastal
Bend region. Among the relatively few sherds of Goose Creek ware examined by
the writer, a number of similarly scored sherds were represented. Campbell ( 1957:
46 ), in describing sherds of Goose Creek In cis ed from the Caplen site, mentions
" tool marks being plainly visible, especially on the interior." The Handbook (S uhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 378, 380) lists deeply striated parallel lines on the interior
as an occasional feature of Goose Creek Plain.

References Cited
Campbell, T. N.
1957. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 448-471.
Potter, \'Vendel H.
1930. Ornamentation on the Pottery of the Texas Coastal Tribes. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. Z, pp. 41-44.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Port Lavaca, Texas
December, 1961

Significance of A New Radiocarbon Date
from the Lewisville Site
WILSON W. CROOK, JR., AND R. K. HARRIS

A new test of the charcoal from Hearth 8 at the Lewisville site in Denton
County, Texas (Crook and Harri s, 1957, 1958 ), h as been released by the University
of California at Los Angeles (F ergusson 3nd Libby, 1962) with a elate expressed as
"greater than 38,000" years ago B. P.
This compares favorably with the previous Humble run on the same material
of " greater than 37,000" (Brannon et al., 1957 ) . The specimen is reported as
UCLA-110, whereas the Humble laboratory analysis was listed as 0-248. Milton
Williams of Humble's Production Research Division, Houston, Texas, submitted
the sample for cross-checking.
Four small logs, burned into excellent charcoal, from Hearth 8 produced the
original dating as a check on the similar ·'greater than 37,000" result from charred
fibrous vegetable material excava ted in Hearth 1 at Lewisvill e (Humble sample
0- 235). Relatively remarkable for an early site, and particularly so to be of an
ideal quality for the radiocarbon technique, the Hearth 8 charcoal was so abundant
that two full tins have been sealed and preserved in the writers' possession. This is
available for possible future checks if further testing is desirable or when new
techniques and innovations in dating arise.
Humble's original work appeared to be definitive when two different samples,
of different materials and from different locations within the same site, corroborated
each other. The UCLA determination almost completely removes any possible criticism of the radiocarbon method of dating in this instance. It will be recalled that
Libby, then with the University of Chicago, developed the process to its first full
application to unknown age materials of archeologic interest in 1950 (Johnson,
1951 ).
Unquestionably, in light of today's knowledge, this then is the approximate age
of the Lewisville site and the Upper Shuler member or sub-formation of the
Pemberton Hill-Lewisville alluvial terrace of the Upper Trinity River system, in
which the site is contained.
From a paleontologica l view, it is also the approximate age not only for the
species identified at Lewisville but for others found up and downstream in the same
terrace formation along the Upper Trinity. Further confirmation of such a conclusion has already been received by the F-U-N analyses conducted on various fossil
bone finds from the several sub-formations or members of the Pemberton HillLewisville terrace by the University of London (Oakley and Howells, 1961, plus
commentary by Crook, 1961). Not only were the bones essentially contemporary
by the F-U-N tests from all alluvial terrace exposures, both up and downstream

328

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from Dallas, but also regardless of whether they came from the basal Hill gravels
or the Lower Shuler sands and Upper Shuler sandy clays above.
In addition, this conclusion is further reinforced by the finclings at the Clear
Creek paleontoiogical quarry in north central Denton County (Slaughter et al.,
1962.). Here an exposure into a late, upstream remnant of the Pemberton HillLewisville terrace of the Elm Fork of Trinity River has yielded a fauna indicative
of approaching cooler conditions, though still relatively arid , and has been
radiocarbon-dated by Mobil Oil Company's research laboratory near Dallas as being
"greater than 28,850," based upon freshwater shellfish remains.
In short, everything-dates, fauna, flora, and geology-suggest a non-glacial
(inter-stadia! or interglacial, as it may be)-period for the T-2. or Pemberton HillLewisville terrace of the Upper Trinity system. I n Europe, there is accumulating
evidence of such a period between about 2.8,000 and 42.,000 years ago; this has
been variously referred to as the Masurian er Paudorf interstadial.
American geologists generally recognize such a period prior to the last major
glaciation of ca. 25,000 years ago, but there is vast disagreement currently as to the
definition of what was formerly called the Wisconsin, and whether or not such a
preceding non-glacial period is in truth the last interglacial or a major interstadial
within a now-greatly-enlarged "Wisconsin." Paleontologically, the animal species
match what was formerly considered Sangamon interglacial, but a southwardretreat, followed by a northward re-entry during a succeeding interstadial, is
possible.
In any event, this was the time that man visited Lewisville repeatedly. Based
not only upon the animals apparently captured and brought to the campfires at
this site, but also upon many recent paleontologic discoveries from the same terrace
deposits within the immediate area (Slaughter et al., 1961), some interesting contemporaries bespeak warmer climate.
Foremost are the land turtles: Geochelone or giant tortoise is today confined to
the tropics, and Terrapene canaliculata ( huge direct ancestor of the living Carolina
terrapin, itself confined to southern United States today) has Lewisville as its
farthest-north recorded fossil occurrence.
The coyote from Lewisville has since been studied and deemed worthy of subspecies differentiation (Slaughter, 1961 ), with the very interesting circumstance
of having only the living form from Honduras as being somewhat similar. Members of the armadillo family are highly suseptible to cold, and it is notable that
three different large ones are present in the terrace: Glyptodon as reported by
White for Lewisville itself; Holmesina from the Hickory Creek site upstream from
Lewisville, and from Dallas downstream; and Dasypus from Dallas.
A 10--12. foot alligator has been found in the same terrace at Dallas; to reach
such size today requires a climate comparable to the southern Louisiana bayous or
the Florida Everglades. Finally, there are the palmetto stumps found beneath
the terrace deposit near Grand Prairie some years ago.
Tapir, found today only in tropical regions such as Central America, South
America, and Malaya, has been a fossil find in the Lewisville terrace deposits in
three areas-Elm Fork of the Trinity near Lewisville, and twice near Dallas.
Of course the vast majority of the accompanying fauna is adapted to wide variations within the North Temperate Zone, and there are a few cool-suggestive forms
such as meadow voles for paradoxes, but there are no downright boreal or arctic
types at all. The warm group shows which way the wind blew in Lewisville times.
It is becoming evident that this was about the time o.f arrival in Europe of Homo

NEW L E WISVILLE DATE

329

sapiens, already fully developed from som e place else. If " som e pl ace else" had
been N orth A sia, it is not improbable that h e migrated in the direction of Am erica
as well. Based upon his performance during last glacial times in Europe, his
culture had advanced to where he could survive the bitter winters that must have
prevailed even in inter-stadial-interglacial times, as today , in the Bering Strait
region. H owells (1959) suggests that the "Am erica n Indian" type may have been
the basic population of northeastern Asia before being submerged by the more
specialized Mongloids that perhaps evolved later ; isolated in America, they may
h ave lingered on.
Incidentally, Wormington (person al communica tion ) of the D en ver Mu seum of
Natural History has commented that the Lewisville chopper would be quite at
home in a number of Siberian collections she h as viewed.
Nevertheless, if man was indeed present at L ewisville at 3 7,000-plus y ea r s ago
in a warm , non -glacial period, he could n ot have been unique. H e was also present
at other local ities at least this far south in North America, and may well alrea dy
have been found elsewhere, but without benefit of radiocarbon dating to back his
credentials! His ancestors mu st have left even earlier campsites to the north on the
migration route. In northern T exas, alone, there is suggestive evidence, based on
geological provenience in the basal Hill gravels of the Lewis vill e terrace, that the
H enderson County stone heads described by Sellards ( 1952) and a h eavily-patinated
scraper found by the writers at P emberton Hill in Dallas, pre-date L ewisville by a
few thousand years.
Already there is a growing trend among scholars to suspect the existen ce of an
earlier, simpler level of Paleo-Ameri can cu lture as typified by non -projectile point
sites bearing a blade-chopper-scrape r-fl ake industry. Severa l such sites have been
radiocarbon dated (Tule Springs, Santa Rosa Island) with ea rliest indica tions
reaching the 30,000 years ago period. M any, including VVormington, would welcome L ewisville into this fold "were it not for that wretched Clovis point. " Texas
h as a considera ble number of blade-chopper-scraper-flake industry sites, unfortun ately none datable as yet, that probably belong to this theory .
Th anks especially to the L ehner mammoth-kill site in Arizona and its 12,000vintage rad iocarbon dates, the Clovis point in Hearth 1 at Lewisville has almost
become the "albatross" around the writers' n ecks. Friends in the profession have
time and again worked up the courage to ask us point-blank, "Did you re ally find
the point in the hearth?" Throw out the Clovis point and dissension almost vani shes
today. But the truth is sometimes awkward to live with ; in addition, to n ega te it
for con venien ce is not scientific. The real problem is that we did find it in
H earth 1, and from the red clay in the cracks and interstices and the caliche coating
over both faces, as found, it appears still to be a genuine inclusion. It is to be hoped
that better explanations will come from future finds.
It is still significant that such early sites do not yield many, if any, chipped
stone projectile points. As such obviously successful hunters at so late a period, this
merely implies that the spears or javelins utilized were tipped with hardwood or
bone points which do not survive in relatively open sites. The Aurignacians arrived in Europe with such a bone-tipped hunting technique, better-preseved in cave
deposits. This supposition probably should be added to the inventory of the earliermentioned blade-chopper-scraper-flake industry in America .
Jn an y event, considering the 9,000-11 ,000 years ago radiocarbon dates now
available from all over the North American continent, plus several in South
America all the way to Tierra del Fuego, it is apparent that by this time man had

330

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

been in the New VVorld so long that he h ad become widely adapted to local conditions throughout the length and breadth of t h e two continents. This, is in itself by
logi c, infers a tremendously long period previous to evolve such local specializ ations.
Lewisville ma y well cau se the finding of n ew sites, theories, and datings that
will yet far surpass its own value.

References Cited
Brannon, H. R. , Jr., A. C. D a ughtry , D . P erry, L. H. Simons, vV. VV. Whitaker,
and Milton Williams.
1957. Humble Oil Company Radiocarbon Dates I. Science, Vol. 1Z5. No. 3239,
pp. 147- 150.
Crook, 'Wilson W., Jr.
196 1. A Revised Interpre tation of the Lagow Discovery, T exas. American Antiquity, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 545- 548.
Crook, Wilson vV., Jr., and R. K. Harris
195 7. H earths and Artifacts of Early Man near L ewisville, T exas, and Associated Faun a] Material. Bulle tin of the T exas Arch eological Society , Vol.
28. pp. 7-97.
1958. A Pleistoce ne Campsite n ear Lewisvi lle, T exas. American Antiquity , Vol.
23, pp. 233- 246.
Fergusson, G. J. , and W. F. Libby
1952. U.C.L.A. Radiocarbon Dates I. American Journal of Science. Radioca rbon ,
Vol. 4 (in press ) .
H owells, VV. vV.
1959. Mankind in the M ak ing. Doubleday & Company.
Johnson , Frederick
1951. Int roduction. In: Radioca rbon Dating . M emoirs of the Socie ty for American Archaeology, No. 8. pp. 1-3.
Oakley, K. P., and VV. W. H owells
1961. Age of th e Skeleton fro m the Lagow Sand Pit, T exas. American Antiq uity,
Vol. 26, No. 4, p p. 543-545.
Slaughter. Bob H.
196 1. The Signifi ca nce of Dasypus bell us (S impson ) in Plei stocene Local
Faunas. The T exas Journa l of Science, Vol. 13, No. 3. pp. 311-315.
196 1. A New Coyote in th e Late Pleistocene of Texas. Journal of Mammalogy,
Vol. 42. No . 4, pp. 503- 509.
Slaughter, Bob H .. vV. W . Crnok, J r ., R. K. Hanis, D. C. Allen . and Martin Seifert
l 932. The Hill-Shuler Lo cal F aunas of the Upper Trinity River. Report of Inveotigations. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas (in
press) .
Slaughter, Bob H., and Ron ald Ritchie
1962. The Mammals of the Clear Creek Local Fauna. Journal of the Graduate
Resear ch Center, Southern Meth odist U niversity (in press ) .
Th e Dallas Archeological Society
Dallas, Texas

Origins of Pottery Types from the
Coastal Bend Region of Texas
1

T. N . CAMPBELL

Thus far six pottery types have been defined for the central section of the Texas
·coast, often popularly referred to as the Coastal Bend region of Texas. Three of
these types, all attributed to the Rockport Focus of late prehistoric and historic
times, h ave been formally described by Suhm, Kri eger, and Jelks ( 1954: 382-385 )
and are known as Rockport Plain, Rockport Black-on -gray, and Rockport Incised.
The Rockport Focus, at least in part, is linked with the Karankawa Indians of the
Texas coast (Campbell, 1960: 150, 168 ). Three additional pottery types have recently been defined by Mounger (1959: 163-177 ) in an unpublished M.A. thesi s
at The University of T exas. These three types, based upon pottery from excava tions at the Espiritu Santo Mission of Goliad. Texas, are attributed to the Aranama
Indians for whom the mission was established. This of course implies that the
pottery types are of historic age. The n ames assigned to these types are Golia d
Plain, Goliad Red-on -buff, and Goliad Black-on-buff. Each of these two series of
types can be regarded as representing a distinctive pottery ware, and we can
conveniently refer to them as Rockport ware and Goliad ware respectively. In this
brief paper the principal identifying characteristics of each of these six types will
be summarized and speculations on their probable migins will be presented.

R ock port Ware
The ty pe descriptions of Rockport Focus pottery presented by Suhm, Krieger,
a nd Jelks were based primarily on laboratory examination of a number of miscel laneous surface collections. Since 1954 some 10,000 potsherds from excavated sites
have been analyzed by Campbell (1956, 1958), and this permits us to make a few
minor modifications of the type description,;.
Rockport Plain. This pottery has a fine-textu red paste, commonly with no
recognizable tempering material ; but some sherds have fine white inclusions believed to be bone. Surface color is rather variable, but shades of gray and brown
predominate . Core color tends to be the same as surface color. Vessel surfaces are
smoothed, often rather unevenly. In the vicinity of Corpus Christi vessels are
frequently deeply brushed or scored on 0ne or both surfaces. Asphaltum coa ting is
rare on identifiable Rockport Plain sherds.
Vessel wall thickness u sually ranges fr om 2 to about 6 mm. , and a considerable
1 This paper was given at the 1959 Pottery Symposium of the Houston Archeological Society, Houston , T exas, December 6, 1959.

332

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

number of sherds indicate remarkably thin-walled vessels for their size. Rim sherds
seem to indicate hemispherical bowls; deep, wide-mouthed pots; and wide-mouthed
jars that have straight, incurved, or slightly outcurved rims. The base form is
believed to range from rounded to bluntly conical. Lips are either rounded or flat,
the latter occasionally deeply notched or diagonally incised. Occasionally rims are
slightly thickened near the lip, and a slight exterior overhang of the lip also
occasionally occurs. Some undecorated body sherds bear round loop handles perpendicular to the vessel wall, but these may have come from other types in the
Rockport series.
Rockport Black-on-gray. This type (Fig. 1, A -M ) differs from Rockport Plain
only in the following characteristics.
The vessel forms also include bottles with relatively short. vertical necks; bowls
with slightly outcurved rims; and globular ollas without necks. Lip notching (A )
is much more common, ranging from mere nicks to deep V-shaped notches. Rims
occasionally have a slight ridge paralleling the lip on the vessel exterior.
Decoration is principally in black asphaltum paint, but occasionally widely spaced
vertical rows of tiny punctates accompany the painted decoration (M ). A very few
sherds show what appears to be a thin , fugitive paint or stain, suggesting that a
polychrome tradition may have existed. The main design elements are large dots,
narrow bands, and straight or wavy lin es of varying width. Large dots are
arranged in vertical rows (L) or randomly in broad horizontal bands on the upper
part of the vessel. Bands commonly occur just below the lip ( B), and from this
band wavy or straight lines extend downward either vertically or diagonally
(C-E, G-J) . A very common design is a series of widely spaced, wavy or straight
lines extending downward from the lip (F ) . Many vessels appear to have paint
only on the lip itself (A ), and occasionally the asphaltum so used was thick and
ran down the walls of the vessel. Many Rockport Black-on-gray sherds bear an
interior coating of asphaltum, and this material also seems to have been used for
mending cracks in vessel walls.
Rockport In cised. This is the most poorly defined pottery type from the Coastal
Bend region. It is rare or absent in the southern portion of this region and not very
common elsewhere. It is believed to be of the same basic ware as Rockport Plain
and Rockport Black-on-gray, inasmuch as plain sherds from sites showing all of
these types are indistinguishable. It therefore differs mainly in the type of decoration. The incised designs (Fig. 1, N-X ), which are confined to the rim region, are
best described as geometric, and in general these designs are poorly executed. The
most common motifs include a band of horizontal parallel lines ( P -Q), below
which sometimes appear pendant triangles or pairs of fringed lines (R-S ); horizontal crosshatched bands (T ); a single zigzag line just below the rim (0 ) ; and
diagonal hachured panels (U). Occasionally a sherd will show closely spaced
scalloped lines, apparently produced by using the edge of a ribbed marine shell
like a rocker stamp. Lip notching occurs on a few sherds.
Considering Rockport ware as a whole, one of the most important future objectives is to obtain whole vessels or at least enough sherds from single vessels to
permit reconstruction of vessel form.

Goliad Ware
A new series of pottery types, now referred to collectively as Goliad ware, has
recently been described by Mounger, as nC'ted above. This series is based upon the

333

ORIGINS OF TEXAS COASTAL P OTTERY

D

cf? ~ ~cG ~
M

0

N

K

Q
p

Q

u

{J~
S

R

w

v
9

T

2
I

3 4
I

I

5 6 7
CM.
I

I

I

x
8
I

9 10
I

I

Fig . 1. Pottery associated with the Rockport Focus. A-M, Rockport Black-on-gray; N-X ,
Rockport Incised. Provenience: Kent-Crane site , R-S ; Live Oak Point site, A-J , M; Mustang
Lake site , N-Q, U-X; Webb Island site, K-L, T.

ana lysis of approximately 22,000 sherds from th e Espiritu Santo Mission at Goliad.
T he types are known as Goliad Plain, Goliad Red-on-buff, and Goliad Black-onbuff. As Mounger plan s to publish the results of her analysis, no illustrations are
given here. The following brief descriptions of the three types will serve until her
more detailed presentation appears in print.

334

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Goliad Plain. This type is based upon 187 rim sherds and 21,425 body sherds.
However, as Goliad Red-on-buff and Goliad Black-on-buff vessels were decorated
only on the upper part of vessel exteriors, an undetermined number of the above
body sherds is undoubtedly from decorated vessels. Eleven Goliad Plain vessels
have been reconstructed.
Goliad Plain has a dark gray paste with varying quantities of bone temper. The
surface color ranges from grayish buff to dull orange, and the white bone temper is
visible on both interior and exterior surfaces. Both surfaces are fairly well smoothed
and some vessels are polished. Wall thickness ranges from 5 to 13 mm. Rims vary
from slightly incurved to moderately outcurved, occasionally with angular eversion.
Lips range from round to flat, the latter occasionally having an exterior flange or
overhang. All vessel bases are well rounded. Vessel forms include shallow bowls;
hemispherical bowls, sometimes with two small round loop handles just below the
lip; both small and large jars and globular ollas with thick, round loop handles that
are usually at right angles to vessel walls but sometimes parallel to the wall near
the lip; very small short-handled ladles; and elbow pipes. Fragments of what
appear to be single handles occur occasionally; these are round in cross section,
sometimes as long as 60 mm., are straight. or slightly curved, and occasionally
have an angular bend at the distal end. A few sherds have numerous wall perforations and appear to represent some sort of colander.
Goliad Red-on-buff. This type is based on 11 rim sherds and 85 body sherds.
It differs little from Goliad Plain except that the vessels are decorated with designs
in a thin red paint. Vessel walls are thinner, ranging from 4 to 6 mm. All lips are
rounded. No vessels can be reconstructed, and no basal sherds have been recognized.
One painted handle fragment indicates that Goliad Red-on-buff vessels sometimes
bear loop handles. Decoration is limited to vessel exteriors and consists of simple
but rather bold designs in a rather dull red paint. The most common design elements are large clots and broad straight or wavy lines. Some sherds bear a single
horizontal band below the lip, and this may be straight, zigzagged, or scalloped.
Other sherds show a single horizontal row of large red dots a short distance below
the lip. Still others show a series of widely spaced but broad vertical lines extending
downward from the lip, and in one instance a vertical row of large dots occurs in
the spaces between the vertical lines. One sherd bears a large circle with a central
dot. In general, the designs on this type resemble the designs on Rockport Black-ongray pottery.
Goliad Black-on-buff. This type is based on 11 rim sherds and 77 body sherds.
It too is similar to Goliad Plain, but vessel walls are thinner (4--6 mm .). No base
sherds or handles have been recognized. One fragment of a bottle neck indicates
that this vessel form occurs. Decoration, which is in black asphaltum paint, is confined to vessel exteriors and is almost identical with decoration on Rockport Blackon-gray vessels. Small dots and nanow wavy or zigzag lines are especially common.
A few sherds show broad horizontal bands below the lip, and one sherd shows a
series of solid triangles pendant from this band.

Origins of Rockport and Go liad Wares
Of the two wares here described, Rockport ware is believed to be the earlier, since
it occurs in prehistoric as well as in historic sites. Goliad ware, however, is thus far
known from a single Spanish mission site.

ORIGINS OF TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY

335

At the present time it would appear that the pottery-making tradition first
reached the Coastal Bend r egion from the east, probably being derived from peoples
who made the incised, sand-tempered pottery of extreme southeastern Texas. Ring's
( 1961 ) radiocarbon dates from the Galena site n ear Hou ston indicate that sandtempered pottery goes back to well before the time of Christ. The vessel forms and
incised decoration of unpainted Rockport pottery have counterparts in southeastern
Texas in the culture commonly referred t0 as the Galveston .B ay Focus. Furthermore, there is a zone of overlap between Rockport ware and Goose Creek ware
(Galveston Bay Focus) in the coastal area lying between Matagorda and Galveston bays.
The Rockport painted pottery, which is the only prehistoric painted pottery
extensively made in the Texas area, constitutes a separate problem. Painting must
be derived from another source. for painted pottery is not found in the lower part
of the southeastern United States. The tradition of painting pottery is probably
derived from the Huastecan region of eastern Mexico, where black-on-white and
polych rom e pottery types h ave substanti,11 prehistoric age and persisted into the
historic p eriod (Ekholm, 1944: 431-432). Huastecan pottery vessels, presumably
trade specimens, have been found as far north as the Rio Grande delta area (Mason ,
1935: 34-39; Ekholm, 1944: 433), and Rockport Black-on -gray pottery has been
reported as far south as the Rio Grande (Anderson, 1932: 30). The scant evidence
of polychrome pottery from the Coastal Bend region conveniently fits this interpret ation, although one tiny sherd of polychrome pottery from Chihuahua has been
found on the surface at a Rockport Focus site near Corpus Christi (Campbell,
1956: 41). It is doubtful if the idea of pa inted pottery reached the T exas coast from
the Southwest. In designs there is very little correspondence between Rockport
Black-on -gray and painted pottery anywhere in North America. The idea of painting
pottery is probably all that diffused, and the proximity of th e Huastecan area makes
it the most likely source. We therefore derive incised decoration from an eastern
direction and painted decoration from a southern direction.
As for Goliad ware, in temper and surface color there is a notable resemblance
to Leon Plain pottery of central T exas (Suhm et al. , 1954: 386); but in its painted
decoration , and particularly in types of designs, it is strikingly similar to Rockport
Black-on-gray pottery from the central section of the Texas coast. Goliad Black-onbuff is indistinguishable from Rockport Black-on-gray except for surface color and
a tendency toward thicker vessel walls. Sherds of Rockport Black-on-gray were also
found at Espiritu Mission, but there is no difficulty in distinguishing it from Goliad
Black-on-buff. Goliad Red -on-buff, however, is unique, for it is the only red-painted
pottery in the Texas area, if one ignores the faint evidence of polychrome pottery
in the Rockport Focus. Reel painting may be the result of Spanish mission influence,
because it occurs on Spanish majolica and china from Espiritu Santo mission.
It would appear then that Goliad ware is the result of influences from two sources,
from central Texas (Leon ware) and from the nearby coast (Rockport ware). It
is of interest to note that the Aranama Inclinns, who made Goliad ware, frequently
deserted the mission and lived with the Tonkawa Indians in central Texas. This
seems to imply earlier friendly relationships with the Tonkawa who, some believe,
may have made Leon Plain pottery. Karankawa Indi ans were frequently at Espiritu
Santo Mission, for a special mission built for them was located nearby. Thus we
have diffusion mechanisms to support this interpretation of Goliad ware origins.
According to the hypothesis presented here, Coastal Bend pottery is the result of

336

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

diffusions from three directions-from the east, from the south, and from the
interior of Texas to the north and northwest. It will be of interest to see if this
interpretation is verified by future archeological investigation.

R eferences Cited
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts ofthe Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-3 1.
Campbell, T. N.
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 7- 46.
1958. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423- 442.
1960. Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958 ) , pp. 145-175.
Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944. Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico. American
Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 38, Part 5.
Mason, J. Alden
1935. The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships between the United
States and Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 7, pp. 29-46.
Mounger, Maria Allen
1959. Mission Espiritu Santo of Coastal Texas: An Example of Historic Site
Archeology. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, The University of Texas.
Ring, E. Raymond, Jr.
1961. An Evaluation of Radiocarbon Dates from the Galena Site, Southeastern
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31 (for 1960),
pp. 317- 325.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25 .
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

