lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

Significance of A New Radiocarbon Date
from the Lewisville Site
WILSON W. CROOK, JR., AND R. K. HARRIS

A new test of the charcoal from Hearth 8 at the Lewisville site in Denton
County, Texas (Crook and Harri s, 1957, 1958 ), h as been released by the University
of California at Los Angeles (F ergusson 3nd Libby, 1962) with a elate expressed as
"greater than 38,000" years ago B. P.
This compares favorably with the previous Humble run on the same material
of " greater than 37,000" (Brannon et al., 1957 ) . The specimen is reported as
UCLA-110, whereas the Humble laboratory analysis was listed as 0-248. Milton
Williams of Humble's Production Research Division, Houston, Texas, submitted
the sample for cross-checking.
Four small logs, burned into excellent charcoal, from Hearth 8 produced the
original dating as a check on the similar ·'greater than 37,000" result from charred
fibrous vegetable material excava ted in Hearth 1 at Lewisvill e (Humble sample
0- 235). Relatively remarkable for an early site, and particularly so to be of an
ideal quality for the radiocarbon technique, the Hearth 8 charcoal was so abundant
that two full tins have been sealed and preserved in the writers' possession. This is
available for possible future checks if further testing is desirable or when new
techniques and innovations in dating arise.
Humble's original work appeared to be definitive when two different samples,
of different materials and from different locations within the same site, corroborated
each other. The UCLA determination almost completely removes any possible criticism of the radiocarbon method of dating in this instance. It will be recalled that
Libby, then with the University of Chicago, developed the process to its first full
application to unknown age materials of archeologic interest in 1950 (Johnson,
1951 ).
Unquestionably, in light of today's knowledge, this then is the approximate age
of the Lewisville site and the Upper Shuler member or sub-formation of the
Pemberton Hill-Lewisville alluvial terrace of the Upper Trinity River system, in
which the site is contained.
From a paleontologica l view, it is also the approximate age not only for the
species identified at Lewisville but for others found up and downstream in the same
terrace formation along the Upper Trinity. Further confirmation of such a conclusion has already been received by the F-U-N analyses conducted on various fossil
bone finds from the several sub-formations or members of the Pemberton HillLewisville terrace by the University of London (Oakley and Howells, 1961, plus
commentary by Crook, 1961). Not only were the bones essentially contemporary
by the F-U-N tests from all alluvial terrace exposures, both up and downstream

328

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from Dallas, but also regardless of whether they came from the basal Hill gravels
or the Lower Shuler sands and Upper Shuler sandy clays above.
In addition, this conclusion is further reinforced by the finclings at the Clear
Creek paleontoiogical quarry in north central Denton County (Slaughter et al.,
1962.). Here an exposure into a late, upstream remnant of the Pemberton HillLewisville terrace of the Elm Fork of Trinity River has yielded a fauna indicative
of approaching cooler conditions, though still relatively arid , and has been
radiocarbon-dated by Mobil Oil Company's research laboratory near Dallas as being
"greater than 28,850," based upon freshwater shellfish remains.
In short, everything-dates, fauna, flora, and geology-suggest a non-glacial
(inter-stadia! or interglacial, as it may be)-period for the T-2. or Pemberton HillLewisville terrace of the Upper Trinity system. I n Europe, there is accumulating
evidence of such a period between about 2.8,000 and 42.,000 years ago; this has
been variously referred to as the Masurian er Paudorf interstadial.
American geologists generally recognize such a period prior to the last major
glaciation of ca. 25,000 years ago, but there is vast disagreement currently as to the
definition of what was formerly called the Wisconsin, and whether or not such a
preceding non-glacial period is in truth the last interglacial or a major interstadial
within a now-greatly-enlarged "Wisconsin." Paleontologically, the animal species
match what was formerly considered Sangamon interglacial, but a southwardretreat, followed by a northward re-entry during a succeeding interstadial, is
possible.
In any event, this was the time that man visited Lewisville repeatedly. Based
not only upon the animals apparently captured and brought to the campfires at
this site, but also upon many recent paleontologic discoveries from the same terrace
deposits within the immediate area (Slaughter et al., 1961), some interesting contemporaries bespeak warmer climate.
Foremost are the land turtles: Geochelone or giant tortoise is today confined to
the tropics, and Terrapene canaliculata ( huge direct ancestor of the living Carolina
terrapin, itself confined to southern United States today) has Lewisville as its
farthest-north recorded fossil occurrence.
The coyote from Lewisville has since been studied and deemed worthy of subspecies differentiation (Slaughter, 1961 ), with the very interesting circumstance
of having only the living form from Honduras as being somewhat similar. Members of the armadillo family are highly suseptible to cold, and it is notable that
three different large ones are present in the terrace: Glyptodon as reported by
White for Lewisville itself; Holmesina from the Hickory Creek site upstream from
Lewisville, and from Dallas downstream; and Dasypus from Dallas.
A 10--12. foot alligator has been found in the same terrace at Dallas; to reach
such size today requires a climate comparable to the southern Louisiana bayous or
the Florida Everglades. Finally, there are the palmetto stumps found beneath
the terrace deposit near Grand Prairie some years ago.
Tapir, found today only in tropical regions such as Central America, South
America, and Malaya, has been a fossil find in the Lewisville terrace deposits in
three areas-Elm Fork of the Trinity near Lewisville, and twice near Dallas.
Of course the vast majority of the accompanying fauna is adapted to wide variations within the North Temperate Zone, and there are a few cool-suggestive forms
such as meadow voles for paradoxes, but there are no downright boreal or arctic
types at all. The warm group shows which way the wind blew in Lewisville times.
It is becoming evident that this was about the time o.f arrival in Europe of Homo

NEW L E WISVILLE DATE

329

sapiens, already fully developed from som e place else. If " som e pl ace else" had
been N orth A sia, it is not improbable that h e migrated in the direction of Am erica
as well. Based upon his performance during last glacial times in Europe, his
culture had advanced to where he could survive the bitter winters that must have
prevailed even in inter-stadial-interglacial times, as today , in the Bering Strait
region. H owells (1959) suggests that the "Am erica n Indian" type may have been
the basic population of northeastern Asia before being submerged by the more
specialized Mongloids that perhaps evolved later ; isolated in America, they may
h ave lingered on.
Incidentally, Wormington (person al communica tion ) of the D en ver Mu seum of
Natural History has commented that the Lewisville chopper would be quite at
home in a number of Siberian collections she h as viewed.
Nevertheless, if man was indeed present at L ewisville at 3 7,000-plus y ea r s ago
in a warm , non -glacial period, he could n ot have been unique. H e was also present
at other local ities at least this far south in North America, and may well alrea dy
have been found elsewhere, but without benefit of radiocarbon dating to back his
credentials! His ancestors mu st have left even earlier campsites to the north on the
migration route. In northern T exas, alone, there is suggestive evidence, based on
geological provenience in the basal Hill gravels of the Lewis vill e terrace, that the
H enderson County stone heads described by Sellards ( 1952) and a h eavily-patinated
scraper found by the writers at P emberton Hill in Dallas, pre-date L ewisville by a
few thousand years.
Already there is a growing trend among scholars to suspect the existen ce of an
earlier, simpler level of Paleo-Ameri can cu lture as typified by non -projectile point
sites bearing a blade-chopper-scrape r-fl ake industry. Severa l such sites have been
radiocarbon dated (Tule Springs, Santa Rosa Island) with ea rliest indica tions
reaching the 30,000 years ago period. M any, including VVormington, would welcome L ewisville into this fold "were it not for that wretched Clovis point. " Texas
h as a considera ble number of blade-chopper-scraper-flake industry sites, unfortun ately none datable as yet, that probably belong to this theory .
Th anks especially to the L ehner mammoth-kill site in Arizona and its 12,000vintage rad iocarbon dates, the Clovis point in Hearth 1 at Lewisville has almost
become the "albatross" around the writers' n ecks. Friends in the profession have
time and again worked up the courage to ask us point-blank, "Did you re ally find
the point in the hearth?" Throw out the Clovis point and dissension almost vani shes
today. But the truth is sometimes awkward to live with ; in addition, to n ega te it
for con venien ce is not scientific. The real problem is that we did find it in
H earth 1, and from the red clay in the cracks and interstices and the caliche coating
over both faces, as found, it appears still to be a genuine inclusion. It is to be hoped
that better explanations will come from future finds.
It is still significant that such early sites do not yield many, if any, chipped
stone projectile points. As such obviously successful hunters at so late a period, this
merely implies that the spears or javelins utilized were tipped with hardwood or
bone points which do not survive in relatively open sites. The Aurignacians arrived in Europe with such a bone-tipped hunting technique, better-preseved in cave
deposits. This supposition probably should be added to the inventory of the earliermentioned blade-chopper-scraper-flake industry in America .
Jn an y event, considering the 9,000-11 ,000 years ago radiocarbon dates now
available from all over the North American continent, plus several in South
America all the way to Tierra del Fuego, it is apparent that by this time man had

330

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

been in the New VVorld so long that he h ad become widely adapted to local conditions throughout the length and breadth of t h e two continents. This, is in itself by
logi c, infers a tremendously long period previous to evolve such local specializ ations.
Lewisville ma y well cau se the finding of n ew sites, theories, and datings that
will yet far surpass its own value.

References Cited
Brannon, H. R. , Jr., A. C. D a ughtry , D . P erry, L. H. Simons, vV. VV. Whitaker,
and Milton Williams.
1957. Humble Oil Company Radiocarbon Dates I. Science, Vol. 1Z5. No. 3239,
pp. 147- 150.
Crook, 'Wilson W., Jr.
196 1. A Revised Interpre tation of the Lagow Discovery, T exas. American Antiquity, Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 545- 548.
Crook, Wilson vV., Jr., and R. K. Harris
195 7. H earths and Artifacts of Early Man near L ewisville, T exas, and Associated Faun a] Material. Bulle tin of the T exas Arch eological Society , Vol.
28. pp. 7-97.
1958. A Pleistoce ne Campsite n ear Lewisvi lle, T exas. American Antiquity , Vol.
23, pp. 233- 246.
Fergusson, G. J. , and W. F. Libby
1952. U.C.L.A. Radiocarbon Dates I. American Journal of Science. Radioca rbon ,
Vol. 4 (in press ) .
H owells, VV. vV.
1959. Mankind in the M ak ing. Doubleday & Company.
Johnson , Frederick
1951. Int roduction. In: Radioca rbon Dating . M emoirs of the Socie ty for American Archaeology, No. 8. pp. 1-3.
Oakley, K. P., and VV. W. H owells
1961. Age of th e Skeleton fro m the Lagow Sand Pit, T exas. American Antiq uity,
Vol. 26, No. 4, p p. 543-545.
Slaughter. Bob H.
196 1. The Signifi ca nce of Dasypus bell us (S impson ) in Plei stocene Local
Faunas. The T exas Journa l of Science, Vol. 13, No. 3. pp. 311-315.
196 1. A New Coyote in th e Late Pleistocene of Texas. Journal of Mammalogy,
Vol. 42. No . 4, pp. 503- 509.
Slaughter, Bob H .. vV. W . Crnok, J r ., R. K. Hanis, D. C. Allen . and Martin Seifert
l 932. The Hill-Shuler Lo cal F aunas of the Upper Trinity River. Report of Inveotigations. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas (in
press) .
Slaughter, Bob H., and Ron ald Ritchie
1962. The Mammals of the Clear Creek Local Fauna. Journal of the Graduate
Resear ch Center, Southern Meth odist U niversity (in press ) .
Th e Dallas Archeological Society
Dallas, Texas

