lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

IN MEMORIAM

George Charles Marius Engerrand *
A. P. BROGAN, J. G. MCALLISTER, AND T. N. CAMPBELL

Dr. George Charles Marius Engerrand, Emeritus Professor of
Anthropology at The University of Texas, died at the age of 84 in
Mexico City on September 2, 1961. His long career as a scientist and
teacher includes two disciplines (geology and anthropology) , three
languages (French, Spanish, and English), and four countries (France,
Belgium, Mexico, and the United States). He was known for the
breadth of his intellectual and professional interests, for his command
of anthropological literature, and for his magnetic personality in the
classroom. He had the respect of scholars, students, and laymen.
Dr. Engerrand was born on August 11 , 1877, at Libourne near
Bordeaux in southwestern France. He was of French Basque ancestry
and was proud of being both Basque and Gascon. He exhibited the
rugged independence of both but was too modest and self-effacing to be
typically Gascon. He received no formal secondary education but was
taught at home by private tutors who prepared him for the examinations required for the B.S. degree. In France at that time a B.S. degree
entitled the student to enter a university.
In 1895, at the age of 18, Dr. Engerrand enrolled as a student in the
Faculte des Sciences of the University of Bordeaux. After three years
of study in the natural sciences he received two degrees, a Licentiate
in Geology (1897) and a Licentiate in Botany ( 1898 ). In the early
part of his career as a student at Bordeaux, Dr. Engerrand's prime interest was paleontology. Then he read Topinard's Elements d'anthro*This memorial resolution appears in Documents and Minutes of the General
Faculty of The University of Texas, pp. 7805-7808. It was filed with the Secretary
of the General Faculty by T . N. Campbell, Chairman of the Special G. C. M .
Engerrand Memorial Resolution Committee, on November 18, 1961, and was distributed among the members of the General Faculty by the University Stenographic
Bureau on December 20, 1961. Its publication here has been approved by the
Secretary of the General Faculty.

George C. M. Engerrand

ENGERRAND MEMORIAL

3

pologie generale and acquired a new interest-anthropology. This was
further stimulated by the sensational archeological discoveries that
were then being made in the nearby Dordogne region. He also began
attending lectures by Emile Durkheim, the famous French sociologist,
who at that time was teaching at Bordeaux.
During his last year at Bordeaux the Dreyfus controversy rocked
France, and Dr. Engerrand aligned himself with a group of students
who spoke out for Dreyfus. He decided that he could not voluntarily
serve his term of military service until Dreyfus was returned from
Devil's Island. In 1898 he went to Brussels, Belgium, and never lived
in France again.
He chose Belgium because the great geographer, Elisee Redus, also
a Gascon, had invited him to teach at L'Institut Geographique de
Bruxelles. Between the years 1898 and 1907 he held various research
and teaching positions in Belgium, some of them concurrently. He was
a geologist on the staff of the Service Geologique de la Belgique and
eventually held professorships at a number of other Belgian institutions. During this Belgian period Dr. Engerrand published frequently,
and he became more and more concerned with anthropology. His most
important work was a book, Six ler;ons de prehistoire ( 1905) , for which
he received the Prix de Keyn from the Belgian Academy of Sciences.
He was much in demand as a popular lectun~r and became deeply
interested in university extension work, an interest he retained
throughout life.
His long dream of going to Mexico was realized in 1907 when the
Mexican government invited him to serve as a geologist with the Mexican National Geological Survey. In time he became chief geologist,
and his field work took him to many parts of Mexico. He always managed to do some anthropological work in connection with his geology.
In 1908 he was also made Professor of Archeology in the Museo
Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, a position he held
until 1914. For the year 1912.-1913 he was elected director of the
International School of American Archeology and Ethnology, succeeding the North American anthropologist Franz Boas.
Political revolutions made it impossible for Dr. Engerrand to continue work in Mexico, and in 1917 he left for the United States. After
teaching one year at the Gulf Coast Military Academy at Gulfport,
Mississippi, he accepted a position as Assistant Professor of Geology
at the University of Mississippi, where he also acquired an M.A.
degree.
In 1920 Dr. Engerrand came to The University of Texas as Adjunct

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Professor of Anthropology. In 1923 he was made associate professor
and in 1929 professor, a position he held until he became emeritus professor one day before his death. He became interested in the Wend
colonists and their descendants in Texas and published a monograph
on these people in 1934. He also received the Ph.D. degree from The
University of Texas in 1935. During the summers of 1943-1946 inclusive he was a visiting professor at the Universidad Nacional Aut6noma de Mexico. In 1959 he was awarded La Croix de Chevalier de
l'Ordre des Palmes, a French government decoration for distinguished
teaching and scholarly publication. At the time of his death he was
writing a biography of his friend, teacher, and associate, :Elisee Redus.
Dr. Engerrand is survived by his wife, five children, and eleven
grandchildren. In 1898 he married Alice Delsaute, from whom he was
separated in 1902. Two sons were born of this marriage-Elisee, now
an attorney in France; and Gabriel, who teaches at North Georgia College. In 1904 Dr. Engerrand married Jeanne Richard, who survives
him and lives in Austin. They have three children, one son and two
daughters-Jacques of Kent State University in Ohio; Jeanne, wife of
W. F. Helwig of the Department of Electrical Engineering at The
University of Texas; and Anita, wife of F. H. Gafford of North Texas
State University.
Dr. Engerrand's main contribution to The University of Texas was
his forty years of successful teaching. Over these years he taught a variety of courses, each of which was carefully prepared on the basis of
the latest and most reliable data. In the classroom he was dynamic and
exciting, and his students felt compelled to do their best. His wit, his
encyclopedic knowledge, and his cosmopolitan background made a fine
antidote for Texas provincialism. Taking a course with Dr. Engerrand
was, for most students, an unforgettable experience.

Publications of George C. M. Engerrand
Abbreviations
AMN
BMN
BMSA
BSAB
BSBG
BSGM
BUPM

E
EIS

Anales del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia.
Boletin del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia.
Bulletins et Memoires de la Societe d' Anthropologie de Paris.
Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie de Bruxelles.
Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie.
Boletin de la Sociedad Geologica Mexicana.
Bole tin de la U niversidad Popular Mexicana.
L'Essor.
Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir.

ENGERRAND MEMORIAL

EUB
HP
ICA
IGB
JMH
MSC
PIGM
RA
RGS
SHQ
SLB
SSSQ
VTB

5

Extension Universitaire de Belgique (pamphlets).
L'Homme Prehistorique.
Reseiia de la 2a Sesion de! 17° Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1910.
L'lnstitut Geographique de Bruxelles Publications.
The Journal of Modern History.
Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio Alzate."
Paregones de! lnstituto Geologico de Mexico.
Revue Anthropologique.
Revue Generales des Sciences.
The Southwestern Historical Quarterly.
Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux.
The Southwestern Social Science Quarterly.
The University of Texas Bulletin

Titles
1898. Note sur deux nouveaux affleurements du calcaire grossier superieur clans
!es environs de Blaye. SLB, Tome 53, pp. 33-35.
1898. Note sur un exemplaire du Gaulteria orbignyi trouve a Blaye clans !es
carrieres du haut de la ville. SLB, Tome 53.
1898. Note sur un nouvel affleurement de falun situe clans la propriete de M.
Piganeau, a Merignac. SLB, Tome 53, pp. 40-42.
1901. Book Review: A. lssel, Osservazioni sul Tongriano di Santa Giustina e
Sallello. BSBG.
1901. Book Review: Communicac6es de Direcc;ao dos Servic;os Geologicos de
Portugal, 1900. BSBG.
1901. Book Review: G. Rovereto, Illustrazione dei rnolluschi fossili Tongriani.
BSBG.
1901. L'Accroissernent du delta du Po au XIXeme siecle. IGB, Pub. 6.
1902. Book Review: C. de Georgi, Ricerche su i terremoti avvenuti in Terra:
d'Otranto dall' XI al secolo XIX. BSBG, pp. 216-226.
1902. Des animaux qui ne meurent pas. EIS.
1902. Le Quaternaire Beige. RGS, 712-725, 775-786.
1902. Les grandes decouvertes de Soignies. EIS.
1902. Un musee prehistorique. EIS, Tome 4.
1903. Book Review: G. Dollfus et Ph. Dautzenberg, Conchyliologie du Miocene,
moyen du bassin de la Loire . BSBG, pp. 146- 150.
1903. Demographie. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 86-91.
1903. Histoire du littoral beige. EIS, Tome 5, pp. 43-47.
1903. La terra a briques de Boom et ses fossiles. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 90-91.
1903. La collectionisme. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 48-52.
1903. Les boniti du monte Nerone par Tito Alippi. BSBG, pp. 69- 75.
1903. L'Etude de la mer. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 291-296.
1903. Notions sur !es premiers ages de l'humanite. EUB.
1903. Les premiers evolutionnistes. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 75-79.
1903. Un apotre. EIS, Tome 4, pp. 80-85.
1904. Book Review: G. Agamennone, Determination des bradysismes clans·
l'interieur de continents au moyen de la photographie. BSBG, pp. 29-38.
1904. L'Origine de l'homme. In: Six conferences sur !'evolution, EUB, pp. 14--16 ..

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1905. La prehistoire. La Patrie Belge, pp . 24-31.
1905. Los gigantes. Boletin de la Escuela Moderna . Ano 5, Num. 3, pp. 36- 37.
1905. Six lec;ons de prehistoire. Bruxelles. 263 pp. (Translated into Spanish, 1905,
as: Nociones sobre las primeras edades de la humanidad, Barcelona; also
translated into Dutch, 1906, as: De eerste tijden der menschheid, HobokenAnvers).
1906. Aperc;u sur les peuples de la terre. EUB.
1906. A propos de la grotte de Furninha. A propos de silex d'Otta. BSAB,
Tome 25. Also in: Communicac6es dos Servic;os Geologicos de Portugal,
1906-1909.
1906. La verite sur l'ile des Pygmees. BSAB, Tome 25, pp. xxx-xxxii.
1906. Les arts plastiques chez les peuples primitifs. EUB .
1906. Les eolithes et la logique. Bruxelles.
1906. Les geants, d'apres MM. P.-E. Launois et P. Roy. BSAB, Tome 25, pp.
xxxii- xli.
1907. L'Enseignement populaire en Belgique. E, Tome 1, pp. 1-3, 9-10, 25-27.
1907. Les phenomenes de la telegonie et de la xenie, sont ils inexplicables?
MSC, Torno 26, pp. 285- 295.
1907. Les variations de la taille humaine, le gigantoinfantilisme et l'acromegalie.
MSC, Torno 26, pp. 261 - 276.
1908. (with Fernando Urbina ) Las ciencias antropologicas en Europa, en los
Estados Unidos y en la America latina . MSC, Torno 27, pp. 81- 123.
1908. Las razas humanas. Barcelona. 201 pp.
1908. (with Fernando Urbina ) Un cote neglige dans le probleme de l 'education
- Algo que se ha descuidado en el problema de la educacion. MSC, Torno
27, pp. 181 - 223.
1909. (with Fernando Urbina ) Nota preliminar acerca de un y acimiento prehistorico ubicado en Concepcion (Estado de Campeche), acompafiada de
un resumen frances. BSGM, Torno 6, pp. 79- 87.
1909. (with Fernando Urbina ) Primera nota acerca de la fauna Miocenica de
Zuluzum (Chiapas) . BSGM, Torno 6, pp. 119-140.
1909. Note preliminaire sur un gisement prehistorique decouvert a Concepcion,
etat de Campeche (Resume extrait du Boletin de la Sociedad Geol6gica
Mexicana ) . MSC, Torno 29, pp. 27- 29.
1909. Una sociedad para el estudio del folklore chileno. MSC, Torno 29, pp. 413416.
1910. Etude preliminaire d' un cas de croisement entre un chinois et une yucateque. BMSA, 6eme serie, Tome 1, pp. 263- 265 .
1910. (with F. Urbina and collaboration of J . Baz y Dresch) Informe acerca de
una excursion geologica preliminar efectuada en el Estado de Yucatan.
PIGM, Torno 3, Num. 7, pp. 369-424.
1910. Informe sobre una excursion prehistorica en el Estado de Yucatan. AMN,
Torno 2, pp. 245- 259.
1910. La extension en el tiempo y en el espacio de la raza humana de Lagoa
Santa segun el Dr. Rivet. MSC, Torno 28, pp. 223-227.
1911. La organisacion de la Extension Universitaria en Belgica. MSC, Torno
31, pp. 67-72.
1911. L'Organisation des etudes geologiques au Mexique. RGS, 22eme annee,
pp. 602-607.

ENGERRAND MEMORIAL

7

1911. Programa general del Curso de Prehistoria. BMN, Tercera Epoca, Torno 1,
Num. 3, pp. 46-51.
1912. La huella mas antigua quiza del hombre en la peninsula de Yucatan.
Estudio de la industria de Concepcion (Campeche). ICA, pp. 89-100.
1812. L'.Ecole internationale d'archeologie et d'ethnologie americaines. RA, Tome
22, pp. 491-492.
1912. L'Etat actuel de la question des eolithes. RGS, 23eme annee, pp. 541-548.
1912. Nota complementaria acerca de los petroglifos de la Baja California.
BMN, Torno 2, Num. 1, pp. 2-4.
1912. Note sur deux enfants nes d'un chinois et d'une mexicaine de race blanche.
RA, Tome 22, pp. 122-125.
1912. Nouveaux petroglyphes de la Basse-Californie. RA, Tome 22, pp. 200-211.
1912. Nuevos petroglifos de la Baja California. BMN, Tercera Epoca, Torno 1,
pp. 197-201.
1912. Observaciones del Padre Marquez acerca del calendario del codigo mexicano del Cardenal Borgia ( traduccion del Italiano). AMN, Torno 3, pp.
165- 173.
1912. Preuves geologiques de ce que la partie nord de la peninsule yucateque
n'a pu etre habitee par l'homme durant l'epoque quaternaire. ICA, pp.
100-105.
1912. Un caso de cruzamiento entre un chino y una yucateca de origin indigena.
ICA, pp. 105-106.
1912. Une arme maya. HP, Tome 10, pp. 389-392.
1913. Book Review: H. Beuchat, Manuel d'archeologie americaine, avec une
preface de H . Vignaud. Isis, Tome 1, pp. 530-537.
1913. Discurso pronunciado por el Sr. Prof. Jorge Engerrand, el dia 20 del
actual, con motivo de la apertura de la exposicion anual de la Escuela
Internacional de Arqueologia y Etnologia Americanas, de la que es director. BMN, Torno 2, Num. 12, pp. 263-265.
1913. Estado actual de la cuesti6n de los eolitos. BMN, Torno 2, N11m. 8, pp.
150-160.
191 3. (with Trinidad Paredes) lnforme relativo a la parte occidental de la
region norte de la Baja California. PIGM, Torno 4, Num. 2-10, pp. 277306.
1913. lnforme sabre una excursion a la Baja California. BMN, Torno 2, Num.
8, pp. 149-150.
1913. La exposici6n de la Escuela Internacional de Arqueologia y Etnologia
Americanas. BMN, Torno 2, Num. 12, pp. 266-268.
1914. Les travaux de l'ecole internationale d'archeologie et d'ethnologie americaines pendant l'annee 1912-1913. RA, Tome 24, pp. 239-243.
1915. (with I. Ramirez Castaneda) Les simples destines a des usages medicaux
ou superstitieux vendus au marche de Zumpango, Mexique. RA, Tome
25, pp. 55-62.
1915. Lo que sabemos acerca de los primeros hombres. BUPM, Torno 1, Num.
14, pp. 65-68.
1917. Etude preliminaire sur les ornaments de coquilles des anciens mexicains.
RA, Tome 27, pp. 81-S5.
1917. Les mutilations dentaires chez les anciens Mayas. RA, Tome 27, pp. 488493.

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1925. The Teaching of Anthropology at the University of Texas. RA, Tome 35,
pp. 394-398.
1926. Book Review: H. H. Wilder, The Pedigree of the Human Race. SSSQ,
Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 84-85.
1929. Mexico (sections on geography, geology, population, and economics) .
Encyclopedia Britannica, 14th Edition, Vol. 15, pp. 377-386.
1931. Ethnology of Africa South of the Equator. University Travel League.
Cleveland.
1934. The So-Called Wends of Germany and Their Colonies in Texas and Australia. UTB, No. 3417. 179 pp.
1936. Book Review: Wendell C. Bennett and Robert M. Zingg, The Tarahumare,
An Indian Tribe of Northern Mexico. SHQ, Vol. 39, No. 3, pp. 248-250.
1960. Book Review: Eric R. Wolf, Sons of the Shaking Earth. SSSQ, Vol. 41 ,
No. 2, pp. 177-178.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
W.W. NEWCOMB, JR.

At the opening of the twentieth century modern anthropology was
just getting under way, a strange, unfamiliar word for a then amorphous science growing out of a maturing western world and from new
discoveries about the world and man. As early as 1836, Boucher de
Perthes in France had maintained that man had been a contemporary
of extinct animals, though it was not until more than twenty years
later that the stone artifacts of his proof were accepted by the scholarly
community of Europe. In 1859, the bomb of Darwin's work exploded,
reducing to rubble the fantasies of the medieval mind and leaving a
deep impression not only on biological anthropology but on all its
fields. Discoveries such as Pithecanthropus erectus in Java, the recognition of what Neanderthal man represented, and the work of many
men in all the countries of the West brought the new science into a
promising being by the beginning of the new century. George C.
Engerrand was not, of course, present at the birth of the new science.
Perhaps he should not even be called one of its pioneers, but he arrived
on the scene-it is difficult not to think of it as a wild frontier-just
after its boundaries had first been explored, and before its roads had
been built or its fields cleared. It was an exciting time to become an
anthropologist; to participate vociferously in its growth and to witness
its very considerable development over the next half century and more
is an experience shared by few others.
Engerrand came into the field of anthropology, as so many others
after him, from geology. His first published papers were in this field.
"Note sur un exemplaire de Gaulteria orbignyi trouve a Blaye clans
les carrieres du haut de la ville," " Note sur deux nouveaux affleurements du calcaire grossier superieur clans les environs de Blaye," and
"Note sur un nouvel affleurement de falun situe clans la propriete de
M. Piganeau, a Merignac" all appeared in the Bulletin de la Societe
Linneenne de Bordeaux in 1898. These brief papers resulted from a
reconnaissance of the D epartment of Gironde in southwestern France,
and he wrote enthusiastically of the discovery of new strata and their

10

TEXAS ARCHEO LOGICAL SOCIETY

fossils. Emigrating to Belgium, and positions as Professeur a !'Institute
des H autes Etudes de Bruxelles and in !'Extension Universitaire de
Belgique, his interest in geology continued. For example, h e published
a two-part review in 1902 of "Le Quaternaire Belge" in the Revue
Generale des Sciences. Part 1 is a concise summary of the stratigraphy,
fauna, and flora of Belgium during th e Quaternary. Part 2, entitled
"Les industries humaines," signals a new-found interest in prehistory,
an interest or rather a devotion, which occupied him until hi s death.
His conception of eoliths, derived from his mentor, M. A. Rutot, then
Conservateur au M usee d'Histoire Naturelle de Bruxelles, is here
found for the first time.
In the next several years Engerrand's interests ranged wider, finding expression in a number of Belgian publications. Some were unsigned and the soubriquet "Georgerrand" was often u sed in the
Encyclopedie lllustree du Soir. One short article, published in this
journal in 1903 and entitled "Histoire du littoral Belge" (unsigned ) ,
was a summary of the geological and cultural history of the Belgian
coast, with emphasis on the more recent past. Another of the same
year, "La terre briques de Boom et ses fossiles" (signed "Georgerrand" ) , told in part the tragic story of Arsene Dumont, as did another
entire piece, "Demographie." Dumont, one of the founders of modern
demography, was unable to pay his bills and for this reason took his
own life. That society should so neglect its needed and most able
members deeply shocked Georgerrand, and his biting criticism of it
is as pertinent today as it was then. Dumont had assiduously sought
the causes of depopulation then occurring in various French communes, and Engerrand was keenly interested in this phenomenon. It
should be remarked that Dumont was one of the first to ascribe multiple socio-cultural causes for such population changes, and he was able
to suggest specific factors responsible for the depopulation of certain
regions.
"Un apotre" ("An Apostle"), which briefly reviewed the life and
accomplishments of Boucher de Perthes, also appeared in 1903, as did
"Notions sur les premiers ages de l'humanite." This twenty-four page
review of European prehistory, published by the Extension Universitaire de Belgique, demonstrated Engerrand's marked talent for condensing the pertinent facts of prehistory into a relatively few pages in
a style the man in the street, or the people its author taught in the
extension university, could readily comprehend. The extension university also published " L'Origine de l'homme," one part of Six conferences sur l' evolution. This brief summary paper is composed of a

a

ENGERRAND IN EUROPE

11

series of statements of fact and belief, and deductions from these,
demonstrating that man is an anthropoid, that he evolved from nonman, and, finally, that his beginnings predate the Quaternary.
The productive year 1903 also saw publication in Encyclopedie
lllustree du Soir of "Les premiers evolutionnistes," in which the relatively new idea of evolution, which Engerrand fervently embraced,
was examined in historical perspective. Actually a review of C. Fenizia's Storia della evoluzione (Milan, 1901 ) , Engerrand recounted the
insights concerning life and the principles of evolution that had
dawned or almost dawned on the savants of the classical world. But
he rightly concluded "La verite ne se revele pas subitement clans les
esprits; elle se conquiert par de penibles travaux et de longues recherches. " ("The truth is not suddenly revealed in the mind; it is
conquered by intensive work and lengthy studies. ")
"Le collectionnisme," signed Georgerrand and placed in the Encyclopedie, also appeared in 1903. The vandalism of archeological sites
was a subject about which he had written before in "Le Quaternaire
Belge." The more recent essay could well be translated and inserted in
a modern American archeological newsletter, both for its pertinence
and because it is written vvith a dash and fire not often enough encountered these days. To him there were two kinds of collectors, those
who made collections to study and those who did so ceremonially, to
gratify mere personal whim and ego. He also distinguished between
harmless collections of infinitely available specimens, such as leaves or
butterflies, and archeological collections which are limited in number.
He then caustically criticized those who were pillaging archeological
sites all over Europe merely to gratify individual whim. Finally, he
suggested that antiquities laws based on those already in effect in Denmark be enacted.
Rounding out the year 1903, Georgerrand penned an essay on
oceanography, "L'Etude de la mer. '' At that point in history Belgium
had done nothing to improve her knowledge of the sea, although
neighboring countries had already begun scientific studies of the seas
and were reaping practical benefits from them. The author, never one
to let such impractical neglect pass unnoticed, made a strong plea for
the government to establish a center for the study of oceanography.
The year 1905 marked the publication of Engerrand's major European work, Six le<;ons de prehistoire. It is a summary of an elementary
course in prehistory given in different Belgian cities under the auspices
of the extension university, but it is something more than a textbook
review of what was then known about European prehistory. The first

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lesson is introductory in nature, defining what prehistory is, briefly
surveying its development, and concludes by criticizing the shortcomings of some who have contributed more confusion than knowledge to prehistoric studies. Altogether it is a charming introduction,
particularly for those who are surprised to encounter Gallic battlecries
at various junctures, and to find sections concluded with such observations as "Mais la verite triomphe toujours." ("But the truth always
triumphs.")
The second lecture is entitled " L'Homme Tertiaire" (Tertiary
Man) and, together with the third lesson, "Les eolithes," makes the
book more than a text. For this, apparently, was one of the first times
the arguments for the acceptance of an eolithic age had all been put together in one place. Drawing on the work of M. A. Rutot and others,
Engerrand strongly championed the cause of an eolithic stage and,
as a result, was shortly to become embroiled with Marcellin Boule in
a heated argument. Chapter 2 opens with a discussion of the Tertiary,
examining its climate, fauna, flora, and paying particular attention to
the evolution of the primates, building a case for the logical stand that
the relatively sophisticated flint knappers of the Old Stone Age must
have developed from more primitive beginnings. From these prefatory
remarks the author turns to a discussion of various sites where
"eoliths" were found-Thenay (Lair-et-Cher), Puy-Courny (Cantal ) ,
and Saint-Prest (Eure-et-Lair ) in France, Otta near Lisbon, the chalk
plateau of Kent and the Cromer forest beds of England. This discussion is capped by a review of the recently (1894 ) discovered
remains of Java man, Pithecanthropus erectus. In the third lesson,
following Rutot, a series of Belgian Quaternary eolithic industries are
described- "Reutelien," "Mafflien," and "Mesvinien." This chapter
also discusses what eoliths are, describes the history of their discovery,
and contains a detailed examination of the objections to the acceptance
of eoliths. The geology of the Quaternary is carefully outlined, other
pertinent matters are discussed, and a strong argument for an eolithic
stage is made.
As is true of many similar controversies, both sides have since
proved to be partly right and partly wrong. Certainly Engerrand's
logic was impeccable. Lower Paleolithic cultures, the Chellean for
example, were preceded and derived from more primitive cultures of
earlier times. But in the enthusiastic search for what had to be, the
difficulty-even the impossibility- of recognizing these cruder remains was evidently not fully appreciated. The eoliths of Thenay and
Puy-Courny, both of which Engerrand felt showed traces of having

ENGERRAND IN EUROPE

13

been used by man, are now regarded as from Miocene deposits and
entirely the result of natural causes (Breuil and Lantier, 1959: 67 ) .
The pieces of flint found in the Tertiary gravels on the North Downs
of Kent, the so-called Harrisonian eoliths, can be duplicated by flints
chipped naturally by the friction of one stone against the other which
occurs in soil-creep (Oakley, 1957: 11). EvenRutot's Belgian Quaternary eolithic industries are now regarded as being naturally chipped
flints, lacking proof of being made or used by man (Breuil and Lantier,
1959: 67). In fact, the only flints that have stood the test of time and
intensive study are those from the Cromer forest beds. These East
Anglia flints were presumably derived from a deposit laid down in the
interglacial preceding the Mindel glaciation, and so are generally
regarded today as Lower Pleistocene. Large flakes, presumably from
this deposit, have been picked up along the shore at Cromer. But that
they come from the Cromer forest beds has not been demonstrated.
Crude hand-axes have been found in situ in the deposit, however, and
are now considered to be pre-Chellean tools, not eoliths (Leakey,
1960: 68-69).
Dawn stones-eoliths-undoubtedly exist. Early men, as do modern
campers intent on pounding a tent stake, picked up suitable rocks and
u_sed them as temporary tools. But to identify any particular pebble
as an eolith, or even a piece of flint which has fortuitously come to
resemble a hand-axe, scraper, or knife, and claim man used it, is to
err. An eolithic stage in human cultural development was a logical
construct to build; in fact, such a postulate may be regarded as almost
inevitable, but for all of that it was an impossible one to demonstrate.
In addition, the tremendous increase in know ledge a bout fossil man
since the beginning of this century ha.s brought general agreement that
"man or a precursor very similar to him" did not "make his appearance on earth toward the middle of the Tertiary epoch." A chronically
tool-using, tool-making primate, that is, man, is as yet confined to the
Quaternary.
The remaining three chapters of Six ler;ons de prehistoire are concerned with the Lower Paleolithic, Upper Paleolithic, and Neolithic.
They comprise a concise summary of European prehistory, and illustrate again the author's ability to compress a large amount of factual
data into a relatively few pages. The publication of this book provoked a reply by Marcellin Boule in the pages of L' Anthropologie
("L'Origine des eolithes," Tome 16: 257-267 ) in which he roundly attacked the position of all those who accepted eoliths. Such men as Harrison, Bell, Shrubsole, Lewis-Abbott, Ashington Bullen, Johnson, and

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

others in England; Capitan, Chantre, Thieullen in France; Hahne,
Klaatsch, Krause, Schweinfurth, and others in Germany; and Rutot in
Belgium, who was named as the head of this school of thought, were
singled out by Boule. You might say that Engerrand, significantly not
mentioned by Boule, stood with a large and distinguished company.
It was in this article that Boule reported on his experiments in which,
by mechanical means, he had produced eoliths. Engerrand soon replied to this assault in a privately printed paper, entitled "Les eolithes
et la logique." In it he ridiculed Boule's manufacture of "artifactual"
eoliths, suggesting that it was possible with modern machinery to
make things much more complicated than eoliths, and again demonstrating that logically a cultural stage must have underlain the Paleolithic. Thus ended the controversy, but by such debate understanding
is tested and strengthened.
The broadness of Engerrand's anthropological interests was again
illustrated in 1906 by the publication of several articles. In "Les arts
plastiques chez les peuples primitifs" he noted that in primitive societies men were more gaily ornamented than females, as with many
male birds and other animals. Setting up an interesting classification
of art forms, he also suggested that adornment of the body was the
most elementary form of art. "Les geants, d'apres MM. P. E. Launois
et P. Roy," was a review of their Etudes biologiques sur les geants,
demonstrating a continuing interest in human biology and abnormality. Another article, "A propos de la Grotte de Furninha," concerned a debate with M. J.-F. Nery Delgado, which had also been
mentioned in "Les eolithes et la logique." A case of misunderstanding,
it was Engerrand's contention that unknown vandals had despoiled
the archeological remains of this cave while seeking treasure.
In 1907, closing out his writings in French and his Belgian sojourn,
Engerrand published a three-part article in L' Essor concerning popular education in Belgium. Education had always been one of his keen
interests, and nowhere is it better shown than in this article. He stated
that the need for knowledge had become greater and greater for all
classes of citizens, and that this popular demand had resulted in the
creation of the extension universities. In the courses which were given,
or at least in those he gave, the aim was not only to give scientific facts
but to inculcate the scientific spirit. His feeling about the necessity for
education was summed up in the concluding lines of Part I: "Ignorant
people," really ignorant nations, "are incapable of realizing great
works."
The second and third parts of "L'Enseignement populaire en Bel-

15

ENGERRAND IN EUROPE

gique" are most interesting and revealing, not so much for what they
relate about their author, but in the picture they portray of Belgian society at the beginning of the twentieth century. We are treated to a
vivid picture of the worker who spat on the lecture room floor because
he knew no better and the bourgeoisie who spat on the floor because he
did, or at least spat because he did not care for the niceties of etiquette.
The author suggests ways of improving such behavior, mostly by the
example to be set by extension professors. If the professors removed
their hats on entering the lecture halls, most of the audience would do
likewise, claims the optimistic author. In short, Engerrand not only attempted to inculcate the scientific spirit in extension courses, but he
also hoped to implant civilized etiquette and raise the general level of
behavior of his students. He likewise suggested that attempts be made
to improve the attractiveness of lecture halls-to provide flowers ,
blackboards, heat, etc. It is hard to imagine that American professors,
and presumably their modern Belgian counterparts, could successfully
teach the type of students in the kind of setting that Engerrand was so
familiar with in Belgium at the turn of the century.
This brief reveiew does not cover by any means all of the published
work in French of George C. Engerrand, as a glance at the attached
(perhaps incomplete) bibliography will show. He wrote many book
reviews and other articles, some of which I was unable to obtain. I
believe, nevertheless, that his major works and the principal currents
of his thought have been covered here, enough certainly to suggest the
breadth of his interests and his deep concern with education.

Bibliography
Breuil, Henri, and Raymond Lantier
1959. Les hommes de la pierre ancienne. Paris.
Engerrand, George C.
1898. Note sur deux nouveaux affleurements du calcaire grossier superieur dans
les environs de Blaye. Bulletin de la Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux, Tome
53, pp. 33-35.
1898. Note sur un exemplaire du Gaulteria orbigny trouve a Blaye dans l es
carrieres du haut de la ville. Bulletin de la Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux, Tome 53, pp. 36-39.
1898. Note sur un nouvel affleurement de falun situe dans la propriete de M .
Piganeau, a Merignac. Bulletin de la Societe Linneenne de Bordeaux,
Tome 53, pp. 40-42.
1901. Book Review: A. lssel, Osservazioni sul Tongriano di Santa Giustina e
Sessello. Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie. Bruxelles.

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1901. Book Review: Communicacoes de Direcc;ao dos Servic;os Geologicos de
Portugal, 1900. Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie. Bruxelles.
1901. Book Review: G. Rovereto, Illustrazione dei mulluschi fossili Tongriani.
Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie. Bruxelles.
1901. L'Accroissement du delta du Po au XIXeme siecle. L'lnstitute Geographique de Bruxelles Publications, No. 6. 36 pp. +map.
1902. Book Review: C. de Georgi, Ricerche su i terremoti avvenuti in T erra
d'Otranto dall' XI al secolo XIX. Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie,
pp. 216-226. Bruxelles.
1902. Des animaux qui ne meurent pas. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir. Bruxelles.
1902. Le Quaternaire Belge. Revue Generale des Sciences, pp. 712-725, 775-786.
1902. Les grandes decouvertes de Soignies. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir.
Bruxelles.
1902. Un musee prehistorique. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir. Bruxelles.
1903. Book Review: G. Dullfus et Ph. Dautzenberg, Conchyliologie du Miocene,
moyen du bassin de la Loire. Bulletin de la Societe Belge de Geologie, pp.
146-150.
1903. Demographie. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp. 86-91.
1903. Histoire du littoral belge. Encyclopedie lllustree du Soir, Tome 5, pp.
43--47.
1903. La terre a briques de Boom et ses fossiles. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir,
Tome 4, pp. 90-91.
1903. Le collectionisme. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp. 48-52.
1903. Les boniti du monte Nerone par Tito Alippi. Bulletin de la Societe Belge
de Geologie, pp. 69-75.
1903. L'Etude de la mer. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp. 291-296.
1903. Notions sur les premiers ages de l'humanite. Extension Universitaire de
Belgique. Bruxelles. 24 pp.
1903. Les premiers evolutionnistes. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp.
75-79.
1903. Un apotre. Encyclopedie Illustree du Soir, Tome 4, pp. 80-85.
1904. Book Review : G. Agamennone, Determination des bradysismes dans l'interieur de continents au moyen de la photographie. Bulletin de la Societe
Belge de Geologie, pp. 29-38.
1904. L'Origine de l'homme. In: Six conferences sur l'evolution, pp. 14-16. Extension Universitaire de Belgique. Cinquieme Conference. Bruxelles.
1905. La prehistoire. La Patrie Belge, pp. 24-31.
1905. Los gigantes. Boletin de la Escuela Moderna, Ano 5, Num. 3, pp. 36-37.
1905. Six lec;ons de prehistoire. Bruxelles. 263 pp. (Translated into Spanish,
1905, as: Nociones sobre las primeras edades de la humanidad, Barcelona; also translated into Dutch, 1906, as: De eerste tijden der menschheid,
Hoboken-Anvers).
1906. Apen;u sur les peuples de la terre. Extension Universitaire de Belgique.
Bruxelles. 20 pp.
1906. A propos de la grotte de Furninha. A propos de silex d'Otta. Bulletin de
la Societe d'Anthropologie de Bruxelles, Tome 25, pp. xxiv-xxx. Also in:
Communicacoes dos Servic;os Geologicos de Portugal, 1906-1909.

ENGERRAND IN EUROPE

17

1906. La verite sur l'ile des Pigmees. Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie de
Bruxelles, Tome 25, pp. xxx-xxxii.
1906. Les arts plastiques chez les peuples primitifs. Extension Universitaire de
Belgique. 12 pp.
1906. Les eoliths et la logique. Bruxelles. 7 pp.
1906. Les geants, d'apres MM. P.-E. Launois et P. Roy. Bulletin de la Societe
d'Anthropologie de Bruxelles, Tome 25, pp. xxxii-xli.
1906. Comment on: Traite l'Anthropologie a la Societe d'Anthropologie de
Bruxelles. Bruxelles. 22 pp.
1907. L'Enseignement Populaire en Belgique. L'Essor, Tome 1, No. 1, pp. 1-3,
9-10, 25-27.
Leakey, L. S. B.
1960. Adam's Ancestors: The Evolution of Man and His Culture. Harper Torchbooks, 4th edition. New York.
Oakley, Kenneth P .
1957. Man the Tool-maker. The University of Chicago Press. Chicago.
Texas Memorial Museum
Austin, Texas

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
JOHN A. GRAHAM

Under invitation of the Mexican Government George C. Engerrand
left Europe to go to Mexico in 1907 as a geologist. During the subsequent ten years in Mexico, until 1917 when he came to the United
States to begin his long, fruitful academic career here, Engerrand was
engaged in a wide variety of scholarly activities only partly reflecting
the breadth and depth of his versatile personality. Here I attempt to
review briefly this ten years of work and to assess their significance
in the history of Mexican studies. Although Engerrand published
numerous short papers and communications from his Mexican work,
a great deal of it unfortunately remained unpublished. 1 In particular
he had planned several monographs, including one on his excavations
in Colima in 1912 or 1913; surely at least in part the failure to produce
these studies may be attributed to his unforeseen and untimely departure from Mexico in 1917, when the unstable conditions of revolutionary Mexico rendered continuance of scientific field work largely impossible.
Engerrand had come to Mexico in 1907 as a geologist, and his
association with the government geological agency, the Instituto
Geologico Nacional, where he held the position of Chief Geologist,
Tertiary-Quaternary Section, lasted until 1915. Although by this
period geological research in Mexico was being implemented largely
by Mexican geologists, Engerrand was in a sense a continuation of an
earlier tradition when Mexican geological studies had been carried out
largely by European geologists. It was not until 1888 that the Mexican
Government, having been convinced of the necessity for organizing
a comprehensive program for the development of Mexican geological
studies, created the Geological Commission which led to the establishment of the Instituto Geologico Nacional a few years later. From the
1 The list of Engerrand's Mexican publications in the bibliography of this paper
should be fairly complete, although some minor titles have probably escaped me.
I am indebted to T . N. Campbell for providing a basic bibliography of Engerrand's
publications for this period.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

beginning one of the Institute's primary aims had been the creation
of a definitive geological map of Mexico, and much of Engerrand's
geological work in Mexico was in connection with the development of
this map.
In 1908, 1909, and 1910 Engerrand made important surveys in
Chiapas, Campeche, and Yucatan, and in 1911 he participated in the
extensive Baja California survey. He worked in Vera Cruz and
Tabasco, and there is also a casual reference to mapping done in
Tamaulipas in 1911or1912 (Engerrand, 1912: 122). As much of the
surveying seems to have remained unpublished, although presumably
reports were filed in the Institute, the full extent of Engerrand's field
work is not immediately apparent. In any event he was soon recognized as a leading authority on Mexican geology and was later invited
to prepare the section on Mexican geology for the 14th edition of the
Encyclopedia Britannica (Engerrand, 1929).
I am not qualified to assess accurately the importance of Engerrand's contributions to Mexican geological science, even if that were
possible from his published works. Perhaps, however, his significance
was greatest in the influence and impetus of his personal contact with
Mexican geology. Engerrand brought to Mexico a highly trained and
experienced mind, well grounded in academic and practical European
education, not only in geology but in other related fields of natural
science. He had an aggressive and scientifically ambitious personality
always demanding the highest in standards. Unfortunately this was
not an auspicious time for scientific and academic endeavor in Mexico
and his career there was premature! y cut short.
The bulk of Engerrand's published works during his years in
Mexico dealt not with geology, however, but with anthropology. In
1909 Engerrand became Professor of Prehistory in the Museo N acional
de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, a position he held until 1914
simultaneously with his appointment in the Instituto Geol6gico Nacional. Although to a certain extent Engerrand considered himself, at
this time at least, above all a geologue et prehistorien, his interests
ranged over the whole field of anthropology. He published short communications on Maya dental mutilations, Aztec shell ornaments, a
Spanish translation of the Italian text of Marquez's description of the
Aztec calendar, and some interesting ethnographic notes on medicinal
herbs used by Nahuatl-speaking Indians at Zumpango. He was very
much concerned with the inadequacy of anthropological training
offered in Mexico and in 1908 published with Fernando Urbina a
lengthy discussion of anthropology as an academic discipline. He discussed the extent of anthropological instruction in Europe and in the

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

21

United States, urging recognition of the need of adequate instruction
in Mexico, and concluded by presenting a comprehensive program for
anthropological training in Mexico. It should be noted that this was
during the period when Franz Boas and others were putting their
efforts into the creation of the International School of American
Archaeology and Ethnology in Mexico; perhaps this was a stimulus
behind Engerrand's paper and plea.
Somewhat related to his concern with competent academic training
in anthropology was his life-long interest in university extension work
and in bringing the results of modern scientific investigation to the
attention of the public. In a paper published in 1911 which discussed
the university extension program in Belgium, particularly emphasizing instruction in anthropological and biological science, Engerrand
appealed to Mexican national pride to provide similar opportunities
for popular education in Mexico. He was also active in extension work
itself in Mexico (Engerrand, 1915b ) .
Engerrand's sustained interest in physical anthropology is reflected
in several papers and communications published during his period in
Mexico ( 1907a, b; 1910d; 1912b, i ) . The first two of these, on giantism and acromegaly and on "telegony" are general discussions, not
based upon data gathered in Mexico and. in the case of the former, represent a continuance of an earlier interest. Another aspect of physical
anthropology in which he manifested an abiding interest was racial
mixture. The Societe d'Anthropologie de Paris, with which in addition
to the Ecole d' Anthropologie he maintained association throughout his
years in Mexico, had established a Commission permanente pour
l'etude des croisements ethniques and devised a questionnaire for
cases of mixture. In Mexico Engerrand briefly studied two cases of
racial mixture, one in Tamaulipas of a Chinese-Mestizo crossing, and
one in Yucatan of a Chinese-Maya crossing, which he reported to the
Societe. He photographed both families and noted in each case the predominance of oriental physical traits in the offspring, although he
reached no specific conclusions. In each case he hoped to follow the
growth pattern of the children to observe the stability or instability of
the observed oriental traits. He also noted such points as moral qualities of the parents, although it is not clear whether he viewed these as
possibly racially linked. 2 With Fernando Urbina he also wrote a paper
2 This was of course just prior to Boas' The Mind of Primitive Man. However,
Engerrand long and early displayed a keen interest in national culture and character and it may be that here he was interested in what pattern these diverse personality characters might be reflected in the children.

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

on public education in Mexico, which he felt should pay close attention
to the matter of racial mixture. In particular he urged detailed records
to be kept, including annual photographs, of the physical and moral
development of the Mestizo population.
As Professor of Prehistory in the National Museum, Engerrand
offered instruction in European prehistory. Students in the Museum
at this time should have counted themselves exceedingly fortunate in
having such experienced instruction in the subject. His plan of instruction, involving a course program of several years duration, included
comprehensive lectures on the various Paleolithic industries as well
as Paleolithic art and advanced Pleistocene geology. 3
In addition to teaching he carried out field research. By virtue of his
position as Chief of the Tertiary-Quaternary Section in the Instituto
Geologico Nacional and his related field work in the preparation of the
geological map of Mexico, Engerrand was able to conveniently combine his research responsibilities as prehistorian in the National Museum with his geological field work. In fact, his discovery of the Concepcion Complex in 1909 was made during geological surveying of the
Yucatecan peninsula. 4
At Concepcion, one jornada north of the Guatemalan frontier on the
itinerary from Flores, Peten, to the ports of Campeche and Champoton, Engerrand discovered a rich lithic workshop resting upon an exposed Pliocene surface and otherwise lacking any geological association. The artifact complex, which Engerrand called the industry of La
Concepcion, was of exceedingly primitive aspect and recalled implements of French Lower Paleolithic typology; no forms of more advanced culture types, as pressure-flaked projectile points, manos and
a Scattered notes on the lecture topics and instruction are to be found in the different numbers of the Boletin del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia r
Etnnlogia, Tercera Epoca, Tomos 1-2 (1911-1913) , but see especially Engerrand,
1911 c.
4 Two preliminary reports were published on the Concepcion discovery. The
original report, published in 1909. does not give the discovery date. The second
report, presented to the 17th International Congress of Americanists meeting in
Mexico City in 1910, was essentially a brief summary of the 1909 report, together
with a republication of the 1909 plates. Here it is stated that the discovery was
made in 1900- presumably a printing error for 1909. In other places Engerrand
gave the elate of discovery as 1909, obviously the correct date since this was the year
of the Upper Usumacinta-Campeche survey (Engerrand, 1910c: 258- 259; 1912f:
492 ) .
Modern writers appear to be unaware of the slightly fuller original report of
1909, since they cite only the later summary (cf. A veleyra, 1950, and VVormington,
195 7) . It should be noted that the republished plates in the later report are, on
the whole, distinctly inferior to those of the original publication.

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

23

and metates, or ceramics, were present. The discovery was made near
the end of the long, arduous Upper Usumacinta-Campeche survey and
limited time prevented a prolonged study of the site. Furthermore, as
the h orses were already heavily loaded and tired, only a representative
sample could be brought back from the large number of artifacts observed. Relatively speaking, however, this was a sizeable collection
compared to most other finds of reputedly early archeological complexes. Engerrand planned to return to the Concepcion locality for
further study and hoped also to discover other similar sites during the
projected Campeche mapping survey, but these plans apparently could
never be carried out.
While not contradicting an assumption of considerable antiquity
for the Concepcion materials, the geological circumstances precluded
any good geological assessment of their age. Engerrand stressed the
resemblances of the Concepcion implements to the French Lower
Paleolithic typology, thus a suggestion of "prehistoric" or great antiquity, but denied that this meant a comparable antiquity. His approach was cautious and his presentation rigorously scientific. Finally,
39 specimens were described and illustrated at % or natural size in
excellent photographic plates, the quality of which is seldom approached in most Mexican publications even of today.
In spite of Engerrand's cautious presentation of the Concepcion implements at the 17th International Congress of Americanists meeting
in Mexico City in 1910, considerable opposition arose to according the
Concepcion Complex any degree of respectable antiquity. I particularly recall hearing Engerrand's vivid account, in his inimitable style,
of Hrdlicka's comments with reference to the antiquity of man in the
New World.
In a more recent appraisal of Engerrand's Concepcion Complex,
Aveleyra has written (Aveleyra, 1950: 42-44):
Desde el punto de vista estrictamente tipologico, es preciso confesar que
los artefactos de La Concepcion presentan un aspecto de lo mas genuinamente prehistorico, pudiendose comparar, como el autor lo hace, con el
material de los niveles mas bajos del paleolitico europeo aunque, con loable
reserva, indica que esta relacion es simplemente hecha a base de tipologia .
. . . Los artefactos de La Concepcion son completamente diferentes a
cualquier otro complejo de piedra de horizontes historicos; su aspecto tosco,
primitivo, su forma y las tecnicas de trabajo que representan, parecen
confirmar la opinion que de ellos expresa el senor Engerrand que cree
tienen antigiiedad prehistorica .
. . . Es muy probable, aun teniendo como i'.mico buluarte el inseguro
argumento tipologico, que Engerrand este en lo cierto al asegurar que el

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

taller de La Concepcion representa "la huella mas antigua del hombre en
la peninsula de Yucatan."

Further evidence of Engerrand's cautious and rigorous attitude toward early lithic complexes of the New World may be seen in his description of a gTOUp of artifact-like specimens from Baja California
which he found in 1911 during a combined geological-prehistoric
reconnaissance. These he published and described as pseudo-eoliths,
attributing them to natural processes (Engerrand, 1912a, 1913a, b).
His discussion of the eolithic question which preceded this by way of
introduction is essentially acceptable even today. With the exception
of some important later studies, such as that of Barnes on the fracture
angles of genuine Paleolithic tools versus those of eolithic assemblages
and demonstrably naturally fractured stones, it remains an up-to-date
and succinct summary of the eolithic problem and still may be read
with profit.
The era of modern scientific archeology in Mesoamerica was inaugurated in the Maya area in 1881 when A. P. Maudslay first began his
brilliant work. Maudslay laid the foundations of a scientific Maya
archeology which has continued to develop largely uninterrupted since
his initial work. Outside the Maya area the beginnings of scientific
field archeology were later and were perhaps more diffuse and difficult
to clearly delimit. In central Mexico it might be said that modern scientific field archeology had its inception in the work of the short-lived
International School of American Archaeology and Ethnology. The
School came into existence in 1910 and first opened in 1911 under the
directorship of Seler. Boas succeeded Seler as director for the academic
year of 1911-1912 and, characteristically, energetically set about carrying out an ambitious and comprehensive progTam for the development of anthropological studies in Mexico. Of very gTeat significance
was his progTam in archeology. Boas had gathered a large series of
ceramic surface collections and proceeded to organize them into the
now familiar tripartite division of Mexican archeology. 5 Boas then
5 Under the names "tipo de los cenos" (i.e., Preclassic), Teotihuacan, and Aztec.
In a recent paper Gamio has given the impression that it was he who established this
initial classification: "Entonces fue cuando despues de detenido estudio, logre
establecer que habia tres tipos principales de ceramica arqueol6gica en el Valle de
Mexico y eran los correspondientes a teotihuacanos, arcaicos y aztecas" (Gamio,
1959: 117). In this point, as in several other statements in his paper, Dr. Gamio's
memory apparently served him poorly; he himself acknowledged in an early paper
that it was Boas who had originally isolated these ceramic groups, coined the
name "de los cerros," and gave the first description of the Valley of Mexico Preclassic (Gamio, 1920: 128). See also Adams, 1960: 99.

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

25

directed Gamio, one of his students in the school, to undertake the demonstration of the chronological succession of these ceramic groups or
horizons through stratigraphic excavation. The resulting excavations
at Atzcapotzalco produced the desired verification. This clearly was a
landmark in the development of Mexican archeology and stratigraphic
archeology continued to be employed in subsequent work by the
School. 6
Through the personal influence of Boas, Engerrand was selected by
the Mexican Government to succeed him as director for the academic
year of 1912-1913. Engerrand described his program for the year as
follows (1912f: 492):
Comme geologue et prehistorien, je vais surtout m'occuper de travaux
archeologiques bases sur la stratigraphie et employer des metodes purement geologiques. Une serie de sondages dans la vallee de Mexico vont me
permettre de determiner les points les plus importants en ce qui concerne
la succession des civilisations et d'entreprendre, par consequent, des
fouilles completes qui nous £assent arriver, s'il est possible jusqu'aux
6 As Adams (1960 ) has recently pointed out, the importance of Gamio's excavation, slightly anticipating Nelson's most important work in the Southwest, has
generally been overlooked. I would argue that great credit is due Boas for it seems
to have been he who first conceived the importance of undertaking stratigraphic
excavations in the Valley of Mexico and established the stratigraphic principle as
a basic methodology of the School's archeological program. His successors, Engerrand, Tozzer and Hay, and Gamio fully appreciated the importance of the method
and carried on the work (cf. Woodbury, 1960: 401 ) . Stratigraphic observations of
one sort or another had of course been made at various times earlier, but their
great significance seems to have been rarely appreciated and not adequately exploited. To mention only one instance, Holmes over two decades earlier called
attention to the ceramic stratigraphy revealed in a deep exposure in Mexico City,
recognizing the sherds from the upper levels as Aztec and those below as representing several earlier horizons of pottery style (Holmes, 1885: 68-81 ).
It would be of the greatest interest to know more of this real birth of stratigraphic
archeology in Mexico with the work of Boas. Boas wrote in 1915: "A survey of the
wells and brick-yards in the environment of the City of M exico showed that this
question (i.e., the sequence of cultures) could be studied by observations on geological sequence of strata. In the year 1911 - 1912 a careful investigation ... was
carried out under supervision of the Director (i. e. Boas) by Mr. Manuel Gamio"
and conclusively proved the sequence of the three civilizations (Boas, 1915: 385).
I cannot but conjecture whether Engerrand may have had some role in the development of the idea of applying the stratigraphic method at this time; he was freshly
arrived from Europe with wide experience in geological stratigraphy and the
current field work being carried out in European Paleolithic archeology. I have
absolutely no evidence for this conjecture, although Boas does acknowledge the
aid of Engerrand in studying the geological strata of the excavations (Boas, 1913:
176). In any case, Engerrand certainly embraced with enthusiasm the application
of the stratigraphic principle in archeology.

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

couches quaternaires OU du tertaire SUperieur, de fac;on a etudier definitivement la question de l'homme prehistorique dans cette riche region qui a
toujours ete un centre d'attraction pour l'homme americain. Des etudes
analoques se feront dans l'Etat de Michoacan et dans celui de Campeche,
sur la frontiere du Guatemala ou j'ai trouve, en 1909, des restes d'un type
tout specialement archaique. En dehors de cela, des fouilles seront faites
dans les regions limitrophes des Etats de Vera-Cruz, Puebla y Oaxaca, OU
se reunissent trois civilisations differentes. Enfin des etudes de linguistique,
de folklore et d'ethnologie seront entreprises en plusieurs points determines.
Thus Engerrand conceived a broad program of investigation, continuing the work of Boas and building upon its important foundations.
His program fully demonstrates Engerrand's appreciation of the application of the stratigraphic method to archeology in the Valley of
Mexico; but to reiterate this point, which is of great significance for
this stage of American archeology's development, I quote from his
address at the opening of the annual exposition of the School in 1913,
at the end of his year of directorship ( 1913c: 263) :
El metodo seguido en los estudios arqueol6gicos ha sido el moderno o
sea el estratigrafico, que se aleja bastante del que llamare tradicionalista.
Se hacen excavaciones, estudiando con todo cuidado lo que se va encontrando en las capas sucesivas, de manera que, segun este metodo, un fragmento de tepelcate adquiere el mismo valor que un f6sil, pues cada uno de
ellos es un dato determinativo, al que se le puede atribuir por sus caracteres, un lugar relativo en el tiempo.
As noted in his report on the work of the School during his year as
director, it was not possible to carry out all of his program due to the
unstable conditions of the time (Engerrand, 1914: 239). Nevertheless,
two students, Isabel Ramirez Castaneda at Culhuacan and Manuel
Gamio at Santa Lucia and Atzcapotzalco, carried out further stratigraphic tests, continuing the School's work of the previous year. Engerrand himself made several soundings in the Valley of Mexico in an
effort to tie archeological complexes to the local geology as ·well as
undertaking a series of archeological excavations in Colima. 7 The other
two Fellows of the School, J. Alden Mason and Paul Radin, carried
out linguistic, ethnographic, and folklore studies.
I have little data for Engerrand's activities in Mexico following completion of his year as director of the School until his departure in 1917.
7 Engerrand, 1913c, d; 1914. Although there exist several references to the Colima
report "in preparation," apparently none of Engerrand's work saw publication.

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

27

His professorship in the National Museum ended in 1914 and his association with the Instituto Geol6gica Nacional ended in 1915. Other
than a short communication to the Revue Anthropologique on the
work of the School during his directorship and a paper on folk medicine and herbs used at Zumpango, I know of no publications for this
period. 8 This was an increasingly difficult period of time in Mexico,
and I can only conjecture that in terms of research it was not very
fruitful, particularly after 1915.
In recalling some of the more salient points which I have tried to
bring out above concerning Engerrand's anthropological career in
Mexico, several matters should be borne in mind. Engerrand came to
Mexico as a geologist; with the exception of a year's leave of absence
from the fostituto Geol6gico Nacional in 1912-1913 to assume directorship of the International School, most of Engerrand's time was
probably consumed in his geological studies, through which he acquired an outstanding reputation as an authority on Mexican geology.
Furthermore, we are dealing with a very short period in his career, a
period in which scientific and academic endeavor became increasingly
difficult due to the instability of the times. Finally, much of his work
went unpublished and unfinished, probably in part a result of the unforeseen difficulties of a revolutionary Mexico. 9
In Mexican archeology Engerrand as a European prchistorian ·was
certainly something of a rara avis. In a field in which virtually no attention has been given to preceramic cultures even until most recently,
Engerrand devoted himself to a considerable extent to discovering a
Mexican prehistory-in the narrower sense of this tenn. In a time
when some were recognizing New World "Paleolithic" assemblages
on the scantiest of evidence and many were denying any antiquity
greater than the time of Christ for man in the New World, Engerrand
approached the problem of early man with remarkable dispassion, bold
yet rigorously cautious; his discovery of the industry of La Concepcion
may yet prove to be of great significance. By the time of his appointment as director of the International School, he was turning his efforts
toward investigating ceramic cultures and their chronology. He early
embraced stratigraphic archeology, carrying on the brilliant begins Titles 1915b, 1917 a, b, wer e prepared earlier and were delayed in publication.
a It is particularly to be r egretted that he was not able to continue his study of
the industry of La Concepcion and that we do not know more of his geologicalarcheological soundings in the Valley of Mexico and excavations in Colima during his directorship of the International School. These were investigations which
might have enhanced his professional reputation enormously.

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

nings achieved by Boas and consolidating stratigraphic methodology
as basic to Mexicanist research. His anthropological interests were not
restricted to archeology, however, and in one way or another he
touched upon many of the varieties of anthropological pursuit in Mexico; his continued efforts toward achieving a more adequate basis for
anthropological instruction and research in Mexico and his concern
with the problems of mestizoation in the development of the Mexican
nation are particularly significant. Although his career in Mexico was
cut short, his influence continued as a teacher of Mexicanist studies in
the United States.

Bibliography
Adams, Richard E.
1960. Manuel Gamio and Stratigraphic Excavation. American Antiquity, Vol.
26, No. 1, pp. 99.
A veleyra Arroyo de Anda, Luis
1950. Prehistoria de Mexico. Mexico.
Boas, Franz
1913. Archaeological Investigations in the Valley of Mexico by the International
School, 1911-12. 18th International Congress of Americanists, London,
1912, pp. 176-179.
1915. Summary of the Work of the International School of American Archaeology and Ethnology in Mexico, 1910-1914. American Anthropologist,
Vol. 17, pp. 384--389.
Engerrand, George C.
1907 a. Les variations de la taille humaine, le giganto-infantilisme et l'acromegalie. Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica " Antonio Alzate," Torno 26,
pp. 261-276.
1907b. Les phenomenes de la telegonie et de la xenie, sont-ils inexplicables?
Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio Alzate," Torno 26, pp. 285295.
1908a. (with Fernando Urbina) Las ciencias antropol6gicas en Europa, en los
Estados Unidos yen la America latina. Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica
" Antonio Alzate," Torno 27, pp. 81-123.
1908b. (with Fernando Urbina) Un cote neglige clans le probleme de l'educationAlgo que se ha descuidado en el problema de la educaci6n. (Parallel
French and Spanish text ). Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio
Alzate," Torno 27, pp. 181-223.
1909a. Una sociedad para el estudio de! fo lklore chileno. Memorias de la Sociedad
Cientifica "Antonio Alzate," Torno 29, pp. 413-416.
1909b. (with Fernando Urbina) Nota preliminar acerca de un yacimiento prehist6rico ubicado en Concepcion (Estado de Campeche) , acompafiada de
un resumen £ranees. Boletin de la Sociedad Geol6gica Mexicana, Torno 6,
pp. 79-87
34 plates.
1909c. (with Fernando Urbina) Primera nota acerca de la fauna miocenica de
Zuluzum (Chia pas). Boletin de la Sociedad Geol6gica Mexicana, Torno 6,
pp. 119-140
3 plates.

+

+

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

29

1909d. Note prelimineire sur une gisement prehistorique decourert a Concepcion,
etat de Campeche (Resume extrait du Boletin de la Sociedad Geologica
Mexicana ) . Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio Alzate," Torno
29, pp. 27-29.
1910a. La extension en el tiempo y en el espacio de la raza humana de Lagoa
Santa segun el Dr. Rivet. Memorias de la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio
Alzate," Torno 28, pp. 223-227.
1910b. (with F. Urbina and collaboration of J. Baz y Dresch) Informe acerca de
una excursion geologica preliminar efectuada en el Estado de Yucatan.
Paregones del Instituto Geologico de Mexico, Torno 3, Num. 7, pp. 369424, + 22 plates.
1910c. Informe sobre una excursion prehistorica en el Estado de Yucatan. Anales
del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Tercera Epoca,
Torno 2, pp. 245-259.
1910d. Etude preliminaire d'un cas de croisement entre un chinois et une yucateque. Bulletins et Memoires de la Societe d'Anthropologie de Paris, 6eme
Serie, Tome 1, pp. 263-265.
1911a. La organizacion de la Extension Universitaria en Belgica. Memorias de
la Sociedad Cientifica "Antonio Alzate," Torno 31, pp. 67-72.
1911 b. L'Organization des etudes geologiques au Mexique. Revue Generale des
Sciences, 22eme Annee, pp. 602-607.
1911c. Programa general del Curso de Prehistoria . Boletin del Museo Nacional de
Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Tercera Epoca, Torno 1, Num. 3, pp.
46-51. (Unsigned but almost surely written by Engerrand. Attributed to
Engerrand in "El Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, su contribucion editorial, cientlfica y de cultura," Mexico, 1954).
1912a. L'Etat actuel de la question de eolithes. Revue Generale des Sciences,
23eme Annee, pp. 541-548. (Differs in minor details only from 1913b).
1912b. Note sur deux enfants nes d'un Chinois et d'une Mexicaine de race
blanche. Revue Anthropologique, Tome 22, pp. 122-125.
1912c. Nouveaux petroglyphes de la Basse-Californie. Revue Anthropologique,
Tome 22, pp. 200-211. (See 1912d).
1912d. Nuevos petroglifos de la Baja California . Boletin del Museo Nacional de
Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Tercera Epoca, Torno 1, Num. 10,
pp. 197-201+13 figures. (Differs from 1912c in addition of colored
plates).
1912e. Nota complementaria acerca de los petroglifos de la Baja California. Boletin
del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etno1ogia, Tercera Epoca,
Torno 2, Num. 1, pp. 2-4 + 2 figures.
1912f. L 'Ecole internationale d'archeologie et d'ethnologie americaines. Revue
Anthropologique, Tome 22, pp. 491-492.
1912g. La huella mas antigua quiza del hombre en la peninsula de Yucatan.
Estudio de la industria de Concepcion (Campeche). Reseii.a de la 2a Sesion
del 17° Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1910, pp. 89100 + 34 plates. (Summary of 1909b) .
1912h. Preuves geologiques de ce que la partie nord de la peninsule yucateque
n 'a etre habitee par l'homme durant l 'epoque quaternaire. Reseii.a de la
2a Sesion del 17° Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1910,
pp. 100-105.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1912i. Un caso de cruzamiento entre un chino y una yucateca de origin indigena. Reseii.a de la 2a Sesion del 17 ° Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico, 1910, pp. 105-106. (Summary of 1910d).
1912j. Une arme maya. L'Homme prehistorique, Tome 10, pp. 289-292.
1912k. Review of: H . Beuchat, Manuel d'archeologie americaine. Isis, Tome 1,
pp. 530-537.
19121. Observaciones del Padre Marquez acerca del calendario del codigo mexicano del Cardinal Borgia ( traduccion del italiano). Anales del Museo
Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia : Numero extraordinario
en homenaje al XVIII Congreso Internacional de Americanistas. Issued
as "Apendice al Torno 3" (1911) of the Anales del Museo Nacional . ..
1913a. Informe sabre una excursion a la Baja California. Boletin del Museo Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Torno 2, Num. 8, pp. 149150.
1913b. Estado actual de la ceustion de los eolitos. Boletin del Museo Nacional de
Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Torno 2, Num. 8, pp. 150-160. (Differs
only in minor details from 1912a.)
1913c. Discurso pronunciado por el Sr. Prof. Jorge Engerrand con motivo de la
apertura de la exposicion anual de la Escuela Internacional de Arqueologia y Etnologia Americanas de la que es director. Boletin del Museo
Nacional de Arqueologia, Historia y Etnologia, Torno 2, Num. 12, pp.
263-265.
1913d. La exposicion de la Escuelo Internacional de Arqueologia y Etnologia
Americanas. Boletin del Museo Nacional de Arquoologia, Historia y
Etnologia, Torno 2, Num. 12, pp. 266-268.
1913e. (with Trinidad Paredes ) lnforme relativo a la parte occidental de la
region norte de la Baja California. Peregones del lnstituto Geologico de
Mexico, Torno 4, Num. 2-10, pp. 277-306.
1914. Les travaux de l':Ecole internationale d'archeologie et d'ethnologie americaines pendant l'annee 1912-1913. Revue Anthropologique, Tome 24, pp.
239-243.
1915a. (with I. Ramirez Castaneda) Les simples destines a des usages medicaux
ou superstitieux vendus au marche de Zumpango, Mexique. Revue Anthropologique, Tome 25, pp. 55-62.
1915b. Lo que sabemos acerca de los primeros hombres. Boletin de la Universidad
Popular Mexicana, Torno 1, Num. 4, pp. 65-68.
1917a. Etude preliminaire sur les ornements de coquilles des anciens Mexicains.
Revue Anthropologique, Tome 27, pp. 81 - 85 .
1917b. Les mutilations dentaires chez les anciens Mayas. Revue Anthropologique,
Tome 27, pp. 488-493.
1929. Mexico : Sections on Geography, Geology, Population, Economics. Encyclopedia Britannica, 14th edition, Vol. 15, pp. 377-386.
Gamio, Manuel
1920. Las excavaciones del Pedregal de San Angel y la cultura arcaica del Valle
de Mexico. American Anthropologist, Vol. 22, pp. 127-143.
1959. Boas sobre ceramica y estratigrafia. In : The Anthropology of Franz Boas.
Memoirs of the American Anthropologi cal Association, No. 89, pp. 117118.

31

ENGERRAND IN MEXICO

Holmes, William Henry
1885. Evidences of the Antiquity of Man on the Site of the City of Mexico.
Transaction of the Anthropological Society of V\Tashington, Vol. 3, pp.
68-81.
Woodbury, Richard B.
1960. Nels C. Nelson and Chronological Archaeology. American Antiquity,
Vol. ZS, pp. 400-401.
1960a. Nelson's Stratigraphy. American Antiquity, Vol. 26, pp. 98- 99.
vVormington, H. M.
1957. Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series 4.
Peabody Museum
Harvard University
Cambridge 38, Mass.

