lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

Origins of Pottery Types from the
Coastal Bend Region of Texas
1

T. N . CAMPBELL

Thus far six pottery types have been defined for the central section of the Texas
·coast, often popularly referred to as the Coastal Bend region of Texas. Three of
these types, all attributed to the Rockport Focus of late prehistoric and historic
times, h ave been formally described by Suhm, Kri eger, and Jelks ( 1954: 382-385 )
and are known as Rockport Plain, Rockport Black-on -gray, and Rockport Incised.
The Rockport Focus, at least in part, is linked with the Karankawa Indians of the
Texas coast (Campbell, 1960: 150, 168 ). Three additional pottery types have recently been defined by Mounger (1959: 163-177 ) in an unpublished M.A. thesi s
at The University of T exas. These three types, based upon pottery from excava tions at the Espiritu Santo Mission of Goliad. Texas, are attributed to the Aranama
Indians for whom the mission was established. This of course implies that the
pottery types are of historic age. The n ames assigned to these types are Golia d
Plain, Goliad Red-on -buff, and Goliad Black-on-buff. Each of these two series of
types can be regarded as representing a distinctive pottery ware, and we can
conveniently refer to them as Rockport ware and Goliad ware respectively. In this
brief paper the principal identifying characteristics of each of these six types will
be summarized and speculations on their probable migins will be presented.

R ock port Ware
The ty pe descriptions of Rockport Focus pottery presented by Suhm, Krieger,
a nd Jelks were based primarily on laboratory examination of a number of miscel laneous surface collections. Since 1954 some 10,000 potsherds from excavated sites
have been analyzed by Campbell (1956, 1958), and this permits us to make a few
minor modifications of the type description,;.
Rockport Plain. This pottery has a fine-textu red paste, commonly with no
recognizable tempering material ; but some sherds have fine white inclusions believed to be bone. Surface color is rather variable, but shades of gray and brown
predominate . Core color tends to be the same as surface color. Vessel surfaces are
smoothed, often rather unevenly. In the vicinity of Corpus Christi vessels are
frequently deeply brushed or scored on 0ne or both surfaces. Asphaltum coa ting is
rare on identifiable Rockport Plain sherds.
Vessel wall thickness u sually ranges fr om 2 to about 6 mm. , and a considerable
1 This paper was given at the 1959 Pottery Symposium of the Houston Archeological Society, Houston , T exas, December 6, 1959.

332

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

number of sherds indicate remarkably thin-walled vessels for their size. Rim sherds
seem to indicate hemispherical bowls; deep, wide-mouthed pots; and wide-mouthed
jars that have straight, incurved, or slightly outcurved rims. The base form is
believed to range from rounded to bluntly conical. Lips are either rounded or flat,
the latter occasionally deeply notched or diagonally incised. Occasionally rims are
slightly thickened near the lip, and a slight exterior overhang of the lip also
occasionally occurs. Some undecorated body sherds bear round loop handles perpendicular to the vessel wall, but these may have come from other types in the
Rockport series.
Rockport Black-on-gray. This type (Fig. 1, A -M ) differs from Rockport Plain
only in the following characteristics.
The vessel forms also include bottles with relatively short. vertical necks; bowls
with slightly outcurved rims; and globular ollas without necks. Lip notching (A )
is much more common, ranging from mere nicks to deep V-shaped notches. Rims
occasionally have a slight ridge paralleling the lip on the vessel exterior.
Decoration is principally in black asphaltum paint, but occasionally widely spaced
vertical rows of tiny punctates accompany the painted decoration (M ). A very few
sherds show what appears to be a thin , fugitive paint or stain, suggesting that a
polychrome tradition may have existed. The main design elements are large dots,
narrow bands, and straight or wavy lin es of varying width. Large dots are
arranged in vertical rows (L) or randomly in broad horizontal bands on the upper
part of the vessel. Bands commonly occur just below the lip ( B), and from this
band wavy or straight lines extend downward either vertically or diagonally
(C-E, G-J) . A very common design is a series of widely spaced, wavy or straight
lines extending downward from the lip (F ) . Many vessels appear to have paint
only on the lip itself (A ), and occasionally the asphaltum so used was thick and
ran down the walls of the vessel. Many Rockport Black-on-gray sherds bear an
interior coating of asphaltum, and this material also seems to have been used for
mending cracks in vessel walls.
Rockport In cised. This is the most poorly defined pottery type from the Coastal
Bend region. It is rare or absent in the southern portion of this region and not very
common elsewhere. It is believed to be of the same basic ware as Rockport Plain
and Rockport Black-on-gray, inasmuch as plain sherds from sites showing all of
these types are indistinguishable. It therefore differs mainly in the type of decoration. The incised designs (Fig. 1, N-X ), which are confined to the rim region, are
best described as geometric, and in general these designs are poorly executed. The
most common motifs include a band of horizontal parallel lines ( P -Q), below
which sometimes appear pendant triangles or pairs of fringed lines (R-S ); horizontal crosshatched bands (T ); a single zigzag line just below the rim (0 ) ; and
diagonal hachured panels (U). Occasionally a sherd will show closely spaced
scalloped lines, apparently produced by using the edge of a ribbed marine shell
like a rocker stamp. Lip notching occurs on a few sherds.
Considering Rockport ware as a whole, one of the most important future objectives is to obtain whole vessels or at least enough sherds from single vessels to
permit reconstruction of vessel form.

Goliad Ware
A new series of pottery types, now referred to collectively as Goliad ware, has
recently been described by Mounger, as nC'ted above. This series is based upon the

333

ORIGINS OF TEXAS COASTAL P OTTERY

D

cf? ~ ~cG ~
M

0

N

K

Q
p

Q

u

{J~
S

R

w

v
9

T

2
I

3 4
I

I

5 6 7
CM.
I

I

I

x
8
I

9 10
I

I

Fig . 1. Pottery associated with the Rockport Focus. A-M, Rockport Black-on-gray; N-X ,
Rockport Incised. Provenience: Kent-Crane site , R-S ; Live Oak Point site, A-J , M; Mustang
Lake site , N-Q, U-X; Webb Island site, K-L, T.

ana lysis of approximately 22,000 sherds from th e Espiritu Santo Mission at Goliad.
T he types are known as Goliad Plain, Goliad Red-on-buff, and Goliad Black-onbuff. As Mounger plan s to publish the results of her analysis, no illustrations are
given here. The following brief descriptions of the three types will serve until her
more detailed presentation appears in print.

334

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Goliad Plain. This type is based upon 187 rim sherds and 21,425 body sherds.
However, as Goliad Red-on-buff and Goliad Black-on-buff vessels were decorated
only on the upper part of vessel exteriors, an undetermined number of the above
body sherds is undoubtedly from decorated vessels. Eleven Goliad Plain vessels
have been reconstructed.
Goliad Plain has a dark gray paste with varying quantities of bone temper. The
surface color ranges from grayish buff to dull orange, and the white bone temper is
visible on both interior and exterior surfaces. Both surfaces are fairly well smoothed
and some vessels are polished. Wall thickness ranges from 5 to 13 mm. Rims vary
from slightly incurved to moderately outcurved, occasionally with angular eversion.
Lips range from round to flat, the latter occasionally having an exterior flange or
overhang. All vessel bases are well rounded. Vessel forms include shallow bowls;
hemispherical bowls, sometimes with two small round loop handles just below the
lip; both small and large jars and globular ollas with thick, round loop handles that
are usually at right angles to vessel walls but sometimes parallel to the wall near
the lip; very small short-handled ladles; and elbow pipes. Fragments of what
appear to be single handles occur occasionally; these are round in cross section,
sometimes as long as 60 mm., are straight. or slightly curved, and occasionally
have an angular bend at the distal end. A few sherds have numerous wall perforations and appear to represent some sort of colander.
Goliad Red-on-buff. This type is based on 11 rim sherds and 85 body sherds.
It differs little from Goliad Plain except that the vessels are decorated with designs
in a thin red paint. Vessel walls are thinner, ranging from 4 to 6 mm. All lips are
rounded. No vessels can be reconstructed, and no basal sherds have been recognized.
One painted handle fragment indicates that Goliad Red-on-buff vessels sometimes
bear loop handles. Decoration is limited to vessel exteriors and consists of simple
but rather bold designs in a rather dull red paint. The most common design elements are large clots and broad straight or wavy lines. Some sherds bear a single
horizontal band below the lip, and this may be straight, zigzagged, or scalloped.
Other sherds show a single horizontal row of large red dots a short distance below
the lip. Still others show a series of widely spaced but broad vertical lines extending
downward from the lip, and in one instance a vertical row of large dots occurs in
the spaces between the vertical lines. One sherd bears a large circle with a central
dot. In general, the designs on this type resemble the designs on Rockport Black-ongray pottery.
Goliad Black-on-buff. This type is based on 11 rim sherds and 77 body sherds.
It too is similar to Goliad Plain, but vessel walls are thinner (4--6 mm .). No base
sherds or handles have been recognized. One fragment of a bottle neck indicates
that this vessel form occurs. Decoration, which is in black asphaltum paint, is confined to vessel exteriors and is almost identical with decoration on Rockport Blackon-gray vessels. Small dots and nanow wavy or zigzag lines are especially common.
A few sherds show broad horizontal bands below the lip, and one sherd shows a
series of solid triangles pendant from this band.

Origins of Rockport and Go liad Wares
Of the two wares here described, Rockport ware is believed to be the earlier, since
it occurs in prehistoric as well as in historic sites. Goliad ware, however, is thus far
known from a single Spanish mission site.

ORIGINS OF TEXAS COASTAL POTTERY

335

At the present time it would appear that the pottery-making tradition first
reached the Coastal Bend r egion from the east, probably being derived from peoples
who made the incised, sand-tempered pottery of extreme southeastern Texas. Ring's
( 1961 ) radiocarbon dates from the Galena site n ear Hou ston indicate that sandtempered pottery goes back to well before the time of Christ. The vessel forms and
incised decoration of unpainted Rockport pottery have counterparts in southeastern
Texas in the culture commonly referred t0 as the Galveston .B ay Focus. Furthermore, there is a zone of overlap between Rockport ware and Goose Creek ware
(Galveston Bay Focus) in the coastal area lying between Matagorda and Galveston bays.
The Rockport painted pottery, which is the only prehistoric painted pottery
extensively made in the Texas area, constitutes a separate problem. Painting must
be derived from another source. for painted pottery is not found in the lower part
of the southeastern United States. The tradition of painting pottery is probably
derived from the Huastecan region of eastern Mexico, where black-on-white and
polych rom e pottery types h ave substanti,11 prehistoric age and persisted into the
historic p eriod (Ekholm, 1944: 431-432). Huastecan pottery vessels, presumably
trade specimens, have been found as far north as the Rio Grande delta area (Mason ,
1935: 34-39; Ekholm, 1944: 433), and Rockport Black-on -gray pottery has been
reported as far south as the Rio Grande (Anderson, 1932: 30). The scant evidence
of polychrome pottery from the Coastal Bend region conveniently fits this interpret ation, although one tiny sherd of polychrome pottery from Chihuahua has been
found on the surface at a Rockport Focus site near Corpus Christi (Campbell,
1956: 41). It is doubtful if the idea of pa inted pottery reached the T exas coast from
the Southwest. In designs there is very little correspondence between Rockport
Black-on -gray and painted pottery anywhere in North America. The idea of painting
pottery is probably all that diffused, and the proximity of th e Huastecan area makes
it the most likely source. We therefore derive incised decoration from an eastern
direction and painted decoration from a southern direction.
As for Goliad ware, in temper and surface color there is a notable resemblance
to Leon Plain pottery of central T exas (Suhm et al. , 1954: 386); but in its painted
decoration , and particularly in types of designs, it is strikingly similar to Rockport
Black-on-gray pottery from the central section of the Texas coast. Goliad Black-onbuff is indistinguishable from Rockport Black-on-gray except for surface color and
a tendency toward thicker vessel walls. Sherds of Rockport Black-on-gray were also
found at Espiritu Mission, but there is no difficulty in distinguishing it from Goliad
Black-on-buff. Goliad Red -on-buff, however, is unique, for it is the only red-painted
pottery in the Texas area, if one ignores the faint evidence of polychrome pottery
in the Rockport Focus. Reel painting may be the result of Spanish mission influence,
because it occurs on Spanish majolica and china from Espiritu Santo mission.
It would appear then that Goliad ware is the result of influences from two sources,
from central Texas (Leon ware) and from the nearby coast (Rockport ware). It
is of interest to note that the Aranama Inclinns, who made Goliad ware, frequently
deserted the mission and lived with the Tonkawa Indians in central Texas. This
seems to imply earlier friendly relationships with the Tonkawa who, some believe,
may have made Leon Plain pottery. Karankawa Indi ans were frequently at Espiritu
Santo Mission, for a special mission built for them was located nearby. Thus we
have diffusion mechanisms to support this interpretation of Goliad ware origins.
According to the hypothesis presented here, Coastal Bend pottery is the result of

336

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

diffusions from three directions-from the east, from the south, and from the
interior of Texas to the north and northwest. It will be of interest to see if this
interpretation is verified by future archeological investigation.

R eferences Cited
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts ofthe Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-3 1.
Campbell, T. N.
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 7- 46.
1958. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423- 442.
1960. Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958 ) , pp. 145-175.
Ekholm, Gordon F.
1944. Excavations at Tampico and Panuco in the Huasteca, Mexico. American
Museum of Natural History, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 38, Part 5.
Mason, J. Alden
1935. The Place of Texas in Pre-Columbian Relationships between the United
States and Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society, Vol. 7, pp. 29-46.
Mounger, Maria Allen
1959. Mission Espiritu Santo of Coastal Texas: An Example of Historic Site
Archeology. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, The University of Texas.
Ring, E. Raymond, Jr.
1961. An Evaluation of Radiocarbon Dates from the Galena Site, Southeastern
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31 (for 1960),
pp. 317- 325.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25 .
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

