lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and
the Burned Rock Middens of Texas
KENNETH II. HONEA

The purpose of this paper is to present a particularly striking example of a
phenomenon that has resulted from convergent cultural evolution in two widely
separated areas of the Old and New Worlds, between which any possibility of
cu lture contact is precluded both by space and time. vVe refer to arti fi cial accretions
or accumulations of thermally fractured hearth-stones and assorted cultural debris.
Known from many areas of the world, they are variously referred to as kioekkenmoeddinger, kitchen middens, burned rock mounds or middens, or simply middens.
W e shall present data on two specific forms of such middens that occur in quantity
in Algeria, Tunisia, and Moriocco of northwestern Africa and in the central and
Trans-Pecos areas of Texas.
In northwestern Africa middens of this type are called rammadiya (plural form:
rammadyat) in Arabic and escargotiere in French. They are typical open camp
sites of the predominantly Mesolithic Capsian industry, which is distinguished by
the production of lamellar blades and certain highly specialized tools made on such
blades (Balout, 1955: 391; Honea, 1958: 20 ) . Rammadyat have a more m less
flattish top, are oval to circular in outline and, as a rule, show considerable variation in size. Pond (1938: 95 ) estima tes the diameter to range from 40 to 300 feet
and the height from 2 to 15 feet. They are most commonly situated on ridges o,r
hill tops in close proximity to a spring, stream, or lake.
Excavations have shown that an average rammadiya is composed, in descending
order of frequency, of burned, broken h e~rth-stones; snail shells; mussel shells;
animal bones; stone tools and debitage (waste flakes, cores, etc.) ; ashes and
charcoal; and soil. Gobert (1937: 644) , who has analyzed a large number of
rammadyat, concludes that they are incidental refuse heaps and were accumulated
through repeated use of one loca tion as a camping site through a period of time.
The proportional volumes of snail shells, mussel shells, and certain kinds of animal
bones are thought to reflect the relative importance of each food item in the diet of
the makers of the rammadyat.
Burials are occasionally found in rammadyat. The greater part of these burials
are not in primary association and often date from the Neolithic period, as is shown
by the presence of potsherds in the grave fill. In some cases only skeletal fragments
are found, and Pond (1938: 105 ) interprets these as resulting from abandonment
of dead bodies at the campsite. In his view, predatory animals fed off the bodies,
leaving the skeletal fragments to be covered by some natural agency.
Detailed studies of rammadyat profiles indicate that they are composed of
numerous , relatively small, component middens "which have been moulded into

318

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a single symmetrical unit by the wind and rain of many centuries" (Pond , 1938:
95; Balout, 1955: 39Z) .
The presumed method of accumulation of a rammadiya may be stated as follows.
Initially, a small. saucer-lik e depression was scooped out of the earth, and in this
depression were placed alternating layer s of firewood and flat rocks . Afte r the fire
h ad burned down , the h eated stones wen'! cleared of ashes; then snails, mussels,
meat, and edible roots and tubers were laid on the stones to bake or steam.
Successive firings of the hearth -stones eventually caused them to crack into smaller,
less useful fragments, for which reason they were thrown onto an adjacent refuse
h eap, along with bones, shells and other vvaste . When the supply of game, snails,
and mussels was depleted in the area, the site was abandoned for a tim e. Such sites
thus represent seasonal camps. Assuming continuous or intermittent u se of the same
area for camping purposes, even a small rammadiya would soon develop a certain
height above the natural level of th e ground. Being of a porous nature and
therefore well drained. it mad e a ch oice camping spot, particularly during rainy
weather, or if loca ted in a marshy area. Subsequent groups of campers would
simply scoop out a depression on top of the existing rammadiya, prepare a hea rth and
fire, and proceed to cook their food in th e manner described above. Th eir discarded
h earth-stones and other items of refuse Wff2 thrown nearby until another heap
was formed. In still later encampments, the process of individu al component midden
accumulation continued, so that over a period of time a fairly e xtensive area was
covered with a series of superimposed and intersecting hearths and camping floors.
As pointed out above, these would then be eroded into a seemingly uniform unit by
th e elements.
There has been some speculation as to the origin of the small holes found in
snail and sometimes mussel shells that occur in rammadyat. Pond (1938: 95 ) offers
a reasonable explanation for these holes:
... heat from the stones on which the snails were cooked burned the small part of
the shell in contact with the hot stones. This burning weakened the shell or made
that small area soluble so that a little weathering would produce a small hole .
Others have suggested that all such holes in the shells were produced by a bone
point used to extract the snail for eating. In as much as these openings are quite
often in positions n ot in line with the natural opening of the shell, "weakened by
fire" explanation seems more logical.
The makers of the rammadyat occasionally manufactured their stone and bone
tools at their camps, as is evidenced by the presence of hammerstones, cores and
waste flakes in the deposits. The presence of tools and industrial debris, which
marks a factory site, can be very useful to the archeologist in determining the
cultural affiliations of the makers of the camp. It does not follow, of course, that all
the component middens within a rammadiya must of necessity represent factory
sites; some may, others may not.
Pond ( 1938: 99-100) has suggested a method for identifying individual camping
floors and component middens. During occupation snail and mussel shells were
broken on the "floor" of the camping area, and this shell debris, along with ash and
soil, would accumulate in low places and become consolidated by rainfall after
abandonment of the camp. Hence bands of ash, crushed shell, and soil that appear
in rammadyat profiles may be interpreted as specific occupations. Although int erpretation of the stratigraphy in a rammadiya is extremely difficult in view of
the nature of the accumulated deposit, it may be possible for the archeologists, with

RAMMADYAT AND TEXAS ROCK MIDDENS

319

the above in mind, to work out the different floors and component middens and
perhaps ascertain whether the individual units are due to groups of campers who
share the same or dissimilar culture traits. As Pond states ( 1938: 107):
From the way these mounds are built up one would expect to find as much
difference between any two sides as between top and bottom. The writer's experience seems to indicate that the [rammadyat] are each the product of one
cu lture-bearing people although in a given region different mounds are often of
different cultures.
Of great importance in the interpretation of rammadyat is the fact that at least
two groups of people presently living in northwestern Africa still make them. One
group consists of the Takrounian Berbers, who live in the Sahel region of Tunisia;
the other is an unidentifi ed Berber group living near Gafsa, also in Tunisia
(Balout, 1955: 392; Choumavitch, 1949: 19-20; Gobert, 1937: 644). The composition of the rammadyat of these groups is very similar to that of th e rammadyat of
the Mesolithic Caspian peoples, even clown to the identical species of snail consumed (the artifacts, of course, are different). These modern Berber gro ups not
only bake foods directly on hearth-stones but they also boil or stew certain foods
in wooden vessels placed between hot hearth-stones. Since the heated stones retain
their warmth for a period of time, the campers cluster around the hearth ar ea
during the cool months of the years.
Practically all that has been said of the rammadyat of northwestern Africa can
be applied, remarkable as it may seem, to the burned rock middens that occur in
such great numbers in central and sou thwestern Texas. Kelley and Campbell
(1942 : 320) h ave succinctly described burned rock middens as "a complex
assemblage of superimposed and intersecting hearths." As in Africa, they are made
up of thousands of thermally fractured fragments of limestone or other available
country rock. In addition, they contain varying quantities of charcoal, ash, snail
and mussel shells, soil, animal bones, stone tools and clebitage and, occasionally,
human burials. Either oval or circular in outline, they may cover areas ranging in
size from a few square yards up to several acres, and they sometimes attain a
height of six to eight feet. The burned rock middens are usually situated near some
source of water, such as springs, or on alluvial terraces along major or minor
streams. The presumed method of accumulation of such middens, as described by
Kelley and Campbell (1942: 320), is essentially the same as described by Pond,
Balout, Gobert, and others for the rammadyat of northwestern Africa.
In view of these striking similarities, we suggest that it may prove of considerable interest to attempt interpretation of the burned rock middens of Texas
along the lines cited for their African counterparts. Specifically, someone should
determine whether or not the bands of soil and ash found in T exas middens
represent camping floors of individual component middens. Are some of the component middens within a burned rock midden factory sites and others not? Are
there differences in the types of food remains in the component middens? Are the
snail and mussel shells associated with a given component of fairly uniform size,
indicating preferences in collecting, or are they variable in size, pointing to the
collection of everything that was available? Do all the component middens of a
burned rock midden contain the same types of food remains, or are there indications
of differential preferences? Are there differences in the total lithic assemblages of
the component middens within a single burned rock midden, indicating the involvement of different cultural groups, or are the various assemblages within a given

320

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

burned rock midden representative of a single cultural unit? Lastly, can woodworking tools, such as gouges or adzes, be interpreted as tools for making wooden
vessels?
Answers to the above questions may be helpful in interpreting the burned rock
middens of Texas and the cultures associated with them. In closing, we would like
to point out that a knowledge of the excavation techniques used by archeologists
on the African rammadyat might prove useful to T exas workers.

References Cited
Balout, L.
1955, Prehistoire de l 'Afrique du Nord. Paris.
Choumavitch, W.
1949. Chasse aux pores-epics et pierre chauffees. Bulletin de la Societe des
Sciences Naturelle de Tunesie, Tome II.
Gobert, E.
1937. Les escargotieres. Le mot et la chose. IIIem e Congress de la Federation
des Societees Savants de l'Afrique du Nord, Tome II. Constantine, Algeria.
Honea, K.
1958. A Contribution to the History of the Hamitic Peoples of Africa. Acta
Ethnologica et Linguistica, No. 5. Vienna.
Kelley, J.C., and T. N. Campbell
1942. What Are the Burnt Rock Mound; of Texas? American Antiquity, Vol. 7,
No. 3, pp. 319-322.
Pond, A.
1938. Prehistoric Habitation Sites in the Sahara and North Africa. Logan
Museum Bulletin, No. 5. Beloit.
The University of Texas
Austin, T exas

