lee of the State Archeologist
IS'r y

BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The George C. Engerrand Volume
Published by the Society

:

Volume 32

:

1961

:

Austin, Texas, 1962

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST , 1991

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of the history, prehistory and the major artifacts of
man and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils
in museums and their study and clc.ssification and the publication of the results
of researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1961
President: E. MoTT DAVIS (Austin)
President Emeritus: Gmus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: WAYNE B. NEYLAND (Houston)
Secretary-Treasurer: MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio)
Editor of Publications: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): R. KING HARRIS (Dallas), MRS. FoRREST
KIRKLAND (Dallas), and CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Trustees: ROBERT HASSKARL, Jn. (Brenham), MARK HuFF (Dallas), C. D. ORCHARD
(San Antonio), E. RAYMOND RING (Houston), CHARLES STARK (Victoria),
CHARLIE R. STEEN (.Santa Fe, N. Mex.), DEE ANN SuHM (Austin), AooLPH H.
WITTE (Henrietta).
Regional Vice-Presidents: HERSCHEL CoBB (Dallas), W. S. FITZPATRICK (Corpus
Christi), JACK T. HUGHES (Canyon), EARL KAVANAUGH (Hamilton), J. HENRY
RAY (Vernon), FRANK RuNKLES (Post), RAYMOND WALLEY (Lake Jackson),
SAM WHITESIDE (Tyler).
Fello.ws: ALEX D. KRIEGER (Riverside, Calif.), CYRUS N. RAY (Abilene), E. H.
SELLARDS (Austin), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Memberships at $25.00 and Life Memberships at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained for
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Witte Museum, Brackenridge Park, San Antonio
9, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is Box 8012, University
Station, Austin 12, Texas.

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Volume 32, for 1961

Editor: T. N. Campbell
Assistant Editors :

E. Mott Davis
Edward B. Jelks

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 196Z

Office of the State Archeologist
Library

This issue is dedicated to the memory of

GEORGE CHARLES MA RIUS ENGERRAND
1877-1961

Table of Contents ,
In Memoriam: George Charles Marius Engerrand
By A. P. Brogan, J. G. McAllister
and T. N. Campbell

1

George C. Engerrand in Europe, 1898-1907
By W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

9

George C. Engerrand in Mexico, 1907-1917
By John A. Graham

19

Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata Area,
Texas
By Glen L. Evans .

33

Archeological Reconnaissance in the Drainage of the Rio
Verde, San Luis Potosi, Mexico
By Nancy P. Troike

47

Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography
By Rudolph C. Troike

57

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle
By Jack T. Hughes

65

The White Site: An Historical Burial in Yoakum County,
Texas
By Dee Ann Suhm

85

The Utilization of Archeological and Ethnohistorical Data in
Estimating Aboriginal Population
By Herbert C. Taylor, Jr.

121

The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr.

141

The Culpepper Site, A Late Fulton Aspect Site in Northeastern
Texas
By J. Dan Scurlock

285

The Rammadyat of Northwest Africa and the Burned Rock
Middens of Texas
By Kenneth H . Honea

317

Scored Pottery of the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

321

Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lewisville
Site
By Wilson W. Crook and R. K. Harris

327

Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of
Texas
By T. N. Campbell

331

Scored Pottery of the Texas
Coastal Bend
C.A.CALHOUN

Many campsites in the Coastal Bend region yield sherds and vessels of Rockport
ware and Goliad ware that bear striae, or scoring, in varied degrees of prominence.
These striae appear on the interior surfaces, the exterior surfaces, and occasionally,
on both surfaces. They are usually horizontal, but are often diagonal, and sometimes
rows of them crisscross, forming a grid pattern. Scored sherds of Rockport ware
occur in sites from Carancahua Bay to Corpus Christi Bay. They are apparently
uncommon around Baffin Bay in Kleberg County, which is well outside the range
of distribution of Goliad ware, and which is tentatively designated as the most southerly area in which Rockport ware was manufactured.
Few explanations have been offered for this feature. Potter ( 1930: 42) states that
the "small grooves and ridges on the surface" of some specimens of Rockport ware
were "probably made to reduce the slipperiness of the vessel and thereby lessen the
danger of breakage." However, the scoring is more often observed on the interior
surfaces rather than on the exterior. Also, vessels that were coated with asphaltum
(a common feature of indigenous pottery of this region, shared by both Rockport
and Goliad wares) might reasonably have been intentionally scored so as to provide
a surface that would improve adherence ::if the asphaltum to the walls of the vessel.
But this mechanical advantage was apparently unknown to,, or generally ignored
by, the aboriginal potters, since sherds displaying scored surfaces in combination
with asphaltum coatings are in the minority among asphaltum coated sherds of
both Rockport and Goliad wares. Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 382) suggest
that the scoring was produced by scraping with coarse grass or twigs.
It is the purpose of this brief paper to present evidence indicating that such
scoring, whether fortuitously or by design, is the direct result of the utilization of a
shell of a ribbed marine bivalve as an :implement in the manufacture of many
vessels of Rockport ware and Goliad ware.
Such shells are quite common in campsites along the Coastal Bend littoral, the
animals having been collected for food from the shallow bays and nearby Gulf of
Mexico. Generally speaking, the most abundant of the shells are those of the
Ponderous Ark (Noelia ponderosa ), the Scallop ( Pecten gibbus amplicostatus),
and the Great Heart Cockle (Dinocardium robust um ) . Examples of these shells are
shown in Fig. 1 at A, B, and C. Other ribbed types frequently represented are the
Angel's vVing (Barnea costata ) and the Bent Mussel (Mytilus recurvus ), but their
use as tools seems doubtful considering their fragility.
The advantages of such an implement are basic. They were readily ava ilable,
they w ere efficient, they were durable, and they required no modification. The

322

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

r ibbed surface prevented build-up of excess paste ahead of the tool (especially if
moistened ) in a spreadin g or smoothing stroke. The con vex surface of the shell
made an e ffi cacious trowel for evenly distributing the lumps or coils of clay, and
the margin was adaptable for scraping and removing excess paste to attain a more
uniforrn thickness and even surface.
The scoring itself, almost without excepti on, consists of units of multiple rows of
n eatly parallel ridges and fu rrows, each ridge the sam e width as the ones adjoining
it. and each furrow or groove the sam e width as the next in its series. Th e width
of the ridges and the width of the furrow s is not n ecessarily always the same, i.e ..
the fur-rows may be wider th an the r idges. Nor is the depth of the furrow s and the
h eight of the ridges uniform within their series, either transversely or longitudinally, the later al grooves and ridges being less pronounced generally than the
m edial on es. All this supports the probability that th e scoring represents sca rs left
by th e curved margin of a ribbed ma rin e shell tool.
At the site of Mission Nuestra Seilora del Rosario, abo ut 2.5 miles w es t of
present-day Goliad on the San Antonio River, are found sherds of Goliad ware
and , in lesser numbers, sh erds of Rockport ware. Many of the sherds recovered
h ere are scored. This feature appears on sherds of both series of pottery types. The
scoring appea rs to be identical wi th that exhibited by sherds occurring in sites
n earer to and along the coast proper. Onl y two types of marine shells are thus far
r epresented in th e materi al from Rosario. One of these is the Panama Shell or
L ettered Olive (Oliva sayana). Most shell s of this ty pe displa y workmanship indica ting that they wer e used for ornaments. The other ma r ine shell found h ere is
the Great Heart Cockle or Heart Clam (Dinocardium robustum Solander), a
rather large ribbed shell averaging between 5 and 14 cm. in length, with about 35
r obust fl at ribs, r egularly a rra nged, and with a serra t e m a rgin. None of the unbroken valves of the Cockle, or fragments therefrom , sh ow any workmanship or
attempt at modification in any manner.
Recently this writer r estored a vessel of Goliad Plain from Rosa rio . The sherds of
this vessel display light scoring on both exterior and interior surfaces. The interior
scoring is horizonta l, and the scoring on the more evenly fini shed ex terio·r forms a
grid pattern of horizontal and diagonal strokes. Some areas of the vessel indicate
that at one stage of its manufacture it mny have home h eavier scoring that was
practically obliterated at a few points by further finishing with a smooth object,
possibly the moisten ed fingers and palms of the m anufa cturer. The tool selected
for use as a spatula and trowel in this restoration work was the shell of a Great
H ea rt Cockle. The shell was a small (5.5 cm. length ) fresh one. The small shell
was employed simply because it was more convenient to work with in conforming
to contours rigidly dictated by the original vessel shape and dimensions determined
by projection from the existing sections. A ; the void areas were reconstructed , and
while the plaster wa s still formative , the surfaces were finished by gentle rubbing
with water -moistened fing ers, thus lowering the ridges and filling in the furrows
somewhat. The lightly scored appearance of the reconstructed surfa ces is strikingly
similar to that of the sherds composing the original section s of the vessel
(Fig. 1, E ) .
Fig . 1. Scoring on pottery from the Coastal Bend region of Texas . Marine shells used to
produce scoring, A-C; scored sherds of Rockport ware, D, F- 1; scored sherds of Goliad ware,
E, J-K; plaques of modeling clay showing scoring produced by ribbed marine shells , G'-K'.

A

c

D

F

E

F'

G

H

G'

I'

J'

J

K

0I

I 2I 3I 4t 5I 6I 7! 8I 9l ID
I

l

SCALE

IN

CMS .

K'

32.4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

At the Kirchmeyer site, on the west bank of Oso Creek, in Nueces County, are
found hundreds of sherds of Rockport ware. A high percentage of these sherds bear
one or more scored surfaces in degrees varying from quite light to very heavy.
One small body sherd deserves at least a brief mention here. This sherd is typical
Rockport ware, brown in color, with a trace of asphaltum clinging to the exterior.
The paste is fine, with tiny white inclusions (probably bone ) and is very hard and
unweathered, even though it is a surface find. It is approximately .5 cm. in thickn ess and 2 cm. in diameter. The exterior is smooth, but the interior is scored. This
scoring consists of two series of striae at slightly different angles to each other.
They are separated by a subtly curved dentate pattern which extends completely
across the surface of the sherd. It was produced by depressing the margin of a ribbed
marine shell about .1 cm. into the plastic clay and moving the concave side of the
shell forward. This action resulted in a scalloped perpendicularity, forward of
which the surface of the sherd was scored ( Fig. 1, D ).
In an effort to determine just what type of shell was used as a tool in manufacturing the vessel represented by the Kirchmeyer sherd, several marginal impressions of each type of ribbed shell that has been found on the site were made on
modeling clay. The shells involved were the Ponderous Ark, the Great Heart
Cockle, and the Scallop. There are certain minor, yet distinct differences between
the margins of these three shells. The Ark was quickly eliminated, and after close
examination and comparison of the sherd and the impressions, it became quite
apparent that the tool which produced the scoring on this sherd was that of a
Scallop shell ( Pecten gibbus amplicostatus Dall) , 4 cm. or less in diameter.
Plate 1, F, is a sherd of Rockport Black-on-Gray belonging to Mr. V. C. Branch
o.f Victoria, who collected it from the surface of a campsite on the north shore of
Copano Bay, in Refugio County. Under a low-power magnifying lens the more
outstanding groups of striae, representing single strokes of the tool, are seen to
overlap and pass through one another distinctly enough to establish the sequence of
the strokes. To illustrate this more clearly, a line drawing (Plate 1, F') was made
and the consecutive strokes numbered 1 through 4. Feature 5 is an area of smoothing, wherein the striae, including those of stroke 4, are effected . Feature 6 is
clearly a dentate imprint produced by the margin of a shell tool. This imprint is
not so prominent as the one displayed by the sherd described above from the
Kirchmeyer site. It was impossible to determine exactly where the stroke associated
with this imprint belongs in the sequence; however, it appears to have begun at
the upper right and swept diagonally towards the left, the imprint occurring at the
termination o.f the stroke. It closely parallrls stroke 3, though prior to it, and was
made with the concavity of the tool (interior of the shell) forward. The spacing and
shape of the "teeth" of the shell tool suggest that it was that of a Scallop (ventral
margin), but the pattern is neither sharp enough nor complete enough to permit
stating this with complete confidence.
Fig. 1, G-K, illustrates several typical scored sherds. To the right of each sherd
is a small plaque of local clay, upon which the general characteristics of the striae
represented on each sherd are duplicated by use of marine shell tools. No attempt
was made to produce an exact replica of each sherd. However, by variance of the
pressure applied to the tool, number, direction, and length of the strokes, the
scored features of each sherd seem satisfactorily paralleled. Fig. 1, G, is a fine
example of scored Rockport ware (from Oso Creek, Nueces County). Only the
interior is illustrated. The exterior is very lightly scored. Fig. 1, H , is also Rockport

SCORED POTTERY FROM TEXAS COAST

325

ware (from Copano Bay, Refugio County), the interior of the sherd being shown.
The exterior is quite smooth. The two dark areas are asphaltum. The single striae
displayed on the sherd were reproduced on the plaque by breaking a Scallop valve
(pedi cle ) in half longitudinally and employing the exterior surface of the rib
adjacent to the fracture. Fig. 1, I, is Rockport ware with a coarser sand temper
(from Lavaca Bay, Calhoun County ) . The exterior is also scored, but not as heavily
as the interior. The grooves on this sherd are V-shaped in cross section. They were
reproduced with the angular ribs along the posterior margin of a Cockle shell tool
(see left side of Fig. 1, C), or the "side" of the tool. Fig. 1, J, is a sherd of Goliad
ware (from Mission Valley, Victoria County) tempered with fine sand and, presumably. bone. Fig. 1, K, is the exterior of the same sherd. The scoring on the
exterior appears to have been "paddled" rather than stroked into a previously
smoothed surface.
It is not meant to imply that all vessels of Rockport ware and Goliad ware were
fashioned in this manner, using a shell tool as an accessory. Such specul ation would
be unfounded and presumptious. More credible evidence of the relationship of
scored vessels of the aforementioned types, and a ribbed marine shell tool, would
possibly be the retention of residue paste by such a tool. It would have to be subjected to a high temperature for the paste to end ure, and the heat of a fire would
probably calcine the shell, or at least fracture it badly. Hence it is unlikely that a
ribbed marine shell will be found with paste still adhering to its edge.
It is possible that the utilization of such shell tools was not confined to the Coastal
Bend region. Among the relatively few sherds of Goose Creek ware examined by
the writer, a number of similarly scored sherds were represented. Campbell ( 1957:
46 ), in describing sherds of Goose Creek In cis ed from the Caplen site, mentions
" tool marks being plainly visible, especially on the interior." The Handbook (S uhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 378, 380) lists deeply striated parallel lines on the interior
as an occasional feature of Goose Creek Plain.

References Cited
Campbell, T. N.
1957. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 448-471.
Potter, \'Vendel H.
1930. Ornamentation on the Pottery of the Texas Coastal Tribes. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. Z, pp. 41-44.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Port Lavaca, Texas
December, 1961

