BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Volume 34

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY I AUSTIN, TEXAS I

1963

Office of the State Archeolo · · ~
' ··"'. , . --......._ L.b
.~
•~"
.,. ..,_~
1 rary
.•i
'!!!.
J~c ; ~ 1 l '-·. • , .• • ·".

.~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1963
President: JACK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Secretary-Treasurer: JEAN A. RICHMOND (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN SuHM (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), W. C. HoLDEN
(Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), HuBERT MEWHINNEY (Houston),
WAYNE NEYLAND (Houston), JAMES WARNICA (Portales, N. Mex.), JAMES
WoRD (Floydada).
Trustees: R. K. HARRis (Dallas), MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio), 0. L. SIMS
(San Angelo), HENRY STURGIS (Austin).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CARL CoMPTON (Denton), ALAN DuKE (Pasadena),
LATHEL DuFFIELD (Austin), R. E. FoRRESTER (Ft. Worth), SHERWOOD GAGLIANO (Baton Rouge, La.), D. T. KENT (Kirbyville), E. 0. MILLER (Moody),
ERIK REED (Sante Fe, N.Mex.), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Fellows: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Seattle, Wash.), CYRus N.
RAY (Abilene), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.) .

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treassurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin 12, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is the
same.
Cover design and portrait by Hal M. Story

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST • 1991

•

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i

Editor: D ee Ann Suhm
~

"f
'L.

Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D. Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1963

Office of the State Archeologis
:. ;.
Library

...

I

I

. '

j

DR. CYRUS N. Rw for more than a quarter of a century has devoted
himself to the furtherance of Texas archeology and the Texas
Archeological Society. His pioneer research into the archeology of the
Abilene area is recorded in the numerous articles he has written for
the Bulletin, and his enthusiasm and dedication to the Society is evident in his many years of service. He is a charter member of the
Society, was Editor of the Bulletin from its founding in 1929 until
1947, was President from 1929 until1948, has been President Emeritus
since 1948, and a Fellow since 1952.
The society is deeply indebted to Dr. Ray, and it is with pleasure
that this issue to the Bulletin is dedicated to him.

Table of Contents
Articles
Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of
Corpus Christi Bay, Texas
By James E. Corbin

5

Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter
(41TV69 ), Travis County, Texas
By J. C. Pollard, John W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis

31

Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified
Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas
By Harry J. Shafer.

57

The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic- Neo-American Site in
San Augustine County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield

83

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus Component
in De Soto Parish, Louisiana
By Clarence H . Webb .

143

A Guide to Pottery Sorting, and the Meaning of Pottery
Types and Attributes
By E. Mott Davis .

189

A Guide to Archeological Reconnaissance
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr. .

203

Book Reviews
Hall, Robert L., The Archeology of Carcajou Point, with an
Interpretation of the Development of Oneota Culture in
Wisconsin
By T. N. Campbell .

219

The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic-NeoAmerican Site in San Augustine
County, Texas
LATHEL F. DUFFIELD
ABSTRACT
The Wolfshead Site, a multi-component site in the McGee Bend Reservoir area
in eastern Texas, was excavated by a crew of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project in November and D ecember, 1960. The data recovered suggest that the site
was first occupied by a group who mad e San Patrice and other types of dart points
with some Paleo-Indian attributes . Later, a group that made expanding stern and/ or
side-notched dart points lived on the site. During the lattee part of this period, a
sand-tempered pottery was utilized . Still later, groups who made contracting stern
dart points and expanding stem arrow points camped there briefly. Th e data from
the Wolfshead Site, plus that from other sites in this area of Texas. provide a
projectile point sequence which may serve as a chronologi ca l guide foe further
work in the area.

INTRODUCTION

In the fall of 1960 the Texas Archeological Salvage Project investigated five sites in the upper part of the McGee Bend Reservoir
area, located in eastern Texas on the Angelina River. One of these, the
Wolfshead Site, is the subject of this report. Wolfshead is a multicomponent site containing archeological remains of both Archaic and
Neo-American cultures, as well as artifacts attributed to transitional
Paleo-Indian-Archaic peoples.
Except for a cursory survey conducted by Gus Arnold in 1939
(Arnold, ms. ), the River Basin Surveys' work at McGee Bend constitutes the only archeological research that has been undertaken in
this part of eastern Texas. The salvage operations began in 1948 when
Robert L. Stephenson made a survey of the reservoir. He discussed the
80 sites that he discovered in terms of the Caddoan area classification
system in use both then and now for northeastern Texas (Stephenson,
1948 ). In 1956 and 1957, nine McGee Bend sites were excavated, and

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

once analysis of these sites was under way it became clear that they
were related not only to the Caddoan archeological area adjoining on
the north, but also to the Galveston Bay Focus adjoining on the south.
Despite these relationships, however, it was apparent that much of the
McGee Bend material is actually rather unique and that the classifications of archeological complexes in current usage for the Caddoan and
Galveston Bay areas are not applicable at McGee Bend.
In an attempt to clarify problems that had arisen from the excavations of 1956 and 195 7, additional excavations were undertaken in
1960 by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project under the provisions
of Memorandum of Agreement No. 14-10-0333-657 between The
University of Texas and the National Park Service. These excavations
were superv.ised by Lhe writer under the general direction of Edward
B. Jelks.
Most of the work of the 1960 season was concentrated on the
Wolfshead Site, where projectile points and other artifacts representing three sequential periods were found. The earliest period is characterized by San Patrice type dart points and by dart points of PaleoIndian typological affinity. Most representative of the second period
are expanding stem and side-notched dart points as well as plain, sandtempered pottery. Small Gary type dart points, expanding stem arrow
points, and the same plain sandy pottery found in the second period
are the major traits of the third period.
Because they possess both Paleo-Indian and Archaic typological attributes, San Patrice points have heretofore been assigned to a hypothetical transitional position between the Paleo-Indian and Archaic
stages (Webb, 1946). At the Wolfshead Site, the placement of San
Patrice points in a transitional Paleo-Indian-Archaic context is supported not only by typological factors but also by distributional and
associational data.
In the interpretive section of this report this sequence and its supporting evidence are presented in detail. Inter- and intra-areal comparisons are also drawn, and several conjectures about the significance
of the data will be presented. In the descriptive section, the characteristics and environment of the Wolfshead Site are discussed, the artifacts and other data recovered are described, and the methods of
excavating, the manner of recording, and procedures of analysis are
explained.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Without the cooperation of many individuals the report on the

85

W OLFSHEAD SITE

WOLFSHEAD SITE
41 SA 117

=

contour interval
1.0 feet
excavated area = C
0

20

40

60

80

Fig . 1.

Wolfshead Site would not have been possible. In the field, Mr. T.
Baker , executor of the Blount estate gave u s access to the land and
granted permission to dig the site. In Austin, M r. Edward B. Jelks,

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Executive Director of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, has
been helpful in supplying information and advice, both during excavation of the site and later during its analysis. Other members of the
T.A.S.P. who aided work in the field or in the laboratory are Kenneth
Bennett, W . A. Davis, and LeRoy Johnson, Jr.
SITE DESCRIPTION

The Wolfshead Site ( 41SA117 ) occupies a large sand-topped knoll
in west-central San Augustine County, Texas (Fig. 1) . The site was
named "Wolfshead" by local collectors because they frequently found
small dart points there with an outline resembling a wolf's head
(San Patrice type). In 1953, after having been cultivated continuously
for many decades, farming activities ceased, and since that time the
site has lain fallow. Erosion, especially around the sloping sides of the
knoll, has been extensive.
Surface evidence of occupation, covering about an acre (Fig. 1) ,
consists principally of petrified wood flakes and cores, a few dart points,
fewer arrow points, and an occasional sherd. The surface debris is
concentrated at the edges of the site where it has been exposed by
eroswn.
Preliminary testing revealed two geologic soil zones: ( 1 ) a basal
red-orange clay, and (2) a surface member of fine-grained, tan, sandy
soil containing, in the lower part, numerous orange-colored, clay
inclusions (Fig. 2 ). The red-orange clay is of the Amite type and is
considered to be a riverine deposit (Martin, 1946). The upper foot or
so of this clay contains cultural material, but it is uncertain whether
this material is contemporaneous with the clay or whether it was
intruded into the red clay from the overlying sandy zone. Some
artifacts were found in situ in the clay where no evidence of intrusion
was apparent; however, it is possible that tree roots or burrowing
gophers could have carried a small amount of cultural detritus downward from the sandy soil into the upper part of the clay. In the
central part of the site tests with a post hole digger encountered a
yellow, mottled clay underlying the red clay at a depth of three feet.
This yellow clay, reportedly a water-deposited member (Ted Silker,
personal communication), is evidently sterile of cultural material.
The tan, sandy surface soil which contains most of the cultural
material, has a maximum thickness on top of the knoll of a bout two
feet, and it pinches out around the edges of the knoll where the underlying clay has been exposed by erosion. In the extreme lower part of

87

WOLFSHEAD SITE

this zone were bits of red clay derived from the clay zone, indicating
that some mixture of the two zones had taken place. Despite this
evidence of slight mixing, the separation between the tan sand and
red clay zones was sharply defined in all parts of the site.

101:,._

Di agrammatic Profile of Line N500

HORIZONTAL SCALE
0

~

~

Plow Zone

D

Fine grained, tan. sandy soil

G:)

Compocl, red clay

UIIJ

Unexcavated

Fig. 2 .

EXCAVATION TECHNIQUES

For horizontal control a cardinally-oriented grid was superimposed
on the Wolfshead Site before beginning excavation. The grid was laid
out with a transit, and the grid stakes were designated according to
their coordinate direction and distance from a primary datum point.
Thus a stake with a designation of N550-E600 would be 550 feet north
and 600 feet east of the primary datum. The grid was so arranged that
all grid points used had north and east coordinates.
To serve as vertical datum, a large nail was driven into the base of
a small oak tree which was located near the N550-E590 stake. This
nail was given an arbitrary elevation of 100 feet and all elevation
readings were taken in reference to this height.
Since the cultural debris exposed on the surface was thinly scattered,
it was necessary to determine areas of concentrated materials by

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

trenching. A series of trenches was dug in sections 10 feet long and
2 5 feet wide, each section being carried down by half-foot intervals.
After each level was excavated and the floor cleaned and checked for
features, pertinent information was recorded on a level report form.
Nearly all the dirt was passed through one-quarter or one-half inch
mesh screens. The materials recovered from each level and from each
excavation unit (generally a 2.5 X 10 ft. trench ) were sacked and
recorded by site, trench designation, level, date of excavation and
excavators. The materials were sent to the laboratory in Austin, where
they were washed, catalogued and prepared for analysis.
Recorded data, in addition to the level reports and bag information,
included a photo record, a contour map, a plan of the excavations, a
site journal, and a daily log. All records and materials recovered are
on file at the Texas Archeological Salvage Project laboratory in Austin.
As the trenching progressed, several areas of concentration were
found and the excavations were focused on those areas in order to
obtain as much information as possible in the limited time available.
Trenches connecting the areas of concentration were dug to help relate
them to one another.
LABORATORY TECHNIQUES

After the materials were catalogued, they were roughly sorted
according to the various classes of artifacts represented, e.g., pottery,
dart points, arrow points, knives, scrapers, and ground stone artifacts.
These groups were later subdivided. The pottery was subdivided on
the basis of tempering agents, the dart points and the arrow points
were classified according to similarity in over-all form and size, and
the other chipped stone objects were placed in subgroups depending
on form and other characteristics. Some of the subgroups were further
subdivided. Each final grouping consisted of individual artifacts which
held a majority of their characteristics in common.
After the artifacts had been classified according to the above
methods, they were described and their horizontal distributions were
studied. This showed that arrow points and some kinds of pottery
clustered in the southern part of the site. On this basis, the site was
divided for purposes of analysis, into two major areas-a northern
section and a southern section (Fig. 3). Several excavation units which
were peripheral to these major areas were analyzed separately.
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

From excavated areas at the Wolfshead Site 885 artifacts were re-

89

WOLFSHEAD SITE

EJ

Northern Area

/ Sherds
Sand-cloy tempered 35
259
Sand tempered
Ot hers
7
.....

____ ___ __ _

301

'

20

10

0

,

30

FEEr

- - ----

"

\

I

I I%
86%
2%
99°/o

l

I

Southern Area
Sherds
Sand- clay tempered 41
Sand
Oth e r

tempered

84
126

32%
67°/o\
I 0/o '
100% \
\
\

\

I

I

\
\
\

\

Fig . 3 . Plan of excavations .

covered. In addition, 60 artifacts were found on the surface, in back
dirt, etc. Included are 512 sherds, 144 dart points and dart point fragments, and 20 arrow points and arrow point fragments.

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PROJECTILE POINTS

Most of the proj ectile points were crudely made from a coarsegrained petrified wood that is laminated and tends to break into thin
sheets when chipped. Apparently, when working this material, it is
possible to achieve only a basic outline as the coarse grain does not permit fine flaking. However, som e artifacts are made of a fine-grained
petrified wood-a material more adaptable to fine chipping-and these
are often delicately flaked. Some points were made from small, finegrained jasper and chert pebbles which are occasionally found in the
nearby stream beds. These points are usually well made, although
they sometimes retain a part of the original cortex.
The difficulties encountered by the prehistoric workman in manufacturing projectile points from the coarse-grained petrified wood and
from the small pebbles are reflected in the archeologists' problems of
analysis and classification. Dart points made of the small pebbles, for
example, are necessarily smaller than dart points made from larger
stones; therefore, at times, the standard division of proj ectile points
into dart point and arrow point categories was difficult to maintain.
Artifacts classed here as arrow points have the following characteristics: ( 1) they were manufactured from thin flakes, (Z ) they are
short in over-all length, and ( 3 ) their outlines are similar to the outlines of recognized arrow point types. Dart points, on the other hand,
were made from small cores or thick flakes, they have a basal or maximum stem width that is relatively wide in relation to the blade length,
and they have outlines similar to those of established types.

Dart Points
Five major forms of dart points are present: points with PaleoIndian attributes ( 42 specimens), expanding stem points (26 specimens), side-notched points (9 specimens), contracting stem points (2,4
specimens ), and points with parallel-sided stems ( 5 specimens ) . In the
analysis, each of these major categories was divided and subdivided
into smaller and smaller subgroups until all the specimens in a particular subgroup were almost identical to one another. In the descriptions that follow, the principal features and measurements of the dart
points comprising each subgroup are given, and occasional reference
is made to comparable points from other sites. Provenience data will
be presented in a later section.

WOLFSHEAD SITE

91

POINTS WITH PALEO-INDIAN ATTRIBUTES

San Patrice Type
The 36 San Patrice points found at the Wolfshead Site do not coincide precisely with the definitions given by W ebb ( 1946: 13-17) , by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 477 ), or by Bell ( 1958: 84-85 ) .
Consequently, the type definition is here expanded to fit the present
sample. The San Patrice group can be recognized by ( 1 ) their slightly
t o strongly concave bases, (2) smoothing of the base and stem edges,
( 3 ) corner notching, ( 4 ) their slight to prominent shoulders, and
(5 ) their short, subtriangular, sometimes stubby blades. Other characteristics that occur frequently, but not always, are basal thinning and
alternate beveling of the blade edges.
The San Patrice points from the W olfshead Site fall rather readily
into three subgroups which are h ere assigned the tentative variety
names hope, st. johns, and goodwin. The system of type-variety nomenclature devised by Johnson ( 1962) and J elks (1962: 23 ) is employed,
w herein the initial letter of a type name is capitalized, all letters of a
variety name are lower case, and all names-both type and varietyare italicized.
st. johns variety (26 specimens, Fig. 4, A-H ) . The st. johns variety
of the San Patrice type differs from the hupe variety in the manner in
which the stem is differentiated from the blade. The st. johns group
has small, but usually prominent, oblique side notches, situated immediately above the base, which define the shoulders and stem.
(Prominent notching was not included as a major attribute of San
Patrice in previous definitions of the type. ) The blades are short, subtriangular in shape, and have edges which vary from concave to convex. Fifteen of the Wolfshead specimens are made of petrified wood,
the others are of jasper and chert. In length, all are between 20 and
34 mm. except for two abnormally long specimens which are 39 and
40 mm. long respectively. Widths range from 17 to 26 mm., the average length is 28 mm., and the average width is 21 mm.
Eleven of the st. johns points have alternately beveled blades, u sually
in conjunction with concave blade edges. The base of 15 specimens
were thinned by the removal of longitudinal flakes from both fa ces:
another was thinned on one side only.
hope variety (9 specimens, Fig. 4, J-N ) . Specimens of the hope
variety have- instead of the prominent side notches characteristic of
the st. johns variety-slightly concave sides which define the stem.
All the bases have been thinned and the short blades have slightly con-

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

D

H

G

F

L

K

J

Q

2
1

3 4
t

t

5
I

M

6
I

7
I

8
t

9
t

~
1

CM.
Fig. 4 . San Patrice Dart Points . A-H, San Patrice st. johns. I, San Patrice goodw in. J-N,
San Patrice hope .

cave to slightly convex edges. These specimens closely resemble the
San Patrice points illustrated by Webb ( 1946: 11, Pl. 1, 7-10, 15-19 )
and by Bell ( 1958: 84-85 ). Four of the hope points are made of a finegrained sandstone (possibly Catahoula sandstone, Sellards, et al. , 1932:

WOLFSHEAD SITE

93

723-726), two were manufactured from petrified wood, and the remainder are of chert. They have the following dimensions: length 26
to 37 mm., average 31 mm.; width 22 to 30 mm., average 24 mm.
Two of the hope points have altemately beveled blades, four lack
beveling, and three are so fragmentary that the blade characteristics
cannot be determined.
goodwin variety ( 1 specimen, Fig. 4, I ) . One large San Patrice point
has concave stem edges and a subtriangular blade with one straight
edge and one convex edge. Made of petrified wood, it measures 54 mm.
long by 32 mm. wide. There is a concavity or broad notch in the base
which is 8 mm. deep . San Patrice goodwin points have been found in
Jasper County (south of the W olfshead Site) on a site in the Dam B
reservoir area (D. T. Kent, Jr. , personal communication ).
Discussion: San Patrice points have been found in Texas at the Jake
Martin Site (Davis and Davis, 1960: 20 ) , the Doering and Kobs sites
(Wheat, 1953: 205, 211 , Pl. 38, m ), the Sawmill Site at McGee Bend
Reservoir, and at an unnamed site at Dam B Reservoir in Jasper
County (D. T. Kent, Jr., personal communication ) . In Louisiana this
type has been reported from the Albany Landing Site (Ford and
Webb, 1956: 73 ) , the Mooringsport Site (ibid.: 74 ) , the Sanson Site
(ibid.: 73 ) , and the type location, the San Patrice Site (Webb, 1946:
13-17). In addition, Webb (1946 ) reports San Patrice points from 16
other sites in Louisiana and from one site in Mississippi. At least one
of the dart points found at the Poverty Point Site in Louisiana and
illustrated by Ford and Webb ( 1956: Fig. 21, q ) appears to fit the
hope variety as defined here, although Ford and Webb identify it as
a Meserve point.
The San Patrice points from the W olfshead Site share some characteristics with the Meserve, Edgewood, and Paisano types. Similarities
to Paisano and Meserve have been noted before (Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks, 1954: 460, 477; Davis and Davis, 1960: 21; Ford and Webb,
1956 : 63 ) , but the Wolfshead sample indicates that San PatriceMeserve relationships are even stronger than has been previously suggested, the differences between them being largely a matter of degree
rather than of kind.
The major differences, some of which have been noted by Davis and
Davis ( 1960: 21 ) , are: ( 1) San Patrice points are shorter and relatively wider than Meserve points; (2 ) some Meserve points appear to
be reworked; ( 3) the shoulders on San Patrice points are always
prominent, whereas the shoulders on Meserve points are often poorly
defined; ( 4) San Patrice stems generally have small but distinct ears

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which protrude at a bout a 45 degree angle from the longitudinal axis
of the point, while the ears on stems of Meserve points are less well
defined; and (5) the beveling of San Patrice blades is generally on
the left whereas the beveling of Meserve blades is on the right (bases
Driented downward ) . Most of these differences are a matter of degree
and only one or two appear to be major.
As for resemblances, the Meserve type and the hope variety of the
San Patrice type share the following characteristics: ( 1) concave
bases which have been ground; (2 ) concave stem edges; (3 ) alternately beveled blades; ( 4) basal thinning by the removal of short
longitudinal flakes. When some of the specimens recovered from the
Wolfshead Site are compared with illustrated Meserve specimens
(compare Fig. 4, K with Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: Pl. 104, K;
and Fig. 4, L with Ford and Webb, 1956: Fig. 21, Q), some overlapping of the types is apparent.
Several possible explanations can be offered for the resemblances
between the San Patrice and Meserve types: ( 1) there are no historical
connections between the two types and the resemblances are purely
fortuitous; (2 ) San Patrice points were entirely or partially contemporary with Meserve points and the resemblances reflect a historical relationship between the two; ( 3 ) one of the two types preceded- and
is parental to--the other.
The first of these possibilities is, in my opinion, unlikely. Meserve
points occur over much of the geographic region where San Patrice
points are commonly found , and both types appear to date generally
from the late Paleo-Indian-early Archaic period. In such circumstances, it is hard to believe that the typological resemblances between
Meserve and San Patrice are accidental.
There is some evidence that the Meserve type came into existence
before the San Patrice type and therefore-if a genetic relationship
between the two may be assumed-San Patrice probably developed
out of Meserve. Evidence for the priority of Meserve consists in its
association with Pleistocene fauna at the Meserve Site in Hall County,
Nebraska (Wormington, 1957: 11 3) , and in the apparent occurrence
of San Patrice in post-Pleistocene contexts at the Jake Martin Site,
Upshur County, Texas (Davis and Davis, 1960 ) , and possibly at the
Poverty Point Site, West Carroll Parish, Louisiana (Ford and Webb,
1956 ). Unfortunately there are no direct stratigraphic data on the
relative temporal positions of the two types.
Another dart point that appears to have some typological affinity
vvith San Patrice is the Edgewood type (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,

WOLFSHEAD SITE

95

1954: 418- 419 ) . Particularly striking is the similarity between the
dixon variety of Edgewood as defined by LeRoy Johnson, Jr., (1962 )
and the st. johns variety of the San Patrice. Some of the attributes
shared by these two varieties are: ( 1) an oblique side notch immediately above the base which defines the stem and shoulders; (2 ) a
concave base; and (3) alternately beveled blades. The differences between st. johns and dixon are, like those between San Patrice and
Meserve, largely a matter of degree. Briefly these differences are: ( 1)
the oblique side notch is wider and deeper in dixon than in st. johns;
(2) dixon has more prominent barbs than does st. johns; (3 ) the basal
concavity is more pronounced in st. johns than in dixon; and ( 4 ) the
beveling of the blade usually occurs on the right side of dixon points
and on the left side of st. johns points.
In attempting to explain the resemblances between San Patrice and
Edgewood, the same three possibilities given above for the San PatriceM eserve relationship must be considered; ( 1) contemporaneity,
(2) development of one type from the other, or (3) coincidental resemblance with no historical relationship. Since little is known about
the spatial and temporal distribution of the Edgewood type, the first
explanation cannot be readily dismissed. The initial estimated dates
for Edgewood place it late in the Archaic Stage. However, at the
Yarbrough Site Edgewood points-especially those that are most similar to the San Patrice type-occurred in the deeper levels of the site
in what is apparently a relatively early Archaic context (Johnson,
1962 ) . Thus, at the present stage of knowledge, there is no strong
argument against the possibility that Edgewood might have developed
out of San Patrice-nor that the San Patrice and Edgewood types are
partially or entirely coeval.

Concave-base Points (5 specimens, Fig. 5, A-D )
Five lanceolate points with concave bases are all crudely made from
petrified wood. Two are basal fragments, while the others are more
complete. Three of them (Fig. 5, A, B, D) are similar in shape to the
Plainviewtype ( Suhm,Krieger,andJelks, 1954: 473 ) , but they cannot
be called Plainview because of the crudeness of the flaking- undoubtedly, to a large extent, a function of the raw material used. The
lower edges and some of the bases are lightly ground. The three points
with Plainview-like shapes are 41 to 52 mm. long, 26 to 30 mm. wide,
and 5 to 8 mm. thick.
One concave-base point (Fig. 5, C) is smoothed along the proximal

96

TEXAS AR CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

A

c

D

0

E
2 3 4

5 6 7 8 9 10
C M.

Fig. 5 . Points with Paleo-Indian Attributes . A-D, Concave-base dart points . E, Scottsbluff-1 ike point .

WOLFSHEAD SITE

97

edges and across the base. It is essentially a lanceolate form with a
slight expansion in the middle of the blade. From the area of maximum
width (23 mm. ) , the edges of the blade taper slightly to the base.
Over-all length is 69 mm.
The fifth concave-base point is too fragmentary for accurate description, but it too has been smoothed across the base and along the lower
edges.

Scottsbluff-like Point ( 1 specimen, Fig. 5, E )
A small, thin, flat Scottsbluff-like point which corresponds to Wormington's ( 1957: 266 ) Type I form was found on top of the red clay at
the same general level where many of the San Patrice points occurred.
This specimen is 40 mm. long, 21 mm. wide, and 4 mm. thick. It is
made of a flint similar to that found in Central Texas, and the stem
edges and base are lightly ground. This specimen is too thin to be
identified definitely as a Scottsbluff point.
EX PA N DING STEM FORMS

Corner-notched Points With Straight Bases (9 specimens, Fig. 6, A , B)
Oblique comer notches, which create an expanding stem and prominent, sometimes barbed, shoulders are characteristic of this group of
dart points. The bases are straight to mildly convex. The blades are
u sually short, but the best-made specimen in this group has a relatively
long blade. In length these points vary from 21 to 42 mm. (excluding
one specimen that is 52 mm. long ) and they average 34 mm.; in width
they range from 20 to 26 mm. , with an average of 23 mm. All but two
of these points are made of chert or jasper.

Corner-notched Points With Convex Bases (7 specimens, Fig. 6, K-M )
These points have corner notching which defines an expanding stem
and produces prominent shoulders, some of which are barbed. The base
of the stem is slightly to strongly convex. The shoulders are generally
rounded, a feature which contrasts with the corner~notched, straightbase points. The blades of this form are relatively short and broad.
The more complete points measure between 42 and 45 mm. in length
and between 22 and 30 mm. in width.

Crude Corner-notched Points (2 specimens, Fig. 6, J)
These two points have one corner notched while the other was never

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

notched or else this part of the point has been broken off. The bases
are straight and the blades are subtriangular with slightly rounded tips
and straight to slightly convex edges. The two specimens are 35 and
36 mm. long by 22 and 24 mm. wide, respectively. The smaller one
is made of brown chert, the larger one of fine-grained, compact
sandstone.

Small, Oblique Corner-notched Points (3 specimens, Fig. 6, H, I )
The basal grinding, incipient oblique corner-notching, and slightly
concave bases of these three points suggest that they are uncompleted
San Patrice points. They are in the San Patrice size range: 26 to 32
mm. long, 17 to 19 mm. wide, and 4 to 6 mm. thick. Two of them are
made of petrified wood, the other of chert.

Corner-notched Points With Slightly Expanded Stems And Broad Bases
(2 specimens, Fig. 6, G )
Two short-bladed points made of petrified wood have straight to
slightly convex bases, prominent shoulders, and mildly convex blade
edges. They are 42 and 43 mm. long by 36 and 3 7 mm. wide respectively. Their stems expand slightly and are broad (19 and 21 mm.
wide).

Miscellaneous Expanding Stem Points ( 3 specimens )
One additional expanding stem point made of petrified wood could
be a scraper or a bunt. The stem of this specimen expands slightly and
has a convex base. The blade, which may be reworked, is distinctive
for its shortness. The shoulders are prominent but one is broken off
(Fig. 7, 0 ) . Another petrified wood point (unfinished) still has the
cortex on the tip and one edge is not worked. This point which is 50
mm. long and 32 mm. wide has a flat base and shallow side notches.
The remaining point in this group has a broad (29 mm.) subtriangular
blade and shallow side-notches which define the stem. One face of the
petrified wood point is flat while the other has crude chipping.
SIDE-NOTCHED FORMS

The side-notched dart points (9 specimens, Fig. 6, C-F) have straight
or slightly concave bases, and most of them are made of coarse-grained
petrified wood, although a few of the better made ones are of chert or
fine-grained petrified wood. The side notches may be set either at right

99

WOLFSHEAD SITE

c

8

A

F

E

H

G

J

M

L

K

Q

0

2 3.4 5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.
!

I

t

!

I

I

!

I

I

Fig . 6. Expanding Stem and Side-notched Dart Points . A, 8, Corner-notched with straight
bases . C-F, Side-notched. G , Corner-notched with slightly expanding stem, broad base . H, I,
Oblique corner-notched . J , Crude corner-notched . K-M. Corner-notched with convex bases .

angles or at a slightly oblique angle to the long axis of the blade. The
length of the blade rather than the angle of the notches, however, was
the main criterion used in dividing the side-notched points into two
subgroups, since a significant typological difference apparently exists
between the points with long blades and those with short ones. The

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

side-notched points with short blades ( 4 specimens, Fig. 6, E, F ) range
in length from 17 to 30 mm. and in width from 22 to 27 mm. On this
group all the notches are at right angles to the blade. The base is as
wide as, or wider than , the blade. This group, which may have been
reworked from longer side-notched points, have broad, convex distal
ends instead of sharp tips, and these distal ends are steeply beveled
from one face. Perhaps these artifacts were designed for use as hafted
scrapers or bunts rather than as conventional dart points.
The side-notched points with long blades (Fig. 6, C, D ) are, on the
whole, wider than the short-bladed ones. They are from 40 to 50 mm.
long and from 25 to 30 mm. wide. All have beveled blade edges, and
four of the five specimens have bases that are narrower than the blades.
CONTRACTING STEM FORMS

Gary Type
All of the 24 dart points with contracting stems are of the Gary type,
and they were generally distributed in the upper levels of the site. As
there is considerable variation within the group, it was divided into
six subgroups for convenience of description.
Small Gary points with slight shoulders ( 10 specimens, Fig. 7, A-D ) .
All except two of these are made of petrified wood, the exceptions
being of red and yellow jasper. These points have contracting stems,
relatively long subtriangular blades with edges varying from slightly
concave to slightly convex, and unworked flat bases on which the
nodular cortex is present. These points tend to be thick ( 6 to 9 mm.
with a mode of 7 mm.). They are relatively short, the length varying
from 30 to 39 mm. (excluding one extra large one which is 46 mm.
long), and averaging 34 mm.; and they are narrow, width being 14
to 20 mm. , with an average of 17 mm. The small shoulders project
slightly to the sides.
Small Gary points with prominent shoulders (5 specimens, Fig. 7,
E, F ) . One of these small points is made of petrified wood, while the
others are of fine-grained cherts. The broad, prominent shoulders are
slightly barbed. These points range in length from 27 to 36 mm .. with
a modal length of 32 mm. Their widths vary from 20 to 24 mm. , with
an average of 22 mm. The edges of the su btriangular blades are
slightly convex, and the short contracting stems have either rounded
or straight bases.
·
Small Gary points with rounded bases (2 specimens, Fig. 7, G ) .
Two of the small Gary points-one 24 mm. long, the other 28 mm.

101

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

c

B

K

J

H

N

0

L

0

2 3 4 5 6

G

F

E

D

M

p

7 8 9 10

CM.
Fig. 7 . Dart Po ints. A-D , Gary , slight shoulde rs. E, F, Gary , p rom inent shoulders . G,
Gary , round base. H, I, Gary , narrow . J , K, Gary, wide . l , Gary , crude . M, Short parallels ided stem, rounded base . N, Pogo? point. 0, Miscellaneous expanding stem . P, Miscellaneous parallel- sided stem .

long-have rounded bases, contracting stems, slight shoulders, and
short subtriangular blades with convex edges. These points are, respectively, 15 and 18 mm. wide. and both are 7 mm. in maximum

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

thickness. They resemble the hobson variety of Gary as defined by
Johnson ( 1962).
Small, narrow Gary points ( 3 specimens, Fig. 7, H, I ). These points
- all made of petrified wood-are narrow in relation to their length.
They are, respectively, 48, 51, and 52 mm. long by 15, 23, and 21 mm.
wide. Thickness is consistent at 7 to 8 mm.
Small, wide Gary points (3 specimens, Fig. 7, J, K). A short, broad
blade and a short, straight or contracting stem with a flat base are the
characteristic traits of this subgroup. The shoulders measure from 26
to 28 mm. wide, while over-all length ranges from 32 to 3 7 mm. These
points are all made from petrified wood and they tend to be relatively
thin.
Crude Gary points ( 1 specimen, Fig. 7, L ) . One Gary point made of
a compact sandstone or small-grained quartzite is 60 mm. long by 24
mm. wide and has a slightly tapered stem with a rounded base. The
shoulders are rounded; the subtriangular blade is rather long and has
convex edges. One face of this specimen is relatively flat, but there is a
prominent hump on the other face which gives the point a flattened
triangular cross section.
PARALLEL-SIDED STEM FORMS

Pogo? Type ( 1 specimen, Fig. 7, N )
A large, fragmentary dart point with a broad triangular blade is
possibly an example of the Pogo type. Made of petrified wood, this
point is 68 mm. long and 48 mm. wide (reconstructed ) . It has welldefined shoulders and a short, parallel-sided stem with a straight base.

Points With Short Stems And Rounded Bases (2 specimens, Fig. 7, M )
The broad, long blades of these points contrast sharply with their
short, narrow, parallel-sided stems. The bases are rounded. The two
specimens are respectively 52 mm. long by 30 and 34 mm. wide, and
both are made of petrified wood. The blades have rounded shoulders
and convex edges. The tip on one specimen is rounded.

Miscellaneous Parallel-sided Stem Points (2 specimens, Fig. 7, P )
Two petrified wood dart points have straight bases and parallelsided stems. The larger of the two has a subtriangular blade with well
defined shoulders and convex edges (Fig. 7, P ), while the smaller has
a narrow blade with poorly defined shoulders and straight edges.

103

WOLFSHEAD SITE
DART POINT FRAGMENTS

Ten unidentifiable dart point bases and 43 dart point blades and
tips were found during excavation of the W olfshead Site. All but six of
these were chipped from petrified wood.

Arrow Points
Twenty arrow point and arrow point fragments were found at the
Wolfshead Site, all of them made from the locally available petrified
wood and river pebbles. Except for one crude specimen with a contracting stem, all of the arrow points have expanding stems. Bases are
usually straight, but some are slightly convex.
E XPANDING STEM FORMS

Friley Type
Seven of the 15 complete expanding stem arrow points have straight
bases and prominent shoulders that either project laterally or recurve
toward the distal end of the point. These features are characteristic of
the Friley type as defined by Bell ( 1960: 46-47 ) . On the basis of the
differences in shoulder treatment, the Friley points were divided into
two subgroups-those with recurved shoulders and those with laterallyprojecting shoulders.
Friley points with recurved shoulders (5 specimens, Fig. 8, C-F ) .
These arrow points have expanding stems (although some are almost
parallel-sided) and reverse barbs. They are thin but-probably because of the poor chipping qualities of the stones used-are not well
made. In all their attributes these points conform to the standard
definition of the Friley type (Bell, 1960: 46-47).
Friley points with laterally-projecting shoulders (2 specimens, Fig.
8, A, B) . Broad expanding stems, short blades, and prominent shoulders that project laterally at approximately right angles to the long
axis of the blade are the distinguishing features of this form of the
Friley type. Other attributes include concave blade edges and straight
bases. The smaller of the two examples found at Wolfshead is 12 mm.
long and 12 mm. wide, while the larger one is 19 mm. long and 13
mm. wide.
The two forms of Friley, while they appear to grade into one
another, seem distinct enough to warrant separate description here.
The significance of the variations noted above, however, cannot be
accurately determined until other sites where Friley points occur have
been analyzed.

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

t',
"\

B

A

c

H

E

D

J

0

2 3 4

5 6

K

F

L

M

7 8 9 10

CM.
Fig . 8 . Arrow Po ints. A, 8, Friley , laterally-projecting shoulders. C-F, Friley , recurved
s houlders. G-1 , Expa nding stem arrow points . J, large arrow point . K, l , Miscellaneou s
arrow po ints . M, Arrow poin t fragment.

Miscellaneous Expanding Stem Arrow Points
In the upper zones were found five small arrow points (Fig. 8, G-I)
that have expanding stems, flat to convex bases, prominent shoulders,
and triangular blades with edges varying from slightly concave to
slightly convex. These resemble the Friley type but do not have the
recurved or. laterally-projecting shoulders th at distinguish Friley
points. Length ranges from 21 to 26 nun.; width is 13 to 17 nun.
Two large specimens (Fig. 8, J) which were classified as arrow
points could, on the basis of length and width, be grouped with the dart
points. On the basis of thickness, blade form, and stem characteristics,
however, they fit the arrow point category. Both of th em have short,
slightly expanded stems, straight bases, well-defined shoulders, and
long subtriangular blades with straight to slightly convex edges. They
were chipped from thin flakes of fine-grained petrified wood and
measure, respectively, 47 to 37 mm. long by 28 and 17 nun. wide.

105

WOLFSHEAD SITE
MISCELLANEOUS FORMS

Two crudely chipped arrow points (Fig. 8, K, L ) are irregular in
shape. Both are made from petrified wood. One has a short, broad
blade and an unusually short stem with a straight, unworked base
that retains the original nodular cortex. This specimen is 20 mm. long
and 18 mm. wide. The other miscellaneous arrow point is long and
narrow, measuring 27 mm. in length and 13 mm. in width. The stem
is long and contracting and has a rounded base. The shoulders are
poorly defined. The blade is subtriangular with a rounded tip and
slightly convex edges .
ARROW POINT FRAGMENTS

Four fragments of arrow points were found that are too incomplete
for accurate description. A typical example is shown in Figure 8 (M ).
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

Knives
The knives, which were commonly manufactured of petrified wood,
could be distinguished from the other artifacts at the W olfshead Site
by ( 1) the bifacial chipping on one or more edges, ( 2 ) by their relatively thin cross sections, and (3) by their lack of stems. Three basic
knife shapes (triangular, quadrilateral, and leaf-shaped ) were recognized, and, on the basis of morphological differences within the knifeshape categories, several subgroups were set up.
TRIANGULAR FORMS

Small Subtriangular Knives ( 5 specimens, Fig. 9, A, B)
These small knives, which have straight bases and subtriangular
blades with convex edges, are short (29 to 41 mm. long) and narrow
(21 to 26 mm. wide ). One is made of a semi-translucent stone; the
others are of fine-grained petrified wood.

Medium-sized Subtriangular Knives (13 specimens, Fig. 9, C-E )
These knives have relatively straight bases and subtriangular blades
with strongly convex edges. Three of the thirteen specimens are
chipped from local river pebbles. Occasionally the original cortex of a
pebble adheres to the base or sides. In length, these forms average 42
mm., ranging from 36 to 48 mm., and in width they average 30 mm.,
varying from 36 to 34 mm.

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

D

H

G

F

I

L

K

J

o·

2• 3 4
I

E

I

5 6 7 8 -9_, 10
•
I

I

I

CM.
Fig . 9 . Knives. A, B, Small subtriangular knives . C-E, Medium-sized subtriangular knives .
F, G, Medium-sized slender knives . H, I, Medium-sized leaf-shaped knives with rounded
bases. J-L, Thick, long knives .

WOLFSHEAD SITE

107

Large Subtriangular Knife ( 1 specimen, Fig. 10, G )
This large knife is subtriangular in shape with strongly convex
lateral edges and a slightly concave base. It is made of petrified wood
and measures 59 mm. long, 41 mm. wide, and 12 mm. thick.

Quarter-oval Knives ( 3 specimens, Fig. 10, F)
This knife form has a straight base, from 28 to 41 mm. wide, and
one straight edge which is 36 to 56 mm. in length. The other edge
curves toward the tip which is blunted. In over-all shape, these knives
resemble a quarter-section from an oval.
QU ADRILATERAL FORMS

Rectangular One-edged Knives (12 specimens, Fig. 11, A-C )
The long rectangular shape, the distinctive cross section, and the
chipping on only one edge are the principal characteristics of this
knife form. Although most examples measure between 61 and 95 mm.
in length (average, 71 mm. ), one is exceptionally long (130 mm.).
They are relatively narrow, ranging from 22 to 44 mm. in width, with
an average of 33 mm. These knives have a narrow, triangular cross
section with the cutting edge, the only edge which has been worked,
representing the apex of the triangle and the back of the blade its base.
Knives of this type, designated Type I blades, have been reported by
Tunnell (1961: 130-131 ) in other Archaic sites in the area.

Rectangular Multi-edged Knives (14 specimens, Fig. 10, B-D)
These short rectangular knives are generally thin slabs of petrified
wood which have been worked on two or three edges. Seven of them
are worked on three edges, five are chipped on two (generally opposite )
edges, and the remaining two specimens have only one sharpened
edge. The latter two specimens differ from the rectangular one-edged
knives in their shortness. These artifacts measure in length from 50 to·
60 mm. with an average of 52 mm., excluding one long specimen
which measures 87 mm. The 51 mm. width of this long specimen, however, falls within the 34 to 51 mm. width range (average 42 mm.) for
the group.

Thick, Long Knives (9 specimens, Fig. 9, J-L)
This group of knives, made of petrified wood, ·is characterized by

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

long, relatively thick blades with parallel edges and blunted or rounded
tips. The straight bases are often unmodified, consisting of the original
cortex. These forms measure from 47 to 71 mm. long (average, 60
mm. ) , 27 to 42 mm. wide (average, 34 mm.), and 7 to 24 mm. thick
(average, 16 mm. ) . These are probably variations of Tunnell's Type
II blade (Tunnell, 1961: 131 ) which he describes for other Archaic
sites in the McGee Bend Reservoir area.

Rhomboidal Knives (2 specimens, Fig. 10, H )
The two specimens classified as rhomboidal knives have been hifacially worked on three or more edges . The edges of the blades are of
varying lengths with the maximum lengths being 45 and 64 mm. and
the maximum widths measuring 41 and 50 mm. , respectively. These
knives are made from thin fragments of petrified wood.
LEAF-SHAPED FORMS

Medium-sized Leaf-shaped Knives With Rounded Bases (5 specimens,
Fig. 9, H, I )
Five knives have leaf-shaped blades with rounded bases. The edges
of the blades are strongly convex. Two of them, both made of local
river pebbles, are thicker than most of the other knives from the site.
Most of these artifacts are about 41 mm. long and 24 or 25 mm. wide.

Medium-sized Slender Knives (4 specimens, Fig. 9, F, G)
These medium-sized knives are long and narrow with convex edges
and bases. The tips are rounded. They are from 52 to 56 mm. long and
26 to 31 mm. wide.

Pointed or Rounded Tip Knives ( 19 specimens, Fig. 11 , D-F )
These knives are made from petrified wood and, while they vary
considerably in size, they all have a similar shape. The slightly convex
edges of the leaf-shaped blades taper to a rounded, or sometimes
pointed, tip, while the bases vary from straight to convex. The lengths
range from 48 to 102 mm., with an average of 69 mm., and the widths
vary from 22 to 52 mm. , with an average of 38 mm. This knife form
conforms closely with the Type II blade form which Tunnell ( 1961:
131 ) has previously described.

109

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

8

c

E

F

0 I 2 3 4

G

5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.

Fig . 10. Knives . A, E, Miscellaneous leaf-shaped knives . B-0, Rectangular multi-edged
knives . F, Quarter-oval knife . G, Large subtri angular knife. H, Rhombo idal knife.

Miscellaneous Leaf-shaped Knives (3 specimens, Fig. 10, A , E )
T hree knives could not be classified in the above categories. On e is a
short (2 7 mm. ), narrow (16 mm.), leaf-shaped specimen, made from
a nonlocal stone, and it has a rounded base and convex edges. Another
knife has a subtriangular blade, w hich measures 30 mm. long by 26
mm. wide, a convex base, and convex edges. T he third specimen, which
is well made of petrified wood, is the basal section of a knife with a
slightly concave base and slightly convex lateral edges.

Large Knife Fragments (28 specimens)
All of these fragmentary knife specimens are made of p etrified wood.

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A
B

0

c

E

0

2 3 4

5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.

Fig . 11 . Quadrilateral and Leaf-shaped Knives. A-C, Rectangular one-edged knives.
D-F, Pointed or rounded tip knives .

They came from knives which had either rounded or straight bases
and pointed or slightly rounded tips. Thirteen of the basal sections are
rounded and seven are straight. The remaining eight fragments represent knife tips.

111

WOLFSHEAD SITE

Small to Medium Knife Fragments ( 17 specimens)
Seventeen fragments of small to medium-sized knives were found
at the Wolfshead Site. All are basal fragments. Three are from knives
with straight bases while the others are from knives with rounded or
convex bases.

Scrapers
At the Wolfshead Site, all of the scrapers recovered possess some
characteristics in common. At least one face is relatively flat and most
of the chipping is confined to the opposite face. Chipping is concentrated, generally on one edge, but occasionally on more than one edge.
Most of the scrapers were made of petrified wood, although a few were
made from local river pebbles.

Quadrilateral Scrapers (5 specimens, Fig. 12, F, G )
Two opposing edges of this scraper form are chipped to create the
scraping edges, the other two edges being unworked. These scrapers
are subrectangular in shape and are 28 to 35 mm. long and 32 to 39
mm. Vlride.

Snub-nose Scrapers ( 16 specimens, Fig. 12, A-E )
The most common form of scraper at the Wolfshead Site is a small,
snub-nose scraper. The principal characteristic of this form is a steeply
beveled edge at the bit end. The shape varies somewhat, but most specimens have a slight convex bit end from which convex lateral edges
taper back to a rounded, or sometimes pointed, base. Seven of the snubnose scrapers are made of petrified wood, seven were shaped from
pebbles, and two were worked from sandstone. The more complete
specimens in this group range in length from 19 to 40 mm. (average,
29 mm. ) and vary in width from 12 to 25 mm. (average, 21 mm.) .

Long Oval Scrapers ( 6 specimens, Fig. 12, H, I )
Most of these scrapers have triangular cross sections and long oval
shapes. They vary in length from 40 to 54 mm. and in width from 17
to 25 mm. Usually, the edges have been chipped all around.

Cortex Scrapers (4 specimens, Fig. 12, J, K)
The presence of unaltered nodular cortex on the dorsal face is a diagnostic feature of these scrapers. All examples are flaked from river

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pebbles and are subtriangular in shape. The chipping is confined to the
lateral edges. T he bases, which are unmodified, vary from straight to
rounded. These scrapers all measure about 26 mm. long, except one
which is 31 mm.long; width varies from 15 to 22 mm.

8

c

A

J

G

F

0
I

E

D

K

H

2 34 5 6 7 8 9 10
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

C M.
Fig . 12 . Scrape rs. A-E, Sn ub- nose sc rapers . F, G, Quadri late ra l sc rapers. H, I, l ong ova l
scrapers .

J, K, Co rte x sc rapers .

D-shaped Scrapers (2 specimens, Fig. 13, D)
Two scrapers shaped like the letter "D" were recovered from the
Wolfshead Site. One is 26 mm. wide and 34 mm. long while the other
is 32 mm. wide and 39 mm. long.

Flake Scrapers (6 specimens, Fig. 13, B, C)
These flakes of petrified wood are unmodified except that one or
more edges are lightly chipped. Probably these were sharp-edged
flakes that were used without modification for scraping purposes, the

WOLFSHEAD SITE

113

chipped edges having resulted from wear during the scraping process.
They vary considerably in shape and size.

Two-edged Scraper ( 1 specimen, Fig. 13, A )
A rectangular scraper, similar to the quadrilateral scrapers except
for length, is chipped on two opposing edges, the other two edges being
unmodified. It measures 52 mm. long by 28 mm. wide. This specimen
resembles forms found at the Poverty Point Site (Ford and Webb,
1956: Fig. 36, h-j ) . It differs, however, in that it is slightly smaller and
unifacially worked. Since the Wolfshead scraper is made of a poor
quality of petrified wood, it is not possible to detect grinding like is
present on the Poverty Point specimens.

Albany Spokeshave (2 specimens, Fig. 13, H )
Two spokeshaves, apparently reworked from projectile points, conform to Webb's Albany type, subtype II (Webb, 1946: 10-11 ) . They
are chipped from one face along the left side of the blade (basal end
oriented downward ) so as to create a strongly beveled edge. These artifacts, both made of petrified wood, are side-notched; the base of one is
slightly convex while the other is concave. One specimen measures 37
mm. long (the other is too fragmentary to determine its length ) ; they
are 20 mm. and 22 mm. in width; and both are 6 mm. in thickness.

Spokeshave ( 1 specimen, Fig. 13, G )
One piece of petrified wood which has a small concave section
worked into one edge could have served as a spokeshave.

Shaft Smoother (2 specimens, Fig. 13, F)
Two pieces of petrified wood have one strongly concave, bifacial
edge. These implements are subtriangular in shape, the tips are
rounded, the bases are straight, and the edges opposite the concave side
are strongly convex. Both specimens measure 46 mm. long and 37 mm.
wide.

Chisel (1 specimen, Fig. 13, E)
An artifact made of petrified wood has a steeply beveled, chisel-like
bit at one end. The rest of the stone is unworked. One side is flat, the
other is ridged . This specimen is 91 mm. long and 41 mm. wide.

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bifaces
Small Subcircular Bifaces ( 15 specimens, Fig. 14, D, E)
Several small, bifacially-chipped artifacts, circular to elliptical in
shape, were found. All of them are made of petrified wood. Diameters
vary from 27 to 54 mm. and thickness ranges from 7 to 14 mm.

Large Subcircular Bifaces (4 specimens, Fig. 14, F)
Several thick, subcircular bifaces, all made of petrified wood, were
recovered from the W olfshead Site. These artifacts are 16 to 19 mm. in
thickness, and diameters range from 36 to 56 mm.

Drills
Two elongated chipped stone artifacts are classified as drills. These
objects have long, narrow, ensiform blades with rounded tips and
straight or slightly convex bases (Fig. 14, A, B). The larger specimen,
which is made of petrified wood, measures 55 mm. in length and 11
mm. in width, while the shorter one-which is made of a river pebble
and has a twist to the blade-is 32 mm. long and 12 mm. wide.

Choppers
Four small choppers or cores (Fig. 14, C) were fashioned from pebbles. One end of the pebble is bifacially worked, the opposite end being
unworked and retaining the unmodified cortex. The largest specimen
is 58 mm. long, and the shortest is 42 mm. long. These forms, judging
from the published descriptions, are the same as Tunnell's blade Type
V (Tunnell, 1961: 133).

Hand Ax
A large ovoid-shaped hand ax, (Fig. 16, A) made of petrified wood
has been worked bifacially on three edges. The remaining edge is unifacially worked and part of the unworked face is still covered by the
original nodular cortex. The edge opposite the unifacially worked edge
is not sharp and appears to have been battered. This specimen is 103
mm. long, 84 mm. wide, and 32 mm. thick.

Large Chipped Stone Objects
These items, frequently large flakes of petrified wood, are generally

11 5

WOLFSHEAD SITE

B

A

D

F

0
I

2
I

i1

G

.

H

5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.
I

e

e

e

I

Fig. 13. Scrapers. A, Two-edged scraper. B, C, Flake scrapers. D, D-shaped scraper. E,
Chisel. F, Shaftsmoother. G, Spokeshave. H, Albany spokeshave.

chipped bifacially on one or more edges. The 12 specimens have irregular shapes.

Small Chipped Stone Objects
The varied size and shape of these small chipped stone objects prevent a detailed description of the group. They are similar, except in
size, to the large chipped stone objects described above, and all are
made of flakes of fossilized wood. Twelve examples were found.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
PECKED OR GROUND STONE OBJECTS

SHAFT POLISHER

This sandstone specimen (Fig. 15, A ) , which is 72 mm. long, 50 mm.
wide, and 25 mm. thick, has a single long groove which suggests its
use as a shaft polisher.
BOATSTONE

A boatstone fragment (Fig. 15, B, C) was apparently associated with
the side-notched dart points at the Wolfshead Site. The end as well as
the back of this specimen is ground flat (Fig. 15, C) and the interior
(Fig. 15, B ) is hollowed out. The entire surface of the specimen is well
smoothed.
GRINDING SLAB

A fragment of a small sandstone grinding slab has a depression on
one surface. The edges of the depression are stained with red ochre,
suggesting that this was used ·f or grinding pigment.
SMOOTHING SLAB

An exfoliated section of a sandstone boulder appears to have been
utilized as a smoothing or grinding implement. It is thin and curved;
one side is smooth, the other is rough. Some of the edges of this specimen are rounded through use, but others are angular and unworn.
HANDSTONE

An oval-shaped handstone used in grinding is smoothed on one face
and is wedge-shaped in cross section. This specimen is 114 mm. long
and 77 mm. wide; it is 48 mm. thick at one edge and 31 mm. thick at
the other. Another handstone (Fig. 16, B) is circular in shape and has
a slight pit in one surface. This specimen is 94 mm. in diameter and
35 mm. thick.
PITTED STONES

Three pitted-stones-one made of hematite, two of sandstonewere found. The hematite specimen has a very slight pit on one side.
One of the sandstone specimens is the pitted handstone described above;
the other is a sandstone slab, 167 mm. long, 86 mm. wide and 50 mm.

117

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

c

B

•

D

F

E

0
I

2 3 4 5• 6 7 8 9 10
I

t

I

I

CM.
Fig. 14. Drills, Choppers, and Bifaces. A, 8, Drills . C, Chopper. D, E, Small bifaces . F,
Large subcircular biface .

thick, which has one deep pit and one shallow pit on one side plus a
shallow pit on the opposite side.
HAMMERSTONE

An elongated chunk of petrified wood has been battered and pecked
at one end, indicating use as a hammer.

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

0
I

2 3 4
I

I

I

56 7 8 9 10I
I

t

I

I

I

CM.
Fig. 15. Shaft Polisher and Boatstone Fragment. A, Shaft polisher. 8-C, Boatstone fragment.
PoTTERY

Surface materials found at the Wolfshead Site prior to excavation
suggested that the site was a pre-pottery, pre-arrow point site; however, excavations soon revealed that this was not the case. Instead, pottery comprised the most numerous class of artifacts ( 539 sherds) and,
in addition, arrow points were present, although not abundant (20
specimens) .
The pottery was divided, on the basis of temper, into two relatively
large groups and one small group. The largest group, comprising 439
sherds, is sand-tempered; the next largest group, consisting of 91
sherds, is tempered with both clay-and-sand. Sherds of the third group
are tempered with clay-bone, sand, and/or other substances.

Sand-Tempered Ware
PASTE AND SURFACE FINISH

Sand, the most frequently used tempering agent at the Wolfshead
Site, is so abundant in some of these sherds that they feel gritty and

\'VOLFSHEAD SITE

119

are easily abraded when rubbed between the fingers. Even when
carefully handled, part of the surface sometimes sloughs off. Among
the sand-tempered sherds, 270 have a dark gray to black paste, 129
have a light yellow-brown or reddish-brown color, and 40 are intermediate between those two color groups. Distribution studies indicate
that differences in paste color are not of chronological significance.
METHOD OF MANUFACTURE

Fractures along coil lines indicate that this pottery was made by the
coiling technique.
VESSE L FORM

Bases
Six small base sherds of the sand-tempered ware reveal that the bases
were convex and thicker than the vessel wall. At other sites in the
McGee Bend area, both convex and conoidal bases have been found
for this ware, as well as an occasional flat base. Conoidal and flat bases,
however, are absent in the sample from the Wolfshead Site.

Rims and lips
The 26 sand-tempered rim sherds suggest three basic vessel forms.
One form, indicated by eight sherds, has an orifice slightly smaller
than the maximum diameter of the vessel and a rim that slants inward
slightly (Fig. 17, B). Another form, indicated by four sherds, has a
vertical or slightly flared rim, suggesting that the diameter of the vessel was greatest at the orifice (Fig. 17, A ). The third vessel form, represented by three sherds, has a recurved shape with a very short rim
and a rounded shoulder (Fig. 17, C). Eleven of the rim sherds are so
small they could not be grouped with any of the above forms.
Lips are generally rounded to sharp, although one sherd has a flattened lip. Two of the sherds with rounded lips have, parallel to the lip,
a slight exterior ridge which was created by smoothing of the lip area.
DECORATION

Two rim sherds and three small body sherds are decorated. On all
of them the designs are incomplete and only the techniques of decoration could be determined. The smaller rim sherd has incised lines immediately below and parallel to the rounded lip. The other rim sherd

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

0

B

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
C M.

Fig . 16 . Hand Ax a nd Pitted Handstone. A, Ha nd a x. B, Pitted handston e.

(Fig. 18, A) has an incised line partially filled with punctations. Concentrated within the upper and lower portions of the incised element,
these punctations were made with a dentate implement or a small,
sharply pointed stick. One of the body sherds may be from the same,
or a similar, vessel since it is decorated in the same manner as the rim
sherds. The design and decoration technique on these sherds suggest
a relationship with the Marksville Stamped type of the lower Mississippi valley (Ford and Willey, 1940: 65- 74), but the temper, the rim
form, and the surface finish are unlike that type.
Another incised body sherd has a design which consists of a series of
closely spaced, shallowly incised, right oblique lines (slanting from
lower left to upper right) across which are deeply incised, more widely
spaced, left oblique lines. This creates a crossed diagonal, grid-like
pattern.
The other decorated body sherd has three small hollow reed punctations arranged in a line, but the complete design cannot be reconstructed from the small sherd.

121

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

8

c

Fig . 17 . Hypothe tical reconstruction of sand-tempered vessel shapes at the Wolfshe a d
Site.
MISCELLANEOUS

Crack-lacing holes are present on two sherds. One sharply curved
sherd which is tapered in cross section may be the bottom of a pipe
bowl, or possibly it is part of a conoidal vessel base.
DISCUSSION

Sand-tempered pottery is apparently the earliest ware in the McGee
Bend Reservoir (Tunnell, 1961; see also Table 1 and 2 herein ) . The
present data suggest that it precedes both contracting stem dart points
and arrow points in this part of Texas. At the Runnels 1, Runnels 2,
and Sawmill sites, a larger percentage of sand-tempered sherds than
clay-tempered sherds was found in the lower levels, while contracting
stem dart points (Gary type) were concentrated in the upper levels
(Tunnell, 1961 ) .
At the Davis Mound, not far west of the Wolfshead Site, sand-tempered pottery was found predominantly in Phase 1 of themound (Newell and Krieger, 1949 : 131 ). The sand-tempered pottery at the Davis
Site is similar in paste and vessel form to the sherds from the Wolfshead Site (Edward B. Jelks, personal communication). The percentage of decorated to undecorated sherds, however, is much higher at the
Davis Site where 33.3 per cent of the sherds are decorated and 66.7
per cent are plain. A vessel count at the Davis Site, however, indicates
that only 16.6 per cent of the individual sand-tempered vessels were
decorated. At the Wolfshead Site, on the other hand, only 1 per cent
of the sand-tempered sherds are decorated. A vessel count was not attempted at W olfshead.
On the Texas coast, the Goose Creek Plain pottery type (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 378-379) bears som e similarity to the sand-

1ZZ

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tempered ware from the Wolfshead Site. Goose Creek Plain has sand
and also sand-and-clay used as tempering agents; in addition, some
vessel shapes are similar to those of the sand-tempered ware at McGee
Bend.
Other sand-tempered types occur early in Louisiana and in the lower
Mississippi valley, but most of these forms bear little resemblance to
the sand-tempered pottery from Wolfshead.

Sand-and-Clay Tempered Wares
PASTE AND SURFACE FINISH

Of the 539 sherds recovered from the Wolfshead Site, 91 or 17 per
cent are tempered with both sand and clay. Of these, 77 are undecorated body sherds, nine are plain rim sherds, two are base sherds, and
three sherds, one of which is a rim, are decorated. While some of these
sherds have large amounts of sand and others have large amounts of
clay, usually both tempering agents occur in more or less equal proportions.
VESSEL FORM

Bases
Bases were either flat discs or were rounded convexly. When
rounded, the vessel wall merged with the base so that the area of juncture was not so clearly demarcated as when the base was flat .

Rims and Lips
The predominantly plain rims are not usually differentiated from
the body of the vessel. They may be straight, incurving, or slightly
outflaring. The lips are generally rounded or slightly flattened, but
some taper to a sharp lip while others are fully flattened .
In general, vessel shapes as indicated by the sherds featured straight
to slightly flaring walls with either a slightly convex or disc-shaped
base.
DECORATION

A decorated rim sherd has a set of three parallel, incised lines which
originate a short distance below the lip and extend down at a slight
left oblique angle. The blank area to the side of the three lines suggests
that they are part of a repetitive design which consisted of alternate

123

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

0

I

2 34 5 6
I

I

I

7 8 9 10

CM.
Fig. 1 8 . Decorated Rim Sherd . A, Decorated rim sherd, sand-tempered.

sets of oblique lines spaced around the rim of the vessel. Two other
decorated sherds have only fragments of lines (one engraved, the other
incised ) which are too incomplete for meaningful description.

Other Tempering Agents
Two small sherds have a combination of bone, clay, and sand-temper. Two other sherds are tempered with a mixture of hematite, sand,
clay, and a type of material (vegetable fiber?) which burned out during the firing, leaving small holes and channels in the paste. Five
sherd s are tempered with materials which have not been fully determined. All contain a small amount of sand as well as minute rounded
particles of an unidentified dark substance. One, in addition, contains
small particles of a yellow material, while another contains larger
fragments of an unknown dark substance.
DIVISIONS OF THE SITE

A horizontal study of the temper groups indicated that the sherds
were not randomly distributed throughout the site. For example, al-

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

though clay-and-sand tempered sherds were found in all sections of
the site, they show a distinct concentration in the southern section.
There they comprise 32 per cent of all the sherds, whereas in the northern area they account for only 11 per cent (Fig. 3). This distribution
pattern, by itself, might appear insignificant, but there are similar
statistical differences in distribution for other classes of artifacts. Only
three arrow points and arrow point fragments , for example, were
recovered in the northern section of the site, while in the southern section, 11 arrow points and arrow point fragments were found . On the
basis of these differences, the site was separated into a southern and
northern section for analysis.
SouTHERN SEcTION

In the southern section, approximately 25 excavation units-consisting of 2.5 X 5, 2.5 X 10, and 5 X 5 ft. units-were removed to a
depth varying from 1.0 to 3.0 ft. In this section the relatively thick
deposit of cultural materials provided a fairly good opportunity for
demonstrable vertical stratigraphy, and some stratigraphic differences
were, in fact, detected. However, the sample is small and the data are
meager, not only for this area, but for the site as a whole, and therefore the opinions offered are necessarily conjectural and tentative
rather than conclusive.
Within the southern section four soil zones were observed. The
upper zone was the humus-stained plow zone which varied in thickness from 0 to 0.5 ft. and measured about 0.4 ft. thick. Below this zone
was a tan sandy zone ranging from 0. 4 to 1.1 ft. in thickness. This
sandy zone was superimposed on a red-orange clay which lay 1.0 to
2.0 ft. below the ground surface. The excavations generally penetrated
only the upper 0.1 ft. of this clay zone, although in one excavation
unit, 1.5 ft. of this zone was removed. Underlying the red-orange soil
at approximately four to five ft. below the surface was a yellowish
clay. This latter zone and the lower portion of the red-orange clay were
sterile of cultural debris.

Discussion of the Artifacts
The artifacts from the southern section of the site include two principal classes-pottery and projectile points-together with a number
of miscellaneous stone artifacts.
POTTERY

Both the sand-tempered and the sand-and-clay tempered sherds were

125

WOLFSHEAD SITE

concentrated in the second and third levels of the site (Table I). There
are no significant vertical differences between the two temper groups
since they maintain approximately the same frequency ratio in each
level (Fig. 19, A, B).
TABLE 1
Vertical distribution of sherds in the southern section

Sand-temper
body
bases
rims
decorated
Cla y-sand
body
bases
rims
Bone-and-clay
Totals

L evell
0- 0.5

Level2
0.5-1.0

L evel 3
1.0- 1.5

13

31

29

Level4
1.5-2.0

1

1
1

2

4

16

12

3

3

54

47

22

3

PROJECTILE POINTS

While the sample was small, the vertical distribution of projectile
points provided the best suggestion of a culture sequence at the Wolfshead Site (Fig. 20 ) . The earliest horizon-represented primarily in
levels four and five (Table 2 )-has 11 projectile points of which eight
(disregarding fragments ) are either of the San Patrice type or are
lanceolate dart points with concave bases.
Following the earliest horizon, and perhaps overlapping it to some
extent, is the side-notched and expanding stem period. Evidence suggestive of this period was found in level three (Table 2 ) where the
majority of the dart points have side notches or expanding stems.
After the side-notched and expanding stem dart point occupation,
there is a sudden increase of contracting stem dart points (primarily
the Gary type ) and expanding stem arrow points (primarily the Friley
type ) in the upper two levels (Fig. 20 ) .
The position of the pottery with respect to the projectile point sequence poses a problem. Judging from its vertical distribution, pottery
first appeared in quantity in level three, and remained popular during
the Gary point and expanded stem arrow point era (Tables 1, 2 ) . This

126

TEXAS ARCH EOLOGICAL SOCIET Y

8

A

Levels
I

2

3

•

4

16

"4
19

Levels
I

35

42

2

31

37

3

2

2

4

No.

Sand-tempered s herds

-

2

3
4
5

-

13

"·

Levels
I

•

2

6

2

-•

15

47

3

10

3 1

4

--

3
Gary

3
4

•

Arrow points

15

37

2

sherds

No.
2

'Yo
25

4

50
12.5
12.5

dart po i nts

F
No.

Levels

E

2

46

15

D

Na.
4

--

19

Cloy-ond-sond tempered

Non -controctin; stem dart pa i nts

Levels

"·

I

c

Levels
I

No.
6

•

Na.

%
4 36 .5

2

4 36.5

3

2 18

4

9

5

-•
Other

6

%
6

II

12

27

28

47

50

4

4

artifacts

Fig. 19. Artifact distribution graphs for the southern section .

tends to substan tiate th e eviden ce fro m oth er sites at McGee Bend
where sand-tempered pottery occurs below the clay an d/ or bone
tempered pottery with noncontracting stem dar t points (T unnell,

127

WOLFSHEAD SITE

TABLE 2
Vertical distribution of projectile points in the southern section

0-0 .5
Levell

0.5-1.0
Level2

1.0-1.5
Level3

1.5-2.0
Level4

3

4

2.0-2.5
Level5

Dart points

San Patrice
st. iohns
hope
Concave-base
Corner-notched
straight base
crude
oblique
slightly expanded
stems with broad
base
miscellaneous
expanded
Side-notched
Gary
slight shoulders
prominent shoulders
wide
Short stem, rounded
base
Miscellaneous
parallel-sided
Fragments
Arrow points
Friley
recurved shoulders
laterally-projecting
shoulders
Miscellaneous
expanding stems
Large arrow points
Miscellaneous
Fragments
Totals

2

2
2

3

1

2

2
1
2

4

2

7

6

25

18

2

2
1

14

12

1961 ) . In these other sites, Gary type dart points are concentrated in
the upper levels with the clay and/ or bone tempered pottery (Tunnell, 1961 ). These data suggest, like the Wolfshead data, that the sandtempered pottery preceded the Gary dart points in the area.

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gary dart points, however, occur at the Wolfshead Site without the
clay and/ or bone tempered pottery. These few points could be part of
the debris from later temporary occupations of the site by hunting
parties from sedentary agricultural villages where the clay and/ or
bone tempered pottery was made. Through time this debris may have
become mixed with the materials from the earlier occupations. Or another interpretation, the Gary dart points could have been introduced
into the area before the manufacture of sand-tempered pottery was
entirely abandoned and before the clay and/ or bone tempered pottery
was in use. Our present data do not favor one interpretation more than
the other.
MISCELLANEOUS STONE ARTIFACTS

Since the southern section of the site can be divided on the basis
of the projectile points into three general time periods, the vertical
distribution of the other stone artifacts found there was examined to
determine if any tool types seem to correlate with specific projectile
point periods. Over 50 per cent of all the stone artifacts other than the
projectile points were found in levels four and five, which suggests that
the site was most intensively occupied during the earliest period
(Table 3, Fig. 19 ) . Some tool forms occurred exclusively in these lower
levels, while others tended to be concentrated there. For example: the
snub-nose scrapers and the cortex scrapers were concentrated in level
four. In addition the D-shaped scrapers, two-edged scraper, flake scrapers, chisel, and all the bifaces are found only in the two lowest levels.
The knife forms, for the most part, are about equally divided between levels three and four, no knife form being exclusively associated
with the early occupation.
Exclusive of projectile points, 28 per cent of the stone artifacts
were found in the third level-the side-notched, expanding stem dart
point zone. A few artifact forms are found only in, or are concentrated
in, this level. These include the rectangular, multi-edged knife, the
shaft smoother, the chopper, the hand ax, and the Albany spokeshave.
It is not surprising that the Albany spokeshave occurs occurs in this
horizon, since it too has a side-notched stem like the dart points of this
period.
In levels one and two (characterized by Gary dart points and arrow
points ) only 18 per cent of the miscellaneous stone artifacts were located, the only exclusive forms being the rectangular, one-edged knife
and the quadrilateral scraper.

129

WOLFSHEAD SITE

Leve ls
I

2

3

4

5

0

25

50

75

100%

Fig . 20. Compa rat ive re lationsh ip of p ro ject ile po ints in the southern se ctio n .

NoRTHERN SEcTION

Evidence from the thin deposits in the northern section of the site
supports the sequence found in the southern section. In the northern
section, about 40 units were excavated to a depth of 0.5 to 1.5 ft. , with
a majority of them being excavated to the maximum depth . The depths
were delimited by the red-orange clay, the upper 0.1 ft . of which was
removed in the excavations. Above the red-orange clay is the tan sandy
zone and above this is the plow zone. This soil profile is the same as
that in the southern section except that the excavations were not carried deep enough to encounter the basal yellow clay.

Discussion of the Artifacts
The two principal artifact classes in the northern section are, again,
pottery and projectile points. As previously mentioned, the pottery
and projectile points in this section differ slightly from those in the

....•

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 3
Vertical distribution of miscellaneous stone artifacts in the southern section

Levell
Knives
Triangular
su btriangular,
small
su btriangular,
medium
quarter-oval
Quadrilateral forms
r ectangular,
one-edged
rectangular,
multi-edged
thick, long
Leaf-shaped form s
pointed or rounded
tips
slender
Fragments
large
small
Scrapers
quadrilateral
snub-nose
Albany spokeshave
long oval
cortex
D-shaped
two-edged
flake scrapers
shaft smoother
chisel
Bifaces
small
large
Choppers
Hand ax
Miscellaneous chipped
large
small
Grinding slab
Pitted stones
Hammerstone
Totals

Level2

Level3

L evel4

2

1
1

5

2

3

L evel5

2
2

3

7
1

6
3

6
1

3

2

4
2
2

3
3

2
2
6

11

27

47

4

131

WOLFSHEAD SITE

2

··:·.·.·:.·.·.·:

50

75

100 •;.

Fig . 21 . Comparat ive relat ionsh ip of pro ject ile po in ts in the no rthern section .

southern section in that clay -and-sand tempered sherds and arrow
points are not as numerous.
POTTERY

The sherds in the northern section of the site were largely concentrated in the second level ( 187 sherds) but a large number (88) occurred in the first level, and there were a few (26) in the third level
(Table 4 ) . Again there are no appreciable vertical differences between
the temper groups (Fig. 22 ) .
TABLE 4
Vertical distribution of sherds in the northern section
T emper g r oup

Sand
body
bases
nms
decorated
Clay-and-sand
body
nm
base
decorated
Bone-and-clay
Sand, clay, hematite
Undetermined
Totals

Levelf

L evel2

L evel 3

67

148

23

3
6

12

8
4
18
1

2

1
2
3

88

187

26

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PROJECTILE POINTS

The shallow deposits in the northern section yielded materials
which suggest the same cultural sequence found in the southern section. For example, the concave base, lanceolate points as well as a
Scottsbluff-like point occurred only in the third or deepest level of the
area. In this level and extending up into the second one were San
Patrice points and corner-notched dart points (Table 5 ) . Gary and
side-notched dart points were found also in th e second level, but they
were found in the first level too. The data for the northern section,

A

2

8

-

Levels

-

3

Non-contracting

No.

%

4

14

13

47

2

II

39

3

stem dart

Levels

Gory

points

c

Levels

2

-

Sand-tempered

dart

"·

Levels

76

29

I

160

62

2

23

9

~

No.

2

44

4

44
II

points

-

21

60

2

6

sherds

F
No.
I

"·

Levels

33

2

67

2
3

Arrow points

o;.

12 34

Cloy-ond-Sond tempered

sherds

-

No.

•

E
Levels

"to

4

D

•

3

-

No.

-

Other

No.

%

13

19

30 45
24

artifacts

Fig . 22 . Arti fact distribution graphs for the northern secti on .

36

133

WOLFSHEAD SITE

when compared with the southern section, suggest that the sequence
is mixed and compressed, especially in the middle or second level.
Only two complete arrow points and one arrow point fragment were
found in the northern section, all in the upper levels.
MISCELLANEOUS STONE ARTIFACTS

Occasionally a particular form of artifact was concentrated in the
upper or the lower portion of the area, and some forms were found
exclusively in one level. The snub-nose scraper and some knives (subtriangular medium, rectangular multi-edged, and rhomboid forms)
were concentrated in the lower levels (Table 6). Also associated with
the lower levels were the bifaces, the drills, and the long oval scraper.
TABLE 5
Vertical distribution of projectile points in the nor thern section

L evell
Dart points
San Patrice
st. johns
hope
goodwin
Concave-base
Scottsbluff-like
Corner-notched
straight base
convex base
slightly expanded stem
with broad base
Side-notched
Gary
slight shoulders
crude
wide
narrow
prominent shoulders
Short stem, rounded base
Miscellaneous parallel-sided
Fragments

Level 2

Level3

3
3

2.
1

2

1
2.

4

6

23

18

2

1

Arrow points
Friley, laterally-projecting shoulders
Miscellaneous expanding stem
Fragment
Totals

9

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 6
Vertical distribution of miscellaneous artifacts in the northern section

Levell
Knives
Triangular
subtriangular, medium
subtriangular, large
Quadrilateral
rectangular, one-edged
rectangular, multi -edged
thick, long
rhomboidal
Leaf-shaped
rounded base, medium
slender
pointed or rounded tips
miscellaneous
Fragments
large
small
Scrapers
quadrilateral
snub-nose
Albany spokeshave
long oval
Bifaces, small
Drills
Chopper
Miscellaneous chipped
large
small
Boatstone
Recent debris
Totals

Level2

Level3

3

3

2

2
2

1

1
3

5

2

3

1
2

2
1
2

2

2
1
1
3
2

2

1
2

13

30

24

Scrapers from the middle level are the quadrilateral form and the
Albany spokeshave. Knives from this level include the le1f-shaped
(slender; rounded base, medium; knives with pointed or rounded tips),
the quadrilateral (rectangular, one-edged) and the triangular (subtriangular, large ) . Miscellaneous artifacts from the middle level are
a chopper and the boatstone fragment.
OTHER EXCAVATIONS

Extraneous excavations in both the northern and southern portions

135

WOLFSHEAD SITE

of the site produced a few artifacts and other material. In the northern
area more than 10 extraneous units were excavated, while in the southern area more than 20 extraneous units were excavated. The depth of
these excavations varied from 0.5 to 2.0 ft. below the surface and they
generally removed the top 0.1 ft . of red-orange clay. A frequency
study of the horizontal distribution of the artifacts recovered indicated
that, on the basis of the relative scarcity of materials, these areas could
be separated from the main areas of concentration. In many cases,
these areas were peripheral, and some units in which the plow zone
was situated direclly on top of the red-orange clay were obviously areas
of mixture. For example, in the upper levels of the peripheral areas
there are more San Patrice dart points than Friley arrow points (Table
7).
TABLE 7
Projectile points from other excavations in the southern section

Dart points
San Patrice
st. iohns
. hope
Comer-notched
convex base
crude
Side-notched
Gary
slight shoulders
r ounded base
Pogo?
Fragments
Arrow points
Friley, recurved shoulders
Fragments
Totals

Levelt

Level2

Level3

3

3

3

1
6

4

16

9

z
1
11

The vertical distribution of the projectile points, sherds, and miscellaneous stone artifacts from extraneous excavations in the southern
portion of the site are listed in Tables 7 and 8. Even in these areas,
there are some suggestions of the expanding stem and side-notched dart
points being succeeded by the contracting stem dart points and arrow
points (Table 7).

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The vertical distribution of the artifacts from the miscellaneous excavations in the northern section of the site is tabulated in Table 9.
The only item of interest is a solitary snub-nose scraper that was found
in the deepest level (Table 9).
TABLE 8
Artifacts from other excava tions in the southern section

Levell
P ottery
Sand-tempered
body sherds
19
rim sh erds
Clay-and-sand
body sherds
3
Unknown
Knives
Triangular
subtri angular, small
subtriangular, medium
Quadrilateral
r ectangular,
one-edged
2
rectangular,
multi-edged
t hick, long
Leaf-shaped
rounded base, medium
slender
pointed or rounded tips
miscellaneous
Fragments
large
2
small
Scrapers
quardilateral
fl ake
1
Bifaces, small
3
Chopper
Miscellan eous chipped
la rge
2
small
Smoothing slab
Totals

39

Level 2

L evel 3

L evel 4

21
3

2

2

2
40

7

2

137

WOLFSHEAD SITE

TABLE 9
Artifacts from other excavation s in th e north ern section

Levell
Pottery
Sand-tempered
body
base
decorated

7
1

Level 2

L evel 3

17

5

L evel4

run

Clay-and-sand temper
body
decorated
Dart points
Corner-notched
convex base
Fragments
Knives
L eaf-shaped
pointed or
rounded tip s
mi scellan eous
Scrapers
qu gdrilateral
snub-nose
Biface, sm all
Miscellaneou s chipped
small
Totals

2

2

3

1

2

2
9

25

16

SUGGESTIONS AND CONJECTURES
C uLT U RE S EQUENCE

Previous work on the Arch aic Stage in the McGee Bend area has
produced a partial scheme (Tunnell, 1961 ) by which we can classify
some of the data from the W olfshead Site. Tunnell reports that the
Runnells 1, Runnells 2, and Sawmill sites had Archaic components
characterized by a dart point form similar to the Kent type. These
Kent-like points, however, differ from the Kent type as defined by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 432- 433) in that a large percentage
of them have expanding stems (Tunnell, 1961: 127 ). Tunnell suggests that at the sites he investigated at least three periods are represented. The first period, he states, is:

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

... characterized by rath er crude dart points with parallel side to e xpanding stems,
shaped by percussion, and made from local stone (dart point Type I ). A distinctive
type of blade was commonly manufactured from a thin slab of silicifi ed wood , and
has fine pressure r etouching along one edge (blade Type I ) . A few other scraping
and cutting artifacts are associated with this occupation in small numbet·s (Tunnell,
1961: 155).

He describes the next period as follows :
To the basic late Archaic culture at M cGee Bend a sand-tempered plain pottery
was added. This was accompanied by a new type of blade, with an unworked base
( blade T y p e II ), pitted stones, and other miscellaneous lithic artifacts (Tunnell,
1961 : 155).

The third period is mentioned as h e continues:
These elem ents increased in popularity fo r a while, but declined in numbers when,
in more recent times, clay-tempered pottery, bone-tempered pottery, and arrow
points appeared (Tunnell, 1961: 155 ) .

Tunnell's first two time divisions can, with modifications, apply to
the Wolfshead Site data. An earlier period, however, can be tentatively
defined on the basis of the meager information from the site. San
Patrice and/ or concave base, lanceolate dart points in the Paleo-Indian
tradition represent this earlier period. Probably associated with these
points are small snub-nose scrapers, small cortex scrapers, D -shaped
scrapers, multi-edged scrapers, large and small bifaces, and grinding
slabs (Table 2).
Succeeding the San Patrice and concave base, lanceolate dart point
period is Tunnell's Archaic assemblage which he suggests can be divided into early and late phases. In the earlier phase are parallel-sided
to expanding stem dart points. At the Wolfshead Site, this early phase
is represented by forms with expanding stems (corner-notched) or
side-notches. The data from the Wolfshead Site plus those from Tunnell's sites suggest that implements other than dart points associated
with this earlier period of the local Archaic include Albany spokeshaves, shaft smoothers, choppers (Tunnell's blade T y pe V, 1961 :
132-133 ), hand axes, drills (Tunnell's drill Type I , 1961: 129 ), polish ed bannerstones, polished boatstones, and the rectangular multiedged knife (Tunnell's blade Type II, 1961 : 131). Tunnell includes
his blade Type I in this earlier period also ( 1961: 155) , but the data
from the Wolfshead Site, plus a re-examination of the distribution of
blade Type I at the Sawmill Site, suggest that, while this blade or knife
form is found in both phases, it occurs predominantly in the later
Archaic period.

WOLFSHEAD SITE

139

During the later phase of the McGee Bend Archaic sand-tempered
pottery was introduced into the area without strongly modifying the
basic stone complex. At this time, the rectangular one-edged knife
(Tunnell's blade Type I, 1961 : 130) was in use. There may have been
other differences between the earlier and later Archaic phases of this
area but they are not well defined at the present. Hints of some of these
differences appear in the projectile point sequence at the Sawmill
Site where there seems to be a trend from lightly barbed points with
strongly expanding stems to points with rectangular, parallel-sided
stems and angular, unbar bed shoulders.
Following the later Archaic phase was a period characterized by
small contracting stem dart points (Gary type ) and expanding stem
arrow points (some of the Friley type ) . Present evidence suggests that
Gary dart points were popular in this area somewhat later than-although they may be partially contemporaneous with-sand-tempered
pottery (Tables 1, 2 ; Tunnell, 1961; Newell and Krieger, 1949: Tables
12, 18), and that they survived into the succeeding clay-tempered and
bone-tempered pottery period.
PROJECTILE POI N T SEQUENCE IN THE McGEE BEND AREA

By combining the known data from this section of eastern Texas, a
general sequence of projectile point forms can be suggested. San Patrice and/ or lanceolate-concave base points preceded side-notched and
expanding stem (corner-notched ) dart points. Also during this sidenotched, expanding stem period there was a gradual trend from points
with widely expanding stems to points with parallel-sided stems (Tunnell, 1961 ).
Some of the moderately to slightly expanding stem forms of this
period (those which have been identified as Kent points) appear to be
crudely made varieties of the Yarbrough type which is more common
in northeastern Texas than in the McGee Bend area . This resemblance,
previously noted by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 432 ) , indicates
that the two types might be related. The additional fact that Kent
points occur earlier than Gary points in the McGee Bend area parallels
the situation in northeastern Texas where Yarbrough also precedes
Gary (Johnson, 1962) .
During the later part of the period characterized by expanding stem
forms, contracting stem dart points (Gary type) were introduced into
the McGee Bend area. Although the present data suggest that the Gary
point and the expanding stem arrow point entered the area simultane-

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ously, information from sites outside the area suggests that Gary points
were introduced somewhat earlier than arrow points (Davis and Davis,
1960; Duffield, 1961 ; Johnson , 1962). During the arrow point period,
stem forms seem to have evolved from expanding, to parallel-sided, to
contracting.
This projectile point sequence, extending from the transitional
Paleo-Archaic to the Neo-American period, is sketchy due to the limited amount of data available for the area. Subsequent research in and
near the area will undoubtedly modify and add more details to the sequence, or it may indicate an alternative interpretation.
REFERENCES CITED
Arnold, Gus E.
m.s. Monthly Reports, October, 1939-July , 1940. Manuscript on fil e in Department of Anthropology, The Univer sity of Texas.
Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identificati on of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1.
1960. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projec tile Points.
Oklahoma Anthrological Society, Special Bulletin No. Z.
Da vis, William A., ,md E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake M artin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir
Area, Northeastern T exas. Archaeology Series, N o. 3, Depar tment of
Anthropology, The University of T exas.
Duffield, Lathe! F.
1961. The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoi r, Rains County, T exas. Bulletin
of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, pp. 51- 116.
Ford, J ames A ., and Clarence H. W ebb
1956. P overty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana . Anthropo logical Papers
of the American Museum of Natu ra l History, Vol. 46, Par t 1.
Ford, James A ., and Gordon R. Willey
1940. Crooks Site: A Marksville Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish,
Louisiana. Anthropological Study, Department of Conservation, Louisiana
Geological Survey, No. 3.
J elks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspec t Site in Hill County,
T exas. A rchaeology Series, No. 5, D epa rtment of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Johnson , LeRoy, Jr.
1961. The Manton Miller· Site : A Late Archaic- Early Ceramic Site in Delta
County, T exas. T ypewritten Report to the National Park Service.
196Z. The Fred Yarbrough and Manton Miller Sites, with a Preliminary
D efinition of the La Harpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 32, pp. 141 -284.

WOLFSHEAD SITE

141

Martin, Irving L.
1946. Amite Series . Soils Series Description of T exas, United States D epartment
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, mimeographed report.
Newell, H . P erry, and Alex D . Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, T exas. American Antiquity,
Vol. 14, No.4, P art 2, April.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932. The Geology of T exas, Vol. 1, Stratigraphy. The U niversity of T exas
Bulletin 3232.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1948. Archeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir: A Preliminary Report.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19,
pp. 57-73.
Suhm, D ee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. J elks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the T exas
Archeological Society , Vol. 25.
Tunnell, Curtis D .
1961. Eviden ce of a Late Archaic Hori zon at Three Sites in the McGee Bend
Reservoir, San Augustine County, T exas. Bulletin of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, pp. 123-158.
Webb, Clarence H.
1946. Two Unusual T y pes of Chipped Stone Artifa cts from Northwest Louisiana .
Bulletin of the T exas Arch eological a nd Paleontological Society, Vol. 17,
pp. 9-17.
Wheat, J oe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast T exas.
(River Basin Surveys P apers, No. 4.) Burea u of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 154, No.4, pp. 143-252.
Wormington, H. M.
1957. An cient M an in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History
Popular Series, No. 4.
The University of T exas
Austin, T exas

