BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Volume 34

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY I AUSTIN, TEXAS I

1963

Office of the State Archeolo · · ~
' ··"'. , . --......._ L.b
.~
•~"
.,. ..,_~
1 rary
.•i
'!!!.
J~c ; ~ 1 l '-·. • , .• • ·".

.~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1963
President: JACK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Secretary-Treasurer: JEAN A. RICHMOND (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN SuHM (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), W. C. HoLDEN
(Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), HuBERT MEWHINNEY (Houston),
WAYNE NEYLAND (Houston), JAMES WARNICA (Portales, N. Mex.), JAMES
WoRD (Floydada).
Trustees: R. K. HARRis (Dallas), MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio), 0. L. SIMS
(San Angelo), HENRY STURGIS (Austin).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CARL CoMPTON (Denton), ALAN DuKE (Pasadena),
LATHEL DuFFIELD (Austin), R. E. FoRRESTER (Ft. Worth), SHERWOOD GAGLIANO (Baton Rouge, La.), D. T. KENT (Kirbyville), E. 0. MILLER (Moody),
ERIK REED (Sante Fe, N.Mex.), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Fellows: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Seattle, Wash.), CYRus N.
RAY (Abilene), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.) .

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treassurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin 12, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is the
same.
Cover design and portrait by Hal M. Story

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST • 1991

•

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i

Editor: D ee Ann Suhm
~

"f
'L.

Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D. Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1963

Office of the State Archeologis
:. ;.
Library

...

I

I

. '

j

DR. CYRUS N. Rw for more than a quarter of a century has devoted
himself to the furtherance of Texas archeology and the Texas
Archeological Society. His pioneer research into the archeology of the
Abilene area is recorded in the numerous articles he has written for
the Bulletin, and his enthusiasm and dedication to the Society is evident in his many years of service. He is a charter member of the
Society, was Editor of the Bulletin from its founding in 1929 until
1947, was President from 1929 until1948, has been President Emeritus
since 1948, and a Fellow since 1952.
The society is deeply indebted to Dr. Ray, and it is with pleasure
that this issue to the Bulletin is dedicated to him.

Table of Contents
Articles
Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of
Corpus Christi Bay, Texas
By James E. Corbin

5

Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter
(41TV69 ), Travis County, Texas
By J. C. Pollard, John W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis

31

Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified
Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas
By Harry J. Shafer.

57

The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic- Neo-American Site in
San Augustine County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield

83

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus Component
in De Soto Parish, Louisiana
By Clarence H . Webb .

143

A Guide to Pottery Sorting, and the Meaning of Pottery
Types and Attributes
By E. Mott Davis .

189

A Guide to Archeological Reconnaissance
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr. .

203

Book Reviews
Hall, Robert L., The Archeology of Carcajou Point, with an
Interpretation of the Development of Oneota Culture in
Wisconsin
By T. N. Campbell .

219

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus
Component in De Soto Parish, Louisiana
CLARENCE H. WEBB
ABSTRACT
This is a belated description of the Smithport L anding Site, one of several known
Alto Focus components in northwestern Louisiana. This large village site, on the
western margin of the Red River flo od plain, covers portions of several low hills
which front on a former lake.
Nineteen pottery vessels, all but two id entifiabl e as Alto Focus types, were found
with fourteen burials. Included are Hickory Fine Engraved, Davis Incised, Kiam
Incised, Wilkinson Punctated, and Smithport Plain (virtually identical with Bowles
Creek Plain ) types.
Surface materials comprise 1553 sherds, 61 dart and 55 arrow points, and a modest
number of chipped and polished stone tools or ornaments. The stone tool assemblage
seems to be basically late Archaic with the addition of small arrow points.
Although the sh.erds as w ell as whole vessels are predominantly derived from
Alto Focus ceramics, a small percentage of Coles Creek, a somewhat larger representation of Bossier Focus, and a few late Caddoan pottery types are identified.
Similarities and differences between the ceramics of this site, the Davis (Alto) Site
in eastern T exas, and the central Louisiana sequence of pottery, are pointed out.
Possible relationships between Coles Creek, Alto, Bossier, and Plaquemine ceramics
are developed. It is postulated that Caddoan (Alto) and Coles Creek peoples or
influences entered northwestern Louisiana almost simultaneously, and that Bossier
Focus developed out of the amalgamation of these two previous cultures. A few
very late Caddoan oherds indicate a late occupation at Smithport Landing, possibly
during historic times.

INTRODUCTION

The Smith port Landing Site was initially explored by Monroe Dodd,
Jr. , and the author between 1934 and 1940. * It was the first site at
which we found burials and whole pottery; it was also the first site in
• Thanks are extended to Monroe Dodd, Jr. , George Freeman, and other friends
who assisted in the site exploration; to Alex Krieger and James A. Ford for
assistance with pottery identification and typology; to A. L. Wedgeworth, Jr. , for
photography; and to Gordon Maxcy for film developing and assistance with the
plates.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Louisiana which was identified as an Alto Focus component (vVebb,
1948 ) and was recognized as such in the Davis Site report (Newell
and Krieger, 1949: 195, 197, Fig. 62 ). In describing the Bossier Focus,
Smithport Landing wa s one of 15 sites used for comparison and discussion of the relative incidence of Bossier Focus pottery types, and of
several pottery complexes. First suggested in my 1948 paper, and
elaborated in a more recent study (Webb, 1961 ) of 20 sites in northwestern Louisiana, is the thesis that the Bossier Focus developed out
of a simultaneous spread of Alto and Coles Creek peoples or influences
across this area in post-Marksville times. Smithport Landing was one
of the key sites in this study, because of the admixture of Alto and Coles
Creek pottery types and the presence of a minor Bossier Focus manife station.
It therefore seems appropriate to publish the available information
about this site, despite the limited excavations conducted nearly 30
years ago. The criticism has been made that too many foci in the
Caddoan area have been based on excavation of a single site and that
the Alto Focus, for example, is based on the Davis Site alone. The information presented herein concerning Smithport Landing and other
Alto Focus manifestations in Louisiana was available to, and used by,
Krieger a indicated in the Davis report. The details should have been
published for other students, however, especially since burials of the
Alto period are limited in number.
SITE ENVIRONMENT

The Smith port Landing Site is in the eastern edge of D e Soto Parish,
about eight miles east of Mansfield, the Parish seat (Fig. 1 ) . It is a relatively large village site situated on eroded and dissected hills which
project in an expanded tongue of land fronting on Old Sm ithpor t or
Clear Lake (Bayou Pierre Lake) . The former lake bed is now dry in
the summer, swampy during the rainy season. Buffalo Bayou courses
through this low area to join the outflow of present Smithport Lake
about one mile northeast of the site. Further eastward this drainage
flows into Bayou Pierre which continues some 20 miles down the southwestern margin of the Red River flood plain until it empties into this
river near Natchitoches .
The hills on which the site is located (Fig. 2 ) are 10 to 20 feet above
the lake bed; where dissected by small drainages the slope is gentle,
but in several places is abrupt. Most of the site was formerly in cultivation and the topsoil, a grayish sand with liberal mixture of humus,

145

SMI THPORT LANDING SITE

* 'Loll& VIEW

/ILL£NA

/ltiTCHITOt:I'ES -X$/!~

/,g; ·;.DI/ES
,;'

.JJ"rol!r ,.1£s.svP

Fig . 1 . Map of no rt hwesle rn Lou isiana and adjoin ing portion of eastern Tex as . Listed
sites have A lto Focus or related components . Note route of the early histo ri c road , El
Cam ino Re a l, w hic h probably follo we d p rehi storic trai ls through t h is area .

is three to four feet thick and apparently fertile. The su bsoil is a rather
dense, reddish or orange sandy clay. The trees around the site are oak,
persimmon, gum, and m :my smaller hawthorns and sassafras. The uplands have h eavy growths of pine and the lake bed ha s the usual cypress, willows, and some hardwoods. The nearby lakes still have abu n dant fish-bass, crappie, "bream" and other small perches, as well as
the "rough" varieties like gar, carp, catfish, shad, and "gasper-gou"and turtles, eels, bullfrogs, snakes, and an occasional alligator are present. Bird species are abundant and in former y ears migratory waterfowl came in tremendous numbers. Edible wild fruits and nuts in the
area are persimmons, haws, crab apples, plums, muscadines and other
wild grapes, hickory nuts, walnuts, pecans, chinquapins (dwarf chestnuts ), yoncapins (seed of Nelumbo lutea, a water lily ), and many
oth ers . D eer were present until the early part of the 20th century and
are now returning; squirrels, rabbits, raccoons, and opossums are the
more prevalent of the edible animals. Mussels and snails are available
in moderate numbers. In aboriginal and early h istoric times this vicinity afforded, undoubtedly, an abundance of natural resources, with
good soil and adequate rainfall for domestic crops.

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

During the 18th and 19th centuries this land was spoken of as "the
coast," inferring a large body of water into which the tongue of land
projected. Like so many other lakes formed where streams run into
the river valley out of the hills, it is probable that old natural river
levees formed a bar or dam which produced the lake; some, however,
are of the opinion that the famous log jam in Red River was instrum ental in production of these lakes. At any rate, much of the traffic
on the river above Alexandria coursed along these lateral streams and
lakes. When we first visited this site, old residents spoke of a deep lake
with steamboat landings at the site and on present Smithport Lake.
The desirability of this land for habitation is attested by the several
prehistoric sites in the neighborhood, the size of the Smith port Landing
Site, and the early documents which indicate a white settlement within a few years after establishment of Natchitoches Post. About equidistant (25-30 miles ) from Natchitoches and the Spanish counter post
at Los Adaes (Fig. 1), families and influences were derived from both
the French and Spanish. Records at Natchitoches record the birth of
Joseph Marcel Antonio DeSoto, son of Manuel DeSoto and Marie De
St. Denis, member of the family of Louis Juchereau De St. Denis who
founded Natchitoches, in 1758 (D'Antonio, 1961a). A later daughter
married Paul Lafitte of Bayou Pierre, as the Smithport Lake Settlement was called.
The Spanish influence became stronger in the latter 1700's, after
Louisiana was ceded to Spain. Even after the Louisiana Purchase, this
land was on the margin of the " neutral ground" and for a time was
under Spanish jurisdiction. This, as well as a comment about a Yatasi
Indian village which may be of significance to the site, is indicated by
D 'Antoni's ( 1961a ) account of the journey in 1808 of Don Marcelo
De Soto, who had become Spanish judge of Bayou Pierre Community,
to San Antonio to petition the governor for a resident pastor. The petition reads in part:
Don Marcelo de Soto, acting justice of Bayupier, Jurisdiction of Nacogdoches,
together with Jose Lafitte, Silvestre Poissot, Pedro Robleau and Miguel Rambin,
all of aforesaid community, who have come to this capital together, has the honor
of appealing with all respect to your lordship's equity, conjointly with and in the
name of all the other residents of the specified Bayupier. [These] consist of thirty
Spanish families gathered together and long established in the aforesaid place, with
no large number of educated persons at their service; besides, there is next to them
the village of the Yatasi Indians. They are all in need of the church and of an
ecclesiatic to minister the Holy Sacraments ....

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

147

Although a resident pastor was not sent, priests from Nacogdoches
visited the settlement for some years, then visitation was taken over
by the French priests at Natchitoches. A chapel was constructed in
1843 "in the center of DeSoto Parish at Bayou Pierre." In 1855 the
first new parish of the Natchitoches Diocese was established here and
a resident priest assigned (D ' Antoni, 1961 b ).
In 1888 a Carmelite Mission was established, with a monastery and
subsequently separate schools for boys and girls (D'Antoni, 1962 ) .
The Carmelites built a rock chapel which is now preserved as an historic monument to their labors; the small settlement three miles east
of the site is now called Carmel.
SITE EXPLORATION AND EXCAVATION

The Smithport Landing Site is located in Township 13 N , Range
12 W , sections 23 and 26, on land owned at present by Edward Lafitte of Carmel, but at the time of our excavation by Guy Sample of
Shreveport. When first visited in 1934, much of the site was in cultivation; now it is in pasturage or woodlands. Evidences of occupation
were found on portions of four hills, heaviest on hills 2 and 3 (Fig. 2 ).
Larger than most sites in this area, we estimated that a total of 40 to
50 acres was occupied. We first explored Hill 1, a low hill which
sloped gently to the bottom lands and had been in cultivation for a
long time. The topsoil was thin and sheet erosion exposed a number of
pottery sherds, projectile points, and other stone objects. It is possible
that this was a separate site, since it is set apart by a wide stream bed
from the other occupied hills, but the artifact types were not different.
The area of occupation covered about five acres.
Hill 2 is higher, about 20 feet above the old lake bed, and slopes
rather sharply southward to the lowlands. The top is gently rounded
and had been put into cultivation only a few years before our first visit.
The topsoil was very dark and many large pottery sherds were found;
in fact, this hill showed the heaviest occupation of the site, over an area
of 20 to 30 acres. The burials ( Fig. 3) which are described later occurred on the crest of this hill, immediately overlooking the old lake.
Hills 3 and 4 run north-south and slope down to a small stream
which separates them. The occupation areas, chiefly along the slopes
to the stream, are estimated at five to ten acres on each hill, although
we were uncertain about Hill 4 because it was partly wooded. There
were two tenant houses in a nearby deserted field. On the back part of
Hill 2 and east of the main tenant house, very black soil, found over

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

. :. ·>, ... .

~

=

F£/1/CtS
f'"lilil\t
7('GitDS

~.jTRE4M:S

. Lo

OltlooiJ£P
/11{~

.1._

...

Fig . 2 . Ske tch of Sm ithport Land ing Site, not to scale . Note occupa tiona l a raa s on fou r
hills, buria l area a nd heavy m idden on Hill 2 .

a radius of 12-15 feet, contained large sherds, numerous animal bones
or bone fragments , and ashes (Fig. 2 ) . Two test pits showed that the
black refuse soil was two to three feet in depth and ashes indicated
extensive cooking. Our notes show no evidence of a house floor or post
molds, although we did not trench the area.
BuRIAL ExcAVATIONs
In May, 1935, Monroe Dodd, Jr., found a small intact vessel (Fig.
4, 0 ) in hog rootings on the crest of Hill2, which had been left uncultivated and put into pasturage that year. Excavations exposed within a
radius of two to three feet a cluster of nine pottery vessels (Fig. 3, Nos.
V-94-102 ) , three of which were intact and four largely so. Included
are vessels shown in Figure 4, B, C, F, K, N, 0, and R. Vessels which
are not illustrated are two broken bottles (probably hit by the plow ),
one Hickory Fine Engraved and an untyped engraved ware with
interlocking spirals. All of the vessels were within two feet of the
surface, as were burials 1 and 2 (Fig. 3 ), male and female adults
lying fully extended and supine, with heads turned to left and right,
respectively. The pottery deposit could have related to either or both
of these . Two Alba points were found to the side of Burial1 .

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

149

On weekend trips between May and November, 1935, with permission of the owner, we worked out the remainder of the burials;
see Figure 3. As a result either of our inexperience or of the way
the burials had been placed, we were not sure of pit outlines and of
which skeletons were associated. All occurred at a depth of two to three
feet from the surface, although disturbed soil continued to a depth of
three to three and a half ·feet and in a few places to four feet. It was
my impression, as recordea in notes, that burials 1 and 2 were together
and that burials 5, 3-4, 6-8 and 11-13, and 9-10 represented interment
groups.
Burials 3 and 4 were side by side and undoubtedly placed together.
Both were supine and fully extended, except that the left arm of Burial
3 was abducted and flexed at right angles. Heads were directed almost
south, that of 3 with face upward; the skull of Burial 4 was turned to
the right. Both were adults, Burial 3 a female , 4 a male. A large, intact
bottle (Fig. 4, A ) was two feet above the heads and a small bowl (Fig.
4 , I ) was in fragments to the left of the skull of Burial 3.
Between this group and Burial 2 we found a skull and several long
bones in an irregular bundle (Fig. 3, Burial 5 ) . There were no associated artifacts.
Burials 6 to 8 were about a foot apart, on the same level, and were
thought to be a single interment. Heads were directed north, all turned
towards the left side, and the bodies were supine and extended, except
that the left arm of Burial 6 was flexed, with the hand lying over a pot-

0

1

23456

Fig . 3 . Burials on Hill 2 of Smithpo rt Landing Site . Vessel numbers a re catalog numbers .
Left arm of 8- 3 shown incorrectly; it shou ld be abducted and f lexed.

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tery vessel above the head of Burial 7 (Fig. 3). This vessel, an intact
cylindrical jar of the type Kiam Incised (Fig. 4, D) was the only offering. Burial 6 was that of a female, age estimated 40-50 years, rather
wacile in build. Burial 7 was a child of 13-15 years and Burial 8 was
either an adolescent or young adult female.
Burials 11 to 13, found on a subsequent visit, may have been a part
of the burial 6-8 interment, as they were at the same depth ( three
feet), were immediately adjacent, and lay in the same orientation.
Burial 11 was a male, supine and extended, with head directed north
and turned to the left. Age was estimated at 18- 20 years. Burial 12
was a female adult, also supine, fully extended and head directed
north but rotated to the right to face Burial 11. Burial 13 was a female
adult, lying across and directly on the previous two, with head directed just north of west and face turned upward. No artifacts were
with these three.
Burials 9 and 10 were probably associated but separate from the
others. They were north of the previous row of burials, with head
orientation toward the north, supine, extended, and the feet just above
the skulls of burials 6 and 7. Burial 9 had the face upright, and was a
child of undetermined age. Burial 10 was of a female adult with head
turned to the left, toward 9. Above the skull of Burial 10 there were
pottery fragments which were later assembled to form vessels 130, 133,
and 134 (Fig. 4, H , E, and G, respectively) and a toy bottle (Fig. 4, P ) .
To the left of the skull of Burial 9 there were three small vessels, two
plain bowls, and a fingernail-pinched cup (Fig. 4, L , M, Q) .
In November, 1935, a final burial (not shown in Fig. 3 ) was found ,
six feet east of burials 12 and 13. This was of a male adult, turned on
the right side with legs partially flexed and the head directed to southeast. No artifacts were associated.
Measurements were made on three intact skulls. That of Burial 6.
adult female, had a circumference of 47 em., glabella to occipital protuberance 27 em., and zygoma to zygoma 30 em. The skull of Burial
10, adult female, had circumference of 46.8 em., glabella to occipital
protuberance 28.5 em., and zygoma to zygoma 31 em. That of Burial
14, adult male, had circumference of 49.5 em., glabella to occipital
protuberance 29.2 em. , and zygoma to zygoma 30.5 em.
DESCRIPTION OF ARTIFACTS
CERAMICS

There are available for study of pottery from this site 19 whole ves-

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

151

sels from the burials, of which 10 are decorated and nine plain; 1533
sherds from surface collections and the several test pits, of which 875
are decorated and 658 plain. Among the sherds there is a group of 37
which have paste and decoration characteristics of late wares, historic
or protohistoric, which will be described in a separate section. Consequently there are 19 whole vessels and 1496 sherds which relate to the
earlier occupation. Most of these are assignable to existing types which
have been described elsewhere and type descriptions will not be repeated, although local or regional variations will be indicated. Reference should be made to the Davis Site report (Newell and Krieger,
1949 ) and T. A. S. handbooks (Suhm, et al., 1954; Suhm and Jelks,
1962 ) for descriptions of Alto types; to the Bossier Focus report (Webb,
1948 ) and the handbooks for the Bossier types; and to the Crooks (Ford
and Willey, 1940 ) , Greenhouse (Ford, 1951) , and Medora (Quimby,
1951 ) Site reports for Coles Creek and Plaquemine types. One new
type of the Alto period, Carmel Engraved, will be described herein.
Certain characteristics of paste, temper, surface and core colors, and
sherd thickness extend throughout the earlier wares from this site. The
paste is generally uniform and compact, rarely lumpy or porous. The
range of hardness is 2 to 3 ( Moh' s Scale), the sherds are broken with
difficulty and seldom can be scored with a fingernail; the majority of
the sherds give a metallic ring when dropped on a hard surface (except for the dark chocolate to black wares ) . Tempering is clay-grit in
most instances, sometimes with finely ground sherds, and a few with
enough grit to feel slightly sandy (none is fully sand tempered ) . Bone
temper occurs in 31 of the 1496 sherds (2%) and shell is totally missmg.
Surface colors are predominantly light, showing oxidizing firing
conditions, and fire clouds are frequent (Fig. 4, A-C), indicating incomplete control of firing. The majority of sherds have light interiors
and cores, but some of the interiors are darker gray or smudged and
some of the cores are dark brown to black, even though the surfaces
are light. Surface colors are varying shades of gray, some buff or tan,
a few orange or reddish-brown; in every type there will be varying
percentages of dark brown (often chocolate or reddish-brown) to black,
although these are never as numerous as in the Alto wares of the Davis
Site, even in the engraved types. The sherds with chocolate brown to
black exteriors usually have uniform darkness through the core and on
interior surfaces; the paste is usually softer and the sherds seldom give
a metallic ring when dropped. Their surfaces tend to be smoothed but
rarely polished.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

152

G

0

0

2

4

6
CM

8

w

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

153

Sherd thickness varies from 4 to 10 mm. , averaging 6 to 7 mm. in
most types. Variations will be noted.
In general, this early ware is thicker and lighter in color than the
later Caddoan wares of the Belcher and late Bossier periods. It is about
the same thickness as the Alto wares of the Davis Site and the Coles
Creek-Early Plaquemine of central Louisiana, but differs from Davis
Alto in having less of the reddish and chocolate to black polished pottery and more buff to light gray. It shares bone tempering with Texas
(Davis ) Alto. In other respects of hardness and coloration, it more
nearly approaches Coles Creek ceramics, although seldom having the
orange tints and never the greenish tints of Coles Creek. It tends to be
thicker, harder, and lighter in color than Plaquemine pottery, although
some of the shapes and designs are similar to Plaquemine types.
A. Engraved Wares

Holly Fine Engraved type is represented by 10 sherds (Fig. 5, A, B),
one from a bottle, five from shallow bowls, and four uncertain. Indicated height of bowl rims is 2.5 to 3 em., vertical or mildly outsloping.
Colors are tan, gray and brown, no black polished. Two of the sherds
are bone tempered. Wall thickness is 6 to 9 mm. The engraved lines
are usually diagonal on the bowls and seven have excised triangles.
Hickory Fine Engraved type includes two whole vessels, both bottles, and nine sherds from four bowls, one bottle, two small jar or cup
forms, and two of uncertain form. The first bottle (Fig. 4, C) is 26 em.
high, 14 em. in body diameter, has an evenly tapered spout and shouldered body. Three lightly engraved lines encircle the shoulder. The
second bottle, which also occurred with Burial1, has the spout missing
but body intact. The body is 12.6 em. high, 15.2 em. in diameter, and
has eight engraved lines encircling the upper body area. Both of these
bottles are gray in color, with black fire clouds, and are clay tempered.
Eight of the sherds of this type (Fig. 5, E, G) are tan to gray with black
areas, while the ninth (Fig. 5, F) is black and polished, with crossengraved decoration. No other Hickory sherd is polished. Temper is
Fig. 4. Pottery From Burials. A, B, Smith port Plain bottles, V-1 04, 95. C, Hickory Fine
Engraved, V-96. D-G, Kiam Incised jars, V-1 06, 133, 94, 1 34 (note plain body on D,
vertical incising on E, fingernail punctating of F, Gl. H, Davis Incised, V-130. I, Untyped,
V-1 05 (plain body, scalloped rim with free punctations on lower surface). J, Smith port Plain
bowl from Allen Site. K-N, Smith port Plain bowls, V-99, 667, 668, 100. 0-P, Smith port
Plain miniatures, V-97, 152 . Q, Wilkinson Punctated (pinched minaturel, V-669 . R, Smithport Plain carinated bow/, V-1 01 .

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D

c

8

H

F

E

K
J

N
M

Q
0

2

4

6

B

10

CM

Fig. 5 . Engraved Sherds . A, B, Holly Fine Engraved . C, D, Holly or Hickory Fine Engraved .
E-G, Hickory Fine Engraved ; H, Untyped zig-zag engraved. 1-P, Carmel Engraved . 0 , Untyped with spurred engraved lines. R, Probable Maddox Engraved .

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

155

clay-grit or sherd, one with bone. The bowls appear to have vertical
or outsloping rims, with walls 5 to 7 mm. thick, but one sherd is from
an incurvate bowl, 4 mm. thick. Five of the sherds have horizontally
engraved lines, 4 to 9 mm. apart; three have diagonal parallel lines and
one has cross diagonals. The latter is a rim sherd and the rounded lip
ha s transverse notching 7- 9 mm. apart (Fig. 5, F) .
Six sherds could be either Holly or Hickory Fine Engraved (Fig. 5,
C, D ) . One is from the top of a bottle spout, another from a bottle shoulder, two are bowl sherds, and the other forms are doubtful. The bottle
sherds have horizontally engraved lines, the other four are diagonal.
One bowl sherd, light in surface color, is only 4 mm. thick. The surface
colors of both Holly and Hickory Fine Engraved types at this site are
more like the later (Phase 2 and 3) periods at the Davis Site ; the earlier
vessels at Davis were preponderantly dark in surface color.

Carmel Engraved Type
(Fig. 5, I-P )
This is presented as a new type, as it is a major engraved type at this
site-with 17 sherds, of which 11 are rim sherds-and has been
found with Alto pottery at five other sites in northwestern Louisiana.
Th ere were five Carmel Engraved sherds from the Colbert Site; four
each from Greer, Mounds Plantation, and Marston sites ; and three
from Chamarre Lake Site. The description is based on the Smithport
collection.
METHOD OF MANUFACTURE: Coiled.
PASTE

Temper: Clay-grit or ground sherd; bone in 2 of 17 sherds.
Texture: Compact, generally fine, occasionally coarse.
Color: Shades of gray from light to almost black, often on same sherd (fire
clouds); buff, tan and reddish-brown. Nearly half of the Smithport sample has
reddish-brown exteriors and interiors. Cores may be same color as exterior,
sometimes darker.

S urface Finish: Smoothed exteriors and interiors, a few with fai r polish, none
highly polished.
FORM

Wall Thickness: 5 to 7 mm., uniform.
Lip: Rounded, usually unmodified; occasional thinning.

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Base: Uncertain, probably mildly convex, circular.

Vessel Shape and Size: So far as presently known, open and carinated bowls only .
Rims are 3 to 7 em. in height, about equally divided between 3-5 and 5-7 em.
range, from an obtuse angle at the junction of base and rim. The bases appear
to be shallow; the rims mildly excurvate, or direct and slanted outward. A few
appear to be vertical. Curvatures suggest diameters of Z0- 30 em.
DECORATION

Treatment: Engraving.
Designs: Effected with heavy engraving on exteriors of rims only. Curving, wide
bands outlined by parallel single engraved lines, with transverse, widely spaced
lines producing a ladder effect. Usually two of such bands form arcs or meanders, with undecorated bands of similar width between them (Fig. 5, 1-K ) .
Occasionally one or more engraved lines flank the engraved bands or bisect the
intervening plain band. Some sherds (Fig. 5, M , N , P ) have straight instead
of curving bands, but otherwise seem to fit into the type.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
This type has occurred only in sites which have Alto Focus pottery; it has not
been found in Bossier Focus sites which lack established Alto types. In the Bossier
Focus, the related engraved type seems to be Maddox Engraved, which in
northwestern Louisiana has cross-hatched engraved bands, generally not curving
and most often vertical, as the major element. In central Louisiana Maddox
Engraved type has been extended to include curvilinear bands ~f cross-hatched
engraving (Suhm and Jelks, 196Z: Pl. 50 ) . The decoration on Plate 50, F of this
handbook is very much like Carmel Engraved and this vessel probably should
be included in this type instead of Maddox.
DISTRIBUTION
In addition to the Smithport Site, Carmel Engraved has been found at one
mound and four village sites in northwestern Louisiana.

There is one untyped engraved vessel and seven sherds. The vessel
(V-102), from Burial 1 is a bottle (with missing spout) of polished
black ware, decorated with engraved interlocking spiral design, four
times repeated. One sherd (Fig. 5, H) has a zig-zag engraved decoration with excisions at the angles, similar to the two sherds illustrated
from the Davis Site (Newell and Krieger: 1949, Fig. 34, S, T). Three
sherds have bands with cross hatching, probably Maddox Engraved
motifs, but the sherds are too small to be sure about the design (Fig. 5,
R) _A bottle sherd (Fig. 5, Q) has diagonal spurred engraved lines. Two
bowl sherds are from polished black wares, with designs which suggest the Glassell Engraved type (Webb, 1959: Fig. 118 ) _

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

157

B. Incised Pottery Types
Davis Incised type is represented by one vessel (Fig. 4, H ) and 17
sherds. The vessel is a deep, reddish-brown bowl, which curves outward from a slightly convex disc base, then is vertical to the rounded,
unmodified lip. It is 10 em. in height, 15.2 em. in greatest diameter.
There are five parallel, smoothed-over incised lines around the upper
body, placed about 1 em. apart. They are shallow and about 2 mm. in
width. The surfaces are smoothed and questionably polished. The 17
sherds (Fig. 6, A-E ) include 11 rim sherds, nine of which indicate
vertical walls, two outward sloping (but no excurvate) . Most of the
vessels seem to be deep bowls, but two sherds indicate shallower carinated bowls with inward curving or sloping rims. All are clay or grit
tempered, with walls 4.5 to 8 mm. thick. Three are black, others gray,
buff, light brown or tan in surface color; surfaces are smoothed and
one of the black sherds (Fig. 6, C) is polished lightly. The lips are
_rounded and unmodified except that most are thinned by an extra
outward curving of the interior wall. The incised lines are smoothed
over, 5 to 13 mm. apart and are 3 to 10 in number. Half of the lines
are less than 1 mm. in width, the others are between 1 and 2 mm. wide,
generally shallow and well executed.
Nine sherds are classified as Sanson Incised (Ford and Willey, 1940 )
because of the wide, shallow, smoothed incising in straight lines (Fig.
6, F, G ) . No rim sherds were found, hence patterning of the incising
is indefinite. Tempering is clay-grit, the surface coloring is gray to
black or dark brown, and the thickness is 5 to 8 mm. The incised lines
are 2.5 to 4.5 mm. in width and appear to have been made with tools
which had bluntly rounded or flat ends.
Two sherds (Fig. 6, H, I ) are possibly Mazique Incised (Ford, 1951 )
but may be well executed Dunkin Incised. They are light gray and
tan in color, and one is a rim sherd. The decoration consists of finely
made parallel incisions, closely placed in diagonal fields or herringbone effect on the upper body. Vessel shape is uncertain.
Coles Creek Incised type is represented by eight sherds, although it
is almost certain that some which are typed as Hardy or Kiam Incised
are in reality Coles Creek. In order to be certain of Coles Creek Period
wares at this site, I have included in this type only those sherds whose
paste characteristics are consistent and which have "overhanging"
parallel lines around the rim (Fig. 6, J) or characteristically placed
triangular punctations below the incised lines (Fig. 6, K ) . Surfaces are
smoothed and are buff or gray in color. The incisions are bold, horizon-

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

D

0

2

4

6

CM
Fig . 6 . Incised Sherds. A-E, Davis Incised lA resembles high rim of jars which are frequent in Haley polleryl. F, G, Sanson Incised. H, I, Mazique Incised . J , K, Coles Creek Incised. L-Q , Kiam or Hardy Incised (note outer lip notching or punclations on L-N, also suspension hole and subjacent hemiconical punctation on 0, almost certainly Hardy Incised} .

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

159

tal, and u sually more closely spaced than in Davis Incised . The subjacent triangles on four sherds are pressed into the paste m ore deeply
at the apex. It must be pointed out that it is not a simple ta sk, in studying sherds from northern Louisiana, to distinguish the four related
types which are characterized by parallel incisions around the rimDavis Incised, Coles Creek Incised, Hardy Incised, and Kiam Incisedunless the technique and paste are characteristic or a large part of the
vessel available. Much overlapping occurs.
One hundred and seventy four sherds from this site are included in
type Kiam Incised or Hardy Incised (Fig. 6, L-Q ). No attempt shall
be made to distinguish between these types, but the problem will be
pointed out and resolution left for future conferen ces. These sh erds
are characterized by parallel incised lines covering the rim or upper
part of the vessel. Fortunately, there are four complete vessels from
the burials (Fig. 4, D-G ) which are ty pical Kiam Incised (Suhm and
Jelks, 1962.: 89, Pl. 45 ) and established the presence of this type. V essel 106 (Fig. 4, D ) is a heavy, thick-walled cylindrical jar with a
slightly recurved and rounded lip. It is 11 em. high , 10.6 em. in diameter, clay tempered, and dark reddish-brown in color. Decoration consists of numerous scratchy incisions covering the upper 3 em .; it is
plain below this zone. Vessel133 (Fig. 4, E) is a jar with narrow excu rvate rim and semiglobular body. It is 12. em. in height and in greatest w idth, and is clay tempered, with irregular light and dark gray
surface color. The rim has three to four irregular, wavy incised lines
which are not continuous ; the body is covered with vertical, firm incisions spaced 4 to 7 mm. apart. Vessel 94 (Fig. 4, F ) is a firm, intact,
well made cylindrical jar, clay tempered, with dark gray-brown surface color except for a few light fire clouds. The upper 2..5 em. has irregular horizontal incisions, 5 to 7 in number, and the remaining body
exterior is covered with fingernail punctations, spaced rather regularly
but not in exact rows. Vessel 134 (Fig. 4, G) is a jar with semiglobular
body, narrowed toward the rim, which is vertical. The clay tempered
paste is softer than the other three vessels and is fired black over the
exterior, dark gray on the interior. It is 11 em. high, 14 em. wide.
D ecoration consists of five firmly incised lines around the rim exterior,
spaced 3 to 5 mm. apart, and paired fingernail punctations or pinches
covering the body. These vessels demonstrate the three most frequ ent
body treatment techniques described for the Kiam Incised type .
The 174 sherds present more variation, and include 82. rim pieces.
Temper is clay-grit or ground sherd except for five which are bone
tempered. The surface colors cover the range of tan, buff, yellow-

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

orange, light to dark gray, reddish-brown and black; the light colors
predominate. Interior and exterior surfaces are smoothed. Wall thickness is 5 to 10 mm., averaging 6.5 to 7 mm. The rim sherds show that
about half have excurvate rims, 1,4 to 1;5 of the vertical, and the others
slant outward. Five have a row of punctations or notches on the rim
exterior (Fig. 6, L-N ), and one has transverse incisions on a flat lip.
The lips are more often rounded, but about 1,4 are flat ; thinning may
occur but not thickening.
The incising varies from thin scratchy lines made with a pointed
tool, to rough and irregular (Fig. 6, Q), to firm, well made and regular
(Fig. 6, L, M , P ). The number of lines varies from two to 20 and the
spacing from two to 10 mm. apart, often varying on the same sherd.
Generally they are placed at 3 to 5 mm. intervals. Although most
were produced with a pointed tool, a few were made with a blunt or
square-tipped tool. Five have hemiconical or oval punctations below
the last line (Fig. 6, 0 ) .
These characteristics as a unit do not fit either Kiam or Hardy Incised types . The predominant shape, with everted or excurvate rim is
more like Kiam, as are bone tempering, and either punctated bodies
(two vessels, two sherds ) or vertical incising on bodies (one vessel, two
sherds ) . The paste and surface coloration are more like Hardy Incised
(except for the five with bone temper), as are the subjacent punctations (Fig. 6, 0 ), occasional stabs or punctations at the ends of lines (in
central Louisiana, this occurs more often in Yokena and French Fork
Incised than in Hardy ), plain bodies (one vessel, five sherds ), cutting
away of the body wall just below the incisions (Fig. 4, D ), and flattened lips. Not described for either Kiam or Hardy types are notched
or incised lips, vertical rows of plowed-up paste where the incisions
meet (Fig. 6, L ) or narrow undecorated gaps at this junction, which
occur on a number of the Smithport sherds. The conclusion seems
obvious that Kiam Incised, Hardy Incised and the similar wares from
this area are local or regional variations of a single widespread ty pe.
The Dunkin Incised type presents the same problem. Although the
sherds assigned to this type have more similarities to type Dunkin Incised than to any other, there are some similarities to M azique and
Manchac Incised types of central Louisiana, and some items which
differ from all of these types. Again, regional or temporal variations of
a single type are indicated and should be subjected to study.
There are 117 sherds of Dunkin Incised which show incising in
varying directions (Fig. 7, A-L ), usually including diagonal lines, and
65 sherds (Fig. 7, 0-R) which show only diagonal lines but are also

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

161

assigned to Dunkin. Thirty of the former group and 25 of the latter are
rim sherds. Paste characteristics, color, and wall thickness are the same
as those described for Kiam Incised. The majority of the rim sherds
indicate everted or excurvate shapes, possibly a fourth are direct and
vertical, none incurvate. Indicated vessel shapes are semiglobular jars
with flaring rims, similar jars with narrowing at the neck and vertical
or slightly everted rims, cylindrical vessels, and simple deep bowls.
Lips are usually narrowed by outward curving of the interior wall, but
may be rounded or occasionally flattened. There are no nodes or handles, and only one rim shows notching.
Incisions are generally bolder than in the Kiam Incised type, spaced
3 to 8 mm. apart, and seldom smoothed over. On the 117 sherds with
lines in varying directions, 52 were made with a round-tipped tool, 47
with a pointed tool, 16 with square-tipped, and two with forked tool
(Fig. 7, D ). In the instance of the rim sherds with diagonal incising, 17
of the 25 slant downward from right to left (Fig. 7, P -R ), eight from
left to right (Fig. 7, 0 ) . The lines may produce diamonds (Fig. 7, C),
triangles (Fig. 7, A, D , J ), chevrons (Fig. 7, B) or, rarely, squares (Fig.
7, I ) . Hemiconical or oval punctations are placed in a single row below the incising in two instances (Fig. 7, L ), above in one (Fig. 7, E ) .
The trait of making firm punctations at the ends of the lines (Fig. 7,
F , H -J) is more frequent than in type Kiam Incised, and gaps are left at
times (Fig. 7, F ). One sherd (Fig. 7, P ) has a wide, smoothed band
interrupting the previously placed incisions below the lip. The num erous body or rim-body sherds which show fields of varying incising
more nearly resemble Dunkin Incised from the Davis Site in having
full body decoration than the central Louisiana Manchac and Mazique
types, where the decoration is usually confined to a narrow rim band.
Cross incising (Fig. 7, M, N ), which is called Harrison Bayou Incised (from the Harrison Bayou Site on Caddo Lake ) in central Louisiana, but is included in Dunkin Incised in eastern Texas ( Suhm and
Jelks, 1962: Pl. 19 ), is present on nine sherds from Smithport. They
are clay tempered, light to dark gray in color, with smoothed surfaces.
The incisions vary from narrow and closely placed to firm, wide lines.
Curvilinear incising is present on two sherds. These resemble curvilinear incising from the Sanson Site in central Louisiana which has
been tentatively termed Neild Incised.

C. Punctated and Punctated-Incised Types
Pennington Punctated-Incised type is represented by 36 sherds (Fig.

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

2

4

CM

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

163

8, A-F ) . Most of these derive from open carinated bowls with excurvate
rims which are 4 to 7 em. in height, but a few seem to be rims of recurved jars. Eight are chocolate brown in color, others tan, gray and
brown-black. The paste is firm, hard in all but two sherds, with
smoothed but not polished surfaces. Two sherds are tempered with
bone, the others with clay-grit or sherd. Wall thickness is in the range
of 5 to 9 mm. , most specimens being 6 to 7 mm. The punctations are
consistently placed in fields which are outlined by single deeply incised lines; the fields are in diagonal bands, diamonds or triangles. The
punctations and incised lines are bold and the 36 sherds include punctations made with a pointed or round-tipped tool in 23 instances,
comma-shaped in four, square (Fig. 8, E ) in five, and triangular in
four.
Eleven sherds show the hybrid Pennington-Crockett design described in the Davis report (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 101 ) . Shapes
and paste characteristics are described above; two sherds are soft,
chocolate brown in color. One has an incurving rim and a suspension
hole (Fig. 8, I ) . The bordering incised line is curved (Fig. 8, G-I ) ;
otherwise these sherds do not differ from the Pennington type. Seven
have rounded punctations, two are comma-shaped, one rectangular,
and one square.
Another group of 19 sherds shows zone punctations which differ in
certain respects from the typical Pennington described above and possibly are nearer to Rhinehart Punctated (Ford, 1951: 83-85). These
19 sherds (Fig. 8, J-0 ) have the same range of paste and coloration;
five are of the softer chocolate brown ware. Rim and body sherds are
represented and in only one instance (Fig. 8, 0) is it certain that the
rim is from an open carinated bowl as are the Pennington sherds. One
heavy sherd (Fig. 8, J) which is 12 mm. thick, suggests a globular vessel which narrows at the neck and recurves to upright at the rim. Another sherd includes the lower rim area which is decorated with zoned
punctatio:J.s and incisions, and the adjoining upper body which is plain.
Char acteristic of this group is the alternation of punctated and incised
field s, or the outlining of punctated zones by multiple incised lines.
The punctations are triangular in three instances, square in one,
comma-shaped in six, round or oval in five, small pits in three, and
crescentic in one.
Fig . 7. Incise d Sherds. A-L, Dun kin Incised lnote C, a larg e sherd with ty pica l des ign ;
punctations w ith lines on E, F, L: rectangular des ign on II . M, N, Harriso n Bayou Incis e d .
0-R , Diagonally incised rim she rds , probab ly Dunkin Incised .

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D

F

E

.

I

•

~

0

. t

·P

0

2

I

I

41

I

CM

6I

8I

10
I

R

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

165

Free punctations made with tools, without zoning or incising, are
present on one vessel (Fig. 4, I ) and 19 sherds (Fig. 8, Q, R ). Paste and
color are as described above; one is bone tempered, six are soft, chocolate brown in color. Rim and body sherds are represented but shapes of
vessels are uncertain. The punctations are triangular in seven instances, comma-shaped in three, square in five, round in three, and
crescentic in two. The vessel (V-1 05 ) is a semiglobular bowl with
plain body and scalloped, everted rim. The lower surface of the rim is
covered with free punctations. The relative increase in frequency of
triangular punctations in this group is significant, in view of the fact
that the Rhinehart Punctated type in central Louisiana features triangular punctations (Ford, 1951: 83), whereas they are infrequent in
Pennington Punctated-Incised at the Davis Site (Newell and Krieger,
1949: 106-8 ) . The absence of ring punctations at Smithport is remarkable, in view of their frequency at both the Davis Site and in
central Louisiana.
A group of six sherds has minute free or zoned punctations. The
sherds are thinner walled than average, 4 to 6 mm. , and five of the six
have black surfaces and soft pastes. The sixth is buff colored, thin and
has a strongly excurvate, narrow rim. Another (Fig. 8, P ) is from an
open carinated bowl and has notches along the carina. All of this group
may relate to the Bossier ceramics at this site, instead of Alto. They
bear some similarity to Dupree Incised of Plaquemine ceramics in
central Louisiana (Quimby, 1951 : 122-3) .
Weches Fingernail Impressed ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 153, Pl. 77;
Newell and Krieger, 1949: 118-20, Fig. 46) is represented by 19 sherds
of characteristic design (Fig. 9, A-E). Nine of these include the lip
area, but all appear to be rim sherds. In three instances some of the
subjacent body wall is attached; on two of these the body is plain, on
the third (Fig. 9, E ) the body has diagonal incised lines suggesting
Dunkin- like decoration. These three have globular bodies and outward
curving or slanting rims, 4 to 4.5 em. high. Other vessels seem to be
cylindrical with vertical rims, and open carinated bowls are possible.
Five of the 19 sherds are chocolate brown in color with clay tempered paste; the others range from tan and buff to dark gray and
reddish-brown. Wall thickness is in the range of 4 to 9 mm., the
Fig . 8 . Punctated Sherds. A-F, Pennington Punctated-/ncised . G-1, Pennington -Crockett
hybrid (I has incurving ri m, hole for suspension). J-0, Penn ington or Rhinehart Punctated IN
has triangular punctations between horizontal lines in Coles Creek tradition). P, Similar to
Dupree Incised but shape suggests Bossier sherd . Q, R, Random punctations .

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~ 1. •
......
.~

·~

"

'ti

..
.

4

6

CM

8

10

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

167

majority 5-7 mm. Typically, the decoration (Fig. 9, A, B, D, E ) is with
widely spaced horizontal incised lines with arcs or quarter circles between; the arcs could have been cut with the fingernail and occasionally are fingernail impressed, but in most the arc is too large, 1.8
to 4 em. (my thumbnail is 1.6 em. wide ) . Four of the sherds have the
arcs without intervening lines (Fig. 9, C).
Four sherds are identical with this group except that the spaces between the horizontal lines have triangular instead of semilunar punctations (Fig. 9, F ) . Seven other sherds have round or oval punctations
in single rows between incised lines (Fig. 9, R, S, U ) . I have not included these with type Pennington Punctated-Incised, as Krieger did
with some reservation (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 106 ) . Neither have
I assigned them to Coles Creek Incised, Hardy Incised or Rhinehart
Punctated, as Ford did, also probably with some reservation (Ford,
1951: Pls. 16, L; 17, 20, H ) , but have preferred to describe them separately as interesting examples of regional variations and typing difficulties in eastern Texas, and northern and central Louisiana.
One sherd (Fig. 9, T ) has a single row of semilunar punctations and
otherwise plain surface. It is thick, clay-grit tempered, and buff colored.

Wilkinson Fingernail Punctated type is represented by one vessel
and 153 sherds. This was described as a minor type in central Louisiana (Ford and Willey, 1940: 50; Ford, 1951: 88-89) to include clay
tempered vessels with fingernail punctations scattered over the vessel
surface, arranged in irregular rows, or pinched in vertical rows. In that
area it is rarely combined with incising and usually covers the entire
vessel. Ford ( 1951: 88 ) thought it occurred at the latter part of the
Coles Creek period and reached maximum popularity in the succeeding
Plaquemine Period or later, but it was missing in Plaquemine context
at Bayou Goula (Quimby, 1957) and Medora (Quimby, 1951) sites.
In the Davis Site report (Newell and Krieger, 1949 ) it was not established as a type, as Krieger considered fingernail punctations to be a
body treatment present in several types (Kiam, Weches, Dunkin, and
Duren Neck Banded ) ; he reported 20,000 body sherds with fingernail
roughening from a total of 96,000 sherds. The difference in attitude
Fig . 9 . Nail Imp ressed and Punctated She rds . A-E , Wech es Fingerna il Impressed . F,
Weches Variant wi t h tool pun cta tions. G, H, Sinner linear Punctoted. 1- K, M- P, Wilkinson
Pun cto ted. L, Ridge pinche d , sim ila r to Killough Pinched. Q , Wil ki nso n Punctoted body,

Kiam Incised rim . R, S, U, Narrow bands w ith round or oval punctations . T, Single row of
sem iluna r punctations .

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

toward this type on the part of these investigators is understandable
when we consider the differences in frequency and u se of the decoration method in the two areas, also that Ford and his co-workers u sed all
sherds in typing, whereas Krieger translated sherds to vessels and u sed
r im decoration as the determinant.
In northwestern Louisiana I have found Wilkin son Punctated a
useful ty pe in sherd collection studies because of its great frequency in
Alto wares, its rarity in Coles Creek, and the rapid shift from nail
roughening to ridging and brushing as body treatments concurrent
with the development of Bossier, Belcher, and other later Caddoan
ceramics. Wilkinson Punctated is therefore a good indicator of early
(Alto) Caddoan occupation at a given site. At Smithport Landing there
were 153 sherds (Fig. 9, I-K, M-P) and one burial vessel, a pinched
toy jar (Fig. 4, Q), of this type. The vessel is 6 em. high, 5 em. wide,
made of thick clay-tempered paste, roughly finished and decorated
with three horizontal rows of nail pinching. The sherds include only
four rims (Fig. 9, I, 0 , P ), showing how rarely this decoration, in
northern Louisiana, covers the vessel. Most of the other sherds are
recognizably body sherds, and in eight instances (as in Fig. 9, Q) the
body-rim juncture is present. The latter sherds have Kiam Incised
decoration on the rim and appear to have come from a modified globular body shape with directly or mildly everted rim. Nine of the 153
sherds are bone tempered, the remainder are clay-grit or ground sherd,
rather granular and coarse. The walls are thick in many instances, the
range 4 to 10 mm. with the majority 7 to 8 mm. Many of the sherds are
large (Fig. 9, I, J ) indicating large, heavy jar forms. Surface colors
range from tan and buff to dark grays and a few reddish-browns, with
more tendency to darker colors than in other types . The majority have
irregular fingernail gouges (Fig. 9, I, J ), but some are pinched (Fig. 9,
K, M, N ) and others impressed more delicately and r egularly (Fig. 9,

0-Q ) .
Eight sherds have distinctly pinched-up ridges (Fig. 9, L ) which
are circular or curvilinear in six instances, vertical in two. The burial
vessel (Fig. 4, Q) may belong with this group, although it has been
tentatively classed as Wilkinson Punctated . The group with pinched
ridges bears considerable resemblance to the type Killough Pinched
( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 91, Pl. 46 ) of Frankston and Titus foci, but,
in the absence of other types characteristic of these assemblages, will
not be so assigned.
Sinner Linear Punctated is a type which so far has been confined to
Bossier and Haley foci (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 143 ; Webb, 1948: 114)

169

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

and the four sherds of this type from the Smith port Landing, although
similar in paste, thickness and color to the Alto sherds, are probably
referable to the subsequent (presumably) Bossier period at this site.
Two are rim sherds; one of these (Fig. 9, G) has parallel, vertical
linear punctating; another (Fig. 9, H ) and a body sherd have horizontal lines; the fourth is uncertain. All have linear nail punctating
and the more typical linear tool punctating is absent.

D. Stamped Types
One sherd of Chevalier Stamped is small ( 3 X 2 em.) but has definite rocker stamping. It is of firm paste, tan exterior surface color with
a black fire cloud at one edge, and black interior. Paste is homogeneous
clay-grit with several bone fragments (accidental?); both surfaces are
smoothed but not polished. In general appearance it resembles many
of the Alto sherds from this site.

E. Ridged Types
The eleven sherds of Belcher Ridged type (Fig. 10, G, H) are generally thinner and darker than the Alto wares. Six are dark chocolate
to black on both surfaces and Lhrough the cores; the other five have
light buff to dark gray surfaces, four of these with black cores. One is
bone tempered, all others clay-grit. No rims are represented and the
body sherds are 3 to 5 mm. in wall thickness. Typically, the elevated
ridges are vertical.

F. Brushed and Brushed-Incised types
There are 38 sherds of the Pease Brushed-Incised type (Fig. 10,
A-F). The paste is smooth, clay-grit tempered except for one bone
tempered; interiors are smoothed, exteriors roughened all over with the
decoration. The color range is about as for other types; eight sherds
are chocolate brown to black and slightly soft. Thickness is 4-5 mm. in
13 of the 38 sherds, 5 to 9 mm. in the remainder. The vertical panels
characteristic of this type are separated by notched applique ridges in
28 (Fig. 10, B, D-F), by rows of tool or nail punctations in seven (Fig.
10, A), and by applique nodes in three (Fig. 10, C). The panels are
roughened by diagonal incisions in 24 instances (Fig. 10, A, C), by
vertical incising in 10 (Fig. 10, E, F), by horizontal incising in one, and
by brushing in three (Fig. 10, B, D) .

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

171

Karnack Brushed-Incised type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 85 ) is applied to barrel-shaped vessels with everted rims, decorated with vertical incising or brushing. Thirty -four sh erds from Smithport fit this
category, although it is possible that some of the vertically incised body
sherds derive from Kiam Incised or W eches Fingernail Impressed vessels. There are only three rim sherds, one rolled (Fig. 10, L ), the other
two everted. The paste, temper, color range, and wall thickness are no
different from other types; seven of the sherds are dark chocolate
brown in color. Only six sherds are less than 5 mm. in thickness and
the average is 6.5 mm.; brushing is used on six of the sherds, vertical
incising on the oth ers, varying from firm to sloppy and scratch y.
The other brushed sherds from this site fall into the type which we
now call Bossier Brushed (formerly Maddox Brushed included these
and the vertically brushed included now in Karnack Brushed-Incised ) .
It is very similar to or identical with Plaquemine Brushed type of the
Plaquemine and late Coles Creek periods in central Louisiana. Chief
indicated differences are rolled or narrow everted rims in some of the
Bossier type, whereas they are direct or slightly everted in Plaquemine;
more frequ ent cross brushing in Plaquemine than in Bossier; bone
temper in a few of the Bossier, absent in Plaquemine; and an occasional row of punctations below the br ushed zone in Plaquemine, not
found in Bossier. These are minor differences, easily attributable to
regional variations, and it would probably be desirable to define a single type, with recognition of minor local variations.
There are 31 Bossier Brushed sherds (Fig. 10, I-K, M ), of which
seven are from r ims. Temper is clay-grit or ground sherd; one is bone
tempered. Surface colors include two black, four chocolate brown, the
others lighter shades of tan, buff, and gray. Only five sh erds are 5 m m.
or less in thickness; others are 5.5-1 1 mm. , averagin g 7.3 mm. (It is
thicker than most types. ) The seven rim sherds have horizontal brushing on two, diagonal on four, both on one. The body sh erds show a
similar distribution, with diagonal brushing predominating. Cross
brushing or incising is present on seven (Fig. 10, M ) .
G. Smithport Plain Type and Other Plain Sherds
There are nine plain vessels (Fig. 4, A, B, K-P, R) from th e burials
Fig . 10. Brushed , Ridged , and Late Wares. A-F , Pease Brushed-incised (note panel separation by punctalions on A , applique noiched ridges on B, D-F, and applique nodes on Cl.
G , H, Belcher Ridged. 1-K, M Bossier or Plaquemine Brushed. L, Karnack Brushed-Incised

(note rolled rim, rarel. N-S, Late Glendora Focus sherds IN , S, shell tempered , incised; 0 , P,
engraved, untyped ; Q, linear punctated , untyped ; R, Hodges Engraved!.

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and 644 plain sherds from this site which apparently relate to the
earlier ceramics. The vessels, all identified as Smithport Plain, include
three bottles, four simple bowls, one carinated bowl, and one recurved
jar. Smithport Plain therefore runs the gamut of vessel forms common
to decorated types; cylindrical jar forms are included in the sherds.
The 644 plain sherds include 65 rim sherds (the only definite Smithport sherds), one-fourth as many as the total rim sherds in the decorated types and exceeded only by Kiam Incised with 82 rim sherds. The
total number of plain sherds in our collection is altered by the element
of selectivity in surface collecting; we were less likely to save plain
sherds unless they were large or were rim sherds. The frequency of
plain wares at this period contrasts with the situation in the later Bossier and Belcher ceramics, where undecorated vessels are infrequent.
For example, at the Belcher Site (Webb, 1959) there were only nine
plain vessels among the total of 195, and plain sherds constituted only
44 per cent of total sherds (most of these were from undecorated portions of decorated vessels).
The 65 Smithport Plain rims include 15 which are everted, 26 vertical, and 18 incurvate; additionally there are rims from two simple,
shallow bowls, one rim with an exterior roll, one everted rim with interior bevel and exterior strap thickening, one bottle spout, and one
shallow toy dish. The everted rims are unmodified in seven instances,
and thinned in eight with rounded lips. Lip thinning of everted rims
was effected by exaggerating the outward curve of the rim interior;
that of incurvate bowls by exaggerating the exterior curve. The vertical rims are unmodified with rounded lips in 12 instances, thinned and
rounded in eight, flat in four, and have beveled exteriors in two. The
incurvate rims are thinned with rounded lips in nine, unmodified with
rounded lips in five, flattened lips in two, externally beveled in one, and
thickened with rounding in one.
The plain sherds include 20 recognizable as bases, nine of which are
complete flat discs. These range from 6 to 13 em. in diameter and are
6 to 12 mm. thick. One large basal sherd has a smooth central perforation, 13 mm. in diameter, and rounded edges. It possibly was used as a
spindle whorl. These are frequently found at Bossier and Belcher sites,
but usually are smaller and lighter.
An additional46 plain sherds show the wall-base junction. Eight of
these are from open flat bowls, one from a deeper bowl, one from a
bottle, four from miniature vessels and 32 from jar, deep bowl or cylindrical vessel forms.

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

173

The plain sherds have paste characteristics similar to the decorated
types already described. Nine of the 644 sherds are bone tempered.

Glendora Focus and Other Late Ceramics
A group of 37 sherds have characteristics completely alien to the
ceramics described above. They are lighter feeling, often with porous
surfaces or with obvious shell tempering, confirmed by tests. Eight are
engraved; a shell tempered sherd, reddish in color (Fig. 10, P ), with
horizontal engraved lines from which triangular spurs project; four
other shell tempered with red or orange color and engraved lines, untyped; two black shell tempered with indeterminate engraving, and
one black polished clay tempered sherd of type Hodges Engraved (Fig.
10, R) .
There are 11 sherds, shell tempered and orange to gray in color,
with curvilinear incising (Fig. 10, N , S) . This ware was once termed
Wilkinson Negative Meander but was never formally described. Another name should be chosen, because the Wilkinson Site, like Smithport, is primarily Alto with transition to Bossier, and has a minimal
late (Natchitoches ) occupation.
Two sherds have linear punctations on shell tempered ware (Fig.
10, Q) and two others, untyped, have horizontal incising. There are
14 plain, 4- 6 mm. thick, of which nine are shell tempered, two bone,
three clay.

Other Pottery Artifacts and Negative Ceramic Traits
A fragment of perforated pottery base, presumably a spindle whorl
fragment, was mentioned in the discussion of plain pottery. There
were also three fragments of fired daub with grass impressions and
one flattened surface. One tiny cone-shaped pottery fragment suggested a figurine or doll leg. No other clay or ceramic artifacts were
found. Noticeable by their absence are pipes or pipe stem fragments,
animal figurines or heads, clay labrets and ear ornaments, all of which
are not unusual in this area.
Other negative ceramic traits are the absence of shell temper, except in the small group of obviously late wares; red filming; pigment
impression into the lines of decoration; handles or other vessel appendages; squared bases (not unusual elsewhere in Coles Creek and
Alto ceramics) ; squared or castellated rims (Vessel 105, Fig. 4, I is
the only instance of scalloped rim); vessel effigies, either whole vessel
or rim attachments; stamping (one foreign sherd), and cord marking.

174

.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PoTTERY ALIGNMENTS AND SEQUENcEs

Table I shows the assignment of burial vessel and sherd types to
various ceramic complexes, based on the descriptions of Ford ( 1951 ),
Ford and Willey ( 1940 ), and Quimby ( 1951 ) for central Louisiana ;
Newell and Krieger ( 1949 ), and Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954) for
east Texas Alto; and the author's publications ( 1948; 1959 ) and collections from northern and central Louisiana. It becomes apparent that
neat typing and alignment of sherd collections from this site, true of
many other sites in northwestern Louisiana, is a phantasy. This site
lies within a broad contact zone, extending into southwestern Arkansas
and eastern Texas, between the expanding populations and flow ering
cultures of the lower Mississippi-Red River confluence in central
TABLE 1
Pottery T ype or Group

Whole
Vessels
Distinctive Alto T ypes
Holly Fine Engraved
Hickory Fine Engraved
Holly or Hickory Engraved
Carmel Engraved
Davis In cised
Kiam Incised vessels
Pennington Punctated-Incised
Pennington-Crockett H y brid
Weches Fingernail Impressed
Smithport Plain
Subtotal
Distinctive Coles Creek
or Troyville T ypes
Coles Creek Incised
Chevalier Stamped
Mazique Incised
Subtotal
Types shared by Alto and
Coles Creek
Wilkinson Punctated
Triangular punctations between
parallel lines
Subtotal
Types shared by Alto, Coles
Creek, Bossier and Plaquemine

z

No. of
S herds

%

10
9
6
17
17

0.66
0.60
0.48
1.13
1.1 3

36
11
19
65

2.40
0.73
1.26
4.36

4

9
16

190

8

12.67

0.53
0.06
0.1 3

2

11

153

0.72

10.20
0.26

4

157

10.46

175

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

TABLE 1 (Continued )
Pottery T ype or Group

Whol e
Vess~ls

Kiam- Hardy In cised
Dunkin-Manchac Incised
Harrison Bayou In cised
Sanson I ncisgd
F ree and atypical zoned punctations
( Pennington-Rhinehart )
Small, zoned pun cta tion s
(Dupree-like)
Round puncta tions between lin es
I solated, s ~milunar punctations
Subtotal
D :stinctive B::> ssier T yp es
Pease Brushed-/ ncised
Belcher Ridged
Sinner Linear Pun ~ta ted
M addc;x Engraved
Glassell Engraved
Subtotal
T ypes Shared by Bossier and
Plaquemine
Bossier-Plaquemine Brush<Jd
Karnack Brushed- Incised
Subtotal
Uncerta in Affili ation or U ntyped
Curvilinear In c~se d
Unty ped engraved
Plain bod y sherds
F ing ~ rna il pinched
Subtotal
Subtotal, Early Occupation
Late Occ upation , Possibly
Historic
Shell tempered curvilinea r
incised
Shell temper ed engraved
H odges Engraved
Other untyped decorated
Late plain

No. of
Sherds

%

174
18Z
9
9

11.60
1Z.1 3
0.60
0.60

38

Z.53

6
7

0.40
0.46
0.06

Z.53
0. 73
0.26
O.ZO
0.1 3

38
11
4
3

z

3.86

58

Z.06
Z.Z6

31
34

4.33

65

z
z

0.1 3
O.ZO
38.60
0.53

579
8
59 1
1498

19

11
7
1
4
14

Subtotal
Grand Total

Z8.40

4Z6

37
1535

39.46
100.00

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Louisiana and Mississippi on one side and the four-state Caddoan area
on the other, in post-Hopewell-Marksville times.
As a result (or as evidence) of this cultural admixture and interchange, we see large groups of sherds from this site, in the punctated
and incised categories, which cannot with impunity be assigned to a
previously described type in a specific cultural assemblage. They could
be as easily assigned to a companion type in one, two or even three
other surrounding assemblages. Only by having whole vessels available-from which details of vessel size and shape, and decoration can
be determined-or by correlation of sherds with distinctive types, may
one draw tentative conclusions about affiliation. I have therefore found
it necessary (Table 1) to list certain types from this site as possibly
deriving from Alto or Coles Creek ceramics, others from Alto, Coles
Creek, Bossier or Plaquemine, and yet a third group of brushed and
incised which might derive, insofar as characteristics of a given sherd
or group of sherds indicate, from Bossier or Plaquemine. The absence
of distinctive Plaquemine types eliminates this assemblage from consideration, but distinctive types of Alto, Coles Creek and Bossier are
present and give our clues for major alignments. We should be able
to work on the assumption that the indeterminate types will derive
from the three complexes, Alto, Coles Creek and Bossier, in about the
same proportion as these complexes are represented by distinctive
types.
It appears, then, that the major complex at this site is Alto; certainly
the burial pottery is of this complex. Coles Creek is present to a minor
extent and it is probable that some of the uncertain punctated and incised sherds are from Hardy, Manchac, and Rhinehart types. Finally,
occupation seems to have lasted into the Alto-Bossier transition to the
stage when distinctive Bossier Focus types had developed, so that there
is a respectable representation of this period. The brushed wares and
some of the incised and punctated also probably relate to the Bossier
pottery complex. It is improbable, however, that Bossier occupation
lasted very long, certainly not long enough for a transition to late
Glendora Focus times when the small group of shell tempered sherds
would have been made. The site was probably deserted for a long time,
then briefly occupied by late Natchitoches-related people, possibly in
the historic period. The Y atasi village mentioned by Marcelo De So to
(D'Antoni, 1961a ) is to be considered.
STONE ARTIFACTS

Dart Points
The 61 larger projectile points which are classified as dart points

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

177

are, with few exceptions, comparatively small and rough. Most are
made of quartzite, cherts, and petrified wood found locally. Thirty
five are of tan chert, four of petrified wood, two of red chert, six of
white or light gray quartzite, and others of varying shades of brown,
or mottled materials.
Gary points (Fig. 11, N -P) total 14; with most made of tan chert,
two of petrified wood, and one of white quartzite. The range in length
is 2.8 to 5.6 em. with nine of the 14 in the category of Small Gary
(Ford and Webb, 1956: 52) . The latter are less than 4.5 em. in length.
Ellis points (Fig. 11 , Q-S ) number 16, of which 12. are made of tan,
gray or yellow local cherts, two of petrified wood. The length varies
from 2.6 to 4.6 em., the width 1.5 to 2.9 em. Shoulders tend to be
straight, only two having barbs. Stem bases are usually straight or
mildly convex.
Carrollton points (Fig. 11, X ) , four in number, are made of materials different from the prevailing tan chert. One each is of granular
quartzite, waxy gray chert, white chert, and black chert. They are 4.1
to 4.5 em. long, 2.3 to 2.8 em. wide. Stems are not smoothed.
Kent points total five (Fig. 11 , T, U), and are typically crude in
manufacture. They are of gray, tan, and mottled cherts. Lengths are
3. 7 em. to 4.5 em., widths 1.6 to 2..4 em.; they are somewhat smaller
than those in eastern Texas ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962) .
The three Pontchartrain points (Fig. 11, EE, FF ) are the largest
and best made points from this site. Two are of light tan chert, the
third of darker tan. Lengths are 7.7, 9.3, and 9.7 em.; widths 2.5, 2.9,
and 3.2 em., respectively. The blades are rounded on one face, ridged
on the other, have good large flake scars, and typical fine retouch at the
edges. One (Fig. 11, FF) has an asymmetrically placed stem ; another
( Fig. 11, EE) has a rectangular stem and short barbs; the third has a
contracting stem.
One projectile point (Fig. 11, Y ) is hesitantly called Ensor because
of the low, narrow side notches and straight stem base. It is small, 3. 7
em. long and 1.8 em. wide, of tan chert, roughly flaked . The blade
edges are convex and irregular serrated.
Two specimens have outlines like Desmuke points but are made of
poor materials, petrified wood and gnarled chert, and the typing is
questionable. Both are thick, with bifacial ridges. A third of similar
appearance has an Almagre-like basal tip, but is much smaller than
this type, 5 em. long, 2.5 em. wide.
Two points are classified as Elam (Fig. 11 , V, W). They are short,.
thick and stubby, slightly asymmetrical and identical in size, 3.5 em.
long, 2.3 em. wide. They are made of tan and brown quartzite.

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

K

Q

R

D

L

s

E

G

F

H

N

M

0

w

v

u

T

cc

DO

JJ

MM
2

NN
4

00
6

8

KK

pp
10

CM
Fig . 11. Projectile Points and Chipped Stone Tools . A, B, Alba type . C, D, Hayes. E, F,
Friley. G , Maud . H, Cliflton . I, Un :yped . J , Catahoula. K-M, Colbert. N-P, Gary. Q-S, Ellis .
T, U, Kent . V, W, Elam . X, Carrollton . Y, possible Ensor . Z-DD , Untyped . EE , FF, Pontchartrain. GG- 11 , Rough blades . JJ , KK , Drills . LL, [nd scraper. MM -PP, Small triangular and
ovate scrapers.

179

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

Twelve projectile points are unclassified. Three of these are broken.
A group of four (Fig. 11, Z) is characterized by rough manufacture,
irregular wide blades with poor tips, and small, poorly formed stems.
Similar specimens have been found at other sites in north Louisiana,
never in large numbers. Possibly they were used as hafted knives or
scrapers. One specimen (Fig. 11, AA ) has long, shallow side notches
which are smoothed and a stubby, poorly made blade. Possibly it is a
reworked Yarbrough point or an atypical Trinity point. A small point
of gray quartzite (Fig. 11 , BB ) has blade edge notches and expanded
stem resembling Evans points, but it is much smaller than Evans. Similar small points with one to several blade edge notches have been
found on sites in Bossier and De Soto parishes; they will probably be
typed by another name than Evans (the name Sinner has been suggested because of their frequency at the Jim Sinner Site).
A small point of white chert (Fig. 11 , CC) has a greater width than
length; the base is wide and short; one shoulder is barbed, the other
barely suggested. Another small point has a rectangular stem and triangular blade but is much smaller than Carrollton, or even Elam
points.
The most unusual point (Fig. 11 , DD ) has a long rectangular stem,
a small shoulder on one side only, and a short, asymmetrical blade.
Blade and stem edges are beveled bilaterally on each face, with fine retouch flaking which serrates all edges. The base is mildly concave and
is thinned by removal of a long, shallow channel flake on one face, a
shorter channel flake on the other, terminating in a hinge fracture .
The base and lower stem edges are smoothed.

Arrow Points
There are 55 small projectile points sufficiently inta ct for typing and
12 broken so that typing is impossible. Materials include tan, red,
brown, and gray chert from local gravels; two gray-white chert; one
novaculite, and two dark brown to black flint.
Alba points (Fig. 11 , A , B), 20 in number, are mostly of tan or
reddish-brown local cherts. They vary from slender to wide, with a
range of 2 to 3.8 em. in length. Most recurve to form widened shoulders
which may be right angled or barbed; edges may be mildly serrated.
I have placed in this type only points with square or rectangular stems.
There are two Hayes points (Fig. 11 , C, D ), of gray and red-brown
chert. They are small, 2.6 and 2.8 em. long, 1.3 and 1.9 em. wide; the

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

first differs from the type description in having straight edges and no
barbs, but the stem shape is typical.
Five points are of Friley type (Fig. 11, E, F), characterized by definite shoulders with extreme curves so that the barbs turn toward the
blade tip. Stems are expanded or rectangular. Three are of red-brown
chert, two of tan chert. Lengths are 1.4 to 2.5 em., widths 1.0 to 1.5 em.
One typical Maud point (Fig. 11, G) of tan chert, has a deeply concave base and mildly serrated edges.
Four points are included in the Cliffton type (Fig. 11, H ) . They are
hardly more than roughly shaped small, wide flakes but have vague
stems and some secondary flaking. They are uniform in size, 2 to 2.3
em. long, 1.6 to 1.9 em. wide and all are made of tan chert. A fifth
small point (Fig. 11 , I) of dark gray flint has a pointed stem, concave
blade edges, and a strongly pointed tip; in essence, it is a concaveedged hexagon. It may be a variation of Cliffton, but has been left
untyped.
A group of 21 points (Fig. 11, K-M) is characterized by expanded
stems produced by corner notching, and blades which are much like
Alba. This point has been the subject of considerable discussion because of its frequency in Louisiana and southern Arkansas; it has been
included in the Alba type in some publications, in the Scallorn type in
others, but has distinct and, we believe, meaningful differences from
each of these types. We have therefore given it the type name Colbert.
It rivals the Alba type in frequency at sites like Smithport Landing,
Colbert, Greer, Swanson's Landing, and Mounds Plantation (Fig. 1)
where there are Alto and Coles Creek components in respectable
amounts. It is found, along with Alba, in central Louisiana, especially
in Troyville-Coles Creek context (Ford, 1951: Fig. 45, U-W). Recent
excavations at the Crenshaw Site in southwestern Arkansas uncovered
Coles Creek and Caddoan burials in Mound B; consistently the Coles
Creek burials had points similar to Colbert (called Homan in Arkansas ) and the Caddoan had Alba or Hayes. The Colbert points have
triangular blades with concave or recurved edges, distinct and usually
wide shoulders, barbs, and triangular or fan-shaped stems. The stem
bases may be straight or more often convex, rarely concave. Specimens
from Smithport are made of tan, reddish-brown, white and gray local
cherts, one of novaculite, and two of white quartz. Lengths are from
1.2 to 3.2 em., widths from 9 mm. to 2 em.
A large flat point of tan chert (Fig. 11 , J) has the flake characteristics of an arrow point despite its large size, 4.3 by 3 em. It has the corner notching and wide barbs characteristic of Catahoula points.

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

181

A small triangular point of brown chert probably belongs to the
Fresno type. The tip is broken but the original length was about 2 em.
MrscELLANEous CHIPPED SToNE TooLs

Generally, the tools from this site are made from native tan chert
cores and flakes, or from petrified wood, and are rough to the point of
being almost nondescript. Imagination is often required to attempt
assignment to types.
A massive axe-shaped object of petrified wood is worked to a nearblade form at the expanded end (Fig. 12, K), but appears to have been
used as a maul. The groove is natural. It is 15 em. long, 9 em. wide, and
4.5 em. in thickness. Two smaller objects of petrified wood (Fig. 12, G,
H ) are partially shaped, showing some of the original surfaces. They
resemble choppers or picks and are 7 X 5.1 X 2.3 em. and 8.8 X 4.7
X 2 em . A fourth object of petrified wood, 10.5 em. long and 4.2 em.
wide, is more suggestive of a pick but shows little evidence of use.
Smaller core tools include two choppers or end scrapers of tan chert
and quartzite. The first has much of its original surfaces, with one
end pointed by bifacial beveling. It is 5.5 em. long. The second is unifacially beveled across one end and onto one edge; it is similar in size.
Two possible gouges of red and tan chert, 3.4 and 4.2 em. long, are
ovate in outline and roughly flaked bifacially at one end. Eight smaller
objects are keel-shaped core scrapers or small choppers of tan and gray
chert. They are irregularly ovate, triangular or elongate, from 2.5 to
4 em. in length, 1.8 to 3.3 em. in width. Flaking is bifacial but those
with one flat face have minimal flaking on this side. Two larger, thick
leaf-shaped forms (Fig. 11, GG, HH ) may have served as knives or
scrapers.
Other tools are made from flakes. Two might be knives: one (Fig.
11 , II) is of gray chert, long and ovoid, rough at the base but well
finished around the edges. It is 5.9 em. long, 2 em. wide. The second is
made from a flat, triangular-shaped piece of petrified wood, which is
unmodified at one end (the base ), but has good secondary flaking
around the edges. It is 5.1 em. long, 3 em. wide, and 6 mm. in thickness.
A thumbnail end scraper (Fig. 11, LL) is of gray quartz, 3 X 2 em.
in diameters, 6 mm. thick. Unifacial beveling on one end and one side
is quite steep and the reverse face shows many tiny fractures around
the cutting curve.
There are 15 small scrapers (Fig. 11 , MM-PP) which are ovate
or triangular in outline and made from flakes which vary from 3 to 8

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCI ETY

.

'

. .

~

.

~'

c

.

.~

D

8
A

0

2

4

6

8

CM

Fig . 12 . Ornaments and Stone Tools . A, Polished stone tablet. B, Banded slate bead .
C, Bone bead . 0, Sandstone bead or concretion. E, Pitted stone . F, Brown sandstone whetstone . G, H, Choppers of petrified wood . I, Polished stone celt. J, Small hammerstone . K,
Maul of petrified wood . (All to scale except 8, C and D which are only sl ightly reduced.!

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

183

mm. in thickness. They are of tan, brown and mottled gray chert, petrified wood, and gray quartzite. Most are flaked bifacially but some show
a preponderance of flaking on the convex face. Sizes range from 2 to
4.5 em. Five small broken flake objects show some flaking.
There are four drills, all made of tan ch ert. One flake drill (Fig. 11,
KK ) has an expanded base, a shaft which is triangular in cross section
and a keen point which shows use polish. A second (Fig. 11 , JJ ) has a
geniculate form, is less well made, but shows usage at the tip. The other
two are tiny, 2.1 and 2.2 em. long, have one flat and one keel-shaped
face, and are worked on two of the three planes. They could have been
used as gravers or drills.

PoLISH E D AND GRoUND SToNE OBJECTS

Few objects of polished stone were found. One large celt (Fig. 12, I )
is from the surface. It is symmetrically ovate, 17.5 em. long, 7. 5 em.
wide, and 3.8 em. thick. It shows pecking marks on the faces, but is
well ground at the bit and along the edges. A triangular hard sandstone pebble, 7.5 X 7 X 3.3 em., has round pits, 3 em. in diameter, on
each face, (Fig. 12, E). There are smooth depressions on two edges. A
la;:ge pitted mortar stone is of ferruginous sandstone, 22 X 16 em. One
face has an oval depression, 13 X 12 em., in the center of which, and
on the opposite face, are deep hemispherical pits, 3.5 em. in diam eter.
An oval-shaped hammerstone (Fig. 12, J) of tan chert is smoothed
on two faces, roughen ed by pecking around all edges. A whetstone of
brown sandstone (Fig. 12, F ) has one deep and two shallow grooves
on one face, two grooves on the opposite.
A rectangular flat tablet of mottled brown slate (Fig. 12, A ) was
found during the burial excavations but not in direct association. It
is 6 em . long, 4.5 em. wide, and 3.5 mm. thick. The faces are polished
and the edges ground smooth vvith rounded corners, but there are no
decorations or perforations.
A bead of gray and brown banded slate (Fig. 12, B) was found on the
surface of Hill 1. It is pear-shaped, 9 mm. long, 12 mm. wide, counterdrilled and highly polished. A small perforated sandstone concretion
(Fig. 12, D ) may have been u sed as a bead, but the perforation seems
to be natural, and the surfaces are not modified.
An oval, reddish claystone concretion was found on the surface. It
is 12 X 6.5 em., and 2. 7 em. thick. The hard cortex had been removed,
exposing the soft ocher, which was a probable source of paint.

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
BoNE OBJECT

A segment of bone, 2.6 em. long, was found on the surface. The ends
are cut squarely across and there is a small (natural? ) perforation. It
is probably a bead of bird bone (Fig. 12, C), is hard, very white, and
the surface is polished. No other artifacts of bone or shell were found,
but the test pits in dark soil exposed numerous animal bones as well as
mussel and snail shells. No identifications were secured.
DISCUSSION

The Smith port Landing Site is one of a number of village and mound
sites along the Red River valley and its tributaries in northwestern
Louisiana (Fig. 1) at which varying amounts of Alto Focus pottery,
whole vessels or sherds, have been found. The mound sites shown are
within the river flood plain, with exception of Thigpen Mound and Village Site, which are on a terrace immediately overlooking the valley;
Gahagan, Curtis, Mounds Plantation, and Belcher mounds are on old
river channels near the present stream. The burial vessels at Gahagan
were Alto types-five Holly Fine Engraved, three Hickory Engraved,
one Kiam Incised-and 12% of the 76 sherds from the surface are the
distinctive Alto types (Hickory, Carmel and Holly Engraved, Davis
Incised, Crockett Curvilinear Incised, W eches Fingernail Impressed
and Pennington Punctated-Incised ). The Thigpen Site is preponderantly Bossier, but included in the scant collection of 102 sherds are one
Weches, five Dunkin, and five Wilkinson. We have only a few sherds
from the Curtis Mound (Sunny Point in Moore's 1912 report) but
Hickory Fine Engraved is included. At the Belcher Mound Site (Webb,
1959 ) the premound level had sherds and burial vessels of both Alto
and Haley types.
The Mounds Plantation (Pickett Landing in Moore's 1912 report)
Site has recently been explored with some intensity (McKinney, Plants
and Webb, to be reported). Twenty-six percent of the decorated sherds
in the previous surface collection were of the distinctive Alto types,
4.15% Coles Creek. A trench through one of the mounds showed intrusive Belcher Focus burials but the fill , habitation, and premound
level .sherds were Coles Creek and Alto, with admixture at all levels
but increasing amounts of Alto in the top levels. Alto types are Davis
and Harrison Bayou Incised; Hickory, Holly and Carmel Engraved;
Pennington, Crockett, Wilkinson, and Weches in the punctated and
punctated-incised categories. Coles Creek types were Coles Creek,
Chase and Beldeau Incised; Rhinehart Punctated; and the shared types:

SlVIITHPORT LANDING SITE

185

Hardy and Sanson Incised. Deep burials in a second mound had scant
pottery but the two vessels were Holly Engraved and a bowl with
Crockett and Pennington designs, both black and polished.
The non-mound village sites shown in Figure 1 are on hills fronting
the valley or on tributaries and lakes. All of those shown have Alto and
Bossier pottery types, most have Coles Creek-Troyville, all have a
good representation of the shared types Hardy-Kiam, Dunkin-Manchac, Harrison Bayou and Sanson Incised, Wilkinson Punctated, and
Rhinehart-atypical, Pennington Punctated-lncised. Omitting these
shared types and using only distinctive types, the Allen Site ha s 7%
Alto, no Coles Creek; the Wilkinson Site has 10.5% Alto, 0.3 % Coles
Creek; the Chamarre Site has 14 % Alto, 1.5 % Troyville ; Williams
Point ha s 4 % Alto , no Coles Creek; East Smithport has 8 % Alto, no
Coles Creek; the Colbert Place has 1.6% Alto, 5.45 % Coles Creek;
Greer has 6.7 % Alto, 1.8 % Coles Creek ; Pease and Sinner are strong
Bossier sites but have 0.3 % and 0.5·% Alto, respectively ; Swanson's
Landing has 4% Alto and 4% Coles Creek; and Harrison Bayou has
1 % Alto.
Not all of the mound or village sites in this same area show this kind
of representation of Alto or Coles Creek; there are as many or more
which are well developed Bossier sites and have little or no Alto. For
example, we have 230 surface sherds from the Vanceville Mound in
Bossier Parish with no Alto or Coles Creek types; the 3942 sherds from
the lower and premound levels of the Oden Mound include two questionable Hickory Engraved, no other Alto or Coles Creek types; 1275
surface sherds from the Marston Village Site show no Coles Creek, one
Holly Fine Engraved, and three Pennington Punctated-lncised. In
these same sites, as the distinctive types drop out, the shared incised
and punctated types like Dunkin-Manchac, Rhinehart-Pennington
variants, Wilkinson , Harrison Bayou Incised and even Hardy-Kiam
Incised are almost completely replaced by Pease Brushed-Incised, Belched Ridged, and the brushed types (Webb, 1959 ) . Large projectile
points and heavy scraper types also disappear, replaced by small arrow
point types and thumbnail-size, triangular and rectangular flake scrapers (Webb, 1959: Fig. 126 ).
The Smithport Landing Site shares with the other hilltop or hill
slope village sites of this earlier Caddoan period the carry-over of late
Archaic dart points, especially types like Gary, Ellis, Kent, Carrollton, Palmillas, San Patrice, Evans, Mar;on , and Pontchartrain. Large
as well as small scrapers, pitted stones, manos of hand size, oval
metates, small drills, large and small celts, brown and white sandstone

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

hones, hammerstones, and crude choppers are usual at these sites. Triangular and ovate knives, recurved-edge (Copena-like ) knives, stone
beads and polished stone problematicals (boatstones, bannerstones,
gorgets) or plummets are all missing or very rare, although stone beads
and problematicals occur in the late Archaic. The slate bead from
Smithport, a recurved (Copena) blade fragment from the Thigpen
Site, and a two-hole gorget from a small site north of Wallace Lake
(Webb, 1948: Pl. 16, 9 ) are exceptions. Small projectile points, generally of Alba and Colbert types, about equal the number of large ones
at these sites. Ear ornaments, shell and bone tools are infrequent.
In conclusion, the Smithport Landing Site is one of the larger village
sites of the earlier Caddoan (Gibson Aspect. Alto Focus) period along
the Red River valley in northwestern Louisian:l. It shares with a n umber of other village sites of this period evidences of a carry over of late
Archaic projectile points and stone artifact traits. It also shares with
numerou s village and mound sites evidences of admixture of Coles
Creek ceramic types and influences with the Alto pottery types as the
earliest pottery at these sites. It seems increasingly clear that the advent of Coles Creek and Alto Caddoan peoples and/ or ceramics, arrow
points, and riverine mound building into this area were virtually
simultaneous occurrences. Out of this blending developed the subsequent Bossier Focus ceramics and other cultural manifestations over
a wide portion of northwestern Louisiana, extending into eastern Texas
and southern Arkansas.
It is possible that the large ceremonial mound groups, like Gahagan
and Mounds Plantation, served as ceremonial centers for a number of
villages, including those in the adjoining hill areas, accounting for the
frequency of specialized burials, with ceremonial copper and polished
stone objects, pipes and ornamentation, and highly developed burial
ceramics, in the mound sites, in comparison with the paucity of these
objects in the hill villages.
Considerable research is needed ( 1) to establish the nature of the
relationships between mound sites in the valleys and the villages in the
hills; ( 2.) to trace the extent of Coles Creek and Alto contacts and the
process of amalgamation of these two strong cultures over the wide
area from central Louisiana into Arkansas, Oklahoma and eastern
Texas (this must have been friendly, as it is inconceivable that Caddoan peoples would have supplanted Coles Creek almost overnight in
hundreds of villages ); (3) and the development out of this amalgamation of Bossier, Plaquemine, and other later cultures.

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

187

REFERENCES CITED
D 'Antoni, Blaise C.
1961a. Bayou Pierre, Land of Yesteryear, Chapter 2. Newsletter, North Louisiana
Historical Assn., April, pp. 9- 14.
1961 b. Bayou Pierre, Land of Yesteryear, Chapter 3. Newsletter, North Louisiana
Historical Assn., July, pp. 7-12.
1962. Bayou Pierre, Land of Yesteryear, Chapter 5. Newsletter, North Louisiana
Historical Assn., May, pp. 13-15.
Ford , James A.
1951. Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site in Avoyelles Parish,
Louisiana . Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural
History, Vol. 44, Part 1.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Part 1.
Ford, James A. , and G. R. Willey
J 940. Crooks Site, A Marksville Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish, Louisiana. Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Study No. 3.
Moore, Clarence B.
1912. Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River. Journal of the Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia, 2nd. S2ries, Vol. 14, Part 4.
Newell , H . Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. Th e George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Quimby, George I.
1951. The Medora Site, West Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. Field Museum of
Natural History, Anthropological Series, Vol. 24, No. 2.
1957. The Bayou Goula Site, lberville Parish, Louisiana. Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 47, No. 2.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks (editors )
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. The Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication No. 1, and The Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin, No.4.
Webb, Clarence H.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19.
1959. The Belcher Mound, A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 16.
1961. Relationships between the Caddoan and Central Louisiana Culture Sequences. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31.

1560 Line A venue
Shreveport, Louisiana

