BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Volume 34

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY I AUSTIN, TEXAS I

1963

Office of the State Archeolo · · ~
' ··"'. , . --......._ L.b
.~
•~"
.,. ..,_~
1 rary
.•i
'!!!.
J~c ; ~ 1 l '-·. • , .• • ·".

.~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1963
President: JACK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Secretary-Treasurer: JEAN A. RICHMOND (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN SuHM (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), W. C. HoLDEN
(Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), HuBERT MEWHINNEY (Houston),
WAYNE NEYLAND (Houston), JAMES WARNICA (Portales, N. Mex.), JAMES
WoRD (Floydada).
Trustees: R. K. HARRis (Dallas), MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio), 0. L. SIMS
(San Angelo), HENRY STURGIS (Austin).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CARL CoMPTON (Denton), ALAN DuKE (Pasadena),
LATHEL DuFFIELD (Austin), R. E. FoRRESTER (Ft. Worth), SHERWOOD GAGLIANO (Baton Rouge, La.), D. T. KENT (Kirbyville), E. 0. MILLER (Moody),
ERIK REED (Sante Fe, N.Mex.), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Fellows: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Seattle, Wash.), CYRus N.
RAY (Abilene), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.) .

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treassurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin 12, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is the
same.
Cover design and portrait by Hal M. Story

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST • 1991

•

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i

Editor: D ee Ann Suhm
~

"f
'L.

Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D. Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1963

Office of the State Archeologis
:. ;.
Library

...

I

I

. '

j

DR. CYRUS N. Rw for more than a quarter of a century has devoted
himself to the furtherance of Texas archeology and the Texas
Archeological Society. His pioneer research into the archeology of the
Abilene area is recorded in the numerous articles he has written for
the Bulletin, and his enthusiasm and dedication to the Society is evident in his many years of service. He is a charter member of the
Society, was Editor of the Bulletin from its founding in 1929 until
1947, was President from 1929 until1948, has been President Emeritus
since 1948, and a Fellow since 1952.
The society is deeply indebted to Dr. Ray, and it is with pleasure
that this issue to the Bulletin is dedicated to him.

Table of Contents
Articles
Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of
Corpus Christi Bay, Texas
By James E. Corbin

5

Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter
(41TV69 ), Travis County, Texas
By J. C. Pollard, John W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis

31

Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified
Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas
By Harry J. Shafer.

57

The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic- Neo-American Site in
San Augustine County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield

83

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus Component
in De Soto Parish, Louisiana
By Clarence H . Webb .

143

A Guide to Pottery Sorting, and the Meaning of Pottery
Types and Attributes
By E. Mott Davis .

189

A Guide to Archeological Reconnaissance
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr. .

203

Book Reviews
Hall, Robert L., The Archeology of Carcajou Point, with an
Interpretation of the Development of Oneota Culture in
Wisconsin
By T. N. Campbell .

219

Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout
Rockshelter ( 41 TV69), Travis County, Texas
J. C. POLLARD, JOHN W. GREER, AND H. F. STURGIS*
ABSTRACT
A rockshelter, located near Austin, Texas (Travis County), was excavated by
members of the local archeological society in 1960-1961. It contained a thin, buried
occupation zone which yielded a relatively small number of artifacts. Projectile
points indicate the occupation to have been pure Central Texas Aspect, possibly
both Austin and Toy ah foci. Several flint artifacts were discovered showing definite
burin treatment.

INTRODUCTION

During the fall of 1959 members of the Travis County Archeological
Society examined a rockshelter in the local Boy Scout camp area for
evidence of aboriginal occupation. Although the shelter floor showed
disturbance by present-day campers, several flint flakes were found
suggesting a much earlier occupation. Additional flakes and two projectile point fragments from a small test pit confirmed the surface
indications. On the basis of these finds the society decided a controlled
excavation would be worthwhile. Excavation was begun February,
1960 and continued more or less regularly through succeeding weekends. The dig was concluded January, 1961.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This report is offered as partial payment of the debt the society owes
to the many persons who gave of their time and skills to help the members learn something of the science of archeology. Especially appreciated was the help and interest received from T. N . Campbell, J. F. Epstein, T. W. McKern, and E. L. Lundelius of The University of
Texas; W. W. Newcomb, Jr., and Dee Ann Suhm of the Texas Memorial Museum; and E. B. Jelks of the Texas Archeological Salvage
• Travis County Archeological Society Report Committee.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Project. All were most gracious in repeatedly interrupting their busy
schedules to help the society whenever called upon . In addition, special
thanks go to E. Mott Davis, Research Archeologist of The University
of Texas. Dr. Davis' many days at the site working and instructing
others, and his never failing encouragement and contagious enthusiasm, sparked the project to completion.
LOCATION

Site 41 TV69 is located in the southwestern portion of Travis County,
about three miles northwest of the city of Austin. The shelter in which
the site lies is located on the north bank of Bull Creek, about one-quarter mile upstream from the juncture of the creek with the Colorado
River. About two miles south of the mouth of the creek, Tom Miller
Dam impounds the river to form Lake Austin (Figs. 1, 2 ) .
The site is on the property of the Tom Wooten Boy Scout Camp,
main summer camp for the Sunrise District of the Capitol Area Council. The shelter is located in a steep cliff face, about 60 feet above the
present level of Bull Creek. This creek is _now flooded by backwaters
from Lake Austin, and is reported to be about 10 feet deep where it
flows past the site.
DESCRIPTION OF THE AR EA

The area is made up of rolling hills interlaced with eroded gullies
and massive limestone outcrops. It is about one mile west, on the upthrust side, of the Balcones Escarpment and has a mean elevation of
about 800 feet.
This is part of the watershed of the Colorado River, and the outstanding topographic features are the waterways eroded through the soft
limestone hill cores . Most of the gullies and valleys are normally dry,
supporting streams of surface run-off only during heavy rains. Several
more or less permanent streams-one of the largest being Bull Creek
- do exist, however. This creek is now drowned by the backwaters of
Lake Austin and, as a result, is deep and relatively slow moving. During early times, however, it probably was shallow and fast flowing and,
judging from present displays, must have been capable of generating
torrents during heavy storms. Under such conditions the creek could
be expected to become very erosive, particularly on soft limestone.
The results are evident: deeply cut gaps through the hills and clifflike stream banks. In certain of these cliff faces soft formations sandwiched between harder limestone layers permitted deep undercutting

33

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

LAKE
AUSTIN
I

·,,

'

.:.

.. '

'

RDY.SCOUT SHftTFR
~

\'

Fig . 1. lloy Scout Shelter. A, Gene ral location . II, The shelter and immediate environ s.

of the rock. The results are rockshelters of the kind making up the
present site.
Geologically this is an area of sedimentary deposits laid down du ring the Cretaceous period, later uplifted along the Balcones fault and,
since that time, eroded into the characteristic maze of hills and valleys.
The surface consists of a thin calcareous clay mantle with scattered

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

small areas of flint pebbles and wind blown sand-and limestone fragments, large and small, in weat abundance.
The predominant formation throughout the area is the Austin limestone. These massive beds are interrupted at times with marl and thin
lenticular deposits of flint.
The 25-35 inches of rainfall per year normally recorded for this
area enforces rather firm limits on the growing season. Most of the
rainfall is concentrated in the winter months, November-January,
with a secondary amount falling in March-April. The low rainfall in
the summer and fall, coupled with the hot summer temperatures (901000 F .), limits vegetation to that adaptable to semi-arid conditions.
This and the sandy soil with little or no humus present make awiculture a marginal enterprise. There is no evidence to suggest that these
conditions were much different in aboriginal times.
Many foods wow wild here today and were doubtless available in
earlier times: pecans, walnuts, acorns, hackberry, cactus, grapes, and
wild plums are in evidence. The hills and valleys must also have provided excellent opportunities for hunting game: doves, quail, turkey,
deer, rabbits, opossums, squirrels, racoons, and bobcats are reported
as still present in the area. Evidently fish, mussels, water plants, and
other foods were also available from the creeks and river.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE

This is a typical central Texas rockshelter in appearance (Figs. 2,
4 ). The shelter is actually in two parts : a small section about 35 feet
long, at the eastern end of the ledge and a larger section on the west
end. The smaller part is relatively narrow, about 10 feet wide, has an
uneven rocky floor and scanty roof protection. Although a small test
pit did turn up several flint chips, this section was not considered worth
excavating.
The main interest was concentrated on the larger, western section
of the shelter. This area measures about 85 feet long. It is approximately 14 feet deep, from front to back wall at floor level, and about
10-12 feet deep at ceiling height. The shelter floor is slightly lower in
the middle than at either end, and in most places slopes gently from
the rear wall toward the edge. For practical purposes, however, the
surface of the shelter fill is level. The surface of the floor deposit is a
hard, clay-like, crust relatively free of dust. It is also without vegetation under the roofed part, although the ledge at each end of the shelter and the talus slope in front is covered with bushes and small trees.

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

Fig . 2.
Creek .

35

A, Distant view of shelter, looking west. B, View of shelter from across Bull

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The wall of the shelter contains several small lenses of marl-like
rock and, towards the eastern end, the erosion of some of the material
has formed a convenient, waist-high shelf. The wall and ceiling show
evidence of several slow, water seepages. In some places on the ceiling, seepage has resulted in rather short, heavy stalactites. In addition,
thin, curtain-like stalactitic formations occur on the wall. There is,
however, no evidence that water flow into the shelter was ever more
than the present seepage.
Along the outer edge of the floor deposit are several large block-like
limestone boulders. The shape and position of these stones indicate
that they are pieces of a once larger projection over the shelter. Other
similar boulders are in evidence in the rather low talus slope between
the cliff face and creek bank. As a guess, these rocks, if put back in
place, would extend the roof outward by five to 10 feet. Several of the
fallen rocks along the edge of the shelter contain erosion pits, an inch or
more deep, worn there by water dripping from the roof. This, and the
extent to which the present edge of the cap rock has been weathered,
lead to the belief that the rock falls are quite old.
The boulders that rim the shelter provide a sort of curb protecting
the shelter fill from damage by erosion from rain or surface water. In
fact, beyond the evidence of a few small potholes and campfires of
modern origin, there was no indication of any appreciable damage to
the shelter deposit by natural or human activities. Scout camp officials
were questioned regarding earlier excavations or artifacts found in the
shelter. Replies indicated that the site was essentially undisturbed and
that no artifacts had been collected from it.
EXCAVATION

Horizontal control was established by laying out a base line near,
and approximately parallel, to the outer edge of the shelter. This line
was marked by stakes at five foot intervals and a grid system of five
foot squares developed from it. Although the long axis of the shelter is
east-northeast, the base line, for convenience, was designated eastwest. All squares are identified by the coordinates of the southeast corner, such as N30-E140 (Fig. 3 ).
A datum point located near the outer edge of the shelter was assumed
to be at an elevation of 100 feet . The elevation of the top of each stake
was measured by means of a transit and referred to the datum point.
The elevation of ground level at each stake was also recorded.
Initial plans were to establish a vertical control system through

37

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

excavation by six inch levels. However, after several squares were dug
using this method, it was apparent that finer control was sometimes
necessary because the occupation zone in places was very thin. Where
this occurred the squares were excavated in two or three inch levels.

PLAN AND GRID
LAYOUT

FLOOR

N

I

4N-30

+++

++4-+

N- 25

E
100

E
105

f23
+

110

115

120

125

130

135

140 145

150

155

160 165

E
170

E
175

A,B - Cross sections (see Fig . 5 )
Areas excavated
0 Firep i ts
Gr i d stakes
~Rock ledge

Fig . J .

In some instances it was necessary to use small hand picks to loosen
the compacted soil. Generally, however, soil was loosened and removed by shovel and trowel. All material was screened through a onethird inch mesh screen. Objects of interest were placed in sacks properly identified as to square and level. All artifacts were later washed,
labeled, and catalogued for future reference. A total of 16 squares was
excavated, most to a depth of about 20 inches below the surface, although several reached 30 or more inches in depth. Most squares were
refilled as soon as digging was completed to avoid developing hazards
for the scouts who continued to use the shelter as a part of their trailways.
Field notes were kept for each day's work and reports were made of
the findings in each level of all squares. Sketches were made of special
features . Soil conditions and strata exposed in the faces of many
squares were also noted and sketched.

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

STRATIGRAPHY

The stratigraphy of the site was difficult to unravel because of the
unevenness of the original floor, shallowness of the deposit, and the
presence of several boulders at critical locations. In general the deposit
in the back of the shelter was too shallow for much differentiation of
strata. Some demarcation was possible in the front half, however. Two
ty pical profiles are shown in Figure 5.
The bulk of the shelter fill was made up of a light brown, fine, sandy
soil; probably wind blown from dried flood deposits along the nearby
creek bank. Where this material received infusions of lime, as from
water oozing from the back wall of the shelter or from the presence of a
lot of lime fragments (roof spalls ) , it developed a caliche-like character. Layer 6 (Fig. 5 ) is believed to have been formed in this manner.
The early inhabitants of the shelter built their fires on, or in the floor
deposit; or-by scooping firepits through the deposit-on the underlying bedrock. The result, a burned area filled with ashy soil and charcoal, is evident as Layer 5. Apparently, ash and charcoal from the fireplaces were moved toward the back wall-possibly by the wind or by
the inhabitants as they cleaned out the hearths for succeeding fires.
Whatever the cause, the result was a loose, gray, ashy stratum (Layer
3) between the fireplaces and back wall of the shelter. Succeeding deposition of a light, wind blown ( ?) soil (Layer 4) eventually covered
these fireplaces. Capping most of the lower layers ( 6 through 3) was
a compact, yellow, caliche-like mantle (Lay er 2 ) containing many
small fragments of limestone. This material was probably formed by
the action of lime in the same manner as Layer 6. In fact, layers 2
and 6 may denote two wet periods separated by a dry interval as indicated by layers 3, 4, and 5. Layer 2 was somewhat more compact than
6 ; however, this may be due to its being nearer the top of the deposit
and therefore subjected to more compaction by years of foot traffic
through the shelter. The surface layer, i.e., the present floor of the
shelter, was a thin, smooth, brown, compact soil ( Layer 1) . Occasional
pit-like outlines (Fig. 5, item 7) were noted in the profiles. The material within these outlines was loose, coarse, dark brown soil. These
pits are believed to be relatively modern.
The stratigraphy can be simplified by classification into three zones
(Fig. 5 ) :
Zone I, bottom of the deposit, rested on rock and consisted of a caliche-like material which conta ined numerous limestone fragm ents. This zone occurred from
two to 36 inches below the surface. Because of the irregularity of the shelter floor,

39

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

•
B
Fig . 4. Excavation of Boy Scout Shelter, A, Main shelter looking east. B, Main shelter,
looking west.

its thickness could not be determined, but it probably ranged from several inches to
several feet. This apparently was the surface upon whi ch the first occupation took
place. No artifacts were recovered from this zone.

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Zone II, the middle part of the deposit, rested on Zone I and was the occupation
zone. Its depth varied from two to 20 inches below the surface, and it was from one
to 10 inches thick. A loose, sandy, tan colored soil, it was stained gray with ash in
places, and was made up principally of layers 3, 4, and 5. Zone II contained numerous mussel and snail shells, fragments of small bones, and localized concentrations
of charcoal fl ecks. Several fireplaces and most artifacts were found in this zone.
Zone II I includes the surface layers which rested on Zone II. This was a thin
zone of light brown soil capped by a hard compact crust. A few artifacts and flakes
were found in this zone, but, because of probable disturbance to this part of the deposit, may be intrusive from Zone II.

NO RT H -

Se c t i o n

(j)

Sect i on

topto il

~ li;ht

c ompac t
; roy, uh y

@

bro wn, co mpa c t , to n d J soil

Ll ;ht

PR O F l L ES

A

Bro wn , tm oot h, c omp act

® YCIIIow ,

S O UT H

cotlcho
.oil

@Dar k ;ro y

to bla ck, bv ntd
cu lhro l cleb ri t
Ytll o w- ; ro y , l ooto c o lich o
~ Probab l e tnodern p it

to ll;

8

cont a in s

@

@Bed roc k

Fig . 5 . North- south profiles along E125 and E130.

OCCUPATIONAL FEAT URES

The only recognizable features in the shelter fill were a number of
firepits or hearths. In all cases these were shallow, unlined, saucerlike depressions, surrounded by burned earth and filled with charcoal
and ash stained soil. Five of these pits can be described as follows
(Fig. 3) :
Pit No. 1 was found in Layer 3, six inches below the surface, and was covered by
a large flat rock (probably roof fall) . The pit was r ectangul ar in outline, about 18 x
13 inches, and four inches deep at the center. It was filled with fine charcoal and
ashy soil. No shell, bone or artifact was associated with this feature.
Pit No. 2 occurred in Layer 4, five inches below the surface. This pit was a shallow, saucer-shaped depression about 12 inches in diameter and two inches deep. It
contained only ash-stained soil and charcoal fragments

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

41

Pit No. 3 was found 12 inches below the surface, in Layer 4. The pit was oval
12 x 15 inches, and three inches deep. It was fill ed with soft, dark gray soil which
contained bits of charcoal and flint. Numerous snail and mussel shells, some of
them burned, were found in this pit.
Pit No . 4 occurred in Layer 3, 12 inches below the surface. The pit was shallow
and saucer-shaped (about 12 inches in diameter), and was filled with dark , loose
earth. Flint chips, bone fragments, a utilized flake, flint scraper, and two points
(Perdiz type ) w ere found in the same level as the firepit and within two feet of it.
Pit No. 5 was encountered six inches below the surface, in Layer 5. This was
shallower than the other pits, was roughly triangular in shape, and was approxi mately two feet on each side. It was surrounded with ashy soil containing many
bone fragments. One arrow point (possibly Eddy type ) was found near this pit.

A number of other fireplaces were found in the shelter; some of
these, however, were on, or so near to the surface that they are considered to be modern. In several instances this was confirmed by nearby finds of bottle caps, glass fragments, 22 caliber cartridge cases, etc.
Several other possible hearths were noted as rather vague areas of ash
or fire darkened earth, but were too poorly defined to be considered as
firepits .
The number of artifacts ( 152) recovered from the site was not large
shell concentration one foot below the surface, in Square N25, E145.
Here 19 mussel shells were found lying almost end-to-end in a slightly
curved east-west alignment. Near the west end of this line of shells
was a small pocket of 25 snail shells and one 8-inch bone awl (Fig. 9,
A, A' ). Also found in this area were 17 small rodent and fish bones,
and a smooth pebble-like limestone nodule about 3 inches in diameter.
There were no indications of use-i.e., polish, scratches, impact scars,
etc.-on the pebble. No explanation can be offered for this assemblage,
although the shell arrangement indicates an intentional array rather
than an accidental grouping.

DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS

The number of artifacts ( 152) recovered from the site was not large
(see Table 1). In addition, horizontal and vertical distributions were
made relatively meaningless by the narrowness of the shelter floor and
the shallowness of the deposit. Two general observations are possible:
( 1) most artifacts were found in the central part of the shelter, and
(2) the artifacts showed no significant groupings either by type or
location.

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

N-30

~

)oo

0

I

/

2

,,-.--.

X

PoOo~< pDooD

0

'' ,_ /

/"

®

,
/

~

~

---, -'

3

I
I

X

\

I

'

;:S--x /

X

X
XX.

><

x "

N-2

c:P 0

E
140

4
AREA OF FISH OR

I

E
145

RODENT VERTEBRAE

SMALL, SMOOTH
STONE
POCKET OF 25 SNAIL SHELLS

X
0 oO

BONE

OR

MUSSEL

~BONE

BONE

FRAGMENT

SHELLS

AWL

Fig. 6. Concentration of refuse in Square N25 , E145 .

ARRow PoiNTS

A total of 24 flint arrow points was found. Seven of these were too
fragmentary for identification, although two blade sections had sharply
serrated edges. The remaining 17 points were classified as follows :

43

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

Unidentified (Fig. 7, M, N). Two points are considered to fall outside the limits of known types. One, Fig. 7, N , is a small point with a
thin, square stem. It measures 2.5 em. long and .8 em. wide. The stem
may be broken, in which case this point is probably the Perdiz type; if
unbroken, it may be the Alba type. The second point (Fig. 7, M) is
asymmetrical and has been worked only along the edges. The stem
is pointed, very small and off-center. It also suggests the Perdiz outline.
It measures 2.2 em. long (incomplete ) and 1 em. wide.
Perdiz (Fig. 7, I-L ) . This group is represented by six points, all of
which are characterized by contracting stems and thin, barbed blades.
Average length is 3.4 em.; average width is 1.5 em.
Cliffton (Fig. 7, G, H ) . Two points have been placed in this group.
One (Fig. 7, H ) is a typical Cliffton point, but the other (Fig. 7, G ) is
somewhat questionable and may be a variant of Perdiz. Average length
is 3.5 em.; average width is 2.3 em.
Alba (Fig. 7, 0-P ). The two points of this type are characterized by
parallel-sided stems and strong shoulders. They average 3.3 em. long
and 1.8 em. wide. Both are somewhat similar to-and may be a variant
of-the Scallorn type. Dee Ann Suhm and Edward B. Jelks (personal
communication) consider these poinls to fit the Eddy classification
better than the Alba type. On the other hand, the bulbous or slightly
expanded stems ascribed to Eddy points by Suhm (1957: 228) are not
evident. The Eddy point, according to Suhm, belongs largely to the
Central Texas Aspect, to both the Austin and Toyah foci.
Scallorn (Fig. 7, Q-T). The five points in this group all have the
expanded stem, straight base, corner notches, and prominent shoulders.
typical of this type. They average 3 em. in length and 1.5 em. in width_
According to Suhm ( 1960: 83 ) and Jelks ( 1962: 84-85), the Toyah
Focus is characterized by the Perdiz and Cliffton arrow point types,.
while the Scallorn arrow point type is the major diagnostic of the Austin Focus. Suhm, as noted above, has further suggested that Eddy may
be a transitional type.
DART POINT

Only one point (Fig. 7, F ) identifiable as a dart point was found in
the shelter. Critical portions of the stem and shoulders are missing so
that classification is questionable. It has, however, tentatively been
identified as Uvalde. This fairly crude point was found in the test hole

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

c

F

I

\

A

~

I:

H

G

J

L

K

M

I\
I

I

,,. ,.
~~
s'/

7"

N

Q

0

2

4

6

R
8

s

T

10

CM
Fig . 7. Points, Spokeshaves, Utilized Flake, Drill, and Gouge. A, 8 , Spokeshaves. C, C',
Gouge-Spol<eshave . D, Utilized flake . E, Drill. F, Dart po int !Uvalde?). G, H, C/iffton points.
1-L, Perdiz points. M, Unidentified points (possibly Perdiz). N, Unidentified point (possibly
A/bal. 0, P, Alba points (or possibly Eddy points). Q-T, Sea/lorn points .

45

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

dug just prior to excavation. It measures 7.5 em. in length and 2. 7 em.
in width.
TABLE 1
Artifacts from the Boy Scout Shelter

Artifact
Arrow points
Fragmentary
Unidentified
Perdiz*
Cliff ton
Alba (or Eddy? )
Scallorn
Dart point, Uvalde?
Drill
Spokeshaves
Graver
Saw

Number
found
7

2
6
2
2
5
1
1
2

Artifact
Knives, identified
Knives, fragments
Scrapers
Gouges
Choppers
Hammerstones
Grinding Stones
Worked flakes, knives
Utilized flake
Worked flint, miscellaneous
Burins, definite and probable
Bone awls
Worked? mussel shells
Total

Number
found

22
17
2
3
6
3
1
5
37
12
10
2
2
152

• Projectile point types follow those described in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954).
DRILL

Only one drill (Fig. 7, E) was found. It is a relatively small flake
drill. The stem is about 3 em. long and .8 em. wide. The base is unworked and still contains much of the cortex of the original nodule.
Over-all length is 5.5 em.
This drill corresponds to those previously described for the Central
Texas Aspect (Miller and Jelks, 1952; Suhm, 1959). It differs from the
usual Edwards Plateau Aspect drill in that it is smaller and does not
have a shaped base.
SPOKESHAVES

Two spokeshaves (Fig. 7, A, B) were found. They are small flakes,
unworked except for a semicircular notch in one edge. The notches are
uniformly 1.2 em. wide; one is 1.2 em. deep, the other about .6 em.
deep. A small snub-nosed gouge (Fig. 7, C, C') also contains a spokeshave notch on one side. It is very similar to those described above. All
appear to have been ideally suited for the smoothing of arrow shafts.

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
GRAVER

One very small (2 em. long and .8 em. wide) fragment of flint with
a needle-like point lightly worked along one edge is classified as a
graving tool.
SAW

A rectangular flake is identified as a saw because of a series of seven
serrations which form a saw-toothed edge at one end (Fig. 8, J, J').
It measures 4.2 em. in length and 2.5 em. in width.
KNIVES

The knives from this site, with only two exceptions, can be divided
into four main groups as follows:

Form I (Fig. 8, A). Represented by seven artifacts, this form is similar to Young arrow points. It is characterized by a rather small blade
and a rounded base. The average length is 3.8 em., the average width
is2.4cm.
Form II (Fig. 8, B) is represented by three specimens. These are
similar to Form I except that the bases are straight or only slightly
convex. They are generally a little larger and thicker than Fresno
points. Average length is 3.8 em., while the average width is 2.4 em.
The particular specimen (Fig. 8, B) illustrating this group is especially interesting. This knife was found broken in two pieces. The
fragments were found at approximately the same depths but about five
feet apart, in adjoining squares. Both pieces must necessarily be of the
same age and both were found in similar surroundings, yet, one section was completely patina ted and the other was essentially free of any
surface alteration. This provides a striking example of the unreliability
of patina as an indicator of age.
Form Ill (Fig. 8, C) includes seven specimens which have the same
general shape as Form I. However, all of these knives are slightly
larger and considerably heavier. The lengths average 4.5 em., the
widths 3 em.
Form IV (Fig. 8, D) is represented by three knives. Specimens in
this group have much the same shapes as Form III knives, but they are
larger and heavier. With an average length of 4.8 em. and an average
width of 3 em., they probably fall into the general range of Abasolo
dart points.

47

BOY SCOUT ROCKS HELTE R

Besides these forms there are 17 unidentifiable fragments, and two
blades which do not fit the above classification. The first of these unclassified blades (Fig. 8, E) is lanceolate in shape an d rather wide for
its length. The blade is formed fr om a cu rved flake an d is unworked on

A

c

B

D

G

E

F

F'
H

J

J'

Fig . 8 . Cutting and Scraping Tools . A, Knife Form I. 8, Knife Form II. C, Knife Form Ill.
D, Knife Form IV. E-F' , Miscellaneous knives. G, H, Flake knives. I, Scraper. J-J ' , Saw.
Dashes along edges of F indicate the extent of basa l smoothing .

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

one face, except for small sharpening flakes around the edges and
thinning of the bulb of percussion at the distal end. The other side
shows percussion flaking over the entire face. This specimen is 6.5 em.
long and 3.1 em. wide. The second unclassified knife (Fig. 8, F , F' ) is a
long, slightly curved blade which is flaked on both sides. The edges
near the base are ground smooth. The base is straight and also appears
to have been smoothed. Workmanship is fairly crude, although the
blade is thin (maximum thickness .4 em.).
Six of the knives have part of the original striking platform, or cortex, on the base (all forms represented) ; and two others have cortex
•On portions of one or both faces.
ScRAPERs

Only two scrapers, both characterized by unifacial flaking, were
found at the Scout Shelter. The first of these (Fig. 9, J) is a cortex flake
worked only along one edge. This scraper has one feature not common
to central Texas forms: one slightly convex edge has a small, rounded
projection about 1.6 em. wide at the base and about .6 em. in length.
At present no published reference to this peculiarity has been found.
However, J. W. Greer has found this type at sites on the Llano River
in Llano County, where it was associated with dart point fragments
(Nolan, Travis, and Marshall ) and one Scallorn arrow point.
The second scraper (Fig. 8, I) is made from a narrow and thick cortex flake. One edge is worked into a slight concavity. This scraper measures 11.3 em. long, 2. 7 em. wide, and 1. 7 em. thick.
GouGES

Three biconvex gouges with chisel-like edges were found . One (Fig.
9, G, G' ) is rectangular (6.3 em. long and 3.5 em. wide ) with rounded,
oppositely beveled ends. Another (Fig. 9, H, H' ) is circular, but has
a straight scraping edge. It measures 4.5 em. by 4 em. The third ( Fig.
7, C, C' ) is a "snub-nose" gouge and has one circular and one pointed
scraping edge. It is 5 em. long and 2.5 em. wide. This latter specimen
also has a small ( 1 em. by .5 em.) spokeshave notch worked into one
edge.
CHOPPERS

Six bifacially worked nodules were found, each having one edge that
was probably used for cutting or chopping. These are relatively small
compared with those found in central Texas burned rock middens.

49

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

All have portions of the cortex still present. The average diameter is
5.5 em.
HAMMERSTONES

Three hammerstones were found. Two of these are simply small
flint nodules about 7 em. in diameter. The third, also of flint is probably half of a small core which has been greatly worn by weathering
or stream action . It measures 6 em. long, 4 em. wide, and 3 em. thick.
This piece was later possibly used as a burin (see L-41 under burins).
GRINDING STONES

There was only one identifiable mano fragment found during the
excavation. This is of fine-grained sandstone, ground smooth over one
face and along its edges. The fragment is too small, however, to show
distinct grinding facets.
Other stones possibly used as manos include three broken quartz
pebbles and a smooth, hard limestone pebble. These stones all show
smooth areas, but actual grinding surfaces cannot be identified.
FLAKE KNIVES

This group is composed of five thin flakes unifacially worked along
one edge, as if to sharpen or strengthen the cutting edges. Two such
knives are illustrated in Figure 8 (G, H ). The remaining three artifacts
have cortex covering the unworked edges. While some of these flakes
could have been used as scrapers, their sizes ( 1.2 to 5 em. in width, 2
em. in length, and 3 em. in thickness) suggest use as small cutting implements.
UTILIZED FLAKES

Thirty -seven flakes were found which fit into this category. Thirtysix of these have slight marginal flaking, but are otherwise unaltered.
This flaking differs from that of the flake knives in that the knives appear to have been intentionally flaked while these seem to be simply
random use scars. Most of these are fairly thick (. 3 to .8 em.) cortex
flakes ranging from 4 to 8 em. in length. They would have been useful for small cutting or scraping operations.
Another utilized flake seems to have been designed for use as a drill.
It has been crudely fashioned by removing two chips from a flake in
order to prepare a pointed blade about 1 em. long. Very small scars,
apparently from use, appear on alternate edges of the shaft. Work-

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

manship does not compare with the drill described earlier and the piece
was therefore assigned to the utilized flake classification.
WoRKED FLINT

Twelve additional pieces of worked flint of unknown use were recovered. These could have been included in the utilized flake group
except that they are too thick to be generally classified as flakes. They
probably were used for a variety of cutting, scraping, and chopping
tasks.
BuRINS

Ten specimens were found indicating the burin technique. Seven
of these were examined and reported on by J. F . Epstein, archeologist
for the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas (see
below). In summary, Dr. Epstein identified one single spall burin, one
double spall burin, and one secondary spall; also three possible burins
and one possible secondary spall. Specifically he states:
Specimen TV69/ L-10 (Fig. 9, C). A single stroke burin made from the lower
portion of a crude lamellar flak e having a prepared, but unfaceted striking platform.
The lower portion of the flake (opposite the bulbar end) had apparently been used
as a scraper, and shows use scars, but no intentional unifacial flaking. A single
burin spa!! had been removed from this end. The burin shows considerable wear at
its tip, on the burin facet. The scraping edge, which intersects the plane of the burin
facet, does not, however, show use in the immediate area of the burin point.
Specimen TV69/L-1 (Fig. 9, F). This is a broken, bifacially worked artifact,
probably a knife. The artifact broke across its width. The break surface was used
as a striking platform to remove two burin spalls, one from each edge of the piece.
One spa!! was about 2 em. long. The spa!! removed from the other edge had a
length of 4 mm. This edge shows multiple battering, in an attempt to remove a spa!!.
Obviously the attempt failed. Since the edge on which the long spa!! had been removed seems to be poorly suited for a burin point, and besides no wear is indicated,
it would seem that the burin technique had been used here to obtain a burin spa!!
for possible use, rather than to make a burin out of a broken blade.
Specimen TV69/L-13 (Fig. 9, D ) . This is an excellent example of a secondary
burin spa!!. (Secondary spalls are the product of resharpening a burin.) It does not
appear to have been used. Length 2.5 em.
Specimen TV69/L-9. This may be a very large secondary burin spa!!. If it is not,
then it is an exceptionally thick flake that comes from a narrow core with a prepared (unfaceted?) striking platform. This core, if it was such, had a width of about
1.5 em., and the flake was removed from its end, rather than by working around it
as in the production of a polyhedral core.

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

51

Specimen TV 69 I L-1. This piece is probably a burin, but it is difficult to be certain.
The specimen is an initial cortex flake that had broken. This break surface was used
to remove one, or possibly more very short spalls between 4 and 6 mm. in length.
The point formed shows no indications of use, but the flint is a poor grade, and
would not show wear clearly anyway.
Specimen TV 69/ 11. This is a specimen of mottled pinkish flint, and a fragment of
cortex is still retained on one flat surface. One convex edge has been converted to a
scraper. This piece has a sharp point produced by two unworked edges that meet
each other at a right angle. It is impossible for me to determine how these edges
and point were produced. They are flat enough to resemble burin facets, but there
is no negative bulb of percussion visible at the point. No wear is visible at the point
either. This effect can be produced by simply stepping on a piece of flint.
Specimen TV69/ L-6. This is a flake which shows just a small section of cortex. It
has a sort of mottled purplish color. One edge is rather wide, and relatively flat, and
appears to have been produced by removing a large spall from the flake. This wide
flat edge was then used as a striking platform to remove a short spall down along
the other edge. In other words this seems to be an angle burin or a burin bee de
flute. The tip formed by these two burin strokes has broken along one side. This
piece shows what seems to be fine wear facets. I know of no other way of explaining
the technique used (which I view as intentional ) to produce the point.
General Comment. There is no question that the burin technique and burins appear at this site. Since the site apparently contains only Central Texas Aspect ma terial, it is of special importance. At present, I have no positive evidence that the
burin technique continued past the Archaic period, and into more recent times. If the
data from this shelter can prove without question that the entire occupation is Central
Texas Aspect, then we will know that burins persisted into very recent times here
in Texas. In terms of our present conception or misconception, this would be rather
extraordinary.

After receiving this report all remaining likely artifacts and flint
chips were re-examined and three additional possible burins were
found. These are:

Specimen L-21. This appears to be a small core ( 4.5 em. in diameter )
with a small beak-like projection which has a triangular cross section.
On a flat side of this beak a flake has been removed, evidently to sharpen
the edge. Use marks are visible over most of the edge.
Specimen L-41. This is kept from a listing as definite only because
use marks are not visible. It is made from a piece of worn or weathered
flint which may originally have been a hammerstone. One flake, 1.3
em. long and 1 em. wide, was removed from the edge opposite the
hammered end, thus forming a striking platform for the second flake
( 1.8 em. long and .5 em. wide ).
Specimen L-44 (Fig. 9, E ). This is a secondary burin spall which

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

measures 4 em. long and 1.6 em. wide and from which at least two
spalls had previously been removed. The spall shows considerable wear
at the tip; two extremely narrow scars ( .7 em. long), which may have
been produced by use, are evident.

0

c

8

E

F

G'

G

J

H'
0

2

6

4

8

10

CM
Fig . 9 . Worked Bone, Bu ri ns , Gouges, and Scraper. A, B, Bone awls. C, Single spall
bu rin . D, E, Secondary burin spalls . F, Knife? fragment show ing burin technique . G-H',
Bifacial gouges. J , Scraper.

53

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER
PIGMENT

Two small fragments of white chalk were found in the main occupation area. These possibly were utilized as a source of white paint
although there was no direct evidence of such use, and they are not
entered in Table 1.
wORKED SHELL

Two mussel shells are classified as possible artifacts. The first of
these is a small rectangle (3.3 em. X 3.1 em.) of shell which appears
to have been intentionally shaped. The edges, however, have not been
smoothed and some doubt is thereby cast on its origin. The second
shell, 4 em. in diameter, is complete, except for a hole ( 1 em. in diameter ) near the hinge of the shell. A. T. Jackson (1938 ) has suggested that such holes served for hafting, or for stringing and use as
rattles. Fundaburk and Foreman ( 195 7) have suggested that similarly
drilled shells were used as spoons in the southeastern United States.
BoNE TooLs
Bone tools are represented by two, possibly three, awls. The first of
these (Fig. 9, A, A' ) is a 21.7 em. long section of bison rib with a pointed
and smoothed distal end. The proximal (articular) portion of this bone
has been removed, but otherwise unmodified. The second (Fig. 9, B)
is a pointed fragment, 6.5 em. long, of bone (bison? ). This piece has
been smoothed over most of its surface, but whether this is a worked
or weathered surface cannot be determined. The third specimen is a
very small, pointed fragment of bone. The point may have been fashioned intentionally or may simply be fortuitous-the size and condition of the fragment make it impossible to tell.
HISTORIC ITEMS

As would be expected in a camping area, a number of historic items
were found during the excavation. These include a scattering of 22
cartridge cases ( 7), nails ( 3), glass fragments (about 25 ), bone buttons ( 2), rusty metal fragments (2 ), and a musket ball. This last item
is an almost perfect sphere of lead, having only one small round, flat
spot, presumably where the sprue material was cut off after molding.
The ball measures 0.535-0.528 inches in diameter and weighs 14.57
grams. Because of its nearly perfect sphericity and almost unmarred
surface it is obvious that the ball has never been fired. None of the

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

historic items can be linked with the Indian occupation (they are not
listed in Table 1) .
REFUSE

Occupational refuse was found throughout the excavation. This includes flint flakes, cores, chunks of flint (bluish-black) , flint pebbles,
burned limestone fragments, ash, and lumps of baked earth. Mussel
and snail shells were abundant, especially in the lower layers of the
shelter fill.
Many animal bone fragments were also found, especially toward
the front of the shelter. Several of these contained scratches or cuts
probably produced by removing flesh from the bones. Animals represented include bison, deer, birds, small mammals, fish , turtles, and
snakes. Judging by the number of bones found, deer seems to have been
the favored food.
CONCLUSIONS

This excavation was undertaken principally to give the Travis
County Archeological Society members an opportunity to practice archeological field work. Much of the excavation was carried out under
the supervision of professional archeologists, and all of it was done
with a sincere effort by the members to do a real workman-like job.
The excavation ran its course routinely to disclose what appears
to be a pure Central Texas Aspect site. An element of more than usual
interest was introduced, however, with Dr. Epstein's identification of
burins and burin spalls. This site provides apparently the first evidence that the burin technique was in use up to relatively recent times.
Three questions bear heavily on the evidence of the burin finds: first,
is the site affiliated with the Central Texas Aspect? Second, is there
any evidence of an earlier occupation? Third, can the burin material
be intrusive? Considering the questions in the order given: (1 ) The
identification of the Central Texas Aspect appears to be sound. The
artifacts closely follow the trait list given in An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm et al., 1954) . More significant, perhaps, authorities such as Suhm, Jelks, and Davis agree with this
identification. (2) There is no evidence considered as indicating occupation earlier than the Central Texas Aspect. Approximately 85%
of the area available for occupation was excavated to sterile caliche or
bedrock. This area included almost all of the shelter suitable for occupation. In this area only one dart point was found . This point is too

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

55

incomplete for positive identification, but it is tentatively classified as
the Uvalde type. Dart points are not considered to be a basic trait of
the Central Texas Aspect; however, they are not uncommon in these
sites. Jelks ( 1953), for example, reports 148 arrow points and 16 dart
points in the Blum Shelter, and yet identifies the site with the Central
Texas Aspect.
There remains the third question: whether the burins could be intrusive. This, of course, cannot be answered with absolute certainty.
Some strong likelihoods, however, can be indicated. In the first place,
the burin material was all found in the surface to 18 inch zone, with
most examples coming from six to 12 inches below the surface. This
corresponds to the depth of most of the other artifacts. Also, it seems
unlikely that all of the burins ( 10 specimens) would be intrusive.
Certainly no modern campers brought these items to the shelter, for to
an untrained eye they appear to be just flint flakes . They are not the
stuff that intrigues the casual amateur collector.
It is unfortunate that burins have not previously been observed in
association with arrow points, or other known Central Texas Aspect
material. In view of the other considerations, however, it is believed
that the use of the burin technique has been demonstrated to have
existed in the Central Texas Aspect. The results of this excavation suggest that a re-examination of flint flakes, etc., from known Central
Texas Aspect sites might be profitable. Possibly the use of burins in
relatively recent times could thereby be confirmed.
The relatively small number of artifacts recovered ( 140 specimens)
makes it difficult to assign this site to a particular focus within the
Central Texas Aspect. The presence of the Perdiz and Cliffton arrow
point types, as well as the bone awls, suggest the Toyah Focus. On the
other hand, the presence of Scallorn arrow points and the absence of
pottery indicate the Austin Focus. Since the artifacts were found without stratification, the site may indicate neither Austin nor Toyah, but
an intermediate culture. In any event the occupation appears to fall
within the Central Texas Aspect and, judging by the absence of trade
goods, before historic times.

REFERENCES CITED
Fundabunk, Emma Lila, and Mary Douglass Foreman (editors )
1957. Sun Circles and Human Hands. Published by Emma Lila Fundaburk,
Luverne, Alabama.

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jackson, A. T.
1938. The Fall Creek Sites. In: Annual Report of WPA and The University of
Texas Archaeological Research, Lake Buchanan, 1936- 1937. The University of Texas Publications, No. 3802, pp. 11 -118.
Jelks, Edward B.
1953. Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 24, pp. 189-207.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
T exas. Archa eology Series, No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of T exas.
Miller, E . 0., and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the T exas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 168-217.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1957. Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No.1, pp. 26-58.
1959. The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. The Texas Journal of
Science, Vol. 11, No.2, pp. 218-250.
1960. A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958 ), pp. 63-107.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory H andbook of T exas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas.
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Austin, Texas

