BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Volume 34

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY I AUSTIN, TEXAS I

1963

Office of the State Archeolo · · ~
' ··"'. , . --......._ L.b
.~
•~"
.,. ..,_~
1 rary
.•i
'!!!.
J~c ; ~ 1 l '-·. • , .• • ·".

.~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1963
President: JACK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Secretary-Treasurer: JEAN A. RICHMOND (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN SuHM (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), W. C. HoLDEN
(Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), HuBERT MEWHINNEY (Houston),
WAYNE NEYLAND (Houston), JAMES WARNICA (Portales, N. Mex.), JAMES
WoRD (Floydada).
Trustees: R. K. HARRis (Dallas), MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio), 0. L. SIMS
(San Angelo), HENRY STURGIS (Austin).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CARL CoMPTON (Denton), ALAN DuKE (Pasadena),
LATHEL DuFFIELD (Austin), R. E. FoRRESTER (Ft. Worth), SHERWOOD GAGLIANO (Baton Rouge, La.), D. T. KENT (Kirbyville), E. 0. MILLER (Moody),
ERIK REED (Sante Fe, N.Mex.), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Fellows: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Seattle, Wash.), CYRus N.
RAY (Abilene), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.) .

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treassurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin 12, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is the
same.
Cover design and portrait by Hal M. Story

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST • 1991

•

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i

Editor: D ee Ann Suhm
~

"f
'L.

Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D. Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1963

Office of the State Archeologis
:. ;.
Library

...

I

I

. '

j

DR. CYRUS N. Rw for more than a quarter of a century has devoted
himself to the furtherance of Texas archeology and the Texas
Archeological Society. His pioneer research into the archeology of the
Abilene area is recorded in the numerous articles he has written for
the Bulletin, and his enthusiasm and dedication to the Society is evident in his many years of service. He is a charter member of the
Society, was Editor of the Bulletin from its founding in 1929 until
1947, was President from 1929 until1948, has been President Emeritus
since 1948, and a Fellow since 1952.
The society is deeply indebted to Dr. Ray, and it is with pleasure
that this issue to the Bulletin is dedicated to him.

Table of Contents
Articles
Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of
Corpus Christi Bay, Texas
By James E. Corbin

5

Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter
(41TV69 ), Travis County, Texas
By J. C. Pollard, John W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis

31

Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified
Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas
By Harry J. Shafer.

57

The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic- Neo-American Site in
San Augustine County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield

83

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus Component
in De Soto Parish, Louisiana
By Clarence H . Webb .

143

A Guide to Pottery Sorting, and the Meaning of Pottery
Types and Attributes
By E. Mott Davis .

189

A Guide to Archeological Reconnaissance
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr. .

203

Book Reviews
Hall, Robert L., The Archeology of Carcajou Point, with an
Interpretation of the Development of Oneota Culture in
Wisconsin
By T. N. Campbell .

219

A Guide to Pottery Sorting, and the Meaning
of -Pottery Types and Attributes*
E. MOTT DAVIS
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews basic procedures in the classification of pottery. Initially,
specimens are sorted into descriptive groups made up of similar pieces, the similarities being based on common attributes-paste, design elements, and so forth. The
next step is the setting up of types which are, basically, groups of attributes which
appear repeatedly in a given area and time span. The types are established by
tabulating the distribution of descriptive groups. Once established, types can be
used in tracing historical relationships between prehistoric cultures. Attributes also
can be used in this way, independently of ty pes.

INTRODUCTION

The classification of prehistoric artifacts is, basically, a matter of
grouping together specimens that look alike. The purpose is twofold.
First, the specimens in each group can be described jointly, and this is
better than having to describe hundreds of specimens individually.
Second, if the sorting has been done judiciously, the groupings can be
said to represent past customs, and hence can be used as tools in the
work of reconstructing cultural history.
This paper is, specifically, about the sorting and classification of
pottery. We start with a pile of potsherds from an archeological site,
and we wonder what to do with them that will make it worth while
having collected them in the first place. Four major steps are recommended: ( 1) sort the sherds into groups of similar specimens for purposes of description ; (2 ) tabulate the groups according to the locations
of the specimens; ( 3) see if the groups fall into types according to their
distribution in the table; ( 4) use the types in establishing relationships
among archeological complexes. It is also profitable, as a separate procedure, to tabulate the occurrence of the individual features on the
• This article is based on a paper given at the Pottery Symposium of the Houston
Archeological Society, at the University of Houston, December 6, 1959.

190

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

specimens, and to use them in the same way that types are used in
establishing sequences and relationships.

THE REASONS FOR DETAILED ANALYSIS

In this paper we will look into these procedures for setting up types;
but first it is worth while to discuss whys and wherefores. The business
of sorting and typing specimens is often dull work, and people who are
otherwise much interested in archeology are likely to be quite unenthusiastic about this part of the subject. After all, it is the romantic
side of archeology, not the rote work, which is one of its main attractions. Finding an implement actually made several thousand years ago
can be quite a thrill, because it is a contacl with the distant, inaccessible past. Real archeology, however, does not subsist on romance. In
the training of every archeologist, be he amateur or professional, there
comes a sorting-out process. The pot-hunters and pure romantics drop
out in the course of the meticulous digging and recording, the cataloging of the specimens, the classification and description and reporting;
and the real archeologists stick it out.
This is not to say that there is no romance to real archeology. The
romance is there, the same feeling of contact with the past. But to
make real contact with the real past, the detailed, careful, craft aspects
of archeology are absolutely essential. The job cannot be done by
enthusiastic day-dreaming.
Therefore, when we are confronted with a pile of broken pieces of
pottery, our handling of them should be guided by the constant realization that we really are working to pierce the curtain of time. We
intend to look into the past and find out what people were actually
doing. It is a slow, careful job. This sort of work is the raw stuff of
historical science.

SORTING INTO DESCRIPTIVE GROUPS

We start, then, with a collection of catalogued potsherds. Note that
they have been cataloged. They are marked with numbers or letters
which show, either directly or by reference to a catalog, where each
one was found. If they have not been cataloged, it is not possible to
follow through to the setting up of types and the exploration into the
history of the makers of the specimens.
Obviously, if we are going to handle all these specimens, we must

POTTERY SORTING

191

organize them in some way or other, and describe them. It is not
practical to describe each specimen individually unless there are only
a dozen or so. Very evidently the collection has to be sorted into groups
which can be handled as units. This, then, is our first job: to organize
the collection into groups of specimens that look enough alike so that
they can be described together. I shall call these groups descriptive
groups.
The sorting is done by checking the individual features of the sherds.
We call these features attributes. They include the nature of the paste,
the temper, the surface treatment, shape of the vessel, method and
design of decoration, and so forth (see appendix at end of this paper ) .
In sorting, one goes over the sherds one by one, checking their various
attributes, and putting them into different piles, each pile representing
a first guess as to what should be a descriptive group. The job usually
involves going through the collection more than once, since one's ideas
as to what the proper divisions should be are likely to change and
become more definite as more and more specimens come under
scrutiny.
The main rule in this procedure is to work with what is there, and
to have as few preconceptions as possible. One should not worry about
the groupings that have been worked out in other collections, or about
what the books say. It is best to be as independent as possible at this
stage of the work. Try sorting according to some likely combination of
attributes-tempering material, color, design-and if the first attempt
does not work, try another combination. In other words, find out how
these sherds sort on the basis of their own characteristics. The object
is to get them into groups in which the sherds are enough alike so that
the groups can be described. As part of the work, one should also keep
his eyes open for sherds that fit each other; in this way the lucky
worker may end up reconstructing parts of the vessels, or perhaps even
entire vessels.
Having accomplished the sorting, the next job is to write descriptions
of the groups. This writing is important, because when you have to
put things down on paper it is not possible to be as careless as when
you are merely thinking about them, and frequently you learn new
things a bout the material in the course of the writing.
The very fact that the pottery can be sorted into groups means that
the people who made the pottery had repetitive habits, which resulted
in certain features of manufacture appearing on numerous sherds and
numerous vessels. In other words, we have already recreated a bit of
prehistoric behavior.

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SETTING UP TYPES

Now that the material has been sorted into descriptive groups and
has been described, we can use it for either of two different kinds of
archeological analysis. First, we can use the material in tracing relationships between the people who made it and other groups of people
- ancestors, relatives, descendants, or neighbors. This is called historical analysis, and it is our main concern here. Second, we can make
inferences as to the part the specimens played in the life of the people
using them; this is functional analysis.
It is appropriate to point out the usefulness of functional analysis,
even though it is not the primary concern of this discussion. In many
areas, as in the Southwestern U.S . or the Caddoan Area in northeastern Texas, one can combine the descriptive groups into a few large
functional categories-cooking and utility vessels, burial vessels, ceremonial vessels, and the like. This sort of analysis, if done with considerable caution, can be a major key in reconstructing the life of
the past.
Our major concern here, however, is to use the pottery in retracing
history-in detecting relationships and developments between different peoples. We are looking for pottery classes that reflect customs
which were transmitted from one group to another, and from one generation to another. Such customs necessarily existed in given areas
and in given time spans. Therefore we want to find pottery categories
which hang together in time and space; and these will be our types.
Thus, a type is basically a group of attributes which appear repeatedly
together on specimens from a given area and within a continuous time
span. Less precisely, a type is a group of similar specimens from a
single time and space span. An example of a modern artifact type
would be a given make and model of an automobile, represented by
thousands of individual cars identified by a series of specific attributes
-grille design, body outline, features of the engine, and so forth.
Setting up types is a laborious but fairly straightforward process, in
which the main step is the making out of a distribution table (see, for
example, Table 1). Across the top of the table, one lists the find spots
-the places where the specimens were found. These will be such
things as grid squares and levels, stratigraphic zones, parts of the site,
particular burials, or (in the case of a surface survey) sites. Down the
side are listed the descriptive groups which have resulted from our
sorting. Thus we have a vertical column for each find spot, and a
horizontal line for each descriptive group. Then the specimens are

193

POTTERY SORTING

TABLE 1

FoND SPoTs-.

Zo111c
J)C&Cit i PTIV£

I

Zot~~dl

ZoNFm

ZoNE I[

(t.owcsr)

ZoNrJl
(HIGHf&T)

TOTALS

(TJtoUPS

,j,

#J .

IHt Ulf Ult Ill

T08IIOWN,
SON£ TEMPER

#2 .
PLAIN, BROWA/,
CLAY T£11PER

ununun
IH1 lll

f>lAtlll, GRAY

19

UIIIHIUII
LHfi.JtfUtf U41JHf~
IHf 1111

5'1-

88
25

23

ununun

IHfJHf/Jif

UftiHfiHI Uf1 Uff IH/f UHJ

JJnun

Ctt
t:J:t1Jlt1 tJfiJIII/JI(
IXIIHIJHIJ)If

~~r

fl'1

66

JH!/1

2'fZ

15
38
JH1 /Ill )Iff lHI 1)11 f)ff
JHfJI(fJHf J.HUH11Hf
/.H1lJfflllf
I)# I

PLAIN, BROWN,
BURNISHED,

SHELl

T£/'fP£11

UltJHI Ufl
till

JIII/II

BROWN,

81JR/IIISH£D TO

f'OLISIIC/)~
INC. I SED t>t51QN,

8

SHELL Tt:I"'PER

72

89

/OJ

107

/}lfJHIJ)If
36 /Ill
6'f

7
#:If.

TOTALS

6

IJIIJHIJIII

j)lt/11

JHtuniJif lH1 Jilt Ill/

~3 -

16

IHIJIIIJNf

98

27

I"'
ID'f

'f6'f

Explanation
Simplified tabulation of the distribution of sherds from a site where the stratigraphic zones (layers of earth) were clear, so th at the sherds could be cataloged
as to which zone each specimen was found in. I n other sites, the find spots migh t
be in terms of arbitrary excavation levels, burials, or other categories mentioned
in the text.
Each mark represen ts one specimen; the marks are grouped in "gates" of five
for ease in counting.
Descriptive groups #1 and #2. are similar in many respects and have the same
distribution except that #1 is less common. They are best combined as a single
tentative type, "plain, gray to brown, clay or bone temper."
Group #3 is distinct in both appearance and distribution, and is a good tentative
type by itself. The same is true of #4.
Speaking in terms of attributes, clay and bone temper reach a peak of popu larity
in zones II and III and decrease thereafter. Shell temper first appears in Zone III
and is dominant in Zone V. The same is true of burnis hing. Incised designs appear
in Zone IV and increase thereafter.
It can readily be seen that the actual number of specimens in each space is not
as important as the relation this number bears to the total in the column or line.
For this reason many tables include figures showing percentages of the tota l.

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

taken one by one, the find spot for each one is determined from the
catalog, and a mark is made for that specimen in the appropriate place
on the table.
Once the table is made out, it is possible to see how certain descriptive
groups hang together, whereas others have independent distributions.
Perhaps two or three of the original descriptive groups share a number
of attributes and always, or nearly always, occur together. If so, they
can be put together and called a possible type. We say possible,
because the conclusion needs to be checked at other sites to make it
firm. If surface collections are being tabulated, some descriptive groups
may occur more frequently on certain sites and much less frequently
on others; in this case one would suspect that types are emerging from
the study.
If you are lucky, someone else will have done similar work elsewhere in your area, and will have described and tabulated his material
as carefully and clearly as you have. If so, you can extend your tabulation on the basis of his material. If he has described his original groupings properly, you might find that his and your groupings coincide,
each study verifying the other and making a good case for setting up
types. On the other hand, you might find reasons to re-group his
material on the basis of the further information in your table. Revisions of this sort are now going on, for instance, in the classification of
Caddoan brushed pottery.

THE USE OF TYPES

We have now bee:-~ through the main steps in the establishment of
types. The use of types in detecting relationships between archeological
complexes is a subject which we can only treat briefly here. An archeological complex, such as the Aransas Focus or the Galveston Bay
Focus, is a group of attributes and types, manifested on artifacts and
structural features, which recur together repeatedly in sites from a
particular area and time span. Such a complex is presumed to represent a group of people who had a common culture; they lived alike.
When two separate complexes, such as the Galveston Bay Focus and
the Toyah Focus, have certain artifact types in common-Perdiz
points, for instance-this fact has some meaning in terms of contacts
between peoples and the spread of customs. Such complexes are said
to be related; how closely related depends on the number of traits

195

POTTERY SORTING

(types and attributes ) they have in common. If a type persists in time
through several succeeding foci, it gives an indication of cultural continuity from one focus to the next. For instance, Dr. Clarence Webb
has recently shown that the Caddoan pottery type Pease BrushedIncised first appears in the Haley Focus and lasts through the succeeding Bossier Focus. The cultural continuity thus demonstrated, combined with the evidence of other types and attributes which also persist from the Haley Focus to the Bossier Focus, gives clear evidence
that the Bossier Focus developed from the Haley Focus.
THE USE OF ATTRIBUTES

Although this paper is primarily about pottery types, it is well to
point out what has already been indicated in the preceding paragraph :
that individual attributes can and should be used in the same way as
types, and quite independently of types, in working out prehistoric
relationships. It is both possible and practical to make out a distribution
table in which each horizontal line is devoted, not to a descriptive
group, but to a single attribute-for instance, shell temper, asphalt
paint, conical vessel base, or squared lip. The attributes that show a
clear time and space distribution on the table, rather than being
scattered at random, evidently represent customs just as our types do,
and we can make use of them in identifying prehistoric cultures and
in detecting relationships between different cultures. The usefulness
of attributes has often been overlooked because of an over-emphasis on
setting up types, and useful information is neglected thereby. As a
matter of fact, there are collections in which it is hard to set up good
types; but the attributes can always be utilized to advantage. The
analyst is therefore cautioned not to ignore the lowly attributes ; they
are often as useful as the types. Examples of profitable utilization of
attributes, independent of types, can be seen in the studies of the
history of certain design concepts in the pottery of the Southeast
(Ford, 1952), or of glaze paint in the Southwest (Kidder and Shepard,
1936: 601-628).
SOME GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

Returning to the matter of pottery types, four general considerations
are worth emphasizing.
First. The word "type" is best restricted to those categories which
appear to have a given time and space distribution as indicated by

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

field evidence. People are likely to be careless with the word " type, "
and to use it in many ways. As a result it is often hard to tell just what
some of the categories mean, and whether "types" set up by different
people can be effectively compared with one another. Matters will be
helped if we restrict the use of the word to groups with specific time
and space distributions.
It should be noted, in this connection, that the descriptive groups
into which we first sorted our material may or may not correspond to
types; the tabulation will show which ones do correspond to types, and
which ones do not. Such purely descriptive categories as .our preliminary descriptive groups should not be called "types" unless it is established that they have historical significance- that they had continuity
in time in a given area.
Second. Types set up from sherds are sherd types; types set up from
rim sherds are rim types; types set up from whole vessels are vessel
types; and there are other sorts of types. These different kinds of types
are not necessarily equal to one another in significance, but they are
all useful. Vessel types are doubtless the most valid in the study of
past customs, because the Indians made vessels, not sherds. Sometimes,
however, sherds are all you have, and in that case you may have to
work with sherd types. Obviously it is important that the worker make
it clear what sort of type he is talking about.
Third. There are hardly ever firm lines between types. Most classification is a matter of breaking up a continuous series. In every collection there are some sherds which can be put in more than one category. For instance, one type may have developed from an earlier one;
in that case where are you going to draw the line? Good judgment is
necessary here, and the main problem must be kept in mind: to set up
categories which will be most helpful in tracing relationships between
sites and complexes, and thus will tell most about the history of
customs.
Since judgement enters into the classification, it is natural that
different workers will draw the lines in different places. For instance,
some people (the " splitters") customarily divide a collection into many
small types, whereas others (the "lumpers" ) feel it is most useful to
set up a few broad, inclusive types and, if necessary, subdivide them
into subtypes or varieties. There is no final answer to such differences
of opinion except that the worker must not only describe his types, but
also must tell how he went a bout setting them up. Then his work can
be used and compared with that of someone else who may have come

197

POTTERY SORTING

up with different results because of having gone at the problem in a
different way.
It should also be evident, from these considerations, that type definitions will be changed as more studies are made and more knowledge is
gained. The problem, after all, is not to set up types, but to understand
what happened in the past. To that end, as studies progress, new types
will be set up and old types may be dropped. A type may be split into
two or more new types if it seems to clarify matters; or several old
types may be combined into a single new type. Still other types will
stand the test of time.
Fourth. There are always some specimens that cannot be classified
into one type or another. They make up the "miscellaneous" column
in the tabulation. They constitute the " residual category." These mavericks should not be forced into one type or another; the analyst should
face facts and throw them into a pile marked "unclassifiable." Naturally, one tries to put as many of the specimens into descriptive groups
as possible; but at the end of the job, it is to be expected that there will
remain a pile made up of stubborn specimens each of which stands by
itself. Any of them that seem significant should be described individually; otherwise one need only make a few general remarks about
why the unclassifiable sherds have presented difficulties.
SUMMARY

We can recapitulate briefly the matters discussed in this paper. The
pottery from each archeological project should be sorted on its own
merits, divided into descriptive groups, which are batches of similar
pieces having a number of features (attributes ) in common. These
descriptive groups are the units to be worked with in setting up types,
which are groupings of attributes with definable space and time distribution. A type has meaning in history; otherwise a grouping should
not be called a type. In pottery several kinds of types are possible, such
as sherd types, rim types. or vessel types. Types can be expected to
grade into one another, and drawing the lines between them is a
matter of judgment in the job of most clearly reconstructing the past.
Therefore, in presenting a classification, the procedures as well as the
results should be described. There will naturally be differences of
opinion as to matters of classification, and type definitions will change
as further studies are made. A few specimens will always defy classification; they may or may not be important. Finally, the establish-

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ment and utilization of pottery types should be supplemented by the
study of the distribution of individual attributes, which are as useful
as types in the study of culture history.
The procedures described here for the classification of pottery may
also be applied to other classes of artifacts, such as chipped stone projectile points, shell ornaments, or bone tools. The ultimate objective
is the reconstruction of a valid picture of the past, presented in such a
manner that it may be checked against the work of others. Thus we
may gain a broader perspective on the course of human events. Types
and attributes are tools to that end, and they should be formulated and
utilized accordingly.

APPENDIX: LIST OF ATTRIBUTES FOR CLASSIFICATION
AND DESCRIPTION OF POTTERY

This is an outline list of many of the terms used in working with
pottery. In a brief presentation such as this, the list cannot aim to be
exhaustive or to give a full explanation of every term. The best way
to become acquainted with pottery analysis, short of doing it oneself,
is to study professional reports of archeological projects in which
pottery collections are analyzed (for basic references see Colton, 1953 ;
Shepard, 195 7) .
PASTE

Method of Manufacture: often this is difficult to determine.
Coiled-built by adding rolls of clay in a continuous spiral, or in
rings, from bottom to top. Traces of coils. incompletely smoothed
out, can sometimes be detected, and sometimes breaks occur
evenly along otherwise invisible coil lines.
Modeled-built up from a lump or lumps.
Wheel-made-can be detected by the even parallel curves of the
smoothing lines on interior surfaces.
Molded-made in a mold; found in Middle America and South
America.
Temper: foreign material mixed into the clay to prevent cracking during drying and firing. Temper can usually be seen with a hand
glass where there are fresh breaks.
Common tempering materials are: sand, clay, grit (crushed rock;
the rock can often be identified), shell, bone, crushed sherd (hard
to distinguish from clay at times), fiber (vegetal rna terial ) .

199

POTTERY SORTING

Texture: the fineness of the paste, usually shown on broken surfaces.
Described as coarse, medium, or fine.
Hardness: this is an indication of how well the material was fired. The
standard mineralogical hardness scale of 1 to 10 (Mohs' scale)
is usually used.
Color: usually stated as dominant surface color. and variations from it;
differences between color on interior and exterior surface of
vessel; difference in color between surface and core of paste, as
seen in fresh breaks; addition of a slip-a thin layer of clay different from the clay used in construction of the vessel. Color is
sometimes described precisely with the use of a color dictionary,
such as those by Munsell (Copper, 1941 ) or Maerz and Paul
( 1950).
Surface finish (as distinguished from decoration ) : rough, bumpy,
smoothed, roughened, burnished (rubbed almost to a polish ),
polished, brushed, stamped with a paddle or stick, fabric impressed. Some techniques, such as brushing, can be used as
surface treatment or as design, or both.
FoRM

Wall thickness: usually given in millimeters; note whether the base is
thicker than the walls.
Rim: the margin of the vessel mouth, where it is distinguished from
the rest of the vessel body by a change in the direction of the wall,
by thickening, or by other differences.
The rim may be incurved, outcurved (flaring ), vertical, straight,
thickened, or with other variations.
Lip: the top of the rim; the juncture of inner and outer surfaces at the
mouth of the vessel.
The lip may be sharp, rounded, flattened (squared ), tapered, turned.
in or out, thinned, thickened, scalloped.
Base: may be convex, concave, flat, pointed.
Vessel size: the various dimensions-diameter, height, width of mouth,
etc.-are usually given in the metric system.
Vessel shape: the shape needs to be described in detail, and illustrations
are most important.
Some of the terms used are: bowl, jar, bottle; globular, hemispherical, conical, long and tapering.
Appendages: handles, lugs, nodes, etc.

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
DECORATION

Technique:
Incised-cut with sharp instrument.
Trailed-cut with blunt instrument. Trailing and incising grade
into each other.
Engraved-cut with sharp instrument after the clay is dry.
Punctated- punched with the end of a stick, with fingernails
( "fingernail punctate" or "fingernail impressed" ) or with some
other instrument.
Pinched.
Ridged.
Appliqm\d-clay strips added to the surface for a relief design.
Cord impressed- design created by pressing a cord into the clay.
Cord-marked- paddled with a cord-wrapped stick; this is usually a
surface treatment rather than a decoration, but is sometimes done
to make designs.
Brushed- may be a rough surface treatment, or may be part of a
design .
Stamped-in the Texas area, largely restricted by stamping with
the edge of a shell, sometimes toothed ("dentate stamped" ) . In
" rocker stamping," the shell is " walked" across the clay surface,
producing a zigzag pattern. Elsewhere there are many other kinds
of stamping.
Neck-banded-the neck coils are not smoothed out, but are left as a
design.
Modeled-the clay has been modeled, often into realistic forms
( effigy pottery ) .
Painted.
Design: the design must be described, and illustrations should be used.
Here such terms are used as: circles, squares, diamonds, straight
lines, curved lines, hatching, cross-hatching, spirals, scrolls, ticked
lines, steps, and so forth .
It should also be specified where the design occurs: on the base,
body, shoulder, neck, rim, or lip of the vessel.
REFERENCES CITED
Colton, H. S.
1953. Potsherds. Museum of Northern Arizona, Bulletin Z5 . Flagstaff.
Copper, F. C.
1941. Munsell Manual of Color. Munsell Color Co., Baltimore.

201

POTTERY SORTING

Ford, James A.
195Z. Measurements of Some Prehistoric Design Developments in the Southeastern States. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of
Natural History, Vol. 44, Pt. 3. New York.
Kidder, Alfred V., and Anna 0. Shepard
1936. The Pottery of Pecos, Volume II. Yale University Press. N ew Haven.
Maerz, A., and M. R. Paul
1950. A Dictionary of Color. Znd edition. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York.
Shepard, Anna 0.
1957. Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Publication 609. Washington, D.C.

Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas

