BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Volume 34

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY I AUSTIN, TEXAS I

1963

Office of the State Archeolo · · ~
' ··"'. , . --......._ L.b
.~
•~"
.,. ..,_~
1 rary
.•i
'!!!.
J~c ; ~ 1 l '-·. • , .• • ·".

.~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1963
President: JACK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Secretary-Treasurer: JEAN A. RICHMOND (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN SuHM (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), W. C. HoLDEN
(Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), HuBERT MEWHINNEY (Houston),
WAYNE NEYLAND (Houston), JAMES WARNICA (Portales, N. Mex.), JAMES
WoRD (Floydada).
Trustees: R. K. HARRis (Dallas), MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio), 0. L. SIMS
(San Angelo), HENRY STURGIS (Austin).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CARL CoMPTON (Denton), ALAN DuKE (Pasadena),
LATHEL DuFFIELD (Austin), R. E. FoRRESTER (Ft. Worth), SHERWOOD GAGLIANO (Baton Rouge, La.), D. T. KENT (Kirbyville), E. 0. MILLER (Moody),
ERIK REED (Sante Fe, N.Mex.), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Fellows: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Seattle, Wash.), CYRus N.
RAY (Abilene), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.) .

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treassurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin 12, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is the
same.
Cover design and portrait by Hal M. Story

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST • 1991

•

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i

Editor: D ee Ann Suhm
~

"f
'L.

Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D. Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1963

Office of the State Archeologis
:. ;.
Library

...

I

I

. '

j

DR. CYRUS N. Rw for more than a quarter of a century has devoted
himself to the furtherance of Texas archeology and the Texas
Archeological Society. His pioneer research into the archeology of the
Abilene area is recorded in the numerous articles he has written for
the Bulletin, and his enthusiasm and dedication to the Society is evident in his many years of service. He is a charter member of the
Society, was Editor of the Bulletin from its founding in 1929 until
1947, was President from 1929 until1948, has been President Emeritus
since 1948, and a Fellow since 1952.
The society is deeply indebted to Dr. Ray, and it is with pleasure
that this issue to the Bulletin is dedicated to him.

Table of Contents
Articles
Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of
Corpus Christi Bay, Texas
By James E. Corbin

5

Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter
(41TV69 ), Travis County, Texas
By J. C. Pollard, John W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis

31

Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified
Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas
By Harry J. Shafer.

57

The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic- Neo-American Site in
San Augustine County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield

83

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus Component
in De Soto Parish, Louisiana
By Clarence H . Webb .

143

A Guide to Pottery Sorting, and the Meaning of Pottery
Types and Attributes
By E. Mott Davis .

189

A Guide to Archeological Reconnaissance
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr. .

203

Book Reviews
Hall, Robert L., The Archeology of Carcajou Point, with an
Interpretation of the Development of Oneota Culture in
Wisconsin
By T. N. Campbell .

219

Archeological Materials From the Northern
Shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas
JAMES E. CORBIN
ABSTRACT
From 1957 to the present, the writer has mad e an arch eological sur vey of the
northem shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas. Dur ing this period, 16 campsites wer e
located. With one possible exception, the McGloin Bluff Site, all are shell middens.
Collecting from the surface of these midd en areas produ ced w ell over 4,000
ar tifacts which are described in detail, and which are assignable to either the
Rockport or Aransas Focus.

INTRODUCTION

The central portion of the Texas Gulf Coast, that area between the
Brazos River and Corpus Christi Bay, has yielded archeological materials that can be assigned to one of the four development stages set up
for Texas as a whole ( Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954) . Thus far the
earliest stage, the Paleo-American, is known only from surface finds
of certain dart point types, including Plainview and Clovis. The later
Archaic Stage is represented by the Aransas Focus, the majority of the
material coming from two excavated sites on Copano Bay (Campbell,
1947; 1952) and from surface collections near Corpus Christi (Campbell, 1956) . The Rockport Focus has been recognized for the NeoAmerican and Historic stages, mainly from archeological surveys
(Martin, n.d.; 1929; 1931; Potter, 1930 ; Sayles, 1935 ) ; from excavated
Aransas Focus sites that were overlain by small Rockport components (Campbell, 1956 ) ; from surface collections near Corpus Christi
( Campbell, 1956 ) ; and from an excavated Rockport Site on Live Oak
Point (Campbell, 1958 ) . Obviously, there are not a wealth of data
from the central coast; and more material and information are needed
before it is possible to have a good understanding of the prehistory of .
the area.
The purpose of this paper is to describe and evaluate archeological
materials I have collected from the surface of 16 sites found in an areal

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

reconnaissance of the extreme southern portion of this central coastal
area. This survey, a sporadic operation from 1957 to the present, covered an area between the city of Portland and the eastern edge of the
southern tip of Live Oak Peninsula.
The physiographic features of the region are much the same
throughout: short beaches backed by bluffs ranging from 12 to 18 feet
high. The bluffs are usually composed of a white clay which is frequently capped by a four to 18 inch deposit of black, sandy clay. On the
southern edge of Live Oak Peninsula, however, the black clay is replaced by wind-blown sand. Here the vegetation is mainly grasses and
oak trees, whereas elsewhere (from Kinney Bayou to Portland ) it is
grasses and mesquite trees.

McGLOIN BLUFF SITE ( 41-SP-ll)
McGloin Bluff is located on the southern tip of Live Oak Peninsula
and faces south toward Corpus Christi Bay. The bluff runs east and
west, and extends from just east of Harbor City to the base of Ingleside Point. It is approximately 14 feet above sea level, and there is a
short beach between the bluff and the waters of the bay. The eastern
half of the bluff is covered with sand dunes that are 12 to 20 feet high.
The main vegetation is grasses, with a few oak trees on the western
section.
The site is approximately at the mid-point of the bluff; its western
half is covered with dunes, but the eastern half is fairly exposed. There
are two running springs located on the site. One is on the western extremity of the site and only started flowing freely after the recent
( 1961 ) hurricane Carla. A second and more reliable spring is located
at the mid-point of the bluff, and the major portion of the site seems
to be centered in this area. There used to be a third spring on the eastern edge of the site, but it apparently has not been flowing for the past
20 years.
I first visited the site early in 1957, after being told of an Indian
" mound" in the area. What I found was a large site on a bluff which
was dissected by a series of small gullies, the areas between the gullies
giving the impression of mounds. No shell midden deposits can be seen
anywhere in the vicinity; in fact, very little shell can be found on the
site. At the time of the initial visit, potsherds and flint flakes were very
numerous but now, after 150 collecting trips to the site, very few artifacts can be recovered. The collection was made entirely from the
surface and to date con sists of 66 stone and shell artifacts and 3,381
potsherds.

7

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

B

C

E

D

F

A

DD

E E

0 I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

CM
Fig . 1. Artifacts of stone a nd shell from the McGlo in Bluff Site.

G

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Projectile Points. Flint projectile points are represented by 27 specimens, seven of which are unidentifiable distal fragments. Of the 20
identifiable points, two can be classed as dart points. One of these (Fig.
1, A ) falls within the range of the Darl type and has a blade that is
altemately beveled to the left. The stem, barely discernible because of
extremely small shoulders, is basally thinned. The other point, classified as Catan (Fig. 1, B), has a convex base and alternately beveled
blade edges. These two specimens are the only suggestions of an Aransas Focus occupation. However, both types are thought to have survived into later times and therefore may be associated with the better
represented Rockport Focus.
The remaining 18 specimens are arrow points, and almost all of these
fall within the range of types associated with the Rockport Focus. The
Perdiz type, which includes seven points, predominates. Four of these
(Fig. 1, H-J ) have blades with straight lateral edges, and one (Fig. 1,
K ) has a blade with convex edges. The stem of the latter specimen is
longer than the blade. A sixth Perdiz (Fig. 1, M ) has a blade with concave edges. The seventh (Fig. 1, N ) point may be classified as a Cliffton, a crude Perdiz, or an unfinished point of either type. Three of the
Perdiz are made from thin flakes, with complete flaking on one side and
only minor flaking on the other. Eddy points (or eddy variety of Seallorn ) are represented by three fragmentary specimens (Fig. 1, 0-Q) ,
all of which show evidence of having had short blades, strong barbs
and bulbous stems.
Two triangular specimens with gently concave bases are classified
a s Starr. One (Fig. 1, C) has nearly straight lateral edges, while the
other (Fig. 1, D ) has concave lateral edges with slight serrations on
the proximal two-third of these edges. Two other triangular points from
the site are identified as Young. These (Fig. 1, R, S) are made from
thin, essentially unifacially worked flakes.
Six additional arrow points do not fit into any of the recognized
types and will, consequently, be described individually. One (Fig. 1,
T ) has a rectangular stem and shoulders which extend at right angles
from the stem. The edges of the blade are straight and slightly serrated. Another small, crude point (Fig. 1, U ) has an expanding stem
with a straight base and small barbs formed by corner notches. The
edges of the blade are straight. A small ( 1.4 em. long ) triangular point
(Fig. 1, V ) has a straight lateral edge. One side has a slight shoulder
about halfway down the edge. Three triangular points (Fig. 1, E-G)
have very deeply concave bases; one of these (Fig. 1, G ) has essentially
straight lateral edges, and the others have slightly concave blade edges.

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

9

Scrapers. End scrapers are represented by one small (3.4 em. long
and 1.3 em. wide) specimen worked on one end (Fig. 1, W ) . Side
scrapers, by contrast, include four examples (Fig. 1, X-AA ) , one of
which (Fig. 1, X) is roughly triangular in outline and has two worked
edges, one being concave, the other convex. A second specimen (Fig.
1, Y ) is rectangular in outline (4.5 em. long and 2 em. wide ) and is
worked along one straight lateral edge. A third side scraper (Fig. 1, Z )
is made from a thin, roughly triangular flake and is lightly retouched
on two edges. The fourth specimen (Fig. 1, AA ) is also rectangular in
shape and is retouched along one straight lateral edge.
Gravers. One graver (Fig. 1, BB ), made from a roughly triangular
flake, was found at the site. It has two graver points, one of which is
broken. One long worked lateral edge might have been used for scrapmg purposes.
Miscellaneous Worked Stone. Two pieces of worked flint cannot be
identified. The first specimen (Fig. 1, CC ) is roughly semicircular in
outline, is worked on both faces, and has a small projection at one end.
The second unidentified fragment (not shown ) is D-shaped in outline,
bifacially chipped, and has retouching along the convex edge.
One worked fragment of hard, gray sandstone (Fig. 1, DD) appears
to be an incurvate rim fragment from a tubular stone pipe. The exterior surface is very well ground, and the interior only a little less so.
Reconstructed, the interior diameter is approximately 8 em. The fragment is .7 em. thick at the rim and .8 em. thick at the opposite end
of the fragment.
Shell Artifacts. Although shell of any kind is scarce at the site, 30
shell artifacts were found. Twenty of these are small whelk shell
columella fragments ranging from 2.5 em. to 7 em. in length. The ends
of one undamaged columella (Fig. 1, EE ) have been ground to very
sharp points. Another type of shell artifact is a small disc (Fig. 1, FF)
which shows heavy grinding along the edges. This specimen is 1.7 em.
in diameter and approximately .5 em. thick. A roughly trapezoidal
shell fragment (Fig. 1, GG ) with a steep bit on the smaller end
appears to be a fragment from the body of a scallop shell. The remainder of the shell artifacts are small, unidentifiable fragments.
Pottery. The many collecting trips to the site have resulted in a
collection of 3,381 potsherds, not including a large number of exceptionally small and badly eroded pieces. The sherds are classified
according to the types defined in An Introductory Handbook of Texas

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rB~
A

B

c

~~ ~'

~,
~
D

E

F

G

~

j

H

K

J

L

p

0

N

M

a w •

••

Jill@~

li

U

AA

Q

R

V

W

S

X

Y

T

Z

, , , , , , , , , ,s ,10

0 1 2 3 4- 5 6 1 8

CM

BB

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

11

Archeology ( Suhm, et al., 1954: 382--385 ) ; with nearly all falling
within the Rockport series.
1) Rockport Plain. Rim sherds from Rockport Plain vessels number
139. These include 63 flat-lipped rims (Fig. 2, U, V ), 11 of which have
asphaltum coatings on both surfaces.* Only four have asphaltum on
the exterior surfaces, and one has scoring on the exterior surface.
Sixty-five sherds are from vessels with rounded lips (Fig. 2, W-Y ) .
Thirty-six of these have no asphaltum, but four have scoring on the
interior surfaces. Asphaltum is found in 29 sherds, 1 7 having asphaltum on one side only. Of these 17, six have asphaltum on the exterior
surfaces and five have asphaltum on the interior surfaces, with two
of the former scored on the interior and one of the latter scored on the
interior. One of these sherds is from a vessel whose internal diameter
at the mouth was approximately 4 em. It is not possible to determine
which surface has been asphalt coated on six sherds.
Four additional sherds, three with asphaltum coatings, have beveled
lips, but it is impossible to distinguish the interior from the exterior
surfaces.
Two sherds have thickened lips (Fig. 2, Z ) . One of these has
asphaltum and scoring on the exterior surface, the asphaltum extending about halfway across the lip. Vessels with V-notched lips are represented by five sherds.
2) Rockport Black-on-gray. Sherds of this type number 74, 32 of
which are from vessel rims. Vessels which had rounded lips are represented by 24 sherds (Fig. 2, A, B) . On all of these only the lip proper
is painted. Four sherds are from vessels that had flattened lips (Fig. 2,
C). On three of these just the flat part of the lip is painted. The lip
of the fourth sherd (Fig. 2, D) is rolled to the interior and is lightly
incised with parallel diagonal lines ; it and the interior of the sherd
are coated with asphaltum. On the exterior surface of the sherd a
vertical, asphaltum painted line extends down from the rim.
One sherd (Fig. 2, E) is from a vessel with an outcurved rim. A
wavy line of asphaltum runs vertically down from the rim. The interior surface of the sherd is coated with asphaltum and this extends
up to the top of the lip.
• Suhrn, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 384) designate any Rockport ware bearing
asphaltum as Rockport Black-on-gray. Herein, however, this type is restricted to
those sherds having obvious designs.
Fig . 2 . Potshe rds fro m the McGloin Bluff Site . Rim p rofiles a re oriented with their interior surface s facing left.

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Three sherds indicate different types of lip notching. One of these
(Fig. 2, F ) has a V-notched flat lip painted with asphaltum. A second
flat lip (Fig. 2, G) is notched with diagonal crenelations and also
painted with asphaltum. The only other rim sherd (Fig. 2, H ) has
U-shaped notches and the same style of lip painting as described above.
Asphaltum painted decorations appear on 42 body sherds. The
motifs consist of various straight, wavy, dotted, and dashed lines on
the exterior surfaces . Of these, 33 also have asphaltum coatings on the
interior surfaces. Two of the latter have interior scoring associated
with asphaltum coating, while another two have scoring, but no asphaltum, on the interior surface.
3) Rockport Incised. One sherd (Fig. 2, S ) with two parallel incised
lines can be classified as Rockport Incised.
4 ) Rockport ware body sherds. A total of 3,153 body sherds fall
within the Rockport ware classification but cannot be identified with
a specific type. Of these, 1,507 bear no asphaltum, but 125 do have
scoring marks. Scoring is present on both sides of 32 sherds, and 93
sherds have scoring on one side only. Exterior scoring occurs on seven
sherds, and 42 sherds have interior scoring. On the remaining 44
sherds it is not possible to tell on which surface the scoring occurs.
Sherds with asphaltum coating number 1,554. Of these 712 have
asphaltum coating on the exterior surfaces and 601 have asphaltum on
the interior surfaces. Asphaltum occurs on both surfaces of 241 sherds.
Scoring and asphaltum combinations are found on 90 sherds. Scoring occurs on both surfaces of 22 sherds, with six having asphaltum
on the interior surfaces, seven having asphaltum on the exterior surfaces, and on seven sherds it is not possible to determine on which
surface the asphaltum occurs. Of the sherds with both surfaces scored,
two have both sides coated with asphaltum. One side only of 68 sherds
has been scored.
Exterior scoring is present on ten sherds, with four having asphaltum
on this surface and four having it on the interior. Asphaltum occurs
on both surfaces of two of these sherds. Interior scoring is found on 21
sherds, ten having asphaltum on this surface and 11 having asphaltum
on the exterior surface. It is not possible to tell on which surface the
scoring is present on the remaining 37 sherds. Asphaltum occurs on
the same surface as the scoring of 15 sherds, on the opposite surface on
16 sherds, and on both surfaces of six sherds.
Two sherds from the necks of bottles have punctations on the exterior surface. One of these (Fig. 2, R) has a single row of punctations

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

13

and asphaltum on the interior surface, and the other has a triple row
of punctations.
5 ) lncised-Punctated Sherd. One Rockport ware rim sherd (Fig. 2,
I ) has a design consisting of alternating rows of incised lines and
punctations, with the first incised line appearing just below the lip.
This is followed by a row of punctations, an incised line, and another
row of punctations. The punctations are rounded and seem to have
been made with a bluntly pointed implement.
6) Red slipped and red painted sherds. A red slip appears on the
exterior surface of one typical Rockport ware body sherd. Light scoring, clearly made before the vessel was slipped, occurs on the exterior
surface. Another sherd with a white exterior has a thin film of red
paint covering part of the surface.
7) Worked sherds. Two discs made from Rockport sherds (Fig. 2, T )
show grinding on their edges and faces.
8 ) Intrusive sherds. Possible intrusive wares are represented by
nine sherds. These are brown in color, and all are tempered with large
white particles of unknown material. These may possibly be sherds
from a vessel of Leon Plain (Suhm, et al., 1954: Pl. 74, E ) , a type
which is associated principally with the Central Texas Aspect. One of
these is a rim sherd with a lip slightly rolled to the interior. Two other
sherds have asphaltum coatings on the interior surfaces.

European Oh;ects. European contact is indicated by a small blue
glass bead. It is .3 em. thick and .4 em. in diameter. It is typical of 18th
century European trade beads (Dee Ann Story, personal communication ) .
Conclusions. Analysis of the archeological materials from the McGloin Bluff Site indicates that only a Rockport Focus component is
present. As noted previously, the two dart points need not be considered as evidence of an Aransas Focus occupation. The site seems to
have been occupied mainly because of its fresh water and the food potential of the surrounding area. Of the few faunal remains found, fish
bones predominate. (Until very recently, the shallow waters along this
particular section of the coast were a favorite of trout, red and flounder
fishermen .) The absence of oyster shells at the site probably indicates
the absence of oyster reefs in the immediate area.
One of the more important findings made at the site is the red painted
sherd. This sherd may answer a question that has been bothering

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

archeologists for sometime: Where is evidence of the red painted pottery that Gatschet ( 1891 ) describes for the historic Karankawa? Specifically, Gatschetwrites ( 1891: 68 ) :
Besides some rude attempts at wood carving a beginning of the plastic arts could
be seen in the appliance of a paint, which was either r ed or black, and a clay
producing a black color. With these they painted figures of animals and human
faces upon their skins and upon pots and articles of wood. These paintings were
far r emote from any artistic finish and were but seldom seen.

It is my conjecture that this sherd is possibly part of that evidence.*
Identification of the Rockport Focus material from the McGloin
Bluff Site is based on a comparison with specimens described in published works on the few excavated Rockport components located in the
southern section of Texas coast. These materials were also compared
with published trait lists for the Rockport Focus. The main value of
the materials from this site is that they increase the number of artifacts that are needed to study the archeology of the area, and they also
substantiate what is already known about the Rockport Focus. There
is also the possibility that these materials represent the remains of late
prehistoric and/ or early historic groups in the area. The trade bead
certainly indicates contact with Europeans.

INGLESIDE COVE SITE ( 41-SP-43)
Ingleside Cove is a small bay lying between Ingleside Point and the
mainland. Just south of Kinney Bayou is the old fishing village of
Ingleside, now shown on most maps as Ingleside on the Bay. The Ingleside Cove Site is located on the eastern shore of the cove approximately halfway between the settlement and the point. This site is a
shell midden associated with the black sandy clay that comprises the
top 12 to 18 inches of the low bluff around the cove. The shell midden
occupies all but the top four to six inches of the black clay. The upper
few inches contain, in the central section of the site, refuse material
from a fairly recent historic occupation. The site is approximately 250
feet long and 25 to 30 feet wide at the present time. Before hurricane
Carla the site was about 35 feet wider, and it was surely more extensive in the past.
I discovered the site on August 21, 1959, and collected the first
archeological materials from the site at that time. I had very few arti-

* Recently, a complete vessel which was decorated with red paint and asphaltum
was found eroding frcm a site near Corpus Christi (T . N. Campbell and Dee Ann
Story, personal commnication) .

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

15

facts from the site before the hurricane, but as this section of the cove
took a hard beating, a large number of specimens were deposited on
the short beach and in the cove itself. The last collecting trip was
made on April 20, 1962. Approximately 25 visits to the site were made
from the time of discovery to the present. The collection to date consists of 46 flint and stone artifacts and 409 potsherds. Collecting was
done on the beach and from the sides of the bluff.

Projectile Points. Of the 24 flint projectile points recovered from the
site, seven are dart points, and another seven appear to be dart point
fragments. Three of the dart points (Fig. 3, A-C) have triangular outlines and probably fit in the Catan-Matamoros range. All show basal
thinning with two having convex bases and the other having a concave
base.
The Ensor type (Fig. 3, D ) is represented by one well flaked specimen that has slight shoulders and an expanding stem with a slightly
concave base. A well worked leaf-shaped point (Fig. 3, E) may be
classified as a narrow variation of the Lerma type. This point is thinned at the base, but it nonetheless has a fairly thick cross section. The
remaining two dart points cannot be classified as to type. One (Fig. 3,
F) has a slightly expanding stem with a straight base which had served
as the striking platform of the original flake. Small bits of asphaltum,
presumably used to help secure the point to the shaft, adheres to the
stem. The other unidentified point (Fig. 3, G) has an expanding stem
and a convex base. Slight shoulders are present, and the blade has convex edges which are bifacially beveled. This point is apparently reworked, as most of the stem and the central portions of both faces have
a good patina, but the edges of the blade and tip do not.
The remaining ten points are arrow points, one of which has the
stem missing and, consequently, cannot be identified as to type. Four
of the points (Fig. 3, H-K) are classified as Perdiz, three as Fresno
(Fig. 3, L, M), one (Fig. 3, N) as Young, and one (Fig. 3, 0) possibly
as Scallorn. Two of the Perdiz points have slightly concave blade edges,
and the third has convex lateral edges. The fourth is a basal fragment
of a point made from a thin flake worked principally along the edges
of one face. All of the Fresno points have slightly convex lateral edges
and straight bases. Two have serrated edges (Fig. 3, L), and the other
(Fig. 3, M) is unifacially beveled on both lateral edges of the blade.
The Young point is worked on one face only, and the striking platform
has not been removed.
Scrapers. Two oval flakes (Fig. 3, P, Q) with retouching on one end

16

TEXAS AR CHEO L OGI CAL SOCIETY

0

M

L

K

J

H

N

Q

p

e&
u

w

v

T

y

X

1

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 " 9 10
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

CM

Fig. 3 . Artifacts of stone and bone from the Ingleside Cove Site.

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

17

are end scrapers. The original cortex is present on the convex surface
except along the worked edges. The side scraper category (Fig. 3, R-T)
contains 14 specimens. These are made from a variety of flakes, varying considerably in size and having concave to convex edges.

Gravers. Three engraving tools (Fig. 3, V, W ), two of which are
made from thin flakes , were found.
Drill. One tip fragment of a drill (Fig. 3, U) shows extensive u se.
Knives. One well worked specimen and the fragment of another are
classified as knives. The complete specimen is triangular in outline
and has lightly serrated edges (Fig. 3, X ). The form of the fragmentary knife cannot be determined.
Cores and Flakes. Five large cores and five small cores were found
at the site. Flakes of various sizes, shapes, and thicknesses number 132.
Shell Artifacts. A flat ovoid piece of shell shows heavy grinding on
its edges and is the only definite shell artifact found. It is approximately 1.5 em. in diameter and .5 em. in thickness. Four badly eroded
whelk columella were also found, but are not certain artifacts.
Worked Bone. Two pieces of bone show some modification. One (Fig.
3, Y ) is a severed fragment of a deer long bone. The other artifact
(Fig. 3, Z) is a flaking tool made from a deer ulna.
Pottery. The collection of potsherds consists of 409 specimens, exclusive of a number of very small and badly eroded pieces.
1) Rockport Plain. Eighteen rim sherds represent Rockport Plain.
Eight sherds (Fig. 4, 0 , P ) are from vessels that had rounded lips, two
of which have scoring on the interior surfaces. Seven sherds, one of
which (Fig. 4, D) is apparently from a vessel that had been repaired
with asphaltum, represent vessels with flattened lips. Two of these
have scoring on the interior surface and asphaltum on both surfaces.
Three sherds are from vessels with lips beveled to the exterior (Fig. 4,
R ); one has scoring and asphaltum on both surfaces.
2) Rockport Black-on-gray. This type is represented by 12 sherds,
six of which are rim sherds. Two sherds are from vessels with rounded
lips, and only the lip proper is painted. One of these (Fig. 4, A ) is from
a vessel that has been repaired with asphaltum. Vessels with an internal lip overhang are represented by two sherds, one of which (Fig.
4, E) has the lip and the interior surface painted with asphaltum. The

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

other has only the lip painted. One sherd (Fig. 4, C) has an extended
lip overhang, with the lip painted and the exterior surface scored. The
remaining rim sherd (Fig. 4, B) has a V-notched lip that is painted
with asphaltum.

Rockport Black-on-gray body sherds number six. Five of these (Fig.
4, H-J) have portions of wavy line designs on their exteriors and asphaltum coatings on the interiors. The other sherd (Fig. 4, K) has a
portion of a straight line on the exterior surface.
3 ) Rockport ware body sherds. This series includes 379 specimens,
220 of which have no traces of asphaltum. Five sherds (Fig. 4, N) are
fragments of vessels with thick, rounded bases. Lacing holes for repairing broken vessels are present on two sherds (Fig. 4, L). Scoring occurs
on both surfaces of eight sherds and one surface of 29 sherds. Of these
29, four have the scoring on the exterior, 17 on the interior, and on
eight it is not possible to tell on which surface the scoring occurs.
Sherds with asphaltum coatings number 158. Asphaltum is present
on the exterior surface of 52 sherds, with scoring appearing on this
surface on two sherds and the interior surface on ten sherds. The interior surface of 34 sherds is coated with asphaltum. Scoring is present on the interior of three of these, on the exterior surface of one, and
on both surfaces of two. On 19 sherds it is not possible to determine on
which surface the asphaltum is present. One of these has scoring on
the same surface as the asphaltum and the other has it on the opposite
surface. Asphaltum occurs on both surfaces of 53 sherds, of which eight
have scoring.
One Rockport ware body sherd (Fig. 4, M) is unique in that it has
an inlaid design on the exterior surface. The design, probably part of
a larger motif, consists of four rather evenly spaced indentations that
have been inlaid with asphaltum. The indentations appear to have
been made before firing. One edge of the sherd shows mending of a
crack with asphaltum.
Fire hardened clay lumps, which are common in all the sites except
McGloin Bluff, were quite numerous at this site. These lumps are of
random shapes and sizes and show varying degrees of firing. Their
colors range from buff to red and dark brown to black.
European Objects. Although no European materials were found that
could be linked with the Rockport material, a number of artifacts representing a late European occupation were collected from the beach
below the central part of the midden. Seven sherds, three of which are
of Spanish or Mexican origin and not datable, one coin, and an old-

19

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

A

B

·.

-

.

c

E

0

I

F

H

G

f:j
.

.

-

.

L

J

M

K

0

N

p

s

R

Q
0123456'18910
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

T

CM

Fig . 4 . Potsherds from the Ingleside Cove Site. Rim profiles a re oriented with thei r int erior surfaces facing left.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

style clay marble represent this occupation. The coin is a United States
quarter dollar, dated 1894, from the Philadelphia mint. The four remaining sherds, probably china of European manufacture, and the
marble perhaps date at approximately the same time.

Conclusions. The archeological materials from the Ingleside Cove
Site indicate that a Rockport Focus component is present. The midden
deposit, however, is shallow and no stratigraphy is in evidence. No
artifacts, with the exception of the Ensor point, are definitely assignable to the Aransas Focus. All other dart points found are types thought
to have survived into the Neo-American period. The site was probably
occupied because of the food potential of the surrounding area. Shell
refuse, large mammal bones, fish bones, and rodent bones, in that
order of frequency, can be identified in the faunal remains from the
site.
The inlaid sherd represents a new decorative technique for this section of the Texas coast; in fact, this appears to be the first sherd of this
type reported in Texas. However, a larger sample of this mode of
decoration is needed before its full significance can be determined.
THE WINDY HILL SITE (41-SP-42)
Approximately 200 yards southeast of the mouth of Kinney Bayou
a shell midden deposit is eroding from a bluff. The midden material
occupies all but the top few inches of the black clay deposit which comprises the upper part of the bluff. Near the center of the midden and
about 100 yards from the edge of the bluff is a small mound about 30
yards in diameter. Fragments of burned bone, shell and flint flakes
can be collected from the gopher tailings on this elevation. This feature
probably represents midden materials capping a small natural knoll.
I have not collected archeological materials from the site, but five
dart points have been collected by the owners of the land, and these
were given to me. Two of these may be classified as Pedernales points
(Fig. 5, A, B). Both of these points have convex blade edges; one is
barbed and the other is shouldered. The tip of the larger specimen
has been reworked. A third point, identified as Kinney (Fig. 5, C), has
a wide, lanceolate shape, convex lateral edges and a concave base. One
small triangular point (Fig. 5, D) with convex, alternately beveled
edges and a straight base is classified as a Matamoros point. The fifth
point (Fig. 5, E) has a long, thin blade with convex edges and slight
shoulders. The stem is badly damaged and a portion of one edge appears to have been reworked. It cannot be identified with any recog-

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

21

nized type. From the little evidence available, it seems probable that
an Aransas Focus component is present at this site.

THE KINNEY BAYOU SITES
Kinney Bayou empties into the northeast side of Ingleside Cove, and
meanders in a northeasterly direction to the outskirts of Ingleside. Two
shell midden sites, one on the northwestern shore and another on the
southeastern shore, are located on the bayou.

Kinney Bayou Site I ( 41-SP-39 )
This shell midden lies buried in the bank on the northwestern edge
of the bayou and extends from the mouth of the bayou to a point about
300 yards upstream. The midden, marked by J. E. Pearce on the U.S.
Army Tactical Map, Corpus Christi Quadrangle, in July of 1930, is associated with a black soil which overlies a white caliche. The old
University of Texas site number is 77B2-14.
Of the 11 worked stone artifacts collected from this site, three are
identifiable as dart points, while another five are tip, medial, and basal
fragments from dart points or knives. One point (Fig. 5, F ) has convex blade edges, small shoulders, and a slightly expanding stem. The
base of the stem has been damaged and it is not possible to determine
its original form . Another dart point (Fig. 5, G ) has a damaged base,
but may be a Matamoros type. The edges of the blade are convex and
are bifacially beveled. The base was thinned by the removal of several
large flakes from one face. The third point (Fig. 5, H ) has a triangular
blade with straight edges and small barbs. Its stem is wide, has parallel
edges and a slightly concave base.
Knives are represented by a single fragment of a fairly large triangular specimen (Fig. 5, I) . The steeply beveled base is slightly concave, and the edges of the blade are convex. The tip of this specimen
has been broken off. The only drills found at the site are two heavily
used tip fragments. Chipping debris collected from the surface includes
cores, three small and one large specimen, and 41 miscellaneous flint
flakes, some of which contain flake scars that suggest use wear.
Before the hurricane, only one small, badly eroded sherd had been
found at this site. On the last collecting trip in December of 1961, however, eight sherds, one of which is a Rockport Plain rim sherd, were
recovered. These were all found within a few inches of each other and
appear to be from the same vessel. No asphaltum or scoring is present
on the sherds.

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

From the few archeological materials collected, it is difficult to determine much about the site. There is not enough evidence to say
definitely which components are present, but very probably peoples of
both the Rockport and the Aransas foci used the site. The size of the
midden indicates that this was a favorite camping spot for a long period
of time.

Kinney Bayou Site II (41-SP-40)
This site is located on the opposite shore and approximately 30 yards
northeast of Kinney Bayou I. Unlike the other sites in the area , this
one is not associated with the dark soil near the surface. Low bluffs
border the bayou on this shore, and archeological debris is eroding
from the bluffs three or four feet below the contact of the black soil
and the white caliche. Material can also be seen eroding from the sides
of three drainage ditches that have been cut through the site.
All of the six projectile points-four of which are essentially complete-can be classified as dart points. One of the fragments is from a
straight based, side notched point; the other fragment (Fig. 5, J) is
the lower half of a rounded base point, possibly a Refugio. Two of the
complete points (Fig. 5, K, L) have blades with convex edges and expanding stems with convex bases. Slight shoulders are present on both
specimens. One of these (Fig. 5, L) is made of fossil wood. Another
dart point (Fig. 5, M ) has a triangular, beveled-edge blade with one
straight and one slightly convex lateral edge. The sixth point (Fig. 5,
N) has a triangular blade with convex edges. Shoulders are present,
but the base of the expanding stem has been damaged.
The other chipped stone artifacts recovered include a basal fragment
of a triangular knife, three side scrapers, one ovoid scraper (Fig. 5, 0 )
of fossil wood, a core and ten miscellaneous flint flakes. In addition, a
piece of sandstone and a fragment of limestone may represent abrading
stones, but both are too heavily weathered for positive identification.
Three conch (Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby) columellae have been
ground diagonally on one side of the anterior end to form gouges. T"vo
of these gouges are badly weathered, but the third (Fig. 5, U ) still has
a sharp cutting edge. The remainder of the artifacts collected from the
site are a piece of worked bone (Fig. 5, W), apparently a medial fragment of a bone awl, and numerous fire-hardened clay lumps of various
SIZeS.

All indications point to an Aransas Focus occupation of the site, as
none of the artifacts can be attributed to the Rockport Focus. As for

23

S U RVEY OF CORPUS C H RISTI B AY

0

F

E

A

G

L

H

Q

M

N

p

0

R

v
S

T

z

AA

u

w

BB

CC

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 8 9
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

X

DO

EE

w
I

CM
Fig . 5. Artifacts of stone and shell from the Windy Hill Site, the Kinney Bayou sites, the
Ramirez Site, and the Brown sites.

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

faunal remains, shell predominates, but a few fragments of burned
bone were found .

THE RAMIREZ SITE (41-SP-38)
About 300 yards west (inland) from Kinney Bayou Site I is a
plowed field that contains two shell middens. The field runs north and
south, and the middens are located at each end of the field , being separated from one another by about 30 yards. I collected only a fragment
of an unidentifiable arrow point, one Rockport ware body sherd, and
several lumps of fire-ha;dened clay from the northern side.
The southern midden yielded two dart points, a flint gouge, a knife
fragment, and some fire-hardened clay lumps. One of the dart points
(Fig. 5, P ) has a triangular blade with straight edges; slight shoulders
are present and the broad stem has straight, parallel edges and a
straight base. The other specimen (Fig. 5, Q), a small triangular point,
has convex edges and a straight base. It is unifacially beveled on both
edges and the base, and the striking platform is still in evidence at the
base. The plano-convex gouge (Fig. 5, R ) is identifiable as the Clear
Fork type, although the base is broken.
Judging from the material collected, it seems that two components
are represented: a Rockport Focus component at the northern midden
and an Aransa s Focus component at the southern midden. The artifact sample, hovvever, is quite small and the iden tifications are very
tentative .

THE LA QUINTA SITE (41-SP-35)
An old fishing resort named La Quinta is located on Corpus Christi
Bay about two and one-half miles south of the town of Gregory. On
December 26, 1961 , I found a small shell midden eroding from a low
bench about 14 feet below the contact zone of the black soil and white
clay. In a survey of the area made three years earlier, no evidence of
this midden was observed. Probably the recent hurricane Carla is
responsible for exposing the midden, which covers an area of approximately 25 square yards. I collected nine lumps of fire-hardened clay,
nine flint flakes, and a medial portion of a dart point or knife . The
depth at which the material is eroding would seem to indicate a fairly·
early occupation site.

THE BROWN SITES ( 41-SP-26 through 41-SP-34)
The road from La Quinta to Gregory, the road from Gregory to'

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

25

Portland, and the strip of coast from La Quinta to Portland bound a
roughly triangular shaped section of land. All this area, except for a
narrow strip bordering the bluffs, is under cultivation. Springs are
fairly numerous along this part of the coast, and about a mile south of
Portland a small creek empties into the bay. The first survey of this
area was made in 1958, and at that time I found five shell middens
eroding from the black clay layer. A second survey was made of the
area between the creek and La Quinta in December, 1961, and four
·more sites were found.

Brown Site I (41-SP-26 )
This site consists of a shell midden eroding from the black clay layer
exposed in the side of a large drainage ditch. No artifacts were collected, but shell refuse, bone fragments , flint flakes, and fire-hardened
lumps of clay were recovered from the edges of the ditch.

Brown Site II ( 41-SP-27)
Listed on University of Texas maps under the old number of 77B218, this site covers an area of about 50 square yards. Most of the cultural debris, however, has been moved down onto the beach area from
an extensive gully that dissects a large part of the site. Material was
collected in November, 1958 and in December, 1961, and includes a
small group of artifacts (see below), charred bone, charcoal, and firehardened clay lumps. In addition, several fire hearths were observed.
One arrow point of the Perdiz type was the only projectile point collected. It (Fig. 5, V) has concave blade edges and strong barbs, but
most of the stem is missing. Each of two small triangular flint flakes has
fine retouching along the lateral edges. Three closely associated whelk
columella "awls" were found eroding from the deposit, still in situ.
Pottery is represented by 15 sherds, one of which is from a Rockport
Plain vessel rim. Another sherd, from the neck of a bottle, has traces
of asphaltum coating on the exterior surface. Six of the body sherds
have scoring marks on the interior surfaces.
It seems probable that only a Rockport Focus component is present
at this site.

Brown Site Ill ( 41-SP-28 )
About 14 feet below the contact zone of the black clay and white
clay, I found a small shell midden eroding from a low bench. Two dart
points, one small side scraper, one core, 17 fire-hardened clay lumps,

2.6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and ten miscellaneous flakes were collected. One dart point (Fig. 5, S) ,
classified as Tortugas, is triangular in outline, has a concave base and
convex edges that are altemately beveled on the left. The other point
(Fig. 5, T) has a lanceolate outline with a concave base and strongly
resembles the Plainview type, but lacks grinding on the basal edges.
The scraper is made from a thin, triangular flake, and only one edge
has been worked.

Brown Sites IV, V, VI ( 41-SP-2.9, 30, and 31)
These are a series of very small shell middens washing out from the
black clay layer. They probably represent occupations by several small
groups for short periods of time. Fire-hardened clay lumps, flint flakes,
and burned bone fragments are mixed with the shell refuse.

Brown Site VII ( 41-SP-32.)
Just east of the small middens described a hove, and in the same black
layer, is a fairly extensive shell midden. The site covers an area of
about 40 square yards and is dissected by a large gully. Most of the materials from the site have eroded down to the beach area via the gully.
One arrow point, a side scraper, and 11 miscellaneous flint flakes
were collected from the surface of this site. The arrow point (Fig. 5,
X) is of the Perdiz type and has slightly convex, serrated edges and
light barbs. The majority of the flaking was done on one face, with
only light retouching occurring on portions of the opposite face. The
scraper (Fig. 5, Y) is made from a small rectangular flake and has
only one worked edge.
A total of 2.6 body sherds represent Rockport wares. One rim sherd
with a rounded lip is from a Rockport Plain vessel. Fire-hardened clay
lumps occurred at this site, but were not as numerous as at other sites.

Brown Site VIII ( 41-SP-33)
This small shell midden is also weathering out of the black clay
layer. Bumed bone, flint flakes, and fire-hardened clay lumps and shell
refuse can be seen on the surface. A pile of refuse, mainly bone, was
eroding from one part of the site when I discovered it, and the remainder of this accumulation was excavated at the time. The pile contained
various skeletal fragments of a deer and two drumfish ear bones. Pieces
of bumed bone and whelk shell which had previously eroded from this
particular spot were also collected.

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

27

Projectile points are represented by five specimens, all of which are
identifiable as arrow points. Two of them are fragmentary: one is part
of a stem and the other the tip of a blade. One of the three remaining
specimens is a Perdiz. The tip of this point (Fig. 5, Z ) is missing, but
the blade appears to have had straight, lightly serrated edges and small
barbs. Another arrow point (Fig. 5, AA) has a blade with convex, serrated edges and slight shoulders. A portion of the stem and the tip of
the blade are missing. The remaining arrow point, or small knife (Fig.
5, BB), h as an asymmetrical blade and only one shoulder.
Two drills, both slender hi-pointed specimens, were found at the site.
One (Fig. 5, CC ) is rod-shaped, with parallel edges and a lenticular
cross section. The other (Fig. 5, DD ) has a proximal end that tapers
to form very slight shoulders and a possible stem. Both are similar to
the drills found at the Indian Island and Webb Island sites (Campbell,
1956: Pl 1, J; Pl. 3, NN-PP ) on the southern side of Corpus Christi
Bay.
Rockport Focus pottery is represented by 45 sherds, three of which
are rim fragments from vessels of Rockport Plain. The rim sherds have
fla~ lips, while one of the body sherds has scoring marks on the interior
surface, and another has scoring on the exterior surface. The latter
sherd s also shows evidence of having come from a vessel that was
mended with asphaltum.

Brown Site IX ( 41-SP-34 )
Approximately 50 yards east of Brown Site VIII, another small
midden is eroding from the black deposit. Like the other Brown sites,
burned bone, burned whelk shell, fire-hardened clay lumps, and other
cultural debris are weathering out from the midden. One arrow point,
one whelk columella drill, and 15 Rockport ware body sherds were
collected from the site. The arrow point (Fig. 5, EE) is the basal half
of a point with a rounded base, possibly of the Young type.
SUMMARY AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

The materials collected in this survey have been described and evaluated. Since extensive excavations are not likely to be carried out in
this area in the near future, I feel that this material has value in adding to our basic knowledges of the cultural complexes involved in the
prehistory of the central Gulf Coast. From observations made while
living in the area, I am of the opinion that unless extensive excavations
are carried out within the next five to six years, a very large amount

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of valuable archeological material is going to be lost to the rapid development that is taking place on the Texas Gulf Coast. It does not
seem wise to rely solely on the work done in the past as, to my knowledge, only seven sites have been excavated in this area. Of these, five
have been described in published archeological reports.
Three of the four culture stages recognized in Texas are identifiable
in the material from this survey. The Aransas Focus of the Archaic
Stage is fairly well represented by three sites (Windy Hill, Kinney
Bayou II, and Ramirez ) , and the Neo-American Stage is well represented by the large amount of material (Rockport Plain and Rockport Black-on-gray sherds; projectile point types Perdiz, Fresno,
Young, and Starr ) assignable to the Rockport Focus. Materials that can
be attributed to the Historic Stage are almost non-existent, although
one site, McGloin Bluff, did yield a glass trade bead.
The materials attributed to the Aransas Focus substantiate what is
already known about the complex. It appears that the three sites containing only Aransas Focus artifacts are on the fringe of the distribution of certain projectile point styles. Here the orientation for styles is
directed for the most part towards central Texas. The collections from
Webb I sland (Campbell, 1956 ), on the opposite side of Corpus Christi
Bay from my survey, contain a greater number of dart points more
commonly found associated with Falcon and Mier Focus material to
the south.
The rest of the sites involved in the survey can, for the most part,
be attributed to the Rockport Focus. The large sample of material collected verifies the association of traits with the southern coastal area
(Starr and Fresno points, tiny end scrapers, hi-pointed flint drills, and
shell discs) and central Texas (Perdiz, Scallorn, and Young points ) .
Additional cultural ties are suggested by the occurrence of the three arrow points (Fig. 1, E-G) with the deeply indented bases. These also
occur in the Brownsville area, but as of yet have not been associated
with any particular focus. The large sample of Rockport potsherds
substantiates what we already know, as well as adding to our knowledge. Incised pottery is very rare, indicating that this area is on the
periphery of the distribution of that decorative technique. The red
painted sherd is some evidence of the pottery reported by Gatschet, and
a new decorative technique is hinted at by the presence of the asphalt
inlaid sherd.
Observations made during the survey may help shed light on two
problems-the origin of the asphaltum used in the decorating of Rockport Focus pottery and the origin of the fire-hardened clay lumps-

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

29

which have been of concern to coastal archeologists. It seems probable
that the asphaltum was picked up by prehistoric peoples in its natural
state on the local Gulf shores. Today natural asphaltum can still be
collected on the beaches, sometimes in very large quantities. Authorities working with the problem of keeping the Padre Island beaches
free of asphaltum believe that it floats across the Gulf from tar pits
and seeps on the coast of the Yucatan Peninsula. The asphaltum arrives on the Texas beaches in a soft enough state to have been applied
immediately to the pottery; or it could have been collected, allowed to
harden, and then remelted when later use was necessary. The problem may be resolved by collecting sufficient samples from the beaches
and comparing them chemically with samples taken from archeological
sites. It seems quite possible that the source discussed above will prove
to be the same one the prehistoric peoples of the area used.
As for the second problem, all the evidence points to open fires built
on the surface as the major explanation for the fire-hardened clay
lumps. Several times I have found these lumps eroded from black, ashy
areas along with charcoal, burned bone, and burned shell. Recently, I
observed a modern camp fire being destroyed by erosion, and clay
lumps identical to those collected in archeological sites were eroding
out from this hearth. The lumps were darker in color and harder near
the center of the hearth, getting lighter and softer towards the perimeter of the burned area. The color of the lumps seems to be determined
by the amount of oxygen that can reach the clay while the fire 1s
burning.

REFERENCES CITED
Campbell, T . N .
1947. The Johnson Site : Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the T exas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18,
pp. 40- 75.
1952. The Kent-Crane Site : A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1958. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. The Texas Joumal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423-442.
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891. The Karankawa Indians, the Coastal Peoples of Texas. Papers of the
Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 1, No.2.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Martin, George C.
n.d.
Preliminary Archaeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast Made
by George C. Martin and Wendell H . Potter in 1927-1928-1929. Privately
Printed.
1929. Notes on some Texas Coast Campsites and Other Remains. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1, pp. 50-57.
1931. Texas Coastal Pottery. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 3, pp. 53-56.
Potter, Wendell H.
1930. Ornamentation on the Pottery of the Texas Coastal Tribes. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 41-44.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, No. XVII .
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Ingleside, Texas

