BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Volume 34

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY I AUSTIN, TEXAS I

1963

Office of the State Archeolo · · ~
' ··"'. , . --......._ L.b
.~
•~"
.,. ..,_~
1 rary
.•i
'!!!.
J~c ; ~ 1 l '-·. • , .• • ·".

.~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1963
President: JACK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Secretary-Treasurer: JEAN A. RICHMOND (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN SuHM (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), W. C. HoLDEN
(Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), HuBERT MEWHINNEY (Houston),
WAYNE NEYLAND (Houston), JAMES WARNICA (Portales, N. Mex.), JAMES
WoRD (Floydada).
Trustees: R. K. HARRis (Dallas), MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio), 0. L. SIMS
(San Angelo), HENRY STURGIS (Austin).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CARL CoMPTON (Denton), ALAN DuKE (Pasadena),
LATHEL DuFFIELD (Austin), R. E. FoRRESTER (Ft. Worth), SHERWOOD GAGLIANO (Baton Rouge, La.), D. T. KENT (Kirbyville), E. 0. MILLER (Moody),
ERIK REED (Sante Fe, N.Mex.), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Fellows: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Seattle, Wash.), CYRus N.
RAY (Abilene), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.) .

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treassurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin 12, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is the
same.
Cover design and portrait by Hal M. Story

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST • 1991

•

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i

Editor: D ee Ann Suhm
~

"f
'L.

Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D. Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1963

Office of the State Archeologis
:. ;.
Library

...

I

I

. '

j

DR. CYRUS N. Rw for more than a quarter of a century has devoted
himself to the furtherance of Texas archeology and the Texas
Archeological Society. His pioneer research into the archeology of the
Abilene area is recorded in the numerous articles he has written for
the Bulletin, and his enthusiasm and dedication to the Society is evident in his many years of service. He is a charter member of the
Society, was Editor of the Bulletin from its founding in 1929 until
1947, was President from 1929 until1948, has been President Emeritus
since 1948, and a Fellow since 1952.
The society is deeply indebted to Dr. Ray, and it is with pleasure
that this issue to the Bulletin is dedicated to him.

Table of Contents
Articles
Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of
Corpus Christi Bay, Texas
By James E. Corbin

5

Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter
(41TV69 ), Travis County, Texas
By J. C. Pollard, John W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis

31

Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified
Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas
By Harry J. Shafer.

57

The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic- Neo-American Site in
San Augustine County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield

83

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus Component
in De Soto Parish, Louisiana
By Clarence H . Webb .

143

A Guide to Pottery Sorting, and the Meaning of Pottery
Types and Attributes
By E. Mott Davis .

189

A Guide to Archeological Reconnaissance
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr. .

203

Book Reviews
Hall, Robert L., The Archeology of Carcajou Point, with an
Interpretation of the Development of Oneota Culture in
Wisconsin
By T. N. Campbell .

219

Archeological Materials From the Northern
Shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas
JAMES E. CORBIN
ABSTRACT
From 1957 to the present, the writer has mad e an arch eological sur vey of the
northem shore of Corpus Christi Bay, Texas. Dur ing this period, 16 campsites wer e
located. With one possible exception, the McGloin Bluff Site, all are shell middens.
Collecting from the surface of these midd en areas produ ced w ell over 4,000
ar tifacts which are described in detail, and which are assignable to either the
Rockport or Aransas Focus.

INTRODUCTION

The central portion of the Texas Gulf Coast, that area between the
Brazos River and Corpus Christi Bay, has yielded archeological materials that can be assigned to one of the four development stages set up
for Texas as a whole ( Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954) . Thus far the
earliest stage, the Paleo-American, is known only from surface finds
of certain dart point types, including Plainview and Clovis. The later
Archaic Stage is represented by the Aransas Focus, the majority of the
material coming from two excavated sites on Copano Bay (Campbell,
1947; 1952) and from surface collections near Corpus Christi (Campbell, 1956) . The Rockport Focus has been recognized for the NeoAmerican and Historic stages, mainly from archeological surveys
(Martin, n.d.; 1929; 1931; Potter, 1930 ; Sayles, 1935 ) ; from excavated
Aransas Focus sites that were overlain by small Rockport components (Campbell, 1956 ) ; from surface collections near Corpus Christi
( Campbell, 1956 ) ; and from an excavated Rockport Site on Live Oak
Point (Campbell, 1958 ) . Obviously, there are not a wealth of data
from the central coast; and more material and information are needed
before it is possible to have a good understanding of the prehistory of .
the area.
The purpose of this paper is to describe and evaluate archeological
materials I have collected from the surface of 16 sites found in an areal

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

reconnaissance of the extreme southern portion of this central coastal
area. This survey, a sporadic operation from 1957 to the present, covered an area between the city of Portland and the eastern edge of the
southern tip of Live Oak Peninsula.
The physiographic features of the region are much the same
throughout: short beaches backed by bluffs ranging from 12 to 18 feet
high. The bluffs are usually composed of a white clay which is frequently capped by a four to 18 inch deposit of black, sandy clay. On the
southern edge of Live Oak Peninsula, however, the black clay is replaced by wind-blown sand. Here the vegetation is mainly grasses and
oak trees, whereas elsewhere (from Kinney Bayou to Portland ) it is
grasses and mesquite trees.

McGLOIN BLUFF SITE ( 41-SP-ll)
McGloin Bluff is located on the southern tip of Live Oak Peninsula
and faces south toward Corpus Christi Bay. The bluff runs east and
west, and extends from just east of Harbor City to the base of Ingleside Point. It is approximately 14 feet above sea level, and there is a
short beach between the bluff and the waters of the bay. The eastern
half of the bluff is covered with sand dunes that are 12 to 20 feet high.
The main vegetation is grasses, with a few oak trees on the western
section.
The site is approximately at the mid-point of the bluff; its western
half is covered with dunes, but the eastern half is fairly exposed. There
are two running springs located on the site. One is on the western extremity of the site and only started flowing freely after the recent
( 1961 ) hurricane Carla. A second and more reliable spring is located
at the mid-point of the bluff, and the major portion of the site seems
to be centered in this area. There used to be a third spring on the eastern edge of the site, but it apparently has not been flowing for the past
20 years.
I first visited the site early in 1957, after being told of an Indian
" mound" in the area. What I found was a large site on a bluff which
was dissected by a series of small gullies, the areas between the gullies
giving the impression of mounds. No shell midden deposits can be seen
anywhere in the vicinity; in fact, very little shell can be found on the
site. At the time of the initial visit, potsherds and flint flakes were very
numerous but now, after 150 collecting trips to the site, very few artifacts can be recovered. The collection was made entirely from the
surface and to date con sists of 66 stone and shell artifacts and 3,381
potsherds.

7

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

B

C

E

D

F

A

DD

E E

0 I 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

CM
Fig . 1. Artifacts of stone a nd shell from the McGlo in Bluff Site.

G

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Projectile Points. Flint projectile points are represented by 27 specimens, seven of which are unidentifiable distal fragments. Of the 20
identifiable points, two can be classed as dart points. One of these (Fig.
1, A ) falls within the range of the Darl type and has a blade that is
altemately beveled to the left. The stem, barely discernible because of
extremely small shoulders, is basally thinned. The other point, classified as Catan (Fig. 1, B), has a convex base and alternately beveled
blade edges. These two specimens are the only suggestions of an Aransas Focus occupation. However, both types are thought to have survived into later times and therefore may be associated with the better
represented Rockport Focus.
The remaining 18 specimens are arrow points, and almost all of these
fall within the range of types associated with the Rockport Focus. The
Perdiz type, which includes seven points, predominates. Four of these
(Fig. 1, H-J ) have blades with straight lateral edges, and one (Fig. 1,
K ) has a blade with convex edges. The stem of the latter specimen is
longer than the blade. A sixth Perdiz (Fig. 1, M ) has a blade with concave edges. The seventh (Fig. 1, N ) point may be classified as a Cliffton, a crude Perdiz, or an unfinished point of either type. Three of the
Perdiz are made from thin flakes, with complete flaking on one side and
only minor flaking on the other. Eddy points (or eddy variety of Seallorn ) are represented by three fragmentary specimens (Fig. 1, 0-Q) ,
all of which show evidence of having had short blades, strong barbs
and bulbous stems.
Two triangular specimens with gently concave bases are classified
a s Starr. One (Fig. 1, C) has nearly straight lateral edges, while the
other (Fig. 1, D ) has concave lateral edges with slight serrations on
the proximal two-third of these edges. Two other triangular points from
the site are identified as Young. These (Fig. 1, R, S) are made from
thin, essentially unifacially worked flakes.
Six additional arrow points do not fit into any of the recognized
types and will, consequently, be described individually. One (Fig. 1,
T ) has a rectangular stem and shoulders which extend at right angles
from the stem. The edges of the blade are straight and slightly serrated. Another small, crude point (Fig. 1, U ) has an expanding stem
with a straight base and small barbs formed by corner notches. The
edges of the blade are straight. A small ( 1.4 em. long ) triangular point
(Fig. 1, V ) has a straight lateral edge. One side has a slight shoulder
about halfway down the edge. Three triangular points (Fig. 1, E-G)
have very deeply concave bases; one of these (Fig. 1, G ) has essentially
straight lateral edges, and the others have slightly concave blade edges.

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

9

Scrapers. End scrapers are represented by one small (3.4 em. long
and 1.3 em. wide) specimen worked on one end (Fig. 1, W ) . Side
scrapers, by contrast, include four examples (Fig. 1, X-AA ) , one of
which (Fig. 1, X) is roughly triangular in outline and has two worked
edges, one being concave, the other convex. A second specimen (Fig.
1, Y ) is rectangular in outline (4.5 em. long and 2 em. wide ) and is
worked along one straight lateral edge. A third side scraper (Fig. 1, Z )
is made from a thin, roughly triangular flake and is lightly retouched
on two edges. The fourth specimen (Fig. 1, AA ) is also rectangular in
shape and is retouched along one straight lateral edge.
Gravers. One graver (Fig. 1, BB ), made from a roughly triangular
flake, was found at the site. It has two graver points, one of which is
broken. One long worked lateral edge might have been used for scrapmg purposes.
Miscellaneous Worked Stone. Two pieces of worked flint cannot be
identified. The first specimen (Fig. 1, CC ) is roughly semicircular in
outline, is worked on both faces, and has a small projection at one end.
The second unidentified fragment (not shown ) is D-shaped in outline,
bifacially chipped, and has retouching along the convex edge.
One worked fragment of hard, gray sandstone (Fig. 1, DD) appears
to be an incurvate rim fragment from a tubular stone pipe. The exterior surface is very well ground, and the interior only a little less so.
Reconstructed, the interior diameter is approximately 8 em. The fragment is .7 em. thick at the rim and .8 em. thick at the opposite end
of the fragment.
Shell Artifacts. Although shell of any kind is scarce at the site, 30
shell artifacts were found. Twenty of these are small whelk shell
columella fragments ranging from 2.5 em. to 7 em. in length. The ends
of one undamaged columella (Fig. 1, EE ) have been ground to very
sharp points. Another type of shell artifact is a small disc (Fig. 1, FF)
which shows heavy grinding along the edges. This specimen is 1.7 em.
in diameter and approximately .5 em. thick. A roughly trapezoidal
shell fragment (Fig. 1, GG ) with a steep bit on the smaller end
appears to be a fragment from the body of a scallop shell. The remainder of the shell artifacts are small, unidentifiable fragments.
Pottery. The many collecting trips to the site have resulted in a
collection of 3,381 potsherds, not including a large number of exceptionally small and badly eroded pieces. The sherds are classified
according to the types defined in An Introductory Handbook of Texas

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rB~
A

B

c

~~ ~'

~,
~
D

E

F

G

~

j

H

K

J

L

p

0

N

M

a w •

••

Jill@~

li

U

AA

Q

R

V

W

S

X

Y

T

Z

, , , , , , , , , ,s ,10

0 1 2 3 4- 5 6 1 8

CM

BB

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

11

Archeology ( Suhm, et al., 1954: 382--385 ) ; with nearly all falling
within the Rockport series.
1) Rockport Plain. Rim sherds from Rockport Plain vessels number
139. These include 63 flat-lipped rims (Fig. 2, U, V ), 11 of which have
asphaltum coatings on both surfaces.* Only four have asphaltum on
the exterior surfaces, and one has scoring on the exterior surface.
Sixty-five sherds are from vessels with rounded lips (Fig. 2, W-Y ) .
Thirty-six of these have no asphaltum, but four have scoring on the
interior surfaces. Asphaltum is found in 29 sherds, 1 7 having asphaltum on one side only. Of these 17, six have asphaltum on the exterior
surfaces and five have asphaltum on the interior surfaces, with two
of the former scored on the interior and one of the latter scored on the
interior. One of these sherds is from a vessel whose internal diameter
at the mouth was approximately 4 em. It is not possible to determine
which surface has been asphalt coated on six sherds.
Four additional sherds, three with asphaltum coatings, have beveled
lips, but it is impossible to distinguish the interior from the exterior
surfaces.
Two sherds have thickened lips (Fig. 2, Z ) . One of these has
asphaltum and scoring on the exterior surface, the asphaltum extending about halfway across the lip. Vessels with V-notched lips are represented by five sherds.
2) Rockport Black-on-gray. Sherds of this type number 74, 32 of
which are from vessel rims. Vessels which had rounded lips are represented by 24 sherds (Fig. 2, A, B) . On all of these only the lip proper
is painted. Four sherds are from vessels that had flattened lips (Fig. 2,
C). On three of these just the flat part of the lip is painted. The lip
of the fourth sherd (Fig. 2, D) is rolled to the interior and is lightly
incised with parallel diagonal lines ; it and the interior of the sherd
are coated with asphaltum. On the exterior surface of the sherd a
vertical, asphaltum painted line extends down from the rim.
One sherd (Fig. 2, E) is from a vessel with an outcurved rim. A
wavy line of asphaltum runs vertically down from the rim. The interior surface of the sherd is coated with asphaltum and this extends
up to the top of the lip.
• Suhrn, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 384) designate any Rockport ware bearing
asphaltum as Rockport Black-on-gray. Herein, however, this type is restricted to
those sherds having obvious designs.
Fig . 2 . Potshe rds fro m the McGloin Bluff Site . Rim p rofiles a re oriented with their interior surface s facing left.

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Three sherds indicate different types of lip notching. One of these
(Fig. 2, F ) has a V-notched flat lip painted with asphaltum. A second
flat lip (Fig. 2, G) is notched with diagonal crenelations and also
painted with asphaltum. The only other rim sherd (Fig. 2, H ) has
U-shaped notches and the same style of lip painting as described above.
Asphaltum painted decorations appear on 42 body sherds. The
motifs consist of various straight, wavy, dotted, and dashed lines on
the exterior surfaces . Of these, 33 also have asphaltum coatings on the
interior surfaces. Two of the latter have interior scoring associated
with asphaltum coating, while another two have scoring, but no asphaltum, on the interior surface.
3) Rockport Incised. One sherd (Fig. 2, S ) with two parallel incised
lines can be classified as Rockport Incised.
4 ) Rockport ware body sherds. A total of 3,153 body sherds fall
within the Rockport ware classification but cannot be identified with
a specific type. Of these, 1,507 bear no asphaltum, but 125 do have
scoring marks. Scoring is present on both sides of 32 sherds, and 93
sherds have scoring on one side only. Exterior scoring occurs on seven
sherds, and 42 sherds have interior scoring. On the remaining 44
sherds it is not possible to tell on which surface the scoring occurs.
Sherds with asphaltum coating number 1,554. Of these 712 have
asphaltum coating on the exterior surfaces and 601 have asphaltum on
the interior surfaces. Asphaltum occurs on both surfaces of 241 sherds.
Scoring and asphaltum combinations are found on 90 sherds. Scoring occurs on both surfaces of 22 sherds, with six having asphaltum
on the interior surfaces, seven having asphaltum on the exterior surfaces, and on seven sherds it is not possible to determine on which
surface the asphaltum occurs. Of the sherds with both surfaces scored,
two have both sides coated with asphaltum. One side only of 68 sherds
has been scored.
Exterior scoring is present on ten sherds, with four having asphaltum
on this surface and four having it on the interior. Asphaltum occurs
on both surfaces of two of these sherds. Interior scoring is found on 21
sherds, ten having asphaltum on this surface and 11 having asphaltum
on the exterior surface. It is not possible to tell on which surface the
scoring is present on the remaining 37 sherds. Asphaltum occurs on
the same surface as the scoring of 15 sherds, on the opposite surface on
16 sherds, and on both surfaces of six sherds.
Two sherds from the necks of bottles have punctations on the exterior surface. One of these (Fig. 2, R) has a single row of punctations

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

13

and asphaltum on the interior surface, and the other has a triple row
of punctations.
5 ) lncised-Punctated Sherd. One Rockport ware rim sherd (Fig. 2,
I ) has a design consisting of alternating rows of incised lines and
punctations, with the first incised line appearing just below the lip.
This is followed by a row of punctations, an incised line, and another
row of punctations. The punctations are rounded and seem to have
been made with a bluntly pointed implement.
6) Red slipped and red painted sherds. A red slip appears on the
exterior surface of one typical Rockport ware body sherd. Light scoring, clearly made before the vessel was slipped, occurs on the exterior
surface. Another sherd with a white exterior has a thin film of red
paint covering part of the surface.
7) Worked sherds. Two discs made from Rockport sherds (Fig. 2, T )
show grinding on their edges and faces.
8 ) Intrusive sherds. Possible intrusive wares are represented by
nine sherds. These are brown in color, and all are tempered with large
white particles of unknown material. These may possibly be sherds
from a vessel of Leon Plain (Suhm, et al., 1954: Pl. 74, E ) , a type
which is associated principally with the Central Texas Aspect. One of
these is a rim sherd with a lip slightly rolled to the interior. Two other
sherds have asphaltum coatings on the interior surfaces.

European Oh;ects. European contact is indicated by a small blue
glass bead. It is .3 em. thick and .4 em. in diameter. It is typical of 18th
century European trade beads (Dee Ann Story, personal communication ) .
Conclusions. Analysis of the archeological materials from the McGloin Bluff Site indicates that only a Rockport Focus component is
present. As noted previously, the two dart points need not be considered as evidence of an Aransas Focus occupation. The site seems to
have been occupied mainly because of its fresh water and the food potential of the surrounding area. Of the few faunal remains found, fish
bones predominate. (Until very recently, the shallow waters along this
particular section of the coast were a favorite of trout, red and flounder
fishermen .) The absence of oyster shells at the site probably indicates
the absence of oyster reefs in the immediate area.
One of the more important findings made at the site is the red painted
sherd. This sherd may answer a question that has been bothering

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

archeologists for sometime: Where is evidence of the red painted pottery that Gatschet ( 1891 ) describes for the historic Karankawa? Specifically, Gatschetwrites ( 1891: 68 ) :
Besides some rude attempts at wood carving a beginning of the plastic arts could
be seen in the appliance of a paint, which was either r ed or black, and a clay
producing a black color. With these they painted figures of animals and human
faces upon their skins and upon pots and articles of wood. These paintings were
far r emote from any artistic finish and were but seldom seen.

It is my conjecture that this sherd is possibly part of that evidence.*
Identification of the Rockport Focus material from the McGloin
Bluff Site is based on a comparison with specimens described in published works on the few excavated Rockport components located in the
southern section of Texas coast. These materials were also compared
with published trait lists for the Rockport Focus. The main value of
the materials from this site is that they increase the number of artifacts that are needed to study the archeology of the area, and they also
substantiate what is already known about the Rockport Focus. There
is also the possibility that these materials represent the remains of late
prehistoric and/ or early historic groups in the area. The trade bead
certainly indicates contact with Europeans.

INGLESIDE COVE SITE ( 41-SP-43)
Ingleside Cove is a small bay lying between Ingleside Point and the
mainland. Just south of Kinney Bayou is the old fishing village of
Ingleside, now shown on most maps as Ingleside on the Bay. The Ingleside Cove Site is located on the eastern shore of the cove approximately halfway between the settlement and the point. This site is a
shell midden associated with the black sandy clay that comprises the
top 12 to 18 inches of the low bluff around the cove. The shell midden
occupies all but the top four to six inches of the black clay. The upper
few inches contain, in the central section of the site, refuse material
from a fairly recent historic occupation. The site is approximately 250
feet long and 25 to 30 feet wide at the present time. Before hurricane
Carla the site was about 35 feet wider, and it was surely more extensive in the past.
I discovered the site on August 21, 1959, and collected the first
archeological materials from the site at that time. I had very few arti-

* Recently, a complete vessel which was decorated with red paint and asphaltum
was found eroding frcm a site near Corpus Christi (T . N. Campbell and Dee Ann
Story, personal commnication) .

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

15

facts from the site before the hurricane, but as this section of the cove
took a hard beating, a large number of specimens were deposited on
the short beach and in the cove itself. The last collecting trip was
made on April 20, 1962. Approximately 25 visits to the site were made
from the time of discovery to the present. The collection to date consists of 46 flint and stone artifacts and 409 potsherds. Collecting was
done on the beach and from the sides of the bluff.

Projectile Points. Of the 24 flint projectile points recovered from the
site, seven are dart points, and another seven appear to be dart point
fragments. Three of the dart points (Fig. 3, A-C) have triangular outlines and probably fit in the Catan-Matamoros range. All show basal
thinning with two having convex bases and the other having a concave
base.
The Ensor type (Fig. 3, D ) is represented by one well flaked specimen that has slight shoulders and an expanding stem with a slightly
concave base. A well worked leaf-shaped point (Fig. 3, E) may be
classified as a narrow variation of the Lerma type. This point is thinned at the base, but it nonetheless has a fairly thick cross section. The
remaining two dart points cannot be classified as to type. One (Fig. 3,
F) has a slightly expanding stem with a straight base which had served
as the striking platform of the original flake. Small bits of asphaltum,
presumably used to help secure the point to the shaft, adheres to the
stem. The other unidentified point (Fig. 3, G) has an expanding stem
and a convex base. Slight shoulders are present, and the blade has convex edges which are bifacially beveled. This point is apparently reworked, as most of the stem and the central portions of both faces have
a good patina, but the edges of the blade and tip do not.
The remaining ten points are arrow points, one of which has the
stem missing and, consequently, cannot be identified as to type. Four
of the points (Fig. 3, H-K) are classified as Perdiz, three as Fresno
(Fig. 3, L, M), one (Fig. 3, N) as Young, and one (Fig. 3, 0) possibly
as Scallorn. Two of the Perdiz points have slightly concave blade edges,
and the third has convex lateral edges. The fourth is a basal fragment
of a point made from a thin flake worked principally along the edges
of one face. All of the Fresno points have slightly convex lateral edges
and straight bases. Two have serrated edges (Fig. 3, L), and the other
(Fig. 3, M) is unifacially beveled on both lateral edges of the blade.
The Young point is worked on one face only, and the striking platform
has not been removed.
Scrapers. Two oval flakes (Fig. 3, P, Q) with retouching on one end

16

TEXAS AR CHEO L OGI CAL SOCIETY

0

M

L

K

J

H

N

Q

p

e&
u

w

v

T

y

X

1

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 " 9 10
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

CM

Fig. 3 . Artifacts of stone and bone from the Ingleside Cove Site.

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

17

are end scrapers. The original cortex is present on the convex surface
except along the worked edges. The side scraper category (Fig. 3, R-T)
contains 14 specimens. These are made from a variety of flakes, varying considerably in size and having concave to convex edges.

Gravers. Three engraving tools (Fig. 3, V, W ), two of which are
made from thin flakes , were found.
Drill. One tip fragment of a drill (Fig. 3, U) shows extensive u se.
Knives. One well worked specimen and the fragment of another are
classified as knives. The complete specimen is triangular in outline
and has lightly serrated edges (Fig. 3, X ). The form of the fragmentary knife cannot be determined.
Cores and Flakes. Five large cores and five small cores were found
at the site. Flakes of various sizes, shapes, and thicknesses number 132.
Shell Artifacts. A flat ovoid piece of shell shows heavy grinding on
its edges and is the only definite shell artifact found. It is approximately 1.5 em. in diameter and .5 em. in thickness. Four badly eroded
whelk columella were also found, but are not certain artifacts.
Worked Bone. Two pieces of bone show some modification. One (Fig.
3, Y ) is a severed fragment of a deer long bone. The other artifact
(Fig. 3, Z) is a flaking tool made from a deer ulna.
Pottery. The collection of potsherds consists of 409 specimens, exclusive of a number of very small and badly eroded pieces.
1) Rockport Plain. Eighteen rim sherds represent Rockport Plain.
Eight sherds (Fig. 4, 0 , P ) are from vessels that had rounded lips, two
of which have scoring on the interior surfaces. Seven sherds, one of
which (Fig. 4, D) is apparently from a vessel that had been repaired
with asphaltum, represent vessels with flattened lips. Two of these
have scoring on the interior surface and asphaltum on both surfaces.
Three sherds are from vessels with lips beveled to the exterior (Fig. 4,
R ); one has scoring and asphaltum on both surfaces.
2) Rockport Black-on-gray. This type is represented by 12 sherds,
six of which are rim sherds. Two sherds are from vessels with rounded
lips, and only the lip proper is painted. One of these (Fig. 4, A ) is from
a vessel that has been repaired with asphaltum. Vessels with an internal lip overhang are represented by two sherds, one of which (Fig.
4, E) has the lip and the interior surface painted with asphaltum. The

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

other has only the lip painted. One sherd (Fig. 4, C) has an extended
lip overhang, with the lip painted and the exterior surface scored. The
remaining rim sherd (Fig. 4, B) has a V-notched lip that is painted
with asphaltum.

Rockport Black-on-gray body sherds number six. Five of these (Fig.
4, H-J) have portions of wavy line designs on their exteriors and asphaltum coatings on the interiors. The other sherd (Fig. 4, K) has a
portion of a straight line on the exterior surface.
3 ) Rockport ware body sherds. This series includes 379 specimens,
220 of which have no traces of asphaltum. Five sherds (Fig. 4, N) are
fragments of vessels with thick, rounded bases. Lacing holes for repairing broken vessels are present on two sherds (Fig. 4, L). Scoring occurs
on both surfaces of eight sherds and one surface of 29 sherds. Of these
29, four have the scoring on the exterior, 17 on the interior, and on
eight it is not possible to tell on which surface the scoring occurs.
Sherds with asphaltum coatings number 158. Asphaltum is present
on the exterior surface of 52 sherds, with scoring appearing on this
surface on two sherds and the interior surface on ten sherds. The interior surface of 34 sherds is coated with asphaltum. Scoring is present on the interior of three of these, on the exterior surface of one, and
on both surfaces of two. On 19 sherds it is not possible to determine on
which surface the asphaltum is present. One of these has scoring on
the same surface as the asphaltum and the other has it on the opposite
surface. Asphaltum occurs on both surfaces of 53 sherds, of which eight
have scoring.
One Rockport ware body sherd (Fig. 4, M) is unique in that it has
an inlaid design on the exterior surface. The design, probably part of
a larger motif, consists of four rather evenly spaced indentations that
have been inlaid with asphaltum. The indentations appear to have
been made before firing. One edge of the sherd shows mending of a
crack with asphaltum.
Fire hardened clay lumps, which are common in all the sites except
McGloin Bluff, were quite numerous at this site. These lumps are of
random shapes and sizes and show varying degrees of firing. Their
colors range from buff to red and dark brown to black.
European Objects. Although no European materials were found that
could be linked with the Rockport material, a number of artifacts representing a late European occupation were collected from the beach
below the central part of the midden. Seven sherds, three of which are
of Spanish or Mexican origin and not datable, one coin, and an old-

19

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

A

B

·.

-

.

c

E

0

I

F

H

G

f:j
.

.

-

.

L

J

M

K

0

N

p

s

R

Q
0123456'18910
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

T

CM

Fig . 4 . Potsherds from the Ingleside Cove Site. Rim profiles a re oriented with thei r int erior surfaces facing left.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

style clay marble represent this occupation. The coin is a United States
quarter dollar, dated 1894, from the Philadelphia mint. The four remaining sherds, probably china of European manufacture, and the
marble perhaps date at approximately the same time.

Conclusions. The archeological materials from the Ingleside Cove
Site indicate that a Rockport Focus component is present. The midden
deposit, however, is shallow and no stratigraphy is in evidence. No
artifacts, with the exception of the Ensor point, are definitely assignable to the Aransas Focus. All other dart points found are types thought
to have survived into the Neo-American period. The site was probably
occupied because of the food potential of the surrounding area. Shell
refuse, large mammal bones, fish bones, and rodent bones, in that
order of frequency, can be identified in the faunal remains from the
site.
The inlaid sherd represents a new decorative technique for this section of the Texas coast; in fact, this appears to be the first sherd of this
type reported in Texas. However, a larger sample of this mode of
decoration is needed before its full significance can be determined.
THE WINDY HILL SITE (41-SP-42)
Approximately 200 yards southeast of the mouth of Kinney Bayou
a shell midden deposit is eroding from a bluff. The midden material
occupies all but the top few inches of the black clay deposit which comprises the upper part of the bluff. Near the center of the midden and
about 100 yards from the edge of the bluff is a small mound about 30
yards in diameter. Fragments of burned bone, shell and flint flakes
can be collected from the gopher tailings on this elevation. This feature
probably represents midden materials capping a small natural knoll.
I have not collected archeological materials from the site, but five
dart points have been collected by the owners of the land, and these
were given to me. Two of these may be classified as Pedernales points
(Fig. 5, A, B). Both of these points have convex blade edges; one is
barbed and the other is shouldered. The tip of the larger specimen
has been reworked. A third point, identified as Kinney (Fig. 5, C), has
a wide, lanceolate shape, convex lateral edges and a concave base. One
small triangular point (Fig. 5, D) with convex, alternately beveled
edges and a straight base is classified as a Matamoros point. The fifth
point (Fig. 5, E) has a long, thin blade with convex edges and slight
shoulders. The stem is badly damaged and a portion of one edge appears to have been reworked. It cannot be identified with any recog-

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

21

nized type. From the little evidence available, it seems probable that
an Aransas Focus component is present at this site.

THE KINNEY BAYOU SITES
Kinney Bayou empties into the northeast side of Ingleside Cove, and
meanders in a northeasterly direction to the outskirts of Ingleside. Two
shell midden sites, one on the northwestern shore and another on the
southeastern shore, are located on the bayou.

Kinney Bayou Site I ( 41-SP-39 )
This shell midden lies buried in the bank on the northwestern edge
of the bayou and extends from the mouth of the bayou to a point about
300 yards upstream. The midden, marked by J. E. Pearce on the U.S.
Army Tactical Map, Corpus Christi Quadrangle, in July of 1930, is associated with a black soil which overlies a white caliche. The old
University of Texas site number is 77B2-14.
Of the 11 worked stone artifacts collected from this site, three are
identifiable as dart points, while another five are tip, medial, and basal
fragments from dart points or knives. One point (Fig. 5, F ) has convex blade edges, small shoulders, and a slightly expanding stem. The
base of the stem has been damaged and it is not possible to determine
its original form . Another dart point (Fig. 5, G ) has a damaged base,
but may be a Matamoros type. The edges of the blade are convex and
are bifacially beveled. The base was thinned by the removal of several
large flakes from one face. The third point (Fig. 5, H ) has a triangular
blade with straight edges and small barbs. Its stem is wide, has parallel
edges and a slightly concave base.
Knives are represented by a single fragment of a fairly large triangular specimen (Fig. 5, I) . The steeply beveled base is slightly concave, and the edges of the blade are convex. The tip of this specimen
has been broken off. The only drills found at the site are two heavily
used tip fragments. Chipping debris collected from the surface includes
cores, three small and one large specimen, and 41 miscellaneous flint
flakes, some of which contain flake scars that suggest use wear.
Before the hurricane, only one small, badly eroded sherd had been
found at this site. On the last collecting trip in December of 1961, however, eight sherds, one of which is a Rockport Plain rim sherd, were
recovered. These were all found within a few inches of each other and
appear to be from the same vessel. No asphaltum or scoring is present
on the sherds.

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

From the few archeological materials collected, it is difficult to determine much about the site. There is not enough evidence to say
definitely which components are present, but very probably peoples of
both the Rockport and the Aransas foci used the site. The size of the
midden indicates that this was a favorite camping spot for a long period
of time.

Kinney Bayou Site II (41-SP-40)
This site is located on the opposite shore and approximately 30 yards
northeast of Kinney Bayou I. Unlike the other sites in the area , this
one is not associated with the dark soil near the surface. Low bluffs
border the bayou on this shore, and archeological debris is eroding
from the bluffs three or four feet below the contact of the black soil
and the white caliche. Material can also be seen eroding from the sides
of three drainage ditches that have been cut through the site.
All of the six projectile points-four of which are essentially complete-can be classified as dart points. One of the fragments is from a
straight based, side notched point; the other fragment (Fig. 5, J) is
the lower half of a rounded base point, possibly a Refugio. Two of the
complete points (Fig. 5, K, L) have blades with convex edges and expanding stems with convex bases. Slight shoulders are present on both
specimens. One of these (Fig. 5, L) is made of fossil wood. Another
dart point (Fig. 5, M ) has a triangular, beveled-edge blade with one
straight and one slightly convex lateral edge. The sixth point (Fig. 5,
N) has a triangular blade with convex edges. Shoulders are present,
but the base of the expanding stem has been damaged.
The other chipped stone artifacts recovered include a basal fragment
of a triangular knife, three side scrapers, one ovoid scraper (Fig. 5, 0 )
of fossil wood, a core and ten miscellaneous flint flakes. In addition, a
piece of sandstone and a fragment of limestone may represent abrading
stones, but both are too heavily weathered for positive identification.
Three conch (Fasciolaria papillosa Sowerby) columellae have been
ground diagonally on one side of the anterior end to form gouges. T"vo
of these gouges are badly weathered, but the third (Fig. 5, U ) still has
a sharp cutting edge. The remainder of the artifacts collected from the
site are a piece of worked bone (Fig. 5, W), apparently a medial fragment of a bone awl, and numerous fire-hardened clay lumps of various
SIZeS.

All indications point to an Aransas Focus occupation of the site, as
none of the artifacts can be attributed to the Rockport Focus. As for

23

S U RVEY OF CORPUS C H RISTI B AY

0

F

E

A

G

L

H

Q

M

N

p

0

R

v
S

T

z

AA

u

w

BB

CC

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 8 9
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

X

DO

EE

w
I

CM
Fig . 5. Artifacts of stone and shell from the Windy Hill Site, the Kinney Bayou sites, the
Ramirez Site, and the Brown sites.

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

faunal remains, shell predominates, but a few fragments of burned
bone were found .

THE RAMIREZ SITE (41-SP-38)
About 300 yards west (inland) from Kinney Bayou Site I is a
plowed field that contains two shell middens. The field runs north and
south, and the middens are located at each end of the field , being separated from one another by about 30 yards. I collected only a fragment
of an unidentifiable arrow point, one Rockport ware body sherd, and
several lumps of fire-ha;dened clay from the northern side.
The southern midden yielded two dart points, a flint gouge, a knife
fragment, and some fire-hardened clay lumps. One of the dart points
(Fig. 5, P ) has a triangular blade with straight edges; slight shoulders
are present and the broad stem has straight, parallel edges and a
straight base. The other specimen (Fig. 5, Q), a small triangular point,
has convex edges and a straight base. It is unifacially beveled on both
edges and the base, and the striking platform is still in evidence at the
base. The plano-convex gouge (Fig. 5, R ) is identifiable as the Clear
Fork type, although the base is broken.
Judging from the material collected, it seems that two components
are represented: a Rockport Focus component at the northern midden
and an Aransa s Focus component at the southern midden. The artifact sample, hovvever, is quite small and the iden tifications are very
tentative .

THE LA QUINTA SITE (41-SP-35)
An old fishing resort named La Quinta is located on Corpus Christi
Bay about two and one-half miles south of the town of Gregory. On
December 26, 1961 , I found a small shell midden eroding from a low
bench about 14 feet below the contact zone of the black soil and white
clay. In a survey of the area made three years earlier, no evidence of
this midden was observed. Probably the recent hurricane Carla is
responsible for exposing the midden, which covers an area of approximately 25 square yards. I collected nine lumps of fire-hardened clay,
nine flint flakes, and a medial portion of a dart point or knife . The
depth at which the material is eroding would seem to indicate a fairly·
early occupation site.

THE BROWN SITES ( 41-SP-26 through 41-SP-34)
The road from La Quinta to Gregory, the road from Gregory to'

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

25

Portland, and the strip of coast from La Quinta to Portland bound a
roughly triangular shaped section of land. All this area, except for a
narrow strip bordering the bluffs, is under cultivation. Springs are
fairly numerous along this part of the coast, and about a mile south of
Portland a small creek empties into the bay. The first survey of this
area was made in 1958, and at that time I found five shell middens
eroding from the black clay layer. A second survey was made of the
area between the creek and La Quinta in December, 1961, and four
·more sites were found.

Brown Site I (41-SP-26 )
This site consists of a shell midden eroding from the black clay layer
exposed in the side of a large drainage ditch. No artifacts were collected, but shell refuse, bone fragments , flint flakes, and fire-hardened
lumps of clay were recovered from the edges of the ditch.

Brown Site II ( 41-SP-27)
Listed on University of Texas maps under the old number of 77B218, this site covers an area of about 50 square yards. Most of the cultural debris, however, has been moved down onto the beach area from
an extensive gully that dissects a large part of the site. Material was
collected in November, 1958 and in December, 1961, and includes a
small group of artifacts (see below), charred bone, charcoal, and firehardened clay lumps. In addition, several fire hearths were observed.
One arrow point of the Perdiz type was the only projectile point collected. It (Fig. 5, V) has concave blade edges and strong barbs, but
most of the stem is missing. Each of two small triangular flint flakes has
fine retouching along the lateral edges. Three closely associated whelk
columella "awls" were found eroding from the deposit, still in situ.
Pottery is represented by 15 sherds, one of which is from a Rockport
Plain vessel rim. Another sherd, from the neck of a bottle, has traces
of asphaltum coating on the exterior surface. Six of the body sherds
have scoring marks on the interior surfaces.
It seems probable that only a Rockport Focus component is present
at this site.

Brown Site Ill ( 41-SP-28 )
About 14 feet below the contact zone of the black clay and white
clay, I found a small shell midden eroding from a low bench. Two dart
points, one small side scraper, one core, 17 fire-hardened clay lumps,

2.6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and ten miscellaneous flakes were collected. One dart point (Fig. 5, S) ,
classified as Tortugas, is triangular in outline, has a concave base and
convex edges that are altemately beveled on the left. The other point
(Fig. 5, T) has a lanceolate outline with a concave base and strongly
resembles the Plainview type, but lacks grinding on the basal edges.
The scraper is made from a thin, triangular flake, and only one edge
has been worked.

Brown Sites IV, V, VI ( 41-SP-2.9, 30, and 31)
These are a series of very small shell middens washing out from the
black clay layer. They probably represent occupations by several small
groups for short periods of time. Fire-hardened clay lumps, flint flakes,
and burned bone fragments are mixed with the shell refuse.

Brown Site VII ( 41-SP-32.)
Just east of the small middens described a hove, and in the same black
layer, is a fairly extensive shell midden. The site covers an area of
about 40 square yards and is dissected by a large gully. Most of the materials from the site have eroded down to the beach area via the gully.
One arrow point, a side scraper, and 11 miscellaneous flint flakes
were collected from the surface of this site. The arrow point (Fig. 5,
X) is of the Perdiz type and has slightly convex, serrated edges and
light barbs. The majority of the flaking was done on one face, with
only light retouching occurring on portions of the opposite face. The
scraper (Fig. 5, Y) is made from a small rectangular flake and has
only one worked edge.
A total of 2.6 body sherds represent Rockport wares. One rim sherd
with a rounded lip is from a Rockport Plain vessel. Fire-hardened clay
lumps occurred at this site, but were not as numerous as at other sites.

Brown Site VIII ( 41-SP-33)
This small shell midden is also weathering out of the black clay
layer. Bumed bone, flint flakes, and fire-hardened clay lumps and shell
refuse can be seen on the surface. A pile of refuse, mainly bone, was
eroding from one part of the site when I discovered it, and the remainder of this accumulation was excavated at the time. The pile contained
various skeletal fragments of a deer and two drumfish ear bones. Pieces
of bumed bone and whelk shell which had previously eroded from this
particular spot were also collected.

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

27

Projectile points are represented by five specimens, all of which are
identifiable as arrow points. Two of them are fragmentary: one is part
of a stem and the other the tip of a blade. One of the three remaining
specimens is a Perdiz. The tip of this point (Fig. 5, Z ) is missing, but
the blade appears to have had straight, lightly serrated edges and small
barbs. Another arrow point (Fig. 5, AA) has a blade with convex, serrated edges and slight shoulders. A portion of the stem and the tip of
the blade are missing. The remaining arrow point, or small knife (Fig.
5, BB), h as an asymmetrical blade and only one shoulder.
Two drills, both slender hi-pointed specimens, were found at the site.
One (Fig. 5, CC ) is rod-shaped, with parallel edges and a lenticular
cross section. The other (Fig. 5, DD ) has a proximal end that tapers
to form very slight shoulders and a possible stem. Both are similar to
the drills found at the Indian Island and Webb Island sites (Campbell,
1956: Pl 1, J; Pl. 3, NN-PP ) on the southern side of Corpus Christi
Bay.
Rockport Focus pottery is represented by 45 sherds, three of which
are rim fragments from vessels of Rockport Plain. The rim sherds have
fla~ lips, while one of the body sherds has scoring marks on the interior
surface, and another has scoring on the exterior surface. The latter
sherd s also shows evidence of having come from a vessel that was
mended with asphaltum.

Brown Site IX ( 41-SP-34 )
Approximately 50 yards east of Brown Site VIII, another small
midden is eroding from the black deposit. Like the other Brown sites,
burned bone, burned whelk shell, fire-hardened clay lumps, and other
cultural debris are weathering out from the midden. One arrow point,
one whelk columella drill, and 15 Rockport ware body sherds were
collected from the site. The arrow point (Fig. 5, EE) is the basal half
of a point with a rounded base, possibly of the Young type.
SUMMARY AND GENERAL CONCLUSIONS

The materials collected in this survey have been described and evaluated. Since extensive excavations are not likely to be carried out in
this area in the near future, I feel that this material has value in adding to our basic knowledges of the cultural complexes involved in the
prehistory of the central Gulf Coast. From observations made while
living in the area, I am of the opinion that unless extensive excavations
are carried out within the next five to six years, a very large amount

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of valuable archeological material is going to be lost to the rapid development that is taking place on the Texas Gulf Coast. It does not
seem wise to rely solely on the work done in the past as, to my knowledge, only seven sites have been excavated in this area. Of these, five
have been described in published archeological reports.
Three of the four culture stages recognized in Texas are identifiable
in the material from this survey. The Aransas Focus of the Archaic
Stage is fairly well represented by three sites (Windy Hill, Kinney
Bayou II, and Ramirez ) , and the Neo-American Stage is well represented by the large amount of material (Rockport Plain and Rockport Black-on-gray sherds; projectile point types Perdiz, Fresno,
Young, and Starr ) assignable to the Rockport Focus. Materials that can
be attributed to the Historic Stage are almost non-existent, although
one site, McGloin Bluff, did yield a glass trade bead.
The materials attributed to the Aransas Focus substantiate what is
already known about the complex. It appears that the three sites containing only Aransas Focus artifacts are on the fringe of the distribution of certain projectile point styles. Here the orientation for styles is
directed for the most part towards central Texas. The collections from
Webb I sland (Campbell, 1956 ), on the opposite side of Corpus Christi
Bay from my survey, contain a greater number of dart points more
commonly found associated with Falcon and Mier Focus material to
the south.
The rest of the sites involved in the survey can, for the most part,
be attributed to the Rockport Focus. The large sample of material collected verifies the association of traits with the southern coastal area
(Starr and Fresno points, tiny end scrapers, hi-pointed flint drills, and
shell discs) and central Texas (Perdiz, Scallorn, and Young points ) .
Additional cultural ties are suggested by the occurrence of the three arrow points (Fig. 1, E-G) with the deeply indented bases. These also
occur in the Brownsville area, but as of yet have not been associated
with any particular focus. The large sample of Rockport potsherds
substantiates what we already know, as well as adding to our knowledge. Incised pottery is very rare, indicating that this area is on the
periphery of the distribution of that decorative technique. The red
painted sherd is some evidence of the pottery reported by Gatschet, and
a new decorative technique is hinted at by the presence of the asphalt
inlaid sherd.
Observations made during the survey may help shed light on two
problems-the origin of the asphaltum used in the decorating of Rockport Focus pottery and the origin of the fire-hardened clay lumps-

SURVEY OF CORPUS CHRISTI BAY

29

which have been of concern to coastal archeologists. It seems probable
that the asphaltum was picked up by prehistoric peoples in its natural
state on the local Gulf shores. Today natural asphaltum can still be
collected on the beaches, sometimes in very large quantities. Authorities working with the problem of keeping the Padre Island beaches
free of asphaltum believe that it floats across the Gulf from tar pits
and seeps on the coast of the Yucatan Peninsula. The asphaltum arrives on the Texas beaches in a soft enough state to have been applied
immediately to the pottery; or it could have been collected, allowed to
harden, and then remelted when later use was necessary. The problem may be resolved by collecting sufficient samples from the beaches
and comparing them chemically with samples taken from archeological
sites. It seems quite possible that the source discussed above will prove
to be the same one the prehistoric peoples of the area used.
As for the second problem, all the evidence points to open fires built
on the surface as the major explanation for the fire-hardened clay
lumps. Several times I have found these lumps eroded from black, ashy
areas along with charcoal, burned bone, and burned shell. Recently, I
observed a modern camp fire being destroyed by erosion, and clay
lumps identical to those collected in archeological sites were eroding
out from this hearth. The lumps were darker in color and harder near
the center of the hearth, getting lighter and softer towards the perimeter of the burned area. The color of the lumps seems to be determined
by the amount of oxygen that can reach the clay while the fire 1s
burning.

REFERENCES CITED
Campbell, T . N .
1947. The Johnson Site : Type Site of the Aransas Focus of the T exas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 18,
pp. 40- 75.
1952. The Kent-Crane Site : A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1958. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. The Texas Joumal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423-442.
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891. The Karankawa Indians, the Coastal Peoples of Texas. Papers of the
Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Vol. 1, No.2.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Martin, George C.
n.d.
Preliminary Archaeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast Made
by George C. Martin and Wendell H . Potter in 1927-1928-1929. Privately
Printed.
1929. Notes on some Texas Coast Campsites and Other Remains. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1, pp. 50-57.
1931. Texas Coastal Pottery. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 3, pp. 53-56.
Potter, Wendell H.
1930. Ornamentation on the Pottery of the Texas Coastal Tribes. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 41-44.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers, No. XVII .
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Ingleside, Texas

Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout
Rockshelter ( 41 TV69), Travis County, Texas
J. C. POLLARD, JOHN W. GREER, AND H. F. STURGIS*
ABSTRACT
A rockshelter, located near Austin, Texas (Travis County), was excavated by
members of the local archeological society in 1960-1961. It contained a thin, buried
occupation zone which yielded a relatively small number of artifacts. Projectile
points indicate the occupation to have been pure Central Texas Aspect, possibly
both Austin and Toy ah foci. Several flint artifacts were discovered showing definite
burin treatment.

INTRODUCTION

During the fall of 1959 members of the Travis County Archeological
Society examined a rockshelter in the local Boy Scout camp area for
evidence of aboriginal occupation. Although the shelter floor showed
disturbance by present-day campers, several flint flakes were found
suggesting a much earlier occupation. Additional flakes and two projectile point fragments from a small test pit confirmed the surface
indications. On the basis of these finds the society decided a controlled
excavation would be worthwhile. Excavation was begun February,
1960 and continued more or less regularly through succeeding weekends. The dig was concluded January, 1961.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This report is offered as partial payment of the debt the society owes
to the many persons who gave of their time and skills to help the members learn something of the science of archeology. Especially appreciated was the help and interest received from T. N . Campbell, J. F. Epstein, T. W. McKern, and E. L. Lundelius of The University of
Texas; W. W. Newcomb, Jr., and Dee Ann Suhm of the Texas Memorial Museum; and E. B. Jelks of the Texas Archeological Salvage
• Travis County Archeological Society Report Committee.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Project. All were most gracious in repeatedly interrupting their busy
schedules to help the society whenever called upon . In addition, special
thanks go to E. Mott Davis, Research Archeologist of The University
of Texas. Dr. Davis' many days at the site working and instructing
others, and his never failing encouragement and contagious enthusiasm, sparked the project to completion.
LOCATION

Site 41 TV69 is located in the southwestern portion of Travis County,
about three miles northwest of the city of Austin. The shelter in which
the site lies is located on the north bank of Bull Creek, about one-quarter mile upstream from the juncture of the creek with the Colorado
River. About two miles south of the mouth of the creek, Tom Miller
Dam impounds the river to form Lake Austin (Figs. 1, 2 ) .
The site is on the property of the Tom Wooten Boy Scout Camp,
main summer camp for the Sunrise District of the Capitol Area Council. The shelter is located in a steep cliff face, about 60 feet above the
present level of Bull Creek. This creek is _now flooded by backwaters
from Lake Austin, and is reported to be about 10 feet deep where it
flows past the site.
DESCRIPTION OF THE AR EA

The area is made up of rolling hills interlaced with eroded gullies
and massive limestone outcrops. It is about one mile west, on the upthrust side, of the Balcones Escarpment and has a mean elevation of
about 800 feet.
This is part of the watershed of the Colorado River, and the outstanding topographic features are the waterways eroded through the soft
limestone hill cores . Most of the gullies and valleys are normally dry,
supporting streams of surface run-off only during heavy rains. Several
more or less permanent streams-one of the largest being Bull Creek
- do exist, however. This creek is now drowned by the backwaters of
Lake Austin and, as a result, is deep and relatively slow moving. During early times, however, it probably was shallow and fast flowing and,
judging from present displays, must have been capable of generating
torrents during heavy storms. Under such conditions the creek could
be expected to become very erosive, particularly on soft limestone.
The results are evident: deeply cut gaps through the hills and clifflike stream banks. In certain of these cliff faces soft formations sandwiched between harder limestone layers permitted deep undercutting

33

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

LAKE
AUSTIN
I

·,,

'

.:.

.. '

'

RDY.SCOUT SHftTFR
~

\'

Fig . 1. lloy Scout Shelter. A, Gene ral location . II, The shelter and immediate environ s.

of the rock. The results are rockshelters of the kind making up the
present site.
Geologically this is an area of sedimentary deposits laid down du ring the Cretaceous period, later uplifted along the Balcones fault and,
since that time, eroded into the characteristic maze of hills and valleys.
The surface consists of a thin calcareous clay mantle with scattered

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

small areas of flint pebbles and wind blown sand-and limestone fragments, large and small, in weat abundance.
The predominant formation throughout the area is the Austin limestone. These massive beds are interrupted at times with marl and thin
lenticular deposits of flint.
The 25-35 inches of rainfall per year normally recorded for this
area enforces rather firm limits on the growing season. Most of the
rainfall is concentrated in the winter months, November-January,
with a secondary amount falling in March-April. The low rainfall in
the summer and fall, coupled with the hot summer temperatures (901000 F .), limits vegetation to that adaptable to semi-arid conditions.
This and the sandy soil with little or no humus present make awiculture a marginal enterprise. There is no evidence to suggest that these
conditions were much different in aboriginal times.
Many foods wow wild here today and were doubtless available in
earlier times: pecans, walnuts, acorns, hackberry, cactus, grapes, and
wild plums are in evidence. The hills and valleys must also have provided excellent opportunities for hunting game: doves, quail, turkey,
deer, rabbits, opossums, squirrels, racoons, and bobcats are reported
as still present in the area. Evidently fish, mussels, water plants, and
other foods were also available from the creeks and river.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE

This is a typical central Texas rockshelter in appearance (Figs. 2,
4 ). The shelter is actually in two parts : a small section about 35 feet
long, at the eastern end of the ledge and a larger section on the west
end. The smaller part is relatively narrow, about 10 feet wide, has an
uneven rocky floor and scanty roof protection. Although a small test
pit did turn up several flint chips, this section was not considered worth
excavating.
The main interest was concentrated on the larger, western section
of the shelter. This area measures about 85 feet long. It is approximately 14 feet deep, from front to back wall at floor level, and about
10-12 feet deep at ceiling height. The shelter floor is slightly lower in
the middle than at either end, and in most places slopes gently from
the rear wall toward the edge. For practical purposes, however, the
surface of the shelter fill is level. The surface of the floor deposit is a
hard, clay-like, crust relatively free of dust. It is also without vegetation under the roofed part, although the ledge at each end of the shelter and the talus slope in front is covered with bushes and small trees.

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

Fig . 2.
Creek .

35

A, Distant view of shelter, looking west. B, View of shelter from across Bull

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The wall of the shelter contains several small lenses of marl-like
rock and, towards the eastern end, the erosion of some of the material
has formed a convenient, waist-high shelf. The wall and ceiling show
evidence of several slow, water seepages. In some places on the ceiling, seepage has resulted in rather short, heavy stalactites. In addition,
thin, curtain-like stalactitic formations occur on the wall. There is,
however, no evidence that water flow into the shelter was ever more
than the present seepage.
Along the outer edge of the floor deposit are several large block-like
limestone boulders. The shape and position of these stones indicate
that they are pieces of a once larger projection over the shelter. Other
similar boulders are in evidence in the rather low talus slope between
the cliff face and creek bank. As a guess, these rocks, if put back in
place, would extend the roof outward by five to 10 feet. Several of the
fallen rocks along the edge of the shelter contain erosion pits, an inch or
more deep, worn there by water dripping from the roof. This, and the
extent to which the present edge of the cap rock has been weathered,
lead to the belief that the rock falls are quite old.
The boulders that rim the shelter provide a sort of curb protecting
the shelter fill from damage by erosion from rain or surface water. In
fact, beyond the evidence of a few small potholes and campfires of
modern origin, there was no indication of any appreciable damage to
the shelter deposit by natural or human activities. Scout camp officials
were questioned regarding earlier excavations or artifacts found in the
shelter. Replies indicated that the site was essentially undisturbed and
that no artifacts had been collected from it.
EXCAVATION

Horizontal control was established by laying out a base line near,
and approximately parallel, to the outer edge of the shelter. This line
was marked by stakes at five foot intervals and a grid system of five
foot squares developed from it. Although the long axis of the shelter is
east-northeast, the base line, for convenience, was designated eastwest. All squares are identified by the coordinates of the southeast corner, such as N30-E140 (Fig. 3 ).
A datum point located near the outer edge of the shelter was assumed
to be at an elevation of 100 feet . The elevation of the top of each stake
was measured by means of a transit and referred to the datum point.
The elevation of ground level at each stake was also recorded.
Initial plans were to establish a vertical control system through

37

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

excavation by six inch levels. However, after several squares were dug
using this method, it was apparent that finer control was sometimes
necessary because the occupation zone in places was very thin. Where
this occurred the squares were excavated in two or three inch levels.

PLAN AND GRID
LAYOUT

FLOOR

N

I

4N-30

+++

++4-+

N- 25

E
100

E
105

f23
+

110

115

120

125

130

135

140 145

150

155

160 165

E
170

E
175

A,B - Cross sections (see Fig . 5 )
Areas excavated
0 Firep i ts
Gr i d stakes
~Rock ledge

Fig . J .

In some instances it was necessary to use small hand picks to loosen
the compacted soil. Generally, however, soil was loosened and removed by shovel and trowel. All material was screened through a onethird inch mesh screen. Objects of interest were placed in sacks properly identified as to square and level. All artifacts were later washed,
labeled, and catalogued for future reference. A total of 16 squares was
excavated, most to a depth of about 20 inches below the surface, although several reached 30 or more inches in depth. Most squares were
refilled as soon as digging was completed to avoid developing hazards
for the scouts who continued to use the shelter as a part of their trailways.
Field notes were kept for each day's work and reports were made of
the findings in each level of all squares. Sketches were made of special
features . Soil conditions and strata exposed in the faces of many
squares were also noted and sketched.

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

STRATIGRAPHY

The stratigraphy of the site was difficult to unravel because of the
unevenness of the original floor, shallowness of the deposit, and the
presence of several boulders at critical locations. In general the deposit
in the back of the shelter was too shallow for much differentiation of
strata. Some demarcation was possible in the front half, however. Two
ty pical profiles are shown in Figure 5.
The bulk of the shelter fill was made up of a light brown, fine, sandy
soil; probably wind blown from dried flood deposits along the nearby
creek bank. Where this material received infusions of lime, as from
water oozing from the back wall of the shelter or from the presence of a
lot of lime fragments (roof spalls ) , it developed a caliche-like character. Layer 6 (Fig. 5 ) is believed to have been formed in this manner.
The early inhabitants of the shelter built their fires on, or in the floor
deposit; or-by scooping firepits through the deposit-on the underlying bedrock. The result, a burned area filled with ashy soil and charcoal, is evident as Layer 5. Apparently, ash and charcoal from the fireplaces were moved toward the back wall-possibly by the wind or by
the inhabitants as they cleaned out the hearths for succeeding fires.
Whatever the cause, the result was a loose, gray, ashy stratum (Layer
3) between the fireplaces and back wall of the shelter. Succeeding deposition of a light, wind blown ( ?) soil (Layer 4) eventually covered
these fireplaces. Capping most of the lower layers ( 6 through 3) was
a compact, yellow, caliche-like mantle (Lay er 2 ) containing many
small fragments of limestone. This material was probably formed by
the action of lime in the same manner as Layer 6. In fact, layers 2
and 6 may denote two wet periods separated by a dry interval as indicated by layers 3, 4, and 5. Layer 2 was somewhat more compact than
6 ; however, this may be due to its being nearer the top of the deposit
and therefore subjected to more compaction by years of foot traffic
through the shelter. The surface layer, i.e., the present floor of the
shelter, was a thin, smooth, brown, compact soil ( Layer 1) . Occasional
pit-like outlines (Fig. 5, item 7) were noted in the profiles. The material within these outlines was loose, coarse, dark brown soil. These
pits are believed to be relatively modern.
The stratigraphy can be simplified by classification into three zones
(Fig. 5 ) :
Zone I, bottom of the deposit, rested on rock and consisted of a caliche-like material which conta ined numerous limestone fragm ents. This zone occurred from
two to 36 inches below the surface. Because of the irregularity of the shelter floor,

39

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

•
B
Fig . 4. Excavation of Boy Scout Shelter, A, Main shelter looking east. B, Main shelter,
looking west.

its thickness could not be determined, but it probably ranged from several inches to
several feet. This apparently was the surface upon whi ch the first occupation took
place. No artifacts were recovered from this zone.

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Zone II, the middle part of the deposit, rested on Zone I and was the occupation
zone. Its depth varied from two to 20 inches below the surface, and it was from one
to 10 inches thick. A loose, sandy, tan colored soil, it was stained gray with ash in
places, and was made up principally of layers 3, 4, and 5. Zone II contained numerous mussel and snail shells, fragments of small bones, and localized concentrations
of charcoal fl ecks. Several fireplaces and most artifacts were found in this zone.
Zone II I includes the surface layers which rested on Zone II. This was a thin
zone of light brown soil capped by a hard compact crust. A few artifacts and flakes
were found in this zone, but, because of probable disturbance to this part of the deposit, may be intrusive from Zone II.

NO RT H -

Se c t i o n

(j)

Sect i on

topto il

~ li;ht

c ompac t
; roy, uh y

@

bro wn, co mpa c t , to n d J soil

Ll ;ht

PR O F l L ES

A

Bro wn , tm oot h, c omp act

® YCIIIow ,

S O UT H

cotlcho
.oil

@Dar k ;ro y

to bla ck, bv ntd
cu lhro l cleb ri t
Ytll o w- ; ro y , l ooto c o lich o
~ Probab l e tnodern p it

to ll;

8

cont a in s

@

@Bed roc k

Fig . 5 . North- south profiles along E125 and E130.

OCCUPATIONAL FEAT URES

The only recognizable features in the shelter fill were a number of
firepits or hearths. In all cases these were shallow, unlined, saucerlike depressions, surrounded by burned earth and filled with charcoal
and ash stained soil. Five of these pits can be described as follows
(Fig. 3) :
Pit No. 1 was found in Layer 3, six inches below the surface, and was covered by
a large flat rock (probably roof fall) . The pit was r ectangul ar in outline, about 18 x
13 inches, and four inches deep at the center. It was filled with fine charcoal and
ashy soil. No shell, bone or artifact was associated with this feature.
Pit No. 2 occurred in Layer 4, five inches below the surface. This pit was a shallow, saucer-shaped depression about 12 inches in diameter and two inches deep. It
contained only ash-stained soil and charcoal fragments

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

41

Pit No. 3 was found 12 inches below the surface, in Layer 4. The pit was oval
12 x 15 inches, and three inches deep. It was fill ed with soft, dark gray soil which
contained bits of charcoal and flint. Numerous snail and mussel shells, some of
them burned, were found in this pit.
Pit No . 4 occurred in Layer 3, 12 inches below the surface. The pit was shallow
and saucer-shaped (about 12 inches in diameter), and was filled with dark , loose
earth. Flint chips, bone fragments, a utilized flake, flint scraper, and two points
(Perdiz type ) w ere found in the same level as the firepit and within two feet of it.
Pit No. 5 was encountered six inches below the surface, in Layer 5. This was
shallower than the other pits, was roughly triangular in shape, and was approxi mately two feet on each side. It was surrounded with ashy soil containing many
bone fragments. One arrow point (possibly Eddy type ) was found near this pit.

A number of other fireplaces were found in the shelter; some of
these, however, were on, or so near to the surface that they are considered to be modern. In several instances this was confirmed by nearby finds of bottle caps, glass fragments, 22 caliber cartridge cases, etc.
Several other possible hearths were noted as rather vague areas of ash
or fire darkened earth, but were too poorly defined to be considered as
firepits .
The number of artifacts ( 152) recovered from the site was not large
shell concentration one foot below the surface, in Square N25, E145.
Here 19 mussel shells were found lying almost end-to-end in a slightly
curved east-west alignment. Near the west end of this line of shells
was a small pocket of 25 snail shells and one 8-inch bone awl (Fig. 9,
A, A' ). Also found in this area were 17 small rodent and fish bones,
and a smooth pebble-like limestone nodule about 3 inches in diameter.
There were no indications of use-i.e., polish, scratches, impact scars,
etc.-on the pebble. No explanation can be offered for this assemblage,
although the shell arrangement indicates an intentional array rather
than an accidental grouping.

DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS

The number of artifacts ( 152) recovered from the site was not large
(see Table 1). In addition, horizontal and vertical distributions were
made relatively meaningless by the narrowness of the shelter floor and
the shallowness of the deposit. Two general observations are possible:
( 1) most artifacts were found in the central part of the shelter, and
(2) the artifacts showed no significant groupings either by type or
location.

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

N-30

~

)oo

0

I

/

2

,,-.--.

X

PoOo~< pDooD

0

'' ,_ /

/"

®

,
/

~

~

---, -'

3

I
I

X

\

I

'

;:S--x /

X

X
XX.

><

x "

N-2

c:P 0

E
140

4
AREA OF FISH OR

I

E
145

RODENT VERTEBRAE

SMALL, SMOOTH
STONE
POCKET OF 25 SNAIL SHELLS

X
0 oO

BONE

OR

MUSSEL

~BONE

BONE

FRAGMENT

SHELLS

AWL

Fig. 6. Concentration of refuse in Square N25 , E145 .

ARRow PoiNTS

A total of 24 flint arrow points was found. Seven of these were too
fragmentary for identification, although two blade sections had sharply
serrated edges. The remaining 17 points were classified as follows :

43

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

Unidentified (Fig. 7, M, N). Two points are considered to fall outside the limits of known types. One, Fig. 7, N , is a small point with a
thin, square stem. It measures 2.5 em. long and .8 em. wide. The stem
may be broken, in which case this point is probably the Perdiz type; if
unbroken, it may be the Alba type. The second point (Fig. 7, M) is
asymmetrical and has been worked only along the edges. The stem
is pointed, very small and off-center. It also suggests the Perdiz outline.
It measures 2.2 em. long (incomplete ) and 1 em. wide.
Perdiz (Fig. 7, I-L ) . This group is represented by six points, all of
which are characterized by contracting stems and thin, barbed blades.
Average length is 3.4 em.; average width is 1.5 em.
Cliffton (Fig. 7, G, H ) . Two points have been placed in this group.
One (Fig. 7, H ) is a typical Cliffton point, but the other (Fig. 7, G ) is
somewhat questionable and may be a variant of Perdiz. Average length
is 3.5 em.; average width is 2.3 em.
Alba (Fig. 7, 0-P ). The two points of this type are characterized by
parallel-sided stems and strong shoulders. They average 3.3 em. long
and 1.8 em. wide. Both are somewhat similar to-and may be a variant
of-the Scallorn type. Dee Ann Suhm and Edward B. Jelks (personal
communication) consider these poinls to fit the Eddy classification
better than the Alba type. On the other hand, the bulbous or slightly
expanded stems ascribed to Eddy points by Suhm (1957: 228) are not
evident. The Eddy point, according to Suhm, belongs largely to the
Central Texas Aspect, to both the Austin and Toyah foci.
Scallorn (Fig. 7, Q-T). The five points in this group all have the
expanded stem, straight base, corner notches, and prominent shoulders.
typical of this type. They average 3 em. in length and 1.5 em. in width_
According to Suhm ( 1960: 83 ) and Jelks ( 1962: 84-85), the Toyah
Focus is characterized by the Perdiz and Cliffton arrow point types,.
while the Scallorn arrow point type is the major diagnostic of the Austin Focus. Suhm, as noted above, has further suggested that Eddy may
be a transitional type.
DART POINT

Only one point (Fig. 7, F ) identifiable as a dart point was found in
the shelter. Critical portions of the stem and shoulders are missing so
that classification is questionable. It has, however, tentatively been
identified as Uvalde. This fairly crude point was found in the test hole

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

c

F

I

\

A

~

I:

H

G

J

L

K

M

I\
I

I

,,. ,.
~~
s'/

7"

N

Q

0

2

4

6

R
8

s

T

10

CM
Fig . 7. Points, Spokeshaves, Utilized Flake, Drill, and Gouge. A, 8 , Spokeshaves. C, C',
Gouge-Spol<eshave . D, Utilized flake . E, Drill. F, Dart po int !Uvalde?). G, H, C/iffton points.
1-L, Perdiz points. M, Unidentified points (possibly Perdiz). N, Unidentified point (possibly
A/bal. 0, P, Alba points (or possibly Eddy points). Q-T, Sea/lorn points .

45

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

dug just prior to excavation. It measures 7.5 em. in length and 2. 7 em.
in width.
TABLE 1
Artifacts from the Boy Scout Shelter

Artifact
Arrow points
Fragmentary
Unidentified
Perdiz*
Cliff ton
Alba (or Eddy? )
Scallorn
Dart point, Uvalde?
Drill
Spokeshaves
Graver
Saw

Number
found
7

2
6
2
2
5
1
1
2

Artifact
Knives, identified
Knives, fragments
Scrapers
Gouges
Choppers
Hammerstones
Grinding Stones
Worked flakes, knives
Utilized flake
Worked flint, miscellaneous
Burins, definite and probable
Bone awls
Worked? mussel shells
Total

Number
found

22
17
2
3
6
3
1
5
37
12
10
2
2
152

• Projectile point types follow those described in Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954).
DRILL

Only one drill (Fig. 7, E) was found. It is a relatively small flake
drill. The stem is about 3 em. long and .8 em. wide. The base is unworked and still contains much of the cortex of the original nodule.
Over-all length is 5.5 em.
This drill corresponds to those previously described for the Central
Texas Aspect (Miller and Jelks, 1952; Suhm, 1959). It differs from the
usual Edwards Plateau Aspect drill in that it is smaller and does not
have a shaped base.
SPOKESHAVES

Two spokeshaves (Fig. 7, A, B) were found. They are small flakes,
unworked except for a semicircular notch in one edge. The notches are
uniformly 1.2 em. wide; one is 1.2 em. deep, the other about .6 em.
deep. A small snub-nosed gouge (Fig. 7, C, C') also contains a spokeshave notch on one side. It is very similar to those described above. All
appear to have been ideally suited for the smoothing of arrow shafts.

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
GRAVER

One very small (2 em. long and .8 em. wide) fragment of flint with
a needle-like point lightly worked along one edge is classified as a
graving tool.
SAW

A rectangular flake is identified as a saw because of a series of seven
serrations which form a saw-toothed edge at one end (Fig. 8, J, J').
It measures 4.2 em. in length and 2.5 em. in width.
KNIVES

The knives from this site, with only two exceptions, can be divided
into four main groups as follows:

Form I (Fig. 8, A). Represented by seven artifacts, this form is similar to Young arrow points. It is characterized by a rather small blade
and a rounded base. The average length is 3.8 em., the average width
is2.4cm.
Form II (Fig. 8, B) is represented by three specimens. These are
similar to Form I except that the bases are straight or only slightly
convex. They are generally a little larger and thicker than Fresno
points. Average length is 3.8 em., while the average width is 2.4 em.
The particular specimen (Fig. 8, B) illustrating this group is especially interesting. This knife was found broken in two pieces. The
fragments were found at approximately the same depths but about five
feet apart, in adjoining squares. Both pieces must necessarily be of the
same age and both were found in similar surroundings, yet, one section was completely patina ted and the other was essentially free of any
surface alteration. This provides a striking example of the unreliability
of patina as an indicator of age.
Form Ill (Fig. 8, C) includes seven specimens which have the same
general shape as Form I. However, all of these knives are slightly
larger and considerably heavier. The lengths average 4.5 em., the
widths 3 em.
Form IV (Fig. 8, D) is represented by three knives. Specimens in
this group have much the same shapes as Form III knives, but they are
larger and heavier. With an average length of 4.8 em. and an average
width of 3 em., they probably fall into the general range of Abasolo
dart points.

47

BOY SCOUT ROCKS HELTE R

Besides these forms there are 17 unidentifiable fragments, and two
blades which do not fit the above classification. The first of these unclassified blades (Fig. 8, E) is lanceolate in shape an d rather wide for
its length. The blade is formed fr om a cu rved flake an d is unworked on

A

c

B

D

G

E

F

F'
H

J

J'

Fig . 8 . Cutting and Scraping Tools . A, Knife Form I. 8, Knife Form II. C, Knife Form Ill.
D, Knife Form IV. E-F' , Miscellaneous knives. G, H, Flake knives. I, Scraper. J-J ' , Saw.
Dashes along edges of F indicate the extent of basa l smoothing .

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

one face, except for small sharpening flakes around the edges and
thinning of the bulb of percussion at the distal end. The other side
shows percussion flaking over the entire face. This specimen is 6.5 em.
long and 3.1 em. wide. The second unclassified knife (Fig. 8, F , F' ) is a
long, slightly curved blade which is flaked on both sides. The edges
near the base are ground smooth. The base is straight and also appears
to have been smoothed. Workmanship is fairly crude, although the
blade is thin (maximum thickness .4 em.).
Six of the knives have part of the original striking platform, or cortex, on the base (all forms represented) ; and two others have cortex
•On portions of one or both faces.
ScRAPERs

Only two scrapers, both characterized by unifacial flaking, were
found at the Scout Shelter. The first of these (Fig. 9, J) is a cortex flake
worked only along one edge. This scraper has one feature not common
to central Texas forms: one slightly convex edge has a small, rounded
projection about 1.6 em. wide at the base and about .6 em. in length.
At present no published reference to this peculiarity has been found.
However, J. W. Greer has found this type at sites on the Llano River
in Llano County, where it was associated with dart point fragments
(Nolan, Travis, and Marshall ) and one Scallorn arrow point.
The second scraper (Fig. 8, I) is made from a narrow and thick cortex flake. One edge is worked into a slight concavity. This scraper measures 11.3 em. long, 2. 7 em. wide, and 1. 7 em. thick.
GouGES

Three biconvex gouges with chisel-like edges were found . One (Fig.
9, G, G' ) is rectangular (6.3 em. long and 3.5 em. wide ) with rounded,
oppositely beveled ends. Another (Fig. 9, H, H' ) is circular, but has
a straight scraping edge. It measures 4.5 em. by 4 em. The third ( Fig.
7, C, C' ) is a "snub-nose" gouge and has one circular and one pointed
scraping edge. It is 5 em. long and 2.5 em. wide. This latter specimen
also has a small ( 1 em. by .5 em.) spokeshave notch worked into one
edge.
CHOPPERS

Six bifacially worked nodules were found, each having one edge that
was probably used for cutting or chopping. These are relatively small
compared with those found in central Texas burned rock middens.

49

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

All have portions of the cortex still present. The average diameter is
5.5 em.
HAMMERSTONES

Three hammerstones were found. Two of these are simply small
flint nodules about 7 em. in diameter. The third, also of flint is probably half of a small core which has been greatly worn by weathering
or stream action . It measures 6 em. long, 4 em. wide, and 3 em. thick.
This piece was later possibly used as a burin (see L-41 under burins).
GRINDING STONES

There was only one identifiable mano fragment found during the
excavation. This is of fine-grained sandstone, ground smooth over one
face and along its edges. The fragment is too small, however, to show
distinct grinding facets.
Other stones possibly used as manos include three broken quartz
pebbles and a smooth, hard limestone pebble. These stones all show
smooth areas, but actual grinding surfaces cannot be identified.
FLAKE KNIVES

This group is composed of five thin flakes unifacially worked along
one edge, as if to sharpen or strengthen the cutting edges. Two such
knives are illustrated in Figure 8 (G, H ). The remaining three artifacts
have cortex covering the unworked edges. While some of these flakes
could have been used as scrapers, their sizes ( 1.2 to 5 em. in width, 2
em. in length, and 3 em. in thickness) suggest use as small cutting implements.
UTILIZED FLAKES

Thirty -seven flakes were found which fit into this category. Thirtysix of these have slight marginal flaking, but are otherwise unaltered.
This flaking differs from that of the flake knives in that the knives appear to have been intentionally flaked while these seem to be simply
random use scars. Most of these are fairly thick (. 3 to .8 em.) cortex
flakes ranging from 4 to 8 em. in length. They would have been useful for small cutting or scraping operations.
Another utilized flake seems to have been designed for use as a drill.
It has been crudely fashioned by removing two chips from a flake in
order to prepare a pointed blade about 1 em. long. Very small scars,
apparently from use, appear on alternate edges of the shaft. Work-

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

manship does not compare with the drill described earlier and the piece
was therefore assigned to the utilized flake classification.
WoRKED FLINT

Twelve additional pieces of worked flint of unknown use were recovered. These could have been included in the utilized flake group
except that they are too thick to be generally classified as flakes. They
probably were used for a variety of cutting, scraping, and chopping
tasks.
BuRINS

Ten specimens were found indicating the burin technique. Seven
of these were examined and reported on by J. F . Epstein, archeologist
for the Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas (see
below). In summary, Dr. Epstein identified one single spall burin, one
double spall burin, and one secondary spall; also three possible burins
and one possible secondary spall. Specifically he states:
Specimen TV69/ L-10 (Fig. 9, C). A single stroke burin made from the lower
portion of a crude lamellar flak e having a prepared, but unfaceted striking platform.
The lower portion of the flake (opposite the bulbar end) had apparently been used
as a scraper, and shows use scars, but no intentional unifacial flaking. A single
burin spa!! had been removed from this end. The burin shows considerable wear at
its tip, on the burin facet. The scraping edge, which intersects the plane of the burin
facet, does not, however, show use in the immediate area of the burin point.
Specimen TV69/L-1 (Fig. 9, F). This is a broken, bifacially worked artifact,
probably a knife. The artifact broke across its width. The break surface was used
as a striking platform to remove two burin spalls, one from each edge of the piece.
One spa!! was about 2 em. long. The spa!! removed from the other edge had a
length of 4 mm. This edge shows multiple battering, in an attempt to remove a spa!!.
Obviously the attempt failed. Since the edge on which the long spa!! had been removed seems to be poorly suited for a burin point, and besides no wear is indicated,
it would seem that the burin technique had been used here to obtain a burin spa!!
for possible use, rather than to make a burin out of a broken blade.
Specimen TV69/L-13 (Fig. 9, D ) . This is an excellent example of a secondary
burin spa!!. (Secondary spalls are the product of resharpening a burin.) It does not
appear to have been used. Length 2.5 em.
Specimen TV69/L-9. This may be a very large secondary burin spa!!. If it is not,
then it is an exceptionally thick flake that comes from a narrow core with a prepared (unfaceted?) striking platform. This core, if it was such, had a width of about
1.5 em., and the flake was removed from its end, rather than by working around it
as in the production of a polyhedral core.

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

51

Specimen TV 69 I L-1. This piece is probably a burin, but it is difficult to be certain.
The specimen is an initial cortex flake that had broken. This break surface was used
to remove one, or possibly more very short spalls between 4 and 6 mm. in length.
The point formed shows no indications of use, but the flint is a poor grade, and
would not show wear clearly anyway.
Specimen TV 69/ 11. This is a specimen of mottled pinkish flint, and a fragment of
cortex is still retained on one flat surface. One convex edge has been converted to a
scraper. This piece has a sharp point produced by two unworked edges that meet
each other at a right angle. It is impossible for me to determine how these edges
and point were produced. They are flat enough to resemble burin facets, but there
is no negative bulb of percussion visible at the point. No wear is visible at the point
either. This effect can be produced by simply stepping on a piece of flint.
Specimen TV69/ L-6. This is a flake which shows just a small section of cortex. It
has a sort of mottled purplish color. One edge is rather wide, and relatively flat, and
appears to have been produced by removing a large spall from the flake. This wide
flat edge was then used as a striking platform to remove a short spall down along
the other edge. In other words this seems to be an angle burin or a burin bee de
flute. The tip formed by these two burin strokes has broken along one side. This
piece shows what seems to be fine wear facets. I know of no other way of explaining
the technique used (which I view as intentional ) to produce the point.
General Comment. There is no question that the burin technique and burins appear at this site. Since the site apparently contains only Central Texas Aspect ma terial, it is of special importance. At present, I have no positive evidence that the
burin technique continued past the Archaic period, and into more recent times. If the
data from this shelter can prove without question that the entire occupation is Central
Texas Aspect, then we will know that burins persisted into very recent times here
in Texas. In terms of our present conception or misconception, this would be rather
extraordinary.

After receiving this report all remaining likely artifacts and flint
chips were re-examined and three additional possible burins were
found. These are:

Specimen L-21. This appears to be a small core ( 4.5 em. in diameter )
with a small beak-like projection which has a triangular cross section.
On a flat side of this beak a flake has been removed, evidently to sharpen
the edge. Use marks are visible over most of the edge.
Specimen L-41. This is kept from a listing as definite only because
use marks are not visible. It is made from a piece of worn or weathered
flint which may originally have been a hammerstone. One flake, 1.3
em. long and 1 em. wide, was removed from the edge opposite the
hammered end, thus forming a striking platform for the second flake
( 1.8 em. long and .5 em. wide ).
Specimen L-44 (Fig. 9, E ). This is a secondary burin spall which

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

measures 4 em. long and 1.6 em. wide and from which at least two
spalls had previously been removed. The spall shows considerable wear
at the tip; two extremely narrow scars ( .7 em. long), which may have
been produced by use, are evident.

0

c

8

E

F

G'

G

J

H'
0

2

6

4

8

10

CM
Fig . 9 . Worked Bone, Bu ri ns , Gouges, and Scraper. A, B, Bone awls. C, Single spall
bu rin . D, E, Secondary burin spalls . F, Knife? fragment show ing burin technique . G-H',
Bifacial gouges. J , Scraper.

53

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER
PIGMENT

Two small fragments of white chalk were found in the main occupation area. These possibly were utilized as a source of white paint
although there was no direct evidence of such use, and they are not
entered in Table 1.
wORKED SHELL

Two mussel shells are classified as possible artifacts. The first of
these is a small rectangle (3.3 em. X 3.1 em.) of shell which appears
to have been intentionally shaped. The edges, however, have not been
smoothed and some doubt is thereby cast on its origin. The second
shell, 4 em. in diameter, is complete, except for a hole ( 1 em. in diameter ) near the hinge of the shell. A. T. Jackson (1938 ) has suggested that such holes served for hafting, or for stringing and use as
rattles. Fundaburk and Foreman ( 195 7) have suggested that similarly
drilled shells were used as spoons in the southeastern United States.
BoNE TooLs
Bone tools are represented by two, possibly three, awls. The first of
these (Fig. 9, A, A' ) is a 21.7 em. long section of bison rib with a pointed
and smoothed distal end. The proximal (articular) portion of this bone
has been removed, but otherwise unmodified. The second (Fig. 9, B)
is a pointed fragment, 6.5 em. long, of bone (bison? ). This piece has
been smoothed over most of its surface, but whether this is a worked
or weathered surface cannot be determined. The third specimen is a
very small, pointed fragment of bone. The point may have been fashioned intentionally or may simply be fortuitous-the size and condition of the fragment make it impossible to tell.
HISTORIC ITEMS

As would be expected in a camping area, a number of historic items
were found during the excavation. These include a scattering of 22
cartridge cases ( 7), nails ( 3), glass fragments (about 25 ), bone buttons ( 2), rusty metal fragments (2 ), and a musket ball. This last item
is an almost perfect sphere of lead, having only one small round, flat
spot, presumably where the sprue material was cut off after molding.
The ball measures 0.535-0.528 inches in diameter and weighs 14.57
grams. Because of its nearly perfect sphericity and almost unmarred
surface it is obvious that the ball has never been fired. None of the

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

historic items can be linked with the Indian occupation (they are not
listed in Table 1) .
REFUSE

Occupational refuse was found throughout the excavation. This includes flint flakes, cores, chunks of flint (bluish-black) , flint pebbles,
burned limestone fragments, ash, and lumps of baked earth. Mussel
and snail shells were abundant, especially in the lower layers of the
shelter fill.
Many animal bone fragments were also found, especially toward
the front of the shelter. Several of these contained scratches or cuts
probably produced by removing flesh from the bones. Animals represented include bison, deer, birds, small mammals, fish , turtles, and
snakes. Judging by the number of bones found, deer seems to have been
the favored food.
CONCLUSIONS

This excavation was undertaken principally to give the Travis
County Archeological Society members an opportunity to practice archeological field work. Much of the excavation was carried out under
the supervision of professional archeologists, and all of it was done
with a sincere effort by the members to do a real workman-like job.
The excavation ran its course routinely to disclose what appears
to be a pure Central Texas Aspect site. An element of more than usual
interest was introduced, however, with Dr. Epstein's identification of
burins and burin spalls. This site provides apparently the first evidence that the burin technique was in use up to relatively recent times.
Three questions bear heavily on the evidence of the burin finds: first,
is the site affiliated with the Central Texas Aspect? Second, is there
any evidence of an earlier occupation? Third, can the burin material
be intrusive? Considering the questions in the order given: (1 ) The
identification of the Central Texas Aspect appears to be sound. The
artifacts closely follow the trait list given in An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm et al., 1954) . More significant, perhaps, authorities such as Suhm, Jelks, and Davis agree with this
identification. (2) There is no evidence considered as indicating occupation earlier than the Central Texas Aspect. Approximately 85%
of the area available for occupation was excavated to sterile caliche or
bedrock. This area included almost all of the shelter suitable for occupation. In this area only one dart point was found . This point is too

BOY SCOUT ROCKSHELTER

55

incomplete for positive identification, but it is tentatively classified as
the Uvalde type. Dart points are not considered to be a basic trait of
the Central Texas Aspect; however, they are not uncommon in these
sites. Jelks ( 1953), for example, reports 148 arrow points and 16 dart
points in the Blum Shelter, and yet identifies the site with the Central
Texas Aspect.
There remains the third question: whether the burins could be intrusive. This, of course, cannot be answered with absolute certainty.
Some strong likelihoods, however, can be indicated. In the first place,
the burin material was all found in the surface to 18 inch zone, with
most examples coming from six to 12 inches below the surface. This
corresponds to the depth of most of the other artifacts. Also, it seems
unlikely that all of the burins ( 10 specimens) would be intrusive.
Certainly no modern campers brought these items to the shelter, for to
an untrained eye they appear to be just flint flakes . They are not the
stuff that intrigues the casual amateur collector.
It is unfortunate that burins have not previously been observed in
association with arrow points, or other known Central Texas Aspect
material. In view of the other considerations, however, it is believed
that the use of the burin technique has been demonstrated to have
existed in the Central Texas Aspect. The results of this excavation suggest that a re-examination of flint flakes, etc., from known Central
Texas Aspect sites might be profitable. Possibly the use of burins in
relatively recent times could thereby be confirmed.
The relatively small number of artifacts recovered ( 140 specimens)
makes it difficult to assign this site to a particular focus within the
Central Texas Aspect. The presence of the Perdiz and Cliffton arrow
point types, as well as the bone awls, suggest the Toyah Focus. On the
other hand, the presence of Scallorn arrow points and the absence of
pottery indicate the Austin Focus. Since the artifacts were found without stratification, the site may indicate neither Austin nor Toyah, but
an intermediate culture. In any event the occupation appears to fall
within the Central Texas Aspect and, judging by the absence of trade
goods, before historic times.

REFERENCES CITED
Fundabunk, Emma Lila, and Mary Douglass Foreman (editors )
1957. Sun Circles and Human Hands. Published by Emma Lila Fundaburk,
Luverne, Alabama.

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jackson, A. T.
1938. The Fall Creek Sites. In: Annual Report of WPA and The University of
Texas Archaeological Research, Lake Buchanan, 1936- 1937. The University of Texas Publications, No. 3802, pp. 11 -118.
Jelks, Edward B.
1953. Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 24, pp. 189-207.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
T exas. Archa eology Series, No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of T exas.
Miller, E . 0., and Edward B. Jelks
1952. Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the T exas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 168-217.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1957. Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No.1, pp. 26-58.
1959. The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology. The Texas Journal of
Science, Vol. 11, No.2, pp. 218-250.
1960. A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958 ), pp. 63-107.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory H andbook of T exas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas.
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Austin, Texas

Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A
Stratified Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas*
HARRY J. SHAFER
ABSTRACT
Limited test excavations made between 1960 and 196Z at the Youngsport Site in
Bell County, Texas have r evealed, in part, a previously unreported Archaic dart
point sequen ce for the central part of the state. The objects recovered, primarily
chipped stone tools, are briefly described and a new dart point type, term ed Gower,
is provisionally defined.

INTRODUCTION

Between 1960 and 1962 the author and Tom Gibson undertook test
excavations at the Youngsport Site in Bell County, Texas. The archeological potential of the site was apparent in the large number and diverse ty pes of dart points which had been collected from th e surface.
Even more importantly, a number of stratified occupational zones have
been exposed in an erosional ditch which has cut through portions of
the site (Fig. 1). Although the excavations were quite limited-they
were restricted to weekends and holidays-the new stratigraphic data
obtained seem to justify a brief report. It must be made clear, however,
that thi s paper is offered only as a preliminary progress report.
PREVIOUS wORK I N THE AREA

To date, the only archeological investigation in the immediate vicinity consists of a preliminary survey of the proposed Stillhouse H ollow Reservoir area on the Lampasas River in the south ern part of Bell
County (Johnson, 1962). This survey, conducted by the Texas Archeo• The a uthor would like to express his apprecia tion for the encouragement and
help given by Edward B. Jelks, L eRoy Johnson, Jr. , and Dee Ann Suhm of The
University of Texas. I t was their interest and concern that has made this paper
possible. The author is also indebted to the landowner for his permission to work
exclusively at the site. Other people helping in this report were Tom Gibson of
Temple and Mr. and Mrs. Emmitt Gower of Killeen.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

logical Salvage Project of The University of Texas, was completed in
the spring of 1962.
Other work in the surrounding area includes testing in Belton Reservoir sites to the north (Miller and Jelks, 1952), as well as excavations
at several similar sites in Travis County to the south (Kelly, 1961 ;
Suhm, 1955) , and the Buchanan Lake sites to the west (Jackson, 1938) .
SITE LOCATION

The Youngsport Site is situated in the southwestern corner of Bell
County, well into the eastern limits of the central Texas hill country
(Fig. 1, C). The site lies buried in the second terrace of a spring-fed
creek, a few hundred yards above the creek's confluence with the Lampasas River (Fig. 1, A ) .
SITE DESCRIPTION

Occupational debris in the bank and in the cultivated fields shows
that the site extends along the north bank of the creek for some three
hundred yards (Fig. 1, A ) . An erosional gully, about 50 feet long, 20
to 25 feet wide, and 16 to 20 feet deep, has cut into the approximate
center of the site and exposed stratified occupational zones. These zones
extend to a depth of at least eight feet below the surface.
NATURAL SETTING

The western part of Bell County borders the eastern edge of the
Edwards Plateau, known locally as the Texas hill country. It consists
of rolling limestone hills covered principally with juniper ("cedar" )
and live oak. Ranching constitutes the chief industry ; the little farming
practiced in this vicinity is r estricted to the river bottom lands or to
terraces near the river.
The principal fauna of the area includes the armadillo, cottontail
and jack rabbits, skunk, opossum, ringtail cat, raccoon, white tail deer,
and fox. Major flora consists of juniper and oak in the uplands and
pecan, willow, bur oak, sycamore, and cottonwood along the streams.
ExcAVATIO N

An extensive excavation was not feasible and the work was limited
to small scale testing of the strata exposed in the ditch and along the
creek bank (Fig. 1, B) . This approach proved worthwhile since anumber of artifacts were obtained from each of the strata observed (Fig.

59

YOUNGSPORT SITE

Q

APPROXIMATE

EXTENT OF SITE

N

/
/

/

A

-. •

c

8
Fig . 1. Youngsport Site . A, Site setting . B, Location of test p its. C, General site locat ion .
Not to sca le .

2 and Table 1). Great care was taken to locate artifacts in situ, and
those found on the surface are not-with one exception-included in
this report. On the other hand, this method of testing made it impossible to recognize possible differences in the horizontal distribution of
the projectile points within the respective zones, and it did not yield
information on the transition-if it existed-between the zones.
STRAT IGRAPHY

A number of superimposed zones, most of which contained cultural

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

debris, were exposed in the erosional ditch which had cut into the
site (Figs. 1 and 2). The nine strata recognized in this exposure are as
follows (they are designated from top to bottom because of the preliminary nature of the excavations):
Stratum 1 was the plow zone which consisted of a black gumbo soil
intermixed with some cultural debris. This layer had been considerably disturbed by cultivation. In the areas tested, it was thin or absent
and none of the artifacts described herein can be attributed to it. In
other parts of the site, however, Stratum 1 reached a maximum thickness of 18 inches.
Stratum 2 was a black compact soil mixed with a few burned rock
fragments (most of which were small), flint chips, bone scrap, snail
and mussel shells, and artifacts-principally Ensor and Mantell points
-attributed to a late Edwards Plateau Aspect occupation.
Stratum 3A was a small lens of ashy black soil mixed with cultural
debris. It averaged about six inches in thickness. The amount of refuse
nonetheless was considerably more numerous than in Stratum 2. Stratum 3A contained a larger number of snail and mussel shells, flint
chips, bumed rocks, bone fragments, and artifacts of the Edward
Plateau Aspect, especially Marshall points.
Stratum 3B, the most concentrated occupational layer, consisted of a
gray soil mixed with bumed rock, snail and mussel shells, bone fragments, flint chips, and artifacts of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Pedernales was the major dart point type recovered from this stratum.
Stratum 4 was a yellowish clay mixed with cultural debris and artifacts of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Although moderately rich, this
zone was, in places, rather thin.
Stratum 5 was a relatively sterile yellow clay which showed signs
of occupation only in the upper and lower fringes. Only one artifact
(a Bulverde point) was found in the upper part of this zone. This suggests that the little cultural material in Stratum 5 is intrusive, having
worked in from above and from below.
Stratum 6 was a yellow clay containing cultural refuse and artifacts
of an early Archaic period not usually included in the Edwards Plateau
Aspect. Snail shells were particularly abundant in Stratum 6.
Stratum 7 was a culturally sterile zone of yellow clay.

61

YOUNGSPOR T SI TE

r-----------------------------------------------~-0'
STRATUM I

STRATUM 2

STRATUM

3A

STRATUM 38

1-----------------------------------1- 4 '
STRATUM 4

STRATUM 5
STRATUM 6

STRATUM 7

STRATUM 8

(unexcavate d}

I I

I

I

Fig . 2 . Genera lized profile of the stratigraphic zones exposed in west wall of the erosional ditch .

S tratum 8 was a yellow clay m ixed with cu ltural debris and artifacts of an early, undefined Arch aic complex. Snail sh ells were numerous in this layer, but many of them were fragmentary.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stratum 9 was a sterile yellow clay which showed no evidence of
occupation in that portion exposed in the ditch. It extended to at least
16.5 feet below the surface. No testing was carried out in this zone.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS
PROJECTILE PoiNTs

Of the 176 artifacts recovered from the excavations, 129 can be classified as projectile points; more specifically as dart points. No arrow
points have yet been found at the site. By referring to An Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm, et al. , 1954), 103 of the dart
points have been identified as to type. The types recognized, a provisional new type (Gower ), and the unidentified points are described
below.

Bulverde (Fig. 5, A-E). Five specimens are classified as Bulverde.
Four of these occurred in Stratum 4 and one in the upper portion of
Stratum 5. All seem to fall within Johnson's Variety 2 Bulverde points
(Johnson, et al., 1962: 19-20). Since they occur with Nolan and
Travis, it is possible that this long and narrow stem variety is earlier
than the wider and shorter stemmed forms (Johnson's Variety 1 ) . If
so, the latter would be expected to occur mainly with Pede males points,
the former (Variety 2) with Nolan and Travis types.
One of the Bulverde points (Fig. 5, A) from Youngsport has been
made into a burin. The two complete Bulverde points are 8.3 and 6.1
em. long, 3.2 and 2.8 em. across the shoulders, 1.5 and 1.6 em. across
the base of the stem, and .8 and. 7 em. thick, respectively.
Castroville (Fig. 3, I-K). A total of ten Castroville points were recovered from the site, nine from Stratum 3B and one from Stratum 2.
Found mainly with Pedernales and Marshall points, they are characterized by broad expanded stems and pronouncedly barbed shoulders. One Castroville point (Fig. 3, J) shows considerable reworking,
as the end of the blade has been refashioned, perhaps to serve as a knife,
and one shoulder has been rechipped to make a burin.
The more complete Castroville points are between 6.1 and 6.2 em.
long, 2. 7 and 3.9 em. across the shoulders, 2 and 2.3 em. across the
base of the stem, and .7 and .9 em. in maximum thickness. The remainder were probably very similar in size.
Ensor (Fig. 3, E, F , H). This type is represented by seven specimens, all of which are from Stratum 2. They occurred principally with

63

YOUNGSPORT SITE

c

B

A

E

F

G·

K

J
0

D

2

4

L
6

CM
Fig . 3 . Dart Points. A-D, Monte// . E, F, H, Ensor. G, Marcos. 1-K, Castroville. l, Williams .

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Mantell points. Two variations can be recognized, although both have
the typical Ensor side or corner notches. The only difference is that
one variety (which includes five specimens) has a straight base (Fig.
3, E, F) , while the other (rep res en ted by two specimens) has a
V-shaped notch in the base (Fig. 3, H). Both forms have previously
been included in the Ensor type (Miller and Jelks, 1952; Johnson, et
al., 1962). There is considerable variation in the length of the Ensor
points, with a range of 4 to 6.4 em. The maximum widths are between
2 and 2.3 em., and the maximum thickness between .5 and .8 em.
Gower (Fig. 7, A-E) . The name Gower is suggested for a group of
crudely made, indented base points, all of which were found in Stratum 8. Represented by five specimens, these points have very short,
parallel-edged stems, and markedly concave bases. The basal indentation of the Gower points-as well as those termed Gower variantshas been produced by the removal of a single (?) flake which left
remnants of a scar around the edges of the basal concavity. This scar
usually appears on only one side of the point, and is sometimes lightly
retouched. The blade is generally short, has convex edges, and weak,
rudimentary shoulders. The dimensions for the complete specimens
are 3.4 to 3.9 em. in length, 1.8 to 2.4 em. in width, and .5 to .8 em.
in maximum thickness. The stems are 1 to 1.4 em. long and about 1.6
em. wide; the basal concavity varies from .3 to .6 em. in depth.
The stratigraphic position of these points suggests that they are
fairly early, although the workmanship and general style seem to
indicate close affiliations with Archaic points. In many ways they look
like very crude Pedernales points.
In addition to the above there are nine dart points which appear to
be related to the Gower type, but which have certain morphological
features setting them apart. Fqr the present these specimens are described as variant Gower points, but it is possible that they will eventually be included as formal varieties of Gower, or set up as distinct
types. All were also found in Stratum 8 and they include:
( 1) Variant A (2 specimens). These points are larger than those
described above but, with the exception of somewhat more pronounced
shoulders, have very similar outlines (Fig. 7, F). The stem is short,
has slightly convex lateral edges, and an indented base. The blade is
roughly triangular in outline and has convex lateral edges which, because of the crude workmanship, are rather sinuous. The maximum
width varies from 3.1 to 3.3 em.; the stem is .9 to 1.2 em. in length

YOUNGSPORT SITE

65

and the maximum thickness is uniformly . 7 em. The total length of
the one complete specimen is 5.2 em.
(2 ) VariantB (1 specimen). Thisfragmentarypoint (Fig. 7,G ) appears to be the basal portion of a lanceolate-shaped form. The base is
only slightly indented and the workmanship is fair. The maximum
width of the surviving portion of the blade is 2.4 em., the maximum
thickness is .6 em., and the basal concavity is .2 em. deep and 2.1 em.
across.
(3) Variant C (1 specimen ) . Although very crudely made, this
fragment (not illustrated) closely resembles the other Gower points,
especially Variant B. One lateral edge of the stem is straight, the other
is convex. The blade is narrow and lacks distinct shoulders. The basal
indentation is fairly pronounced, measuring .3 em. deep. The stem is
1.9 em. wide and 2 em. long, while the blade has a maximum width of
2.1 em. The estimated length is 7.5 em.; it appears to be the longest
point found in Stratum 8.
( 4 ) Variant D ( 1 specimen ) . This very poorly made basal fragment
(Fig. 7, K ) is from a roughly leaf-shaped point. The indentation in the
base is .5 em. deep, the width across the base 2.3 em., the maximum
width of the blade 3 em., and the thickness 1 em.
(5 ) Variant E ( 1 specimen). One point (Fig. 7, H) resembles the
Pedernales type, but a careful examination of its features, as well as
its stratigraphic occurrence, indicates a closer relationship with the
Gower points. The stem is roughly rectangular and the base is slightly
indented. The workmanship is rather poor. The stem is 1.1 em. long
and 1.2 em. wide; while the blade is 5 em. long, 2.4 em. wide, and .8
em. thick.
( 6 ) Variant F (3 specimens ) . Two of three points included in this
variant (Fig. 7, I, J) have slightly expanding stems and rounded basal
tips or ears. One of the expanded stem forms (Fig. 7, I ) has a deeply
concave base, smoothed stem edges, and slight, unbarbed shoulders.
The second point (Fig. 7, J) is much like the above, except that it is
somewhat smaller and more fragmentary. The third specimen (not
illustrated ) is similar to the Pedernales type, except that the lateral
edges of the stem are well smoothed. The stem of this point is 1.2 em.
and 1. 7 em. wide; the basal indentation is .4 em. in depth. The maximum blade width is 2.5 em., the maximum thickness is .7 em., and the
total length is 5 em.

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

8

A

D

:

H

G

F

E

K

J
0

4

2

6

CM
Fig . 4 . Dart Points . A-1 , Marshall . J, Uvalde . K, Lange .

YOUNGSPORT SITE

67

Lange (Fig. 4, K). Two possible Lange points were found in Stratum 3B, along with Pedernales, Castroville, and Marshall points. Both
have somewhat narrower stems than those illustrated by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954: Pl. 97), and consequently they are only
tentatively assigned to this type. The one complete Lange point is 6.3
em. long, 2.5 em. wide across the shoulders, 1.5 em. wide across the
base of the stem, and . 7 em. thick.
M areas (Fig. 3, G). Only one specimen, from Stratum 2, can be classified as a Marcos point. It was found with Mantell and Ensor points,
and could possibly be a variation of the latter type. It measures 4 em. in
length, 3.5 em. across the shoulders, 2 em. across the base of the stem,
and .6 em. in maximum thickness.
Marshall (Fig. 4, A-I) . Fifteen Marshall points were found in the
excavations, eight in Stratum 3A and seven in Stratum 3B. All those
from Stratum 3A possess fine secondary chipping-sometimes producing fine serrations-along the blade edges, while only one of the Marshall points from Stratum 3B exhibits this feature. The base of each
point is slightly concave, and all have pronouncedly barbed shoulders.
These points are between 4.3 and 6.6 em. in length, 2.6 to 4 em. across
the shoulders, 1.4 to 1.7 em. across the base of the stem, and .5 to 1.3
em. in maximum thickness.
Mantell (Fig. 3, A-D). Fourteen Mantell points were recovered from
Stratum 2, where they were apparently associated with the Ensor and
Marcos types. The complete specimens are between 5.5 and 6.6 em.
long, 3 and 4 em. across the shoulders, 1.9 and 2.5 em. across the base,
and .5 and .7 em. thick.
Morrill (Fig. 6, B). Only one Morrill point is recognized in the collection. It was obtained from Stratum 6, and appears to be closely associated with Wells points. This particular specimen is almost identical
to one illustrated by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 107, S). It is 6.5
em. long, 2.3 em. in maximum width, and .9 em. in thickness. The
stem, which is 2.5 em. long, is almost the same length as the blade. Interestingly, five of the six points from Stratum 6 (Fig. 6, A-D), including two Wells and the one Morrill, are characterized by long and
slender, roughly rectangular stems.
Nolan (Fig. 6, H , I ) . The two Nolan points found at the site occurred in Stratum 4, along with Travis and Bulverde points. It is
surprising, since it is a major point type to the south and west, that
more Nolan points were not found at the Youngsport Site. The two

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

A

c

B

D

H

F

E

0

L

K

J
2

4

M

6

CM
Fig . 5 . Dart Points . A, Bulverde with burin (arrows show direction of b(ows l. B- E, Bulverde . F-M , Pedernales .

YOUNGSPORT SITE

69

recovered are between 3.1 and 2.3 em. across the shoulders, and 1.8
and 1.6 em. across the base of the stem, and .9 and .6 em. thick, respectively. The one complete Nolan is 7.1 em. long.

Pedernales (Fig. 5, F-M). Represented by 41 specimens, Pedernales
is by far the most common type found at the site. All were obtained
from Stratum 3B, which also yielded Castroville, Lange, Marshall,
Uvalde, and Williams points. They are between 5.1 and 8.4 em. in
length, 2.1 and 3.2 em. in width across the shoulders, and .6 apd 1.1
em. in maximum thickness.
Travis (Fig. 6, F ). One Travis point was recovered from Stratum 4 ,
along with Bulverde and Nolan points. It measures 5.6 em. long, 2.5
em. across the shoulders, 1. 7 across the base of the stem, and .9 em. in
maximum thickness .
Uvalde (Fig. 4, J). One point identifiable as the Uvalde ty pe was
found in Stratum 3B. It is 6.6 em. long, 2.2 em. across the shoulders,
1.8 em. across the base of the stem, and .8 em. in maximum thickness.
Wells (Fig. 6, A ) . Two long, contracting stem points, identified as
the Wells type, were recovered from Stratum 6. They were found with
a Morrill point and appear to date from a fairly early Archaic period.
The one complete example has a total length of 6. 7 em. and a stem
length of almost 3 em. The shoulders on both are about 2.2 em. wide,
and the maximum thickness varies from . 7 to .9 em.
Williams (Fig. 3, L ) . This type is represented by one specimen
which was found in Stratum 3B. It measures 6.1 em. long, 2. 7 em.
across the shoulders, 2 em. across the base of the stem, and .6 em. in
maximum thickness.
Unidentified Dart Points. Twelve projectile points fail to fit any of
the known types, and are not numerous enough to justify establishing,
even tentatively, any new types. Five are from Stratum 3B, two from
Stratum 4, three from Stratum 6, one from Stratum 8, and one from
the surface.
Two small fragmentary expanding stem points with convex bases
were found in Stratum 3B. They have short barbs and broad stems.
The blade is incomplete on both specimens, but appears to have been
triangular in outline. Both points are similar to the Castroville type,
but are notably smaller in size. Maximum width of the stem is 2.5
em., average stem length 1 em., maximum width of the blade is 2 .7
em., and the average thickness is .7 em.

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCI ETY

,.;

c

8

A

D

F

E

G

J

H
0

4

2

6

CM
Fig . 6 . Dart Points . A, Wells . 8, Morrill . C-E, G, J , Un identified . F, Travis . H, I, Nolan.

YOUNGSPORT SITE

71

An additional two points from Stratum 3B have faintly convex bases
and roughly rectangular stems. The blades are triangular, weakly
shouldered, and have slightly convex lateral edges. The crude, essentially unifacial chipping is one of the most distinctive features of these
points; otherwise, they resemble the Travis type. The average stem
width is 1.6 em., average stem length 1.5 em., average blade width 2.3
em., average thickness .8 em., and the range in total length is 5.5 to
5.8cm.
A large bulbous stemmed point is the only other unidentified point
from Stratum 3B. Although fragmentary, the blade is distinguished by
large, but bar bless, shoulders and convex blade edges. Maximum width
across the stem is 2 em., length of the stem 1. 7 em., maximum blade
width 3.8 em., and thickness .8 em.
Illustrated in Fig. 6, J is a leaf-shaped point found in Stratum 4. It
is worked primarily on one face, has a slightly convex base and a contracting stem. The blade possesses extremely weak shoulders, convex
blade edges and is lanceolate in outline. The workmanship is rather
poor. This point is 6.5 em. long, 3 em. in maximum width, and .6 em.
in maximum thickness.
A complete dart point with a broad rectangular stem and faint
smoothing on the lateral edges of the stem was found in Stratum 4. The
blade has very slight shoulders and convex edges . The stem and, to a
lesser extent, the workmanship suggest the Scottsbluff type. This point
(Fig. 6, G ) is 5 em. long, 2.5 em. across the shoulders, 2.3 em. across
the base of the stem, and .9 em. thick.
Two small dart points from Stratum 6 (Fig. 6, C, D) are characterized by long, roughly rectangular stems, and small triangular
blades. In some respects they are like Carrollton points, but they are
smaller and lack the basal smoothing of Carrollton. They are 4.2 and
4. 7 em. long, 2.1 and 1.8 em. wide across the shoulders, and .8 and . 7
em. thick, respectively.
A small expanding stem dart point (Fig. 6, E) was found in Stratum
6. The base is concave and the blade is short and triangular with small
barbs. This point bears some resemblances to both the Frio and Edgewood types, but cannot be classed as either. It measures 4.2 em. long,
2. 7 em. across the shoulders, 2.5 em. across the base, and .7 em. in
maximum thickness.
The one unidentified point (not illustrated) from Stratum 8 is a
crudely made specimen with a more or less rectangular stem and a
convex base. The blade has moderately strong barbs, with one straight
lateral edge and one convex lateral edge. The stem is 2 em. wide, 1.8

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

E

F

H

G

J
0

D

t.

K
4

2

6

CM
Fig . 7 . Darl Points and Knife from Stratum 8 . A-E , Gower. F, Gower, Variant A. G,
Gower, Variant B. H, Gower, Variant E. I, J , Gower, Variant F. K, Gower, Variant D. L,
lonceolate knife with a slightly concave base . Dots on I indicate extent of stem smoothing .

73

YOUNGSPORT SITE

em. long; the blade is 3.8 em. wide and 1 em. thick; and the total length
is 7.3 em.
The last unidentified point, found on the surface, • is a long and
slender, rectangular-stemmed specimen (Fig. 8, E ) , which in outline
is somewhat like the Bulverde type. In size, however, it is similar to
what Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 396-399 ) have termed spear
points. The workmanship is very good, with the blade exhibiting neat
parallel flake scars. The blade has straight edges and prominent, but
not barbed, shoulders. The edges of the stem are parallel and the base
is essentially straight. This specimen is 11.2 em. long, 3 em. across
the shoulder, 2 em. across the base of the stem, and 1 em. in maximum
thickness.
DRILLS

Five artifacts classed as drills were found in Stratum 3B. Three are
apparently reworked projectile points, one Pedernales, one Marshall
(Fig. 8, C), and one unidentified (Fig. 8, D). The remaining drills
have simple expanding stems (Fig. 8, A, B) . All are bifacially worked
and the drill shafts appear lenticular in cross section. One (Fig. 8, B)
has traces of the nodular cortex on one face of the stem and across the
base. The opposite face of this same specimen has retained portions of
the bulb of percussion. The two complete shafts (Fig. 8, A, D) are both
about4.5 em. long.
KNIVES

The thirteen artifacts identified as knives can be sorted into three
major groups on the basis of variations in their outlines. The most
common form- ten examples-has a lanceolate outline and a concave
(Fig. 7, L ) or convex base (Fig. 9, A, B, E ). These specimens are comparatively short and percussion chipped, several possibly by the billet
technique. Two of the lanceolate knives are very crudely made and
notably thicker than the others. These knives average 8.1 em. long, 5
em. in maximum width, and 2.4 em. in maximum thickness. The eight
better made specimens, by contrast, average 6.2 em. long, 3. 7 em. in
maximum width, and 1.5 em. in maximum thickness. Seven of the
lanceolate knives are from Stratum 3B, one from Stratum 2, and two
from Stratum 8.
• Although from the surface, this specimen is included because of its uniqueness.
The other points from the surface duplicate those found in situ and, consequ ently,
are not considered .

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

A

D

F

E
0

c

2

4

G

CM
Fig . 8 . Drills, Large Stemmed Point, Gouges and Worked Antler. A-D, Drills . E, Large ,
unidentified stemmed point . F, G, Gouges. H, Cut and smoothed deer antler.

A second knife form, represented by two specimens, consists of large
flakes retouched primarily on one face (Fig. 9, C). Both appear to have
been hastily fa shioned from large hammerstone flakes. The largest
example is 11 em. long, 4 .1 em. in maximum width, and 1.4 em. in

75

YOUNGSPORT SITE

maximum thickness. One was found in Stratum 3B, the other (Fig. 9,
C) in Stratum 4.
The third knife type, known from one complete specimen (Fig. 9,
D), is a straight-based triangular form. It is by far the best made knife
found at the site, and has broad, shallow flake scars which suggest the
billet percussion chipping technique. The lateral edges have been retouched so that this knife appears somewhat lenticular in cross section. It was found in Stratum 3B, and is 11.3 em. long, 5.2 em. across
the base, and 1 em. in maximum thickness.
SCRAPERS

A total of twelve scrapers, including three distinct types and two
unidentifiable fragments, were recovered from the Youngsport Site.
One type, a convex side scraper, is made from flake s retouched primarily along one edge. Six of these were found, four in Stratum 3B, one in
Stratum 6, and one in Stratum 8. The three complete examples range
from 4.8 to 7.4 em. in length, 4.3 to 5 em. in maximum width, and .6 to
1.6 em. in maximum thickness.
The second group of scrapers consists of two specimens from Stratum
3B which are chipped only on one end (Fig. 10, A) . Both are made
from rather thick flakes and do not evidence any intentional shaping.
The bit edge on both is rather pronounced.
Two flakes chipped along most of their edges constitute the third
type of scraper (Fig. 10, B) . One of these has been fashioned from a
billet flake, the other from a hammerstone flake. One was found in
Stratum 3B, the other in Stratum 6.
Two additional flakes appear to have been used as scraping tools, but
both are too fragmentary to classify further. One was found in Stratum
3B, and one in Stratum 8.
CHOPPERS

Two large flint nodules with percussion chipping on one or both
faces were recovered from Stratum 3B. One of these (Fig. 10, C) has
a very neat cutting or chopping edge, while the other specimen is quite·
crudely made. The proximal ends of both are unaltered and retain the
nodular cortex.
CLEAR FoRK GouGE

Two artifacts, one from Stratum 6 and one from Stratum 8, can be
identified as Clear Fork Gouges. One specimen (Fig. 8, F) is bifacially

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

c

E

D
0

F,

I

CM
Fig. 9. Knives and Hammerstone . A, B, E, Rounded base knives . C, Large flake knife.
D, Triangular, straight base knife . F, Hammerstone.

chipped and plano-convex in cross section. It has a slightly concave bit
w hich has been produced by the removal of several small flakes and
w hich shows considerable wear from u se. The distal end is somewh at

YOUNGSPORT SITE

77

tapered. This specimen is 10.3 em. long, 4.1 em. across the bit, and 1.5
em. in maximum thickness.
The second gouge ( Fig. 8, G) , obtained from Stratum 6, is worked
mainly on one face, and is plano-convex in cross section. It exhibits
much poorer chipping than the first gouge, and a prepared striking
platform is still visible at one lateral edge. The bit is straight and shows
very slight wear. The distal end does not taper as much as that of the
other gouge, but it has been thinned, possibly to facilitate hafting. This
specimen is 6 em. long, 3.8 em. across the the bit, and 1.8 em. in maximum thickness.
HAMMERSTONES
Three more or less spherical flint nodules, presumed hammerstones
(Fig. 9, F ), were found in Stratum 3B. All appear to have been exhausted cores which were re-utilized. The diameters range from 7 to
8.6cm.
MANOS
Four manos or handstones were r ecovered. One, an unshaped quartz
cobble, was found in Stratum 2. Three others, all shaped by pecking,
occurred in Stratum 3B. One of these is of quartz, one of limestone, and
one of granite.
··,
MISCELLANEOUS STONE
Two rectangular shaped artifacts of an unidentified soft stone
(slate? ) occurred in Stratum 3B. Both are broken, but show some signs
of having been intentionally smoothed on the edges. The use of these
objects is unknown.
BoNE AwLs
Three pointed bone artifacts or awls were recovered from Stratum
3B. One has been worked from a limb bone, while the other two were
worked from unidentifiable splinters.
DEER ANTLER
A deer antler artifact (Fig. 8, H ) has been intentionally cut and
smooth ed, and possibly served as a handle. A small hole, 1.7 em. deep
and 1 em. in diameter, has been drilled in one end, probably for hafting
an artifact such as a drill. The antler measures 8.1 em. long and 2 em.
in maximum diameter. It was found in Stratum 4.

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

6

CM
Fig. 1 0 . Scrapers and Chopper. A, End and side scraper. 8 , Utilized flake scraper. C,
Chopper.

79

YOUNGSPORT SITE

SUMMARY AND COMPARISONS

The most significant findings made at the Youngsport Site deal
principally with the relative stratigraphic occurrence of certain dart
point types. With few exceptions, the other artifacts did not reveal
meaningful distribution patterns. This point sequence can be summarized as follows:
TABLE 1
Provenience of Artifacts
S tratum Stra tum Stralum Stra tum Stratum Stra tu m Stratum

Artifact

2

Dart point typ es
Bulverde
Castroville
Ensor
7
Gower
Gower Variants
Lange
Marcos
Marshall
Mantell
14
Morrill
Nolan
Pedernales
Travis
Uvalde
Wells
Williams

3A

4

6

8

4

5
9

z

1
15
14
1

7

z

41

41

1

z
5

3

1Z

5

5
9
8

2
2

z

8

13
1Z

2

z
3

3
3

Z5

Totals

10
7

5
9

8

Surface

5

9

U nidentified
dart points
Drills
Knives
Scrapers
Choppers
Clear Fork Gouges
Harnmerstones
Manos
Misc. stone
Bone artifacts
Totals

38

4

z

z

3

4

101

11

9

zo

176

1. The earliest period of occupation yet recognized at the site occurred only in Stratum 8 and is characterized almost exclusively by

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rather crudely made, indented base points. These are provisionally
termed Gower and Gower variants. The only other possibly distinctive
artifact is the Clear Fork gouge which was found in strata 8 and 6 (one
specimen in each).
2. Stratigraphically above Stratum 8 and separated from it by a
sterile yellow clay (Stratum 7) was an occupational zone, Stratum 6,
wliich is characterized by long, narrow, stemmed points, including
types Morrill and Wells.
3. Above Stratum 6 is a relatively sterile clay (Stratum 5 ) which
yielded only one artifact, a Bulverde point. It is quite probable that
this specimen is intrusive from the layer above, Stratum 4, where
Bulverde points were more numerous.
4. Overlying Stratum 5 was a moderately rich cultural zone ( Stratum 4 ) which contained dart point types Bulverde, Travis, and Nolan.
5. Above Stratum 4 was the richest cultural zone (Stratum 3B ) encountered by the test excavations. It yielded six different dart point
types (Castroville, Lange, Marshall, Pedernales, Uvalde, and Williams ), although the Pedernales points were by far the most common.
Other classes of artifacts were also relatively more numerous in this
zone and the full significance of their presence is difficult to ascertain.
It might be noted, however, that manos appear for the first time, and
that all the drills were obtained from this zone.
6. Stratum 3A, a localized zone above Stratum 3B, produced only
Marshall points. No other artifacts were obtained from this lens.
7. The most recent occupational zone sampled, Stratum 2, yielded
principally Mantell and Ensor points; minor forms include one Marcos
aud one Castroville.
The above dart point sequence in many ways agrees very closely
with that recently reported by Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell ( 1962:
118-123) for the Canyon Reservoir area, Comal County, Texas. Stratum 4 at the Youngsport Site corresponds very favorably with their
Early Archaic period, while Stratum 3B coincides with their Middle
Archaic period and Stratum 2 with their Late Archaic. Their Transitional Archaic period, provisionally distinguished by Darl points and
a small, unnamed expanding stem form, is not present at the Youngsport Site. Also, unlike the Canyon Reservoir sites, there was no suggestion of a time difference between Ensor and Mantell points. Perhaps
Stratum 2 represents mixed refuse from several occupations.
While concurring with the Canyon Reservoir data, the findings at
the Youngsport Site suggest some additions and refinements. In the
first place, there now seems to be enough information to temporally

81

YOUNGSPORT SITE

place the Castroville and Marshall types: Both apparently first appeared in the Middle Archaic period and survived into early Late
Archaic times. Although less well represented, and hence more tenuous, the occurrence of Lange and Williams points seems to indicate
that they belong principally to the Middle Archaic time period.
Perhaps the most important information obtained at the Youngsport
Site concerns the two occupational zones underlying the Nolan, Travis ,
and Bulverde types. Comparable data were not found at the three Canyon Reservoir sites, although the Crumley Site in Travis County
(Kelly, 1961 ) did yield a few apparently similar indented base points
(tentatively termed "Crumley") from the deepest levels. No zone similar to Stratum 6, which is distinguished by Wells and Morrill points,
has yet been reported from other sites in central Texas.
REFERENCES CITED
Jackson, A . T.
1938. The Fall Creek Sites. University of T exas Publications, No. 3802.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962. Survey and Appraisal of the A rcheological Resour ces of Stillhouse Hollow
Reservoir on the Lampasas River , Bell County, T exas. T y p : d Report
Submitted to the U.S. National Park Se rvi ce by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr. , D ee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunn ell
1962. Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge
and Oblate Sites. T e xas M emorial Muse um Bulletin, No. 5.
Kelly, Col. Thomas C.
1961. The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt Rock Midd en , Travis County, Texas.
Bulletin of th e Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31 (for 1960), pp.
239-272.
Miller, E. 0 ., and Edward B. J elks
1952. Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 168- 217.
Suhm. D ee Ann
1955 . Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County , T exas. Bulletin of th e
T exas Archeological Society , Vol. 26, pp. 7- 54.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger , and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
The University of T exas
Austin, Texas

The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic-NeoAmerican Site in San Augustine
County, Texas
LATHEL F. DUFFIELD
ABSTRACT
The Wolfshead Site, a multi-component site in the McGee Bend Reservoir area
in eastern Texas, was excavated by a crew of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project in November and D ecember, 1960. The data recovered suggest that the site
was first occupied by a group who mad e San Patrice and other types of dart points
with some Paleo-Indian attributes . Later, a group that made expanding stern and/ or
side-notched dart points lived on the site. During the lattee part of this period, a
sand-tempered pottery was utilized . Still later, groups who made contracting stern
dart points and expanding stem arrow points camped there briefly. Th e data from
the Wolfshead Site, plus that from other sites in this area of Texas. provide a
projectile point sequence which may serve as a chronologi ca l guide foe further
work in the area.

INTRODUCTION

In the fall of 1960 the Texas Archeological Salvage Project investigated five sites in the upper part of the McGee Bend Reservoir
area, located in eastern Texas on the Angelina River. One of these, the
Wolfshead Site, is the subject of this report. Wolfshead is a multicomponent site containing archeological remains of both Archaic and
Neo-American cultures, as well as artifacts attributed to transitional
Paleo-Indian-Archaic peoples.
Except for a cursory survey conducted by Gus Arnold in 1939
(Arnold, ms. ), the River Basin Surveys' work at McGee Bend constitutes the only archeological research that has been undertaken in
this part of eastern Texas. The salvage operations began in 1948 when
Robert L. Stephenson made a survey of the reservoir. He discussed the
80 sites that he discovered in terms of the Caddoan area classification
system in use both then and now for northeastern Texas (Stephenson,
1948 ). In 1956 and 1957, nine McGee Bend sites were excavated, and

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

once analysis of these sites was under way it became clear that they
were related not only to the Caddoan archeological area adjoining on
the north, but also to the Galveston Bay Focus adjoining on the south.
Despite these relationships, however, it was apparent that much of the
McGee Bend material is actually rather unique and that the classifications of archeological complexes in current usage for the Caddoan and
Galveston Bay areas are not applicable at McGee Bend.
In an attempt to clarify problems that had arisen from the excavations of 1956 and 195 7, additional excavations were undertaken in
1960 by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project under the provisions
of Memorandum of Agreement No. 14-10-0333-657 between The
University of Texas and the National Park Service. These excavations
were superv.ised by Lhe writer under the general direction of Edward
B. Jelks.
Most of the work of the 1960 season was concentrated on the
Wolfshead Site, where projectile points and other artifacts representing three sequential periods were found. The earliest period is characterized by San Patrice type dart points and by dart points of PaleoIndian typological affinity. Most representative of the second period
are expanding stem and side-notched dart points as well as plain, sandtempered pottery. Small Gary type dart points, expanding stem arrow
points, and the same plain sandy pottery found in the second period
are the major traits of the third period.
Because they possess both Paleo-Indian and Archaic typological attributes, San Patrice points have heretofore been assigned to a hypothetical transitional position between the Paleo-Indian and Archaic
stages (Webb, 1946). At the Wolfshead Site, the placement of San
Patrice points in a transitional Paleo-Indian-Archaic context is supported not only by typological factors but also by distributional and
associational data.
In the interpretive section of this report this sequence and its supporting evidence are presented in detail. Inter- and intra-areal comparisons are also drawn, and several conjectures about the significance
of the data will be presented. In the descriptive section, the characteristics and environment of the Wolfshead Site are discussed, the artifacts and other data recovered are described, and the methods of
excavating, the manner of recording, and procedures of analysis are
explained.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Without the cooperation of many individuals the report on the

85

W OLFSHEAD SITE

WOLFSHEAD SITE
41 SA 117

=

contour interval
1.0 feet
excavated area = C
0

20

40

60

80

Fig . 1.

Wolfshead Site would not have been possible. In the field, Mr. T.
Baker , executor of the Blount estate gave u s access to the land and
granted permission to dig the site. In Austin, M r. Edward B. Jelks,

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Executive Director of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, has
been helpful in supplying information and advice, both during excavation of the site and later during its analysis. Other members of the
T.A.S.P. who aided work in the field or in the laboratory are Kenneth
Bennett, W . A. Davis, and LeRoy Johnson, Jr.
SITE DESCRIPTION

The Wolfshead Site ( 41SA117 ) occupies a large sand-topped knoll
in west-central San Augustine County, Texas (Fig. 1) . The site was
named "Wolfshead" by local collectors because they frequently found
small dart points there with an outline resembling a wolf's head
(San Patrice type). In 1953, after having been cultivated continuously
for many decades, farming activities ceased, and since that time the
site has lain fallow. Erosion, especially around the sloping sides of the
knoll, has been extensive.
Surface evidence of occupation, covering about an acre (Fig. 1) ,
consists principally of petrified wood flakes and cores, a few dart points,
fewer arrow points, and an occasional sherd. The surface debris is
concentrated at the edges of the site where it has been exposed by
eroswn.
Preliminary testing revealed two geologic soil zones: ( 1 ) a basal
red-orange clay, and (2) a surface member of fine-grained, tan, sandy
soil containing, in the lower part, numerous orange-colored, clay
inclusions (Fig. 2 ). The red-orange clay is of the Amite type and is
considered to be a riverine deposit (Martin, 1946). The upper foot or
so of this clay contains cultural material, but it is uncertain whether
this material is contemporaneous with the clay or whether it was
intruded into the red clay from the overlying sandy zone. Some
artifacts were found in situ in the clay where no evidence of intrusion
was apparent; however, it is possible that tree roots or burrowing
gophers could have carried a small amount of cultural detritus downward from the sandy soil into the upper part of the clay. In the
central part of the site tests with a post hole digger encountered a
yellow, mottled clay underlying the red clay at a depth of three feet.
This yellow clay, reportedly a water-deposited member (Ted Silker,
personal communication), is evidently sterile of cultural material.
The tan, sandy surface soil which contains most of the cultural
material, has a maximum thickness on top of the knoll of a bout two
feet, and it pinches out around the edges of the knoll where the underlying clay has been exposed by erosion. In the extreme lower part of

87

WOLFSHEAD SITE

this zone were bits of red clay derived from the clay zone, indicating
that some mixture of the two zones had taken place. Despite this
evidence of slight mixing, the separation between the tan sand and
red clay zones was sharply defined in all parts of the site.

101:,._

Di agrammatic Profile of Line N500

HORIZONTAL SCALE
0

~

~

Plow Zone

D

Fine grained, tan. sandy soil

G:)

Compocl, red clay

UIIJ

Unexcavated

Fig. 2 .

EXCAVATION TECHNIQUES

For horizontal control a cardinally-oriented grid was superimposed
on the Wolfshead Site before beginning excavation. The grid was laid
out with a transit, and the grid stakes were designated according to
their coordinate direction and distance from a primary datum point.
Thus a stake with a designation of N550-E600 would be 550 feet north
and 600 feet east of the primary datum. The grid was so arranged that
all grid points used had north and east coordinates.
To serve as vertical datum, a large nail was driven into the base of
a small oak tree which was located near the N550-E590 stake. This
nail was given an arbitrary elevation of 100 feet and all elevation
readings were taken in reference to this height.
Since the cultural debris exposed on the surface was thinly scattered,
it was necessary to determine areas of concentrated materials by

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

trenching. A series of trenches was dug in sections 10 feet long and
2 5 feet wide, each section being carried down by half-foot intervals.
After each level was excavated and the floor cleaned and checked for
features, pertinent information was recorded on a level report form.
Nearly all the dirt was passed through one-quarter or one-half inch
mesh screens. The materials recovered from each level and from each
excavation unit (generally a 2.5 X 10 ft. trench ) were sacked and
recorded by site, trench designation, level, date of excavation and
excavators. The materials were sent to the laboratory in Austin, where
they were washed, catalogued and prepared for analysis.
Recorded data, in addition to the level reports and bag information,
included a photo record, a contour map, a plan of the excavations, a
site journal, and a daily log. All records and materials recovered are
on file at the Texas Archeological Salvage Project laboratory in Austin.
As the trenching progressed, several areas of concentration were
found and the excavations were focused on those areas in order to
obtain as much information as possible in the limited time available.
Trenches connecting the areas of concentration were dug to help relate
them to one another.
LABORATORY TECHNIQUES

After the materials were catalogued, they were roughly sorted
according to the various classes of artifacts represented, e.g., pottery,
dart points, arrow points, knives, scrapers, and ground stone artifacts.
These groups were later subdivided. The pottery was subdivided on
the basis of tempering agents, the dart points and the arrow points
were classified according to similarity in over-all form and size, and
the other chipped stone objects were placed in subgroups depending
on form and other characteristics. Some of the subgroups were further
subdivided. Each final grouping consisted of individual artifacts which
held a majority of their characteristics in common.
After the artifacts had been classified according to the above
methods, they were described and their horizontal distributions were
studied. This showed that arrow points and some kinds of pottery
clustered in the southern part of the site. On this basis, the site was
divided for purposes of analysis, into two major areas-a northern
section and a southern section (Fig. 3). Several excavation units which
were peripheral to these major areas were analyzed separately.
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

From excavated areas at the Wolfshead Site 885 artifacts were re-

89

WOLFSHEAD SITE

EJ

Northern Area

/ Sherds
Sand-cloy tempered 35
259
Sand tempered
Ot hers
7
.....

____ ___ __ _

301

'

20

10

0

,

30

FEEr

- - ----

"

\

I

I I%
86%
2%
99°/o

l

I

Southern Area
Sherds
Sand- clay tempered 41
Sand
Oth e r

tempered

84
126

32%
67°/o\
I 0/o '
100% \
\
\

\

I

I

\
\
\

\

Fig . 3 . Plan of excavations .

covered. In addition, 60 artifacts were found on the surface, in back
dirt, etc. Included are 512 sherds, 144 dart points and dart point fragments, and 20 arrow points and arrow point fragments.

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PROJECTILE POINTS

Most of the proj ectile points were crudely made from a coarsegrained petrified wood that is laminated and tends to break into thin
sheets when chipped. Apparently, when working this material, it is
possible to achieve only a basic outline as the coarse grain does not permit fine flaking. However, som e artifacts are made of a fine-grained
petrified wood-a material more adaptable to fine chipping-and these
are often delicately flaked. Some points were made from small, finegrained jasper and chert pebbles which are occasionally found in the
nearby stream beds. These points are usually well made, although
they sometimes retain a part of the original cortex.
The difficulties encountered by the prehistoric workman in manufacturing projectile points from the coarse-grained petrified wood and
from the small pebbles are reflected in the archeologists' problems of
analysis and classification. Dart points made of the small pebbles, for
example, are necessarily smaller than dart points made from larger
stones; therefore, at times, the standard division of proj ectile points
into dart point and arrow point categories was difficult to maintain.
Artifacts classed here as arrow points have the following characteristics: ( 1) they were manufactured from thin flakes, (Z ) they are
short in over-all length, and ( 3 ) their outlines are similar to the outlines of recognized arrow point types. Dart points, on the other hand,
were made from small cores or thick flakes, they have a basal or maximum stem width that is relatively wide in relation to the blade length,
and they have outlines similar to those of established types.

Dart Points
Five major forms of dart points are present: points with PaleoIndian attributes ( 42 specimens), expanding stem points (26 specimens), side-notched points (9 specimens), contracting stem points (2,4
specimens ), and points with parallel-sided stems ( 5 specimens ) . In the
analysis, each of these major categories was divided and subdivided
into smaller and smaller subgroups until all the specimens in a particular subgroup were almost identical to one another. In the descriptions that follow, the principal features and measurements of the dart
points comprising each subgroup are given, and occasional reference
is made to comparable points from other sites. Provenience data will
be presented in a later section.

WOLFSHEAD SITE

91

POINTS WITH PALEO-INDIAN ATTRIBUTES

San Patrice Type
The 36 San Patrice points found at the Wolfshead Site do not coincide precisely with the definitions given by W ebb ( 1946: 13-17) , by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 477 ), or by Bell ( 1958: 84-85 ) .
Consequently, the type definition is here expanded to fit the present
sample. The San Patrice group can be recognized by ( 1 ) their slightly
t o strongly concave bases, (2) smoothing of the base and stem edges,
( 3 ) corner notching, ( 4 ) their slight to prominent shoulders, and
(5 ) their short, subtriangular, sometimes stubby blades. Other characteristics that occur frequently, but not always, are basal thinning and
alternate beveling of the blade edges.
The San Patrice points from the W olfshead Site fall rather readily
into three subgroups which are h ere assigned the tentative variety
names hope, st. johns, and goodwin. The system of type-variety nomenclature devised by Johnson ( 1962) and J elks (1962: 23 ) is employed,
w herein the initial letter of a type name is capitalized, all letters of a
variety name are lower case, and all names-both type and varietyare italicized.
st. johns variety (26 specimens, Fig. 4, A-H ) . The st. johns variety
of the San Patrice type differs from the hupe variety in the manner in
which the stem is differentiated from the blade. The st. johns group
has small, but usually prominent, oblique side notches, situated immediately above the base, which define the shoulders and stem.
(Prominent notching was not included as a major attribute of San
Patrice in previous definitions of the type. ) The blades are short, subtriangular in shape, and have edges which vary from concave to convex. Fifteen of the Wolfshead specimens are made of petrified wood,
the others are of jasper and chert. In length, all are between 20 and
34 mm. except for two abnormally long specimens which are 39 and
40 mm. long respectively. Widths range from 17 to 26 mm., the average length is 28 mm., and the average width is 21 mm.
Eleven of the st. johns points have alternately beveled blades, u sually
in conjunction with concave blade edges. The base of 15 specimens
were thinned by the removal of longitudinal flakes from both fa ces:
another was thinned on one side only.
hope variety (9 specimens, Fig. 4, J-N ) . Specimens of the hope
variety have- instead of the prominent side notches characteristic of
the st. johns variety-slightly concave sides which define the stem.
All the bases have been thinned and the short blades have slightly con-

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

D

H

G

F

L

K

J

Q

2
1

3 4
t

t

5
I

M

6
I

7
I

8
t

9
t

~
1

CM.
Fig. 4 . San Patrice Dart Points . A-H, San Patrice st. johns. I, San Patrice goodw in. J-N,
San Patrice hope .

cave to slightly convex edges. These specimens closely resemble the
San Patrice points illustrated by Webb ( 1946: 11, Pl. 1, 7-10, 15-19 )
and by Bell ( 1958: 84-85 ). Four of the hope points are made of a finegrained sandstone (possibly Catahoula sandstone, Sellards, et al. , 1932:

WOLFSHEAD SITE

93

723-726), two were manufactured from petrified wood, and the remainder are of chert. They have the following dimensions: length 26
to 37 mm., average 31 mm.; width 22 to 30 mm., average 24 mm.
Two of the hope points have altemately beveled blades, four lack
beveling, and three are so fragmentary that the blade characteristics
cannot be determined.
goodwin variety ( 1 specimen, Fig. 4, I ) . One large San Patrice point
has concave stem edges and a subtriangular blade with one straight
edge and one convex edge. Made of petrified wood, it measures 54 mm.
long by 32 mm. wide. There is a concavity or broad notch in the base
which is 8 mm. deep . San Patrice goodwin points have been found in
Jasper County (south of the W olfshead Site) on a site in the Dam B
reservoir area (D. T. Kent, Jr. , personal communication ).
Discussion: San Patrice points have been found in Texas at the Jake
Martin Site (Davis and Davis, 1960: 20 ) , the Doering and Kobs sites
(Wheat, 1953: 205, 211 , Pl. 38, m ), the Sawmill Site at McGee Bend
Reservoir, and at an unnamed site at Dam B Reservoir in Jasper
County (D. T. Kent, Jr., personal communication ) . In Louisiana this
type has been reported from the Albany Landing Site (Ford and
Webb, 1956: 73 ) , the Mooringsport Site (ibid.: 74 ) , the Sanson Site
(ibid.: 73 ) , and the type location, the San Patrice Site (Webb, 1946:
13-17). In addition, Webb (1946 ) reports San Patrice points from 16
other sites in Louisiana and from one site in Mississippi. At least one
of the dart points found at the Poverty Point Site in Louisiana and
illustrated by Ford and Webb ( 1956: Fig. 21, q ) appears to fit the
hope variety as defined here, although Ford and Webb identify it as
a Meserve point.
The San Patrice points from the W olfshead Site share some characteristics with the Meserve, Edgewood, and Paisano types. Similarities
to Paisano and Meserve have been noted before (Suhm, Krieger, and
Jelks, 1954: 460, 477; Davis and Davis, 1960: 21; Ford and Webb,
1956 : 63 ) , but the Wolfshead sample indicates that San PatriceMeserve relationships are even stronger than has been previously suggested, the differences between them being largely a matter of degree
rather than of kind.
The major differences, some of which have been noted by Davis and
Davis ( 1960: 21 ) , are: ( 1) San Patrice points are shorter and relatively wider than Meserve points; (2 ) some Meserve points appear to
be reworked; ( 3) the shoulders on San Patrice points are always
prominent, whereas the shoulders on Meserve points are often poorly
defined; ( 4) San Patrice stems generally have small but distinct ears

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which protrude at a bout a 45 degree angle from the longitudinal axis
of the point, while the ears on stems of Meserve points are less well
defined; and (5) the beveling of San Patrice blades is generally on
the left whereas the beveling of Meserve blades is on the right (bases
Driented downward ) . Most of these differences are a matter of degree
and only one or two appear to be major.
As for resemblances, the Meserve type and the hope variety of the
San Patrice type share the following characteristics: ( 1) concave
bases which have been ground; (2 ) concave stem edges; (3 ) alternately beveled blades; ( 4) basal thinning by the removal of short
longitudinal flakes. When some of the specimens recovered from the
Wolfshead Site are compared with illustrated Meserve specimens
(compare Fig. 4, K with Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: Pl. 104, K;
and Fig. 4, L with Ford and Webb, 1956: Fig. 21, Q), some overlapping of the types is apparent.
Several possible explanations can be offered for the resemblances
between the San Patrice and Meserve types: ( 1) there are no historical
connections between the two types and the resemblances are purely
fortuitous; (2 ) San Patrice points were entirely or partially contemporary with Meserve points and the resemblances reflect a historical relationship between the two; ( 3 ) one of the two types preceded- and
is parental to--the other.
The first of these possibilities is, in my opinion, unlikely. Meserve
points occur over much of the geographic region where San Patrice
points are commonly found , and both types appear to date generally
from the late Paleo-Indian-early Archaic period. In such circumstances, it is hard to believe that the typological resemblances between
Meserve and San Patrice are accidental.
There is some evidence that the Meserve type came into existence
before the San Patrice type and therefore-if a genetic relationship
between the two may be assumed-San Patrice probably developed
out of Meserve. Evidence for the priority of Meserve consists in its
association with Pleistocene fauna at the Meserve Site in Hall County,
Nebraska (Wormington, 1957: 11 3) , and in the apparent occurrence
of San Patrice in post-Pleistocene contexts at the Jake Martin Site,
Upshur County, Texas (Davis and Davis, 1960 ) , and possibly at the
Poverty Point Site, West Carroll Parish, Louisiana (Ford and Webb,
1956 ). Unfortunately there are no direct stratigraphic data on the
relative temporal positions of the two types.
Another dart point that appears to have some typological affinity
vvith San Patrice is the Edgewood type (Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks,

WOLFSHEAD SITE

95

1954: 418- 419 ) . Particularly striking is the similarity between the
dixon variety of Edgewood as defined by LeRoy Johnson, Jr., (1962 )
and the st. johns variety of the San Patrice. Some of the attributes
shared by these two varieties are: ( 1) an oblique side notch immediately above the base which defines the stem and shoulders; (2 ) a
concave base; and (3) alternately beveled blades. The differences between st. johns and dixon are, like those between San Patrice and
Meserve, largely a matter of degree. Briefly these differences are: ( 1)
the oblique side notch is wider and deeper in dixon than in st. johns;
(2) dixon has more prominent barbs than does st. johns; (3 ) the basal
concavity is more pronounced in st. johns than in dixon; and ( 4 ) the
beveling of the blade usually occurs on the right side of dixon points
and on the left side of st. johns points.
In attempting to explain the resemblances between San Patrice and
Edgewood, the same three possibilities given above for the San PatriceM eserve relationship must be considered; ( 1) contemporaneity,
(2) development of one type from the other, or (3) coincidental resemblance with no historical relationship. Since little is known about
the spatial and temporal distribution of the Edgewood type, the first
explanation cannot be readily dismissed. The initial estimated dates
for Edgewood place it late in the Archaic Stage. However, at the
Yarbrough Site Edgewood points-especially those that are most similar to the San Patrice type-occurred in the deeper levels of the site
in what is apparently a relatively early Archaic context (Johnson,
1962 ) . Thus, at the present stage of knowledge, there is no strong
argument against the possibility that Edgewood might have developed
out of San Patrice-nor that the San Patrice and Edgewood types are
partially or entirely coeval.

Concave-base Points (5 specimens, Fig. 5, A-D )
Five lanceolate points with concave bases are all crudely made from
petrified wood. Two are basal fragments, while the others are more
complete. Three of them (Fig. 5, A, B, D) are similar in shape to the
Plainviewtype ( Suhm,Krieger,andJelks, 1954: 473 ) , but they cannot
be called Plainview because of the crudeness of the flaking- undoubtedly, to a large extent, a function of the raw material used. The
lower edges and some of the bases are lightly ground. The three points
with Plainview-like shapes are 41 to 52 mm. long, 26 to 30 mm. wide,
and 5 to 8 mm. thick.
One concave-base point (Fig. 5, C) is smoothed along the proximal

96

TEXAS AR CHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

A

c

D

0

E
2 3 4

5 6 7 8 9 10
C M.

Fig. 5 . Points with Paleo-Indian Attributes . A-D, Concave-base dart points . E, Scottsbluff-1 ike point .

WOLFSHEAD SITE

97

edges and across the base. It is essentially a lanceolate form with a
slight expansion in the middle of the blade. From the area of maximum
width (23 mm. ) , the edges of the blade taper slightly to the base.
Over-all length is 69 mm.
The fifth concave-base point is too fragmentary for accurate description, but it too has been smoothed across the base and along the lower
edges.

Scottsbluff-like Point ( 1 specimen, Fig. 5, E )
A small, thin, flat Scottsbluff-like point which corresponds to Wormington's ( 1957: 266 ) Type I form was found on top of the red clay at
the same general level where many of the San Patrice points occurred.
This specimen is 40 mm. long, 21 mm. wide, and 4 mm. thick. It is
made of a flint similar to that found in Central Texas, and the stem
edges and base are lightly ground. This specimen is too thin to be
identified definitely as a Scottsbluff point.
EX PA N DING STEM FORMS

Corner-notched Points With Straight Bases (9 specimens, Fig. 6, A , B)
Oblique comer notches, which create an expanding stem and prominent, sometimes barbed, shoulders are characteristic of this group of
dart points. The bases are straight to mildly convex. The blades are
u sually short, but the best-made specimen in this group has a relatively
long blade. In length these points vary from 21 to 42 mm. (excluding
one specimen that is 52 mm. long ) and they average 34 mm.; in width
they range from 20 to 26 mm. , with an average of 23 mm. All but two
of these points are made of chert or jasper.

Corner-notched Points With Convex Bases (7 specimens, Fig. 6, K-M )
These points have corner notching which defines an expanding stem
and produces prominent shoulders, some of which are barbed. The base
of the stem is slightly to strongly convex. The shoulders are generally
rounded, a feature which contrasts with the corner~notched, straightbase points. The blades of this form are relatively short and broad.
The more complete points measure between 42 and 45 mm. in length
and between 22 and 30 mm. in width.

Crude Corner-notched Points (2 specimens, Fig. 6, J)
These two points have one corner notched while the other was never

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

notched or else this part of the point has been broken off. The bases
are straight and the blades are subtriangular with slightly rounded tips
and straight to slightly convex edges. The two specimens are 35 and
36 mm. long by 22 and 24 mm. wide, respectively. The smaller one
is made of brown chert, the larger one of fine-grained, compact
sandstone.

Small, Oblique Corner-notched Points (3 specimens, Fig. 6, H, I )
The basal grinding, incipient oblique corner-notching, and slightly
concave bases of these three points suggest that they are uncompleted
San Patrice points. They are in the San Patrice size range: 26 to 32
mm. long, 17 to 19 mm. wide, and 4 to 6 mm. thick. Two of them are
made of petrified wood, the other of chert.

Corner-notched Points With Slightly Expanded Stems And Broad Bases
(2 specimens, Fig. 6, G )
Two short-bladed points made of petrified wood have straight to
slightly convex bases, prominent shoulders, and mildly convex blade
edges. They are 42 and 43 mm. long by 36 and 3 7 mm. wide respectively. Their stems expand slightly and are broad (19 and 21 mm.
wide).

Miscellaneous Expanding Stem Points ( 3 specimens )
One additional expanding stem point made of petrified wood could
be a scraper or a bunt. The stem of this specimen expands slightly and
has a convex base. The blade, which may be reworked, is distinctive
for its shortness. The shoulders are prominent but one is broken off
(Fig. 7, 0 ) . Another petrified wood point (unfinished) still has the
cortex on the tip and one edge is not worked. This point which is 50
mm. long and 32 mm. wide has a flat base and shallow side notches.
The remaining point in this group has a broad (29 mm.) subtriangular
blade and shallow side-notches which define the stem. One face of the
petrified wood point is flat while the other has crude chipping.
SIDE-NOTCHED FORMS

The side-notched dart points (9 specimens, Fig. 6, C-F) have straight
or slightly concave bases, and most of them are made of coarse-grained
petrified wood, although a few of the better made ones are of chert or
fine-grained petrified wood. The side notches may be set either at right

99

WOLFSHEAD SITE

c

8

A

F

E

H

G

J

M

L

K

Q

0

2 3.4 5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.
!

I

t

!

I

I

!

I

I

Fig . 6. Expanding Stem and Side-notched Dart Points . A, 8, Corner-notched with straight
bases . C-F, Side-notched. G , Corner-notched with slightly expanding stem, broad base . H, I,
Oblique corner-notched . J , Crude corner-notched . K-M. Corner-notched with convex bases .

angles or at a slightly oblique angle to the long axis of the blade. The
length of the blade rather than the angle of the notches, however, was
the main criterion used in dividing the side-notched points into two
subgroups, since a significant typological difference apparently exists
between the points with long blades and those with short ones. The

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

side-notched points with short blades ( 4 specimens, Fig. 6, E, F ) range
in length from 17 to 30 mm. and in width from 22 to 27 mm. On this
group all the notches are at right angles to the blade. The base is as
wide as, or wider than , the blade. This group, which may have been
reworked from longer side-notched points, have broad, convex distal
ends instead of sharp tips, and these distal ends are steeply beveled
from one face. Perhaps these artifacts were designed for use as hafted
scrapers or bunts rather than as conventional dart points.
The side-notched points with long blades (Fig. 6, C, D ) are, on the
whole, wider than the short-bladed ones. They are from 40 to 50 mm.
long and from 25 to 30 mm. wide. All have beveled blade edges, and
four of the five specimens have bases that are narrower than the blades.
CONTRACTING STEM FORMS

Gary Type
All of the 24 dart points with contracting stems are of the Gary type,
and they were generally distributed in the upper levels of the site. As
there is considerable variation within the group, it was divided into
six subgroups for convenience of description.
Small Gary points with slight shoulders ( 10 specimens, Fig. 7, A-D ) .
All except two of these are made of petrified wood, the exceptions
being of red and yellow jasper. These points have contracting stems,
relatively long subtriangular blades with edges varying from slightly
concave to slightly convex, and unworked flat bases on which the
nodular cortex is present. These points tend to be thick ( 6 to 9 mm.
with a mode of 7 mm.). They are relatively short, the length varying
from 30 to 39 mm. (excluding one extra large one which is 46 mm.
long), and averaging 34 mm.; and they are narrow, width being 14
to 20 mm. , with an average of 17 mm. The small shoulders project
slightly to the sides.
Small Gary points with prominent shoulders (5 specimens, Fig. 7,
E, F ) . One of these small points is made of petrified wood, while the
others are of fine-grained cherts. The broad, prominent shoulders are
slightly barbed. These points range in length from 27 to 36 mm .. with
a modal length of 32 mm. Their widths vary from 20 to 24 mm. , with
an average of 22 mm. The edges of the su btriangular blades are
slightly convex, and the short contracting stems have either rounded
or straight bases.
·
Small Gary points with rounded bases (2 specimens, Fig. 7, G ) .
Two of the small Gary points-one 24 mm. long, the other 28 mm.

101

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

c

B

K

J

H

N

0

L

0

2 3 4 5 6

G

F

E

D

M

p

7 8 9 10

CM.
Fig. 7 . Dart Po ints. A-D , Gary , slight shoulde rs. E, F, Gary , p rom inent shoulders . G,
Gary , round base. H, I, Gary , narrow . J , K, Gary, wide . l , Gary , crude . M, Short parallels ided stem, rounded base . N, Pogo? point. 0, Miscellaneous expanding stem . P, Miscellaneous parallel- sided stem .

long-have rounded bases, contracting stems, slight shoulders, and
short subtriangular blades with convex edges. These points are, respectively, 15 and 18 mm. wide. and both are 7 mm. in maximum

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

thickness. They resemble the hobson variety of Gary as defined by
Johnson ( 1962).
Small, narrow Gary points ( 3 specimens, Fig. 7, H, I ). These points
- all made of petrified wood-are narrow in relation to their length.
They are, respectively, 48, 51, and 52 mm. long by 15, 23, and 21 mm.
wide. Thickness is consistent at 7 to 8 mm.
Small, wide Gary points (3 specimens, Fig. 7, J, K). A short, broad
blade and a short, straight or contracting stem with a flat base are the
characteristic traits of this subgroup. The shoulders measure from 26
to 28 mm. wide, while over-all length ranges from 32 to 3 7 mm. These
points are all made from petrified wood and they tend to be relatively
thin.
Crude Gary points ( 1 specimen, Fig. 7, L ) . One Gary point made of
a compact sandstone or small-grained quartzite is 60 mm. long by 24
mm. wide and has a slightly tapered stem with a rounded base. The
shoulders are rounded; the subtriangular blade is rather long and has
convex edges. One face of this specimen is relatively flat, but there is a
prominent hump on the other face which gives the point a flattened
triangular cross section.
PARALLEL-SIDED STEM FORMS

Pogo? Type ( 1 specimen, Fig. 7, N )
A large, fragmentary dart point with a broad triangular blade is
possibly an example of the Pogo type. Made of petrified wood, this
point is 68 mm. long and 48 mm. wide (reconstructed ) . It has welldefined shoulders and a short, parallel-sided stem with a straight base.

Points With Short Stems And Rounded Bases (2 specimens, Fig. 7, M )
The broad, long blades of these points contrast sharply with their
short, narrow, parallel-sided stems. The bases are rounded. The two
specimens are respectively 52 mm. long by 30 and 34 mm. wide, and
both are made of petrified wood. The blades have rounded shoulders
and convex edges. The tip on one specimen is rounded.

Miscellaneous Parallel-sided Stem Points (2 specimens, Fig. 7, P )
Two petrified wood dart points have straight bases and parallelsided stems. The larger of the two has a subtriangular blade with well
defined shoulders and convex edges (Fig. 7, P ), while the smaller has
a narrow blade with poorly defined shoulders and straight edges.

103

WOLFSHEAD SITE
DART POINT FRAGMENTS

Ten unidentifiable dart point bases and 43 dart point blades and
tips were found during excavation of the W olfshead Site. All but six of
these were chipped from petrified wood.

Arrow Points
Twenty arrow point and arrow point fragments were found at the
Wolfshead Site, all of them made from the locally available petrified
wood and river pebbles. Except for one crude specimen with a contracting stem, all of the arrow points have expanding stems. Bases are
usually straight, but some are slightly convex.
E XPANDING STEM FORMS

Friley Type
Seven of the 15 complete expanding stem arrow points have straight
bases and prominent shoulders that either project laterally or recurve
toward the distal end of the point. These features are characteristic of
the Friley type as defined by Bell ( 1960: 46-47 ) . On the basis of the
differences in shoulder treatment, the Friley points were divided into
two subgroups-those with recurved shoulders and those with laterallyprojecting shoulders.
Friley points with recurved shoulders (5 specimens, Fig. 8, C-F ) .
These arrow points have expanding stems (although some are almost
parallel-sided) and reverse barbs. They are thin but-probably because of the poor chipping qualities of the stones used-are not well
made. In all their attributes these points conform to the standard
definition of the Friley type (Bell, 1960: 46-47).
Friley points with laterally-projecting shoulders (2 specimens, Fig.
8, A, B) . Broad expanding stems, short blades, and prominent shoulders that project laterally at approximately right angles to the long
axis of the blade are the distinguishing features of this form of the
Friley type. Other attributes include concave blade edges and straight
bases. The smaller of the two examples found at Wolfshead is 12 mm.
long and 12 mm. wide, while the larger one is 19 mm. long and 13
mm. wide.
The two forms of Friley, while they appear to grade into one
another, seem distinct enough to warrant separate description here.
The significance of the variations noted above, however, cannot be
accurately determined until other sites where Friley points occur have
been analyzed.

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

t',
"\

B

A

c

H

E

D

J

0

2 3 4

5 6

K

F

L

M

7 8 9 10

CM.
Fig . 8 . Arrow Po ints. A, 8, Friley , laterally-projecting shoulders. C-F, Friley , recurved
s houlders. G-1 , Expa nding stem arrow points . J, large arrow point . K, l , Miscellaneou s
arrow po ints . M, Arrow poin t fragment.

Miscellaneous Expanding Stem Arrow Points
In the upper zones were found five small arrow points (Fig. 8, G-I)
that have expanding stems, flat to convex bases, prominent shoulders,
and triangular blades with edges varying from slightly concave to
slightly convex. These resemble the Friley type but do not have the
recurved or. laterally-projecting shoulders th at distinguish Friley
points. Length ranges from 21 to 26 nun.; width is 13 to 17 nun.
Two large specimens (Fig. 8, J) which were classified as arrow
points could, on the basis of length and width, be grouped with the dart
points. On the basis of thickness, blade form, and stem characteristics,
however, they fit the arrow point category. Both of th em have short,
slightly expanded stems, straight bases, well-defined shoulders, and
long subtriangular blades with straight to slightly convex edges. They
were chipped from thin flakes of fine-grained petrified wood and
measure, respectively, 47 to 37 mm. long by 28 and 17 nun. wide.

105

WOLFSHEAD SITE
MISCELLANEOUS FORMS

Two crudely chipped arrow points (Fig. 8, K, L ) are irregular in
shape. Both are made from petrified wood. One has a short, broad
blade and an unusually short stem with a straight, unworked base
that retains the original nodular cortex. This specimen is 20 mm. long
and 18 mm. wide. The other miscellaneous arrow point is long and
narrow, measuring 27 mm. in length and 13 mm. in width. The stem
is long and contracting and has a rounded base. The shoulders are
poorly defined. The blade is subtriangular with a rounded tip and
slightly convex edges .
ARROW POINT FRAGMENTS

Four fragments of arrow points were found that are too incomplete
for accurate description. A typical example is shown in Figure 8 (M ).
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

Knives
The knives, which were commonly manufactured of petrified wood,
could be distinguished from the other artifacts at the W olfshead Site
by ( 1) the bifacial chipping on one or more edges, ( 2 ) by their relatively thin cross sections, and (3) by their lack of stems. Three basic
knife shapes (triangular, quadrilateral, and leaf-shaped ) were recognized, and, on the basis of morphological differences within the knifeshape categories, several subgroups were set up.
TRIANGULAR FORMS

Small Subtriangular Knives ( 5 specimens, Fig. 9, A, B)
These small knives, which have straight bases and subtriangular
blades with convex edges, are short (29 to 41 mm. long) and narrow
(21 to 26 mm. wide ). One is made of a semi-translucent stone; the
others are of fine-grained petrified wood.

Medium-sized Subtriangular Knives (13 specimens, Fig. 9, C-E )
These knives have relatively straight bases and subtriangular blades
with strongly convex edges. Three of the thirteen specimens are
chipped from local river pebbles. Occasionally the original cortex of a
pebble adheres to the base or sides. In length, these forms average 42
mm., ranging from 36 to 48 mm., and in width they average 30 mm.,
varying from 36 to 34 mm.

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

D

H

G

F

I

L

K

J

o·

2• 3 4
I

E

I

5 6 7 8 -9_, 10
•
I

I

I

CM.
Fig . 9 . Knives. A, B, Small subtriangular knives . C-E, Medium-sized subtriangular knives .
F, G, Medium-sized slender knives . H, I, Medium-sized leaf-shaped knives with rounded
bases. J-L, Thick, long knives .

WOLFSHEAD SITE

107

Large Subtriangular Knife ( 1 specimen, Fig. 10, G )
This large knife is subtriangular in shape with strongly convex
lateral edges and a slightly concave base. It is made of petrified wood
and measures 59 mm. long, 41 mm. wide, and 12 mm. thick.

Quarter-oval Knives ( 3 specimens, Fig. 10, F)
This knife form has a straight base, from 28 to 41 mm. wide, and
one straight edge which is 36 to 56 mm. in length. The other edge
curves toward the tip which is blunted. In over-all shape, these knives
resemble a quarter-section from an oval.
QU ADRILATERAL FORMS

Rectangular One-edged Knives (12 specimens, Fig. 11, A-C )
The long rectangular shape, the distinctive cross section, and the
chipping on only one edge are the principal characteristics of this
knife form. Although most examples measure between 61 and 95 mm.
in length (average, 71 mm. ), one is exceptionally long (130 mm.).
They are relatively narrow, ranging from 22 to 44 mm. in width, with
an average of 33 mm. These knives have a narrow, triangular cross
section with the cutting edge, the only edge which has been worked,
representing the apex of the triangle and the back of the blade its base.
Knives of this type, designated Type I blades, have been reported by
Tunnell (1961: 130-131 ) in other Archaic sites in the area.

Rectangular Multi-edged Knives (14 specimens, Fig. 10, B-D)
These short rectangular knives are generally thin slabs of petrified
wood which have been worked on two or three edges. Seven of them
are worked on three edges, five are chipped on two (generally opposite )
edges, and the remaining two specimens have only one sharpened
edge. The latter two specimens differ from the rectangular one-edged
knives in their shortness. These artifacts measure in length from 50 to·
60 mm. with an average of 52 mm., excluding one long specimen
which measures 87 mm. The 51 mm. width of this long specimen, however, falls within the 34 to 51 mm. width range (average 42 mm.) for
the group.

Thick, Long Knives (9 specimens, Fig. 9, J-L)
This group of knives, made of petrified wood, ·is characterized by

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

long, relatively thick blades with parallel edges and blunted or rounded
tips. The straight bases are often unmodified, consisting of the original
cortex. These forms measure from 47 to 71 mm. long (average, 60
mm. ) , 27 to 42 mm. wide (average, 34 mm.), and 7 to 24 mm. thick
(average, 16 mm. ) . These are probably variations of Tunnell's Type
II blade (Tunnell, 1961: 131 ) which he describes for other Archaic
sites in the McGee Bend Reservoir area.

Rhomboidal Knives (2 specimens, Fig. 10, H )
The two specimens classified as rhomboidal knives have been hifacially worked on three or more edges . The edges of the blades are of
varying lengths with the maximum lengths being 45 and 64 mm. and
the maximum widths measuring 41 and 50 mm. , respectively. These
knives are made from thin fragments of petrified wood.
LEAF-SHAPED FORMS

Medium-sized Leaf-shaped Knives With Rounded Bases (5 specimens,
Fig. 9, H, I )
Five knives have leaf-shaped blades with rounded bases. The edges
of the blades are strongly convex. Two of them, both made of local
river pebbles, are thicker than most of the other knives from the site.
Most of these artifacts are about 41 mm. long and 24 or 25 mm. wide.

Medium-sized Slender Knives (4 specimens, Fig. 9, F, G)
These medium-sized knives are long and narrow with convex edges
and bases. The tips are rounded. They are from 52 to 56 mm. long and
26 to 31 mm. wide.

Pointed or Rounded Tip Knives ( 19 specimens, Fig. 11 , D-F )
These knives are made from petrified wood and, while they vary
considerably in size, they all have a similar shape. The slightly convex
edges of the leaf-shaped blades taper to a rounded, or sometimes
pointed, tip, while the bases vary from straight to convex. The lengths
range from 48 to 102 mm., with an average of 69 mm., and the widths
vary from 22 to 52 mm. , with an average of 38 mm. This knife form
conforms closely with the Type II blade form which Tunnell ( 1961:
131 ) has previously described.

109

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

8

c

E

F

0 I 2 3 4

G

5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.

Fig . 10. Knives . A, E, Miscellaneous leaf-shaped knives . B-0, Rectangular multi-edged
knives . F, Quarter-oval knife . G, Large subtri angular knife. H, Rhombo idal knife.

Miscellaneous Leaf-shaped Knives (3 specimens, Fig. 10, A , E )
T hree knives could not be classified in the above categories. On e is a
short (2 7 mm. ), narrow (16 mm.), leaf-shaped specimen, made from
a nonlocal stone, and it has a rounded base and convex edges. Another
knife has a subtriangular blade, w hich measures 30 mm. long by 26
mm. wide, a convex base, and convex edges. T he third specimen, which
is well made of petrified wood, is the basal section of a knife with a
slightly concave base and slightly convex lateral edges.

Large Knife Fragments (28 specimens)
All of these fragmentary knife specimens are made of p etrified wood.

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A
B

0

c

E

0

2 3 4

5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.

Fig . 11 . Quadrilateral and Leaf-shaped Knives. A-C, Rectangular one-edged knives.
D-F, Pointed or rounded tip knives .

They came from knives which had either rounded or straight bases
and pointed or slightly rounded tips. Thirteen of the basal sections are
rounded and seven are straight. The remaining eight fragments represent knife tips.

111

WOLFSHEAD SITE

Small to Medium Knife Fragments ( 17 specimens)
Seventeen fragments of small to medium-sized knives were found
at the Wolfshead Site. All are basal fragments. Three are from knives
with straight bases while the others are from knives with rounded or
convex bases.

Scrapers
At the Wolfshead Site, all of the scrapers recovered possess some
characteristics in common. At least one face is relatively flat and most
of the chipping is confined to the opposite face. Chipping is concentrated, generally on one edge, but occasionally on more than one edge.
Most of the scrapers were made of petrified wood, although a few were
made from local river pebbles.

Quadrilateral Scrapers (5 specimens, Fig. 12, F, G )
Two opposing edges of this scraper form are chipped to create the
scraping edges, the other two edges being unworked. These scrapers
are subrectangular in shape and are 28 to 35 mm. long and 32 to 39
mm. Vlride.

Snub-nose Scrapers ( 16 specimens, Fig. 12, A-E )
The most common form of scraper at the Wolfshead Site is a small,
snub-nose scraper. The principal characteristic of this form is a steeply
beveled edge at the bit end. The shape varies somewhat, but most specimens have a slight convex bit end from which convex lateral edges
taper back to a rounded, or sometimes pointed, base. Seven of the snubnose scrapers are made of petrified wood, seven were shaped from
pebbles, and two were worked from sandstone. The more complete
specimens in this group range in length from 19 to 40 mm. (average,
29 mm. ) and vary in width from 12 to 25 mm. (average, 21 mm.) .

Long Oval Scrapers ( 6 specimens, Fig. 12, H, I )
Most of these scrapers have triangular cross sections and long oval
shapes. They vary in length from 40 to 54 mm. and in width from 17
to 25 mm. Usually, the edges have been chipped all around.

Cortex Scrapers (4 specimens, Fig. 12, J, K)
The presence of unaltered nodular cortex on the dorsal face is a diagnostic feature of these scrapers. All examples are flaked from river

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pebbles and are subtriangular in shape. The chipping is confined to the
lateral edges. T he bases, which are unmodified, vary from straight to
rounded. These scrapers all measure about 26 mm. long, except one
which is 31 mm.long; width varies from 15 to 22 mm.

8

c

A

J

G

F

0
I

E

D

K

H

2 34 5 6 7 8 9 10
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

C M.
Fig . 12 . Scrape rs. A-E, Sn ub- nose sc rapers . F, G, Quadri late ra l sc rapers. H, I, l ong ova l
scrapers .

J, K, Co rte x sc rapers .

D-shaped Scrapers (2 specimens, Fig. 13, D)
Two scrapers shaped like the letter "D" were recovered from the
Wolfshead Site. One is 26 mm. wide and 34 mm. long while the other
is 32 mm. wide and 39 mm. long.

Flake Scrapers (6 specimens, Fig. 13, B, C)
These flakes of petrified wood are unmodified except that one or
more edges are lightly chipped. Probably these were sharp-edged
flakes that were used without modification for scraping purposes, the

WOLFSHEAD SITE

113

chipped edges having resulted from wear during the scraping process.
They vary considerably in shape and size.

Two-edged Scraper ( 1 specimen, Fig. 13, A )
A rectangular scraper, similar to the quadrilateral scrapers except
for length, is chipped on two opposing edges, the other two edges being
unmodified. It measures 52 mm. long by 28 mm. wide. This specimen
resembles forms found at the Poverty Point Site (Ford and Webb,
1956: Fig. 36, h-j ) . It differs, however, in that it is slightly smaller and
unifacially worked. Since the Wolfshead scraper is made of a poor
quality of petrified wood, it is not possible to detect grinding like is
present on the Poverty Point specimens.

Albany Spokeshave (2 specimens, Fig. 13, H )
Two spokeshaves, apparently reworked from projectile points, conform to Webb's Albany type, subtype II (Webb, 1946: 10-11 ) . They
are chipped from one face along the left side of the blade (basal end
oriented downward ) so as to create a strongly beveled edge. These artifacts, both made of petrified wood, are side-notched; the base of one is
slightly convex while the other is concave. One specimen measures 37
mm. long (the other is too fragmentary to determine its length ) ; they
are 20 mm. and 22 mm. in width; and both are 6 mm. in thickness.

Spokeshave ( 1 specimen, Fig. 13, G )
One piece of petrified wood which has a small concave section
worked into one edge could have served as a spokeshave.

Shaft Smoother (2 specimens, Fig. 13, F)
Two pieces of petrified wood have one strongly concave, bifacial
edge. These implements are subtriangular in shape, the tips are
rounded, the bases are straight, and the edges opposite the concave side
are strongly convex. Both specimens measure 46 mm. long and 37 mm.
wide.

Chisel (1 specimen, Fig. 13, E)
An artifact made of petrified wood has a steeply beveled, chisel-like
bit at one end. The rest of the stone is unworked. One side is flat, the
other is ridged . This specimen is 91 mm. long and 41 mm. wide.

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bifaces
Small Subcircular Bifaces ( 15 specimens, Fig. 14, D, E)
Several small, bifacially-chipped artifacts, circular to elliptical in
shape, were found. All of them are made of petrified wood. Diameters
vary from 27 to 54 mm. and thickness ranges from 7 to 14 mm.

Large Subcircular Bifaces (4 specimens, Fig. 14, F)
Several thick, subcircular bifaces, all made of petrified wood, were
recovered from the W olfshead Site. These artifacts are 16 to 19 mm. in
thickness, and diameters range from 36 to 56 mm.

Drills
Two elongated chipped stone artifacts are classified as drills. These
objects have long, narrow, ensiform blades with rounded tips and
straight or slightly convex bases (Fig. 14, A, B). The larger specimen,
which is made of petrified wood, measures 55 mm. in length and 11
mm. in width, while the shorter one-which is made of a river pebble
and has a twist to the blade-is 32 mm. long and 12 mm. wide.

Choppers
Four small choppers or cores (Fig. 14, C) were fashioned from pebbles. One end of the pebble is bifacially worked, the opposite end being
unworked and retaining the unmodified cortex. The largest specimen
is 58 mm. long, and the shortest is 42 mm. long. These forms, judging
from the published descriptions, are the same as Tunnell's blade Type
V (Tunnell, 1961: 133).

Hand Ax
A large ovoid-shaped hand ax, (Fig. 16, A) made of petrified wood
has been worked bifacially on three edges. The remaining edge is unifacially worked and part of the unworked face is still covered by the
original nodular cortex. The edge opposite the unifacially worked edge
is not sharp and appears to have been battered. This specimen is 103
mm. long, 84 mm. wide, and 32 mm. thick.

Large Chipped Stone Objects
These items, frequently large flakes of petrified wood, are generally

11 5

WOLFSHEAD SITE

B

A

D

F

0
I

2
I

i1

G

.

H

5 6 7 8 9 10
CM.
I

e

e

e

I

Fig. 13. Scrapers. A, Two-edged scraper. B, C, Flake scrapers. D, D-shaped scraper. E,
Chisel. F, Shaftsmoother. G, Spokeshave. H, Albany spokeshave.

chipped bifacially on one or more edges. The 12 specimens have irregular shapes.

Small Chipped Stone Objects
The varied size and shape of these small chipped stone objects prevent a detailed description of the group. They are similar, except in
size, to the large chipped stone objects described above, and all are
made of flakes of fossilized wood. Twelve examples were found.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
PECKED OR GROUND STONE OBJECTS

SHAFT POLISHER

This sandstone specimen (Fig. 15, A ) , which is 72 mm. long, 50 mm.
wide, and 25 mm. thick, has a single long groove which suggests its
use as a shaft polisher.
BOATSTONE

A boatstone fragment (Fig. 15, B, C) was apparently associated with
the side-notched dart points at the Wolfshead Site. The end as well as
the back of this specimen is ground flat (Fig. 15, C) and the interior
(Fig. 15, B ) is hollowed out. The entire surface of the specimen is well
smoothed.
GRINDING SLAB

A fragment of a small sandstone grinding slab has a depression on
one surface. The edges of the depression are stained with red ochre,
suggesting that this was used ·f or grinding pigment.
SMOOTHING SLAB

An exfoliated section of a sandstone boulder appears to have been
utilized as a smoothing or grinding implement. It is thin and curved;
one side is smooth, the other is rough. Some of the edges of this specimen are rounded through use, but others are angular and unworn.
HANDSTONE

An oval-shaped handstone used in grinding is smoothed on one face
and is wedge-shaped in cross section. This specimen is 114 mm. long
and 77 mm. wide; it is 48 mm. thick at one edge and 31 mm. thick at
the other. Another handstone (Fig. 16, B) is circular in shape and has
a slight pit in one surface. This specimen is 94 mm. in diameter and
35 mm. thick.
PITTED STONES

Three pitted-stones-one made of hematite, two of sandstonewere found. The hematite specimen has a very slight pit on one side.
One of the sandstone specimens is the pitted handstone described above;
the other is a sandstone slab, 167 mm. long, 86 mm. wide and 50 mm.

117

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

c

B

•

D

F

E

0
I

2 3 4 5• 6 7 8 9 10
I

t

I

I

CM.
Fig. 14. Drills, Choppers, and Bifaces. A, 8, Drills . C, Chopper. D, E, Small bifaces . F,
Large subcircular biface .

thick, which has one deep pit and one shallow pit on one side plus a
shallow pit on the opposite side.
HAMMERSTONE

An elongated chunk of petrified wood has been battered and pecked
at one end, indicating use as a hammer.

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

0
I

2 3 4
I

I

I

56 7 8 9 10I
I

t

I

I

I

CM.
Fig. 15. Shaft Polisher and Boatstone Fragment. A, Shaft polisher. 8-C, Boatstone fragment.
PoTTERY

Surface materials found at the Wolfshead Site prior to excavation
suggested that the site was a pre-pottery, pre-arrow point site; however, excavations soon revealed that this was not the case. Instead, pottery comprised the most numerous class of artifacts ( 539 sherds) and,
in addition, arrow points were present, although not abundant (20
specimens) .
The pottery was divided, on the basis of temper, into two relatively
large groups and one small group. The largest group, comprising 439
sherds, is sand-tempered; the next largest group, consisting of 91
sherds, is tempered with both clay-and-sand. Sherds of the third group
are tempered with clay-bone, sand, and/or other substances.

Sand-Tempered Ware
PASTE AND SURFACE FINISH

Sand, the most frequently used tempering agent at the Wolfshead
Site, is so abundant in some of these sherds that they feel gritty and

\'VOLFSHEAD SITE

119

are easily abraded when rubbed between the fingers. Even when
carefully handled, part of the surface sometimes sloughs off. Among
the sand-tempered sherds, 270 have a dark gray to black paste, 129
have a light yellow-brown or reddish-brown color, and 40 are intermediate between those two color groups. Distribution studies indicate
that differences in paste color are not of chronological significance.
METHOD OF MANUFACTURE

Fractures along coil lines indicate that this pottery was made by the
coiling technique.
VESSE L FORM

Bases
Six small base sherds of the sand-tempered ware reveal that the bases
were convex and thicker than the vessel wall. At other sites in the
McGee Bend area, both convex and conoidal bases have been found
for this ware, as well as an occasional flat base. Conoidal and flat bases,
however, are absent in the sample from the Wolfshead Site.

Rims and lips
The 26 sand-tempered rim sherds suggest three basic vessel forms.
One form, indicated by eight sherds, has an orifice slightly smaller
than the maximum diameter of the vessel and a rim that slants inward
slightly (Fig. 17, B). Another form, indicated by four sherds, has a
vertical or slightly flared rim, suggesting that the diameter of the vessel was greatest at the orifice (Fig. 17, A ). The third vessel form, represented by three sherds, has a recurved shape with a very short rim
and a rounded shoulder (Fig. 17, C). Eleven of the rim sherds are so
small they could not be grouped with any of the above forms.
Lips are generally rounded to sharp, although one sherd has a flattened lip. Two of the sherds with rounded lips have, parallel to the lip,
a slight exterior ridge which was created by smoothing of the lip area.
DECORATION

Two rim sherds and three small body sherds are decorated. On all
of them the designs are incomplete and only the techniques of decoration could be determined. The smaller rim sherd has incised lines immediately below and parallel to the rounded lip. The other rim sherd

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

0

B

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
C M.

Fig . 16 . Hand Ax a nd Pitted Handstone. A, Ha nd a x. B, Pitted handston e.

(Fig. 18, A) has an incised line partially filled with punctations. Concentrated within the upper and lower portions of the incised element,
these punctations were made with a dentate implement or a small,
sharply pointed stick. One of the body sherds may be from the same,
or a similar, vessel since it is decorated in the same manner as the rim
sherds. The design and decoration technique on these sherds suggest
a relationship with the Marksville Stamped type of the lower Mississippi valley (Ford and Willey, 1940: 65- 74), but the temper, the rim
form, and the surface finish are unlike that type.
Another incised body sherd has a design which consists of a series of
closely spaced, shallowly incised, right oblique lines (slanting from
lower left to upper right) across which are deeply incised, more widely
spaced, left oblique lines. This creates a crossed diagonal, grid-like
pattern.
The other decorated body sherd has three small hollow reed punctations arranged in a line, but the complete design cannot be reconstructed from the small sherd.

121

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

8

c

Fig . 17 . Hypothe tical reconstruction of sand-tempered vessel shapes at the Wolfshe a d
Site.
MISCELLANEOUS

Crack-lacing holes are present on two sherds. One sharply curved
sherd which is tapered in cross section may be the bottom of a pipe
bowl, or possibly it is part of a conoidal vessel base.
DISCUSSION

Sand-tempered pottery is apparently the earliest ware in the McGee
Bend Reservoir (Tunnell, 1961; see also Table 1 and 2 herein ) . The
present data suggest that it precedes both contracting stem dart points
and arrow points in this part of Texas. At the Runnels 1, Runnels 2,
and Sawmill sites, a larger percentage of sand-tempered sherds than
clay-tempered sherds was found in the lower levels, while contracting
stem dart points (Gary type) were concentrated in the upper levels
(Tunnell, 1961 ) .
At the Davis Mound, not far west of the Wolfshead Site, sand-tempered pottery was found predominantly in Phase 1 of themound (Newell and Krieger, 1949 : 131 ). The sand-tempered pottery at the Davis
Site is similar in paste and vessel form to the sherds from the Wolfshead Site (Edward B. Jelks, personal communication). The percentage of decorated to undecorated sherds, however, is much higher at the
Davis Site where 33.3 per cent of the sherds are decorated and 66.7
per cent are plain. A vessel count at the Davis Site, however, indicates
that only 16.6 per cent of the individual sand-tempered vessels were
decorated. At the Wolfshead Site, on the other hand, only 1 per cent
of the sand-tempered sherds are decorated. A vessel count was not attempted at W olfshead.
On the Texas coast, the Goose Creek Plain pottery type (Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks, 1954: 378-379) bears som e similarity to the sand-

1ZZ

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tempered ware from the Wolfshead Site. Goose Creek Plain has sand
and also sand-and-clay used as tempering agents; in addition, some
vessel shapes are similar to those of the sand-tempered ware at McGee
Bend.
Other sand-tempered types occur early in Louisiana and in the lower
Mississippi valley, but most of these forms bear little resemblance to
the sand-tempered pottery from Wolfshead.

Sand-and-Clay Tempered Wares
PASTE AND SURFACE FINISH

Of the 539 sherds recovered from the Wolfshead Site, 91 or 17 per
cent are tempered with both sand and clay. Of these, 77 are undecorated body sherds, nine are plain rim sherds, two are base sherds, and
three sherds, one of which is a rim, are decorated. While some of these
sherds have large amounts of sand and others have large amounts of
clay, usually both tempering agents occur in more or less equal proportions.
VESSEL FORM

Bases
Bases were either flat discs or were rounded convexly. When
rounded, the vessel wall merged with the base so that the area of juncture was not so clearly demarcated as when the base was flat .

Rims and Lips
The predominantly plain rims are not usually differentiated from
the body of the vessel. They may be straight, incurving, or slightly
outflaring. The lips are generally rounded or slightly flattened, but
some taper to a sharp lip while others are fully flattened .
In general, vessel shapes as indicated by the sherds featured straight
to slightly flaring walls with either a slightly convex or disc-shaped
base.
DECORATION

A decorated rim sherd has a set of three parallel, incised lines which
originate a short distance below the lip and extend down at a slight
left oblique angle. The blank area to the side of the three lines suggests
that they are part of a repetitive design which consisted of alternate

123

WOLFSHEAD SITE

A

0

I

2 34 5 6
I

I

I

7 8 9 10

CM.
Fig. 1 8 . Decorated Rim Sherd . A, Decorated rim sherd, sand-tempered.

sets of oblique lines spaced around the rim of the vessel. Two other
decorated sherds have only fragments of lines (one engraved, the other
incised ) which are too incomplete for meaningful description.

Other Tempering Agents
Two small sherds have a combination of bone, clay, and sand-temper. Two other sherds are tempered with a mixture of hematite, sand,
clay, and a type of material (vegetable fiber?) which burned out during the firing, leaving small holes and channels in the paste. Five
sherd s are tempered with materials which have not been fully determined. All contain a small amount of sand as well as minute rounded
particles of an unidentified dark substance. One, in addition, contains
small particles of a yellow material, while another contains larger
fragments of an unknown dark substance.
DIVISIONS OF THE SITE

A horizontal study of the temper groups indicated that the sherds
were not randomly distributed throughout the site. For example, al-

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

though clay-and-sand tempered sherds were found in all sections of
the site, they show a distinct concentration in the southern section.
There they comprise 32 per cent of all the sherds, whereas in the northern area they account for only 11 per cent (Fig. 3). This distribution
pattern, by itself, might appear insignificant, but there are similar
statistical differences in distribution for other classes of artifacts. Only
three arrow points and arrow point fragments , for example, were
recovered in the northern section of the site, while in the southern section, 11 arrow points and arrow point fragments were found . On the
basis of these differences, the site was separated into a southern and
northern section for analysis.
SouTHERN SEcTION

In the southern section, approximately 25 excavation units-consisting of 2.5 X 5, 2.5 X 10, and 5 X 5 ft. units-were removed to a
depth varying from 1.0 to 3.0 ft. In this section the relatively thick
deposit of cultural materials provided a fairly good opportunity for
demonstrable vertical stratigraphy, and some stratigraphic differences
were, in fact, detected. However, the sample is small and the data are
meager, not only for this area, but for the site as a whole, and therefore the opinions offered are necessarily conjectural and tentative
rather than conclusive.
Within the southern section four soil zones were observed. The
upper zone was the humus-stained plow zone which varied in thickness from 0 to 0.5 ft. and measured about 0.4 ft. thick. Below this zone
was a tan sandy zone ranging from 0. 4 to 1.1 ft. in thickness. This
sandy zone was superimposed on a red-orange clay which lay 1.0 to
2.0 ft. below the ground surface. The excavations generally penetrated
only the upper 0.1 ft. of this clay zone, although in one excavation
unit, 1.5 ft. of this zone was removed. Underlying the red-orange soil
at approximately four to five ft. below the surface was a yellowish
clay. This latter zone and the lower portion of the red-orange clay were
sterile of cultural debris.

Discussion of the Artifacts
The artifacts from the southern section of the site include two principal classes-pottery and projectile points-together with a number
of miscellaneous stone artifacts.
POTTERY

Both the sand-tempered and the sand-and-clay tempered sherds were

125

WOLFSHEAD SITE

concentrated in the second and third levels of the site (Table I). There
are no significant vertical differences between the two temper groups
since they maintain approximately the same frequency ratio in each
level (Fig. 19, A, B).
TABLE 1
Vertical distribution of sherds in the southern section

Sand-temper
body
bases
rims
decorated
Cla y-sand
body
bases
rims
Bone-and-clay
Totals

L evell
0- 0.5

Level2
0.5-1.0

L evel 3
1.0- 1.5

13

31

29

Level4
1.5-2.0

1

1
1

2

4

16

12

3

3

54

47

22

3

PROJECTILE POINTS

While the sample was small, the vertical distribution of projectile
points provided the best suggestion of a culture sequence at the Wolfshead Site (Fig. 20 ) . The earliest horizon-represented primarily in
levels four and five (Table 2 )-has 11 projectile points of which eight
(disregarding fragments ) are either of the San Patrice type or are
lanceolate dart points with concave bases.
Following the earliest horizon, and perhaps overlapping it to some
extent, is the side-notched and expanding stem period. Evidence suggestive of this period was found in level three (Table 2 ) where the
majority of the dart points have side notches or expanding stems.
After the side-notched and expanding stem dart point occupation,
there is a sudden increase of contracting stem dart points (primarily
the Gary type ) and expanding stem arrow points (primarily the Friley
type ) in the upper two levels (Fig. 20 ) .
The position of the pottery with respect to the projectile point sequence poses a problem. Judging from its vertical distribution, pottery
first appeared in quantity in level three, and remained popular during
the Gary point and expanded stem arrow point era (Tables 1, 2 ) . This

126

TEXAS ARCH EOLOGICAL SOCIET Y

8

A

Levels
I

2

3

•

4

16

"4
19

Levels
I

35

42

2

31

37

3

2

2

4

No.

Sand-tempered s herds

-

2

3
4
5

-

13

"·

Levels
I

•

2

6

2

-•

15

47

3

10

3 1

4

--

3
Gary

3
4

•

Arrow points

15

37

2

sherds

No.
2

'Yo
25

4

50
12.5
12.5

dart po i nts

F
No.

Levels

E

2

46

15

D

Na.
4

--

19

Cloy-ond-sond tempered

Non -controctin; stem dart pa i nts

Levels

"·

I

c

Levels
I

No.
6

•

Na.

%
4 36 .5

2

4 36.5

3

2 18

4

9

5

-•
Other

6

%
6

II

12

27

28

47

50

4

4

artifacts

Fig. 19. Artifact distribution graphs for the southern section .

tends to substan tiate th e eviden ce fro m oth er sites at McGee Bend
where sand-tempered pottery occurs below the clay an d/ or bone
tempered pottery with noncontracting stem dar t points (T unnell,

127

WOLFSHEAD SITE

TABLE 2
Vertical distribution of projectile points in the southern section

0-0 .5
Levell

0.5-1.0
Level2

1.0-1.5
Level3

1.5-2.0
Level4

3

4

2.0-2.5
Level5

Dart points

San Patrice
st. iohns
hope
Concave-base
Corner-notched
straight base
crude
oblique
slightly expanded
stems with broad
base
miscellaneous
expanded
Side-notched
Gary
slight shoulders
prominent shoulders
wide
Short stem, rounded
base
Miscellaneous
parallel-sided
Fragments
Arrow points
Friley
recurved shoulders
laterally-projecting
shoulders
Miscellaneous
expanding stems
Large arrow points
Miscellaneous
Fragments
Totals

2

2
2

3

1

2

2
1
2

4

2

7

6

25

18

2

2
1

14

12

1961 ) . In these other sites, Gary type dart points are concentrated in
the upper levels with the clay and/ or bone tempered pottery (Tunnell, 1961 ). These data suggest, like the Wolfshead data, that the sandtempered pottery preceded the Gary dart points in the area.

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gary dart points, however, occur at the Wolfshead Site without the
clay and/ or bone tempered pottery. These few points could be part of
the debris from later temporary occupations of the site by hunting
parties from sedentary agricultural villages where the clay and/ or
bone tempered pottery was made. Through time this debris may have
become mixed with the materials from the earlier occupations. Or another interpretation, the Gary dart points could have been introduced
into the area before the manufacture of sand-tempered pottery was
entirely abandoned and before the clay and/ or bone tempered pottery
was in use. Our present data do not favor one interpretation more than
the other.
MISCELLANEOUS STONE ARTIFACTS

Since the southern section of the site can be divided on the basis
of the projectile points into three general time periods, the vertical
distribution of the other stone artifacts found there was examined to
determine if any tool types seem to correlate with specific projectile
point periods. Over 50 per cent of all the stone artifacts other than the
projectile points were found in levels four and five, which suggests that
the site was most intensively occupied during the earliest period
(Table 3, Fig. 19 ) . Some tool forms occurred exclusively in these lower
levels, while others tended to be concentrated there. For example: the
snub-nose scrapers and the cortex scrapers were concentrated in level
four. In addition the D-shaped scrapers, two-edged scraper, flake scrapers, chisel, and all the bifaces are found only in the two lowest levels.
The knife forms, for the most part, are about equally divided between levels three and four, no knife form being exclusively associated
with the early occupation.
Exclusive of projectile points, 28 per cent of the stone artifacts
were found in the third level-the side-notched, expanding stem dart
point zone. A few artifact forms are found only in, or are concentrated
in, this level. These include the rectangular, multi-edged knife, the
shaft smoother, the chopper, the hand ax, and the Albany spokeshave.
It is not surprising that the Albany spokeshave occurs occurs in this
horizon, since it too has a side-notched stem like the dart points of this
period.
In levels one and two (characterized by Gary dart points and arrow
points ) only 18 per cent of the miscellaneous stone artifacts were located, the only exclusive forms being the rectangular, one-edged knife
and the quadrilateral scraper.

129

WOLFSHEAD SITE

Leve ls
I

2

3

4

5

0

25

50

75

100%

Fig . 20. Compa rat ive re lationsh ip of p ro ject ile po ints in the southern se ctio n .

NoRTHERN SEcTION

Evidence from the thin deposits in the northern section of the site
supports the sequence found in the southern section. In the northern
section, about 40 units were excavated to a depth of 0.5 to 1.5 ft. , with
a majority of them being excavated to the maximum depth . The depths
were delimited by the red-orange clay, the upper 0.1 ft . of which was
removed in the excavations. Above the red-orange clay is the tan sandy
zone and above this is the plow zone. This soil profile is the same as
that in the southern section except that the excavations were not carried deep enough to encounter the basal yellow clay.

Discussion of the Artifacts
The two principal artifact classes in the northern section are, again,
pottery and projectile points. As previously mentioned, the pottery
and projectile points in this section differ slightly from those in the

....•

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 3
Vertical distribution of miscellaneous stone artifacts in the southern section

Levell
Knives
Triangular
su btriangular,
small
su btriangular,
medium
quarter-oval
Quadrilateral forms
r ectangular,
one-edged
rectangular,
multi-edged
thick, long
Leaf-shaped form s
pointed or rounded
tips
slender
Fragments
large
small
Scrapers
quadrilateral
snub-nose
Albany spokeshave
long oval
cortex
D-shaped
two-edged
flake scrapers
shaft smoother
chisel
Bifaces
small
large
Choppers
Hand ax
Miscellaneous chipped
large
small
Grinding slab
Pitted stones
Hammerstone
Totals

Level2

Level3

L evel4

2

1
1

5

2

3

L evel5

2
2

3

7
1

6
3

6
1

3

2

4
2
2

3
3

2
2
6

11

27

47

4

131

WOLFSHEAD SITE

2

··:·.·.·:.·.·.·:

50

75

100 •;.

Fig . 21 . Comparat ive relat ionsh ip of pro ject ile po in ts in the no rthern section .

southern section in that clay -and-sand tempered sherds and arrow
points are not as numerous.
POTTERY

The sherds in the northern section of the site were largely concentrated in the second level ( 187 sherds) but a large number (88) occurred in the first level, and there were a few (26) in the third level
(Table 4 ) . Again there are no appreciable vertical differences between
the temper groups (Fig. 22 ) .
TABLE 4
Vertical distribution of sherds in the northern section
T emper g r oup

Sand
body
bases
nms
decorated
Clay-and-sand
body
nm
base
decorated
Bone-and-clay
Sand, clay, hematite
Undetermined
Totals

Levelf

L evel2

L evel 3

67

148

23

3
6

12

8
4
18
1

2

1
2
3

88

187

26

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PROJECTILE POINTS

The shallow deposits in the northern section yielded materials
which suggest the same cultural sequence found in the southern section. For example, the concave base, lanceolate points as well as a
Scottsbluff-like point occurred only in the third or deepest level of the
area. In this level and extending up into the second one were San
Patrice points and corner-notched dart points (Table 5 ) . Gary and
side-notched dart points were found also in th e second level, but they
were found in the first level too. The data for the northern section,

A

2

8

-

Levels

-

3

Non-contracting

No.

%

4

14

13

47

2

II

39

3

stem dart

Levels

Gory

points

c

Levels

2

-

Sand-tempered

dart

"·

Levels

76

29

I

160

62

2

23

9

~

No.

2

44

4

44
II

points

-

21

60

2

6

sherds

F
No.
I

"·

Levels

33

2

67

2
3

Arrow points

o;.

12 34

Cloy-ond-Sond tempered

sherds

-

No.

•

E
Levels

"to

4

D

•

3

-

No.

-

Other

No.

%

13

19

30 45
24

artifacts

Fig . 22 . Arti fact distribution graphs for the northern secti on .

36

133

WOLFSHEAD SITE

when compared with the southern section, suggest that the sequence
is mixed and compressed, especially in the middle or second level.
Only two complete arrow points and one arrow point fragment were
found in the northern section, all in the upper levels.
MISCELLANEOUS STONE ARTIFACTS

Occasionally a particular form of artifact was concentrated in the
upper or the lower portion of the area, and some forms were found
exclusively in one level. The snub-nose scraper and some knives (subtriangular medium, rectangular multi-edged, and rhomboid forms)
were concentrated in the lower levels (Table 6). Also associated with
the lower levels were the bifaces, the drills, and the long oval scraper.
TABLE 5
Vertical distribution of projectile points in the nor thern section

L evell
Dart points
San Patrice
st. johns
hope
goodwin
Concave-base
Scottsbluff-like
Corner-notched
straight base
convex base
slightly expanded stem
with broad base
Side-notched
Gary
slight shoulders
crude
wide
narrow
prominent shoulders
Short stem, rounded base
Miscellaneous parallel-sided
Fragments

Level 2

Level3

3
3

2.
1

2

1
2.

4

6

23

18

2

1

Arrow points
Friley, laterally-projecting shoulders
Miscellaneous expanding stem
Fragment
Totals

9

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 6
Vertical distribution of miscellaneous artifacts in the northern section

Levell
Knives
Triangular
subtriangular, medium
subtriangular, large
Quadrilateral
rectangular, one-edged
rectangular, multi -edged
thick, long
rhomboidal
Leaf-shaped
rounded base, medium
slender
pointed or rounded tips
miscellaneous
Fragments
large
small
Scrapers
quadrilateral
snub-nose
Albany spokeshave
long oval
Bifaces, small
Drills
Chopper
Miscellaneous chipped
large
small
Boatstone
Recent debris
Totals

Level2

Level3

3

3

2

2
2

1

1
3

5

2

3

1
2

2
1
2

2

2
1
1
3
2

2

1
2

13

30

24

Scrapers from the middle level are the quadrilateral form and the
Albany spokeshave. Knives from this level include the le1f-shaped
(slender; rounded base, medium; knives with pointed or rounded tips),
the quadrilateral (rectangular, one-edged) and the triangular (subtriangular, large ) . Miscellaneous artifacts from the middle level are
a chopper and the boatstone fragment.
OTHER EXCAVATIONS

Extraneous excavations in both the northern and southern portions

135

WOLFSHEAD SITE

of the site produced a few artifacts and other material. In the northern
area more than 10 extraneous units were excavated, while in the southern area more than 20 extraneous units were excavated. The depth of
these excavations varied from 0.5 to 2.0 ft. below the surface and they
generally removed the top 0.1 ft . of red-orange clay. A frequency
study of the horizontal distribution of the artifacts recovered indicated
that, on the basis of the relative scarcity of materials, these areas could
be separated from the main areas of concentration. In many cases,
these areas were peripheral, and some units in which the plow zone
was situated direclly on top of the red-orange clay were obviously areas
of mixture. For example, in the upper levels of the peripheral areas
there are more San Patrice dart points than Friley arrow points (Table
7).
TABLE 7
Projectile points from other excavations in the southern section

Dart points
San Patrice
st. iohns
. hope
Comer-notched
convex base
crude
Side-notched
Gary
slight shoulders
r ounded base
Pogo?
Fragments
Arrow points
Friley, recurved shoulders
Fragments
Totals

Levelt

Level2

Level3

3

3

3

1
6

4

16

9

z
1
11

The vertical distribution of the projectile points, sherds, and miscellaneous stone artifacts from extraneous excavations in the southern
portion of the site are listed in Tables 7 and 8. Even in these areas,
there are some suggestions of the expanding stem and side-notched dart
points being succeeded by the contracting stem dart points and arrow
points (Table 7).

136

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The vertical distribution of the artifacts from the miscellaneous excavations in the northern section of the site is tabulated in Table 9.
The only item of interest is a solitary snub-nose scraper that was found
in the deepest level (Table 9).
TABLE 8
Artifacts from other excava tions in the southern section

Levell
P ottery
Sand-tempered
body sherds
19
rim sh erds
Clay-and-sand
body sherds
3
Unknown
Knives
Triangular
subtri angular, small
subtriangular, medium
Quadrilateral
r ectangular,
one-edged
2
rectangular,
multi-edged
t hick, long
Leaf-shaped
rounded base, medium
slender
pointed or rounded tips
miscellaneous
Fragments
large
2
small
Scrapers
quardilateral
fl ake
1
Bifaces, small
3
Chopper
Miscellan eous chipped
la rge
2
small
Smoothing slab
Totals

39

Level 2

L evel 3

L evel 4

21
3

2

2

2
40

7

2

137

WOLFSHEAD SITE

TABLE 9
Artifacts from other excavation s in th e north ern section

Levell
Pottery
Sand-tempered
body
base
decorated

7
1

Level 2

L evel 3

17

5

L evel4

run

Clay-and-sand temper
body
decorated
Dart points
Corner-notched
convex base
Fragments
Knives
L eaf-shaped
pointed or
rounded tip s
mi scellan eous
Scrapers
qu gdrilateral
snub-nose
Biface, sm all
Miscellaneou s chipped
small
Totals

2

2

3

1

2

2
9

25

16

SUGGESTIONS AND CONJECTURES
C uLT U RE S EQUENCE

Previous work on the Arch aic Stage in the McGee Bend area has
produced a partial scheme (Tunnell, 1961 ) by which we can classify
some of the data from the W olfshead Site. Tunnell reports that the
Runnells 1, Runnells 2, and Sawmill sites had Archaic components
characterized by a dart point form similar to the Kent type. These
Kent-like points, however, differ from the Kent type as defined by
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks (1954: 432- 433) in that a large percentage
of them have expanding stems (Tunnell, 1961: 127 ). Tunnell suggests that at the sites he investigated at least three periods are represented. The first period, he states, is:

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

... characterized by rath er crude dart points with parallel side to e xpanding stems,
shaped by percussion, and made from local stone (dart point Type I ). A distinctive
type of blade was commonly manufactured from a thin slab of silicifi ed wood , and
has fine pressure r etouching along one edge (blade Type I ) . A few other scraping
and cutting artifacts are associated with this occupation in small numbet·s (Tunnell,
1961: 155).

He describes the next period as follows :
To the basic late Archaic culture at M cGee Bend a sand-tempered plain pottery
was added. This was accompanied by a new type of blade, with an unworked base
( blade T y p e II ), pitted stones, and other miscellaneous lithic artifacts (Tunnell,
1961 : 155).

The third period is mentioned as h e continues:
These elem ents increased in popularity fo r a while, but declined in numbers when,
in more recent times, clay-tempered pottery, bone-tempered pottery, and arrow
points appeared (Tunnell, 1961: 155 ) .

Tunnell's first two time divisions can, with modifications, apply to
the Wolfshead Site data. An earlier period, however, can be tentatively
defined on the basis of the meager information from the site. San
Patrice and/ or concave base, lanceolate dart points in the Paleo-Indian
tradition represent this earlier period. Probably associated with these
points are small snub-nose scrapers, small cortex scrapers, D -shaped
scrapers, multi-edged scrapers, large and small bifaces, and grinding
slabs (Table 2).
Succeeding the San Patrice and concave base, lanceolate dart point
period is Tunnell's Archaic assemblage which he suggests can be divided into early and late phases. In the earlier phase are parallel-sided
to expanding stem dart points. At the Wolfshead Site, this early phase
is represented by forms with expanding stems (corner-notched) or
side-notches. The data from the Wolfshead Site plus those from Tunnell's sites suggest that implements other than dart points associated
with this earlier period of the local Archaic include Albany spokeshaves, shaft smoothers, choppers (Tunnell's blade T y pe V, 1961 :
132-133 ), hand axes, drills (Tunnell's drill Type I , 1961: 129 ), polish ed bannerstones, polished boatstones, and the rectangular multiedged knife (Tunnell's blade Type II, 1961 : 131). Tunnell includes
his blade Type I in this earlier period also ( 1961: 155) , but the data
from the Wolfshead Site, plus a re-examination of the distribution of
blade Type I at the Sawmill Site, suggest that, while this blade or knife
form is found in both phases, it occurs predominantly in the later
Archaic period.

WOLFSHEAD SITE

139

During the later phase of the McGee Bend Archaic sand-tempered
pottery was introduced into the area without strongly modifying the
basic stone complex. At this time, the rectangular one-edged knife
(Tunnell's blade Type I, 1961 : 130) was in use. There may have been
other differences between the earlier and later Archaic phases of this
area but they are not well defined at the present. Hints of some of these
differences appear in the projectile point sequence at the Sawmill
Site where there seems to be a trend from lightly barbed points with
strongly expanding stems to points with rectangular, parallel-sided
stems and angular, unbar bed shoulders.
Following the later Archaic phase was a period characterized by
small contracting stem dart points (Gary type ) and expanding stem
arrow points (some of the Friley type ) . Present evidence suggests that
Gary dart points were popular in this area somewhat later than-although they may be partially contemporaneous with-sand-tempered
pottery (Tables 1, 2 ; Tunnell, 1961; Newell and Krieger, 1949: Tables
12, 18), and that they survived into the succeeding clay-tempered and
bone-tempered pottery period.
PROJECTILE POI N T SEQUENCE IN THE McGEE BEND AREA

By combining the known data from this section of eastern Texas, a
general sequence of projectile point forms can be suggested. San Patrice and/ or lanceolate-concave base points preceded side-notched and
expanding stem (corner-notched ) dart points. Also during this sidenotched, expanding stem period there was a gradual trend from points
with widely expanding stems to points with parallel-sided stems (Tunnell, 1961 ).
Some of the moderately to slightly expanding stem forms of this
period (those which have been identified as Kent points) appear to be
crudely made varieties of the Yarbrough type which is more common
in northeastern Texas than in the McGee Bend area . This resemblance,
previously noted by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 432 ) , indicates
that the two types might be related. The additional fact that Kent
points occur earlier than Gary points in the McGee Bend area parallels
the situation in northeastern Texas where Yarbrough also precedes
Gary (Johnson, 1962) .
During the later part of the period characterized by expanding stem
forms, contracting stem dart points (Gary type) were introduced into
the McGee Bend area. Although the present data suggest that the Gary
point and the expanding stem arrow point entered the area simultane-

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ously, information from sites outside the area suggests that Gary points
were introduced somewhat earlier than arrow points (Davis and Davis,
1960; Duffield, 1961 ; Johnson , 1962). During the arrow point period,
stem forms seem to have evolved from expanding, to parallel-sided, to
contracting.
This projectile point sequence, extending from the transitional
Paleo-Archaic to the Neo-American period, is sketchy due to the limited amount of data available for the area. Subsequent research in and
near the area will undoubtedly modify and add more details to the sequence, or it may indicate an alternative interpretation.
REFERENCES CITED
Arnold, Gus E.
m.s. Monthly Reports, October, 1939-July , 1940. Manuscript on fil e in Department of Anthropology, The Univer sity of Texas.
Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identificati on of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1.
1960. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projec tile Points.
Oklahoma Anthrological Society, Special Bulletin No. Z.
Da vis, William A., ,md E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake M artin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir
Area, Northeastern T exas. Archaeology Series, N o. 3, Depar tment of
Anthropology, The University of T exas.
Duffield, Lathe! F.
1961. The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoi r, Rains County, T exas. Bulletin
of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, pp. 51- 116.
Ford, J ames A ., and Clarence H. W ebb
1956. P overty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana . Anthropo logical Papers
of the American Museum of Natu ra l History, Vol. 46, Par t 1.
Ford, James A ., and Gordon R. Willey
1940. Crooks Site: A Marksville Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish,
Louisiana. Anthropological Study, Department of Conservation, Louisiana
Geological Survey, No. 3.
J elks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspec t Site in Hill County,
T exas. A rchaeology Series, No. 5, D epa rtment of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Johnson , LeRoy, Jr.
1961. The Manton Miller· Site : A Late Archaic- Early Ceramic Site in Delta
County, T exas. T ypewritten Report to the National Park Service.
196Z. The Fred Yarbrough and Manton Miller Sites, with a Preliminary
D efinition of the La Harpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 32, pp. 141 -284.

WOLFSHEAD SITE

141

Martin, Irving L.
1946. Amite Series . Soils Series Description of T exas, United States D epartment
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, mimeographed report.
Newell, H . P erry, and Alex D . Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, T exas. American Antiquity,
Vol. 14, No.4, P art 2, April.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932. The Geology of T exas, Vol. 1, Stratigraphy. The U niversity of T exas
Bulletin 3232.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1948. Archeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir: A Preliminary Report.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19,
pp. 57-73.
Suhm, D ee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. J elks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the T exas
Archeological Society , Vol. 25.
Tunnell, Curtis D .
1961. Eviden ce of a Late Archaic Hori zon at Three Sites in the McGee Bend
Reservoir, San Augustine County, T exas. Bulletin of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, pp. 123-158.
Webb, Clarence H.
1946. Two Unusual T y pes of Chipped Stone Artifa cts from Northwest Louisiana .
Bulletin of the T exas Arch eological a nd Paleontological Society, Vol. 17,
pp. 9-17.
Wheat, J oe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast T exas.
(River Basin Surveys P apers, No. 4.) Burea u of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 154, No.4, pp. 143-252.
Wormington, H. M.
1957. An cient M an in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History
Popular Series, No. 4.
The University of T exas
Austin, T exas

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus
Component in De Soto Parish, Louisiana
CLARENCE H. WEBB
ABSTRACT
This is a belated description of the Smithport L anding Site, one of several known
Alto Focus components in northwestern Louisiana. This large village site, on the
western margin of the Red River flo od plain, covers portions of several low hills
which front on a former lake.
Nineteen pottery vessels, all but two id entifiabl e as Alto Focus types, were found
with fourteen burials. Included are Hickory Fine Engraved, Davis Incised, Kiam
Incised, Wilkinson Punctated, and Smithport Plain (virtually identical with Bowles
Creek Plain ) types.
Surface materials comprise 1553 sherds, 61 dart and 55 arrow points, and a modest
number of chipped and polished stone tools or ornaments. The stone tool assemblage
seems to be basically late Archaic with the addition of small arrow points.
Although the sh.erds as w ell as whole vessels are predominantly derived from
Alto Focus ceramics, a small percentage of Coles Creek, a somewhat larger representation of Bossier Focus, and a few late Caddoan pottery types are identified.
Similarities and differences between the ceramics of this site, the Davis (Alto) Site
in eastern T exas, and the central Louisiana sequence of pottery, are pointed out.
Possible relationships between Coles Creek, Alto, Bossier, and Plaquemine ceramics
are developed. It is postulated that Caddoan (Alto) and Coles Creek peoples or
influences entered northwestern Louisiana almost simultaneously, and that Bossier
Focus developed out of the amalgamation of these two previous cultures. A few
very late Caddoan oherds indicate a late occupation at Smithport Landing, possibly
during historic times.

INTRODUCTION

The Smith port Landing Site was initially explored by Monroe Dodd,
Jr. , and the author between 1934 and 1940. * It was the first site at
which we found burials and whole pottery; it was also the first site in
• Thanks are extended to Monroe Dodd, Jr. , George Freeman, and other friends
who assisted in the site exploration; to Alex Krieger and James A. Ford for
assistance with pottery identification and typology; to A. L. Wedgeworth, Jr. , for
photography; and to Gordon Maxcy for film developing and assistance with the
plates.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Louisiana which was identified as an Alto Focus component (vVebb,
1948 ) and was recognized as such in the Davis Site report (Newell
and Krieger, 1949: 195, 197, Fig. 62 ). In describing the Bossier Focus,
Smithport Landing wa s one of 15 sites used for comparison and discussion of the relative incidence of Bossier Focus pottery types, and of
several pottery complexes. First suggested in my 1948 paper, and
elaborated in a more recent study (Webb, 1961 ) of 20 sites in northwestern Louisiana, is the thesis that the Bossier Focus developed out
of a simultaneous spread of Alto and Coles Creek peoples or influences
across this area in post-Marksville times. Smithport Landing was one
of the key sites in this study, because of the admixture of Alto and Coles
Creek pottery types and the presence of a minor Bossier Focus manife station.
It therefore seems appropriate to publish the available information
about this site, despite the limited excavations conducted nearly 30
years ago. The criticism has been made that too many foci in the
Caddoan area have been based on excavation of a single site and that
the Alto Focus, for example, is based on the Davis Site alone. The information presented herein concerning Smithport Landing and other
Alto Focus manifestations in Louisiana was available to, and used by,
Krieger a indicated in the Davis report. The details should have been
published for other students, however, especially since burials of the
Alto period are limited in number.
SITE ENVIRONMENT

The Smith port Landing Site is in the eastern edge of D e Soto Parish,
about eight miles east of Mansfield, the Parish seat (Fig. 1 ) . It is a relatively large village site situated on eroded and dissected hills which
project in an expanded tongue of land fronting on Old Sm ithpor t or
Clear Lake (Bayou Pierre Lake) . The former lake bed is now dry in
the summer, swampy during the rainy season. Buffalo Bayou courses
through this low area to join the outflow of present Smithport Lake
about one mile northeast of the site. Further eastward this drainage
flows into Bayou Pierre which continues some 20 miles down the southwestern margin of the Red River flood plain until it empties into this
river near Natchitoches .
The hills on which the site is located (Fig. 2 ) are 10 to 20 feet above
the lake bed; where dissected by small drainages the slope is gentle,
but in several places is abrupt. Most of the site was formerly in cultivation and the topsoil, a grayish sand with liberal mixture of humus,

145

SMI THPORT LANDING SITE

* 'Loll& VIEW

/ILL£NA

/ltiTCHITOt:I'ES -X$/!~

/,g; ·;.DI/ES
,;'

.JJ"rol!r ,.1£s.svP

Fig . 1 . Map of no rt hwesle rn Lou isiana and adjoin ing portion of eastern Tex as . Listed
sites have A lto Focus or related components . Note route of the early histo ri c road , El
Cam ino Re a l, w hic h probably follo we d p rehi storic trai ls through t h is area .

is three to four feet thick and apparently fertile. The su bsoil is a rather
dense, reddish or orange sandy clay. The trees around the site are oak,
persimmon, gum, and m :my smaller hawthorns and sassafras. The uplands have h eavy growths of pine and the lake bed ha s the usual cypress, willows, and some hardwoods. The nearby lakes still have abu n dant fish-bass, crappie, "bream" and other small perches, as well as
the "rough" varieties like gar, carp, catfish, shad, and "gasper-gou"and turtles, eels, bullfrogs, snakes, and an occasional alligator are present. Bird species are abundant and in former y ears migratory waterfowl came in tremendous numbers. Edible wild fruits and nuts in the
area are persimmons, haws, crab apples, plums, muscadines and other
wild grapes, hickory nuts, walnuts, pecans, chinquapins (dwarf chestnuts ), yoncapins (seed of Nelumbo lutea, a water lily ), and many
oth ers . D eer were present until the early part of the 20th century and
are now returning; squirrels, rabbits, raccoons, and opossums are the
more prevalent of the edible animals. Mussels and snails are available
in moderate numbers. In aboriginal and early h istoric times this vicinity afforded, undoubtedly, an abundance of natural resources, with
good soil and adequate rainfall for domestic crops.

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

During the 18th and 19th centuries this land was spoken of as "the
coast," inferring a large body of water into which the tongue of land
projected. Like so many other lakes formed where streams run into
the river valley out of the hills, it is probable that old natural river
levees formed a bar or dam which produced the lake; some, however,
are of the opinion that the famous log jam in Red River was instrum ental in production of these lakes. At any rate, much of the traffic
on the river above Alexandria coursed along these lateral streams and
lakes. When we first visited this site, old residents spoke of a deep lake
with steamboat landings at the site and on present Smithport Lake.
The desirability of this land for habitation is attested by the several
prehistoric sites in the neighborhood, the size of the Smith port Landing
Site, and the early documents which indicate a white settlement within a few years after establishment of Natchitoches Post. About equidistant (25-30 miles ) from Natchitoches and the Spanish counter post
at Los Adaes (Fig. 1), families and influences were derived from both
the French and Spanish. Records at Natchitoches record the birth of
Joseph Marcel Antonio DeSoto, son of Manuel DeSoto and Marie De
St. Denis, member of the family of Louis Juchereau De St. Denis who
founded Natchitoches, in 1758 (D'Antonio, 1961a). A later daughter
married Paul Lafitte of Bayou Pierre, as the Smithport Lake Settlement was called.
The Spanish influence became stronger in the latter 1700's, after
Louisiana was ceded to Spain. Even after the Louisiana Purchase, this
land was on the margin of the " neutral ground" and for a time was
under Spanish jurisdiction. This, as well as a comment about a Yatasi
Indian village which may be of significance to the site, is indicated by
D 'Antoni's ( 1961a ) account of the journey in 1808 of Don Marcelo
De Soto, who had become Spanish judge of Bayou Pierre Community,
to San Antonio to petition the governor for a resident pastor. The petition reads in part:
Don Marcelo de Soto, acting justice of Bayupier, Jurisdiction of Nacogdoches,
together with Jose Lafitte, Silvestre Poissot, Pedro Robleau and Miguel Rambin,
all of aforesaid community, who have come to this capital together, has the honor
of appealing with all respect to your lordship's equity, conjointly with and in the
name of all the other residents of the specified Bayupier. [These] consist of thirty
Spanish families gathered together and long established in the aforesaid place, with
no large number of educated persons at their service; besides, there is next to them
the village of the Yatasi Indians. They are all in need of the church and of an
ecclesiatic to minister the Holy Sacraments ....

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

147

Although a resident pastor was not sent, priests from Nacogdoches
visited the settlement for some years, then visitation was taken over
by the French priests at Natchitoches. A chapel was constructed in
1843 "in the center of DeSoto Parish at Bayou Pierre." In 1855 the
first new parish of the Natchitoches Diocese was established here and
a resident priest assigned (D ' Antoni, 1961 b ).
In 1888 a Carmelite Mission was established, with a monastery and
subsequently separate schools for boys and girls (D'Antoni, 1962 ) .
The Carmelites built a rock chapel which is now preserved as an historic monument to their labors; the small settlement three miles east
of the site is now called Carmel.
SITE EXPLORATION AND EXCAVATION

The Smithport Landing Site is located in Township 13 N , Range
12 W , sections 23 and 26, on land owned at present by Edward Lafitte of Carmel, but at the time of our excavation by Guy Sample of
Shreveport. When first visited in 1934, much of the site was in cultivation; now it is in pasturage or woodlands. Evidences of occupation
were found on portions of four hills, heaviest on hills 2 and 3 (Fig. 2 ).
Larger than most sites in this area, we estimated that a total of 40 to
50 acres was occupied. We first explored Hill 1, a low hill which
sloped gently to the bottom lands and had been in cultivation for a
long time. The topsoil was thin and sheet erosion exposed a number of
pottery sherds, projectile points, and other stone objects. It is possible
that this was a separate site, since it is set apart by a wide stream bed
from the other occupied hills, but the artifact types were not different.
The area of occupation covered about five acres.
Hill 2 is higher, about 20 feet above the old lake bed, and slopes
rather sharply southward to the lowlands. The top is gently rounded
and had been put into cultivation only a few years before our first visit.
The topsoil was very dark and many large pottery sherds were found;
in fact, this hill showed the heaviest occupation of the site, over an area
of 20 to 30 acres. The burials ( Fig. 3) which are described later occurred on the crest of this hill, immediately overlooking the old lake.
Hills 3 and 4 run north-south and slope down to a small stream
which separates them. The occupation areas, chiefly along the slopes
to the stream, are estimated at five to ten acres on each hill, although
we were uncertain about Hill 4 because it was partly wooded. There
were two tenant houses in a nearby deserted field. On the back part of
Hill 2 and east of the main tenant house, very black soil, found over

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

. :. ·>, ... .

~

=

F£/1/CtS
f'"lilil\t
7('GitDS

~.jTRE4M:S

. Lo

OltlooiJ£P
/11{~

.1._

...

Fig . 2 . Ske tch of Sm ithport Land ing Site, not to scale . Note occupa tiona l a raa s on fou r
hills, buria l area a nd heavy m idden on Hill 2 .

a radius of 12-15 feet, contained large sherds, numerous animal bones
or bone fragments , and ashes (Fig. 2 ) . Two test pits showed that the
black refuse soil was two to three feet in depth and ashes indicated
extensive cooking. Our notes show no evidence of a house floor or post
molds, although we did not trench the area.
BuRIAL ExcAVATIONs
In May, 1935, Monroe Dodd, Jr., found a small intact vessel (Fig.
4, 0 ) in hog rootings on the crest of Hill2, which had been left uncultivated and put into pasturage that year. Excavations exposed within a
radius of two to three feet a cluster of nine pottery vessels (Fig. 3, Nos.
V-94-102 ) , three of which were intact and four largely so. Included
are vessels shown in Figure 4, B, C, F, K, N, 0, and R. Vessels which
are not illustrated are two broken bottles (probably hit by the plow ),
one Hickory Fine Engraved and an untyped engraved ware with
interlocking spirals. All of the vessels were within two feet of the
surface, as were burials 1 and 2 (Fig. 3 ), male and female adults
lying fully extended and supine, with heads turned to left and right,
respectively. The pottery deposit could have related to either or both
of these . Two Alba points were found to the side of Burial1 .

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

149

On weekend trips between May and November, 1935, with permission of the owner, we worked out the remainder of the burials;
see Figure 3. As a result either of our inexperience or of the way
the burials had been placed, we were not sure of pit outlines and of
which skeletons were associated. All occurred at a depth of two to three
feet from the surface, although disturbed soil continued to a depth of
three to three and a half ·feet and in a few places to four feet. It was
my impression, as recordea in notes, that burials 1 and 2 were together
and that burials 5, 3-4, 6-8 and 11-13, and 9-10 represented interment
groups.
Burials 3 and 4 were side by side and undoubtedly placed together.
Both were supine and fully extended, except that the left arm of Burial
3 was abducted and flexed at right angles. Heads were directed almost
south, that of 3 with face upward; the skull of Burial 4 was turned to
the right. Both were adults, Burial 3 a female , 4 a male. A large, intact
bottle (Fig. 4, A ) was two feet above the heads and a small bowl (Fig.
4 , I ) was in fragments to the left of the skull of Burial 3.
Between this group and Burial 2 we found a skull and several long
bones in an irregular bundle (Fig. 3, Burial 5 ) . There were no associated artifacts.
Burials 6 to 8 were about a foot apart, on the same level, and were
thought to be a single interment. Heads were directed north, all turned
towards the left side, and the bodies were supine and extended, except
that the left arm of Burial 6 was flexed, with the hand lying over a pot-

0

1

23456

Fig . 3 . Burials on Hill 2 of Smithpo rt Landing Site . Vessel numbers a re catalog numbers .
Left arm of 8- 3 shown incorrectly; it shou ld be abducted and f lexed.

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tery vessel above the head of Burial 7 (Fig. 3). This vessel, an intact
cylindrical jar of the type Kiam Incised (Fig. 4, D) was the only offering. Burial 6 was that of a female, age estimated 40-50 years, rather
wacile in build. Burial 7 was a child of 13-15 years and Burial 8 was
either an adolescent or young adult female.
Burials 11 to 13, found on a subsequent visit, may have been a part
of the burial 6-8 interment, as they were at the same depth ( three
feet), were immediately adjacent, and lay in the same orientation.
Burial 11 was a male, supine and extended, with head directed north
and turned to the left. Age was estimated at 18- 20 years. Burial 12
was a female adult, also supine, fully extended and head directed
north but rotated to the right to face Burial 11. Burial 13 was a female
adult, lying across and directly on the previous two, with head directed just north of west and face turned upward. No artifacts were
with these three.
Burials 9 and 10 were probably associated but separate from the
others. They were north of the previous row of burials, with head
orientation toward the north, supine, extended, and the feet just above
the skulls of burials 6 and 7. Burial 9 had the face upright, and was a
child of undetermined age. Burial 10 was of a female adult with head
turned to the left, toward 9. Above the skull of Burial 10 there were
pottery fragments which were later assembled to form vessels 130, 133,
and 134 (Fig. 4, H , E, and G, respectively) and a toy bottle (Fig. 4, P ) .
To the left of the skull of Burial 9 there were three small vessels, two
plain bowls, and a fingernail-pinched cup (Fig. 4, L , M, Q) .
In November, 1935, a final burial (not shown in Fig. 3 ) was found ,
six feet east of burials 12 and 13. This was of a male adult, turned on
the right side with legs partially flexed and the head directed to southeast. No artifacts were associated.
Measurements were made on three intact skulls. That of Burial 6.
adult female, had a circumference of 47 em., glabella to occipital protuberance 27 em., and zygoma to zygoma 30 em. The skull of Burial
10, adult female, had circumference of 46.8 em., glabella to occipital
protuberance 28.5 em., and zygoma to zygoma 31 em. That of Burial
14, adult male, had circumference of 49.5 em., glabella to occipital
protuberance 29.2 em. , and zygoma to zygoma 30.5 em.
DESCRIPTION OF ARTIFACTS
CERAMICS

There are available for study of pottery from this site 19 whole ves-

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

151

sels from the burials, of which 10 are decorated and nine plain; 1533
sherds from surface collections and the several test pits, of which 875
are decorated and 658 plain. Among the sherds there is a group of 37
which have paste and decoration characteristics of late wares, historic
or protohistoric, which will be described in a separate section. Consequently there are 19 whole vessels and 1496 sherds which relate to the
earlier occupation. Most of these are assignable to existing types which
have been described elsewhere and type descriptions will not be repeated, although local or regional variations will be indicated. Reference should be made to the Davis Site report (Newell and Krieger,
1949 ) and T. A. S. handbooks (Suhm, et al., 1954; Suhm and Jelks,
1962 ) for descriptions of Alto types; to the Bossier Focus report (Webb,
1948 ) and the handbooks for the Bossier types; and to the Crooks (Ford
and Willey, 1940 ) , Greenhouse (Ford, 1951) , and Medora (Quimby,
1951 ) Site reports for Coles Creek and Plaquemine types. One new
type of the Alto period, Carmel Engraved, will be described herein.
Certain characteristics of paste, temper, surface and core colors, and
sherd thickness extend throughout the earlier wares from this site. The
paste is generally uniform and compact, rarely lumpy or porous. The
range of hardness is 2 to 3 ( Moh' s Scale), the sherds are broken with
difficulty and seldom can be scored with a fingernail; the majority of
the sherds give a metallic ring when dropped on a hard surface (except for the dark chocolate to black wares ) . Tempering is clay-grit in
most instances, sometimes with finely ground sherds, and a few with
enough grit to feel slightly sandy (none is fully sand tempered ) . Bone
temper occurs in 31 of the 1496 sherds (2%) and shell is totally missmg.
Surface colors are predominantly light, showing oxidizing firing
conditions, and fire clouds are frequent (Fig. 4, A-C), indicating incomplete control of firing. The majority of sherds have light interiors
and cores, but some of the interiors are darker gray or smudged and
some of the cores are dark brown to black, even though the surfaces
are light. Surface colors are varying shades of gray, some buff or tan,
a few orange or reddish-brown; in every type there will be varying
percentages of dark brown (often chocolate or reddish-brown) to black,
although these are never as numerous as in the Alto wares of the Davis
Site, even in the engraved types. The sherds with chocolate brown to
black exteriors usually have uniform darkness through the core and on
interior surfaces; the paste is usually softer and the sherds seldom give
a metallic ring when dropped. Their surfaces tend to be smoothed but
rarely polished.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

152

G

0

0

2

4

6
CM

8

w

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

153

Sherd thickness varies from 4 to 10 mm. , averaging 6 to 7 mm. in
most types. Variations will be noted.
In general, this early ware is thicker and lighter in color than the
later Caddoan wares of the Belcher and late Bossier periods. It is about
the same thickness as the Alto wares of the Davis Site and the Coles
Creek-Early Plaquemine of central Louisiana, but differs from Davis
Alto in having less of the reddish and chocolate to black polished pottery and more buff to light gray. It shares bone tempering with Texas
(Davis ) Alto. In other respects of hardness and coloration, it more
nearly approaches Coles Creek ceramics, although seldom having the
orange tints and never the greenish tints of Coles Creek. It tends to be
thicker, harder, and lighter in color than Plaquemine pottery, although
some of the shapes and designs are similar to Plaquemine types.
A. Engraved Wares

Holly Fine Engraved type is represented by 10 sherds (Fig. 5, A, B),
one from a bottle, five from shallow bowls, and four uncertain. Indicated height of bowl rims is 2.5 to 3 em., vertical or mildly outsloping.
Colors are tan, gray and brown, no black polished. Two of the sherds
are bone tempered. Wall thickness is 6 to 9 mm. The engraved lines
are usually diagonal on the bowls and seven have excised triangles.
Hickory Fine Engraved type includes two whole vessels, both bottles, and nine sherds from four bowls, one bottle, two small jar or cup
forms, and two of uncertain form. The first bottle (Fig. 4, C) is 26 em.
high, 14 em. in body diameter, has an evenly tapered spout and shouldered body. Three lightly engraved lines encircle the shoulder. The
second bottle, which also occurred with Burial1, has the spout missing
but body intact. The body is 12.6 em. high, 15.2 em. in diameter, and
has eight engraved lines encircling the upper body area. Both of these
bottles are gray in color, with black fire clouds, and are clay tempered.
Eight of the sherds of this type (Fig. 5, E, G) are tan to gray with black
areas, while the ninth (Fig. 5, F) is black and polished, with crossengraved decoration. No other Hickory sherd is polished. Temper is
Fig. 4. Pottery From Burials. A, B, Smith port Plain bottles, V-1 04, 95. C, Hickory Fine
Engraved, V-96. D-G, Kiam Incised jars, V-1 06, 133, 94, 1 34 (note plain body on D,
vertical incising on E, fingernail punctating of F, Gl. H, Davis Incised, V-130. I, Untyped,
V-1 05 (plain body, scalloped rim with free punctations on lower surface). J, Smith port Plain
bowl from Allen Site. K-N, Smith port Plain bowls, V-99, 667, 668, 100. 0-P, Smith port
Plain miniatures, V-97, 152 . Q, Wilkinson Punctated (pinched minaturel, V-669 . R, Smithport Plain carinated bow/, V-1 01 .

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D

c

8

H

F

E

K
J

N
M

Q
0

2

4

6

B

10

CM

Fig. 5 . Engraved Sherds . A, B, Holly Fine Engraved . C, D, Holly or Hickory Fine Engraved .
E-G, Hickory Fine Engraved ; H, Untyped zig-zag engraved. 1-P, Carmel Engraved . 0 , Untyped with spurred engraved lines. R, Probable Maddox Engraved .

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

155

clay-grit or sherd, one with bone. The bowls appear to have vertical
or outsloping rims, with walls 5 to 7 mm. thick, but one sherd is from
an incurvate bowl, 4 mm. thick. Five of the sherds have horizontally
engraved lines, 4 to 9 mm. apart; three have diagonal parallel lines and
one has cross diagonals. The latter is a rim sherd and the rounded lip
ha s transverse notching 7- 9 mm. apart (Fig. 5, F) .
Six sherds could be either Holly or Hickory Fine Engraved (Fig. 5,
C, D ) . One is from the top of a bottle spout, another from a bottle shoulder, two are bowl sherds, and the other forms are doubtful. The bottle
sherds have horizontally engraved lines, the other four are diagonal.
One bowl sherd, light in surface color, is only 4 mm. thick. The surface
colors of both Holly and Hickory Fine Engraved types at this site are
more like the later (Phase 2 and 3) periods at the Davis Site ; the earlier
vessels at Davis were preponderantly dark in surface color.

Carmel Engraved Type
(Fig. 5, I-P )
This is presented as a new type, as it is a major engraved type at this
site-with 17 sherds, of which 11 are rim sherds-and has been
found with Alto pottery at five other sites in northwestern Louisiana.
Th ere were five Carmel Engraved sherds from the Colbert Site; four
each from Greer, Mounds Plantation, and Marston sites ; and three
from Chamarre Lake Site. The description is based on the Smithport
collection.
METHOD OF MANUFACTURE: Coiled.
PASTE

Temper: Clay-grit or ground sherd; bone in 2 of 17 sherds.
Texture: Compact, generally fine, occasionally coarse.
Color: Shades of gray from light to almost black, often on same sherd (fire
clouds); buff, tan and reddish-brown. Nearly half of the Smithport sample has
reddish-brown exteriors and interiors. Cores may be same color as exterior,
sometimes darker.

S urface Finish: Smoothed exteriors and interiors, a few with fai r polish, none
highly polished.
FORM

Wall Thickness: 5 to 7 mm., uniform.
Lip: Rounded, usually unmodified; occasional thinning.

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Base: Uncertain, probably mildly convex, circular.

Vessel Shape and Size: So far as presently known, open and carinated bowls only .
Rims are 3 to 7 em. in height, about equally divided between 3-5 and 5-7 em.
range, from an obtuse angle at the junction of base and rim. The bases appear
to be shallow; the rims mildly excurvate, or direct and slanted outward. A few
appear to be vertical. Curvatures suggest diameters of Z0- 30 em.
DECORATION

Treatment: Engraving.
Designs: Effected with heavy engraving on exteriors of rims only. Curving, wide
bands outlined by parallel single engraved lines, with transverse, widely spaced
lines producing a ladder effect. Usually two of such bands form arcs or meanders, with undecorated bands of similar width between them (Fig. 5, 1-K ) .
Occasionally one or more engraved lines flank the engraved bands or bisect the
intervening plain band. Some sherds (Fig. 5, M , N , P ) have straight instead
of curving bands, but otherwise seem to fit into the type.
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
This type has occurred only in sites which have Alto Focus pottery; it has not
been found in Bossier Focus sites which lack established Alto types. In the Bossier
Focus, the related engraved type seems to be Maddox Engraved, which in
northwestern Louisiana has cross-hatched engraved bands, generally not curving
and most often vertical, as the major element. In central Louisiana Maddox
Engraved type has been extended to include curvilinear bands ~f cross-hatched
engraving (Suhm and Jelks, 196Z: Pl. 50 ) . The decoration on Plate 50, F of this
handbook is very much like Carmel Engraved and this vessel probably should
be included in this type instead of Maddox.
DISTRIBUTION
In addition to the Smithport Site, Carmel Engraved has been found at one
mound and four village sites in northwestern Louisiana.

There is one untyped engraved vessel and seven sherds. The vessel
(V-102), from Burial 1 is a bottle (with missing spout) of polished
black ware, decorated with engraved interlocking spiral design, four
times repeated. One sherd (Fig. 5, H) has a zig-zag engraved decoration with excisions at the angles, similar to the two sherds illustrated
from the Davis Site (Newell and Krieger: 1949, Fig. 34, S, T). Three
sherds have bands with cross hatching, probably Maddox Engraved
motifs, but the sherds are too small to be sure about the design (Fig. 5,
R) _A bottle sherd (Fig. 5, Q) has diagonal spurred engraved lines. Two
bowl sherds are from polished black wares, with designs which suggest the Glassell Engraved type (Webb, 1959: Fig. 118 ) _

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

157

B. Incised Pottery Types
Davis Incised type is represented by one vessel (Fig. 4, H ) and 17
sherds. The vessel is a deep, reddish-brown bowl, which curves outward from a slightly convex disc base, then is vertical to the rounded,
unmodified lip. It is 10 em. in height, 15.2 em. in greatest diameter.
There are five parallel, smoothed-over incised lines around the upper
body, placed about 1 em. apart. They are shallow and about 2 mm. in
width. The surfaces are smoothed and questionably polished. The 17
sherds (Fig. 6, A-E ) include 11 rim sherds, nine of which indicate
vertical walls, two outward sloping (but no excurvate) . Most of the
vessels seem to be deep bowls, but two sherds indicate shallower carinated bowls with inward curving or sloping rims. All are clay or grit
tempered, with walls 4.5 to 8 mm. thick. Three are black, others gray,
buff, light brown or tan in surface color; surfaces are smoothed and
one of the black sherds (Fig. 6, C) is polished lightly. The lips are
_rounded and unmodified except that most are thinned by an extra
outward curving of the interior wall. The incised lines are smoothed
over, 5 to 13 mm. apart and are 3 to 10 in number. Half of the lines
are less than 1 mm. in width, the others are between 1 and 2 mm. wide,
generally shallow and well executed.
Nine sherds are classified as Sanson Incised (Ford and Willey, 1940 )
because of the wide, shallow, smoothed incising in straight lines (Fig.
6, F, G ) . No rim sherds were found, hence patterning of the incising
is indefinite. Tempering is clay-grit, the surface coloring is gray to
black or dark brown, and the thickness is 5 to 8 mm. The incised lines
are 2.5 to 4.5 mm. in width and appear to have been made with tools
which had bluntly rounded or flat ends.
Two sherds (Fig. 6, H, I ) are possibly Mazique Incised (Ford, 1951 )
but may be well executed Dunkin Incised. They are light gray and
tan in color, and one is a rim sherd. The decoration consists of finely
made parallel incisions, closely placed in diagonal fields or herringbone effect on the upper body. Vessel shape is uncertain.
Coles Creek Incised type is represented by eight sherds, although it
is almost certain that some which are typed as Hardy or Kiam Incised
are in reality Coles Creek. In order to be certain of Coles Creek Period
wares at this site, I have included in this type only those sherds whose
paste characteristics are consistent and which have "overhanging"
parallel lines around the rim (Fig. 6, J) or characteristically placed
triangular punctations below the incised lines (Fig. 6, K ) . Surfaces are
smoothed and are buff or gray in color. The incisions are bold, horizon-

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

D

0

2

4

6

CM
Fig . 6 . Incised Sherds. A-E, Davis Incised lA resembles high rim of jars which are frequent in Haley polleryl. F, G, Sanson Incised. H, I, Mazique Incised . J , K, Coles Creek Incised. L-Q , Kiam or Hardy Incised (note outer lip notching or punclations on L-N, also suspension hole and subjacent hemiconical punctation on 0, almost certainly Hardy Incised} .

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

159

tal, and u sually more closely spaced than in Davis Incised . The subjacent triangles on four sherds are pressed into the paste m ore deeply
at the apex. It must be pointed out that it is not a simple ta sk, in studying sherds from northern Louisiana, to distinguish the four related
types which are characterized by parallel incisions around the rimDavis Incised, Coles Creek Incised, Hardy Incised, and Kiam Incisedunless the technique and paste are characteristic or a large part of the
vessel available. Much overlapping occurs.
One hundred and seventy four sherds from this site are included in
type Kiam Incised or Hardy Incised (Fig. 6, L-Q ). No attempt shall
be made to distinguish between these types, but the problem will be
pointed out and resolution left for future conferen ces. These sh erds
are characterized by parallel incised lines covering the rim or upper
part of the vessel. Fortunately, there are four complete vessels from
the burials (Fig. 4, D-G ) which are ty pical Kiam Incised (Suhm and
Jelks, 1962.: 89, Pl. 45 ) and established the presence of this type. V essel 106 (Fig. 4, D ) is a heavy, thick-walled cylindrical jar with a
slightly recurved and rounded lip. It is 11 em. high , 10.6 em. in diameter, clay tempered, and dark reddish-brown in color. Decoration consists of numerous scratchy incisions covering the upper 3 em .; it is
plain below this zone. Vessel133 (Fig. 4, E) is a jar with narrow excu rvate rim and semiglobular body. It is 12. em. in height and in greatest w idth, and is clay tempered, with irregular light and dark gray
surface color. The rim has three to four irregular, wavy incised lines
which are not continuous ; the body is covered with vertical, firm incisions spaced 4 to 7 mm. apart. Vessel 94 (Fig. 4, F ) is a firm, intact,
well made cylindrical jar, clay tempered, with dark gray-brown surface color except for a few light fire clouds. The upper 2..5 em. has irregular horizontal incisions, 5 to 7 in number, and the remaining body
exterior is covered with fingernail punctations, spaced rather regularly
but not in exact rows. Vessel 134 (Fig. 4, G) is a jar with semiglobular
body, narrowed toward the rim, which is vertical. The clay tempered
paste is softer than the other three vessels and is fired black over the
exterior, dark gray on the interior. It is 11 em. high, 14 em. wide.
D ecoration consists of five firmly incised lines around the rim exterior,
spaced 3 to 5 mm. apart, and paired fingernail punctations or pinches
covering the body. These vessels demonstrate the three most frequ ent
body treatment techniques described for the Kiam Incised type .
The 174 sherds present more variation, and include 82. rim pieces.
Temper is clay-grit or ground sherd except for five which are bone
tempered. The surface colors cover the range of tan, buff, yellow-

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

orange, light to dark gray, reddish-brown and black; the light colors
predominate. Interior and exterior surfaces are smoothed. Wall thickness is 5 to 10 mm., averaging 6.5 to 7 mm. The rim sherds show that
about half have excurvate rims, 1,4 to 1;5 of the vertical, and the others
slant outward. Five have a row of punctations or notches on the rim
exterior (Fig. 6, L-N ), and one has transverse incisions on a flat lip.
The lips are more often rounded, but about 1,4 are flat ; thinning may
occur but not thickening.
The incising varies from thin scratchy lines made with a pointed
tool, to rough and irregular (Fig. 6, Q), to firm, well made and regular
(Fig. 6, L, M , P ). The number of lines varies from two to 20 and the
spacing from two to 10 mm. apart, often varying on the same sherd.
Generally they are placed at 3 to 5 mm. intervals. Although most
were produced with a pointed tool, a few were made with a blunt or
square-tipped tool. Five have hemiconical or oval punctations below
the last line (Fig. 6, 0 ) .
These characteristics as a unit do not fit either Kiam or Hardy Incised types . The predominant shape, with everted or excurvate rim is
more like Kiam, as are bone tempering, and either punctated bodies
(two vessels, two sherds ) or vertical incising on bodies (one vessel, two
sherds ) . The paste and surface coloration are more like Hardy Incised
(except for the five with bone temper), as are the subjacent punctations (Fig. 6, 0 ), occasional stabs or punctations at the ends of lines (in
central Louisiana, this occurs more often in Yokena and French Fork
Incised than in Hardy ), plain bodies (one vessel, five sherds ), cutting
away of the body wall just below the incisions (Fig. 4, D ), and flattened lips. Not described for either Kiam or Hardy types are notched
or incised lips, vertical rows of plowed-up paste where the incisions
meet (Fig. 6, L ) or narrow undecorated gaps at this junction, which
occur on a number of the Smithport sherds. The conclusion seems
obvious that Kiam Incised, Hardy Incised and the similar wares from
this area are local or regional variations of a single widespread ty pe.
The Dunkin Incised type presents the same problem. Although the
sherds assigned to this type have more similarities to type Dunkin Incised than to any other, there are some similarities to M azique and
Manchac Incised types of central Louisiana, and some items which
differ from all of these types. Again, regional or temporal variations of
a single type are indicated and should be subjected to study.
There are 117 sherds of Dunkin Incised which show incising in
varying directions (Fig. 7, A-L ), usually including diagonal lines, and
65 sherds (Fig. 7, 0-R) which show only diagonal lines but are also

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

161

assigned to Dunkin. Thirty of the former group and 25 of the latter are
rim sherds. Paste characteristics, color, and wall thickness are the same
as those described for Kiam Incised. The majority of the rim sherds
indicate everted or excurvate shapes, possibly a fourth are direct and
vertical, none incurvate. Indicated vessel shapes are semiglobular jars
with flaring rims, similar jars with narrowing at the neck and vertical
or slightly everted rims, cylindrical vessels, and simple deep bowls.
Lips are usually narrowed by outward curving of the interior wall, but
may be rounded or occasionally flattened. There are no nodes or handles, and only one rim shows notching.
Incisions are generally bolder than in the Kiam Incised type, spaced
3 to 8 mm. apart, and seldom smoothed over. On the 117 sherds with
lines in varying directions, 52 were made with a round-tipped tool, 47
with a pointed tool, 16 with square-tipped, and two with forked tool
(Fig. 7, D ). In the instance of the rim sherds with diagonal incising, 17
of the 25 slant downward from right to left (Fig. 7, P -R ), eight from
left to right (Fig. 7, 0 ) . The lines may produce diamonds (Fig. 7, C),
triangles (Fig. 7, A, D , J ), chevrons (Fig. 7, B) or, rarely, squares (Fig.
7, I ) . Hemiconical or oval punctations are placed in a single row below the incising in two instances (Fig. 7, L ), above in one (Fig. 7, E ) .
The trait of making firm punctations at the ends of the lines (Fig. 7,
F , H -J) is more frequent than in type Kiam Incised, and gaps are left at
times (Fig. 7, F ). One sherd (Fig. 7, P ) has a wide, smoothed band
interrupting the previously placed incisions below the lip. The num erous body or rim-body sherds which show fields of varying incising
more nearly resemble Dunkin Incised from the Davis Site in having
full body decoration than the central Louisiana Manchac and Mazique
types, where the decoration is usually confined to a narrow rim band.
Cross incising (Fig. 7, M, N ), which is called Harrison Bayou Incised (from the Harrison Bayou Site on Caddo Lake ) in central Louisiana, but is included in Dunkin Incised in eastern Texas ( Suhm and
Jelks, 1962: Pl. 19 ), is present on nine sherds from Smithport. They
are clay tempered, light to dark gray in color, with smoothed surfaces.
The incisions vary from narrow and closely placed to firm, wide lines.
Curvilinear incising is present on two sherds. These resemble curvilinear incising from the Sanson Site in central Louisiana which has
been tentatively termed Neild Incised.

C. Punctated and Punctated-Incised Types
Pennington Punctated-Incised type is represented by 36 sherds (Fig.

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

2

4

CM

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

163

8, A-F ) . Most of these derive from open carinated bowls with excurvate
rims which are 4 to 7 em. in height, but a few seem to be rims of recurved jars. Eight are chocolate brown in color, others tan, gray and
brown-black. The paste is firm, hard in all but two sherds, with
smoothed but not polished surfaces. Two sherds are tempered with
bone, the others with clay-grit or sherd. Wall thickness is in the range
of 5 to 9 mm. , most specimens being 6 to 7 mm. The punctations are
consistently placed in fields which are outlined by single deeply incised lines; the fields are in diagonal bands, diamonds or triangles. The
punctations and incised lines are bold and the 36 sherds include punctations made with a pointed or round-tipped tool in 23 instances,
comma-shaped in four, square (Fig. 8, E ) in five, and triangular in
four.
Eleven sherds show the hybrid Pennington-Crockett design described in the Davis report (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 101 ) . Shapes
and paste characteristics are described above; two sherds are soft,
chocolate brown in color. One has an incurving rim and a suspension
hole (Fig. 8, I ) . The bordering incised line is curved (Fig. 8, G-I ) ;
otherwise these sherds do not differ from the Pennington type. Seven
have rounded punctations, two are comma-shaped, one rectangular,
and one square.
Another group of 19 sherds shows zone punctations which differ in
certain respects from the typical Pennington described above and possibly are nearer to Rhinehart Punctated (Ford, 1951: 83-85). These
19 sherds (Fig. 8, J-0 ) have the same range of paste and coloration;
five are of the softer chocolate brown ware. Rim and body sherds are
represented and in only one instance (Fig. 8, 0) is it certain that the
rim is from an open carinated bowl as are the Pennington sherds. One
heavy sherd (Fig. 8, J) which is 12 mm. thick, suggests a globular vessel which narrows at the neck and recurves to upright at the rim. Another sherd includes the lower rim area which is decorated with zoned
punctatio:J.s and incisions, and the adjoining upper body which is plain.
Char acteristic of this group is the alternation of punctated and incised
field s, or the outlining of punctated zones by multiple incised lines.
The punctations are triangular in three instances, square in one,
comma-shaped in six, round or oval in five, small pits in three, and
crescentic in one.
Fig . 7. Incise d Sherds. A-L, Dun kin Incised lnote C, a larg e sherd with ty pica l des ign ;
punctations w ith lines on E, F, L: rectangular des ign on II . M, N, Harriso n Bayou Incis e d .
0-R , Diagonally incised rim she rds , probab ly Dunkin Incised .

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D

F

E

.

I

•

~

0

. t

·P

0

2

I

I

41

I

CM

6I

8I

10
I

R

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

165

Free punctations made with tools, without zoning or incising, are
present on one vessel (Fig. 4, I ) and 19 sherds (Fig. 8, Q, R ). Paste and
color are as described above; one is bone tempered, six are soft, chocolate brown in color. Rim and body sherds are represented but shapes of
vessels are uncertain. The punctations are triangular in seven instances, comma-shaped in three, square in five, round in three, and
crescentic in two. The vessel (V-1 05 ) is a semiglobular bowl with
plain body and scalloped, everted rim. The lower surface of the rim is
covered with free punctations. The relative increase in frequency of
triangular punctations in this group is significant, in view of the fact
that the Rhinehart Punctated type in central Louisiana features triangular punctations (Ford, 1951: 83), whereas they are infrequent in
Pennington Punctated-Incised at the Davis Site (Newell and Krieger,
1949: 106-8 ) . The absence of ring punctations at Smithport is remarkable, in view of their frequency at both the Davis Site and in
central Louisiana.
A group of six sherds has minute free or zoned punctations. The
sherds are thinner walled than average, 4 to 6 mm. , and five of the six
have black surfaces and soft pastes. The sixth is buff colored, thin and
has a strongly excurvate, narrow rim. Another (Fig. 8, P ) is from an
open carinated bowl and has notches along the carina. All of this group
may relate to the Bossier ceramics at this site, instead of Alto. They
bear some similarity to Dupree Incised of Plaquemine ceramics in
central Louisiana (Quimby, 1951 : 122-3) .
Weches Fingernail Impressed ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 153, Pl. 77;
Newell and Krieger, 1949: 118-20, Fig. 46) is represented by 19 sherds
of characteristic design (Fig. 9, A-E). Nine of these include the lip
area, but all appear to be rim sherds. In three instances some of the
subjacent body wall is attached; on two of these the body is plain, on
the third (Fig. 9, E ) the body has diagonal incised lines suggesting
Dunkin- like decoration. These three have globular bodies and outward
curving or slanting rims, 4 to 4.5 em. high. Other vessels seem to be
cylindrical with vertical rims, and open carinated bowls are possible.
Five of the 19 sherds are chocolate brown in color with clay tempered paste; the others range from tan and buff to dark gray and
reddish-brown. Wall thickness is in the range of 4 to 9 mm., the
Fig . 8 . Punctated Sherds. A-F, Pennington Punctated-/ncised . G-1, Pennington -Crockett
hybrid (I has incurving ri m, hole for suspension). J-0, Penn ington or Rhinehart Punctated IN
has triangular punctations between horizontal lines in Coles Creek tradition). P, Similar to
Dupree Incised but shape suggests Bossier sherd . Q, R, Random punctations .

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~ 1. •
......
.~

·~

"

'ti

..
.

4

6

CM

8

10

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

167

majority 5-7 mm. Typically, the decoration (Fig. 9, A, B, D, E ) is with
widely spaced horizontal incised lines with arcs or quarter circles between; the arcs could have been cut with the fingernail and occasionally are fingernail impressed, but in most the arc is too large, 1.8
to 4 em. (my thumbnail is 1.6 em. wide ) . Four of the sherds have the
arcs without intervening lines (Fig. 9, C).
Four sherds are identical with this group except that the spaces between the horizontal lines have triangular instead of semilunar punctations (Fig. 9, F ) . Seven other sherds have round or oval punctations
in single rows between incised lines (Fig. 9, R, S, U ) . I have not included these with type Pennington Punctated-Incised, as Krieger did
with some reservation (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 106 ) . Neither have
I assigned them to Coles Creek Incised, Hardy Incised or Rhinehart
Punctated, as Ford did, also probably with some reservation (Ford,
1951: Pls. 16, L; 17, 20, H ) , but have preferred to describe them separately as interesting examples of regional variations and typing difficulties in eastern Texas, and northern and central Louisiana.
One sherd (Fig. 9, T ) has a single row of semilunar punctations and
otherwise plain surface. It is thick, clay-grit tempered, and buff colored.

Wilkinson Fingernail Punctated type is represented by one vessel
and 153 sherds. This was described as a minor type in central Louisiana (Ford and Willey, 1940: 50; Ford, 1951: 88-89) to include clay
tempered vessels with fingernail punctations scattered over the vessel
surface, arranged in irregular rows, or pinched in vertical rows. In that
area it is rarely combined with incising and usually covers the entire
vessel. Ford ( 1951: 88 ) thought it occurred at the latter part of the
Coles Creek period and reached maximum popularity in the succeeding
Plaquemine Period or later, but it was missing in Plaquemine context
at Bayou Goula (Quimby, 1957) and Medora (Quimby, 1951) sites.
In the Davis Site report (Newell and Krieger, 1949 ) it was not established as a type, as Krieger considered fingernail punctations to be a
body treatment present in several types (Kiam, Weches, Dunkin, and
Duren Neck Banded ) ; he reported 20,000 body sherds with fingernail
roughening from a total of 96,000 sherds. The difference in attitude
Fig . 9 . Nail Imp ressed and Punctated She rds . A-E , Wech es Fingerna il Impressed . F,
Weches Variant wi t h tool pun cta tions. G, H, Sinner linear Punctoted. 1- K, M- P, Wilkinson
Pun cto ted. L, Ridge pinche d , sim ila r to Killough Pinched. Q , Wil ki nso n Punctoted body,

Kiam Incised rim . R, S, U, Narrow bands w ith round or oval punctations . T, Single row of
sem iluna r punctations .

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

toward this type on the part of these investigators is understandable
when we consider the differences in frequency and u se of the decoration method in the two areas, also that Ford and his co-workers u sed all
sherds in typing, whereas Krieger translated sherds to vessels and u sed
r im decoration as the determinant.
In northwestern Louisiana I have found Wilkin son Punctated a
useful ty pe in sherd collection studies because of its great frequency in
Alto wares, its rarity in Coles Creek, and the rapid shift from nail
roughening to ridging and brushing as body treatments concurrent
with the development of Bossier, Belcher, and other later Caddoan
ceramics. Wilkinson Punctated is therefore a good indicator of early
(Alto) Caddoan occupation at a given site. At Smithport Landing there
were 153 sherds (Fig. 9, I-K, M-P) and one burial vessel, a pinched
toy jar (Fig. 4, Q), of this type. The vessel is 6 em. high, 5 em. wide,
made of thick clay-tempered paste, roughly finished and decorated
with three horizontal rows of nail pinching. The sherds include only
four rims (Fig. 9, I, 0 , P ), showing how rarely this decoration, in
northern Louisiana, covers the vessel. Most of the other sherds are
recognizably body sherds, and in eight instances (as in Fig. 9, Q) the
body-rim juncture is present. The latter sherds have Kiam Incised
decoration on the rim and appear to have come from a modified globular body shape with directly or mildly everted rim. Nine of the 153
sherds are bone tempered, the remainder are clay-grit or ground sherd,
rather granular and coarse. The walls are thick in many instances, the
range 4 to 10 mm. with the majority 7 to 8 mm. Many of the sherds are
large (Fig. 9, I, J ) indicating large, heavy jar forms. Surface colors
range from tan and buff to dark grays and a few reddish-browns, with
more tendency to darker colors than in other types . The majority have
irregular fingernail gouges (Fig. 9, I, J ), but some are pinched (Fig. 9,
K, M, N ) and others impressed more delicately and r egularly (Fig. 9,

0-Q ) .
Eight sherds have distinctly pinched-up ridges (Fig. 9, L ) which
are circular or curvilinear in six instances, vertical in two. The burial
vessel (Fig. 4, Q) may belong with this group, although it has been
tentatively classed as Wilkinson Punctated . The group with pinched
ridges bears considerable resemblance to the type Killough Pinched
( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 91, Pl. 46 ) of Frankston and Titus foci, but,
in the absence of other types characteristic of these assemblages, will
not be so assigned.
Sinner Linear Punctated is a type which so far has been confined to
Bossier and Haley foci (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 143 ; Webb, 1948: 114)

169

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

and the four sherds of this type from the Smith port Landing, although
similar in paste, thickness and color to the Alto sherds, are probably
referable to the subsequent (presumably) Bossier period at this site.
Two are rim sherds; one of these (Fig. 9, G) has parallel, vertical
linear punctating; another (Fig. 9, H ) and a body sherd have horizontal lines; the fourth is uncertain. All have linear nail punctating
and the more typical linear tool punctating is absent.

D. Stamped Types
One sherd of Chevalier Stamped is small ( 3 X 2 em.) but has definite rocker stamping. It is of firm paste, tan exterior surface color with
a black fire cloud at one edge, and black interior. Paste is homogeneous
clay-grit with several bone fragments (accidental?); both surfaces are
smoothed but not polished. In general appearance it resembles many
of the Alto sherds from this site.

E. Ridged Types
The eleven sherds of Belcher Ridged type (Fig. 10, G, H) are generally thinner and darker than the Alto wares. Six are dark chocolate
to black on both surfaces and Lhrough the cores; the other five have
light buff to dark gray surfaces, four of these with black cores. One is
bone tempered, all others clay-grit. No rims are represented and the
body sherds are 3 to 5 mm. in wall thickness. Typically, the elevated
ridges are vertical.

F. Brushed and Brushed-Incised types
There are 38 sherds of the Pease Brushed-Incised type (Fig. 10,
A-F). The paste is smooth, clay-grit tempered except for one bone
tempered; interiors are smoothed, exteriors roughened all over with the
decoration. The color range is about as for other types; eight sherds
are chocolate brown to black and slightly soft. Thickness is 4-5 mm. in
13 of the 38 sherds, 5 to 9 mm. in the remainder. The vertical panels
characteristic of this type are separated by notched applique ridges in
28 (Fig. 10, B, D-F), by rows of tool or nail punctations in seven (Fig.
10, A), and by applique nodes in three (Fig. 10, C). The panels are
roughened by diagonal incisions in 24 instances (Fig. 10, A, C), by
vertical incising in 10 (Fig. 10, E, F), by horizontal incising in one, and
by brushing in three (Fig. 10, B, D) .

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

171

Karnack Brushed-Incised type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 85 ) is applied to barrel-shaped vessels with everted rims, decorated with vertical incising or brushing. Thirty -four sh erds from Smithport fit this
category, although it is possible that some of the vertically incised body
sherds derive from Kiam Incised or W eches Fingernail Impressed vessels. There are only three rim sherds, one rolled (Fig. 10, L ), the other
two everted. The paste, temper, color range, and wall thickness are no
different from other types; seven of the sherds are dark chocolate
brown in color. Only six sherds are less than 5 mm. in thickness and
the average is 6.5 mm.; brushing is used on six of the sherds, vertical
incising on the oth ers, varying from firm to sloppy and scratch y.
The other brushed sherds from this site fall into the type which we
now call Bossier Brushed (formerly Maddox Brushed included these
and the vertically brushed included now in Karnack Brushed-Incised ) .
It is very similar to or identical with Plaquemine Brushed type of the
Plaquemine and late Coles Creek periods in central Louisiana. Chief
indicated differences are rolled or narrow everted rims in some of the
Bossier type, whereas they are direct or slightly everted in Plaquemine;
more frequ ent cross brushing in Plaquemine than in Bossier; bone
temper in a few of the Bossier, absent in Plaquemine; and an occasional row of punctations below the br ushed zone in Plaquemine, not
found in Bossier. These are minor differences, easily attributable to
regional variations, and it would probably be desirable to define a single type, with recognition of minor local variations.
There are 31 Bossier Brushed sherds (Fig. 10, I-K, M ), of which
seven are from r ims. Temper is clay-grit or ground sherd; one is bone
tempered. Surface colors include two black, four chocolate brown, the
others lighter shades of tan, buff, and gray. Only five sh erds are 5 m m.
or less in thickness; others are 5.5-1 1 mm. , averagin g 7.3 mm. (It is
thicker than most types. ) The seven rim sherds have horizontal brushing on two, diagonal on four, both on one. The body sh erds show a
similar distribution, with diagonal brushing predominating. Cross
brushing or incising is present on seven (Fig. 10, M ) .
G. Smithport Plain Type and Other Plain Sherds
There are nine plain vessels (Fig. 4, A, B, K-P, R) from th e burials
Fig . 10. Brushed , Ridged , and Late Wares. A-F , Pease Brushed-incised (note panel separation by punctalions on A , applique noiched ridges on B, D-F, and applique nodes on Cl.
G , H, Belcher Ridged. 1-K, M Bossier or Plaquemine Brushed. L, Karnack Brushed-Incised

(note rolled rim, rarel. N-S, Late Glendora Focus sherds IN , S, shell tempered , incised; 0 , P,
engraved, untyped ; Q, linear punctated , untyped ; R, Hodges Engraved!.

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and 644 plain sherds from this site which apparently relate to the
earlier ceramics. The vessels, all identified as Smithport Plain, include
three bottles, four simple bowls, one carinated bowl, and one recurved
jar. Smithport Plain therefore runs the gamut of vessel forms common
to decorated types; cylindrical jar forms are included in the sherds.
The 644 plain sherds include 65 rim sherds (the only definite Smithport sherds), one-fourth as many as the total rim sherds in the decorated types and exceeded only by Kiam Incised with 82 rim sherds. The
total number of plain sherds in our collection is altered by the element
of selectivity in surface collecting; we were less likely to save plain
sherds unless they were large or were rim sherds. The frequency of
plain wares at this period contrasts with the situation in the later Bossier and Belcher ceramics, where undecorated vessels are infrequent.
For example, at the Belcher Site (Webb, 1959) there were only nine
plain vessels among the total of 195, and plain sherds constituted only
44 per cent of total sherds (most of these were from undecorated portions of decorated vessels).
The 65 Smithport Plain rims include 15 which are everted, 26 vertical, and 18 incurvate; additionally there are rims from two simple,
shallow bowls, one rim with an exterior roll, one everted rim with interior bevel and exterior strap thickening, one bottle spout, and one
shallow toy dish. The everted rims are unmodified in seven instances,
and thinned in eight with rounded lips. Lip thinning of everted rims
was effected by exaggerating the outward curve of the rim interior;
that of incurvate bowls by exaggerating the exterior curve. The vertical rims are unmodified with rounded lips in 12 instances, thinned and
rounded in eight, flat in four, and have beveled exteriors in two. The
incurvate rims are thinned with rounded lips in nine, unmodified with
rounded lips in five, flattened lips in two, externally beveled in one, and
thickened with rounding in one.
The plain sherds include 20 recognizable as bases, nine of which are
complete flat discs. These range from 6 to 13 em. in diameter and are
6 to 12 mm. thick. One large basal sherd has a smooth central perforation, 13 mm. in diameter, and rounded edges. It possibly was used as a
spindle whorl. These are frequently found at Bossier and Belcher sites,
but usually are smaller and lighter.
An additional46 plain sherds show the wall-base junction. Eight of
these are from open flat bowls, one from a deeper bowl, one from a
bottle, four from miniature vessels and 32 from jar, deep bowl or cylindrical vessel forms.

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

173

The plain sherds have paste characteristics similar to the decorated
types already described. Nine of the 644 sherds are bone tempered.

Glendora Focus and Other Late Ceramics
A group of 37 sherds have characteristics completely alien to the
ceramics described above. They are lighter feeling, often with porous
surfaces or with obvious shell tempering, confirmed by tests. Eight are
engraved; a shell tempered sherd, reddish in color (Fig. 10, P ), with
horizontal engraved lines from which triangular spurs project; four
other shell tempered with red or orange color and engraved lines, untyped; two black shell tempered with indeterminate engraving, and
one black polished clay tempered sherd of type Hodges Engraved (Fig.
10, R) .
There are 11 sherds, shell tempered and orange to gray in color,
with curvilinear incising (Fig. 10, N , S) . This ware was once termed
Wilkinson Negative Meander but was never formally described. Another name should be chosen, because the Wilkinson Site, like Smithport, is primarily Alto with transition to Bossier, and has a minimal
late (Natchitoches ) occupation.
Two sherds have linear punctations on shell tempered ware (Fig.
10, Q) and two others, untyped, have horizontal incising. There are
14 plain, 4- 6 mm. thick, of which nine are shell tempered, two bone,
three clay.

Other Pottery Artifacts and Negative Ceramic Traits
A fragment of perforated pottery base, presumably a spindle whorl
fragment, was mentioned in the discussion of plain pottery. There
were also three fragments of fired daub with grass impressions and
one flattened surface. One tiny cone-shaped pottery fragment suggested a figurine or doll leg. No other clay or ceramic artifacts were
found. Noticeable by their absence are pipes or pipe stem fragments,
animal figurines or heads, clay labrets and ear ornaments, all of which
are not unusual in this area.
Other negative ceramic traits are the absence of shell temper, except in the small group of obviously late wares; red filming; pigment
impression into the lines of decoration; handles or other vessel appendages; squared bases (not unusual elsewhere in Coles Creek and
Alto ceramics) ; squared or castellated rims (Vessel 105, Fig. 4, I is
the only instance of scalloped rim); vessel effigies, either whole vessel
or rim attachments; stamping (one foreign sherd), and cord marking.

174

.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

PoTTERY ALIGNMENTS AND SEQUENcEs

Table I shows the assignment of burial vessel and sherd types to
various ceramic complexes, based on the descriptions of Ford ( 1951 ),
Ford and Willey ( 1940 ), and Quimby ( 1951 ) for central Louisiana ;
Newell and Krieger ( 1949 ), and Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954) for
east Texas Alto; and the author's publications ( 1948; 1959 ) and collections from northern and central Louisiana. It becomes apparent that
neat typing and alignment of sherd collections from this site, true of
many other sites in northwestern Louisiana, is a phantasy. This site
lies within a broad contact zone, extending into southwestern Arkansas
and eastern Texas, between the expanding populations and flow ering
cultures of the lower Mississippi-Red River confluence in central
TABLE 1
Pottery T ype or Group

Whole
Vessels
Distinctive Alto T ypes
Holly Fine Engraved
Hickory Fine Engraved
Holly or Hickory Engraved
Carmel Engraved
Davis In cised
Kiam Incised vessels
Pennington Punctated-Incised
Pennington-Crockett H y brid
Weches Fingernail Impressed
Smithport Plain
Subtotal
Distinctive Coles Creek
or Troyville T ypes
Coles Creek Incised
Chevalier Stamped
Mazique Incised
Subtotal
Types shared by Alto and
Coles Creek
Wilkinson Punctated
Triangular punctations between
parallel lines
Subtotal
Types shared by Alto, Coles
Creek, Bossier and Plaquemine

z

No. of
S herds

%

10
9
6
17
17

0.66
0.60
0.48
1.13
1.1 3

36
11
19
65

2.40
0.73
1.26
4.36

4

9
16

190

8

12.67

0.53
0.06
0.1 3

2

11

153

0.72

10.20
0.26

4

157

10.46

175

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

TABLE 1 (Continued )
Pottery T ype or Group

Whol e
Vess~ls

Kiam- Hardy In cised
Dunkin-Manchac Incised
Harrison Bayou In cised
Sanson I ncisgd
F ree and atypical zoned punctations
( Pennington-Rhinehart )
Small, zoned pun cta tion s
(Dupree-like)
Round puncta tions between lin es
I solated, s ~milunar punctations
Subtotal
D :stinctive B::> ssier T yp es
Pease Brushed-/ ncised
Belcher Ridged
Sinner Linear Pun ~ta ted
M addc;x Engraved
Glassell Engraved
Subtotal
T ypes Shared by Bossier and
Plaquemine
Bossier-Plaquemine Brush<Jd
Karnack Brushed- Incised
Subtotal
Uncerta in Affili ation or U ntyped
Curvilinear In c~se d
Unty ped engraved
Plain bod y sherds
F ing ~ rna il pinched
Subtotal
Subtotal, Early Occupation
Late Occ upation , Possibly
Historic
Shell tempered curvilinea r
incised
Shell temper ed engraved
H odges Engraved
Other untyped decorated
Late plain

No. of
Sherds

%

174
18Z
9
9

11.60
1Z.1 3
0.60
0.60

38

Z.53

6
7

0.40
0.46
0.06

Z.53
0. 73
0.26
O.ZO
0.1 3

38
11
4
3

z

3.86

58

Z.06
Z.Z6

31
34

4.33

65

z
z

0.1 3
O.ZO
38.60
0.53

579
8
59 1
1498

19

11
7
1
4
14

Subtotal
Grand Total

Z8.40

4Z6

37
1535

39.46
100.00

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Louisiana and Mississippi on one side and the four-state Caddoan area
on the other, in post-Hopewell-Marksville times.
As a result (or as evidence) of this cultural admixture and interchange, we see large groups of sherds from this site, in the punctated
and incised categories, which cannot with impunity be assigned to a
previously described type in a specific cultural assemblage. They could
be as easily assigned to a companion type in one, two or even three
other surrounding assemblages. Only by having whole vessels available-from which details of vessel size and shape, and decoration can
be determined-or by correlation of sherds with distinctive types, may
one draw tentative conclusions about affiliation. I have therefore found
it necessary (Table 1) to list certain types from this site as possibly
deriving from Alto or Coles Creek ceramics, others from Alto, Coles
Creek, Bossier or Plaquemine, and yet a third group of brushed and
incised which might derive, insofar as characteristics of a given sherd
or group of sherds indicate, from Bossier or Plaquemine. The absence
of distinctive Plaquemine types eliminates this assemblage from consideration, but distinctive types of Alto, Coles Creek and Bossier are
present and give our clues for major alignments. We should be able
to work on the assumption that the indeterminate types will derive
from the three complexes, Alto, Coles Creek and Bossier, in about the
same proportion as these complexes are represented by distinctive
types.
It appears, then, that the major complex at this site is Alto; certainly
the burial pottery is of this complex. Coles Creek is present to a minor
extent and it is probable that some of the uncertain punctated and incised sherds are from Hardy, Manchac, and Rhinehart types. Finally,
occupation seems to have lasted into the Alto-Bossier transition to the
stage when distinctive Bossier Focus types had developed, so that there
is a respectable representation of this period. The brushed wares and
some of the incised and punctated also probably relate to the Bossier
pottery complex. It is improbable, however, that Bossier occupation
lasted very long, certainly not long enough for a transition to late
Glendora Focus times when the small group of shell tempered sherds
would have been made. The site was probably deserted for a long time,
then briefly occupied by late Natchitoches-related people, possibly in
the historic period. The Y atasi village mentioned by Marcelo De So to
(D'Antoni, 1961a ) is to be considered.
STONE ARTIFACTS

Dart Points
The 61 larger projectile points which are classified as dart points

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

177

are, with few exceptions, comparatively small and rough. Most are
made of quartzite, cherts, and petrified wood found locally. Thirty
five are of tan chert, four of petrified wood, two of red chert, six of
white or light gray quartzite, and others of varying shades of brown,
or mottled materials.
Gary points (Fig. 11, N -P) total 14; with most made of tan chert,
two of petrified wood, and one of white quartzite. The range in length
is 2.8 to 5.6 em. with nine of the 14 in the category of Small Gary
(Ford and Webb, 1956: 52) . The latter are less than 4.5 em. in length.
Ellis points (Fig. 11 , Q-S ) number 16, of which 12. are made of tan,
gray or yellow local cherts, two of petrified wood. The length varies
from 2.6 to 4.6 em., the width 1.5 to 2.9 em. Shoulders tend to be
straight, only two having barbs. Stem bases are usually straight or
mildly convex.
Carrollton points (Fig. 11, X ) , four in number, are made of materials different from the prevailing tan chert. One each is of granular
quartzite, waxy gray chert, white chert, and black chert. They are 4.1
to 4.5 em. long, 2.3 to 2.8 em. wide. Stems are not smoothed.
Kent points total five (Fig. 11 , T, U), and are typically crude in
manufacture. They are of gray, tan, and mottled cherts. Lengths are
3. 7 em. to 4.5 em., widths 1.6 to 2..4 em.; they are somewhat smaller
than those in eastern Texas ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962) .
The three Pontchartrain points (Fig. 11, EE, FF ) are the largest
and best made points from this site. Two are of light tan chert, the
third of darker tan. Lengths are 7.7, 9.3, and 9.7 em.; widths 2.5, 2.9,
and 3.2 em., respectively. The blades are rounded on one face, ridged
on the other, have good large flake scars, and typical fine retouch at the
edges. One (Fig. 11, FF) has an asymmetrically placed stem ; another
( Fig. 11, EE) has a rectangular stem and short barbs; the third has a
contracting stem.
One projectile point (Fig. 11, Y ) is hesitantly called Ensor because
of the low, narrow side notches and straight stem base. It is small, 3. 7
em. long and 1.8 em. wide, of tan chert, roughly flaked . The blade
edges are convex and irregular serrated.
Two specimens have outlines like Desmuke points but are made of
poor materials, petrified wood and gnarled chert, and the typing is
questionable. Both are thick, with bifacial ridges. A third of similar
appearance has an Almagre-like basal tip, but is much smaller than
this type, 5 em. long, 2.5 em. wide.
Two points are classified as Elam (Fig. 11 , V, W). They are short,.
thick and stubby, slightly asymmetrical and identical in size, 3.5 em.
long, 2.3 em. wide. They are made of tan and brown quartzite.

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

K

Q

R

D

L

s

E

G

F

H

N

M

0

w

v

u

T

cc

DO

JJ

MM
2

NN
4

00
6

8

KK

pp
10

CM
Fig . 11. Projectile Points and Chipped Stone Tools . A, B, Alba type . C, D, Hayes. E, F,
Friley. G , Maud . H, Cliflton . I, Un :yped . J , Catahoula. K-M, Colbert. N-P, Gary. Q-S, Ellis .
T, U, Kent . V, W, Elam . X, Carrollton . Y, possible Ensor . Z-DD , Untyped . EE , FF, Pontchartrain. GG- 11 , Rough blades . JJ , KK , Drills . LL, [nd scraper. MM -PP, Small triangular and
ovate scrapers.

179

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

Twelve projectile points are unclassified. Three of these are broken.
A group of four (Fig. 11, Z) is characterized by rough manufacture,
irregular wide blades with poor tips, and small, poorly formed stems.
Similar specimens have been found at other sites in north Louisiana,
never in large numbers. Possibly they were used as hafted knives or
scrapers. One specimen (Fig. 11, AA ) has long, shallow side notches
which are smoothed and a stubby, poorly made blade. Possibly it is a
reworked Yarbrough point or an atypical Trinity point. A small point
of gray quartzite (Fig. 11 , BB ) has blade edge notches and expanded
stem resembling Evans points, but it is much smaller than Evans. Similar small points with one to several blade edge notches have been
found on sites in Bossier and De Soto parishes; they will probably be
typed by another name than Evans (the name Sinner has been suggested because of their frequency at the Jim Sinner Site).
A small point of white chert (Fig. 11 , CC) has a greater width than
length; the base is wide and short; one shoulder is barbed, the other
barely suggested. Another small point has a rectangular stem and triangular blade but is much smaller than Carrollton, or even Elam
points.
The most unusual point (Fig. 11 , DD ) has a long rectangular stem,
a small shoulder on one side only, and a short, asymmetrical blade.
Blade and stem edges are beveled bilaterally on each face, with fine retouch flaking which serrates all edges. The base is mildly concave and
is thinned by removal of a long, shallow channel flake on one face, a
shorter channel flake on the other, terminating in a hinge fracture .
The base and lower stem edges are smoothed.

Arrow Points
There are 55 small projectile points sufficiently inta ct for typing and
12 broken so that typing is impossible. Materials include tan, red,
brown, and gray chert from local gravels; two gray-white chert; one
novaculite, and two dark brown to black flint.
Alba points (Fig. 11 , A , B), 20 in number, are mostly of tan or
reddish-brown local cherts. They vary from slender to wide, with a
range of 2 to 3.8 em. in length. Most recurve to form widened shoulders
which may be right angled or barbed; edges may be mildly serrated.
I have placed in this type only points with square or rectangular stems.
There are two Hayes points (Fig. 11 , C, D ), of gray and red-brown
chert. They are small, 2.6 and 2.8 em. long, 1.3 and 1.9 em. wide; the

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

first differs from the type description in having straight edges and no
barbs, but the stem shape is typical.
Five points are of Friley type (Fig. 11, E, F), characterized by definite shoulders with extreme curves so that the barbs turn toward the
blade tip. Stems are expanded or rectangular. Three are of red-brown
chert, two of tan chert. Lengths are 1.4 to 2.5 em., widths 1.0 to 1.5 em.
One typical Maud point (Fig. 11, G) of tan chert, has a deeply concave base and mildly serrated edges.
Four points are included in the Cliffton type (Fig. 11, H ) . They are
hardly more than roughly shaped small, wide flakes but have vague
stems and some secondary flaking. They are uniform in size, 2 to 2.3
em. long, 1.6 to 1.9 em. wide and all are made of tan chert. A fifth
small point (Fig. 11 , I) of dark gray flint has a pointed stem, concave
blade edges, and a strongly pointed tip; in essence, it is a concaveedged hexagon. It may be a variation of Cliffton, but has been left
untyped.
A group of 21 points (Fig. 11, K-M) is characterized by expanded
stems produced by corner notching, and blades which are much like
Alba. This point has been the subject of considerable discussion because of its frequency in Louisiana and southern Arkansas; it has been
included in the Alba type in some publications, in the Scallorn type in
others, but has distinct and, we believe, meaningful differences from
each of these types. We have therefore given it the type name Colbert.
It rivals the Alba type in frequency at sites like Smithport Landing,
Colbert, Greer, Swanson's Landing, and Mounds Plantation (Fig. 1)
where there are Alto and Coles Creek components in respectable
amounts. It is found, along with Alba, in central Louisiana, especially
in Troyville-Coles Creek context (Ford, 1951: Fig. 45, U-W). Recent
excavations at the Crenshaw Site in southwestern Arkansas uncovered
Coles Creek and Caddoan burials in Mound B; consistently the Coles
Creek burials had points similar to Colbert (called Homan in Arkansas ) and the Caddoan had Alba or Hayes. The Colbert points have
triangular blades with concave or recurved edges, distinct and usually
wide shoulders, barbs, and triangular or fan-shaped stems. The stem
bases may be straight or more often convex, rarely concave. Specimens
from Smithport are made of tan, reddish-brown, white and gray local
cherts, one of novaculite, and two of white quartz. Lengths are from
1.2 to 3.2 em., widths from 9 mm. to 2 em.
A large flat point of tan chert (Fig. 11 , J) has the flake characteristics of an arrow point despite its large size, 4.3 by 3 em. It has the corner notching and wide barbs characteristic of Catahoula points.

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

181

A small triangular point of brown chert probably belongs to the
Fresno type. The tip is broken but the original length was about 2 em.
MrscELLANEous CHIPPED SToNE TooLs

Generally, the tools from this site are made from native tan chert
cores and flakes, or from petrified wood, and are rough to the point of
being almost nondescript. Imagination is often required to attempt
assignment to types.
A massive axe-shaped object of petrified wood is worked to a nearblade form at the expanded end (Fig. 12, K), but appears to have been
used as a maul. The groove is natural. It is 15 em. long, 9 em. wide, and
4.5 em. in thickness. Two smaller objects of petrified wood (Fig. 12, G,
H ) are partially shaped, showing some of the original surfaces. They
resemble choppers or picks and are 7 X 5.1 X 2.3 em. and 8.8 X 4.7
X 2 em . A fourth object of petrified wood, 10.5 em. long and 4.2 em.
wide, is more suggestive of a pick but shows little evidence of use.
Smaller core tools include two choppers or end scrapers of tan chert
and quartzite. The first has much of its original surfaces, with one
end pointed by bifacial beveling. It is 5.5 em. long. The second is unifacially beveled across one end and onto one edge; it is similar in size.
Two possible gouges of red and tan chert, 3.4 and 4.2 em. long, are
ovate in outline and roughly flaked bifacially at one end. Eight smaller
objects are keel-shaped core scrapers or small choppers of tan and gray
chert. They are irregularly ovate, triangular or elongate, from 2.5 to
4 em. in length, 1.8 to 3.3 em. in width. Flaking is bifacial but those
with one flat face have minimal flaking on this side. Two larger, thick
leaf-shaped forms (Fig. 11, GG, HH ) may have served as knives or
scrapers.
Other tools are made from flakes. Two might be knives: one (Fig.
11 , II) is of gray chert, long and ovoid, rough at the base but well
finished around the edges. It is 5.9 em. long, 2 em. wide. The second is
made from a flat, triangular-shaped piece of petrified wood, which is
unmodified at one end (the base ), but has good secondary flaking
around the edges. It is 5.1 em. long, 3 em. wide, and 6 mm. in thickness.
A thumbnail end scraper (Fig. 11, LL) is of gray quartz, 3 X 2 em.
in diameters, 6 mm. thick. Unifacial beveling on one end and one side
is quite steep and the reverse face shows many tiny fractures around
the cutting curve.
There are 15 small scrapers (Fig. 11 , MM-PP) which are ovate
or triangular in outline and made from flakes which vary from 3 to 8

182

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCI ETY

.

'

. .

~

.

~'

c

.

.~

D

8
A

0

2

4

6

8

CM

Fig . 12 . Ornaments and Stone Tools . A, Polished stone tablet. B, Banded slate bead .
C, Bone bead . 0, Sandstone bead or concretion. E, Pitted stone . F, Brown sandstone whetstone . G, H, Choppers of petrified wood . I, Polished stone celt. J, Small hammerstone . K,
Maul of petrified wood . (All to scale except 8, C and D which are only sl ightly reduced.!

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

183

mm. in thickness. They are of tan, brown and mottled gray chert, petrified wood, and gray quartzite. Most are flaked bifacially but some show
a preponderance of flaking on the convex face. Sizes range from 2 to
4.5 em. Five small broken flake objects show some flaking.
There are four drills, all made of tan ch ert. One flake drill (Fig. 11,
KK ) has an expanded base, a shaft which is triangular in cross section
and a keen point which shows use polish. A second (Fig. 11 , JJ ) has a
geniculate form, is less well made, but shows usage at the tip. The other
two are tiny, 2.1 and 2.2 em. long, have one flat and one keel-shaped
face, and are worked on two of the three planes. They could have been
used as gravers or drills.

PoLISH E D AND GRoUND SToNE OBJECTS

Few objects of polished stone were found. One large celt (Fig. 12, I )
is from the surface. It is symmetrically ovate, 17.5 em. long, 7. 5 em.
wide, and 3.8 em. thick. It shows pecking marks on the faces, but is
well ground at the bit and along the edges. A triangular hard sandstone pebble, 7.5 X 7 X 3.3 em., has round pits, 3 em. in diameter, on
each face, (Fig. 12, E). There are smooth depressions on two edges. A
la;:ge pitted mortar stone is of ferruginous sandstone, 22 X 16 em. One
face has an oval depression, 13 X 12 em., in the center of which, and
on the opposite face, are deep hemispherical pits, 3.5 em. in diam eter.
An oval-shaped hammerstone (Fig. 12, J) of tan chert is smoothed
on two faces, roughen ed by pecking around all edges. A whetstone of
brown sandstone (Fig. 12, F ) has one deep and two shallow grooves
on one face, two grooves on the opposite.
A rectangular flat tablet of mottled brown slate (Fig. 12, A ) was
found during the burial excavations but not in direct association. It
is 6 em . long, 4.5 em. wide, and 3.5 mm. thick. The faces are polished
and the edges ground smooth vvith rounded corners, but there are no
decorations or perforations.
A bead of gray and brown banded slate (Fig. 12, B) was found on the
surface of Hill 1. It is pear-shaped, 9 mm. long, 12 mm. wide, counterdrilled and highly polished. A small perforated sandstone concretion
(Fig. 12, D ) may have been u sed as a bead, but the perforation seems
to be natural, and the surfaces are not modified.
An oval, reddish claystone concretion was found on the surface. It
is 12 X 6.5 em., and 2. 7 em. thick. The hard cortex had been removed,
exposing the soft ocher, which was a probable source of paint.

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
BoNE OBJECT

A segment of bone, 2.6 em. long, was found on the surface. The ends
are cut squarely across and there is a small (natural? ) perforation. It
is probably a bead of bird bone (Fig. 12, C), is hard, very white, and
the surface is polished. No other artifacts of bone or shell were found,
but the test pits in dark soil exposed numerous animal bones as well as
mussel and snail shells. No identifications were secured.
DISCUSSION

The Smith port Landing Site is one of a number of village and mound
sites along the Red River valley and its tributaries in northwestern
Louisiana (Fig. 1) at which varying amounts of Alto Focus pottery,
whole vessels or sherds, have been found. The mound sites shown are
within the river flood plain, with exception of Thigpen Mound and Village Site, which are on a terrace immediately overlooking the valley;
Gahagan, Curtis, Mounds Plantation, and Belcher mounds are on old
river channels near the present stream. The burial vessels at Gahagan
were Alto types-five Holly Fine Engraved, three Hickory Engraved,
one Kiam Incised-and 12% of the 76 sherds from the surface are the
distinctive Alto types (Hickory, Carmel and Holly Engraved, Davis
Incised, Crockett Curvilinear Incised, W eches Fingernail Impressed
and Pennington Punctated-Incised ). The Thigpen Site is preponderantly Bossier, but included in the scant collection of 102 sherds are one
Weches, five Dunkin, and five Wilkinson. We have only a few sherds
from the Curtis Mound (Sunny Point in Moore's 1912 report) but
Hickory Fine Engraved is included. At the Belcher Mound Site (Webb,
1959 ) the premound level had sherds and burial vessels of both Alto
and Haley types.
The Mounds Plantation (Pickett Landing in Moore's 1912 report)
Site has recently been explored with some intensity (McKinney, Plants
and Webb, to be reported). Twenty-six percent of the decorated sherds
in the previous surface collection were of the distinctive Alto types,
4.15% Coles Creek. A trench through one of the mounds showed intrusive Belcher Focus burials but the fill , habitation, and premound
level .sherds were Coles Creek and Alto, with admixture at all levels
but increasing amounts of Alto in the top levels. Alto types are Davis
and Harrison Bayou Incised; Hickory, Holly and Carmel Engraved;
Pennington, Crockett, Wilkinson, and Weches in the punctated and
punctated-incised categories. Coles Creek types were Coles Creek,
Chase and Beldeau Incised; Rhinehart Punctated; and the shared types:

SlVIITHPORT LANDING SITE

185

Hardy and Sanson Incised. Deep burials in a second mound had scant
pottery but the two vessels were Holly Engraved and a bowl with
Crockett and Pennington designs, both black and polished.
The non-mound village sites shown in Figure 1 are on hills fronting
the valley or on tributaries and lakes. All of those shown have Alto and
Bossier pottery types, most have Coles Creek-Troyville, all have a
good representation of the shared types Hardy-Kiam, Dunkin-Manchac, Harrison Bayou and Sanson Incised, Wilkinson Punctated, and
Rhinehart-atypical, Pennington Punctated-lncised. Omitting these
shared types and using only distinctive types, the Allen Site ha s 7%
Alto, no Coles Creek; the Wilkinson Site has 10.5% Alto, 0.3 % Coles
Creek; the Chamarre Site has 14 % Alto, 1.5 % Troyville ; Williams
Point ha s 4 % Alto , no Coles Creek; East Smithport has 8 % Alto, no
Coles Creek; the Colbert Place has 1.6% Alto, 5.45 % Coles Creek;
Greer has 6.7 % Alto, 1.8 % Coles Creek ; Pease and Sinner are strong
Bossier sites but have 0.3 % and 0.5·% Alto, respectively ; Swanson's
Landing has 4% Alto and 4% Coles Creek; and Harrison Bayou has
1 % Alto.
Not all of the mound or village sites in this same area show this kind
of representation of Alto or Coles Creek; there are as many or more
which are well developed Bossier sites and have little or no Alto. For
example, we have 230 surface sherds from the Vanceville Mound in
Bossier Parish with no Alto or Coles Creek types; the 3942 sherds from
the lower and premound levels of the Oden Mound include two questionable Hickory Engraved, no other Alto or Coles Creek types; 1275
surface sherds from the Marston Village Site show no Coles Creek, one
Holly Fine Engraved, and three Pennington Punctated-lncised. In
these same sites, as the distinctive types drop out, the shared incised
and punctated types like Dunkin-Manchac, Rhinehart-Pennington
variants, Wilkinson , Harrison Bayou Incised and even Hardy-Kiam
Incised are almost completely replaced by Pease Brushed-Incised, Belched Ridged, and the brushed types (Webb, 1959 ) . Large projectile
points and heavy scraper types also disappear, replaced by small arrow
point types and thumbnail-size, triangular and rectangular flake scrapers (Webb, 1959: Fig. 126 ).
The Smithport Landing Site shares with the other hilltop or hill
slope village sites of this earlier Caddoan period the carry-over of late
Archaic dart points, especially types like Gary, Ellis, Kent, Carrollton, Palmillas, San Patrice, Evans, Mar;on , and Pontchartrain. Large
as well as small scrapers, pitted stones, manos of hand size, oval
metates, small drills, large and small celts, brown and white sandstone

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

hones, hammerstones, and crude choppers are usual at these sites. Triangular and ovate knives, recurved-edge (Copena-like ) knives, stone
beads and polished stone problematicals (boatstones, bannerstones,
gorgets) or plummets are all missing or very rare, although stone beads
and problematicals occur in the late Archaic. The slate bead from
Smithport, a recurved (Copena) blade fragment from the Thigpen
Site, and a two-hole gorget from a small site north of Wallace Lake
(Webb, 1948: Pl. 16, 9 ) are exceptions. Small projectile points, generally of Alba and Colbert types, about equal the number of large ones
at these sites. Ear ornaments, shell and bone tools are infrequent.
In conclusion, the Smithport Landing Site is one of the larger village
sites of the earlier Caddoan (Gibson Aspect. Alto Focus) period along
the Red River valley in northwestern Louisian:l. It shares with a n umber of other village sites of this period evidences of a carry over of late
Archaic projectile points and stone artifact traits. It also shares with
numerou s village and mound sites evidences of admixture of Coles
Creek ceramic types and influences with the Alto pottery types as the
earliest pottery at these sites. It seems increasingly clear that the advent of Coles Creek and Alto Caddoan peoples and/ or ceramics, arrow
points, and riverine mound building into this area were virtually
simultaneous occurrences. Out of this blending developed the subsequent Bossier Focus ceramics and other cultural manifestations over
a wide portion of northwestern Louisiana, extending into eastern Texas
and southern Arkansas.
It is possible that the large ceremonial mound groups, like Gahagan
and Mounds Plantation, served as ceremonial centers for a number of
villages, including those in the adjoining hill areas, accounting for the
frequency of specialized burials, with ceremonial copper and polished
stone objects, pipes and ornamentation, and highly developed burial
ceramics, in the mound sites, in comparison with the paucity of these
objects in the hill villages.
Considerable research is needed ( 1) to establish the nature of the
relationships between mound sites in the valleys and the villages in the
hills; ( 2.) to trace the extent of Coles Creek and Alto contacts and the
process of amalgamation of these two strong cultures over the wide
area from central Louisiana into Arkansas, Oklahoma and eastern
Texas (this must have been friendly, as it is inconceivable that Caddoan peoples would have supplanted Coles Creek almost overnight in
hundreds of villages ); (3) and the development out of this amalgamation of Bossier, Plaquemine, and other later cultures.

SMITHPORT LANDING SITE

187

REFERENCES CITED
D 'Antoni, Blaise C.
1961a. Bayou Pierre, Land of Yesteryear, Chapter 2. Newsletter, North Louisiana
Historical Assn., April, pp. 9- 14.
1961 b. Bayou Pierre, Land of Yesteryear, Chapter 3. Newsletter, North Louisiana
Historical Assn., July, pp. 7-12.
1962. Bayou Pierre, Land of Yesteryear, Chapter 5. Newsletter, North Louisiana
Historical Assn., May, pp. 13-15.
Ford , James A.
1951. Greenhouse: A Troyville-Coles Creek Period Site in Avoyelles Parish,
Louisiana . Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of Natural
History, Vol. 44, Part 1.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Part 1.
Ford, James A. , and G. R. Willey
J 940. Crooks Site, A Marksville Period Burial Mound in La Salle Parish, Louisiana. Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey, Anthropological Study No. 3.
Moore, Clarence B.
1912. Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River. Journal of the Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia, 2nd. S2ries, Vol. 14, Part 4.
Newell , H . Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. Th e George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the
Society for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Quimby, George I.
1951. The Medora Site, West Baton Rouge Parish, Louisiana. Field Museum of
Natural History, Anthropological Series, Vol. 24, No. 2.
1957. The Bayou Goula Site, lberville Parish, Louisiana. Fieldiana: Anthropology, Vol. 47, No. 2.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks (editors )
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. The Texas Archeological Society, Special Publication No. 1, and The Texas Memorial
Museum Bulletin, No.4.
Webb, Clarence H.
1948. Caddoan Prehistory: The Bossier Focus. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19.
1959. The Belcher Mound, A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 16.
1961. Relationships between the Caddoan and Central Louisiana Culture Sequences. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31.

1560 Line A venue
Shreveport, Louisiana

A Guide to Pottery Sorting, and the Meaning
of -Pottery Types and Attributes*
E. MOTT DAVIS
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews basic procedures in the classification of pottery. Initially,
specimens are sorted into descriptive groups made up of similar pieces, the similarities being based on common attributes-paste, design elements, and so forth. The
next step is the setting up of types which are, basically, groups of attributes which
appear repeatedly in a given area and time span. The types are established by
tabulating the distribution of descriptive groups. Once established, types can be
used in tracing historical relationships between prehistoric cultures. Attributes also
can be used in this way, independently of ty pes.

INTRODUCTION

The classification of prehistoric artifacts is, basically, a matter of
grouping together specimens that look alike. The purpose is twofold.
First, the specimens in each group can be described jointly, and this is
better than having to describe hundreds of specimens individually.
Second, if the sorting has been done judiciously, the groupings can be
said to represent past customs, and hence can be used as tools in the
work of reconstructing cultural history.
This paper is, specifically, about the sorting and classification of
pottery. We start with a pile of potsherds from an archeological site,
and we wonder what to do with them that will make it worth while
having collected them in the first place. Four major steps are recommended: ( 1) sort the sherds into groups of similar specimens for purposes of description ; (2 ) tabulate the groups according to the locations
of the specimens; ( 3) see if the groups fall into types according to their
distribution in the table; ( 4) use the types in establishing relationships
among archeological complexes. It is also profitable, as a separate procedure, to tabulate the occurrence of the individual features on the
• This article is based on a paper given at the Pottery Symposium of the Houston
Archeological Society, at the University of Houston, December 6, 1959.

190

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

specimens, and to use them in the same way that types are used in
establishing sequences and relationships.

THE REASONS FOR DETAILED ANALYSIS

In this paper we will look into these procedures for setting up types;
but first it is worth while to discuss whys and wherefores. The business
of sorting and typing specimens is often dull work, and people who are
otherwise much interested in archeology are likely to be quite unenthusiastic about this part of the subject. After all, it is the romantic
side of archeology, not the rote work, which is one of its main attractions. Finding an implement actually made several thousand years ago
can be quite a thrill, because it is a contacl with the distant, inaccessible past. Real archeology, however, does not subsist on romance. In
the training of every archeologist, be he amateur or professional, there
comes a sorting-out process. The pot-hunters and pure romantics drop
out in the course of the meticulous digging and recording, the cataloging of the specimens, the classification and description and reporting;
and the real archeologists stick it out.
This is not to say that there is no romance to real archeology. The
romance is there, the same feeling of contact with the past. But to
make real contact with the real past, the detailed, careful, craft aspects
of archeology are absolutely essential. The job cannot be done by
enthusiastic day-dreaming.
Therefore, when we are confronted with a pile of broken pieces of
pottery, our handling of them should be guided by the constant realization that we really are working to pierce the curtain of time. We
intend to look into the past and find out what people were actually
doing. It is a slow, careful job. This sort of work is the raw stuff of
historical science.

SORTING INTO DESCRIPTIVE GROUPS

We start, then, with a collection of catalogued potsherds. Note that
they have been cataloged. They are marked with numbers or letters
which show, either directly or by reference to a catalog, where each
one was found. If they have not been cataloged, it is not possible to
follow through to the setting up of types and the exploration into the
history of the makers of the specimens.
Obviously, if we are going to handle all these specimens, we must

POTTERY SORTING

191

organize them in some way or other, and describe them. It is not
practical to describe each specimen individually unless there are only
a dozen or so. Very evidently the collection has to be sorted into groups
which can be handled as units. This, then, is our first job: to organize
the collection into groups of specimens that look enough alike so that
they can be described together. I shall call these groups descriptive
groups.
The sorting is done by checking the individual features of the sherds.
We call these features attributes. They include the nature of the paste,
the temper, the surface treatment, shape of the vessel, method and
design of decoration, and so forth (see appendix at end of this paper ) .
In sorting, one goes over the sherds one by one, checking their various
attributes, and putting them into different piles, each pile representing
a first guess as to what should be a descriptive group. The job usually
involves going through the collection more than once, since one's ideas
as to what the proper divisions should be are likely to change and
become more definite as more and more specimens come under
scrutiny.
The main rule in this procedure is to work with what is there, and
to have as few preconceptions as possible. One should not worry about
the groupings that have been worked out in other collections, or about
what the books say. It is best to be as independent as possible at this
stage of the work. Try sorting according to some likely combination of
attributes-tempering material, color, design-and if the first attempt
does not work, try another combination. In other words, find out how
these sherds sort on the basis of their own characteristics. The object
is to get them into groups in which the sherds are enough alike so that
the groups can be described. As part of the work, one should also keep
his eyes open for sherds that fit each other; in this way the lucky
worker may end up reconstructing parts of the vessels, or perhaps even
entire vessels.
Having accomplished the sorting, the next job is to write descriptions
of the groups. This writing is important, because when you have to
put things down on paper it is not possible to be as careless as when
you are merely thinking about them, and frequently you learn new
things a bout the material in the course of the writing.
The very fact that the pottery can be sorted into groups means that
the people who made the pottery had repetitive habits, which resulted
in certain features of manufacture appearing on numerous sherds and
numerous vessels. In other words, we have already recreated a bit of
prehistoric behavior.

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SETTING UP TYPES

Now that the material has been sorted into descriptive groups and
has been described, we can use it for either of two different kinds of
archeological analysis. First, we can use the material in tracing relationships between the people who made it and other groups of people
- ancestors, relatives, descendants, or neighbors. This is called historical analysis, and it is our main concern here. Second, we can make
inferences as to the part the specimens played in the life of the people
using them; this is functional analysis.
It is appropriate to point out the usefulness of functional analysis,
even though it is not the primary concern of this discussion. In many
areas, as in the Southwestern U.S . or the Caddoan Area in northeastern Texas, one can combine the descriptive groups into a few large
functional categories-cooking and utility vessels, burial vessels, ceremonial vessels, and the like. This sort of analysis, if done with considerable caution, can be a major key in reconstructing the life of
the past.
Our major concern here, however, is to use the pottery in retracing
history-in detecting relationships and developments between different peoples. We are looking for pottery classes that reflect customs
which were transmitted from one group to another, and from one generation to another. Such customs necessarily existed in given areas
and in given time spans. Therefore we want to find pottery categories
which hang together in time and space; and these will be our types.
Thus, a type is basically a group of attributes which appear repeatedly
together on specimens from a given area and within a continuous time
span. Less precisely, a type is a group of similar specimens from a
single time and space span. An example of a modern artifact type
would be a given make and model of an automobile, represented by
thousands of individual cars identified by a series of specific attributes
-grille design, body outline, features of the engine, and so forth.
Setting up types is a laborious but fairly straightforward process, in
which the main step is the making out of a distribution table (see, for
example, Table 1). Across the top of the table, one lists the find spots
-the places where the specimens were found. These will be such
things as grid squares and levels, stratigraphic zones, parts of the site,
particular burials, or (in the case of a surface survey) sites. Down the
side are listed the descriptive groups which have resulted from our
sorting. Thus we have a vertical column for each find spot, and a
horizontal line for each descriptive group. Then the specimens are

193

POTTERY SORTING

TABLE 1

FoND SPoTs-.

Zo111c
J)C&Cit i PTIV£

I

Zot~~dl

ZoNFm

ZoNE I[

(t.owcsr)

ZoNrJl
(HIGHf&T)

TOTALS

(TJtoUPS

,j,

#J .

IHt Ulf Ult Ill

T08IIOWN,
SON£ TEMPER

#2 .
PLAIN, BROWA/,
CLAY T£11PER

ununun
IH1 lll

f>lAtlll, GRAY

19

UIIIHIUII
LHfi.JtfUtf U41JHf~
IHf 1111

5'1-

88
25

23

ununun

IHfJHf/Jif

UftiHfiHI Uf1 Uff IH/f UHJ

JJnun

Ctt
t:J:t1Jlt1 tJfiJIII/JI(
IXIIHIJHIJ)If

~~r

fl'1

66

JH!/1

2'fZ

15
38
JH1 /Ill )Iff lHI 1)11 f)ff
JHfJI(fJHf J.HUH11Hf
/.H1lJfflllf
I)# I

PLAIN, BROWN,
BURNISHED,

SHELl

T£/'fP£11

UltJHI Ufl
till

JIII/II

BROWN,

81JR/IIISH£D TO

f'OLISIIC/)~
INC. I SED t>t51QN,

8

SHELL Tt:I"'PER

72

89

/OJ

107

/}lfJHIJ)If
36 /Ill
6'f

7
#:If.

TOTALS

6

IJIIJHIJIII

j)lt/11

JHtuniJif lH1 Jilt Ill/

~3 -

16

IHIJIIIJNf

98

27

I"'
ID'f

'f6'f

Explanation
Simplified tabulation of the distribution of sherds from a site where the stratigraphic zones (layers of earth) were clear, so th at the sherds could be cataloged
as to which zone each specimen was found in. I n other sites, the find spots migh t
be in terms of arbitrary excavation levels, burials, or other categories mentioned
in the text.
Each mark represen ts one specimen; the marks are grouped in "gates" of five
for ease in counting.
Descriptive groups #1 and #2. are similar in many respects and have the same
distribution except that #1 is less common. They are best combined as a single
tentative type, "plain, gray to brown, clay or bone temper."
Group #3 is distinct in both appearance and distribution, and is a good tentative
type by itself. The same is true of #4.
Speaking in terms of attributes, clay and bone temper reach a peak of popu larity
in zones II and III and decrease thereafter. Shell temper first appears in Zone III
and is dominant in Zone V. The same is true of burnis hing. Incised designs appear
in Zone IV and increase thereafter.
It can readily be seen that the actual number of specimens in each space is not
as important as the relation this number bears to the total in the column or line.
For this reason many tables include figures showing percentages of the tota l.

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

taken one by one, the find spot for each one is determined from the
catalog, and a mark is made for that specimen in the appropriate place
on the table.
Once the table is made out, it is possible to see how certain descriptive
groups hang together, whereas others have independent distributions.
Perhaps two or three of the original descriptive groups share a number
of attributes and always, or nearly always, occur together. If so, they
can be put together and called a possible type. We say possible,
because the conclusion needs to be checked at other sites to make it
firm. If surface collections are being tabulated, some descriptive groups
may occur more frequently on certain sites and much less frequently
on others; in this case one would suspect that types are emerging from
the study.
If you are lucky, someone else will have done similar work elsewhere in your area, and will have described and tabulated his material
as carefully and clearly as you have. If so, you can extend your tabulation on the basis of his material. If he has described his original groupings properly, you might find that his and your groupings coincide,
each study verifying the other and making a good case for setting up
types. On the other hand, you might find reasons to re-group his
material on the basis of the further information in your table. Revisions of this sort are now going on, for instance, in the classification of
Caddoan brushed pottery.

THE USE OF TYPES

We have now bee:-~ through the main steps in the establishment of
types. The use of types in detecting relationships between archeological
complexes is a subject which we can only treat briefly here. An archeological complex, such as the Aransas Focus or the Galveston Bay
Focus, is a group of attributes and types, manifested on artifacts and
structural features, which recur together repeatedly in sites from a
particular area and time span. Such a complex is presumed to represent a group of people who had a common culture; they lived alike.
When two separate complexes, such as the Galveston Bay Focus and
the Toyah Focus, have certain artifact types in common-Perdiz
points, for instance-this fact has some meaning in terms of contacts
between peoples and the spread of customs. Such complexes are said
to be related; how closely related depends on the number of traits

195

POTTERY SORTING

(types and attributes ) they have in common. If a type persists in time
through several succeeding foci, it gives an indication of cultural continuity from one focus to the next. For instance, Dr. Clarence Webb
has recently shown that the Caddoan pottery type Pease BrushedIncised first appears in the Haley Focus and lasts through the succeeding Bossier Focus. The cultural continuity thus demonstrated, combined with the evidence of other types and attributes which also persist from the Haley Focus to the Bossier Focus, gives clear evidence
that the Bossier Focus developed from the Haley Focus.
THE USE OF ATTRIBUTES

Although this paper is primarily about pottery types, it is well to
point out what has already been indicated in the preceding paragraph :
that individual attributes can and should be used in the same way as
types, and quite independently of types, in working out prehistoric
relationships. It is both possible and practical to make out a distribution
table in which each horizontal line is devoted, not to a descriptive
group, but to a single attribute-for instance, shell temper, asphalt
paint, conical vessel base, or squared lip. The attributes that show a
clear time and space distribution on the table, rather than being
scattered at random, evidently represent customs just as our types do,
and we can make use of them in identifying prehistoric cultures and
in detecting relationships between different cultures. The usefulness
of attributes has often been overlooked because of an over-emphasis on
setting up types, and useful information is neglected thereby. As a
matter of fact, there are collections in which it is hard to set up good
types; but the attributes can always be utilized to advantage. The
analyst is therefore cautioned not to ignore the lowly attributes ; they
are often as useful as the types. Examples of profitable utilization of
attributes, independent of types, can be seen in the studies of the
history of certain design concepts in the pottery of the Southeast
(Ford, 1952), or of glaze paint in the Southwest (Kidder and Shepard,
1936: 601-628).
SOME GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

Returning to the matter of pottery types, four general considerations
are worth emphasizing.
First. The word "type" is best restricted to those categories which
appear to have a given time and space distribution as indicated by

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

field evidence. People are likely to be careless with the word " type, "
and to use it in many ways. As a result it is often hard to tell just what
some of the categories mean, and whether "types" set up by different
people can be effectively compared with one another. Matters will be
helped if we restrict the use of the word to groups with specific time
and space distributions.
It should be noted, in this connection, that the descriptive groups
into which we first sorted our material may or may not correspond to
types; the tabulation will show which ones do correspond to types, and
which ones do not. Such purely descriptive categories as .our preliminary descriptive groups should not be called "types" unless it is established that they have historical significance- that they had continuity
in time in a given area.
Second. Types set up from sherds are sherd types; types set up from
rim sherds are rim types; types set up from whole vessels are vessel
types; and there are other sorts of types. These different kinds of types
are not necessarily equal to one another in significance, but they are
all useful. Vessel types are doubtless the most valid in the study of
past customs, because the Indians made vessels, not sherds. Sometimes,
however, sherds are all you have, and in that case you may have to
work with sherd types. Obviously it is important that the worker make
it clear what sort of type he is talking about.
Third. There are hardly ever firm lines between types. Most classification is a matter of breaking up a continuous series. In every collection there are some sherds which can be put in more than one category. For instance, one type may have developed from an earlier one;
in that case where are you going to draw the line? Good judgment is
necessary here, and the main problem must be kept in mind: to set up
categories which will be most helpful in tracing relationships between
sites and complexes, and thus will tell most about the history of
customs.
Since judgement enters into the classification, it is natural that
different workers will draw the lines in different places. For instance,
some people (the " splitters") customarily divide a collection into many
small types, whereas others (the "lumpers" ) feel it is most useful to
set up a few broad, inclusive types and, if necessary, subdivide them
into subtypes or varieties. There is no final answer to such differences
of opinion except that the worker must not only describe his types, but
also must tell how he went a bout setting them up. Then his work can
be used and compared with that of someone else who may have come

197

POTTERY SORTING

up with different results because of having gone at the problem in a
different way.
It should also be evident, from these considerations, that type definitions will be changed as more studies are made and more knowledge is
gained. The problem, after all, is not to set up types, but to understand
what happened in the past. To that end, as studies progress, new types
will be set up and old types may be dropped. A type may be split into
two or more new types if it seems to clarify matters; or several old
types may be combined into a single new type. Still other types will
stand the test of time.
Fourth. There are always some specimens that cannot be classified
into one type or another. They make up the "miscellaneous" column
in the tabulation. They constitute the " residual category." These mavericks should not be forced into one type or another; the analyst should
face facts and throw them into a pile marked "unclassifiable." Naturally, one tries to put as many of the specimens into descriptive groups
as possible; but at the end of the job, it is to be expected that there will
remain a pile made up of stubborn specimens each of which stands by
itself. Any of them that seem significant should be described individually; otherwise one need only make a few general remarks about
why the unclassifiable sherds have presented difficulties.
SUMMARY

We can recapitulate briefly the matters discussed in this paper. The
pottery from each archeological project should be sorted on its own
merits, divided into descriptive groups, which are batches of similar
pieces having a number of features (attributes ) in common. These
descriptive groups are the units to be worked with in setting up types,
which are groupings of attributes with definable space and time distribution. A type has meaning in history; otherwise a grouping should
not be called a type. In pottery several kinds of types are possible, such
as sherd types, rim types. or vessel types. Types can be expected to
grade into one another, and drawing the lines between them is a
matter of judgment in the job of most clearly reconstructing the past.
Therefore, in presenting a classification, the procedures as well as the
results should be described. There will naturally be differences of
opinion as to matters of classification, and type definitions will change
as further studies are made. A few specimens will always defy classification; they may or may not be important. Finally, the establish-

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ment and utilization of pottery types should be supplemented by the
study of the distribution of individual attributes, which are as useful
as types in the study of culture history.
The procedures described here for the classification of pottery may
also be applied to other classes of artifacts, such as chipped stone projectile points, shell ornaments, or bone tools. The ultimate objective
is the reconstruction of a valid picture of the past, presented in such a
manner that it may be checked against the work of others. Thus we
may gain a broader perspective on the course of human events. Types
and attributes are tools to that end, and they should be formulated and
utilized accordingly.

APPENDIX: LIST OF ATTRIBUTES FOR CLASSIFICATION
AND DESCRIPTION OF POTTERY

This is an outline list of many of the terms used in working with
pottery. In a brief presentation such as this, the list cannot aim to be
exhaustive or to give a full explanation of every term. The best way
to become acquainted with pottery analysis, short of doing it oneself,
is to study professional reports of archeological projects in which
pottery collections are analyzed (for basic references see Colton, 1953 ;
Shepard, 195 7) .
PASTE

Method of Manufacture: often this is difficult to determine.
Coiled-built by adding rolls of clay in a continuous spiral, or in
rings, from bottom to top. Traces of coils. incompletely smoothed
out, can sometimes be detected, and sometimes breaks occur
evenly along otherwise invisible coil lines.
Modeled-built up from a lump or lumps.
Wheel-made-can be detected by the even parallel curves of the
smoothing lines on interior surfaces.
Molded-made in a mold; found in Middle America and South
America.
Temper: foreign material mixed into the clay to prevent cracking during drying and firing. Temper can usually be seen with a hand
glass where there are fresh breaks.
Common tempering materials are: sand, clay, grit (crushed rock;
the rock can often be identified), shell, bone, crushed sherd (hard
to distinguish from clay at times), fiber (vegetal rna terial ) .

199

POTTERY SORTING

Texture: the fineness of the paste, usually shown on broken surfaces.
Described as coarse, medium, or fine.
Hardness: this is an indication of how well the material was fired. The
standard mineralogical hardness scale of 1 to 10 (Mohs' scale)
is usually used.
Color: usually stated as dominant surface color. and variations from it;
differences between color on interior and exterior surface of
vessel; difference in color between surface and core of paste, as
seen in fresh breaks; addition of a slip-a thin layer of clay different from the clay used in construction of the vessel. Color is
sometimes described precisely with the use of a color dictionary,
such as those by Munsell (Copper, 1941 ) or Maerz and Paul
( 1950).
Surface finish (as distinguished from decoration ) : rough, bumpy,
smoothed, roughened, burnished (rubbed almost to a polish ),
polished, brushed, stamped with a paddle or stick, fabric impressed. Some techniques, such as brushing, can be used as
surface treatment or as design, or both.
FoRM

Wall thickness: usually given in millimeters; note whether the base is
thicker than the walls.
Rim: the margin of the vessel mouth, where it is distinguished from
the rest of the vessel body by a change in the direction of the wall,
by thickening, or by other differences.
The rim may be incurved, outcurved (flaring ), vertical, straight,
thickened, or with other variations.
Lip: the top of the rim; the juncture of inner and outer surfaces at the
mouth of the vessel.
The lip may be sharp, rounded, flattened (squared ), tapered, turned.
in or out, thinned, thickened, scalloped.
Base: may be convex, concave, flat, pointed.
Vessel size: the various dimensions-diameter, height, width of mouth,
etc.-are usually given in the metric system.
Vessel shape: the shape needs to be described in detail, and illustrations
are most important.
Some of the terms used are: bowl, jar, bottle; globular, hemispherical, conical, long and tapering.
Appendages: handles, lugs, nodes, etc.

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
DECORATION

Technique:
Incised-cut with sharp instrument.
Trailed-cut with blunt instrument. Trailing and incising grade
into each other.
Engraved-cut with sharp instrument after the clay is dry.
Punctated- punched with the end of a stick, with fingernails
( "fingernail punctate" or "fingernail impressed" ) or with some
other instrument.
Pinched.
Ridged.
Appliqm\d-clay strips added to the surface for a relief design.
Cord impressed- design created by pressing a cord into the clay.
Cord-marked- paddled with a cord-wrapped stick; this is usually a
surface treatment rather than a decoration, but is sometimes done
to make designs.
Brushed- may be a rough surface treatment, or may be part of a
design .
Stamped-in the Texas area, largely restricted by stamping with
the edge of a shell, sometimes toothed ("dentate stamped" ) . In
" rocker stamping," the shell is " walked" across the clay surface,
producing a zigzag pattern. Elsewhere there are many other kinds
of stamping.
Neck-banded-the neck coils are not smoothed out, but are left as a
design.
Modeled-the clay has been modeled, often into realistic forms
( effigy pottery ) .
Painted.
Design: the design must be described, and illustrations should be used.
Here such terms are used as: circles, squares, diamonds, straight
lines, curved lines, hatching, cross-hatching, spirals, scrolls, ticked
lines, steps, and so forth .
It should also be specified where the design occurs: on the base,
body, shoulder, neck, rim, or lip of the vessel.
REFERENCES CITED
Colton, H. S.
1953. Potsherds. Museum of Northern Arizona, Bulletin Z5 . Flagstaff.
Copper, F. C.
1941. Munsell Manual of Color. Munsell Color Co., Baltimore.

201

POTTERY SORTING

Ford, James A.
195Z. Measurements of Some Prehistoric Design Developments in the Southeastern States. Anthropological Papers of the American Museum of
Natural History, Vol. 44, Pt. 3. New York.
Kidder, Alfred V., and Anna 0. Shepard
1936. The Pottery of Pecos, Volume II. Yale University Press. N ew Haven.
Maerz, A., and M. R. Paul
1950. A Dictionary of Color. Znd edition. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York.
Shepard, Anna 0.
1957. Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Publication 609. Washington, D.C.

Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas

A Guide to Archeological Reconnaissance
LEROY JOHNSON, JR.
ABSTRACT
The purposes and techniques of archeological reconnaissance or survey, particularly as they apply to Texas, are discussed. Specifically reviewed are the preparatory steps necessa ry before going into the field , the actual r econnaissance, and th e
analysis of the sites recorded and the materials collected.

INTRODUCTION

This brief article is designed to set forth , in an abbreviated fashion,
some of the most important features of archeological field surveying,
as it might be practiced in Texas and similar geographic areas. For
those individuals who may wish to pursue the topic further, a select
listing of recommended articles and books on the subject is provided in
the attached bibliography.
Field survey, or reconnaissance, involves the systematic search for
archeological sites and the proper recording of their location and
characteristics. Another feature is the collecting of surface (and, less
commonly_ subsurface ) materials which can be studied to obtain information on the physical and cultural nature of th e site.
A proper foundation in the goals and techniques of archeological
reconnaissance is essential for amateur and professional archeologists
alike. Regrettably, many institutions and amateur societies dedicated
to the study of archeology have been content to assemble miscellaneous
bits of information reported to them by others, rather than conduct
their own investigations of specific geographic areas. However, the
knowledge that can be acquired from planned reconnaissance is manifold: it can be highly valuable for determining limits of specific cultural complexes; for making distribution studies of specific archeological traits; as well as for conducting other types of research which
make use of comparative data. Invaluable information on aboriginal
population size, settlement patterns, etc., also emerges from careful
surveys.
Thorough regional surveys should ~e an integral part of the pro-

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

gram of all organizations that engage in archeological field investigation. The information obtained from them will not only clarify and
supplement the results of previous excavations and research, but will
prepare a basis for future work. This is especially true with respect to
salvage archeology. In this, the archeologist is engaged in a race against
time where extensive construction activities (viz. , dams, reservoirs,
highways, housing) will lead to the destruction of archeological sites.
Governmental agencies such as the River Basin Surveys of the Smithsonian Institution and the National Park Service, as well as state and
local organizations, must carry out adequate surveys of these regions .
Well-founded descriptions of the sites and the materials collected permit evaluation of the sites so that priority in the excavation schedule
can be determined. Limitations of time and funds preclude the excavation , usually, of all sites found during any survey. Nevertheless, when
the most significant sites can be located in time for study and excavation, an appreciable amount of important data and materials can often
be saved from destruction or serious damage.
It is perhaps in the field of archeological reconnaissance that local
groups of amateurs have the greatest opportunity for making a substantial contribution to the field. Many groups which have neither the
time, funds , nor technical training necessary to carry out extensive
excavations can nevertheless make worthwhile surveys in their own
areas. Employing methods similar to those set forth herein, these societies can unify the labors of their members and thus obtain much
important information. To accomplish this end, a central file may be
established to which each individual can contribute data he has gathered and recorded according to standards set forth by the organization.
Many such groups engage in archeological surveying activities on
week ends or during other free time. This work can be done by individuals or by several persons constituting a small field party. Fairly
large tracts of land can thus be covered, and when the sites are accurately located and evaluated, the information can usually be published
in a scientific journal as a survey report.
For the amateur living in a region where there are no local organizations, similar survey methods, modified to fit the imposed limitations,
can be applied successfully. The adoption of a site numbering system
and an adequate method for recording locations and for describing and
evaluating the data is just as obligatory for a single individual as for
a large organization. The amateur archeologist, working alone, can
engage in the same type of investigation undertaken by large groups.
Although this work will necessarily be on a smaller scale, he will still

ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE

205

be able to acquire important information about the region which he
studies, provided that he work carefully and maintain accurate records.
PREPARATIONS

Before going into the field, there are a number of preparatory steps to
be taken regardless of the extent or duration of the trip planned. To
begin with, a thorough study should be made of previous archeological
research in the area to be covered. This preliminary library work involves an examination not only of the published reports and papers,
but also of unpublished site records and field notes. In addition to data
contained in the archeological references, helpful information can
many times be found in ethnographic and historical accounts of the
region .
By means of this review of the extant literature, the field worker
should acquire a familiarity with the cultural units represented in the
area, the nature of the sites which are generally encountered there (i.e.,
small open occupation sites, large masonry structures, etc.), and the
artifact types which have been established. A knowledge of the local
system of culture classification and the terminology utilized by other
investigators in the same region will make one's descriptions more
easily correlated with the earlier work.
Helpful details can also be gleaned from old field journals, when
they are available. For example, earlier workers in a particular locality
often solved practical problems of transportation, food requirements,
and living conditions in a fashion best suited to the area; these data
are frequently set down in their field journals. The present investigator
is thus, with this information, spared the necessity of experimenting
for himself and, perhaps, of making costly mistakes.
Another phase of preparation for field work which should be considered is the first-hand examination of a considerable quantity of the
materials (pottery, stone artifacts, or what not) which may have been
recovered previously from sites in the area. A familiarity with these
objects will assist the investigator in making his own identifications.
Personal visits or other communication with former workers is also
worthwhile since these people provide many useful insights into local
problems, based upon actual experiences.
The following institutions have conducted most of the archeological
research in Texas and possess records describing the results of their
investigations:
( 1) Texas Memorial Museum, Austin

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(2) Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin
(3) Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas,
Austin
( 4 ) Witte Memorial Museum, San Antonio
( 5 ) Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, Canyon
(6 ) Sul Ross State College, Alpine
( 7) The Museum, Texas Technological College, Lubbock
( 8) Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Also, numerous local archeological and historical societies throughout the state have records of their work which would likely be of benefit to the investigator. By combining the information obtained from
professional institutions, local organizations, and from archeologists
and amateurs who are familiar with a particular region, the field
worker can acquire a fairly accurate picture of the ground to be covered before he actually takes to the field. In this manner he will be
able to progress more rapidly and accurately than if he had proceeded
without first having made these preliminary investigations.
Another important feature of this preparatory study is the acquisition and careful examination of maps. Among those in Texas which
can most frequently be used to good advantage are the following. There
are, of course, many others.
(1) U. S. Geological Survey ( USGS) : A series of quadrangle topographic maps ranging in scale from 1/ 24,000 to 1/ 125,000;
these maps, however, cover only a portion of the state.
(2 ) Texas State Highway Department: General Highway Maps
prepared for the various counties, with scales of 1/ 126,000, etc.
(3) United States Forest Service: Maps for those areas in the state
which lie within National Forests.
( 4) United States Army Corps of Engineers, Bureau of Reclamation, and Private Engineering Company Maps: These maps
cover areas of construction and are especially useful for salvage
archeology projects.
The USGS topographic maps are particularly useful for examining
details of terrain as an aid in locating archeological sites. By carefully
studying drainage systems, river flood plains, terraces, bluffs which
might contain rockshelters or caves, etc., one can often select the appropriate areas in which to concentrate one's endeavors. Of course the
distribution of archeological sites in any area may not follow a general
pattern, but when a pattern emerges, the task of locating new sites
becomes much simplified. It must be realized that these distribution
patterns, when they do occur, differ from region to region, and that

ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE

207

it is advisable to review the reports and works of investigators who
have been in the area previously, in order to determine the nature of
any such pattern.
The county highway maps can be best used for determining the
most suitable access roads, studying the types of road surfaces, and
making plans for operations during inclement weather. Quite often
small roads and trails are shown on these maps, and a knowledge of
them can be of great aid in planning the route for entering relatively
inaccessible areas. Care should be taken, however, to note the date of
publication of the maps in view of the fact that changes in highways
and road systems are frequent in some areas.
The USGS topographic maps may be acquired from the Office of
Map Information, U. S. Geological Survey, Washington 25, D.C., or
they may be purchased from a:n.y large engineering company or surveying office in the major cities. The county General Highway Maps may
be purchased from the Texas State Highway Department, Austin, or
at the county seats of the various counties.
Of some limited use to the field worker are the soil maps published
by the U. S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Soils, Washington,
and the Geologic Map of Texas, published by the Bureau of Economic
Geology, Austin, Texas. These maps can sometimes be of aid in locating and identifying river terraces, alluvial formations, and other significant natural features. This information may aid in locating sites
of some geologic antiquity, particularly the frequently buried sites of
the Paleo-Indian and Archaic cultures. When relationships between
certain types of archeological sites and geological formations have already been established, these maps and similar geologic publications
show the researcher where to direct his studies.
In recent years much attention has been given to aerial photography. Good aerial photographs, or composite maps made from these
photographs, can be used successfully as supplements to the topographic sheets. Detailed information about specific natural features
and vegetation, and sometimes even archeological sites themselves
can be discovered from such photographs. For example, a disturbance
on the ground will show on a photograph as a difference in tone,
either because of a variation between the color, or the reflecting power,
of the particular feature (or area) and its surroundings. By way of
illustration, the shadows formed by mounds, thick midden areas, or
raised structures can readily be recognized. So, too, can the darker
areas caused by concavities in the earth's surface representing pit
houses, borrow pits, or other man-made depressions. In certain regions

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

differences in soil color, due to the presence of a rich, dark midden
humus, can be recognized. For best results, two photographs taken
from slightly different angles should be observed with a stereoscope
in order to produce a three-dimensional view, thus emphasizing the
relief. Such photographs, however, are not easily obtainable, and the
cost of having them made is extremely high. Excellent aerial photographs of much of the United States can be purchased from the U. S.
Soil Conservation Service, Department of Agriculture, which has offices
located in the various county seats.
Another preparation which cannot be overlooked before starting
actual field reconnaissance is the establishment of a site designation
system for recording the finds. For professional archeologists or institutions working in Texas, the three-part numbering system of The
University of Texas is recommended: ( 1) state number ( 41 for Texas ),
(2) county abbreviation, and (3) the site number within the county.
For example, the George C. Davis Site of the Alto Focus has been assigned the number 41 CE19, indicating that this is the 19th site located
in Cherokee County (CE), Texas (41). For a complete listing of
county abbreviations see Table 1.
The amateur who would like to coordinate his investigations with
those of major institutions, may report the sites which he locates to
some university or museum in his area. The report should be made in
a manner which conforms to the recording specifications of that institution. In this way numbers will be assigned to the sites and the amateur may then utilize them in his own records. Not only will these
organizations acquire new data through this arrangement, but the
amateur will also profit. First, he will probably have access to additional information which the university or museum already has recorded in its files. Second, his site designation problem is solved since
he is provided with official numbers. Finally, cooperative relations are
fostered between the professional institution and the amateurs in its
area.
There are a number of less complex systems for designating sites
which are quite adequate and are, in fact, preferred by many amateurs
and local archeological societies because of simplicity and ease of application. For example, sites may be numbered solely by employing
the county abbreviation and a site number within that county. Thus,
HZ-2 is site number 2 in Hudspeth County; another possibility is to
employ the initial of the investigator's surname plus a number assigned
to the site. Hence, J-105 is the 105th site located by Mr. Jones.

AR C H EOLOGI CA L R ECONNAI SSANCE

209

TABLE
COUNTY SYMBOLS FOR ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE DESIGNATION
TEXAS (41 )

And ers on ••• • •• AN
Crane ••••••••• CR
Hartl ey • •••••• HT
Madi son ••••••• MA
San Pat r icio •• sP
Andrews ••••••• AD
Cr oc kett •••••• CX
Ha s ke ll •• • •••• HK
Mar i on •••••••• MR
San Saba •••••• ss
Angelina • • ••• ,Af,
Cr os by .. .... ., CB
Hays,. • • ••• .,,HY
Martin ........ MT
Schlei cher •• , .SL
Ar ansas ••••••• AS ~ b erson • • • • • CU
He mphill •••••• ffii
Ma s on ••••••••• MS
Scurry • • •••••• sc
lrcher •• • ••••• AR
Dallam •••••••• DA
Hender son ••••• HE
Matagor da ••••• AXJ
Shac kelford • • • SF
Armstrong ••••• AM
Dalla z., •••• • •DL
Hid al go ••••••• HG
Maver ick •••••• MV'
Shelby •••••• • • SY
At a s cosa •••• • • AT
Dawson •••• • ••• DS
Hill ••••• , •••• HI
McCull oc h • •••• MK
Sherman ••••••• SH
____!!!stin •••••••• AU
De af Smith • •• • DF
Hockley ••• • ••• HQ
McLenn an •••••• ML
Smi t h ••• • ••••• SM
Ba iley •••••••• BA Delte ••••••.•• DT
Hood ••••• • •••• HD
McMull e n •••••• MC
Sorne rv e l l ••• •• fYI
Bandera •• • •••• BN
Denton .• • .. . • • DN
Hopkins ••• • ••• HP
Medina •••••••• ME
Starr •• • •••••• SR
Bastr op ••• ••• . BP
De Wi t t ••••• •• DW Hou s ton ••••••• HO
Menard ••• , •• • • MN
St ephens •• ·•• ,SE
Bayl or • • •••• • • BY
Di c ken s ••• •• • • DK
Howa r d • •• • , • •• HW
Midland ••• , •• ,MD
St erli ng • • , . , . ST
Bee ...... .. . .,BE
Dimmitt •••• • .,DM Hudspeth ...... HZ
Milam ... ., • .,, MM
Stonewall. • •• • SN
Bell. ..... . ... BL
Donley .. . .. .. . DY
Hunt .. , ....... HU
Mills •• • •••••• MI
Sutton ... ... ,.SU
Bexar ••••••••• BX ._....Q£v a l •• • • • •••• DV --...tl!!t c hinson • • • • HC
Mit chell •• • •.• MH
Swi s her •• •• ••• SW
Blanco •••• • ••• BC
Ea stland • •• • • • EA __!!:ion •••• • • , •• I R
Montague •••••• MU ~rant •.••• ooTR
Bor den •• o ••••• BD
Ector . . ....... EC
Jack •• ••• • •••• J A
Montgomer y •••• MQ Tayl or •••••••• TA
Bo sque •••••• o. BQ
Edwards ••••••• ED
Jacks on ~· · ••••JK
Moo r e , •••• • , •• MO
Terr ell •••• o • • TE
Bovrie •• • • o •••• BW El li s •••••• • o , EL
Jasper •••••••• J P
Morr i s •• , ••••• MX
Terr y ••••• o • • • TY
Brazor i a •• • •• , 80
El Pa so •••• ,, . EP
J eff Dav is •••• JD ___M.Qtley •• • • , • • • MY
Throckmor ton •• TH
J ef f erson ••••• JF
Na cogdo c he s ••• NA
Titus • • •.••••• TT
Braz os ••••• o • • BZ ___i:.rath •• • ••• ••• ER
Br ewster •••••• BS
Falls •••• •• ••• FA
Jim Hogg • ••••• JH
Navar ro ••••••• NV
Tom Gr een ••••• TO
Br iscoe ••••••• BI
Fann in • •• ••••• FN
Jim We l ls •• • •• JW
Newton •••••••• NW
Tr avis ••• •• ••• TV
Br ook s ••.••••• BK F a yette •••• • •• FY J ohns on ••••••• JN
Nol an •••••• • •• NL
Tr in ity ••••••• TN
Brown, • • • ••••• BR
Fisher • •• • •••• FS ......J.2nes ••••••••• J S ......l!!:!.e ces •••• • •• , NU _.l:i.ler •••••• • •• TL
Burl eson • • •••• BU
Floyd ••••• • ••• F L
Karne s •••.••••• KA
Ochil t ree ••••• oc
Up s hur ••• • • o • • UR
__!L
urnet ........ BT
Foard ..... . ... FD
Kaufman ,. ..... KF
Oldhllll1 ...... .,OL
Upt on ••••• • ••• UT
Caldwell .... ., CW For t Be"d ..... FB
Kendall. ... . .. KE ____Qrange ........ OR ___\!ya l d e ... . .... uv
Calhoun ..... ., CL
F r ankl ir" ..... FK
Kenedy ........ KN
Palo Pi n t o .. ., PP
Val Ve r de • •••• vv
Callahan • • • ••• CA F rees t or.e ••••• FT
Kent •• • ••• • ••• KT
Pan ola •••••••• PN
Van Zandt •• • •• VN
Came r on •• ••••• CF -.!!:.i o ••••• • •• • •FR
Kerr • • ••••• • •• KR
Parke r ••••• • .• PR __!!ctoria • . •• •• VT
Camp •••• • ••••• CP
Gaine s •• • • , ••• GA
Kimbl e ••• , • ••• KM
Parmer •••••• , . PM
Walker •••••••• WA
Carson •••••••• cz
Galv eston ••• • • GV
King •••••• • ••• KG
Pecos • • ••••••• PC
Waller •••••••• WL
Ca ss • • • • •••••• CS
Garza ••••••••• GR
Kinn ey •••••••• KY
Polk ••• •• ••••• PK Wa rd • •••• •• • •• WR
Gillespie • • •• • GL
Kleberg •••• • •• KL
Pot t er •••••••• PT
Washingt on •••• WT
Ca stro ••. •• •• CAS
Chambers •••••• CH
Glasscock •• • •• GC ___]Snox •••••••••• KX
Presidio •• o • • • PS
Webb •••••••••• WB
Chero ke e •••••• CE
Gol 'l ad . •o • • • o . GD
Lamar ••••••••• LR ----a;in s •••••••• ,RA
Wha rt on , •••••• WH
Childr ess • •.•• CI
Gonzales ••• • •• GZ
Lamb ,. , ••••••• LA
Rondal l, ,, .... RD
Whe ele r • •••••• WE
Cl ay ....... . .,CY
Gray .. . ..... .,GY
Lampasas ••• • • ,LM
Re a gan ........ RG
Wichita ... . ... we
Cochr an ••••••• CQ
Grays on .••••• , GS
La Sall e •••••• LS
Real •••• • ••••• RE
Wilba r ger ••••• WG
Coke •••••• • •• • CK Gr egg ••.•••• • • GO
Lavaca •••••••• LC
Red Riv er • • ••• RR
Willacy ••••••• WY
Coleman, •••• , .CN
Grimes •• • • • • • • OM Le e , •• , ••• • , •• I.E
Reeves •• o. o., . RV
Wi ll iam son •••• WM
Collin ••••••• COL ~adalupe ••••• GU
Leon •••••••••• LN
Refugi o ••••••• RF
Wilson ••• • •••• WN
Collings worth .CG
Ha le ...... . ... HA Liber ty ....... LB
Rober t s , ... . .. RB
Winkle r . .. .... WK
Color ado •••••• CD
Hall ••• , ••••• .HL
Limestone ••••• LT
Rob ert s on ••• • • RT
Wise •• • • •• •••• ws
Comal •• • •••• , ,Ct.!
Hamilton •• • • , ,HM
Lipscomb • ••••• LP
Roc kwall • ••• • ,RW __j!£od • • •••• • •• ,WD
Comanc he • ••••• CJ
Hansford •••••• HF
Liv e Oa.k • ••••• LK
Runnel s •••• • •• RN
Yoakum , •••• • •• YK
Concho •••••••• cc
Hardeman •••••• HI
Llano •••• • •••• LL ____li!:!s k • ••• , ••••• RK ____12ung ••••••••• YN
Cooke ••••••• • • co
Hard in., • ••••• HN
Loving •••••••• LV
Sabi ne •••••••• SB
Za pata •••••••• ZP
Coryel l ••••••• CV
Har r i s •••••••• HR
Lubboc k •• • •••• LU
San Aueu stine .SA Zavala •••••••• ZV
Cottl e . . .. . ... CT
Harr ison •••••• HS
Lynn .......... LY
San Jacint o ... SJ

FIELD RECONNAISSANCE

Assembling necessary field equipment is the first step in beginning
actual explorations. There are, of course, many items w hich can be of
use; h ow ever, the following brief list of m aterials w ill probably fulfill
th e requirem ents of most situation s.

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1. Cameras and accessories. Any sturdy, easily usable camera is
suitable for the field.
2. Maps. These have been described above in the section on preparations.
3. Army compass or Brunton pocket transit.
4. Measuring tapes. A 100-ft. steel tape and a small 6-ft. or 8-ft.
steel tape.
5. Hand or eye level. This is used for obtaining approximate elevations or for drawing maps.
6. Machete or brush knife. Used for clearing undergrowth.
7. Shovel. One with a rectangular blade is useful for digging small
test pits and cleaning walls of erosional cuts.
8. Mason's trowel. Used for the same purpose as the shovel, but for
work on a smaller scale.
9. Sacks. Of paper, or cloth, for collecting specimens.
10. Whisk broom and paint brushes. For cleaning exposed features.
11. Looseleaf notebook. This should contain lined paper for notes,
graph paper for sketches and maps, site survey forms, and carbon
paper for duplicate copies if desired.
12. Pencils. No. 2 or 3 for general writing, 3H for drawing, and
perhaps a set of colored pencils for maps.
13. Protractor with straight edge. For making sketch maps.
14. Scales. A device in inches or the metric system to be used in all
photographs to show scale of site and features.
15. Directional Arrow. Of fairly large size and painted white; for
indicating direction of north in photographs. This may be combined with item 14.
16. India ink and crow quill pen. For placing cataloque numbers on
specimens collected in the field.
17. First aid kit (snake bite kit may likewise be useful ) .
18. Canteen .
19. Knapsack, or the like. For convenience in carrying equipment,
food, etc.
At the beginning of the reconnaissance the survey party ought, if
possible, to interview people in the area from whom useful information or assistance might be secured. Visits may be made to local construction contractors, research institutions, museums, and libraries.
Amateurs, collectors, and "old timers" who may have an intimate
knowledge of the geography and history of the area may also be sought
out and consulted. By carefully explaining the nature and purpose of
the proposed study, the investigators can often interest others in their

ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE

211

activities and thereby obtain valuable information and assistance.
Needless to say, establishing cordial relations with influential persons
in the area to be visited is sometimes important. It is helpful to explain
to these people-especially to those who are civic-minded and interested in the history and background of their community-the significance and goals of the research which is to be undertaken. Such individuals can frequently pave the way for smooth personal dealings with
possible informants. This is a phase of archeological investigation
which should not be overlooked.
Another important factor in the planning of a reconnaissance trip
is the division of the area into convenient sections which can be covered
singly. In this way several persons or groups can work over different
parts contemporaneously, and much time may be saved in the preliminary search.
The next task is to make a quick trip through the entire area to be
surveyed, accompanied, if at all possible, by local people. This is necessary so that the survey party can become familiar at the the outset with
the topography, the roads, and the over-all situation which will confront them.
Next, any sites which have been reported by local informants should
be .visited, mapped, and recorded. Then the investigators are ready
to choose one of the divisions of the area in which to begin an intensive
reconnaissance. By utilizing information obtained from the reports of
other workers and from topographic maps, the survey group will be
in a position to select the most likely geographic .locations (i.e. , river
terraces, river bottoms, cliffs with caves, etc.) in which to begin their
search. After one area has been completely reconnoitered, work in a
new division is begun. By carefully explaining the purpose of the work
to landowners and tenants and by asking permission to search for sites
on their land, tactful and considerate field workers can accomplish infinitely more than those individuals who barge through the countryside leaving gates open and treading upon crops and who, in general,
are inconsiderate of the rights and privacy of others.
Some familiarity with the type of sites frequently encountered in an
area is often necessary in order to be able to recognize archeological
sites readily, assuming, of course, that previous investigations have
been carried on. Generally speaking, sites are recognized by surface
indications which may consist of potsherds, fragments of bone, shell,
flint debris, or other remains of human occupation and activity. Frequently the discoloration of soil in long-inhabited spots and the dense
vegetation which feeds on humus-rich midden soil offer clues to the

212

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

existence of a site in the locality. For instance, the difference in the
density, color, and height of cotton or other crops in large fields may
serve as an indication of occupation zones in many sections of the state.
For sites of very great antiquity, especially belonging to Paleo-Indian
cultures, some previous experience with similar localities and a knowledge of geology are often necessary for accurate field identification.
When an archeological site has been located, a minimum-data Site
Survey Form, such as the one presented here, should be carefully completed and any other information, not specifically called for on the
form, of possible importance should be recorded and attached to the
form . A sketch map of the site, drawn to scale, perhaps on graph paper,
should also be prepared and attached to the form. Duplicate copies may
be made of both the form and sketch map for the use of other individuals and institutions.

SITE SURVEY FORM
1. SITE NO . ... ...... ... 2. STATE. ................... 3. COUNTY .......... .... .... ..

4. LOCATION ... ....... ......... .. ..... ... ...................... ........... ................ ... .... .

5. TYPE OF SITE ...... .................................. ................... ...... .......... .....
6. CULTURAL AFFILIATION .. .......................................... ...... ...... ..
7. OWNERSHIP DATA .................................... .................. .... .......... ..

8. INFORMANTS ..................... ................................................ ... ....... .
9. SITE DESCRIPTION .... ... .... .................... .. ...... ... ... ........ ................ .

10. AREA OF OCCUPATION ...... ....................................................... .

ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE

213

11 . PRESENT CONDITION: vegetation ----- ------------ --- -·------ ---- ------ ---- ---cultivation ____ __ ··-·-----· ··--·· -- ------ ----···· ---··- erosion·---------------···· ·· ·--· ---- ---12. CHARACTER AND DEPTH OF FILL ---- ··------·---··---·-·----------·-----

13. PREVIOUS INVESTIGATION OR EXCAVATION ··- ··---·-------

14. PREVIOUS DESIGNATIONS FOR SITE ---·---·--···--··---·-· ···-·-· ·---·-

15. WORK DONE BY SURVEY: surface collection ......, test pits __ ____ ,

excavation. -··-··--·· ·-· --··--· ····-- ····--· -····-··-·-··---·--·-··· ··-··-···-···--··- ··-·-·-····-16. MATERIAL COLLECTED -·-··· -··-···- ··--··- -· ·----- -----· ---- -- -· --·--·· ·-----·---

17. MATERIAL OBSERVED OR REPORTED -·---··--·-·· ·· ----··----- ···------·
18. POSSIBLE OBSTACLES TO WORK-·--- ·----· -····· ·--·-·-·---·-·-----··-----19. PHOTOGRAPHS·-·-·--··· -·----·--- 20. MAPS OF SITE. ... ---·- ·-····---····-·
21. RECORDED BY. ... ·--·-·- ··· ·· ·····-····-·· ··--- -· 22. DATE. ....... ---··-· ···--··---·
EXPLANATION OF SITE SURVEY FORM

1. Site No. The site should be assigned a number in accordance with the recording system used by the particular field workers, institution, or archeological
society.
2 . State, 3. County. Fill in where applicable. In other states the township and
range designations should also be included.
4. Location. Include the following data : (a ) location by land surveys where
possible, and (b ) location by distances from towns, road junctions, or n atural
geographic features . These distances should be ,measured, if possible, with the
automobile mileage indicator.
5. Type of Site. It should be stated whether the site is an open occupation site, a
burial area, a rockshelter, a ceramic or lithic site, etc.
6. Cultural Affiliation. This may be determined by an examination of artifacts or
features present. Frequently this is not possible until the completion of the
laboratory analysis of the materials collected.

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

7. Ownership Data. H ere should be includ ed the nam e and address of the own er
of the land, as well as th e names and addresses of tenants and former owners,
when the information is available. The attitude of th e owner toward s further
investigation or excava tion should also be ascertained and recorded.
8. Informants. The names and addresses of any persons whose aid l ed to th e locacation of the site sh ould be included to aid future inves tigators.
9. Site Description. After the site h as been thoroughly investigated, da ta on the
geographic and topogra phic setting, th e position of the site with respect to
water, natural features, houses and other man-made objects, and any additional
items which th e recorders consider pertinent should be noted in this space.
10. Area of Occupation. For large sites this should be estimated in a cres ; for sm all
sites in terms of feet. yards, or meters. In som e instances tape measurements
can be made.
11. Present Condition. The presence of vegetation or cultivated areas and th e deg ree
of soil erosion should be carefully described.
12. Character and Depth of the Fill. Th e na ture and depth of the soil deposits. or
fill , can often be ascertai ned by cleaning and examining road cuts and erosional
cuts. Where no such examination is possible, a few small test holes, only a few
feet in diameter, may be dug at shallow sites. D ata from these investigatio ns
should be recorded as follows: "su r face to 8 inch es, plow zone; 8 in ch es to 18
in ch es, dark, humu s-stain ed sand, etc." Any such test pits should be recorded
carefully in the notes and sketch map, and should be marked in the fi eld. for
exampl e, by including a bottle or other modern a rtifact in the pit before it is
re fill ed, in order to prevent any misi nterpretation of the fea ture by later investigators. It is a problem to say just how much subsurface investigation is desirable
during a survey. At some sites it may be feasibl e to carry on rather extensive
tes ting. It is frequently desirable in determining the vertical extent of midden
soil, for instance, to establish a coord in ate grid system upon the surface a nd to
sink pits with an auger at regular intervals on the grid pattern. Porta ble motordriven augers, designed for use by two people, are availa ble for this type of
testing. In particular sites, such as those at which elaborate subsurface fea tures
are suspected, proton-magnetometers and like devices may be successfull y used.
13. Previous In vestigation or Excavation . An entry is to be made when a site has
been previously recorded or excava ted. Give th e source of inform ation and
references to publications if a ny exist.
14. Previous Designations for Site. Includ e here all the former names or designations for the site whether applied by local inhabitants, amat eurs, or professional
archeologists. List all sources of information or bibliographic data.
15. Work Done by Survey. Check appropriate spaces.
16. Material Collected. While the site and adja cent areas are being investigated,
surface artifacts and other material of inter est should be collected and placed in
properly Ia belled bags. In the fi eld it is sufficient to sta te that the material
collected includes "potsh erds, projectile points," or wh atever. Sometimes a field
number is placed on a n artifact as soon as it is found in order to insure that
its correct location will be record ed. This is especially important in th e case of
stone axes, pottery vessels, and other objects which may conceivably be h a ndled
before they are sent to th e laboratory. After a labora tory examination of the
artifacts is completed, they should be tabula ted by type and quantity and this
tab ulation should be attached to the site survey form .

ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE

215

17. Material Observed or Reported. This section should be used for recording
materials which were said to have been collec ted at this site, but which are in
the possession of others.
18. Possible Obstacles to Work. This space should be reserved for describing situations which might interfere with excavation, such as thick, tangled underbrush,
or the la ck of cooperation on the part of the landowner.
19. Photographs. Several photographs, taken from different vantage points, should
be made of the site. It is helpful to include natural features and man-made
objects so that the site m ay easily be identified. Photographs should be assigned
field numbers and r ecorded on a field photograph record fo rm. The field numbers assigned should be recorded both on the field photograph record and in
section 19 on the Site Survey Form.
20. Maps of the Site. This space is provided to indicate that a map of the site h as
been prepared and is attached to the field survey form. The sketch, preferably
drawn to scale on gra ph paper, should give information which would be useful
to any individual trying to locate the site. In it should be included ( 1) an
approximate distance scale, (2 ) a directional arrow, (3 ) the main geographic
features su ch as hills, str eams, etc., ( 4 ) heavy vegetation such as woods, thickets,
swamps, etc., (5) cultivated fields , (6) houses or other man-made structures,
( 7) roads or paths, fences, walls, telephone poles, etc., (8 ) the area of the
aboriginal occupation as can be determined from surface indications, preferably
shaded in colored pencil, and (9) a ny other important features or landmarks.
21. Recorded by . The n ames of the individuals responsi ble for completing the site
survey form should be listed here.
22. Date. Give the date or dates when the survey was made.

Information, in addition to that on the site form, that may be pertinent at some sites includes ( 1) approximate elevation of the site above
mean sea level, when determinable from topographic sheets or nearby
surveyors' benchmarkers, and (2 ) the coordinates of the site in degrees, minutes, and approximate seconds of latitude and longitude if
this information can be determined from maps at hand.
When this examination has been completed, the exact location of the
site is to be plotted on the USGS topographic sheets, county road maps,
or other maps used by the survey party.
In practically all instances a field journal proves to be of immense
value not only for the investigators conducting a reconnaissance expedition, but also for subsequent investigators who may wish to review
the work, the trials and tribulations of their predecessors. Some important data which may be included in a day-by-day account of happenings during the survey are the names and addresses of informants
along with the information which they provided, details concerning
the use and functioning of equipment, and an account of the expenses
incurred during the progress of the survey.

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ANALYSES

When the survey party has returned from the field, the artifacts
which were collected should be washed and catalogued. The maps and
field notes, together with the photographs, should be organized and
filed for further reference. It is suggested that amateur societies establish a general or central file to which individuals can contribute copies
of the site data forms and notes which they have made in the field.
Thereby an appreciable quantity of important information can be compiled through the years.
After proper cleaning and labelling, the artifacts from the various
sites should be spread out for examination, and typological studies
should be made. After this analysis has been completed, seriation studies are often possible; the areal distribution of artifacts can likewise be
plotted. The importance of surface collections for establishing the distribution of artifact types should not be underestimated, for the results
of such studies, limited as they be by lack of stratigraphic data, can
nevertheless add much to the understanding of the archeological situation in a particular area.
Finally, after the completion of this work, recommendations for the
future excavation of important sites should be made to those institutions and agencies which engage in excavation. Usually the sites which
are selected for intensive study are those which ( 1) seem to offer unusual data not yet encountered in the area, (2 ) hold hope for solving
special regional archeological problems, ( 3 ) are in danger of imminent
destruction, ( 4 ) offer the largest amount of data and material. It
should be emphasized here again that accurate field excavations can
be carried out only by individuals properly trained in that type of
work. However, those who have not received this training can learn
much a bout the archeology of a particular region, and can accomplish
useful investigations, by concentrating their endeavors on systematic
and accurate field reconnaissance.
RECOMMENDED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Atkinson, R. J. C.
1953. Field Archaeology. 2nd r evised edition. Methuen and Co., London.
Crawford, 0. G. S.
1953. Archaeology in the Field. Phoenix House, London.
H eizer, R. F . (editor )
1958. A Guide to Archaeological Field Methods. 3rd revised edition. National
Press, Palo Alto, California .

ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE

217

Kenyon, Kathleen M .
1952. Beginning in Archaeology. Phoenix House, London.
Meighan, Clement W .
1961. The Archaeologist's Note Book. Chandler Publishing Co., San Francisco.
Soday, Frank J.
1957. An Archaeological Field Manual. Tennessee Archaeological Society, Miscellaneous Papel' No. Z. University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

Department of Anthropology and Sociology
University of California at Los Angeles

Book Reviews
The Archeology of Carcajou Point, with an Interpretation of the Development of Oneota Culture in Wisconsin. By Robert L. Hall.
The University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, 1962. 2 volumes,
xiii + 200 pp., 83 plates, 15 tables. $8.00.
Carcajou Point is a site on Koshkonong Lake in southeastern Wisconsin that has
long been linked with the Siouan-speaking Winnebago Indians. As previously made
surface collections were rich in European trade materials, the site was excavated for
the purpose of documenting the material culture of the Winnebago in the late 18th
and early 19th centuries. The results of excavation were somewha t surprising.
Below the historic Winnebago materials was abundant evidence of a lengthy prehistoric occupation by a people whose culture can best be characterized as Mississippian. Contrary to what might have been expected in the lower levels, very few
Woodland artifacts were found. On the basis of this earlier Mississippian occupation at Carcajou Point and similar materials from other sites in the same area, Hall
has defined a Koshkonong Focus, and this he associates with the Oneota tradition
in the Upper Mississippi cultural phase.
Most of Hall's report is concerned with the Koshkonong Focus and its cultural
affiliations, and we learn relatively little about the culture of the historic Winnebago
as represented at the Carcajou Point Site. To begin with, before making controlled
excavations, Hall and his associates shoveled away the plow zone, without troweling
or screening the material, and thus disposed of much historic Winnebago material.
Of 79 features below the plow zone, only three yielded European trade objects, and
these three features contained very few identifiable native Winnebago artifacts.
Hall also chose to ignore the extensive surface collections made by various persons
at Carcajou Point over the past 80 years. As a consequence, those who are interested
in Winnebago archeology or in European trade objects referable to the late 18th
and early 19th centuries will be disappointed by Hall's report. This is not to minimize Hall's contribution to the prehistoric archeology of Wisconsin and surrounding
states, which is impressive, but to point out that he could also have added valuable
data to the historic archeology of that area if he had chosen to do so.
As indicated above, most of the data from the Carcajou Point Site pertain to the
Koshkonong Focus. The main characteristics of this local U ppet· Mississippi culture
are: an economy based on hunting, fishing, plant-food collecting, and simple agriculture; rectangular houses; underground pits, presumably for food storage but
later used for burials and disposal of refuse; extended and bundle burials; shelltempered pottery, both plain and decorated, with the main decorated types characterized by broadly trailed designs below the rims and by indented or notched lips;
and small, unnotched, triangular arrow points. Three charcoal samples from prehistoric Carcajou Point refuse pits yielded radiocarbon dates of A.D. 998, 1028, and
1528. Hall thinks it is safe to say that the earlier prehistoric occupation began about
A.D. 1000, but he is somewhat uncertain as to the duration of this occupation. One
of his charts indicates a terminal date of A.D. 1400. Although he suspects that the
site was abandoned several hundred years before being occupied by the historic

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Winnebago, he thinks it is likel y that the Koshkonong Lake area was more or less
continuously occupied until 1832., when the Winnebago abandoned this locality.
Hall broadens the concept of the Oneota culture, and he sees the Koshkonong
Focus as a western Great Lakes variant of the Oneota complex with "attenuated"
Middle Mississippi characteristics. He follows Griffin and others in deriving these
Middle Mississippi traits from the Old Village Focus near St. Louis, Missouri, and
the Rock River Focus of southern Wisconsin, best represented by the site of Aztalan,
a northern outpost of Middle Mississippi culture. Hall derives the modern Winnebago from these Middle Mississippi sources through the Silvernale, Koshkonong,
Grand River, Huber, and Lake Winnebago foci; and he derives the more westerly
Chiwere Sioux (Ioway, Oto, and Missouri ) from the same sources through the
Apple River, Blue Earth, and Orr foci . Thus Oneota represents a late, peripheral,
prehistoric Mississippian cultural tradition that is linked with certain modern
Siouan-speaking Indians.
It is of interest to note that excavation at the Carcajou Point Site was done mainly
by volunteers who worked on weekends. As the site was not patrolled during the
week, unauthorized persons also dug there, sometimes looting features whose excavation was still incomplete. In this respect the state of public morals does not seem
to be any higher in Wisconsin than elsewhere in the United States.
The format of Hall 's two-volume work is unusual because each volume is constructed differently. Volume I, the text, is stitched and cloth-covered in the standard
manner; but Volume II, which contains only illustrations and tables, is papercovered and held together by spiral wire. Presumably both author and publisher
considered this a convenience to the reader. After using this publica tion, I still
prefer a single volume with illustrations and tables placed near the text references.

T. N . Campbell
The University of Texas

