BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL
SOCIETY
Volume 34

PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY I AUSTIN, TEXAS I

1963

Office of the State Archeolo · · ~
' ··"'. , . --......._ L.b
.~
•~"
.,. ..,_~
1 rary
.•i
'!!!.
J~c ; ~ 1 l '-·. • , .• • ·".

.~

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man
and the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in
museums and their study and classification and the publication of the results of
researches incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1963
President: JACK T. HuGHES (Canyon)
President Emeritus: CYRus N. RAY (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
Secretary-Treasurer: JEAN A. RICHMOND (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN SuHM (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), W. C. HoLDEN
(Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), HuBERT MEWHINNEY (Houston),
WAYNE NEYLAND (Houston), JAMES WARNICA (Portales, N. Mex.), JAMES
WoRD (Floydada).
Trustees: R. K. HARRis (Dallas), MARDITH K. SCHUETZ (San Antonio), 0. L. SIMS
(San Angelo), HENRY STURGIS (Austin).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CARL CoMPTON (Denton), ALAN DuKE (Pasadena),
LATHEL DuFFIELD (Austin), R. E. FoRRESTER (Ft. Worth), SHERWOOD GAGLIANO (Baton Rouge, La.), D. T. KENT (Kirbyville), E. 0. MILLER (Moody),
ERIK REED (Sante Fe, N.Mex.), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.).
Fellows: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin), ALEX D. KRIEGER (Seattle, Wash.), CYRus N.
RAY (Abilene), CLARENCE H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.) .

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four
times a year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at
$5.00 per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treassurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University
of Texas, Austin 12, Texas. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is the
same.
Cover design and portrait by Hal M. Story

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST • 1991

•

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

i

Editor: D ee Ann Suhm
~

"f
'L.

Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D. Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1963

Office of the State Archeologis
:. ;.
Library

...

I

I

. '

j

DR. CYRUS N. Rw for more than a quarter of a century has devoted
himself to the furtherance of Texas archeology and the Texas
Archeological Society. His pioneer research into the archeology of the
Abilene area is recorded in the numerous articles he has written for
the Bulletin, and his enthusiasm and dedication to the Society is evident in his many years of service. He is a charter member of the
Society, was Editor of the Bulletin from its founding in 1929 until
1947, was President from 1929 until1948, has been President Emeritus
since 1948, and a Fellow since 1952.
The society is deeply indebted to Dr. Ray, and it is with pleasure
that this issue to the Bulletin is dedicated to him.

Table of Contents
Articles
Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of
Corpus Christi Bay, Texas
By James E. Corbin

5

Archeological Excavations at the Boy Scout Rockshelter
(41TV69 ), Travis County, Texas
By J. C. Pollard, John W. Greer, and H. F. Sturgis

31

Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified
Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas
By Harry J. Shafer.

57

The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic- Neo-American Site in
San Augustine County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield

83

The Smithport Landing Site: An Alto Focus Component
in De Soto Parish, Louisiana
By Clarence H . Webb .

143

A Guide to Pottery Sorting, and the Meaning of Pottery
Types and Attributes
By E. Mott Davis .

189

A Guide to Archeological Reconnaissance
By LeRoy Johnson, Jr. .

203

Book Reviews
Hall, Robert L., The Archeology of Carcajou Point, with an
Interpretation of the Development of Oneota Culture in
Wisconsin
By T. N. Campbell .

219

Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A
Stratified Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas*
HARRY J. SHAFER
ABSTRACT
Limited test excavations made between 1960 and 196Z at the Youngsport Site in
Bell County, Texas have r evealed, in part, a previously unreported Archaic dart
point sequen ce for the central part of the state. The objects recovered, primarily
chipped stone tools, are briefly described and a new dart point type, term ed Gower,
is provisionally defined.

INTRODUCTION

Between 1960 and 1962 the author and Tom Gibson undertook test
excavations at the Youngsport Site in Bell County, Texas. The archeological potential of the site was apparent in the large number and diverse ty pes of dart points which had been collected from th e surface.
Even more importantly, a number of stratified occupational zones have
been exposed in an erosional ditch which has cut through portions of
the site (Fig. 1). Although the excavations were quite limited-they
were restricted to weekends and holidays-the new stratigraphic data
obtained seem to justify a brief report. It must be made clear, however,
that thi s paper is offered only as a preliminary progress report.
PREVIOUS wORK I N THE AREA

To date, the only archeological investigation in the immediate vicinity consists of a preliminary survey of the proposed Stillhouse H ollow Reservoir area on the Lampasas River in the south ern part of Bell
County (Johnson, 1962). This survey, conducted by the Texas Archeo• The a uthor would like to express his apprecia tion for the encouragement and
help given by Edward B. Jelks, L eRoy Johnson, Jr. , and Dee Ann Suhm of The
University of Texas. I t was their interest and concern that has made this paper
possible. The author is also indebted to the landowner for his permission to work
exclusively at the site. Other people helping in this report were Tom Gibson of
Temple and Mr. and Mrs. Emmitt Gower of Killeen.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

logical Salvage Project of The University of Texas, was completed in
the spring of 1962.
Other work in the surrounding area includes testing in Belton Reservoir sites to the north (Miller and Jelks, 1952), as well as excavations
at several similar sites in Travis County to the south (Kelly, 1961 ;
Suhm, 1955) , and the Buchanan Lake sites to the west (Jackson, 1938) .
SITE LOCATION

The Youngsport Site is situated in the southwestern corner of Bell
County, well into the eastern limits of the central Texas hill country
(Fig. 1, C). The site lies buried in the second terrace of a spring-fed
creek, a few hundred yards above the creek's confluence with the Lampasas River (Fig. 1, A ) .
SITE DESCRIPTION

Occupational debris in the bank and in the cultivated fields shows
that the site extends along the north bank of the creek for some three
hundred yards (Fig. 1, A ) . An erosional gully, about 50 feet long, 20
to 25 feet wide, and 16 to 20 feet deep, has cut into the approximate
center of the site and exposed stratified occupational zones. These zones
extend to a depth of at least eight feet below the surface.
NATURAL SETTING

The western part of Bell County borders the eastern edge of the
Edwards Plateau, known locally as the Texas hill country. It consists
of rolling limestone hills covered principally with juniper ("cedar" )
and live oak. Ranching constitutes the chief industry ; the little farming
practiced in this vicinity is r estricted to the river bottom lands or to
terraces near the river.
The principal fauna of the area includes the armadillo, cottontail
and jack rabbits, skunk, opossum, ringtail cat, raccoon, white tail deer,
and fox. Major flora consists of juniper and oak in the uplands and
pecan, willow, bur oak, sycamore, and cottonwood along the streams.
ExcAVATIO N

An extensive excavation was not feasible and the work was limited
to small scale testing of the strata exposed in the ditch and along the
creek bank (Fig. 1, B) . This approach proved worthwhile since anumber of artifacts were obtained from each of the strata observed (Fig.

59

YOUNGSPORT SITE

Q

APPROXIMATE

EXTENT OF SITE

N

/
/

/

A

-. •

c

8
Fig . 1. Youngsport Site . A, Site setting . B, Location of test p its. C, General site locat ion .
Not to sca le .

2 and Table 1). Great care was taken to locate artifacts in situ, and
those found on the surface are not-with one exception-included in
this report. On the other hand, this method of testing made it impossible to recognize possible differences in the horizontal distribution of
the projectile points within the respective zones, and it did not yield
information on the transition-if it existed-between the zones.
STRAT IGRAPHY

A number of superimposed zones, most of which contained cultural

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

debris, were exposed in the erosional ditch which had cut into the
site (Figs. 1 and 2). The nine strata recognized in this exposure are as
follows (they are designated from top to bottom because of the preliminary nature of the excavations):
Stratum 1 was the plow zone which consisted of a black gumbo soil
intermixed with some cultural debris. This layer had been considerably disturbed by cultivation. In the areas tested, it was thin or absent
and none of the artifacts described herein can be attributed to it. In
other parts of the site, however, Stratum 1 reached a maximum thickness of 18 inches.
Stratum 2 was a black compact soil mixed with a few burned rock
fragments (most of which were small), flint chips, bone scrap, snail
and mussel shells, and artifacts-principally Ensor and Mantell points
-attributed to a late Edwards Plateau Aspect occupation.
Stratum 3A was a small lens of ashy black soil mixed with cultural
debris. It averaged about six inches in thickness. The amount of refuse
nonetheless was considerably more numerous than in Stratum 2. Stratum 3A contained a larger number of snail and mussel shells, flint
chips, bumed rocks, bone fragments, and artifacts of the Edward
Plateau Aspect, especially Marshall points.
Stratum 3B, the most concentrated occupational layer, consisted of a
gray soil mixed with bumed rock, snail and mussel shells, bone fragments, flint chips, and artifacts of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Pedernales was the major dart point type recovered from this stratum.
Stratum 4 was a yellowish clay mixed with cultural debris and artifacts of the Edwards Plateau Aspect. Although moderately rich, this
zone was, in places, rather thin.
Stratum 5 was a relatively sterile yellow clay which showed signs
of occupation only in the upper and lower fringes. Only one artifact
(a Bulverde point) was found in the upper part of this zone. This suggests that the little cultural material in Stratum 5 is intrusive, having
worked in from above and from below.
Stratum 6 was a yellow clay containing cultural refuse and artifacts
of an early Archaic period not usually included in the Edwards Plateau
Aspect. Snail shells were particularly abundant in Stratum 6.
Stratum 7 was a culturally sterile zone of yellow clay.

61

YOUNGSPOR T SI TE

r-----------------------------------------------~-0'
STRATUM I

STRATUM 2

STRATUM

3A

STRATUM 38

1-----------------------------------1- 4 '
STRATUM 4

STRATUM 5
STRATUM 6

STRATUM 7

STRATUM 8

(unexcavate d}

I I

I

I

Fig . 2 . Genera lized profile of the stratigraphic zones exposed in west wall of the erosional ditch .

S tratum 8 was a yellow clay m ixed with cu ltural debris and artifacts of an early, undefined Arch aic complex. Snail sh ells were numerous in this layer, but many of them were fragmentary.

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Stratum 9 was a sterile yellow clay which showed no evidence of
occupation in that portion exposed in the ditch. It extended to at least
16.5 feet below the surface. No testing was carried out in this zone.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS
PROJECTILE PoiNTs

Of the 176 artifacts recovered from the excavations, 129 can be classified as projectile points; more specifically as dart points. No arrow
points have yet been found at the site. By referring to An Introductory
Handbook of Texas Archeology (Suhm, et al. , 1954), 103 of the dart
points have been identified as to type. The types recognized, a provisional new type (Gower ), and the unidentified points are described
below.

Bulverde (Fig. 5, A-E). Five specimens are classified as Bulverde.
Four of these occurred in Stratum 4 and one in the upper portion of
Stratum 5. All seem to fall within Johnson's Variety 2 Bulverde points
(Johnson, et al., 1962: 19-20). Since they occur with Nolan and
Travis, it is possible that this long and narrow stem variety is earlier
than the wider and shorter stemmed forms (Johnson's Variety 1 ) . If
so, the latter would be expected to occur mainly with Pede males points,
the former (Variety 2) with Nolan and Travis types.
One of the Bulverde points (Fig. 5, A) from Youngsport has been
made into a burin. The two complete Bulverde points are 8.3 and 6.1
em. long, 3.2 and 2.8 em. across the shoulders, 1.5 and 1.6 em. across
the base of the stem, and .8 and. 7 em. thick, respectively.
Castroville (Fig. 3, I-K). A total of ten Castroville points were recovered from the site, nine from Stratum 3B and one from Stratum 2.
Found mainly with Pedernales and Marshall points, they are characterized by broad expanded stems and pronouncedly barbed shoulders. One Castroville point (Fig. 3, J) shows considerable reworking,
as the end of the blade has been refashioned, perhaps to serve as a knife,
and one shoulder has been rechipped to make a burin.
The more complete Castroville points are between 6.1 and 6.2 em.
long, 2. 7 and 3.9 em. across the shoulders, 2 and 2.3 em. across the
base of the stem, and .7 and .9 em. in maximum thickness. The remainder were probably very similar in size.
Ensor (Fig. 3, E, F , H). This type is represented by seven specimens, all of which are from Stratum 2. They occurred principally with

63

YOUNGSPORT SITE

c

B

A

E

F

G·

K

J
0

D

2

4

L
6

CM
Fig . 3 . Dart Points. A-D, Monte// . E, F, H, Ensor. G, Marcos. 1-K, Castroville. l, Williams .

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Mantell points. Two variations can be recognized, although both have
the typical Ensor side or corner notches. The only difference is that
one variety (which includes five specimens) has a straight base (Fig.
3, E, F) , while the other (rep res en ted by two specimens) has a
V-shaped notch in the base (Fig. 3, H). Both forms have previously
been included in the Ensor type (Miller and Jelks, 1952; Johnson, et
al., 1962). There is considerable variation in the length of the Ensor
points, with a range of 4 to 6.4 em. The maximum widths are between
2 and 2.3 em., and the maximum thickness between .5 and .8 em.
Gower (Fig. 7, A-E) . The name Gower is suggested for a group of
crudely made, indented base points, all of which were found in Stratum 8. Represented by five specimens, these points have very short,
parallel-edged stems, and markedly concave bases. The basal indentation of the Gower points-as well as those termed Gower variantshas been produced by the removal of a single (?) flake which left
remnants of a scar around the edges of the basal concavity. This scar
usually appears on only one side of the point, and is sometimes lightly
retouched. The blade is generally short, has convex edges, and weak,
rudimentary shoulders. The dimensions for the complete specimens
are 3.4 to 3.9 em. in length, 1.8 to 2.4 em. in width, and .5 to .8 em.
in maximum thickness. The stems are 1 to 1.4 em. long and about 1.6
em. wide; the basal concavity varies from .3 to .6 em. in depth.
The stratigraphic position of these points suggests that they are
fairly early, although the workmanship and general style seem to
indicate close affiliations with Archaic points. In many ways they look
like very crude Pedernales points.
In addition to the above there are nine dart points which appear to
be related to the Gower type, but which have certain morphological
features setting them apart. Fqr the present these specimens are described as variant Gower points, but it is possible that they will eventually be included as formal varieties of Gower, or set up as distinct
types. All were also found in Stratum 8 and they include:
( 1) Variant A (2 specimens). These points are larger than those
described above but, with the exception of somewhat more pronounced
shoulders, have very similar outlines (Fig. 7, F). The stem is short,
has slightly convex lateral edges, and an indented base. The blade is
roughly triangular in outline and has convex lateral edges which, because of the crude workmanship, are rather sinuous. The maximum
width varies from 3.1 to 3.3 em.; the stem is .9 to 1.2 em. in length

YOUNGSPORT SITE

65

and the maximum thickness is uniformly . 7 em. The total length of
the one complete specimen is 5.2 em.
(2 ) VariantB (1 specimen). Thisfragmentarypoint (Fig. 7,G ) appears to be the basal portion of a lanceolate-shaped form. The base is
only slightly indented and the workmanship is fair. The maximum
width of the surviving portion of the blade is 2.4 em., the maximum
thickness is .6 em., and the basal concavity is .2 em. deep and 2.1 em.
across.
(3) Variant C (1 specimen ) . Although very crudely made, this
fragment (not illustrated) closely resembles the other Gower points,
especially Variant B. One lateral edge of the stem is straight, the other
is convex. The blade is narrow and lacks distinct shoulders. The basal
indentation is fairly pronounced, measuring .3 em. deep. The stem is
1.9 em. wide and 2 em. long, while the blade has a maximum width of
2.1 em. The estimated length is 7.5 em.; it appears to be the longest
point found in Stratum 8.
( 4 ) Variant D ( 1 specimen ) . This very poorly made basal fragment
(Fig. 7, K ) is from a roughly leaf-shaped point. The indentation in the
base is .5 em. deep, the width across the base 2.3 em., the maximum
width of the blade 3 em., and the thickness 1 em.
(5 ) Variant E ( 1 specimen). One point (Fig. 7, H) resembles the
Pedernales type, but a careful examination of its features, as well as
its stratigraphic occurrence, indicates a closer relationship with the
Gower points. The stem is roughly rectangular and the base is slightly
indented. The workmanship is rather poor. The stem is 1.1 em. long
and 1.2 em. wide; while the blade is 5 em. long, 2.4 em. wide, and .8
em. thick.
( 6 ) Variant F (3 specimens ) . Two of three points included in this
variant (Fig. 7, I, J) have slightly expanding stems and rounded basal
tips or ears. One of the expanded stem forms (Fig. 7, I ) has a deeply
concave base, smoothed stem edges, and slight, unbarbed shoulders.
The second point (Fig. 7, J) is much like the above, except that it is
somewhat smaller and more fragmentary. The third specimen (not
illustrated ) is similar to the Pedernales type, except that the lateral
edges of the stem are well smoothed. The stem of this point is 1.2 em.
and 1. 7 em. wide; the basal indentation is .4 em. in depth. The maximum blade width is 2.5 em., the maximum thickness is .7 em., and the
total length is 5 em.

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

8

A

D

:

H

G

F

E

K

J
0

4

2

6

CM
Fig . 4 . Dart Points . A-1 , Marshall . J, Uvalde . K, Lange .

YOUNGSPORT SITE

67

Lange (Fig. 4, K). Two possible Lange points were found in Stratum 3B, along with Pedernales, Castroville, and Marshall points. Both
have somewhat narrower stems than those illustrated by Suhm,
Krieger, and Jelks (1954: Pl. 97), and consequently they are only
tentatively assigned to this type. The one complete Lange point is 6.3
em. long, 2.5 em. wide across the shoulders, 1.5 em. wide across the
base of the stem, and . 7 em. thick.
M areas (Fig. 3, G). Only one specimen, from Stratum 2, can be classified as a Marcos point. It was found with Mantell and Ensor points,
and could possibly be a variation of the latter type. It measures 4 em. in
length, 3.5 em. across the shoulders, 2 em. across the base of the stem,
and .6 em. in maximum thickness.
Marshall (Fig. 4, A-I) . Fifteen Marshall points were found in the
excavations, eight in Stratum 3A and seven in Stratum 3B. All those
from Stratum 3A possess fine secondary chipping-sometimes producing fine serrations-along the blade edges, while only one of the Marshall points from Stratum 3B exhibits this feature. The base of each
point is slightly concave, and all have pronouncedly barbed shoulders.
These points are between 4.3 and 6.6 em. in length, 2.6 to 4 em. across
the shoulders, 1.4 to 1.7 em. across the base of the stem, and .5 to 1.3
em. in maximum thickness.
Mantell (Fig. 3, A-D). Fourteen Mantell points were recovered from
Stratum 2, where they were apparently associated with the Ensor and
Marcos types. The complete specimens are between 5.5 and 6.6 em.
long, 3 and 4 em. across the shoulders, 1.9 and 2.5 em. across the base,
and .5 and .7 em. thick.
Morrill (Fig. 6, B). Only one Morrill point is recognized in the collection. It was obtained from Stratum 6, and appears to be closely associated with Wells points. This particular specimen is almost identical
to one illustrated by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 107, S). It is 6.5
em. long, 2.3 em. in maximum width, and .9 em. in thickness. The
stem, which is 2.5 em. long, is almost the same length as the blade. Interestingly, five of the six points from Stratum 6 (Fig. 6, A-D), including two Wells and the one Morrill, are characterized by long and
slender, roughly rectangular stems.
Nolan (Fig. 6, H , I ) . The two Nolan points found at the site occurred in Stratum 4, along with Travis and Bulverde points. It is
surprising, since it is a major point type to the south and west, that
more Nolan points were not found at the Youngsport Site. The two

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

A

c

B

D

H

F

E

0

L

K

J
2

4

M

6

CM
Fig . 5 . Dart Points . A, Bulverde with burin (arrows show direction of b(ows l. B- E, Bulverde . F-M , Pedernales .

YOUNGSPORT SITE

69

recovered are between 3.1 and 2.3 em. across the shoulders, and 1.8
and 1.6 em. across the base of the stem, and .9 and .6 em. thick, respectively. The one complete Nolan is 7.1 em. long.

Pedernales (Fig. 5, F-M). Represented by 41 specimens, Pedernales
is by far the most common type found at the site. All were obtained
from Stratum 3B, which also yielded Castroville, Lange, Marshall,
Uvalde, and Williams points. They are between 5.1 and 8.4 em. in
length, 2.1 and 3.2 em. in width across the shoulders, and .6 apd 1.1
em. in maximum thickness.
Travis (Fig. 6, F ). One Travis point was recovered from Stratum 4 ,
along with Bulverde and Nolan points. It measures 5.6 em. long, 2.5
em. across the shoulders, 1. 7 across the base of the stem, and .9 em. in
maximum thickness .
Uvalde (Fig. 4, J). One point identifiable as the Uvalde ty pe was
found in Stratum 3B. It is 6.6 em. long, 2.2 em. across the shoulders,
1.8 em. across the base of the stem, and .8 em. in maximum thickness.
Wells (Fig. 6, A ) . Two long, contracting stem points, identified as
the Wells type, were recovered from Stratum 6. They were found with
a Morrill point and appear to date from a fairly early Archaic period.
The one complete example has a total length of 6. 7 em. and a stem
length of almost 3 em. The shoulders on both are about 2.2 em. wide,
and the maximum thickness varies from . 7 to .9 em.
Williams (Fig. 3, L ) . This type is represented by one specimen
which was found in Stratum 3B. It measures 6.1 em. long, 2. 7 em.
across the shoulders, 2 em. across the base of the stem, and .6 em. in
maximum thickness.
Unidentified Dart Points. Twelve projectile points fail to fit any of
the known types, and are not numerous enough to justify establishing,
even tentatively, any new types. Five are from Stratum 3B, two from
Stratum 4, three from Stratum 6, one from Stratum 8, and one from
the surface.
Two small fragmentary expanding stem points with convex bases
were found in Stratum 3B. They have short barbs and broad stems.
The blade is incomplete on both specimens, but appears to have been
triangular in outline. Both points are similar to the Castroville type,
but are notably smaller in size. Maximum width of the stem is 2.5
em., average stem length 1 em., maximum width of the blade is 2 .7
em., and the average thickness is .7 em.

70

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCI ETY

,.;

c

8

A

D

F

E

G

J

H
0

4

2

6

CM
Fig . 6 . Dart Points . A, Wells . 8, Morrill . C-E, G, J , Un identified . F, Travis . H, I, Nolan.

YOUNGSPORT SITE

71

An additional two points from Stratum 3B have faintly convex bases
and roughly rectangular stems. The blades are triangular, weakly
shouldered, and have slightly convex lateral edges. The crude, essentially unifacial chipping is one of the most distinctive features of these
points; otherwise, they resemble the Travis type. The average stem
width is 1.6 em., average stem length 1.5 em., average blade width 2.3
em., average thickness .8 em., and the range in total length is 5.5 to
5.8cm.
A large bulbous stemmed point is the only other unidentified point
from Stratum 3B. Although fragmentary, the blade is distinguished by
large, but bar bless, shoulders and convex blade edges. Maximum width
across the stem is 2 em., length of the stem 1. 7 em., maximum blade
width 3.8 em., and thickness .8 em.
Illustrated in Fig. 6, J is a leaf-shaped point found in Stratum 4. It
is worked primarily on one face, has a slightly convex base and a contracting stem. The blade possesses extremely weak shoulders, convex
blade edges and is lanceolate in outline. The workmanship is rather
poor. This point is 6.5 em. long, 3 em. in maximum width, and .6 em.
in maximum thickness.
A complete dart point with a broad rectangular stem and faint
smoothing on the lateral edges of the stem was found in Stratum 4. The
blade has very slight shoulders and convex edges . The stem and, to a
lesser extent, the workmanship suggest the Scottsbluff type. This point
(Fig. 6, G ) is 5 em. long, 2.5 em. across the shoulders, 2.3 em. across
the base of the stem, and .9 em. thick.
Two small dart points from Stratum 6 (Fig. 6, C, D) are characterized by long, roughly rectangular stems, and small triangular
blades. In some respects they are like Carrollton points, but they are
smaller and lack the basal smoothing of Carrollton. They are 4.2 and
4. 7 em. long, 2.1 and 1.8 em. wide across the shoulders, and .8 and . 7
em. thick, respectively.
A small expanding stem dart point (Fig. 6, E) was found in Stratum
6. The base is concave and the blade is short and triangular with small
barbs. This point bears some resemblances to both the Frio and Edgewood types, but cannot be classed as either. It measures 4.2 em. long,
2. 7 em. across the shoulders, 2.5 em. across the base, and .7 em. in
maximum thickness.
The one unidentified point (not illustrated) from Stratum 8 is a
crudely made specimen with a more or less rectangular stem and a
convex base. The blade has moderately strong barbs, with one straight
lateral edge and one convex lateral edge. The stem is 2 em. wide, 1.8

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

E

F

H

G

J
0

D

t.

K
4

2

6

CM
Fig . 7 . Darl Points and Knife from Stratum 8 . A-E , Gower. F, Gower, Variant A. G,
Gower, Variant B. H, Gower, Variant E. I, J , Gower, Variant F. K, Gower, Variant D. L,
lonceolate knife with a slightly concave base . Dots on I indicate extent of stem smoothing .

73

YOUNGSPORT SITE

em. long; the blade is 3.8 em. wide and 1 em. thick; and the total length
is 7.3 em.
The last unidentified point, found on the surface, • is a long and
slender, rectangular-stemmed specimen (Fig. 8, E ) , which in outline
is somewhat like the Bulverde type. In size, however, it is similar to
what Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 396-399 ) have termed spear
points. The workmanship is very good, with the blade exhibiting neat
parallel flake scars. The blade has straight edges and prominent, but
not barbed, shoulders. The edges of the stem are parallel and the base
is essentially straight. This specimen is 11.2 em. long, 3 em. across
the shoulder, 2 em. across the base of the stem, and 1 em. in maximum
thickness.
DRILLS

Five artifacts classed as drills were found in Stratum 3B. Three are
apparently reworked projectile points, one Pedernales, one Marshall
(Fig. 8, C), and one unidentified (Fig. 8, D). The remaining drills
have simple expanding stems (Fig. 8, A, B) . All are bifacially worked
and the drill shafts appear lenticular in cross section. One (Fig. 8, B)
has traces of the nodular cortex on one face of the stem and across the
base. The opposite face of this same specimen has retained portions of
the bulb of percussion. The two complete shafts (Fig. 8, A, D) are both
about4.5 em. long.
KNIVES

The thirteen artifacts identified as knives can be sorted into three
major groups on the basis of variations in their outlines. The most
common form- ten examples-has a lanceolate outline and a concave
(Fig. 7, L ) or convex base (Fig. 9, A, B, E ). These specimens are comparatively short and percussion chipped, several possibly by the billet
technique. Two of the lanceolate knives are very crudely made and
notably thicker than the others. These knives average 8.1 em. long, 5
em. in maximum width, and 2.4 em. in maximum thickness. The eight
better made specimens, by contrast, average 6.2 em. long, 3. 7 em. in
maximum width, and 1.5 em. in maximum thickness. Seven of the
lanceolate knives are from Stratum 3B, one from Stratum 2, and two
from Stratum 8.
• Although from the surface, this specimen is included because of its uniqueness.
The other points from the surface duplicate those found in situ and, consequ ently,
are not considered .

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

A

D

F

E
0

c

2

4

G

CM
Fig . 8 . Drills, Large Stemmed Point, Gouges and Worked Antler. A-D, Drills . E, Large ,
unidentified stemmed point . F, G, Gouges. H, Cut and smoothed deer antler.

A second knife form, represented by two specimens, consists of large
flakes retouched primarily on one face (Fig. 9, C). Both appear to have
been hastily fa shioned from large hammerstone flakes. The largest
example is 11 em. long, 4 .1 em. in maximum width, and 1.4 em. in

75

YOUNGSPORT SITE

maximum thickness. One was found in Stratum 3B, the other (Fig. 9,
C) in Stratum 4.
The third knife type, known from one complete specimen (Fig. 9,
D), is a straight-based triangular form. It is by far the best made knife
found at the site, and has broad, shallow flake scars which suggest the
billet percussion chipping technique. The lateral edges have been retouched so that this knife appears somewhat lenticular in cross section. It was found in Stratum 3B, and is 11.3 em. long, 5.2 em. across
the base, and 1 em. in maximum thickness.
SCRAPERS

A total of twelve scrapers, including three distinct types and two
unidentifiable fragments, were recovered from the Youngsport Site.
One type, a convex side scraper, is made from flake s retouched primarily along one edge. Six of these were found, four in Stratum 3B, one in
Stratum 6, and one in Stratum 8. The three complete examples range
from 4.8 to 7.4 em. in length, 4.3 to 5 em. in maximum width, and .6 to
1.6 em. in maximum thickness.
The second group of scrapers consists of two specimens from Stratum
3B which are chipped only on one end (Fig. 10, A) . Both are made
from rather thick flakes and do not evidence any intentional shaping.
The bit edge on both is rather pronounced.
Two flakes chipped along most of their edges constitute the third
type of scraper (Fig. 10, B) . One of these has been fashioned from a
billet flake, the other from a hammerstone flake. One was found in
Stratum 3B, the other in Stratum 6.
Two additional flakes appear to have been used as scraping tools, but
both are too fragmentary to classify further. One was found in Stratum
3B, and one in Stratum 8.
CHOPPERS

Two large flint nodules with percussion chipping on one or both
faces were recovered from Stratum 3B. One of these (Fig. 10, C) has
a very neat cutting or chopping edge, while the other specimen is quite·
crudely made. The proximal ends of both are unaltered and retain the
nodular cortex.
CLEAR FoRK GouGE

Two artifacts, one from Stratum 6 and one from Stratum 8, can be
identified as Clear Fork Gouges. One specimen (Fig. 8, F) is bifacially

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

c

E

D
0

F,

I

CM
Fig. 9. Knives and Hammerstone . A, B, E, Rounded base knives . C, Large flake knife.
D, Triangular, straight base knife . F, Hammerstone.

chipped and plano-convex in cross section. It has a slightly concave bit
w hich has been produced by the removal of several small flakes and
w hich shows considerable wear from u se. The distal end is somewh at

YOUNGSPORT SITE

77

tapered. This specimen is 10.3 em. long, 4.1 em. across the bit, and 1.5
em. in maximum thickness.
The second gouge ( Fig. 8, G) , obtained from Stratum 6, is worked
mainly on one face, and is plano-convex in cross section. It exhibits
much poorer chipping than the first gouge, and a prepared striking
platform is still visible at one lateral edge. The bit is straight and shows
very slight wear. The distal end does not taper as much as that of the
other gouge, but it has been thinned, possibly to facilitate hafting. This
specimen is 6 em. long, 3.8 em. across the the bit, and 1.8 em. in maximum thickness.
HAMMERSTONES
Three more or less spherical flint nodules, presumed hammerstones
(Fig. 9, F ), were found in Stratum 3B. All appear to have been exhausted cores which were re-utilized. The diameters range from 7 to
8.6cm.
MANOS
Four manos or handstones were r ecovered. One, an unshaped quartz
cobble, was found in Stratum 2. Three others, all shaped by pecking,
occurred in Stratum 3B. One of these is of quartz, one of limestone, and
one of granite.
··,
MISCELLANEOUS STONE
Two rectangular shaped artifacts of an unidentified soft stone
(slate? ) occurred in Stratum 3B. Both are broken, but show some signs
of having been intentionally smoothed on the edges. The use of these
objects is unknown.
BoNE AwLs
Three pointed bone artifacts or awls were recovered from Stratum
3B. One has been worked from a limb bone, while the other two were
worked from unidentifiable splinters.
DEER ANTLER
A deer antler artifact (Fig. 8, H ) has been intentionally cut and
smooth ed, and possibly served as a handle. A small hole, 1.7 em. deep
and 1 em. in diameter, has been drilled in one end, probably for hafting
an artifact such as a drill. The antler measures 8.1 em. long and 2 em.
in maximum diameter. It was found in Stratum 4.

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

6

CM
Fig. 1 0 . Scrapers and Chopper. A, End and side scraper. 8 , Utilized flake scraper. C,
Chopper.

79

YOUNGSPORT SITE

SUMMARY AND COMPARISONS

The most significant findings made at the Youngsport Site deal
principally with the relative stratigraphic occurrence of certain dart
point types. With few exceptions, the other artifacts did not reveal
meaningful distribution patterns. This point sequence can be summarized as follows:
TABLE 1
Provenience of Artifacts
S tratum Stra tum Stralum Stra tum Stratum Stra tu m Stratum

Artifact

2

Dart point typ es
Bulverde
Castroville
Ensor
7
Gower
Gower Variants
Lange
Marcos
Marshall
Mantell
14
Morrill
Nolan
Pedernales
Travis
Uvalde
Wells
Williams

3A

4

6

8

4

5
9

z

1
15
14
1

7

z

41

41

1

z
5

3

1Z

5

5
9
8

2
2

z

8

13
1Z

2

z
3

3
3

Z5

Totals

10
7

5
9

8

Surface

5

9

U nidentified
dart points
Drills
Knives
Scrapers
Choppers
Clear Fork Gouges
Harnmerstones
Manos
Misc. stone
Bone artifacts
Totals

38

4

z

z

3

4

101

11

9

zo

176

1. The earliest period of occupation yet recognized at the site occurred only in Stratum 8 and is characterized almost exclusively by

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rather crudely made, indented base points. These are provisionally
termed Gower and Gower variants. The only other possibly distinctive
artifact is the Clear Fork gouge which was found in strata 8 and 6 (one
specimen in each).
2. Stratigraphically above Stratum 8 and separated from it by a
sterile yellow clay (Stratum 7) was an occupational zone, Stratum 6,
wliich is characterized by long, narrow, stemmed points, including
types Morrill and Wells.
3. Above Stratum 6 is a relatively sterile clay (Stratum 5 ) which
yielded only one artifact, a Bulverde point. It is quite probable that
this specimen is intrusive from the layer above, Stratum 4, where
Bulverde points were more numerous.
4. Overlying Stratum 5 was a moderately rich cultural zone ( Stratum 4 ) which contained dart point types Bulverde, Travis, and Nolan.
5. Above Stratum 4 was the richest cultural zone (Stratum 3B ) encountered by the test excavations. It yielded six different dart point
types (Castroville, Lange, Marshall, Pedernales, Uvalde, and Williams ), although the Pedernales points were by far the most common.
Other classes of artifacts were also relatively more numerous in this
zone and the full significance of their presence is difficult to ascertain.
It might be noted, however, that manos appear for the first time, and
that all the drills were obtained from this zone.
6. Stratum 3A, a localized zone above Stratum 3B, produced only
Marshall points. No other artifacts were obtained from this lens.
7. The most recent occupational zone sampled, Stratum 2, yielded
principally Mantell and Ensor points; minor forms include one Marcos
aud one Castroville.
The above dart point sequence in many ways agrees very closely
with that recently reported by Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell ( 1962:
118-123) for the Canyon Reservoir area, Comal County, Texas. Stratum 4 at the Youngsport Site corresponds very favorably with their
Early Archaic period, while Stratum 3B coincides with their Middle
Archaic period and Stratum 2 with their Late Archaic. Their Transitional Archaic period, provisionally distinguished by Darl points and
a small, unnamed expanding stem form, is not present at the Youngsport Site. Also, unlike the Canyon Reservoir sites, there was no suggestion of a time difference between Ensor and Mantell points. Perhaps
Stratum 2 represents mixed refuse from several occupations.
While concurring with the Canyon Reservoir data, the findings at
the Youngsport Site suggest some additions and refinements. In the
first place, there now seems to be enough information to temporally

81

YOUNGSPORT SITE

place the Castroville and Marshall types: Both apparently first appeared in the Middle Archaic period and survived into early Late
Archaic times. Although less well represented, and hence more tenuous, the occurrence of Lange and Williams points seems to indicate
that they belong principally to the Middle Archaic time period.
Perhaps the most important information obtained at the Youngsport
Site concerns the two occupational zones underlying the Nolan, Travis ,
and Bulverde types. Comparable data were not found at the three Canyon Reservoir sites, although the Crumley Site in Travis County
(Kelly, 1961 ) did yield a few apparently similar indented base points
(tentatively termed "Crumley") from the deepest levels. No zone similar to Stratum 6, which is distinguished by Wells and Morrill points,
has yet been reported from other sites in central Texas.
REFERENCES CITED
Jackson, A . T.
1938. The Fall Creek Sites. University of T exas Publications, No. 3802.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962. Survey and Appraisal of the A rcheological Resour ces of Stillhouse Hollow
Reservoir on the Lampasas River , Bell County, T exas. T y p : d Report
Submitted to the U.S. National Park Se rvi ce by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr. , D ee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunn ell
1962. Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge
and Oblate Sites. T e xas M emorial Muse um Bulletin, No. 5.
Kelly, Col. Thomas C.
1961. The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt Rock Midd en , Travis County, Texas.
Bulletin of th e Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31 (for 1960), pp.
239-272.
Miller, E. 0 ., and Edward B. J elks
1952. Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23,
pp. 168- 217.
Suhm. D ee Ann
1955 . Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County , T exas. Bulletin of th e
T exas Archeological Society , Vol. 26, pp. 7- 54.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger , and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
The University of T exas
Austin, Texas

