BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Vol. 35 I Published by the Society I Austin, Texas, 1964

·

Offtce of the State Areheo!og!

.·~~·;. . . ._.___ Library

~-.,-~4!o-: .;'• -~ · · · : - ~ .

'

"

__ -:S
. ,(

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man and
the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement
of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of researches
incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1964
President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
President Emeritus: CYRUS N. R,w (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAMES H. WoRD (Floydada)
Secretary-Treasurer: DoRRIS L. 0LDS (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL A. CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W. C. HoLDEN (Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), IsABELLE R.
LoBDELL (Fort Worth), and E. A. WHITE (El Paso).
Trustees: 0. L. SrMs (San Angelo), MARDITH K. ScHUETZ (San Antonio), and
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CHARLES W. BANDY (Brownfield), JAy C. BLAINE
(Richardson), CHARLES N. BoLLICH (Beaumont), ADA BRANCH (Victoria),
W. A. DAVIS (Jasper), JoHN HENDRICK (El Paso), ELBERT D. HELM (Fort
Worth), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.), and DoN R. WILLIAMS (San Marcos).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership
at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5.00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin, Texas 78712. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is
the same.

Cover design by Mark L. Parsons; taken from petroglyph panel at the Verbena
Site, Garza County, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, I 991

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Editor: Dee Ann Story ,
Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D . Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1964

Office of the ~tate Archeologist J·
"" . .. ......

~;.1

--

..._____ Library

I

Table of Contents
Artic(es
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacada
By Jane Holden Kelley .

1

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield .

19

Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas
By Curtis D. Tunnell .

83

Indian Skeletal Material from the Jim Arnold Site
By Thomas W. McKern

95

The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas
By Frank A. Runkles .

101

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher
County, Texas
By Cyrus N. Ray and Edward B. Jelks .

127

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor
Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas
By Elton R. Prewitt

143

West Indian Seal Remains from Two Historic Sites in
Coastal South Texas
By Gerald G. Raun

189

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of
Corpus Christi, Texas
By W. S. Fitzpatrick, Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N.
Campbell .

193

A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

205

The Zanonian Springs Site: An Archaic-Nee-American
Site in McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Texas
By W. A. Davis and Helen Ruth Horn

213

Obituary
Gustav Edmund Cranz, Jr. ( 1908-1963 )

251

Book Reviews
Forrester, Robert E., The Ham Creek Site
By Dorris L. Olds .

253

Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol. 1
By Dorris L. Olds .

254

Hester, James J., Early Navajo Migrations and
Acculturation in the Southwest
By Richard E. Ross .

256

Dutton, Bertha P., Sun Father's Way, The Kiva Murals
of Kuaua
By William W. Newcomb .

257

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian
Burial in Fisher County, Texas
CYRUS N. RAY AND EDWARD B. JELKS
ABSTRACT
An Indian burial in Fisher County, T exas, excavated in 1960, contained a number
of European trade items (glass beads, brass hawk bells, brass bracelets, and other
objects) . Comparison with Europea n trade items from other sites suggests that: ( 1)
the burial dates from the first half of the 19th century, and (2 ) recognizable typologica l changes probably took place in some classes of trade good s that were bartered
to Indians of the southern plains in the 18th and 19th centuries.

INTRODUCTION

In November, 1960, a young man named Marshall Billingsley found
a human tibia and several heavy brass bracelets eroding out of a dry
creek bank in southwestern Fisher County, Texas. Recognizing that
his find might be of scientific importance, he brought the tibia and
bracelets to the senior author Df the present paper and generously
agreed to show him the site and help him excavate it. Accordingly,
permission was obtained from the landowner, Mr. W . H . Watson, and
young Billingsley and the senior author excavated the remainder of
what proved to be a historic Indian burial. The site has been named
in honor of the landowner and has been assigned the number 41 FS 1
in The University of Texas files.
The burial was of a middle-aged Indian woman who had apparently
been placed in a crevice in the ground in a standing position, her face
to the southwest. The lower part of the buriaL including a tibia
and several brass bracelets, had been exposed by erosion in the upper
part of a vertical cut-bank some 10 feet high at the edge of the dry
creek. The senior author dug out what was left of the burial, passing
the bones and other objects as they were recovered to Billingsley, who
transferred them to a box in the dry creek bed below.
The Indian had been so covered with brass omaments that many of
the bones were stained green with verdigris over large areas, and
sizable pieces of flesh and cloth were so well preserved that the weave
of the cloth could still be seen. The flesh had dried out as in a mummy
and was light and odorless even when damp.

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Most of the skeleton was recovered in a good state of preservation.
Associated artifacts included an iron axe, 20 brass bracelets, nine brass
finger rings, a small mirror, a quantity of glass beads, and a rather
large section of clothing consisting of several layers of cloth to which
were sewn many light-weight brass hawk bells and one small brass
button. Unfortunately, the section of clothing (with most ~f the hawk
bells ), four of the bracelets, one of the tibias, the right humerus, and
an unknown quantity of glass beads were stolen by an unknown
bystander while the excavation was in progress. The surviving artifacts
are described in detail below.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE SKELETAL REMAINS

1

Skeletal material from the W. H . Watson site consists of the almost
complete skeleton of one individual. The pelvis and feet are the principal areas missing. The left humerus is circled by three copper bracelets,
and owing to impregnation of the metal much of the tissue on the
humerus and on the left second phalanges was preserved.
The skeleton is that of a female approximately 45 years of age at
the time of death. Age determination was based on cranial sutures,
long bone epiphyses, and the medial epiphyses of the clavicles. Most
of the extremity bones were present and used for stature estimation.
Living stature was approximately 5'1".
Table 1 shows the more important measurements of the skull.
Measurements plus observations demonstrate a skull that is broad
( mesocranic ) and low ( chamaecranic ) . The face is short and wide
with an upper facial index of 48.9 and a total facial index of 74.4
(actually, hypereuryprosopic ) . The glabella is small, the bridge arch
is medium and the orbits are square. The nasal aperture is triangular
and fairly wide yielding a nasal index of 54.2 (chama errhine ) . All
muscle attachment areas are small and the back of the skull ends in a
pronounced occipital bun.
The mandible is delicate, with gonial angles slightly everted. The
chin is round and the mylo-hyoid ridge is medium.
Dental wear is extreme but caries are not present. However, abscessed alveolar pockets are evident in both maxilla and mandible.
There is nothing distinctive about the postcranial skeleton. General
muscularity is moderate. Squatting facets are present.
Evidence of temporomandibular osteo-arthritis deformans is manifested by a flattening of the mandibular condyle and erosion and
1 This section was prepared by T. W . M cKern, physical anthropologist at The
University of T exas.

129

W . H. WATSON SITE

lipping of the articular fossa. Furthermore, exostoses were formed in
the central parts of the condyle, thus producing deformation in the
longitudinal axis. Actually, the mandibular condyle was not normally
seated in the fossa but up on the articular eminence. This relationship
probably resulted in what is commonly called "snapping jaw." This
pathology is purely derived from trauma, either functional or extrinsic.
Some lipping of the anterior borders of the thoracic vertebrae was
observed.
TABLE 1
Cranial measurements (in mm.) and indices
Maximum length
Maximum breadth
Basion-bregma height .
Auricular head height .
Minimum frontal .
Bizygomatic breadth
Bicondylar breadth
Nasion-menton .

. 176
. 139
119
. . 104
91
133
125
99

Nasion-prosthion
Nasal height
Nasal width
Orbital height, right
Orbital width, right
Palate breadth
Palate length

65
48
26
36
36
59
54

Indices
Cranial index
Length-height index
Total face index .

79.0
67.6
74.4

Upper face index
Nasal index
Palate index

48.9
54.2
109.1

DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS
GLASS BEADS

(approximately 19,900 specimens; Figs. 1, 2)

Numerous glass trade beads in a variety of shapes, sizes, and colors
were found in the grave. The beads may conveniently be divided into
two basic classes : ( 1) relatively large beads that were presumably
strung into necklaces, and (2) small "seed" beads of the kind customarily used for making embroidered headwork designs on clothing or
other articles. Most of the beads are patina ted to some degree.
Necklace beads (83 specimens: Fig. 1, A-E). These are all of prolate
spheroid shape (that is, shaped more or less like a football) and all are
of simple structure; 2 most specimens have a swirled appearance, evidently having been twisted around a wire while molten. Two colors
are present-an opaque milky white and a transparent ruby redand there are three distinct size groups: large, medium, and small. The
2 As here defined, a simple bead is one of monolithic stru cture; a compound bead
has two different structural components (see Duffield and Jelks, 1961 : 40-41).

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

A

F

c

.8

E

0

G

H

0

2
r--1---r-----=r---1
--.-----,14 CM.

Fig. 1 . Glass Beads. A-C, Red necklace beads. D, E, White necklace beads . F, G, Blue seed
beads . H, Clear/ Opaque White seed beads .

large or~es are 9 to 12-.5 mm. long and 6 to 8 mm. in maximum diameter; the medium ones are 8 to 9 mm. long and 5 to 5.5 mm. in diameter; the small ones measure 6 to 8 mm. long by 4 to 5 mm. in
diameter. There are 2,3 large white necklace beads and 15 large red
ones. Of the 41 small necklace beads, 2,4 are white and 17 are red. All
four of the medium-sized necklace beads are red. The perforations of
all the necklace beads are between 1 and 2, mm. in diameter.
Seed beads (approximately 19,850 specimens: Fig. 1, F-H, Fig. 2-,
A-E). There are four different colors of these tiny beads: white, amber, aquamarine ( blue-green ), and several shades of blue. Except for
a Clear/ Opaque White" variety, all are of simple construction. The
3 A Clear/Opaque White bead is one that has an opaque white core which is
covered by a superficial layer of clear glass (see Duffield and I elks, 1961: 40-41 ).
To the casual observer a Clear/ Opa qu e White bead appears to be made entirely of
opaque white glass. However, if an end of the bead be viewed from an oblique
angle its compound n 01 ture is usually apparent on close inspection: the superficial
clear layer still looks white, but the core looks even whiter. The only way the clear
glass can be seen is to look at a section of a cut or broken bead, and even then the
dear glass is often visible only under magnification.

131

W. H . WATSON SITE

seed beads were m ade by drawing out a th in tube of molten glass,
breaking the tube (after it had cooled ) into bead lengths, and then removing the sharp edges of the beads, probably by heating them in arevolving drum . T hus, prior to rounding off of their sharp edges, the
beads were all essentially cylindrical in shape, albeit some were longer
than others. Longitudinal sections of the finished beads tend to be
curvilinear rather than angular in outline (see Fig. 2), the degree of
curvature on a particular specimen depending on the intensity of the
final heating and rolling operation as well as on the length of the bead.
The variations in shape of the seed beads found at the Watson Site
are shown in Figure 2 and their dimensions are given in Table 2. Although the basic shape of all th e seed beads is pretty much the same,
there are some differences in size between beads of different colors
(see Table 2) .
HAwK BELLS ( 45 specimens; Fig. 3, A -B')
These tiny subsph erical bells consist of four structural parts : ( 1) an
obverse body half made of thin sheet brass and pierced by two round
holes that are connected by a narrow slit; (2 ) a reverse body half, also
of thin sheet brass and shaped like the obverse half, but w ithout the
holes or the slit; ( 3) a narrow strip of sheet brass bent to form a small
loop and riveted through the center of the reverse body half; ( 4 ) a tiny
pellet of iron enclosed within the body of the bell to make it jingle.
The iron pellets are all highly oxidized and their original form cannot
be determined. The two halves of the body were soldered together, and
a small drop of solder was placed at the juncture of the attachment
loop and the body of the bell. The solder, both for joining the two body
halves and for securing the attachment loop, is of a silver-colored
metal.

wa\
\

I I

I

I

8ift1./
A

I

-\ era,
-/
\

l

I

)

I

}

B

0

I

2

I

~'\ o/22><',
-~/ &gj/ w/
')

\

\

I I

I

) I

c

0

4

6 MM .

I

I

I

I I

I/

E

I

Fig . 2 . Cross se ct ions of glass seed beads , showing va riations in form and s ize.

.......

w

l:<l

TABLE 2
Seed beads: Significant data (dimensions to nearest

Yz

millimeter )

Diameter of

No. of
specimens

Diameter

Simple beads
Opaque pale blue

136

2 + - 3-

1- -

2Yz

Opaque amber

210

2- - 3

1- -

2

Yz - 1Yz

Appears black or dark brown to naked
eye. Total sample measured.

Opaque white

6,600
(est.)

2- - 3-

1

-

2

Yz

-1

Surface usually looks chalky. Sample
of 262 measured.

7,400
(est.)

2

1- -

3

Yz

-

Conspicuous longitudinal striations
visible on surface. Glass very bubbly
(microscopic examination). Sample of
approx. 300 specimens measured.

Bead

va1·ieties

Translucent
aquamarine

-

3

Lenglh

performation

1- -

1+

1+

Hem arks

Total sample measured.

Compound beads
Clear/ Opaque white

~

>
>
::0

(J)

Translucent blue
(several shades)

..,

406

2

-

4-

1- -

3+

1-

- 1Yz

These run larger in diameter than the
other simple seed beads. Sample of
approx. 200 specimens examined.

(')

li1
~

0
1:"'
0
c;l

.....

5,100
(est.)

2Yz - 4

1Yz -3

1- -1+

Somewhat larger than the simple seed
beads. Surface is shiny. Sample of 238
measured .

(')

>

1:"'
(J)

0

(')

.....

..,
~

><:

133

W. H. WATSON SITE

T h e hawk bells are of two sizes. The smaller ones ( 39 whole and
fragmentary specimens, Fig. 3, A, A') are 1.5 em. in diameter and 8
to 9 mm. in maximum body thickness. The two holes on the obverse
side are approximately 2 mm. in diameter and between 6 and 7 mm.
apart. The attachment loops average 1 to 2 mm. in diameter and the
brass strips from which they are made are approximately 1 mm. wide.
The edges of the two body halves are pressed together in such a manner as to form a narrow flange, slightly less than a millimeter wide,
which encircles the equatorial circumference of the bell. A hawk bell
that is apparently identical in size and structure to the smaller bells
from the Watson Site has been reported from Kipp's Post, a North
Dakota trading post of the 1820's, by Woolworth and Wood (1960:
282, Pl. 60, n ) .
The larger hawk bells (Fig. 3, B, B') , represented by two complete
and four fragmentary specimens, are constructed similarly to the
smaller ones except that the two body halves are soldered together
with their edges flush rather than flanged outward as in the case of the
smaller bells. The diameter of the one measurable specimen is 1.6 em.;
maximum body thickness is 1.1 em. The two holes on the obverse side

A

8

c

A'

8'

c'

0

I

2

4

6 CM.

I

l

I

Fig . 3 . Brass Hawk Be ll s and Button . A, A', Sma ller fo rm of hawk bel l. B, B', La rge r fo rm
of ha wk bell. C, C', Button .

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are about 3 mm. in diameter and 7 mm. apart. The attachment loops
measure 3 to 4 mm. in diameter, and the brass strips from which they
are formed are about 1.5 to 2.0 mm. wide.
BRASS BuTTON (1 specimen; Fig. 3, C, C')
This, the only button found at the Watson Site, is roughly hemispherical in shape and is of hollow, compound construction. It is 1.2
em. in diameter and the maximum body thickness is 8 mm. There is
no decoration. The body of the button consists of two pieces that are
joined together so that the edges of the obverse piece overlap those of
the reverse piece. An attachment loop fastened to the center of the
reverse side has an interior diameter of 3 mm. This specimen appears
identical to a form termed "bullet button" by Olsen (1963: 552, Fig.
1, F), said to date between 1812 and 1830 A.D.
FINGER RINGS (9 specimens; Fig. 4)
All of the rings were still in place around the finger bones when
found . There are two kinds: those made of wire and those made of
flattened brass straps.
Wire rings (7 specimens; Fig. 4, A). Six complete finger rings and
a fragment of a seventh are made of brass wire that is approximately
semicircular in cross section with the flat side of the semicircle facing
inward toward the center of the ring (Fig. 4, A). These were probably machine-stamped in one piece: at least no seams can be seen as
would be expected if they were made of lengths of wire with the ends
soldered or welded together. Also, they are all of precisely the same
dimensions, which are: ring diameter (measured from the inside edge
of the wire), 2.0 em.; width of wire, 2.0 mm.; thickness of wire,
1.5mm.
Strap rings (2 specimens; Fig. 4, B, C). Two rings-made of brass
straps that are lenticular in cross section-are much heavier than the
wire rings. They appear to be homemade affairs that were probably
hammered out of heavy brass wire. They are formed of strips bent into
circles; on one specimen the ends of the strip meet, but on the other
there is a gap about a millimeter wide between the ends. Both rings
have a diameter of 2.0 em., the same as that of the wire rings. The
brass strips are respectively 9 and 10 mm. wide; both are 2 mm. thick.
A similar strap ring from the Yellowhouse Canyon burial is illustrated
by Newcomb (1955: Pl. 25, D).

W . H.

135

WATSON SITE

c

8

A

0

I

2

I

4

I

6 CM.

I

Fig. 4. Brass Finger Rings . A, Wire ring. 8 , C, Strap rings.

BRASS BRACELETS ( 16 specimens; Fig. 5 )
Fifteen of the bracelets are made of heavy brass wire, the wire diameters all falling between 5 and 7 mm. ( 1 to 5 gauge). The sixteenth is lenticular in cross section and appears to have been hammered out of a piece of brass wire like that from which the others are
made. The latter bracelet is bent into an oval shape, the long axis of the
oval measuring 6.3 em. and the maximum width 3.8 em. In section
this specimen averages slightly more than 1 em . wide, with a maximum thickness of about 2 mm. There is a gap 1.0 em. wide between
the two ends of the metal strip from which the bracelet is formed .
Four of the wire bracelets (Fig. 15, A ) were made by bending sections of wire into circles. The two ends of the wire meet on one specimen so as to form a closed circle, but there are gaps 2 to 3 mm. wide
left between the ends of the wire in the other three examples. The wire
is of round cross section, and all four specimens are of the same size,
about 7.5 em. in diameter (measured from the inside edge of the
wire) .
The other eleven wire bracelets are oval in shape, with gaps 2.2 to
2.9 em. across left between the ends of the wire (Fig. 5, B-F) . The long
axes of the oval bracelets are from 5.7 to 8.0 em. long; maximum
width ranges from 3.7 to 5.2 em. (measurements made from the inside edges of the wire) . On some specimens the wire sections are
round; on others they are slightly flattened on two opposite sides of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

136

c

B

A

E

D

F

o•

G
0

5

10 CM.

I I I I I I I I I I I

W.

H.

137

WATSON SITE

the wire ; on still others they are flattened on four sides (approximately
square ).
Four of the oval bracelets have designs on their outside surfaces.
Three of the designs (Fig. 5, D, D', E, E', G) were produced by filing
notches perpendicular to the long axis of the wire; the fourth (Fig. 5,
F, F' ) consists of stamped figures that were applied with a die.
The bracelets were positioned on the body as follows : four around
each humerus and groups of not less than four around each tibia.
MIRROR ( 1 specimen )
This flat, rectangular plate of glass, which is 12.0 em. long, 8.5 em.
wide, and slightly more than 1 mm. thick, is evidently a mirror from
which the silvering has disappeared. It is lightly patinated on both
faces.
IRoN AxE ( 1 specimen; Fig. 6)
This light axe was probably hafted with a short handle in the manner of a hatchet. The blade is subtriangular with a convex bit; the
" eye" where the handle was inserted is ovate in shape, measuring
approximately 4 em. long by 3 em. wide. Maximum length of this
specimen is 14.0 em. The shape and size can be seen in the illustration (Fig. 6 ) .
The axe was found at the very bottom of the grave, but it could
have dropped downward appreciably after having been placed with
the burial, especially if this was a crevice burial as the circumstances
suggest.
TEXTILES ( 19 fragments; Fig. 7)
Fragments of cloth recovered from the Watson Site appear to have
come from two separate pieces of woolen fabric. Presumably the fragments are remains of clothing, but the original design cannot be
determined. Both fabrics are probably of commercial manufacture.
One fabric (Fig. 7, A ), represented by 7 fragments , is composed of
Z-twisted threads in a plain, warp-faced weave, with 23 warps and
14 wefts to the inch. The weft threads are tightly twisted; the warp
threads are loosely twisted and somewhat smaller than those of the
weft. The second fabric (Fig. 7, B) is a plain weave made from loosely

Fig . 5 . Brass Bracelets. Designs that appear on the decorated specimens are reproduced in
the drawings , which represent straightened-out bracelets, in the lower half of the figure.
The drawings were made by Chris Jelks.

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

5
......-T,....,.,__,._,

r-1..-,

10
1. CM.

-r-1..,......,......,.,......

Fig . 6 . Iron Axe . Side and top views .

S-twisted threads, with both warp and weft running 14 threads to the
inch.
LEATHER ( 4

fragments; Fig. 8)
Four small pieces of tanned leath er are possibly parts of a saddle.
Three of them are painted red on one side, and one of the painted
ones (Fig. 8) bears a tooled decoration.

8

A

or---r------=?r-----,.----;4r--_____,-____:;E? c M.

I

I

I

Fig. 7 . Textile Fragments .

I

139

W. H. WATSON SITE

DISCUSSION

Because, with our present knowledge, none of the items associated
with the Watson burial can be dated precisely, it is difficult to assign
a narrow date to the burial. Typological comparison with material
from other historic sites, however, offers evidence that the Watson Site
almost certainly dates between 1800 and 1860, and it ;_s our opinion
that the actual date probably is between 1820 and 1840. The reasons
for arriving at this estimate are given in the following brief discussion.
Two historic burials have been reported in the same general region
of western Texas as the Watson Site: the Yellowhouse Canyon burial
in Lubbock County (Newcomb, 1955 ) and the White Site in Yoakum
County (Suhm, 1962) . The White Site clearly dates from the middle
to late nineteenth century while the Yellowhouse Canyon Site certainly dates after 1858 (an associated pistol is a model first manufactured in that year) and probably before 1875. A comparison of
beads and other trade objects from the Watson, White, and Yellowhouse Canyon sites suggests that the Watson Site predates the other
two by a few years.
Specific stylistic changes appear to have taken place in the seed
beads traded to Indians in the southern Plains during the 18th and
19th centuries. Seed beads of the 18th century tend to be of somewhat larger size than those of the 19th century; also, certain forms
that were in common use during the late 18th century evidently had
disappeared from the trader's stock of goods before the middle of the
19th century. A quantity of white seed beads found at the Pearson
Site in Rains County, Texas, for example, are all of compound Clear/
Opaque White structure (Duffield and Jelks, 1961 : 41-48). This site
dates somewhere in the 1700 to 1835 period, probably between 1750
and 1820 (ibid.: 76-79 ). The white seed beads from the White Site,
in contrast, are all of simple rather than compound form ( Suhm, 1962:
95) as are those from Yellowhouse Canyon (the latter have been examined personally by the junior author) . There is much unpublished
data from an extensive series of sites which support the conclusion
that there was probably a change through time from compound to
simple white seed beads.
Since the white seed beads from the Watson Site are about evenly
divided between compound and simple forms, it appears likely, on
this basis, that the Watson burial dates later than the Pearson Site
but earlier than the White and Yellowhouse Canyon sites. Similarly,
the size range of the seed beads from Watson falls between those from
Pearson on the one hand and those from the White and Yellowhouse

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

2

4

-r,-.___,6,

1..---r-,r----,.----r-1

CM.

Fig. 8. Tooled Leather.

Canyon sites on the other. The seed beads from Pearson are from 1 to 3
mm. long and 2 to 4 mm. in diameter; but a large majority fall between 2 and 3 mm. long by 3 to 4 mm. in diameter (Duffield and
Jelks, 1961: 43-50 ). The seed beads from the White Site are appreciably smaller, being from slightly less than 1 to a maximum of
1 Y2 mm. long, and from 2 to 2¥2mm. in diameter ( Suhm, 1962: 95 ).
The seed beads from Yellowhouse Canyon are of similar size. The
Watson seed beads are from slightly less than 1 to slightly more than
3 mm. long and from slightly less than 2 to a maximum of 4 mm. in
diameter. Thus, their size range falls between that of the relatively
large Pearson seed beads and the significantly smaller ones from the
White and Yellowhouse Canyon sites.
The bracelets from the Watson Site are made of considerably larger
wire (5 to 7 mm. in diameter) than those from some late 19th century sites of the region. The White Site bracelets, for example, all
measure between 2 and 3 mm. in wire diameter (Suhm, 1962: 94 ).
This suggests the possibility that the gauge of the wire used for making
bracelets may have some chronological significance; but this is, of
course, conjectural at present.
The hawk bells also suggest a date between 1800 and 1850 as they
are identical to a specimen from Kipp's Post, a North Dakota trading
station of the 1820's (Woolworth and Wood, 1960: Pl. 60, n ). Most
of the hawk bells from the White Site (Suhm, 1962: 87, Fig. 1, A) ,
represented by 49 examples, differ from the Watson specimens in
these respects: they are larger, they are spherical rather than oblate,
they have wire instead of strap attachment loops, and they have
crossed slits in the obverse face rather than a single slit with a round

141

W. H. WATSON SITE

hole at each end. Perhaps these differences are indicative of stylistic
changes through time. Two fragmentary hawk bells from the White
Site are generally similar to the Watson specimens, but they are
larger and possibly also differ in structural details.
In summary, there are suggestions that certain typological changes
took place in some kinds of European trade goods that were bartered
to the Indians of the southern plains in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Although firm typologies-including accurate chronological ordering-have not yet been established, certain trends can be discerned,
trends which suggest that the Watson burial dates from the first half
of the 19th century, probably between 1820 and 1840. There are no
specific indications as to the tribal affiliation of the buried woman,
but in view of the site location, the mode of interment, and the estimated time period, it is our guess that she was Comanche.
REFERENCES CITED
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series, No. 4.
Newcomb, W . W ., Jr.
1955. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 186-199.
Olsen, Stanley J .
1953. Dating Early Plain Buttons by Their Form. American Antiquity, Vol. 28,
No. 4, pp. 551-554.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1952. The White Site: An Historic Indian Burial in Yoakum County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32, pp . 85-119 .
Woolworth, Alan R. , and W. Raymond Wood
1960. The Archeology of a Small Trading Post (Kipp 's Post, 32MN1 ) in the
Garrison Reservoir, North Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 20.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin, No. 176, pp. 239-305.
Abilene, Texas
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

