BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Vol. 35 I Published by the Society I Austin, Texas, 1964

·

Offtce of the State Areheo!og!

.·~~·;. . . ._.___ Library

~-.,-~4!o-: .;'• -~ · · · : - ~ .

'

"

__ -:S
. ,(

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man and
the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement
of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of researches
incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1964
President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
President Emeritus: CYRUS N. R,w (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAMES H. WoRD (Floydada)
Secretary-Treasurer: DoRRIS L. 0LDS (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL A. CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W. C. HoLDEN (Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), IsABELLE R.
LoBDELL (Fort Worth), and E. A. WHITE (El Paso).
Trustees: 0. L. SrMs (San Angelo), MARDITH K. ScHUETZ (San Antonio), and
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CHARLES W. BANDY (Brownfield), JAy C. BLAINE
(Richardson), CHARLES N. BoLLICH (Beaumont), ADA BRANCH (Victoria),
W. A. DAVIS (Jasper), JoHN HENDRICK (El Paso), ELBERT D. HELM (Fort
Worth), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.), and DoN R. WILLIAMS (San Marcos).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership
at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5.00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin, Texas 78712. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is
the same.

Cover design by Mark L. Parsons; taken from petroglyph panel at the Verbena
Site, Garza County, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, I 991

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Editor: Dee Ann Story ,
Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D . Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1964

Office of the ~tate Archeologist J·
"" . .. ......

~;.1

--

..._____ Library

I

Table of Contents
Artic(es
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacada
By Jane Holden Kelley .

1

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield .

19

Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas
By Curtis D. Tunnell .

83

Indian Skeletal Material from the Jim Arnold Site
By Thomas W. McKern

95

The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas
By Frank A. Runkles .

101

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher
County, Texas
By Cyrus N. Ray and Edward B. Jelks .

127

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor
Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas
By Elton R. Prewitt

143

West Indian Seal Remains from Two Historic Sites in
Coastal South Texas
By Gerald G. Raun

189

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of
Corpus Christi, Texas
By W. S. Fitzpatrick, Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N.
Campbell .

193

A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

205

The Zanonian Springs Site: An Archaic-Nee-American
Site in McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Texas
By W. A. Davis and Helen Ruth Horn

213

Obituary
Gustav Edmund Cranz, Jr. ( 1908-1963 )

251

Book Reviews
Forrester, Robert E., The Ham Creek Site
By Dorris L. Olds .

253

Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol. 1
By Dorris L. Olds .

254

Hester, James J., Early Navajo Migrations and
Acculturation in the Southwest
By Richard E. Ross .

256

Dutton, Bertha P., Sun Father's Way, The Kiva Murals
of Kuaua
By William W. Newcomb .

257

The Garza Site: A Neo-American
Campsite Near Post, Texas
FRANK A. RUNKLES
ABSTRACT
A small archeological site in Garza County, Texas was dug in 1959 by the South
Plains Archeological Society to salvage materials threatened to be destroyed by
highway construction. The excavations yielded tubular bone beads, bone awls, wolf
teeth pendants, chipped stone knives, scrapers, drills , arrow points (including a
new type herein called Garza) , and numerous broken bison bones. These artifacts
and the occupational features, mainly hearths, are described, and the distribution
of the Garza type arrow point is discussed.

INTRODUCTION

The Garza Site, recorded as 41 Ga 40 in the files of the West Texas
Museum at Texas Technological College, is located about 16 airline
miles south of Post, Texas, in Garza County. It consists of a buried
occupational zone (Figs. 1, 2) which contains a distinctive type of
arrow point (for which the name Garza is suggested) along with a
limited amount of other cultural debris.
The site lies about one mile east of the Llano Estacado (Staked
Plains ), a vast, relatively featureless plain which extends from the
west some five to 15 miles into Garza County. Below the caprock-an
erosional escarpment that marks the edge of the Llano Estacadathere are many small, intermittent streams which make up the headwaters of the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River. At the present time, rain water rushing down these normally dry creeks is causing considerable erosion of their alluvial banks .
The Garza Site was discovered in just such an eroded bank by
several state highway engineers in November 1958, while surveying
the proposed right-of-way for State Highway 669. The engineers observed a hearth containing stones and charcoal in a creek bank about
3.5 feet below the surface. They reported the find to J. M. Baylis (then
secretary of the Garza Chapter of South Plains Archeological Society),
and during the excavations they were most cooperative in making
possible the first known archeological highway salvage in the State
of Texas.

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

103

GARZA SITE

The site is buried in a low terrace on the west side of a bend in a
dry, unnamed creek (Figs. 1, 2). Overlain by approximately 16 to 42
inches of sterile soil, the occupational zone lies in the first and only
terrace of a shallow and narrow valley. This zone has been exposed
and partly removed by recent erosion. The terrace deposit, or more
properly the valley fill, consists primarily of slope wash derived from
the easily eroded Triassic clays which outcrop nearby. Although generally very thin ( 2 inches on the average), the occupational zone did
reach a maximum of about 6 to 14 inches in thickness where hearths
and other features were encountered.
EXCAVATION ·

The excavation was begun in January 1959 and continued intermittently until June 1959. It was conducted by members of the South
Plains Archeological Society under the general direction of Drs. Earl
F. Green and David H. Kelley of the West Texas Museum, Texas
Technological College. The actual field work, however, was supervised by the author and Emmett Shedd.
A horizonal datum point, designated as ON-OE, was established
140 feet west of the hearth discovered by the highway engineers. A
grid composed of 10 foot squares was extended 140 feet east and 100
feet north of the datum (Fig. 2 ) .
The excavations concentrated on the occupational zone, which appeared clearly as a layer of discolored earth with bits of charcoal,
flint flakes , and splintered bone. It was buried as much as 42 inches
below the surface at the creek bank, but became shallower (as little
as 16 inches below the surface ) toward the western part of the site,
at the base of a low hill. Apart from the lateral cutting of the stream,
the only disturbance to the site consisted of slumpage which had been
produced by deep water erosion underneath the surface (Fig. 2).
Evidence obtained from the excavation suggested that the hearths
and other features uncovered had been anchored in place by gently
deposited silts. It seems probable that this deposition initially occurred
shortly after the site was abandoned.
Forty-two squares were worked (Fig. 2 ) . Of these 26 were completely

Fig . 1. The Garza Site. A, Looking west at alluvial bank in which the site was first discovered; hearth and occupation zone are exposed where the worker is kneeling. B, Over-alf
view of the site, looking east, after the mesquite trees and sterile overburden had been.
bulldozed off.

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

6DN~~tr~~~~~-k-+--~+-~~

X-------------r-~H--k~~~~~~-+~--~-

40Nr-~+r~~k-~~~~--~4.-t~A

0

'>O

eo

GARZA SITE

GA-40

GARZA COUN TY, TEXAS
[Sl = Grid
• · = Test

MAP BY :

s~uare s

pits

worKed

fRANK A.RUNKLH

Fig . 2 . Garza Site. Plan of excavation and generalized cross section .

excavated, and 3,734 square feet of occupation area were uncovered.
With the generous aid of Mr. John F . Lott, the landowner who furnished an operator and earth-moving equipment, approximately 8,000
cubic feet of overburden were dozed off (Fig. 1, B) and an eight foot

105

GARZA SITE

deep trench (Fig. 2 ) was dug to make certain that there was not an
earlier occupation represented at the site. Man hours-all of which
were volunteered-actually spent digging by hand totaled 1,692. It is
estimated that 1,867 cubic feet of hard, dry clay soil, much too compact
to be troweled, were chipped away by picks, shovels, and ice picks.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS AND OTHER
OCCUPATIONAL REFUSE

A total of 238 artifacts was collected from the Garza Site by members of the South Plains Archeological Society. In analyzing these
materials, they were first sorted into three broad groups: objects of
bone, chipped stone, and pecked and ground stone. Within these
general groupings a number of presumed functional categories (such
as bone awls, arrow points, scrapers, etc.) were recognized. In many
instances, it was possible to distinguish even more discrete categories
which are based primarily on comparisons of morphological features.
These final groupings are largely of a descriptive nature, although
two distinctive cultural types- the Harrell and Garza arrow point
types- are included.
As a group the artifacts from the Garza Site strongly suggest that
the occupants had an economy based largely on hunting. Among the
most common types of artifacts recovered are chipped stone arrow
points, knives, and scrapers-implements which were probably used
to kill and butcher animals. Confirmation of this interpretation was
readily obtained from the numerous bison bones which occurred in
the occupation zone.
OBJECTS oF BoNE

Splinter awls (Fig. 3, C, D ) . The two awls recovered are made from
bone splinters, possibly from bison leg bones that were initially broken
open to obtain marrow. Both specimens are essentially complete. One
(Fig. 3, C) tapers to a keen, slightly ground point, but is otherwise
unaltered. The other awl (Fig. 3, D ) is much larger and more extensively smoothed, apparently from greater use. It lacks only a small
portion of the distal end. The first specimen is 7.6 em. long, .8 em.
wide, and .4 em. thick; the second is 15 em. long, 2 em. wide at the
basal end, and 1 em. in maximum thickness.
Tubular beads (Fig. 3, E-G; Fig. 8, A ) . Four cylindrical beads,
each of which has been ground smooth on both ends and shows polish
from use, appear to have been fashioned from bird and/ or small mam-

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mal bones. They are 3 em. long, and from .5 to . 7 em. in diameter.
None shows indications of having been decorated, alth ough the surfaces of two are somewhat eroded.
Wolf teeth pendants (Fig. 3, A, B) . Two wolf canine teeth, probably from the same individual, have a shallow groove about .5 em .
below the enamel end. T h e remaining portions are not modified. T he

•

0

'0

A

8

c

E

F

G

0

2

4

6

CM

Fig . 3 . Artifacts of Te eth and Bone. A, B, Wolf teeth pendants. C, D, Spl inter bo ne aw ls.
E-G, Tubula r bone beads .

107

GARZA SITE

two teeth were found together in a position which suggested that they
may have been tied together and presumably worn as a necklace. Each
is 5.5 em. long and 1.3 em. in maximum width.
CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

Arrow Points
Unidentified triangular points (Fig. 4, J -L, N-P ). Twenty·seven
triangular points, many of which are broken, cannot readily be identified with a recognized type. They have straight to convex lateral edges
and straight or concave bases. Several of the larger specimens (Fig.
4 , N-P) are crudely made, and most (22 ) are essentially unifacially
worked. Two (Fig. 4, 0 , P ) of the crude points are large enough to
be classified as Matamoros points ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 215), except
that the blades are not beveled. Perhaps these, and many of the others,
are unfinished points or small knives. At the other extreme, the smaller
and better chipped examples (such as Fig. 4, J ) could possibly be
identified as Fresno points ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 273) . The complete
specimens range from 2 to 4 em. in length, from 1.5 to 2 em. in maximum width, and .3 to .6 em. in thickness.
Harrell points (Fig. 4, F-I). Fifteen triple-notched arrow points
can be classified as the Harrell type ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 275).
Each has two lateral notches and one basal notch. The lateral edges
vary from straight to convex, and are sometimes finely serrated (Fig.
4 , G ). One point (Fig. 4, H ) has a straight base; the remainder have
slightly to markedly concave bases, and all have sharply defined basal
corners. Approximately half of the Harrell points are well worked on
both faces, while the others are made from plano-convex flakes which
are chipped principally on one (the convex ) face. All were fashioned
from stream worn flint and chert nodules probably obtained at or
near the site. They range from 2 to 4 em. in length, 1 to 2 em. in width,
and .2 to .3 em. in thickness.
Garza points (Fig. 4, A-E) . The name Garza is suggested for 13
triangular points, each of which has a centrally-placed basal notch. It
is felt that these points are distinctive enough to warrant establishing
them as a new type. (Additional distributional data on the Garza type
are presented in the concluding section.)
Both the lateral edges and the bases vary from straight to convex.
Serrations are often present on the blade edges (Fig. 4, A, B, D , E ),
and two (Fig. 4, D, E) have shallow, token notches near the tip end
of one lateral edge. Both of the latter specimens are well made and

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

G

c

B

D

H

M

J

N
0

E

K

0
4

2

F

L

p
6

CM
fig . 4 . Projectile Points. A-E, Garza points . F-1 , Harrell points . J- L, N-P, Unidentified
triangular po ints. M, Unidentified dart point.

GARZA SITE

109

have the same outline shape, with deeply serrated edges. The majority
of the Garza points exhibit fine workmanship, even though almost
half of them are only unifacially worked. One point is of obsidian, the
others are of local flints and cherts which, in the form of smoothed
stream pebbles, are abundant at the site.
The Garza points range from Z to 4 em. in length, although only
one (Fig. 4, E) is over 3.5 em. long. The maximum width occurs
across the base and is 1 to 2 em. These points are generally thin, with
the thickness varying from .1 to .3 em.
Arrow point fragments. Unidentifiable fragments of points, most of
which are well worked arrow point tips, total 19. One is made of
obsidian, the rest of local flint and chert.

Dart Point
Only one dart point (Fig. 4, M), an unclassifiable expanding stem
form, was recovered from the site. It has slightly convex blade edges,
pronouncedly barbed shoulders, and a straight base. The edges of the
blade have fine retouching which has produced faint serrations. This
dart point was found immediately below a layer of packed ash, on
what was the ground surface at the time of the original occupation.
The tan flint from which it was made is rarely found in Garza County,
suggesting that this specimen is intrusive to the site. It is 5.5 em. in
total length, 2.3 em. wide across the barbs, and .5 em. in maximum
thickness. The stem is . 7 em. long and 1. 7 em. wide at the base.

Drills
Bifacially worked drill (Fig. 5, J ) . One complete drill has an expanded base and is flaked across both surfaces. The shaft is . 7 em. wide,
lenticular in cross section, and shows wear on the edges, perhaps a
result of drilling stone. The drill measures 5.3 em. long, 2.2 em. wide
across the base, and .6 em. in maximum thickness.
Flake drills (Fig. 5, D-I ) . Nine drills are distinct from the above in
that they are smaller and have less well worked bases and shafts. Most
were formed by minimal alteration of thin flakes, with the majority
of the chipping being confined to the shafts. Even on the shafts the
flaking is primarily along the edges. All distal ends taper to a point,
but one (Fig. 5, H ) is especially keen. Several, but not all, are wom
along the lateral edges of the shaft. These flake drills vary from 3.1 to
5.4 em. in total length and 1 to 1.9 em . across the base. The shafts

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

G

0

E

H
J

N
0

2

4

CM
Fig . 5 . Knives, Drills, and Scrapers. A-C , Flake knives. D-1, Flake drills . J, Bifacial drill.
K-N, Side scrapers.

are 1.5 to 2.8 em. in length, .3 to .6 em. in width, and .1 to .5 em. in
thickness.

Knives
Slender, triangular knife (Fig. 6, H ). One bifacially worked knife
has a convex base and straight blade edges which recurve very slightly

GARZA SITE

111

near the distal end. Because of its narrowness, this specimen approaches
the shape of a drill; its inclusion in the knife category is therefore
somewhat arbitrary. Both lateral edges show secondary retouching
possibly intended to sharpen the specimen. It measures 6 em. in length,
1.5 em. in maximum width, and .4 em. in maximum thickness.
Alternately beveled knife. Although only the distal ( ?) end of this
specimen was recovered, it has all the earmarks of the diamond-shaped,
alternately beveled-edged knives which are commonly found in this
portion of Texas. It is made from a dark gray, translucent flint that
is not native to the area . The surviving part of the knife is 5.5 em.
long and 1.8 em wide at the broken end.
Flake knives (Fig. 5, A-C ) . Ninety-seven relatively thin flakes retouched along one or more marginal edges are termed flake knives .
They could also be regarded as flake scrapers, since most are worked on
only one face. The term knife, however, has been chosen because they
were found among splintered bones and because so few (only two )
other probable knives were found at the site. Finally, these flakes seem
too thin to have functioned effectively as scrapers. They vary considerably in size, from 2.2 to 5. 7 em. in length and 1 to 2.6 em. in width.

Scrapers
End scrapers (Fig. 6, A-G) . Twenty-one end scrapers have been
made from medium-sized, generally thick flakes. Each has a steep,
convex scraping bit at the distal end. All are plano-convex in cross
section and many have retained portions of the weathered cortex on
the convex surface. The flat surface is unaltered and often has a bulb
of percussion. Several are made from initial cortex flakes, and most,
if not virtually all, appear to have been removed from the core by
means of a hammerstone. Both prepared and unprepared striking platforms are present. These end scrapers range from 3 to 8 em. in length,
3 to 4 em. in width at the bit, and .7 to 1.8 em. in maximum thickness.
Large end scraper·chopper (Fig. 7, D) . This specimens has been
made from a large nodule of locally-obtained, coarse-grained quartzite.
Approximately the lower two thirds of both faces are flaked. The
proximal end of one face is unworked and retains the nodular cortex,
while the opposite face of this end has been fashioned to form a rather
steep scraping edge. Both the lateral edges and the scraping bit show
battering, presumably from use. This specimen is 15.6 em. long, 8.8
em. across the bit end, and 5.1 em. in maximum thickness.
Side scrapers (Fig. 5, K-N ) . Made from long, narrow flakes, nine
specimens have been chipped along one or both lateral edges to form

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

D

A

E

F

G

K

J
0

H

2

4

6

6

CM

Fig. 6 . Scrapers and Knife . A-G , End scrapers . H, Possible knife. 1-K, Concave-edged side
scrapers .

prominent scraping bits. A few (su ch as Fig. 5, M ) also have one end
worked into a scraper, and one (Fig. 5, K ) terminates in a sharp point.
The side scrapers range from 4 to 7.5 em. in length, Z to 5 em. in
width, and .5 to .9 em. in maximum thickness .
Concave-edged side scrapers (Fig. 6, I-K ). Four small flint flake s
have intentionally-produced concave edges. These range from a small,
distinct concavity-so-called spokeshave-to broad and very slightly

113

GARZA SITE

concave scraping edge. Most of these flakes are roughly rectangular
in outline, measuring 2.6 to 4.9 em. in length, 1.5 to 2.2 em. in maximum width, and .3 to . 7 em. in maximum thickness. Two (Fig. 6, I,
K ) have retained portions of the cortex.

Choppers
Four choppers or hand-axes (Fig. 7, A-C, E ) have been fashioned
from water worn pebbles. Each is bifacially worked on the distal end
so as to produce a convex cutting or "chopping" edge. The upper portions of the pebbles are not altered. These specimens exhibit a considerable range in size: 4 to 11 em. in length and 3 to 5 em. in width
across the distal end. Only the largest one ( Fig. 7, E ) shows extensive
signs of use.
PECKED AND GROUND STONE OBJECTS

Hammerstones. Five stream worn pebbles of flint and quartzite
show some evidence of having been used as hammerstones. One with
quite extensive battering may have been an exhausted core that was
re-utilized. The other four are only slightly worn.
Grinding stones. An irregular slab of hard limestone has a shallow
natural depression which shows polish from use. Found associated
with this slab was a quartzite pebble which is somewhat worn on one
surface. Otherwise the latter is unaltered. The grinding slab is approximately 3.9 em. thick and a maximum of 56 em. across; the handstone
is 10.2 em. long, 7.6 em. wide, and 5 em. thick.
MiscELLANEous Occu PATIONAL REFUSE

Ocher
Four small pieces of red ocher were recovered during the excavations. These do not show definite signs of use, but may have been
intentionally brought to the site and used as sources of pigment.

Chipping Debris
Twenty-six flint or chert cores were recovered. A few resemble
crude, keel-backed scrapers, but the edges do not show evidence of
having been used. In addition to the cores, 10,444 flakes were found
in the occupational zone. Many of these have sharp edges and could
have served as knives. All of local material, except for four translucent
obsidian chips.

'-

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B

c

E
0

2

4

6

e

CM

Fig. 7 . Choppers. A-C, E, Choppers. D, Combination end scraper and chopper.

Miscellaneous Stones
Nine large quartzite pebbles, all of which can easily be held in the
hand, were found among splintered pieces of bison bone. It seems
likely that these unmodified, stream worn stones were utilized to
break open animal bones.

115

GARZA SITE

Faunal Remains
Bison. A total of 67 bison teeth and mandible fragments were found
scattered throughout the occupational level. The front incisor teeth
were quite numerous and, interestingly, none was intact in the mandible, although several were often found together. Perhaps they may
have served as simple cutting tools, in spite of the fact that none
appeared to be modified in any way.
In addition to the teeth and jaw fragments , the excavations recovered
2,026 pieces of bison bone, most of which had been broken into
splinters of various size, apparently by pounding. Recognized in this
collection were long bones, foot and toe bones, shoulder blades, and a
few rib bones. Four sets of foot bones (each consisting of the first
through third phalanx ) were found articulated in such a manner as to
indicate that the foot had been intentionally severed from the rest of
the leg. One hundred and three pieces show cuts and scratches that
appear to have been made with flint scrapers and knives.
Turtle. Several leg bones and carapace fragments of land terrapin
were found concentrated in one place. The species represented has not
yet been identified.
Rodent. Several rodent bones, none of which have been identified,
were found at the site. They are not altered and may be intrusive.
Snake. One shed fang of a snake belonging to the pit viper family
was recovered in the excavation. The only member of this family to
be found in the area today is the western diamond-back rattlesnake.
l!ackberrySeeds
Hackberry seeds were occasionally found scattered throughout the
occupational zone. It is quite possible that their occurrence in this
zone is fortuitous.
OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES

During the course of excavation, 10 occupational features were
recognized at the Garza Site. These include six hearths, two concentrations of bone splinters, one accumulation of small flint chips, and a
possible grinding stone cache. The location of each of the features is
shown in Figure 9; and a typical, although somewhat idealized hearth,
is given in Figure 10, and one of the bone accumulations (Feature H )
is illustrated in Figure 11.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B

Fig . 8 . Excavation of Site. A, Arrow point to tubular beads found in situ . B, Cleani ng
one of the hearths, Feature A.

117

GARZA SITE
FEATURE

A

This feature , a hearth which had been exposed and partially
removed by stream erosion, consisted of three layers of fire-cracked
sandstone and charcoal (Fig. 8, B) . It was found approximately three
feet below the present ground surface. Considerable charcoal, sufficient for an excellent radiocarbon sample, and an occasional leg bone
of a bison calf were the only cultural debris associated with this feature.
The hearth appeared to have been built on the original occupational
surface and that portion remaining was 22 inches long, 18 inches wide,
and 10 inches thick.
FEATURE

B

A second and somewhat disturbed hearth which measured 6.5 inches
in thickness was found partially exposed in one edge of the sink area
(Figs. 2 and 9). That part remaining contained broken fragments of
fire-blackened sandstone and, immediately east of these stones, an
inch thick layer of gray ash with burned and splintered bones and
two bison teeth. At the eastern edge of this ash layer the shattered
lOON

)

9DN

I

BON

1

70N

J(

I

60N
50N

E

1\

.;or;

\

o]

H

oON

\4

2DN
G
JON

ON

c
OE

IDE

2-0E

30E

40£

50£

eO£

70£

0£

9Qf

D

\

8
lODE

liD I

1ur

F
zos )OS

Fig. 9. Location of the occupation features found at the Garza Site.

.~

I5Df

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

remains of the right half of a bison mandible were recovered. The
incisor teeth in the mandible appear to have been intentionally removed. Seven inches from the mandible, a scraper and one incisor
tooth were found , while approximately 1.5 feet further to the east there
was a second scraper and two more bison incisor teeth. Although somewhat speculative, it seems possible that the scrapers may have been
used to extract and clean the incisor teeth and that the teeth, in turn,
may have served as chisel-like tools.
FEATURE

c

Approximately five feet southwest of Feature B, a concentrated area
of flint chips was encountered. Containing 7,972 flakes, several fragments of arrow points, and portions of two bison leg bones, this roughly
circular concentration was 18 inches across, 16 inches below the surface, and a maximum of 2. 7 inches thick. The flakes were all smallthe largest was about fingernail size-and appear to have been derived
from three different cores of local material. The arrow point fragments, none of which was complete enough for typological identification, were made of the same stones. The majority of the flint chips
were so small that they could be recovered only by taking out blocks
of clay and dissolving the clay with water on a fine screen.
FEATURES

D

AND

E

Although found a considerable distance from one another (Fig. 9),
these two hearths are so similar that they can conveniently be described
together. Both consisted primarily of burned sandstone and limestone
slabs, some of which were as much as 10 inches in diameter. Like
Feature A, these slabs were stacked in layers. Charcoal was present in
both hearths, as were a few small fragments of burned bone. Each
measured 20 inches in diameter; FeatureD was found 22 inches below
the surface and was 7 inches thick, while Feature E was 17 inches
below the surface and was 8 inches thick.
FEATURE F

A fifth hearth, also consisting of sandstone slabs and charcoal, was
approximately 18 inches in diameter, 7.5 inches thick, and 20 inches
below the surface. Adjacent to this feature, on the northeastern edge,
was a packed layer of ash which yielded several pieces of burned bison
bone, a few bison bone and teeth fragments, and several flint flakes.

119

GARZA SITE

HEARTH

ASH
CROSS SECTION

TYPICAL HEARTH AT THE GARZA SITE

1

TOP VIE\.V

I FOOT
Fig. 10. Idealized plan view and cross section of typical hearth.

Underneath the ash layer was a dart point (Fig. 4, M ) and, at the
eastern edge of the layer, remains of a land terrapin. Other objects
found in the general vicinity of the hearth include: 37 bison leg bone
splinters, one bison incisor tooth, 336 flint flakes (most of which are

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

very small ) , four obsidian chips, two flint cores, one quartzite hammerstone, eight flake knives, one flake drill, one drill shaft, two Harrell
points, one Garza point, three small triangular points, one large triangular point or knife (Fig. 4, 0 ) , and four arrow point fragments.
The presence of this much cultural debris clearly indicates that this
hearth had been built in a comparatively heavily occupied portion of
the site.
FEATURE

G

A quartzite pebble and a limestone slab appear to have been associated and, consequently, are designated as a feature (see also the artifact
descriptions above ). Both show some slight signs of use as grinding
implements. They were encountered at a depth of 19 inches below the
surface. Nearby a few hackberry seeds, a chopper (Fig. 7, E ), and a
medium-sized end scraper were collected.
FEATURE

H

Perhaps the most interesting feature recorded at the Garza Site was
a pile of bison bone splinters which were surrounded on three sides by
small, well spaced stones (Fig. 11). The bone concentration was found
17 inches below the surface, measured 12 inches in diameter and 3
inches in thickness. The nine stones about the bones were placed five
to 10 inches apart and formed a nearly complete square which measured 22 inches across. Seven of these stones were of fire-fractured
sandstone, one (which marked the northeast corner) was a tan quartzite pebble, and one (which marked the northwest corner ) was a glossy
black quartzite pebble. The seemingly careful arrangement of three
stones on each side suggests special significance, perhaps of a ceremonial nature. There are no indications that the fourth or south side
(Fig. 11) was ever "closed."
FEATURE

I

The sixth and only other hearth found at the site was quite similar
to those described a hove. It was encountered at a depth of 16 inches
below the surface and reached a maximum thickness of 6.5 inches.
Feature I consisted of several layers of sandstone and limestone slabs
and, on the northeast side, a small concentration of packed ash. This
hearth was found in the occupation zone and the materials from the
general area include: a flake drill, an end scraper, two side scrapers,

121

GARZA SITE

1
s

c
22 INCHES

Fig . 11. Unusual accumulation of bone !Feature H) . A, Concentration of splintered bison
bone. 8, Fragment of dark tan, water-worn pebble. C, Fragmentary , glossy black quartzite
pebble.

three flake knives, two Harrell points, two triangular points, four
arrow point fragments, and a snake fang. Curiously, no flint flakes nor
bone fragments were recovered from the vicinity.
FEATURE

J

At a depth of 18 inches below the surface a neat, circular accumulation of splintered bison bones was encountered. It measured 21 inches
in diameter and three inches in thickness at the center. While no other
cultural debris was found nearby, it was quite evident that the bones
had been carefully placed in a pile.

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The Garza Site is a small campsite which yielded 238 artifacts, 10
occupational features , and numerous bison bones. The bison were
clearly killed and partially butchered elsewhere, for among the thousands of bone fragments found, only leg bones and lower jaws were
represented. Apparently, the forelimbs were detached in such a
manner as to include the scapulae and the upper ribs . The hind limbs
were probably separated from the body at the pelvic socket, as evidenced by knife marks found on the femurs. All bones, except those
of the foot, had been shattered by blows from a dull object (choppers
or hammerstones? ) probably to obtain marrow. Mandibles are well
represented in the collection and may have been removed from the
skull with tongues attached to make transporting the tongues to camp
easier. It is also possible that the incisor teeth, with their chisel-like
edges, may have been used as cutting and scraping implements.
The six hearths were the most common occupational features uncovered by the excavations. All were a bout the same size ( 18 to 22
inches in diameter ), had been built on the surface, and were composed
of two to three layers of small stone slabs. In several instances (Feature B, F, I ) a packed layer of ash was found just east or northeast of
the hearths. These ash accumulations perhaps resulted from cleaning
the hearths. Their consistent easterly occurrence may reflect the direction of the prevailing winds at the time of occupation.
The unusual arrangement of splintered bone and stones designated
as Feature H may be indicative of some form of "bison spirit" worship.
A similar arrangement of bones (but without stones) was labelled
Feature J. No artifacts were directly associated with either accumulation.
The concentration of flint flakes , Feature C, very likely represents
the chipping debris left by a single knapper fashioning arrow points.
Several fragmentary and unclassifiable triangular points were recovered among the flakes . Perhaps these points were broken during the
manufacture. Interestingly, 82 percent of all of the triangular points
are fragmentary, a condition which suggests that they may have been
only an intermediate step in the production of other point forms, such
as Harrell, or Garza.
Regards the intrasite distribution of certain artifacts, it is the opinion
of those who worked at the site that many of the tools were found in
contexts which provide some data on their use. In particular, the
consistent occurrence of triangular " points" in association with flake

GARZA SITE

123

knives and/ or scrapers seems to suggest that they served as cutting,
scraping, and punching tools as well as points for arrows.
Of the 238 artifacts found at the site, the triangular arrow point
with a basal notch is of particular interest and is defined as a new
type, Garza. The evidence from this site indicates that it is associated
primarily, or perhaps even exclusively, with the triple notched Harrell
points, and not with the side-notched Harrell (Suhm and Jelks, 1962:
275, Pl. 138, I-P ) or Washita (Bell, 1958 : 98, Pl 49 ) type. Holden
( 1938: 211 ) found a basally-notched triangular arrow point (now
identifiable as the Garza type ) at the Blue Mountain Rockshelter in
Winkler County, in the same level that produced both forms of Harrell
points. However, the associational data here are not tight and, more
importantly, the deepest stratum at Blue Mountain yielded four unnotched triangular points and two Garza points.
At the Johnson Site, a buried campsite in Lubbock County, Wheat
( 1955: 73-74 ) found a single Garza point in association with scrapers,
a flake knife, a triangular point, drills, a bone awl, a wolf canine tooth,
obsidian flakes , and bison bones. This assemblage is much like that
from the Garza Site and, notably, there were no Harrell points present.
Earl Green (personal communication ) found a Garza point and a
probable tripled-notched Harrell point at the Lubbock Reservoir Site,
in an occupational zone 24 to 30 inches below the surface. In the same
layer there were scrapers, tubular beads, pieces of hematite, an unworked ( ?) mussel shell, and probable manos and milling slabs.
Twelve inches above this layer there was another occupational zone
which contained pottery. Dr. Green, on the basis of his work at the
Lubbock Reservoir Site, suggests that the date for the Garza point level
should date prior to A.D. 1500.
Several surface collections have been made in Garza and nearby
counties which contain materials similar to those from the Garza Site.
Also included in some of these collections are Perdiz points and a distinctive expanding stem form with a basal notch (known locally as
"Lott" points ) . As Garza points also occur at these sites, it is possible
that they are of the same age as are both Perdiz and "Lott" points.
Since 1955 the author has been collecting information concerning
the distribution of Garza points . Approximately 450 points of this
type have been recorded as a result of questionnaires and personal
research. Over 200 of these, mostly surface finds, have been catalogued
for Garza County alone. No other area has yet reported this concentration. While these findings are not to be considered as final, the known
extent of the Garza type in Texas is bound on the north by Lamb and

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

NE W MEX ICO

TEXAS

Fig . 12 . Approximate extent of the d istribution of Garza arrow po int type shown by
dotted li ne .

Bailey counties, on the east by southern Floyd to Taylor counties, on
the southwest by Crane County and on the west by El Paso County.
A few points of this type have been reported from widely scattered

125

GARZA SITE

areas in eastern New Mexico, west to the Pecos River and south to
Donna Ana and Otero counties (Fig. 12 ) .
Although more work is needed on the cultural associations, temporal
placement, and geographic extent of the Garza point, the findings at
this and other sites clearly indicate that it represents a distinctive and
significant new type.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identification of certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin No. 1, Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
Holden, W . C.
1938. Blue Mountain Rock Shelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 208-221.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology : Ty.p~ Descriptions. Special Publication
No. 1 of the Texas Archeological Society and Bulletin No. 4 of the Texas
Memorial Museum.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1955. Two Archeological Sites near Lubbock, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical
Review, No. 28 pp. 71-77.
Post, Texas

