BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Vol. 35 I Published by the Society I Austin, Texas, 1964

·

Offtce of the State Areheo!og!

.·~~·;. . . ._.___ Library

~-.,-~4!o-: .;'• -~ · · · : - ~ .

'

"

__ -:S
. ,(

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man and
the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement
of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of researches
incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1964
President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
President Emeritus: CYRUS N. R,w (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAMES H. WoRD (Floydada)
Secretary-Treasurer: DoRRIS L. 0LDS (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL A. CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W. C. HoLDEN (Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), IsABELLE R.
LoBDELL (Fort Worth), and E. A. WHITE (El Paso).
Trustees: 0. L. SrMs (San Angelo), MARDITH K. ScHUETZ (San Antonio), and
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CHARLES W. BANDY (Brownfield), JAy C. BLAINE
(Richardson), CHARLES N. BoLLICH (Beaumont), ADA BRANCH (Victoria),
W. A. DAVIS (Jasper), JoHN HENDRICK (El Paso), ELBERT D. HELM (Fort
Worth), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.), and DoN R. WILLIAMS (San Marcos).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership
at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5.00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin, Texas 78712. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is
the same.

Cover design by Mark L. Parsons; taken from petroglyph panel at the Verbena
Site, Garza County, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, I 991

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Editor: Dee Ann Story ,
Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D . Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1964

Office of the ~tate Archeologist J·
"" . .. ......

~;.1

--

..._____ Library

I

Table of Contents
Artic(es
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacada
By Jane Holden Kelley .

1

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield .

19

Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas
By Curtis D. Tunnell .

83

Indian Skeletal Material from the Jim Arnold Site
By Thomas W. McKern

95

The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas
By Frank A. Runkles .

101

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher
County, Texas
By Cyrus N. Ray and Edward B. Jelks .

127

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor
Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas
By Elton R. Prewitt

143

West Indian Seal Remains from Two Historic Sites in
Coastal South Texas
By Gerald G. Raun

189

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of
Corpus Christi, Texas
By W. S. Fitzpatrick, Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N.
Campbell .

193

A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

205

The Zanonian Springs Site: An Archaic-Nee-American
Site in McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Texas
By W. A. Davis and Helen Ruth Horn

213

Obituary
Gustav Edmund Cranz, Jr. ( 1908-1963 )

251

Book Reviews
Forrester, Robert E., The Ham Creek Site
By Dorris L. Olds .

253

Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol. 1
By Dorris L. Olds .

254

Hester, James J., Early Navajo Migrations and
Acculturation in the Southwest
By Richard E. Ross .

256

Dutton, Bertha P., Sun Father's Way, The Kiva Murals
of Kuaua
By William W. Newcomb .

257

A Polychrome Vessel From the
Texas Coastal Bend
C.A.CALHOUN
ABSTRACT
A small, restorable polychrome jar recently found at a campsite on the southcentral coast of Texas is described in detail. It is one of the few complete vessels
known from the area and, even more importantly, it confirms the existence of a
polychrome decorative technique in the native (Rockport) ceramics. The several
artifacts r ecovered from the same occupational stratum as the jar suggest that it
dates from th e historic phase of the Rockport Focus.

INTRODUCTION
In March of 1962, the writer and Dee Ann Story (then Curator of
Anthropology, Texas Memorial Museum ) visited a campsite buried in
a low sand and clay dune on the south-central coast (or Coastal Bend )
of Texas, near the city of Corpus Christi. At that time, a compact group
of sherds was found weathering from a buried occupational zone exposed in an erosion gully. The sherds were collected and a nearly complete vessel, the subject of this report, was subsequently reconstructed.
Encouraged by the success in restoring the vessel, the author returned
to the site to carry out limited excavation. Although this work is still
underway and full evaluation of the site is not yet possible, a few of
the more pertinent finds can briefly be noted. A test in the immediate
area where the sherds of the jar were recovered indicated that the
uppermost zone consisted of a culturally sterile, sandy-clay that
reached a maximum thickness of nine inches. Below this layer was a
thin (generally about five inches thick ), darkly-stained occupation
zone which yielded two additional sherds of the jar (the only other
ones found to date). The soil beneath the occupational zone was lighter
in color and devoid of cultural refuse; excavations were terminated at
a depth of 30 inches below the surface.
The findings made in the above-mentioned test were disappointing,
for no diagnostic artifacts were found in association with the sherds
from the vessel. However, additional work in an area about 35 feet
from where the jar was found, in the same darkly-stained occupational
layer, has provided some useful information. Here, a small and shallow

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

basin-shaped hearth was uncovered and nearby were found the top and
shoulders of a small bronze ( ?) bell of European manufacture, a fragment of badly oxidized iron, a section of a large Rockport Black-ongray olla, a few flint chips, marine shells, fish scales, and small animal
bones. These data strongly suggests that the polychrome jar is quite
late, possibly belonging to the Historic Stage of the Rockport Focus.
DESCRIPTION OF THE VESSEL

The vessel form is best described as a small jar (Fig. 1, A-C ). Its
globular body rises into a constricted neck, which in turn recurves
smoothly to form a widely flaring rim. The rim is only slightly thinned
and the lip is rounded. The base is gently convex and slightly thicker
(Fig. 1, C) than the remainder of the vessel. The over-all height is
18.9 em.; the height from the base of the constricted area of the neck
is 12.6 em. The greatest diameter of the body is 12.8 em. and the
smallest diameter of the neck is 7. 4 em. The rim is not complete, but
the projected outside diameter of the orifice measures 12.8 em. The
wall thickness is generally 3.5 mm. for the body, neck, and the rim,
although just below the lip it is 3 mm. The maximum thickness at the
base is 5 mm.
An occasional horizontal fracture plane and slight beveling of the
sherd edges suggest that the vessel was manufactured by the coiling
technique. The angles of the bevels further suggest that the successive
coils were pressed down from the vessel exterior. The sherds in general indicate that a very good bond was effected between the plastic
increments.
The vessel appears to have been made from a light-colored clay possibly obtained at the site, where erosion has partially exposed the
kaolin-like clay of the Beaumont Formation. The tempering material
consists of a very fine, white sand of the type commonly found on offshore barrier islands and in sand dunes on the mainland littoral. Two
minute voids were noted in the cores of two sherds. One of these is a
cylindrical mold less than 1 mm. in diameter and approximately 2.5
mm. in length. The second mold was made by a tiny capsular object
with distinct longitudinal corrugations. Both appear to represent impurities, grass or the like, inadvertently included in the clay or tempering material, and burned out during firing.
The paste is quite hard and has a uniformly fine texture. The exterior and interior surfaces are well smoothed, but unslipped, and some
bumpy areas remain as a result of slightly uneven wall thickness. In

POLYCHROME VESSEL

207

one area of the basal interior, faint tool marks are visible in the form
of light striae or scoring. Some erosion and spalling have occurred near
the base, but the fractured edges of the sherds are characteristically
sharp and have resisted weathering well.
The surface color of the vessel is a light grayish-buff on both the
exterior and interior. A small area of yellow and orange on the exterior surface of the rim is a result of fire-mottling. The core is generally dark tan, although orangish tinges sometimes occur at fresh
fractures.
By far the most outstanding feature of the vessel is the combined
application of asphaltum and a fugitive red wash, which intentionally
or accidentally has produced a polychrome decoration. Much of the
exterior and interior surfaces of the body are heavily coated with
asphaltum, presumably to waterproof the vessel. On the exterior, the
asphaltum extends from the base to about 13 em. above the base, and
terminates in a ragged, uneven perimeter (Fig. 1). The interior coating appears to be somewhat thicker than that on the exterior, but there
are several small holidays on the inside of the base. The asphaltum on
the inside surface extends upward to an average height of 12 em.,
and ends very irregularly.
The random, detached spots of asphaltum above the irregula~ edges
of the body coating (Fig. 1, A, C), as well as the visible evidence of
overlapping brush strokes and the small area left uncoated on the basal
interior, must have resulted from the asphaltum being brushed on
while in a fluid state. The author is familiar with other samples of
asphaltum-coated Rockport pottery where the solid asphaltum was
apparently placed inside the vessel, melted, and the vessel rotated to
coat its interior. This latter procedure is usually evident by the presence of thick "puddles" of asphaltum. Such is not the case with the
small polychrome jar.
Asphaltum was also used as decoration, for the upper part of the
rim and lip are painted with a black band. On the exterior of the rim
this band averages 4 mm. wide, on the interior it averages 3 mm. wide.
It is somewhat irregular and poorly executed, although the asphaltum
has been more carefully applied than that on the body of the vessel.
The asphaltum used to waterproof and to decorate the vessel could
easily have been obtained near the site. All of the asphaltum found
on the Texas coast is a heavy, bituminous residue of petroleum from
which the more volatile hydrocarbon fractions have been lost by exposure to the sun and air. The crude petroleum rises to the surface in
the Gulf of Mexico and, possibly, the Caribbean Sea. Directed by the

5

CM

B

A

c
0

10

CM
Fig . 1. Restored Polychrome Jar. A, 8, Side view. C, Drawing showing vessel profile .

209

POLYCHROME VESSEL

prevailing winds and currents, some of it floats to the Texas Gulf
coast, where it commonly appears as small , coagulated lumps along
the beaches and in sand dune blowouts.
The fugitive red was only sparingly used, being confined to a decorative band immediately below the black band. The red band varies
only slightly in width, with an average of 1 em. The color appears to
have originally been dark red, but in most places it h as weathered t o
a thin, cinnamon brown stain. It is the writer's opinion that the red
decoration was applied before the black, and subsequent to the firing
of the vessel.
Unlike the asphaltum, the origin and exact nature of the red pigment
are unknown. On the basis of the color (as well as the confirmed
utilization in other areas ) r ed ocher is a possibility. However, examples of this material are rare in the central section of the coast.
Moreover, the few (intrusive ?) specimens of ocher known thus far
have been recovered from archeological sites on the northeastern section of the central coast. Another possible source is suggested by the
lumps of fired clay which appear in abundance in many Coastal Bend
sites. These are sometimes bright red and it seem s conceivable that
they could have been used as pigment.
DISCUSSION

The occurrence of native-made polychrome pottery in the Rockport
Focus has been suspected but not satisfactorily demonstrated until the
present find. T. N. Campbell in a recent paper ( 1962: 335) hinted
at the existence of a polychrome tradition in the Rockport Focus; while
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 384) have noted that a polychrome
effect sometimes results in rare sherds of Rockport Black-on-gray which
have black asphaltum lines applied over a surface previously covered
with a thin, red wash. Campbell (personal communication) has also
pointed out the possibility of Spanish influence, since the early Spaniards in this region made common use of polychrome china and earthenware. There are yet other sources that might account for this polychrome technique (i.e., the use of red and black pigment on Rockport
ware) including the historic Goliad ware from the central coast. This
pottery utilized the two basic colors, red and black, on two different
pottery types, Goliad Red-on-buff and Goliad Black-on-buff (Mounger,
1959; Campbell, 1962: 332- 334). However, no examples of Goliad
ware are known on which the two colors have been combined. Another
possible source was from the south, on the lower Texas coast and

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

northeastern Mexico, from whence the painted pottery may have
originally diffused to the Rockport Focus (Campbell, 1960: 168; 1962:
335 ). Several instances of Huastecan polychrome trade ware have been
recorded among the artifact inventories of Brownsville Focus sites
(Suhm, et al. , 1954: 133), and sherds of Rockport Black-on-gray have
been reported from sites in the same area (Anderson, 1932: 30 ) .
There remains a dearth of complete and restored vessels attributable
to the Rockport Focus (Fitzpatrick, et al., 1964). The recognized vessel
forms have necessarily been based primarily on rim sherds and basal
sherds, and, to a lesser extent, upon the suggestive contours of larger
neck and body sherds. The form represented by the vessel under consideration cannot be closely correlated with other forms mentioned or
illustrated in literature dealing with the Texas coast. This anomaly
suggests a limited distribution, both chronologically and geographically.
Only two other rim sherds are known to this writer which seem to
parallel the rim section of the polychrome vessel. Both of these sherds
are surface finds and they came from the same site as the polychrome
vessel. The lip of one is rounded and that of the other is slightly
flattened. Both are dark gray in color, one nearly blue. The texture,
temper, hardness, and projected diameters of both rim sherds are quite
similar to the reconstructed vessel, but neither of these sherds bears
any traces of asphaltum or red pigment. Significantly, these sherdsas well as those from the jar-would have earlier probably been identified as coming from the rim of a bowl.
Perhaps the shape was designed for some specialized function. There
can be little doubt that it was intended as a container for liquid, especially in view of the thorough asphaltum coating over most of the body.
The large mouth and funnel-shaped rim of the jar raises speculation
regarding its use for collecting water. Such a receptacle would seem
particularly efficient in securing water from slow seeps, or even rainwater dripping from a large surface. Because of the polychrome decoration and shape it is also possible that this vessel was used as a
ceremonial drinking vase (Fitzpatrick, et al. , 1964) .
Eventually pottery of this style may constitute a new type which
might be called "Rockport Polychrome." However, by present definition, the vessell is considered to be Rockport Black-on-gray. It is recommended that it remain so classified until further research provides
more data regarding the distribution and frequency of the polychrome
decoration.

211

POLYCHROME VESSEL

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Campbell, T. N.
1960. Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958 ) , pp. 145-175.
1962. Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32 (for 1961) , pp. 331-336.
Fitzpatrick, W. S., Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N. Campbell
1964. A Rockport Focus Vessel from the Vicinity of Corpus Christi, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35 (this issue) .
Mounger, Maria Allen
1959. Mission Espiritu Santo of Coastal Texas: An Example of Historic Site
Archeology. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, The University of Texas.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Port Lavaca, Texas

