BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Vol. 35 I Published by the Society I Austin, Texas, 1964

·

Offtce of the State Areheo!og!

.·~~·;. . . ._.___ Library

~-.,-~4!o-: .;'• -~ · · · : - ~ .

'

"

__ -:S
. ,(

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man and
the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement
of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of researches
incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1964
President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
President Emeritus: CYRUS N. R,w (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAMES H. WoRD (Floydada)
Secretary-Treasurer: DoRRIS L. 0LDS (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL A. CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W. C. HoLDEN (Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), IsABELLE R.
LoBDELL (Fort Worth), and E. A. WHITE (El Paso).
Trustees: 0. L. SrMs (San Angelo), MARDITH K. ScHUETZ (San Antonio), and
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CHARLES W. BANDY (Brownfield), JAy C. BLAINE
(Richardson), CHARLES N. BoLLICH (Beaumont), ADA BRANCH (Victoria),
W. A. DAVIS (Jasper), JoHN HENDRICK (El Paso), ELBERT D. HELM (Fort
Worth), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.), and DoN R. WILLIAMS (San Marcos).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership
at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5.00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin, Texas 78712. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is
the same.

Cover design by Mark L. Parsons; taken from petroglyph panel at the Verbena
Site, Garza County, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, I 991

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Editor: Dee Ann Story ,
Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D . Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1964

Office of the ~tate Archeologist J·
"" . .. ......

~;.1

--

..._____ Library

I

Table of Contents
Artic(es
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacada
By Jane Holden Kelley .

1

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield .

19

Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas
By Curtis D. Tunnell .

83

Indian Skeletal Material from the Jim Arnold Site
By Thomas W. McKern

95

The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas
By Frank A. Runkles .

101

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher
County, Texas
By Cyrus N. Ray and Edward B. Jelks .

127

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor
Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas
By Elton R. Prewitt

143

West Indian Seal Remains from Two Historic Sites in
Coastal South Texas
By Gerald G. Raun

189

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of
Corpus Christi, Texas
By W. S. Fitzpatrick, Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N.
Campbell .

193

A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

205

The Zanonian Springs Site: An Archaic-Nee-American
Site in McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Texas
By W. A. Davis and Helen Ruth Horn

213

Obituary
Gustav Edmund Cranz, Jr. ( 1908-1963 )

251

Book Reviews
Forrester, Robert E., The Ham Creek Site
By Dorris L. Olds .

253

Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol. 1
By Dorris L. Olds .

254

Hester, James J., Early Navajo Migrations and
Acculturation in the Southwest
By Richard E. Ross .

256

Dutton, Bertha P., Sun Father's Way, The Kiva Murals
of Kuaua
By William W. Newcomb .

257

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford
Reservoir, Hutchinson County, Texas*
LA THEL F. DUFFIELD
ABSTRACT
Three sites-Conner, Medford Ranch, and Spring Canyon-in the Sanford Reservoir, Hutchinson County, Texas, were excavated in the late summer of 1961 by the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project. Each site contained the remains of several
structures partially constructed of stone, as well as small quantities of domestic
refuse. The objects recovered include . 1,308 ceramic, bone, and stone artifacts, all
of which are typical of the Antelope Creek Focus of the Panhandle Aspect. The
architecture, on the other hand, is not typical of this focus, and makes a conclusive
cultural assignment of these sites difficult.

INTRODUCTION

In August of 1961 , the Texas Archeological Salvage Project dispatched a field party to the Sanford Reservoir damsite in the southwestern corner of Hutchinson County (Fig. 1) to excavate three sites
which were in imminent danger of being destroyed by construction.
The sites, Spring Canyon (41 HC 20), Medford Ranch (41 HC 10)
and Conner (41 HC 7), were in proposed borrow areas and were the
first in the reservoir to have been excavated under the Inter-Agency
Archaeological Salvage Program.
All three sites are in or near canyons tributary to the Canadian
River and have, as their most distinctive features, ruins of buildings
that were constructed in part of white dolomite slabs. The Conner Site,
first to be excavated, was small and consisted of two oval-shaped houses
and two very small trash areas. After finishing work at the Conner
Site, the field party moved to the larger Medford Ranch Site and excavated three structures and associated middens. The third and last site
dug, Spring Canyon, had one prominent ruin and several small outlying structures. The excavations were supervised by the author.
• The archeological investigation of the Sanford Reservoir sites was carried out
by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project as a cooperative project of the National
Park Service and The University of Texas. The following report was accepted by
the National Park Service in December, 1962, in partial fulfillment of the terms of
Contract No. 14-10-0333-802 between The University of Texas and the National
Park Service.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In the report which follows each site is treated individually, after
which the over-all findings are discussed and compared with the Antelope Creek Focus and with related sites.
ENVIRONMENT

A physiographic map of northwestern Texas shows the entrenched
Canadian River and its short tributaries dividing the panhandle into
northern and southern sections. It also reveals another outstanding
feature, the caprock escarpment, which forms an effective east-west
ecological barrier.
The Texas panhandle, according to Blair ( 1950) , is within the
Kansan Biotic Province, which, in tum, is ilivided into three well
demarcated districts. Each district shares the escarpment as a common
boundary: to the east of the escarpment is the Mixed-grass Plains
District; to the southeast of the escarpment is the Mesquite Plains

4

\~

Sanford
Reservoir

TEXAS

Fig. 1. Map showing location of Sanford Reservoir.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

21

District; and to the west of the escarpment, on the caprock where the
Sanford Reservoir lies, is the Short-grass Plains District.
The Kansan Province has a rainfall deficiency and the available
moisture decreases from the east to the west. The western section,
which includes the Sanford Reservoir area, is classified as semiarid.
The fauna of the Kansan Province includes at least 59 mammalian
species, five of which are restricted to the province, 14 species of lizards,
31 species of snakes, and one species of land turtle.
Blair ( 1950: 111 ) characterized the flora of the Short-grass District
as follows:
A short-grass association, with buffalo grass the principal constituent, is the most
important plant association of the Short-grass Plains district in both T exas and
Oklahoma.

The soils of the Short-grass District are derived principally from
the great mass of alluvium (fan and river deposits) which, in Cenozoic
time, washed down from the Rocky Mountains in New Mexico. The
soils are naturally rich, although the fertility has recently been reduced
by wheat and grain sorghum farming and by erosion. In the Canadian
breaks cattle raising is important, but the current economic foundation
rests mainly upon the scattered oil fields in the area.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

When Krieger ( 1946) defined the Antelope Creek Focus and the
Panhandle Aspect, it was the latest of a series of attempts (Moorehead,
1921; Holden, 1929; Studer, 1931; Holden, 1933; Sayles, 1935) to
classify and organize the archeological data from the Texas panhandle.
Since that time, few reports on sites or problems of the area have been
published, and the definition of the Antelope Creek Focus has not
been elaborated or modified (see, for example, Suhm, et al., 1954:
66-77 ). The Optima Focus of the Oklahoma panhandle (Watson,
1950 ), however, has been added to the Panhandle Aspect.
Recent work in the area, primarily by Jack T. Hughes of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society and members of the Nor-Pan Archeological Society, and secondarily by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, has raised questions about the definition of the Antelope Creek
Focus. In brief, excavations have recovered certain architectural features which are quite unlike the structures described by Krieger.
Hughes (personal communication) proposes that, until further work
can better define the focus or foci involved, the sites in the area should
be assigned to the Panhandle Aspect only. An alternative proposal,

22

TEXAS 'ARC:gEOLOGI<;:AL SOCIETY

based on findings made at the Sanford Reservoir, will be presented in
the concluding section of this report.
METHOD OF ExcAVATION AND ANALYSIS PROCEDURE

Since the three sites had some characteristics in common, the same
general excavation technique could be employed at each. To initiate
work, a cardinally oriented grid was laid out in such a manner as to
confine the majority of the excavation units (largely five-foot squares)
to one quadrant. Each point on the grid was designated according to
its direction and distance from an arbitrary reference point. Each
square was given the designation of the point in its southeastern
corner. The grid system facilitated the recording not only of the
middens and soil profiles but also of the structures.
For vertical control, a reference point was established and was
assigned an assumed elevation of 100 feet at each of the sites. All
elevations were calculated in reference to these points.
Although sometimes widely scattered, the majority of the artifacts
were concentrated in the midden areas. When there was a possibility
of recovering artifacts, the excavation units were dug in half·foot
levels; however, when it was necessary to hurry the excavations, or
when artifacts were absent or scarce, the fill was less carefully removed. All midden areas were excavated by arbitrary levels, but, unfortunately, the amount of material recovered was so small that an
analysis of the vertical provenience was of no interpretive value.
A standard report form was completed for each level dug, and each
excavation unit, either a five-foot square or half of a five-foot square,
was drawn on the plan of excavation. Other records for the sites
include contour maps, ground plans of the structures, profiles, daily
logs, and photographs.
All the materials recovered were placed in sacks on which were
recorded the name and number of the site, the excavation unit, the
level, the names of the excavators, and the date. These were sent to
Austin, where the materials were washed, catalogued, and prepared
for analysis.
Since the artifact yields were low, each site was analyzed as a single
unit and no intrasite distribution studies were attempted. Intersite
comparisons, however, have been made for the more common artifacts
such as arrow points, knives, and pottery. Although the present analysis did not find any major contrasts, there were some minor ones and,
as more data become available for the area, perhaps other differences
will become apparent.

23

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

CONNER SITE (41 HC 7)
SITE DESCRIPTION

The Conner Site, located in a small canyon about 1.5 miles east of
Sanford, Texas, occupies a promontory (Figs. 2; 3, A) in the forks of
a small arroyo on the south side of the Canadian River. The canyon is
wide where it joins the Canadian River valley, but becomes progressively narrower as one moves up the canyon. Flanked by sharply

Mag.

NN

41 HC 7
SANFORD RESERVOIR
Contour Map
contour interval = 1.0 feet
shading indicates area excavated
20

40

60

Fig. 2 . Contour map of the Conner Site.

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rising canyon walls, the flat valley would, in aboriginal times, have
been suitable for small scale agriculture.
That this canyon was a popular area for settlement in prehistoric
times is attested by the eight sites located in and at the edges of the
valley. A short distance down the arroyo from the Conner Site is a
similar, but larger site, 41 HC 6, which was recently dug by the NorPan Archeological Society. 41 HC 6 had four or five oval to circular
structures and a small amount of associated midden debris. Another
site, 41 HC 3, perched on the canyon rim, had a larger multiroomed
structure which was excavated by Jack T. Hughes of the PanhandlePlains Historical Society. In addition to the sites with stone structures,
several smaller surface sites which are possibly of Archaic affinity
occur in various parts of the canyon.
METHOD oF ExcAvATION

Surface indications of occupation at the Conner Site consisted of a
scattering of flint flakes and a concentration of dolomite slabs. Excavations were initiated in the western part of the slab concentration
where portions of the walls of an oval structure, Room 1, were outlined.
After the wall foundations were defined, the interior fill was excavated
and screened by arbitrary half-foot levels.
While the excavations were in progress in Room 1, the eastern part
of the slab concentration was tested and another, more circular room
(Room 2) was exposed. Its interior fill was also dug by arbitrary halffoot intervals. Once the rooms had been cleaned out, the immediate
area outside of the structures was cleared in hopes of locating cache
pits or large middens, but neither was found.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES

Structures

The two small rooms (1 and 2 ) and two small adjacent middens
were completely excavated. The rooms were oval to circular in shape
(Fig. 4 ) , measured five to six feet in maximum diameter, and each
had a continuous wall foundation of vertical slabs (Fig. 3, B) . Only
one of the rooms had a doorway and neither contained an interior
fireplace. At first these features were believed to be granaries or storage
cists, but at a related site in a nearby canyon, the Nor-Pan Archeological Society excavated a similar structure which contained an interior
fireplace. This suggests that these small buildings were, at least on
occasion, used as dwellings.

THREE PANHAN DLE ASPECT SITES

25

Room 1 had an oval outline with a long axis of about 5.5 feet, and a
short axis of about 4.5 feet (Fig. 4 ). The doorway of this room faced
the northeast (Fig. 3, B) . Since the bottom of the deepest slab was only
.24 feet below the original ground level (Fig. 3, B) and since there
was no evidence of a trench which could have supported these heavy
slabs, this structure was probably built on the original ground surface.
However, it must be admitted that no clearly defined floor could be
recognized.
Room 2 lacked a doorway and was circular, with a diameter of 5
feet (Fig. 4 ). More slabs were used in the construction of Room 2 than
Room 1 (Fig. 4 ), but they too were apparently placed on the original
ground surface. The ground surface in this portion of the site was
sloping and there were no indications that the inhabitants made an
attempt at leveling the interior floor; at least, no prepared floor was
encountered.
There was not a sufficient number of slabs to reconstruct the walls
of either structure above one tier. This strongly suggests that either the
walls were robbed or that the slabs were u sed only in the construction
of the lower sections of the walls. Perhaps the upper parts consisted of
more perishable materials, possibly skins or poles and thatch.

Middens
To the northeast of each structure was a small midden which contained little cultural material (Fig. 4 ). The middens were thin and
approximately 2 to 3 feet in diameter. The refuse consisted of small
flecks of charcoal, flint flakes , bone scraps, mussel shell fragments, and
an occasional artifact. The small size of the refuse accumulations and
the scarcity of cultural debris suggest that these structures were
utilized for only a short period of time.
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

Only three Fresno arrow points, four small cordmarked sherds, two
manos, one circular biface, two utilized flake scrapers, three fragments
of knife blades, one chopper, one metate fragment, and a moderate
quantity of chipping debris were found at this site. Small amounts of
food refuse, principally mussel shells and bison bones, were also
recovered.
Most of the stone artifacts found at the Conner Site, as well as those
from the other two sites, were made of "flint" from the nearby Ali bates
quarry (Shaeffer, 1958 ) . Some of the larger specimens, such as

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

27

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

41 HC 7
STONE STRUCTUR ES
SANFO~O

RESERVOIR

0

bouldtr

~
~

J:P

·~

~

ROOM!

~
...

~

Fig. 4. Stone structures and middens at the Conner Site.

choppers and grinding stones, however, were made of fine-grained
quartzite pebbles and cobbles which occur in the uplands of the area.
Unless otherwise specified, the chipped stone artifacts described below
are made of the Ali bates dolomite.
Fresno arrow points (Fig. 5, E-G ). Three rather crudely made
Fresno arrow points (Suhm, et al., 1954: 498-499) were found-two
in the midden areas and one in Room 1. Two have slightly concave
bases, one has a straight base, and all have convex blade edges. The tips
of two specimens are missing, but all three appear to have been from
2. 7 to 2.9 em. long. The maximum widths vary from 1.5 to 1.8 em.
Knife fragments (Fig. 5, B, C) . Three basal sections of knives, two
with pointed bases and one with a rounded base, were recovered. The
maximum widths of the fragments are 6.5, 4, and 3.7 em., respectively.
Fig . 3 . Conner Site. A, General view of site, looking north with the Canadian River in the
background. A, Room 1 doorway ; arrow pointing north . Scale three feet long.

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Relatively thin, the thickest fragment measures 1.4 em., and the
thinnest .5 em. The flakes removed in the manufacture of these knives
were broad and thin like those usually identified with the billet percussion technique (Honea, ms. ) .
Utilized flake scarpers (Fig, 5, D ) . Two scrapers were made by
retouching the edges of long flakes. Both are 5.6 em. long, but the widths
are 2.8 and 4.0 em. The narrower one (Fig. 5, D ) is much thinner
than the other.
Circular biface (Fig. 5, A ). A moderately thin ( 1.8 em.), medium
size (6.5 em. in diameter) circular biface made from an igneous pebble
was found near Room 2.
Chopper. One chopper made from a tan quartzite pebble was hifacially chipped on the cutting (distal) end while the proximal end
was unaltered. This specimen is 10 em. wide, 7.4 em. long and has a
maximum thickness of 3. 7 em.
Handstones or manos (Fig. 5, H ) . Two manos were found . The
smaller one is an oval-shaped tan quartzite pebble smoothed on one
side and battered along portions of the edge. It has a maximum diameter of 11 em. and is 3.6 em. in thickness. The other grinding stone
(Fig. 5, H ) , also fashioned from a tan quartzitic stone, has a long,
oval outline, is 18.2 em. long, 8.2 em. wide, and 4.2 em. in maximum
thickness. The ends of this latter specimen are battered and one side
is smoothed.
Grinding slab fragment. A fragment of a dolomite grinding slab has
a prominent, basin-shaped depression, 5.6 em. deep. The original size
of the slab cannot be determined.
Sherds. Four small cordmarked sherds-three from the midden
outside of Room 2 and one from inside Room 1-are thin and sand
tempered. The one flat rim fragment resembles that commonly found
on the Borger Cordmarked type ( Suhm, et al., 1954: 390-393 ) . All
are probably of the Borger type, although the sherds are too small to
be certain.
MEDFORD RANCH SITE (41 HC 10)
SITE DESCRIPTION

On the north side of the Canadian River opposite the Conner Site,
and a short distance up Spring Canyon, is the Medford Ranch Site
(41 HC 10 ) . The site is located on a high bench or terrace-like erosional remnant (Fig. 6 ) at the western edge of the valley. To the west,
immediately behind the site, the canyon walls ascend rapidly, while
to the east of the site the bench descends abruptly to the sandy flood

29

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

A

c

B

E

0

4

2

F

G

6

em

Fig. 5 . Slone artifacts from the Conner Site. A, Circular biface. B, C, Knife fragments. D,
Utilized flake scraper. E-G, Fresno arrow points. H, Mano.

plain of a springfed creek (Fig. 7, A). In contrast to the deep arroyo
at the Conner Site, the channel of this creek is alluvia ted.
Spring Canyon and its namesake springs must have attracted several
groups of prehistoric settlers, for there are at least five medium-sized
sites (of which ihe Medford Ranch Site is the most extensive) in the
immediate area. All but one of these sites are larger than those in the
canyon across the river. The Spring Canyon sites occur in the sandy

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

flood plain, on erosional remnants at the edges of the valley, and on the
canyon rims.
A mesquite grove obscured much of the Medford Ranch Site, but,
where clear of vegetation, a sparse pavement of Alibates flint flakes
covered the ground. Among the flakes there were a few flint artifacts
and, less often, potsherds. In four different areas of the site there were
clusters of white dolomite slabs, three of which had been damaged
by potholes.
METHOD OF ExcAVATION

As no well defined outlines of structures were apparent, the excavations were initiated within the slab concentrations in an attempt to
locate the bases of house walls. Once these walls were located and
defined, it was hoped that the interior fill could be removed to a short
distance above the floor and then the floor could be cleaned and recorded as a unit. Although many of the slabs were found somewhat in
line, it became obvious that the houses could not be defined from the
interior without loss of information. Consequently, trenches were dug
(using arbitrary levels and excavation units ) around the exteriors.
Not only did the trenches define the wall foundation, but, in addition,
some unsuspected exterior structural units were located. After the
foundations were cleared, it was apparent that the majority of the
slabs had been moved, and in some cases, several slabs had slumped
into the interior (Fig. 7, B).
STRUCTURES

Although several structures were present at the site, only three were
excavated. Each of these had ( 1) a square to rectangular shape (the
smallest measured 9 X 9 feet, the next 9 X 10 feet, and the largest
10.5 by 12.5 feet ) ; (2 ) predominantly horizontal masonry with only
a few vertical slabs; and ( 3 ) small contiguous structures on the north
and/ or south sides. While they shared these traits, the differences in
detail, especially in House A, were striking.

House A
House A (Figs. 7, B; 8) was the best defined of the three structures
but, nonetheless, was one of the more complicated ones to excavate.
This structure, unlike the others, had been built in a rectangular pit
excavated to a depth of about one foot below the original ground sur-

31

THREE PANHAN DLE ASPECT SI TES

Moq.

NN

M EDFOR D RAN CH S ITE
4 1 H C 10
Contour Mop

=

contour in terval
1.0 feet
shading indicates ar ea excavated

Fig . 6 . Contour map of the Medford Ranch Site.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

face. The sides of the pit had been plastered with puddled adobe (Fig.
7, D ) and part of the adobe extended about half a foot onto the room
floor. The floor of the house, marked by the puddled adobe at its juncture with the walls, had not been prepared, nor did it contain any
concentration of refuse.
In the center of the east wall was a possible entranceway, although
earlier reports (Studer, 1934; Krieger, 1946 ) refer to similar features
as ventilators. Whether this was a ventilator, a low tunnel entrance,
or a taller upright entrance cannot be positively determined with the
present data. The "entranceway" was paved with puddled adobe for
all but the easternmost half foot and sloped slightly upward toward the
"exit" (the east end), where there was a short step up (.32 feet) to
the original ground surface (Fig. 9). Along the north side of the

A

B

c

D

Fig . 7. Medford Ronch Site . A, View of Site, looking northeast. B. House A during excavation . C, Houses B and C during excavation . D, Northeast corner of House A showing adobe
at the base of the wall. Scale three feet long .

..-

..----• I
.'' I

'
-,
\

\

'

~adobe

r"' ,,-""

< ~ --

o/D

"t reosyre "

'

floke cache

,. ... - - ,
0

~~:~:_:)

--

-

pit

-----

adobe
pavem ent

MEDFORD RANCH SITE
41 HC 10
HOUSE

0

0

~ Slanting

slab s

(arrows po int to lowes t end)

[J3

Vert ical sl ab s

•

Pos t holes

--

0

Fig, 8 . House A at the Medford Ranch Site.

A

Ho r iz onta l sl ab s

feet

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

33

entranceway was a row of vertical slabs which extended about one
foot past the exit step, while on the south side there were a few
scattered horizontal slabs which may or may not have been part of
the original structure. Where the entranceway opened into the room
there was a puddled adobe step, .65 feet below the floor level of the
entranceway. A vertical slab riser reinforced the wall at this point
(Fig. 9) .
Evidence of roof and wall ( ?) supports consisted of five postholes,
the largest of which was centrally located. The four other postholes
were smaller and were found in the eastern half of the house: one in
the northeastern corner, one in the southeastern corner, one in the
middle of the north wall, and one in the middle of the south wall
(Fig. 8). In spite of an intensive search, no postholes were found in
the western half of the house.
There was no central fireplace, but a small ash area containing
some quartzite boiling stones was found in the southeastern part of
the house and a second, smaller concentration of boiling stones was
located near the east wall, just north of the entranceway (Fig. 8). No
other interior feature was present.
The slabs used in wall construction were apparently stacked horizontally on the edges of the pit and when the house collapsed the stones,
judging from their slant, had slumped inward toward the center (Figs.
7, B; 8 ) . As was noted for the Conner Site, there were not enough
stones to account for more than two, or possibly three, courses of slabs.
This seems to indicate that the upper portions of the walls were constructed of a more perishable material, possibly animal hides or pole
and thatch.
In contrast with the other walls, the original position of the many
stone slabs (not all are shown in Fig. 8) covering the vertical riser of
the entranceway could not be fully reconstructed. The slabs found
about the entranceway, however, were numerous enough to suggest
that they, like the rest of the wall slabs, had once been higher and had
slipped into the position in which they were found. If this is correct,
then they may have originally been placed along the sides and/ or top
of the entranceway.
The small structure attached to the north side of the house was not
clearly defined, although it appeared to consist of horizontal (? ) , unshaped slabs laid in a semicircular arc. The walls of this secondary
feature joined the main structure at the northeastern corner and at
the north wall about two-thirds the length of the wall from the eastern
corner (Fig. 8) . There was no clearly defined floor and the wall con-

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

struction could not be accurately determined by the position or location of the slabs. There are suggestions, however, that the attached
room was not built in a pit, but rather was constructed on top of an
accumulation of trash.

House B
The unshaped dolomite slabs comprising House B were scattered
more than those of House A and, since we were attempting to leave
most of the construction stones in situ, they made excavating and recording tedious. This was, however, the only difficulty, for there were
no complex architectural features such as house pits or entranceways
present in House B. While there was no well defined doorway, there
was in the east wall an area where the slabs were out of line and were
less numerous (not all are shown in Fig. 10), perhaps indicating a
former opening. The nature of the wall construction was not at all
clear, for some of the foundation slabs were upright, some were horizontal, and others (the majority ) were slanted. A distinct floor was
not evident and the excavations were continued to the base of the slabs.
Once the rectangular house outline had been fully recorded, the
fallen slabs were removed in order to check the floor of the excavation
for features. This resulted in the location of two large pits (the only
ones found at the site ), two ash concentrations with boiling stones, and
one posthole in the center of the west wall (Fig. 10 ).
The small room attached to House B was semicircular and, like
the main structure, was constructed of unshaped dolomite slabs, many
of which were laid horizontally. It extended practically the full length
of the south wall. Another possible addition, even less well defined,

--~E

MEDFORD RANCH SITE
Idealized cross sect ion of House A
0

2

4

6

feet

Fig . 9 . Idea lized cros s se ct ion of Hou se A.

MEDFORD RANCH SITE
41 HC 10
Hou ses 8 and C

D
~

Honzontol slobs

P"l
L2J

Slontmg slobs
poi nI t o lowes t end)
Ve (arrows
r
r ,col slobs

D

Orientation unrecorded

0

,;, "

·

:;:~~--

·Houses B and Cat th e Medford Ranch S't
• e.

'

«<
--~

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

35

seemed to join the north wall. Possibly this northern structure had
been raided for stones for use in other construction activities, or perhaps some of the slabs had inadvertently been removed during the
excavation. These additions, like the one on House A, had no clearly
defined floors and the type of wall construction could not be determined. Beneath the northern addition were trash deposits which indicate that it was built sometime after the main structure.

House C
House C, the rectangular structure attached to the west side of
House B, was badly disturbed, particularly along the north wall (Fig.
10). No doorway or interior features such as hearths, postholes or pits
were found and no details regarding wall construction could be salvaged. Contiguous with the south wall of House C was a long narrow
structure which was much longer than the other "storage" rooms at
the site. Since the excavations were not extensive in this area (because
. of previous disturbance ), this small attached structure was not well
defined. Judging from the remaining slabs, however, it seems to have
been semicircular in outline.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES

Pits
Two pits, the only ones uncovered at the Medford Ranch Site, were
found in House B (Fig. 11 ) . One, Pit 1, was roughly bell-shaped in
cross section and the other, Pit 2, was basin-shaped in cross section.
Pit 1 had undercut sides which gradually curved inward to form a
relatively flat floor about 2 feet in diameter (Fig. 11 ) . It was 1.6 feet
deep and 2.3 feet in diameter at the mouth. A few pottery sherds, a
scraper, an oval knife, some bone fragments, and flint flakes were recovered from this pit.
The basin-shaped pit, No. 2, had an irregular, oval outline. It was
1.15 feet deep, had a maximum diameter of 2.6 feet and a minimum
diameter of 2 feet. In this pit were found two mussel shell scrapers,
a bone awl, an ax? (core) , flint chips, bone fragments, and charcoal
flakes.

Roiling Stone Pits and Caches
Both in and outside of the houses were nests of fire-cracked, spherical
and egg-shaped stones, herein termed boiling stones. When found

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

I--

0

2

I

3

FE ET

oc- ~

D

Fig . 11. Pits 1 and 2 at the Medford Ranch Site.

within the structures these quartzitic or igneous stones were in shallow
rectangular or oblong pits surrounded by beds of gray ash. Houses A
and B each yielded two such caches. When the boiling stone caches
were found on the exterior of the houses (four instances ) they were
not in pits but rather were piled next to the walls. The largest cache
was found outside of House B (Fig. 10 ) and had nine stones which
ranged from 15 .2. em. long, 7.1 em, wide, and 8.1 em. thick to 8 em.
long, 4.2, em. wide, and 4.6 em. thick. The stones in the smaller caches
were similar in size and numbered 3 (three instances ) , 4, 5, 6, and 8,
respectively.

Middens
Middens were located close to the north walls and toward the eastern
corners of both Houses A and B (Fig. 12, ) . The midden associated with
House A extended approximately 12, or 13 feet east-west, 10 feet northsouth, and had a maximum depth of about 1. 7 feet. The one near
House B was nearly 12, feet east-west and 15 feet north-south. In
addition to being larger, the midden near House B was richer, although

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

37

shallower (ca. 1.2 feet deep) than the one near House A. In spite of
a careful search in other areas around and near the houses, these were
the only refuse accumulations found . Both were in basin-shaped depressions (Fig. 13 ) which may represent natural undulations in the
former surface of the ground or borrow areas created by construction
activities. Trash deposits occurred in a similar depression associated
with a larger structure at the Spring Canyon Site.

Flint Flake Caches
Three flint flake caches containing from 29 to 161 flakes were found
near House A . In two of these, utilized flake scrapers were also found:
the largest cache contained three long, utilized flake scrapers, while
the smallest one included one small flake scraper with a concave edge.
In addition to the three flake concentrations, one cache of utilized flake
scrapers was found near House A. The latter specimens are described
in more detail in the artifact descriptions.
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

The artifacts from the Medford Ranch Site resemble those characteristic of the Antelope Creek Focus (Krieger, 1946 ). They include Borger
Cordmarked pottery, triangular arrow points, alternately beveled
knives, oval knives, and snub-nose end scrapers. Sherds constitute considerably more than half of the total assemblage, while stone and bone
objects comprise the rest.
To initiate the analysis, the artifacts were sorted first according to
material-i.e., stone, bone, or ceramic. The stone specimens were
further grouped according to the assumed function, over-all shape, and
size, while the ceramics were subdivided on the basis of temper and
shape. By this procedure of progressively finer sorting, it was possible
to define a series of small groups of specimens which share the majority
of their attributes. In the following section these latter groups are described and the provenience of the specimens is discussed.

Stone Artifacts
Nearly all of the stone specimens from the Medford Ranch Site
were made of Alibates flint, although some, particularly the pecking
pebbles, hammerstones, and manos, were made of quartzite or other
materials.

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

N
NSS~~
midden w ··

~.

slab

midden-~~ .~~~ntratiani~535
NSO~I
w

MEDFORD RANCH SITE
Houses and Middens

I-

0

10

20

40

60

FEET

Fig. 1 2. Houses and middens at the Medford Ranch Site.

ARROW POINTS

All of the arrow points have a triangular shape and, except for one
which is of obsidian, are made from Alibates flint. These points are
separated into smaller groups on the basis of workmanship and the
presence or absence of side-notching.

39

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

Medford Ranch Site
41 HC 7
Profile of

-

E5 09.4 line
4

0

N532.5
E509.4

I

N525
E5fl94

F" EET

f il l

s

N

Fig. 13. Profile of E509.4 line at the Medford Ranch Site.

Fresno points (Fig. 14, J-L ). The three bifacially worked triangular
points classified as Fresno have straight to slightly concave bases and
straight to slightly convex edges. Two of these wer e found near House
B and one was recovered near the entrance to House A.
Side-notched points (Fig. 14, M-0 ). Nine side-notched points resembling the Washita type (Bell, 1958 : 98-99 ) were recovered. They
are basically triangular in shape and have side notches about Y3 to Y5
the distance from the base to the tip . They differ from the Washita
type in that the bases are generally concave; two, however, have
straight bases and another has a convex base. The side-notched points
vary in length from 1. 7 to 3.5 em. and in width from .8 to 1.8 em.
Seven were found in or near House A and two were found in or near
House B.
Young points (Fig. 14, F-H ) . The five Young points (Suhm, et al. ,.
1954: 510-511 ) have triangular outlines with convex edges and
straight bases. Two are bifacially chipped and the other three are
unifacially chipped. The shortest one measures 3 em. long and 1.8 em.
wide, while the longest one measures 3.2 em. long and 1.4 em. wide.
Three were found near House A, one near House B, and one near
House C.
Obsidian arrow point (Fig. 14, I) . An obsidian arrow point was
found near House B. It is triangular in outline and has slightly convex edges and a broken base. The surviving portion of this point is
3.2 em. long and 1.5 em. wide.
Arrow point fragments . Three arrow point fragments , two tips and

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

8

F

J

G

H

M

L

K
0

2

4

N

0

6

em
Fig . 14. Arrow Points and Pottery from the Medford Ranch Site. A, 8, Perforated pottery
discs . C, Unperforated pottery d isc . D, E, Borger Cordmarked rim sherds . F-H , Young arrow
points . I, Obsidian arrow point. J-L, Fresno arrow points . M-0 , Side-notched arrow points.

a mid-section, were found adjacent to H ouse A. None can be identified
as to type.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

41

KNIVES

All the knives from the site are long and relatively narrow. They
are bifacially chipped and the flake scars indicate that generally thin~
wide flakes with only slight bulbs of percussion had been removed in
their manufacture. Four different forms-oval, ovate, straight-based,
and alternately beveled-are recognized.
Oval knives (Fig. 15, F ) . Two crudely chipped oval knives were
recovered in the excavations. The smaller of the two is 6.8 em. long,
5 .1 em. wide, and 1.4 em. thick, and has crude flaking on both face s.
The larger specimen is somewhat better made, and is 9.7 em. long,
7.8 em. wide, and 2.6 em. thick.
Ovate knives (Fig. 15, A-C ) . Although well represented (36 specimens ) , none of the ovate knives is complete. The size range cannot
be determined, but they are generally thin and lenticular in cross
section and have either rounded or slightly pointed bases (or tips).
The workmanship varies from fine to crude, with the majority being
somewhere in between. One is made of fine-grained reddish quartzite,
the remainder are of Ali bates flint .
Knives, straight base (Fig. 15, D, E) . Two straight-based knife
fragments were recovered. Judging from slant of the lateral edges
these knives were probably triangular or subtriangular in outline. One
has well defined basal corners while the other has slightly rounded
corners. The smaller of the two is 2.2 em. wide and is estimated to
have been about 4.9 em. long; the larger one is 3.2 em. wide and was
an estimated 4. 7 em. long.
Alternately beveled knives (Fig. 15, G) . Only one of the four alternately beveled knives found at the Medford Ranch Site is complete.
This specimen is double-pointed and is beveled on the upper left and
lower right (face up ) . Relatively thin, this knife measured .8 em. in
thickness, 12.3 em. in length, and 3.1 em. in width.
The other three knives of this group are also relatively thin, varying
fro_m .6 to .9 em. in thickness. One, broken across the mid-section, has
a broad blade ( 4. 7 em. wide ) with a small bevel on the alternate edges
and opposite sides. This specimen measures 7.7 em. long. A second
knife, also broken across the middle, has the same length, but is narrower (3.5 em. wide ) . The third fragment, 5.8 em. long and 2 em.
wide, lacks part of the blade and the distal end.
SCRAPERS

All of the scrapers from the site are unifacially chipped, with the

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

E

0

0

2

4

6

em
Fig . 1 5 . Kn ives f rom the Medfo rd Ranch Site. A-C , Ovate knives. D, E, Stra ight- based
kn ives. F, Oval knife . G, Alternately beveled knife .

workmanship varying from good to poor. Three varieties of scrapersutilized flake, snub-nose, and oval-are recognized.
Utilized flake scrapers (Fig. 16, I, J ). Near House A was a cache of
five utilized flake scrapers, each of which had fine marginal chipping

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

43

along the lateral edges, and two unworked flakes . The scrapers varied
in length from 6 to 8. 7 em. and in width from 2.4 to 3.5 em. Three
other other caches which contained mainly unmodified flakes have
already been described.
Snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 16, D-F ). Each of the six snub-nosed end
scrapers has sides which taper from the expanded bit or scraping edge
to the rounded base. The bit is generally convex and is either steeply
beveled or finely chipped. These scrapers vary from 2.6 to 5.2 em. in
length and from 1. 7 to 3.1 em. in width. The largest and smallest specimens are made from a flint foreign to this area.
Oval scrapers (Fig. 16, A-C ). Ten scrapers with long, oval outlines
are fa shioned from thin flakes . They range in length from 5.2 to 6.7 em.
and in width from 2.6 to 3.7 em. Their form and good workmanship
suggest that these specimens may also have been used as knives.
MISCELLANEOUS STONE ARTIFACTS

Drills (Fig. 16, G, H ) . The four drills from the site have long,
narrow, slightly tapering blades and relatively unmodified bases. The
blades on three of the drills are unifacially worked, while the fourth
is bifacially chipped. The blades vary in length from 2 to 3.5 em. and
the width at the juncture of the blade with the base varies from .8 to
1.3 em. Three were found near House A ; the provenience of the other
is uncertain.
Large core tools (Fig. 17) . Five large, bifacially chipped, oval-shaped
core tools have one or more battered edges. These range from 12.7 to
17.7 em. in length, from 6. 7 to 9.6 em. in width, and from 2.6 to 4.4 em.
in thickness.
Obsidian flakes. Seven small flakes of obsidian were found scattered
about House A.
Manos. A large, oblong river cobble with a triangular cross section
was pecked and slightly smoothed on one surface. This specimen, found
near House B, is 21 em. long, 10.1 em . wide, and 7.2 em. thick.
Grinding slabs. The five more or less rectangular grinding slabs
were all found in or near the houses (Fig. 8) , or incorporated into the
wall construction (Fig. 10 ) . Each has a long, narrow ( 14.2 to 17.2 em.
wide) depression which varies from 3 to 5.5 em. in maximum depth .
Only three, however, are complete enough to determine the maximum
length ( 34 to 39 em.) of the grinding depression.
Hammerstones. Two globular-shaped hammerstones of fine-grained
quartzite have battered edges. Both were found north of House B. Th~

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

A

8

G

F

E

0

H

J
0

4

2

6

em
Fig. 16. Scrapers and Drills from the Medford Ranch Site. A-C, Oval scrapers. D-E, Snubnose end scrapers . G-H, Drills. I, J, Utilized flake scrapers.

larger one is 9.3 em. long and 8.8 em. wide, the other is 7.0 em. long
and 6.3 em. wide.
Pecking pebbles (Fig. 18, D ). Two quartzite river pebbles, less massive than those presumably utilized as hammerstones, have battered
edges which suggest their use as pecking stones. One of the stones has
a thin oval shape, three battered edges, and one smooth side; the opposite side is naturally convex. This specimen measures 7 em. long

45

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

and 5 em. wide. T he other pecking stone is egg shaped, has a circular
cross section, and is battered and pecked all over. It is 4.5 em. long and
4.9 em. wide.

Worked Bone
Worked bone specimens are present but, except for the awls, are too
small and/ or fragmentary to be accurately identified.

A

Q

?

~

'

~

CM.

' ? '

'

~

Fig . 17 . Large core tools from the Medford Ranch Site .

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bison scapula. The largest worked scapula fragment may have been
used as a hoe blade, but it is so badly broken that its original shape cannot be determined. The other smaller fragments came from the scalene
or flat portion of the scapula. Each one has either a beveled edge or a
groove made by a sharp instrument.
Bone awls (Fig. 18, A-C). Two of the eight awls from the site were
manufactured from deer or antelope cannon (metapodial ) bones . One
of these (Fig. 18, A ) the longest awl found, is 16.7 em. in length;
the other cannon bone awl (Fig. 18, C) is considerably shorter, 9.7 em.
Five of the remaining awls, are oval in cross section and were worked
so extensively that the original bone could not be identified. The
longest of these is 11.9 em., while the shortest is 7.8 em. One of the
two other awls was made from a triangular piece of scapula and measures 5.5 em. in length. The last awl is short (4.4 em.), has a rectangular cross section, a short, pointed distal end, and a rounded proximal
end (Fig. 18, B).
Pottery
Most of the pottery at the Medford Ranch Site was cordmarked,
tempered with sand and grit, and can be typed as Borger Cordmarked
( Suhm, et al. , 1954: 390-393). Some sherds had, in addition to the
sand and grit, crushed quartz or bone tempering.
Borger Cordmarked (Fig. 14, A-E). The Borger Cordmarked sherds
(524 specimens) were the largest class of artifacts found at the Medford Ranch Site. These sherds have the following traits: They are
tempered with sand and grit, rarely bone (10 sherds), or crushed
quartz (2 sherds). Their exteriors are cordmarked with the cordmarking placed vertically around the rim and neck. The interiors are rough
and bumpy and the sherds occasionally split between the inner and
outer walls, suggesting that this pottery was made by a paddle and
anvil technique. The vessels were apparently large, globular forms
with rounded bottoms and vertical rims. The lips are flat, rarely sharp,
and are always cordmarked.
Plain sherds. Eleven sherds resemble the cordmarked ones in temper,
paste, and texture, but differ from them in surface finish.
Pottery discs (Fig. 14, A-C). Irregular discs of pottery, ranging in
diameter from 2.4 to 5.4 em., had been fashioned from sherds of cordmarked pottery. Fourteen are from body sherds while two are from
neck sherds. The edges of the discs are rounded and the central perforations, when present, were biconically drilled. Three of the discs had not

47

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

been drilled, althou gh one of these has a small central indentationbeginning of a perforation-in one side. Eleven of the discs were
found near House A, three near House B, one in the attached structure
on the south side of House C, and one in miscellaneous excavations.

D

B

c

A

9

2
I

3 4
I

I

E

5 6
CM.
I

I

7
I

8
I

9
I

10
I

Fig . 1 8. Bone, Stone , and Shell Artifacts from the Medford Ranch Site. A-C , Bone awls .
0 , Pecking pebble . E, Utilized mussel shell.

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

MISCELLANEOUS ARTIFACTS

Paint materials. Two fragments of hematite, a piece of limonite, and
a smoothed sandstone fragment with traces of red hematite indicate
that mineral pigments were used at the Medford Ranch Site. The
pieces of hematite and limonite are well smoothed on one face, but
unmodified on the opposite side.
Utilized shell (Fig. 18, E). Four nearly complete and seven fragmentary mussel shells ( Unio gracilis Barnes ?) have the ventral
edges smoothed and rounded. These shells may have been used as
scrapers or possibly as spoons.
SPRING CANYON SITE (41 HC 20)
SITE DESCRIPTION

The Spring Canyon Site, unlike the Conner and Medford Ranch
sites, lies at the edge of the rolling breaks east of Spring Canyon and
north of the Canadian River gorge. Situated high above these two
canyons, the site provides an impressive panoramic view of the surrounding terrain : To the south can be seen the Canadian Canyon with
its colorful Permian redbeds and, near the top , contrasting white strata
of undulating dolomite. To the west, portions of Spring Canyon are
visible, while to the southwest the juncture of the Spring Canyon and
Canadian River valleys comes into view. To the east, where the sharp
edge of the Canadian Canyon has eroded away, the rolling and rough
terrain smoothly merges with the relatively level uplands.
When approached from the northeast, the site, prior to excavation,
was marked by a large, prominent "mound" littered with white dolomite slabs (Figs. 19; 20, A ) . Some of these stones were still in place
in the mound and the surface outlines of a rectangular structure could
faintly be discerned. Evidence of other former structures consisted of
three concentrations of dolomite slabs (Fig. 25 ), one to the southeast
of the mound, the second a short distance north-northeast of the
mound, and the third slightly farther away, to the northeast of the
mound.
METHOD oF ExcAVATION

After the grid had been established and elevations determined for
the major reference points, excavations were initiated in the slab concentration to the northeast of the mound, where the outlines of a small
oval structure were partially visible. First the exterior walls of this

49

T HREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

w

I-

(i)

z o
~ N
z u

<[I
Ll(!)

z
0::

(l_
(f)

...

l
i

Vi
1:

...
u"
0

1:

"'Q.

.!:

.

"'

-=0

a.

"E
~

.2

1:

0

u
0:

"'

i.i:

structure were completely defined, then the interior was dug by halffoot levels. Additional excavations to the north of this house located
a midden and a large trash-filled pit.
While testing was underway in the oval structure, work was begun

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

on the large rectangular structure which was buried by wind-blown
sand. Excavations in this latter feature attempted ( 1) to reveal the
interior of the east wall since ·t his is where the ventilators and/ or doorways of the Antelope Creek Focus houses are frequently located, (2) to
locate internal features, and ( 3 ) to clear at least half of the house by
removing opposing quadrants. Of these objectives, only the first was
successful.
On the inside and near the north wall of the large structure, a fivefoot test square was dug in half-foot intervals and all of the dirt was
passed through a half-inch screen to determine what might be found
in the house fill and to lcicate the house floor . The fill from the test,
however, was virtually sterile and no floor could be defined. A second
test square in the central part of the house also failed to locate interior
features. On the basis of these findings, the remainder of the fill was
carefully shoveled out down to the lowest edge of the vertical slabs
and dumped without screening.
STRUCTURES

The most outstanding features at the Spring Canyon Site were the
four scattered stone concentrations which contained the remains of
wall foundations. At times, a well-defined wall foundation would suddenly terminate without completing a structure outline; however, in
two cases it was possible to completely outline a structure (Fig. 25 ).
The more extensive of these (Fig. 21) represents one of the largest
rectangular houses yet reported for the area. This structure was fairly
well defined on the surface, even though the bases of the walls were
buried by three to three and a half feet of wind-blown sand. The
smaller structure (Fig. 24, A; 25 ) , northeast of the main one, was
oval and was quite similar to those found at the Conner Site.
Main Structure
Excavations in the wind-blown mound revealed a large rectangular
house approximately 29 feet wide and 32.5 feet long (Fig. 21 ) . The
walls were somewhat irregular (from .8 to 1.2 ft. thick) and frequently
bowed either in or out. The interior faces of the walls were constructed
of large, vertically placed dolomite slabs (Fig. 20, D) with as many as
two tiers found still intact (Fig. 22) . The exterior wall faces , by contrast, consisted of coursed, unshaped, horizontally laid slabs cemented
together with liberal amounts of adobe (Figs. 20, C; 23 ) . Adobe, at least
in the east and north walls, was used as a thick foundation for the hori-

51

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

A

B

c

D

Fig . 20. Spring Canyon Site . A, Wind-b lown mou nd befo re excavation . B, Doorway and
co lumn s a t the ma in structure. C, Exterio r s ide of east wall , ma in structure. D, Interior side
of west wall , main structu re . Scale th ree feet long .

zontal stones and as a cement to secure the rubble to the vertical interior slabs (Fig. 23). The adobe found at or near the original ground
surface was soft, moist, and easily excavated, whereas the adobe from
higher in the walls was very hard and compact.
The floor of the structure, like those of the other houses excavated,
could not be located. Consequently, the exact relationships between the
original ground surface, the floor, and the base of the walls remain
undetermined (Fig. 23 ) . It might be noted, however, that the vertical
slabs (Figs. 20, D; 23) are massive and surely must have required
some support. Possibly, the slabs were placed in a trench, or reinforced with adobe.
All of the corners, except the southwestern one, were rounded and
were constructed much like the walls (Fig. 21 ) . In the southwest

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

corner, however, there was a gap of two feet between the horizontal
wall slabs (Fig. 21 ). On both sides of this opening-and forming part
of the walls-were two roughly oval piles of horizontal slabs coated
with adobe (Fig. 20, B). The position and shape of these piles suggest
that they are the basal remnants of columns. They extended about two
feet a hove the presumed floor level and were approximately three feet
in diameter. The western column was supported by an adobe foundation.
While no interior features were located in the large structure, the
remains of a single wall of horizontal slabs were found attached to
the exterior face of the south side. This exterior wall joined the house
at a right angle, a bout four feet west of the southeast corner (Fig. 25).
Since its full extent could not be determined, the purpose of this wall
remains very much in doubt. Limited excavations about the remainder
of the house exterior did not uncover other features.

Oval Structure
To the northeast of the main building was a small, oval-shaped
structure, the base of which consisted entirely of vertically placed
slabs. The maximum east-west dimension was 8.2 feet, the maximum
north-south dimension, 5.2 feet. A gap in the southwest corner of the
wall foundation may have been a doorway. The only feature recorded in the interior was a shallow, oval-shaped, flat-bottom pit which
had penetrated .3 feet into the subsoil. The shallowness of the pit suggests that it may have been dug after the house had been abandoned
and partially or wholly filled by trash and wind-blown sand. There
was considerable cultural debris in the interior structure fill , but it
cannot be determined whether this refuse was associated primarily
with the pit or with the house.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES

Middens
A concentration of midden debris was found to the north and/ or
northeast of each structure excavated at Sanford Reservior, indicating
that these were preferred areas for dumping refuse. The digging was
concentrated in the midden areas as they generally contained the
greatest number of artifacts and other cultural detritus.
In the Spring Canyon Site, three such midden areas were located
and partially or completely (Fig. 25) excavated. North of the main

~
~

~gp
'~

~

qi~
'0

I

If!
.

.

.
·

''
'
.

.

~
~
\)
fD

~\
\1

~

wu
m

\

~
.
.

fJ

SPRING CANYON SITE
MAIN

STRUCTURE

VERTICAL SLABS

D

HORI ZONTAL SLABS

~

SLANTING
(ARROWS

l!il
0

SLABS

POINT TO THE LOWEST

END)

UNEXCAVATED
I

2

3

4

FEET

Fig . 21. Main structure at the Spring Canyon Site.

53

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES
Nl32

Nl23 .5

:, '!., ~ ,/,,,;;:
adobe

~

h~

~

"'-vert1col
slobs

1/

~
I

l

.L

rubble

~

~

subsoil

SPRING
Profile

CANYON

SITE

of East Wall of Moin Structure
0

2

FEE T

Fig. 22 . Interior profile of east wall of the main structure at the Spring Canyon Site .

structure was a relatively large midden, about 15 feet north-south,
20 feet east-west, and 1.7 feet deep, which had accumulated in a basinshaped depression similar to that found at the Medford Ranch Site.
Although the yield was less than expected, there was sufficient debris
to warrant complete excavation. To the northeast and adjacent to the
main structure, limited excavations tested a second and somewhat
richer midden deposit of undetermined size (see Addendum).
The one midden associated with the oval structure was adjacent to
the northeast corner. An area 10 feet square, believed to be the central
portion of the midden, was dug. In this square a great deal of debris
was encountered, although the presence of a pit in the middle of the
midden complicated its interpretation. This pit had been filled with
refuse before the site was abandoned.

Pits
Two apparently similar pits were found at the site. The basal portion of one was encountered in the floor of the oval structure. It measured 5 feet east-west and 4.25 feet north-south, and had penetrated
only .3 feet into the subsoil. The second pit, found north of the same
structure, was uncovered about .5 feet below the present ground sur-

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

face . It was oval- shaped, had inward slopin g sides and a flat bottom,
and was rounded where the walls joined the bottom (Fig. 26 ) . It was
3.9 feet deep and had a maximu m diameter of 5.3 feet and·a minimum
diameter of 4.4 feet. The second pit yielded a large quantity of cultural
debris, including most of the pottery obtained at the site.

Caches
Flint caches were not as abundant at the Spring Cayon Site as they
were at the Medford Ranch Site. The Spring Canyon excavations
encountered only three flake caches which contained 271, 38, and 15
flakes , respectively, of Alibates dolomite. All of the fla kes have the
characteristics produced by the billet techniqu e: they are long, narrow,
and thin, and have a lipped striking platform. The fla kes in these
caches were concentrated in small piles and at one time could have
been in small bags or some other type of perishable containers. The
largest cache was found in the oval structu re, anoth er was found in
the midden to the north of the oval structure, and th e smallest was

SPRING

CANYON SITE

Generalized Profile Showing
Wall Construction
0

I

2

FEET

Fig . 23 . Generalized profile showing wall construction at the Spring Canyon Site.

55

THREE PANHAND L E ASPECT SI TES

found beneath an unworked fragment of bison scapula in th e midden
to the north of the main structu re.
In addition to the flint cach es, one cache of bison scapulae (one
squ ash knife an d two worked fragments ) was found in the oval structure, close to th e sou th wall (Fig. 24, B) .

A

B

Fig . 24 . Spring Canyon Site. A, Oval structure, looking west. 8, Bison scapula cache along
interior of south wall of the oval structure .

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

The artifacts from the Spring Canyon Site were of three different
classes, stone, bone, and pottery, with the latter being the best represented. There was, however, a greater variety of stone artifacts. (For
additional artifacts from the Spring Canyon Site see Addendum below)

Stone Artifacts
ARROW POINTS

While all of the arrow points from the Spring Canyon Site were
basically triangular in outline, they can be subdivided on the basis of
the presence or absence of side notches and the quality of the workmanship.
Fresno points (Fig. 27, A-C). Fifteen points are unnotched triangular forms with generally straight or, less often, slightly convex lateral
edges. Most of the bases are somewhat concave, but a few are straight
and one is slightly convex. As a group, these points are thin and, with
one exception, bifacially chipped. They vary in length from 2.4 to
2.9 em. (most are 2.8 em. ) and range in width from 1.2 to 1.8 em.
Side-notched points (Fig. 27, G). Only one complete side-notched
point and a fragment of another were found in the excavations at the
site. Both have deeply concave bases and straight lateral edges which
are notched about midway between the base and tip. The width of
the blade between the notches on the complete specimen is .6 em., while
the maximum width is 1.5 em. and the length is 2.1 em. These points
resemble the Washita point (Bell, 1958: 98-99) but the deeply concave base precludes it from that type. It is probably a closely related
variant.
Young points (Fig. 27, D-F). Thirteen arrow points are made from
thin flakes which are retouched primarily along the edges of one face.
The majority have slightly convex edges and straight bases, although
one has relatively straight lateral edges while another has a convex
base. One is made from a fine-grained brown quartzite, another from
moss agate; the remainder are of Alibates flint. The Young points range
in length from 2.1 to 3.8 em. and in width from 2.1 to 1.4 em.
Arrow point fragments . Four arrow point tips were recovered, three
of them bifacially chipped and one unifacially worked. None can be
identified as to type.
KNIVES

Ovate knives (Fig. 28, F ) . Bifacially chipped, ovate-shaped specimens with thin lenticular cross sections are the most common knife

57

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

N

slab
concentrations

SPRING CANYON SITE
Structures and Middens
0
I

20

ao

f'EET

Fig. 25. Structures and middens at the Spring Canyon Site.

form (22 examples) found at the Spring Canyon Site. In spite of the
number of ovate knives, only two are complete. One of the complete
specimens measures 12.9 em. long and 6 em. wide; the other one is 8.7
em. long and 4.3 em. wide. The widths of the fragments vary from
3.1 to 6.4 ern., with the majority falling between 4.3 and 5.4 em. While
most are made from Alibates flint, one is of fine-grained, gray quartzite.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Beveled knives (Fig. 28, A). The three beveled knives from the
Spring Canyon Site are essentially diamond-shaped with one end being
longer than the other end. They vary in over-all length from 10.3 to
13.3 em. The longer end of each knife has relatively straight edges
while the shorter end generally has slightly convex edges. The broad,
thin flake scars suggest that they were chipped by means of the billet
percussion technique (Honea, ms.). When held vertically with the
long end upward, the beveled edges appear on the upper left and lower
right edges of the specimens.
SCRAPERS

Unifacial chipping is characteristic of all the scrapers. Some are
little more than utilized flakes, while others are carefully shaped and
worked over much of one face.
Utilized flake scrapers (Fig. 28, B). The twenty-two utilized flake
scrapers are of various shapes and sizes, but basically they are flakes
with one or more retouched edges-presumably resulting from use.
Most are made from thin, broad flakes .
Tapering base snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 28, D ). Eight scrapers are
triangular in outline, being widest across the bit end and tapering to a
pointed or rounded proximal end. The bit edge is slightly convex on
all specimens, and all are made from flakes which were narrow but
slightly thicker than the flakes used for the other types of scrapers.
The ventral sides are unmodified. A portion of the original cortex has
been retained on the dorsal side of one of the snub-nose scrapers. None
is dorsally and basally thinned as has been noted on similar specimens
found in north-central Texas (Duffield and Jelks, 1961 ) . With one
exception-a miniature specimen which measures 2.9 em. long and
1.9 em. across the bit-these scrapers evenly range from 3.4 to 9.6 em.
in length and from 2. 7 to 4.5 em. in width.
Straight base snub-nose scraper (Fig. 28, C) . With the exception of
the straight base, the one example of this type possesses all of the
characteristics of the tapered base snub-nose scrapers described above.
Ovate scrapers (Fig. 28, E). Ten specimens resemble the ovate
knives in shape, but have unifacial chipping along the marginal edges.
One end is usually wider than the other end, probably a characteristic
of the flakes used in the manufacture of these scrapers. The ovate
scrapers range in length from 5 to 8.5 em.
Triangular flake scrapers (Fig. 29, D-F ) . Fifteen thin, subtriangular scrapers, varying in length from 3.4 to 4.6 em. and in width from

59

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

N

Pit in oval
structure
A

A

I

{;ij,~~~~·~~·~[j~Dt
I

B
0

Pit north of 9
oval structure
2

3

4

5

f~et

Fig . 26 . Pits at the Spring Canyon Site .

1.9 to 2.6 em., have steep bevels along all edges. The presumed proximal end is generally the widest part of the specimen and is straight to
slightly convex. These scrapers resemble Young points but they are
more crudely made and greater in length. They also resemble the snubnose scrapers, but are distinguished from them by their thinness.

60

TE:XAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

8

A

D

E

F

G

0

2

3

4

5 6
CM.

7

8

9

10

Fig. 27.. Arrow Points and Pottery from the Spring Canyon Site. A-C, Fresno arrow points .
0-F, Young arrow points . G, Side-notched arrow point . H, I, Borger Cordmarked rim sherds.

MISCELLAN EOUS STONE ARTIFACTS

Spokeshave (Fig. 29, G). A shallow concavity ( .2 em. deep, 1.4 em.
wide ) in the lateral edge of a small flake suggests that it may have
been used as a spokeshave.
Drills (Fig. 29, A-C). Flake drills are well represented ( 11 specimens ) in the collection from the Spring Canyon Site. The majority
have narrow ( .8 to 1.0 em. ) , long shafts and unmodified bases. Three,
however, lack bases, another three have the edges of the shaft alternately beveled, and one has a slightly retouched base. The lengths of
the drill shafts range from 2 to 2.9 em. , with most measuring 2 to
2.5 em.
Grauer (Fig. 29, H ). One flake has a small angular projection,
possibly a graver point, which has been produced by the intersection

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

61

of two flakes scars. The edges on either side of the point have been
partially retouched.
Stone Disc (Fig. 30, C). Two, crudely chipped stone discs, possibly
used as jar lids, were recovered from the site. The smaller of the two
(approximately 8 em. in diameter ) is made of micaceous quartzite,
has flattened sides and is relatively thin ( 1. 7 em.). The larger disc
(about 10.5 em. in diameter ) is quite similar, but is made of finegrained red sandstone and is 2.4 em. in thickness.
Cores. The 17 cores from the site vary in shape and size, and are,
for the most part, bifacially chipped. Many of the flakes removed from
them were long, wide, and relatively thin. The cores vary from 4.8 to
10.7 em. in length and from 4 to 10.5 em. in width.
Awl sharpeners (Fig. 30, A ). Two fine-grained sandstone awl
sharpeners-one complete and one fragmentary-were recovered. The
complete specimen (Fig. 30, A ) has a rectangular cross section and is
9 em. long and 3 em. wide. One side has a shallow longitudinal
U-shaped groove, about 1 em. wide, which extends almost the full
length of the specimen. On the reverse side the longitudinal groove is
shorter and is not as wide or as deep. The other sharpener is thin ( 1.4
em. thick ) and relatively short (7.1 em. ) , and has three broad, shallow
grooves-two on one side and one on the other side.
Gorget (Fig. 30, B). An irregularly-shaped, red sandstone gorget
has two suspension holes near the upper corners. There is no evidence
of intentional shaping: three edges of the gorget are slightly convex,
while the fourth (the presumed bottom edge) is fairly straight. One
lateral edge is 4.6 em. long, the other is 7 em. long. Both suspension
holes were drilled from the smoother side of the gorget; one of these,
however, consists of two overlapping holes placed side by side.
Manos . Each of the two manos or handstones has one surface pecked
and roughened, and at least one end battered. The opposite sides have
been smoothed by natural stream abrasion. One mano is long and
narrow (24.6 X 9 em. ), has an ovoid cross section and is 6.3 em. thick.
The other specimen is shorter ( 19.1 em. long ) and wider (12.4 em.)
and is approximately the same thickness (6.4 em.). Both are made
from quartzitic stones.
Milling slab. The one milling stone recovered from the site was
collected from the surface. Made from a rectangular slab of sandstone,
it has a shallow, oval-shaped basin which is approximately 21 em.
long and 16.2 em. wide. The slab itself has a maximum width of 24.2
em. , a maximum length of 34 em., and a maximum thickness of 6.1 em.
Hammerstones. In addition to the two manos which apparently

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

CM.
Fig . 28 . Knives and Scrapers from the Sp ri ng Canyon Site . A, Be veled kn ife . B, Utilized
fla ke scrape r. C, Straight base s nub-nos e end scraper. D, Tapering base snub- no se end
sc rape r. E, Ovate scraper. F, Ovate knife .

were sometimes used as hammerstones, there are 10 river pebbles (five
of which are fragmentary ) with battered edges .
Ground Stone Object. A small fragment of fin e-grained sandstone
is smoothed on one side and along one edge. It is too incomplete to
be positively identified, but was presumably used as some type of
smoother.

63

JHREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

c

B

A

0

F

E

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

CM.

G

H

Fig. 29 . Drills , Scrapers , and Gravers from the Spring Canyon Site . A-C, Drills. D-F,
Triangular flake scrapers . G, Spokeshave. H, Graver.

Worked Bone
The worked bone objects are perhaps the most distinctive artifacts
found at the Spring Canyon Site. They were shaped by breaking,
cutting, and abrading: if the bone was thin, it was heavily scored
from one side and then broken along this line; if thick, a combination
of breaking, hacking, and cutting with an instrument that left shallow,
knife-like grooves was used . With these techniques it was possible to
fa shion bone hoes and squash knives from bison scapulae, digging stick

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

heads from bison tibiae, and other artifacts from cannon bones, ribs,
etc.
For convenience and consistency in describing the bone implements,
they will be oriented as the bones occur in the skeleton. That is, the
joint which is the most distant from the body, the distal end, will be
placed downward, while the joint closest to the body axis, the proximal
end, will be oriented upward. That portion of the bone which faces the
head of the animal is the anterior and that part which is oriented
toward the rear is the posterior. When discussing the shoulder blade
or scapula, however, a more detailed, but nontechnical terminology
will be employed. For a definition of these terms consult Fig. 31 .

A

B

o

2

3

4

s s

7

a

9

10

CM.
Fig . 30. Ground and Chipped Stone Artifacts from the Sprin g Canyon Site. A, Awl
sharpener. B, Stone gorget. C, Stone disc .

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

65

Bone hoes (Fig. 32, C) . Made from flat, triangular sections of bison
scapulae or shoulder blades, the two hoes are relatively short (24 em.
in maximum length ) , and have been trimmed on both ends and along ·
one lateral edge. In the process of manufacture, the articular end of
the scapula was broken off, leaving a jagged edge. About 9 em. 'from
this broken end a shallow (hafting? ) notch 'has been cut into the
anterior edge. The distal end of the scapula was also removed, apparently to produce a sharp " hoeing" edge. This end slants from the longer
posterior edge to the shorter cut edge of the specimen (Fig. 32, C).
Implements of this type have been found at both Antelope Creek and
Optima Focus sites (Krieger, 1946: 45 ; Watson, 1950.: Pl. 2 ) .
Squash knives (Fig. 32, A ). Three squash knives-all fragmentary
and 28 em. long- were made from the central portions of bison
shoulder blades. In the manufacture of these knives, the articular end
of the scapula has been removed, and the higher part of the spine cut
away, leaving the base of the spine to form a central ridge on one face .
The edge on the anterior side has a slight, natural curve and bevel
which could function as a cutting or working edge. The other edge
(posterior side ) of the specimen has been severed and has a faint bevel
produced by a deep cutting scar. On one specimen the remnant of the
spine forms the back or one edge of the knife. All may be a form of
scapula hoe; however, the narrow " handle" (proximal end ) suggests
that they were intended for use as knives.
Digging stick heads (Fig. 32, B) . Digging stick heads , commonly
found in Antelope Creek Focus sites, were manufactured from the
lower leg bones or tibiae of bison. The more complete of the four specimens from the Spring Canyon Site measure 17.5 to 25 em. in length.
In each case, the proximal end and most of the anterior surface have
been removed. The latter was severed diagonally through the shaft
some 8.5 to 12 em. above the distal joint. The resulting working edge
is steeply beveled from the posterior end and is either slightly rounded
or slanted from the upper left to the lower right when viewed from the
anterior. An oval hole through the articular surface into the cavity of
the bone generally has a maximum diameter of 3 em. On two of the
specimens the outer perimeter of the hole is fire blackened, possibly
from attempts to burn though the outer, compact layer of bone. This,.
perhaps, was a preliminary step in making the perforation. Each of the
specimens has a high use polish around the outer surface of the bone,
but lacks signs of wear in the cavity. This, plus traces of the porous,
bony cellular structure, indicates that the digging stick itself extended
to the working edge of the h ead. Perhaps the head not only provided a

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

harder, more lasting edge, but also reduced the wear on the tip of the
stick.
Worked bison scapulae (Fig. 33, F ) . Two long, triangular-shaped
pieces of bison scapula had been cached in the oval structure (Fig. 2.4,
B) . The spine and one lateral edge has been removed on the larger and
more complete specimen (30.5 em. long) . In addition, the posterior
ridge has been trimmed and the articular end, like that of the hoes,
has been broken. The distal end of the blade has been cut straight across
and all that remains of the scapula is the thin blade and part of the
posterior ridge (Fig. 33, F ) . The second specimen is quite fragmentary,
but was perhaps similar to the first. Both may be blanks for bison
scapula hoes or by-products in the manufacture of squash knives . In
connection with the latter, it is interesting to note that squash knives
are made from the spine and anterior edge of the scapula-the sections
which have been removed from these two specimens. Moreover, a
squash knife was found cached with these pieces.
Bone awls (Fig. 33, B, C). One complete awl and two fragmentary
ones were found at the Spring Canyon Site. The complete specimen
(Fig. 33, C) is circular in cross section, fairly straight, and is 16.8 em.
long. The surface, however, is so eroded that it is impossible to identify

BISON SCAPULA
(dorsal view)
Fig. 31 . Mo rpholog ica l features of a b ison scapula.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

67

the bone. One of the fragments is a basal section which is highly
polished and which has a triangular cross section (Fig. 33, B). The
cellular structure of this specimen is fairly dense. The remaining fragment is a distal end which is somewhat plano-convex in cross section.
Cut bone and antler fragments (Fig. 33, A, D, E). Several bone and
horn fragments have been cut or show attempts at cutting. One small
scapula fragment ( 8 em. long ) was cut from the thin section of the
blade (Fig. 33, A ). Three other cut pieces are from deer cannon bones.
Two of these have the central groove of the shaft deepened in an
attempt to split the bone, while the third (Fig. 33, D ) is an articular
end which has been removed from the shaft by cutting a groove about
2.8 em. below the joint. Finally, one rib fragment (Fig. 33, E) and one
horn section have been severed by circumscribing a groove and breaking the specimen along the grooved line. Most of these fragments are
probably residue from the manufacture of bone implements, as none
show indications of having been used.
Pottery
The 394 potsherds recovered from the excavations can be sorted into
several groups principally on the basis of the surface finish and paste
characteristics. Borger Cordmarked, represented by 317 specimens, is
by far the most common type. In general, this type is distinguished by
globular vessel forms, crushed rock and/ or sand temper, and exterior
surfaces roughened by cordmarks ( Suhm, et al., 1954: 390-393).
When examined in detail, however, the Borger Cordmarked sherds
from the site can be divided into two closely related subgroups or
varieties. One variety ( 188 specimens ) is tempered with large, angular
particles of crushed quartzite mixed with sand, has relatively thick
walls, and is dark on the exterior surface. The second variety, by contrast, is tempered with sand (although one has an admixture of bone ) ,
is comparatively thin, and has a more compact paste and a lighter,
often orangish surface color. The latter variety is represented by 129
sherds.
All of the Borger sherds fracture easily, but those with crushed
quartzite hmd to break more readily than the others. The fracture
planes are irregular, and no definite indications of coils can be observed. Both the exterior and interior surfaces are bumpy, although
the cordmarks tend to obscure this exterior roughness. These features,
coupled with the wide variation in the wall thickness of any one vessel,
suggest that this pottery was finished by the paddle and anvil techmque.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

Q

?9 4~1\I{l\'tO

CM.

Fig . 32. Bone Artifacts from the Spring Canyon Site. A, Squash knife . 8 , Digging stick tip .
C, Scapula hoe .

Although the majority of the Borger Cordmarked sherds are from
vessel walls, there are four large rim sherds which provide some
useful data on the juncture of the body wall with the rim (Fig. 2.7, H ,
I ) . In one case, the rim merges with the body in a gentle curve, while
on the others the rim flares out from the body at a much greater angle.
All the larger sherds indicate that the vessels were globular to elongated jars with prominent rims . The cord impressions, presumably
made with a cord-wrapped paddle, are usually oriented vertically.
In addition to the above, there are 67 sherds which have many

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

69

characteristics of the Borger type, but which are poorly smoothed on
the exterior surfaces. The exteriors, however, do occasionally have
faint traces of cordmarks. This pottery is generally thin and is tempered with cemented particles of sand (crushed sandstone? ) . In view
of these features, it seems probable that these sherds are a variation of
the Borger type. In fact, it is possible that many are from the basal
portions of Borger vessels, where the cordmarking is usually faint or
sometimes absent.
Clearly to be differentiated from the above are ten plain sherds
which have fine sand temper, compact, tan-colored paste, thick walls,
light gray exteriors, and dark gray interiors. The exterior surfaces are
smoothed and show no traces of having been cordmarked. No definite
coils are visible, but the regular nature of the fracture planes strongly
suggests the coil technique. The rim and neck sherds indicate that they
are from vessels which, unlike Borger, had short, slightly flaring necks
with rounded lips. Basal sherds may be represented by a few sherds
which have one edge decidedly thicker than the other an d a surface
contour which is different from the body sherds. These sherds suggest
that both conical and rounded bases are present.

Miscellaneous Artifacts
Utilized mussel shells. Twenty mussel shells are ground smooth
along one edge and were possibly used as scrapers or spoons. The only
other worked mussel shell has a groove cut through the umbo. The
purpose of this groove is not known.
Daubing. Two forms of fire-hardened daubing were found at the
site. One group (7 specimens ) is orangish-brown, contains numerous
charcoal flecks , and has preserved small stick and grass impressions.
The others ( 7 specimens ) are thinner and have only grass impressions.
The daubing was found rather widely scattered over the site and
cannot be clearly associated with specific structures.
Paint. Evidence of the use of pigment consists of a fragment of red
ocher and a dolomite palette smeared with red ocher. The ocher fragment is thin, irregularly shaped, and smoothed on one side. The
smoothed surface contains many scratches, presumably produced by
use. The palette is fragmentary, measuring 19.2 em. long and 12.3 em ..
wide, and is heavily coated with ocher on the rougher surface.
Corncob. A small charred corncob fragment was found in the
midden at the northeast corner of the main structure. This specimen,
along with other corn remains from a site ( 41 HC 3, University of

70

TE'XAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

.'
~

fli.
r •

8

'
1,1

.

I
·~

A

c

[·

~

":!
'•
·.l

l

0

0

0

2

3
em.

4

2

4
em.

6

5

Fig . 33. Miscellaneous Worked Bone from the Spring Canyon Site. A, Cut scapula fragment.
B, Bone awl fragment. C, Complete bone awl. D, Cut metatarsal fragment. E, Cut rib fragment . F, Worked bison scapula .

Texas site number; A-61 , Panhandle Plains Museum number ) directly
across the river from the Spring Canyon Site, were examined by Dr.
Hugh Cutler, Executive Director of the Missouri Botanical Garden in
St. Louis, Missouri. Dr. Cutler describes the specimen from the Spring
Canyon Site as a .. . "cob fragment, 14 row, 3.1 mm. kernel thickness,
7 mm. cupule width, glumes short." This specimen is larger than the

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

71

corn remains recovered from Site 41 HC 3 by Jack Hughes of the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum. Dr. Cutler points out this and
other differences when he states, "The cobs [from 41 HC 3] with small
cupules 4.8 mm. and 4 mm. are probably pop corns or very small
flint. The larger 14 row cob [from the Spring Canyon Site] is similar
to Southern Plains corn and Pima-Papago and Basketmaker" ( Cutler,
personal correspondence) .
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
CoMPARISON OF THE THREE SANFORD REsERvoiR SITES

The three Sanford Reservoir sites-Conner, Medford Ranch, and
Spring Canyon-are small village sites distinguished principally by
architectural remains and localized accumulations of domestic refuse.
Two of these, Conner and Medford Ranch, are in small side canyons
tributary to the Canadian, while the third, Spring Canyon, is situated
on the eroded edge of the canyon rim.
All three contained the remains of more or less permanent structures, the lower portions of which were constructed of unshaped dolomite slabs. Two such structures were excavated at the Conner Site,
three at the Medford Ranch Site, and two at the Spring Canyon Site.
Remains of additional buildings were in evidence at the latter two
sites, but were not dug. Only the Medford Ranch Site yielded a structure which might be termed a multi-roomed dwelling (Houses B and
C). Several of the houses, however, did have a small, vaguely definable
room (possible storage bins of dry-laid masonry ) attached to either
the north or south wall. The over-all impression nonetheless is that of
small isolated houses, rather than a contiguous pueblo.
The structures were small (with the exception of the main house
at Spring Canyon ) and were either circular to oval or square to rectangular in floor plan. The wall foundations of the more or less circular
ones, including two at Conner and one at Spring Canyon, were constructed of a single row of vertical slabs which may have been set in a
trench or reinforced with adobe. In each case these were isolated rooms
(i .e., they had no attached structures). By contrast, the square or
rectangular houses-three at the Medford Ranch Site and one at
Spring Canyon-were larger, were approximately oriented with the
cardinal directions, and, at the Medford Ranch Site, each had a small
storage (?) structure attached to one wall. The masonry in these
houses was relatively variable and complex. In one instance, House C
at Medford Ranch, some of the slabs had been disturbed and many

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

details of construction are lacking. However, the data for this house
and for House B suggest a mixture of horizontal and, to a lesser extent,
vertical masonry. The other structure excavated at the Medford Ranch
Site (House A ) was unique in that the slabs appeared to have been
laid horizontally on the edges <?fa rectangular pit (Fig. 9). In addition,
this house had a masonry entranceway (or ventilator shaft) which
extended approximately 6 feet beyond the east wall.
The rectangular house at the Spring Canyon Site, the best preserved
and largest structure excavated by the salvage project, had double
walls. The interior side was composed of massive vertical slabs possibly set in adobe ( Fig. 23 ) , while the exterior wall was made of
smaller horizontally placed slabs (or rubble) set in liberal amounts of
adobe.
In all instances, only the bases of the original walls were constructed
of stone. The slabs found intact and those scattered about the walls of
each structure would, at the most, account for two or possibly three
courses of masonry. The upper portions of the walls and roofs must
surely have been of a more perishable material, perhaps poles and
adobe (jacal ), or poles and hide.
There were few interior features: five postholes and two possible
boiling stone concentrations were located within House A, Medford
Ranch; two storage pits, two boiling stone concentrations, and one
posthole were found in House B, Medford Ranch; a storage pit, and a
worked bison scapula, and a flint flake cache were uncovered in the
small oval structure at Spring Canyon. None, however, had well
defined floors, hearths, or notable accumulations of refuse within the
rooms. In connection with the absence of hearths, it is interesting to
note that none of the houses appeared to have burned.
Several exterior features were revealed by excavations about the
structures. To the north or northeast of each was a refuse accumulation
which was generally small in size, but fairly rich in cultural debris.
Two trash deposits at the Medford Ranch Site and one at the Spring
Canyon Site had accumulated in shallow, basin-shaped depressions.
Other occupational features found include four flake and/ or utilized
flake scraper caches and four boiling stone concentrations at the Medford Ranch Site; and one large, basin-shaped pit and two flake caches
at the Spring Canyon Site. In each case, the caches were merely concentrations of objects. All the storage pits-both inside and outside of
the structures-were unlined. They ranged from oval to circular in
outline and from bell-shaped to basin-shaped in cross section.
Specimens recovered from the excavations include chipped and

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

73

ground stone objects, potsherds, and, with the exception of the Conner
Site, worked bone. The artifact y ield, however, was very low ( 17
specimen s) at the Conner Site and, probably as a result, little diversity
was noted in the specimens from this site. Otherwise, the collections
from each site have much in common. Borger Cordmarked was by far
the most common type of pottery recovered. Of the 933 sherds found
at the sites ( four from Conner, 535 from Medford Ranch, and 394
from Spring Canyon ), 845 are identified as Borger Cordmarked. An
additional 57 sherds from the Medford Ranch Site may be Borger; the
remaining 21 sherds are from an unidentified plain ware (or wares ) .
The most characteristic chipped stone artifacts are notched
(Washita-like types ) and unnotched (Fresno and Young types)
triangular arrow points, well made drills with square or T-shaped
bases, snub-nose and side scrapers, and well-made oval and, less often,
diamond-shaped, bevel-edged knives . Almost all of the chipped stone
artifacts had been fashioned from silicified dolomite, so-called Ali bates
"flint. " The ground stone specimens, not numerous at any of the three
sites, include oval- and rectangular-shaped manos, basin-shaped metates, a sandstone gorget, and several awl sharpeners. Worked shell
and bone were found at the Medford Ranch and Spring Canyon sites,
and include mussel shell scrapers, bone awls, and bison bone hoe
blades, digging stick tips, and squash knives.
CuLT U RAL AFFILIATIONS OF THE SITES

Virtually all of the sites in the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles
having masonry walls (or wall foundations ), evidence of an equal
reliance on agriculture and hunting, notched and unnotched triangular
arrow points, a number of bone tools, and cordmarked pottery have
been included in the Panhandle Aspect (Krieger, 1946: 41-49; Watson, 1950; Suhm, et al., 1954: 66-67) . This aspect, in turn, has been
divided into two foci, Antelope Creek and Optima. The former has
been reported along the Canadian River in the Texas panhandle
(Krieger, 1946 : 41-49 ), while the Optima Focus occurs in the Oklahoma panhandle, on the North Canadian River (Watson, 1950 ) .
The differences between the two foci comprising the Panhandle
Aspect seem to be relatively minor and are based mainly, but not
entirely, on variations in architecture. In general, the Antelope Creek
Focus is characterized (Krieger, 1946: 42-43 ) by fairly large multiroomed pueblos having a considerable amount of stone masonry in the
wall construction. The Optima Focus, known only from excavations

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

at the Stamper Site, is distinguished (Watson, 1950: 48-49 ) by isolated square to rectangular rooms, with single rows of vertical slabs
serving as the base of the walls. Other traits said to differentiate these
foci are innumerated by Watson ( 1950: 52-53 ) and need not be
reviewed here, except to note that they are based largely on the presence or absence of certain minor types of stone, bone, and shell
artifacts.
The Medford Ranch, Conner, and Spring Canyon sites can, without
reservation, be identified with the Panhandle Aspect. The focal affiliations , however, are less clear. In nonarchitectural traits, the three sites
show many similarities with both foci, although only Antelope Creek
Focus pottery (Borger Cordmarked ) was recover ed. On the other hand,
the collections from Sanford Reservoir lack certain Antelope Creek
and Optima focus traits (Krieger, 1946; Suhm, et al. , 1954; Watson ,
1950 ). The distinctive, nonarchitectural, Antelope Creek Focus traits
not found are tubular clay pipes, double-bitted axes, wedge-shaped
manos, serrated edge mussel shells, conch ( ?) shell beads, beamers,
eyed needles, tortoise shell rattles, and lined or plastered storage pits.
Distinctive Optima Focus traits not present are : Stamper Cordmarked
(which differs from Borger mainly in having cambered rims and
incised rim decorations ), triangular knives, mussel shell discs, and
cylindrical beads. While the full significance of the absence of these
traits is not clear, it does seem important that only 1,308 artifacts (933
of which are potsherds ) were recovered from all of the Sanford Reservoir sites. Moreover, many of the above traits are minor or rare types
and, consequently, would not be expected to occur in a small sample.
To summarize the nonarchitectural traits, the collections from the
Medford Ranch, Conner, and Spring Canyon sites do not align perfectly with either focus; however, with the exception of pottery, they
seem to agree slightly better with the Optima Focus.
With respect to architecture, the structures at the three Sanford
Reservoir sites, when examined in detail are considerably different
from those described as typical Antelope Creek Focus (Krieger, 1946:
42-43 ). They also differ-but not as markedly-from the houses at
the Stamper Site (Watson, 1950). These comparisons point out the
difficulty in assigning these sites to a particular focus and, in light of
the available data, any of the following cultural alignments could be
made.
( 1) The sites may be variants of the Optima Focus . While the
geographical location does not preclude assignment to the Optima
Focus, the Sanford sites are nevertheless more than 100 miles from the
nearest known Optima Focus component.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

75

(2 ) These may be earlier or later sites of the.Antelope Creek Focus.
The architectural variations observed may be explained in terms of
time differences, although much time depth has not been definitely
demonstrated for the focus.
( 3 ) These sites may represent outlying farming communities and/ or
areas of cultural lag. Perhaps the concept of the Antelope Creek Focus
has been distorted by a concentration on the larger sites in the area.
While none of the above explanations is perhaps adequate in itself,
a combination of the latter two may be nearer the actual situation.
The three sites appear to be more closely related to the Antelope Creek
than to the Optima Focus. If the architectural discrepancies are ignored, these sites can tentatively be assigned to the Antelope Creek
Focus.
The data from these three sites point out that the Antelope Creek
Focus as a working hypothesis needs further refinement and that
future work in the area should attempt to seek answers to these problems.
TEMPORAL PosiTION OF THE SITES

Before 1932, the workers in the Texas panhandle believed that the
many sites there with masonry ruins were an eastern extension of the
earlyPuebloan (Basketmaker) culture (Holden, 1933: 50 ). This thinking, however, was revised that year when Puebloan trade sherds, dated
at about A.D. 1350, were found in the excavation of the Saddle-Back
Ruin. Since 1932, no new dates have been suggested; for example,
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 72-73 ) estimated the age of this
material to be "A.D. 1300-1450 .. . for the period with Puebloan
trade material. The agricultural settlements," they add, "may have
been established earlier. " This last statement hints at some time depth
in the Panhandle Aspect (specifically the Antelope Creek Focus ). In
the following, a highly tentative--and somewhat tenuous-attempt is
made at a temporal ordering of several sites in Texas (two from Sanford Reservoir ) and Oklahoma. This approach is based on the relative
frequency of unnotched triangular points and the assumption that this
style, in very late times, replaced notched triangular points. If correct,
then a site with 25% plain triangular points would be earlier than one
with 75% plain triangular points.
The evidence-admittedly still scant-favoring a late position for
the plain triangular points (Fresno type) is derived principally from
the southern plains, where historic and protohistoric sites have yielded
more plain than notched triangular points and, conversely, where
earlier prehistoric sites have yielded more notched than unnotched

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

triangular arrow points (Wedel, 1959; Duffield and Jelks, 1961 ) . As a
possible check on this sequence, arrow point frequencies for several
Washita River (Lawton, 1958; Oaks, 1953; Schmitt, 1950; Schmitt
and Toldan, 1953; Sharrock, 1959a, 1959b, 1961 ) and Custer (Brighton, 1951; Buck, 1959; Gallaher, 1951 ) Focus sites in central and
western Oklahoma have been examined (Fig. 34).
Percent plain Total
triangles arrow points

Sites

440
33
109

70.2
66.6
51.3
39.5
35.7
33.3
29 . 1

Grant
Thomas
Brol.-.'11

Lacy
Van Schuyver
Willingham
Lee

38

14
24
117

Fig . 34. Triangular arrow point frequencies in Washita River Focus sites.

In the Washita River Focus it was found that the popularity of plain
triangular points increased gradually from 29.1% of the total arrow
points in the older Lee Site (Sharrock, 1961: 30, Fig. 34) to 70% in
the more recent Grant Site. In the Custer Focus, plain triangular
arrow points increased from 22% in the earlier Phillips Site to 66.7%
in the later Shahan I Site (Buck, 1959: 30). Unfortunately, the arrow
point sample is limited in some of the sites in this latter sequence but
nevertheless the trend is convincing.
Assuming that the same arrow point sequence existed in the Texas
panhandle just to the west of the Oklahoma foci, it might be possible
to arrange temporally some of the excavated sites. Currently only
three sites, the Medford Ranch Site, the Spring Canyon Site, and CR-1
(Glasscock and Glasscock, 1955), have been reported in sufficient
detail to enable a comparison to be made. The small Conner Site has
TABLE 1
Relative percentage of arrow point forms in various sites
Medford Ran ch Site
No.
Percent

Plain trianguar
Side-notched
Young points
Side-notched with
basal notch
Miscellaneous
Totals

3
9
5

1
18

16.66
50.00
27.77

5.55
99.98%

No.

625
637
151
15
14
1442

CR-1
Percent

Spring Canyon Site
No.
Percent

43.34
44.17
10.47

15
2
13

50
6.66
43 .33

1.04
.97
99.99%

30

99.99%

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

77

only three arrow points (all Fresno) and it is excluded from this
analysis (Table 1).
Judging from these data, the Spring Canyon Site is the youngest of
the three while the Medford Ranch Site is the oldest.
Again it should be emphasized that this ordering is highly tentative
and until further work can validate or repudiate this approach no firm
reliance should be made on the sequence. Perhaps as more sites in the
area are worked, this approach to temporal ordering may prove fruitful.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

From the inception of the project, various individuals and institutions have given valuable assistance and co-operation. To all who have
had a part in this undertaking I am deeply indebted, particularly to
the following: Mr. Jack T. Hughes from the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society Museum at Canyon, Texas. Jack Hughes made several
visits to the digs and offered valuable suggestions on various approaches
to our archeological problems in the area and, in addition, he furnished
corn remains recovered from Site 41 HC 3. He also made available
the materials that the Panhandle-Plains Museum expedition recovered
from the Spring Canyon Site after the completion of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project dig. Dr. Hugh Cutler, Executive Director of
the Missouri Botanical Garden identified the corn from the Spring
Canyon Site. Mr. Hall Medford gave us permission to excavate two of
the sites (41 HC 10 and 41 HC 20) on his ranch. The personnel of the
Bureau of Reclamation field office at Borger and the main office in
Amarillo were very co-operative in helping locate landowners and
permitting us the use of maps and aerial photographs. Messrs. K. C.
Travis and C. B. Wade, citizens of Stinnett, Texas, provided conversation during many of the evenings and helped make our visit to the
area an enjoyable one.
Thanks also go to the crew-James Robert Conner, Bill Robert
Harrison, Dan Herman Jackson, Kenneth R. Lane, and Gary G.
Tunnell, students at West Texas State College; Mark Lemual Parsons
and Jack Daniel Scurlock, students at The University of Texas-who
were instrumental in recovering the data presented in this report.
Special acknowledgment is due assistant archeologist W. A. (Bill)
Davis, who was plagued with the minutiae of recording and other
excavation problems.
Finally, my sincere thanks for constructive suggestions and advice
are due the staff archeologists of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project in Austin, especially Edward B. Jelks, whose fund of knowl-

78

TEXAS ARCH E OLOGICAL SOCIETY

edge of Texas archeology was frequently tapped in our discussions of
the problems of the area.
ADDENDUM

After the Texas Archeological Salvage Project completed their investigations at the Spring Canyon Site, the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society Museum excavated a midden area to the northeast of the
main structure (Fig. 21). The specimens recovered by the PanhandlePlains Historical Society Museum were not available at the time of the
original analysis, but have recently been loaned to The University of
Texas. While a detailed description of these specimens is not possible
at the present time, the more interesting artifacts are briefly noted below.
Among the arrow points are six Fresno, four Washita-like, four
Young and four unclassified fragments. Two additional arrow points
deserve special mention. One of these is the basal portion of a Washitalike point which has been broken across the blade at the upper edge of
the notches. The distal part of the remaining stub has been reworked
into a short, blunted tip. The other unusual arrow point is a narrow,
unnotched triangular specimen made from a thin flake. The basal
corners of this point protrude from the blade, and the left edges of the
blade (tip oriented upwards ) are beveled while the right edges are unmodified.
One barbed dart point fragment with slightly concave blade edges
was recovered. Both the proximal and distal ends are missing, but the
stem of this specimen appears to have been formed by corner notches.
Included in the unifacially worked implements are three snub-nose
scrapers, one of which is unusually small. This small specimen is made
from a narrow, thin flake, and is worked along all edges of one face .
From the bit end, where it measures .8 em. wide, the lateral edges
taper (specimen 3. 7 em. long ) to a sharply pointed base. Other chipped
stone artifacts include one diamond-shaped, alternately beveled knife
(9 em. long), two complete ovate knives, 17 ovate knife fragments,
four drills, seven triangular fla·k e scrapers, and nine utilized flake
scrapers .
Pecked and ground stone artifacts are represented by two grinding
slab fragments, two manos, two awl sharpeners made of unshaped
pieces of sandstone, five hammerstones, one pestle-like hammerstone,
and a thick ( 3 em. ), chipped and partially ground stone disc that varies
from 10 to 11 em. in diameter.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

79

Bone artifacts include six small needle-like awl fragments , one short
( 4.5 em. long) metapodial awl, one digging stick tip fragment ( articular end) , one possible squash knife fragment, and part of the working
edge of a bison scapula, perhaps from a hoe.
Six worked shell specimens were also discovered. One has a longitudinal slit in the umbo, while the ventral edges of all examples are
ground smooth, evidently use. On the interior of several of these
shells are scratches which are generally oriented parallel with the long
axis of the shells . These scratches suggest that the shells may have
served both as scrapers and as knives .
No attempt has been made to analyze, or even to tabulate, the large
number of cordmarked sherds found by the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society Museum. Three sherds, however, are interesting since they
provide information not recovered by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project. One of these is an unperforated cordmark pottery disc which
measures 4 em. in diameter; another is a sherd from the neck-shoulder
area of a small cordmarked vessel. The vessel represented by the latter
sherd, like some of its larger Borger Cardmarked counterparts ( Suhm,
et al., 1954: 390-392), was globular (ca. 8.5 em. in maximum diameter) with a short, slightly flaring rim. The fracture lines of this sherd
suggest that the vessel wAs mAde hy the coil method. The third sherd
in this group is small ( 1.8 em. in diameter) and has impressions of at
least four rows of coiled basketry. The coil impressions measure .6 em.
from edge to edge.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1.
Blair, W . Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,.
pp. 93-117.
Brighton, Harold D.
1951. Archaeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 164-187.
Buck, Arthur Dewey
1959. The Custer Focus of the Southern Plains. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 1-31.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 4, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gallaher, Art
1951. The Goodman I Site, in Custer County, Oklahoma . Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 188-216.
Glasscock, Keith, and Alma Glasscock
1955. Report on Cr-1, An Indian Campsite in Moore County, Texas. PanhandlePlains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 96-106.
Holden, W. C.
1929. Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest T exas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1, pp. 23-35.
1933. Excavation of Saddle-Back Ruin. Bulletin of the T exas At·cheological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, pp. 39-52.
Honea, Kenneth H .
ms.
Techniques and Analysis of Stone Flaking. Unpublished manuscript.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publication No. 4640.
Lawton, Sherman P.
1958. The Max Thomas Site, Gd-4. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society, Vol. 6, pp. 83-88.
Moorehead, Warren K.
1921. Recent Explorations in Northwestern Texas. American Anthropologist,
Vol. 23, No.1, pp. 1-11.
Oaks, John Underhill
1953. The Lacy Site, Garvin County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 1, pp. 17-24.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of T exas. Medallion Papers, Vol. 17.
Schmitt, Karl
1950. The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 21, pp. 69-89 .
Schmitt, Karl , and Raymond Toldan, Jr.
1953. The Brown Site, Gd-1, Grady County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 24, pp. 141-176.
Shaeffer, James B.
1958. The Alibates Flint Quarry, Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 2,
pp. 189-191.
Sharrock, Floyd W.
1959a. Preliminary Report on the Van Shuyver Site, Pottawotami County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 33-40.
1959b. Test Excavations at the Willingham Site, Ml-5, McClain County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 41-50.
1961. The Grant Site of the Washita River Focus. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 1-66.
Studer, Floyd V.
1931. Archeological Survey of the North Panhandle of Texas. Bulletin of the

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

81

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 3, pp. 70- 75.
1934. Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 6, pp. 80-96.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Watson, Virginia
1950. The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 21,
pp. 7-68.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin, No. 174.
Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas

