BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Vol. 35 I Published by the Society I Austin, Texas, 1964

·

Offtce of the State Areheo!og!

.·~~·;. . . ._.___ Library

~-.,-~4!o-: .;'• -~ · · · : - ~ .

'

"

__ -:S
. ,(

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man and
the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement
of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of researches
incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1964
President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
President Emeritus: CYRUS N. R,w (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAMES H. WoRD (Floydada)
Secretary-Treasurer: DoRRIS L. 0LDS (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL A. CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W. C. HoLDEN (Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), IsABELLE R.
LoBDELL (Fort Worth), and E. A. WHITE (El Paso).
Trustees: 0. L. SrMs (San Angelo), MARDITH K. ScHUETZ (San Antonio), and
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CHARLES W. BANDY (Brownfield), JAy C. BLAINE
(Richardson), CHARLES N. BoLLICH (Beaumont), ADA BRANCH (Victoria),
W. A. DAVIS (Jasper), JoHN HENDRICK (El Paso), ELBERT D. HELM (Fort
Worth), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.), and DoN R. WILLIAMS (San Marcos).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership
at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5.00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin, Texas 78712. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is
the same.

Cover design by Mark L. Parsons; taken from petroglyph panel at the Verbena
Site, Garza County, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, I 991

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Editor: Dee Ann Story ,
Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D . Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1964

Office of the ~tate Archeologist J·
"" . .. ......

~;.1

--

..._____ Library

I

Table of Contents
Artic(es
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacada
By Jane Holden Kelley .

1

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield .

19

Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas
By Curtis D. Tunnell .

83

Indian Skeletal Material from the Jim Arnold Site
By Thomas W. McKern

95

The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas
By Frank A. Runkles .

101

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher
County, Texas
By Cyrus N. Ray and Edward B. Jelks .

127

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor
Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas
By Elton R. Prewitt

143

West Indian Seal Remains from Two Historic Sites in
Coastal South Texas
By Gerald G. Raun

189

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of
Corpus Christi, Texas
By W. S. Fitzpatrick, Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N.
Campbell .

193

A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

205

The Zanonian Springs Site: An Archaic-Nee-American
Site in McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Texas
By W. A. Davis and Helen Ruth Horn

213

Obituary
Gustav Edmund Cranz, Jr. ( 1908-1963 )

251

Book Reviews
Forrester, Robert E., The Ham Creek Site
By Dorris L. Olds .

253

Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol. 1
By Dorris L. Olds .

254

Hester, James J., Early Navajo Migrations and
Acculturation in the Southwest
By Richard E. Ross .

256

Dutton, Bertha P., Sun Father's Way, The Kiva Murals
of Kuaua
By William W. Newcomb .

257

Comments on the Archeology of
the Llano Estacado *
JANE HOLDEN KELLEY
ABSTRACT
Although the Llano Estacada is relatively rich in prehistoric remains, there have
been very few systematic investigations into the archeology of the area. Moreover,
the bulk of the work done thus far has concentrated on Early Man sites. The later
materials have been much ignored and are known principally from surface collections made by amateurs. From the point of view of the archeologist, one of the major
problems is the scarcity of stratified sites; many of the known sites occur in wind
blown areas where artifacts are almost invariably mixed.

THE AREA

The geographic area that is designated as the Llano Estacado (or
Staked Plains) covers some 50,000 square miles, being bounded on the
north by the Canadian River, on the west by the Pecos River, and on
the east by the erosional escarpment known as the Caprock; the southern boundary fades into the Edwards Plateau (Fig. 1) . This region
has remarkably little in the way of topographic relief. Shallow surface
lakes are a dominant feature in the flat expanse, as are the shallow
valleys that form the upper reaches of the Red, Brazos and Colorado
rivers. Short grass is the dominant form of vegetation over much of
the area, with the valleys and canyons occasionally supporting some
heavier growth of cottonwood, hackberry, and other plants that need
more moisture than the Llano Estacada normally offers. The fauna,
prior to 1880, was always dominated by large herd animals such as
bison and antelope. Smaller animals such as fox, coyote, prairie dogs
and rabbits were also common.
REVIEW OF ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

There has been little in the way of professional archeological field
work in the area, and what has been done has emphasized studies of
Early Man. The extensive work of amateur archeologists is largely
• This paper, submitted in 1958, was originally scheduled to appear in a proposed
Part II of "A Review of Texas Archeology."

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 1 . The Llano Estacado and adjacent regions . After A. K. Lebeck, 1922 ,

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACADO

3

unpublished and is only now being put into an organized frame of
reference. Since the bulk of the systematized information is published
elsewhere, only a brief summary will be presented here.
PALEO- INDIAN STAGE

Six of the major published Early Man sites of North America fall
within this area (Fig. 2 ) . It should be noted that virtually every surface lake and every valley have produced finds of Early Man materials, but these finds are largely unpublished.
Blackwater Locality No. 1 is located between Portales and Clovis,
in eastern New Mexico, and has produced artifacts from five horizons
(Sellards, 1952 ) . ( 1) The oldest of these horizons is represented by
the Llano or Clovis complex which has Clovis points in association
with extinct fauna, of which the most diagnostic form is the elephant.
(2) The next cultural horizon is the Folsom horizon, characterized
by the fluted Folsom points in association with Bison antiquus in a diatomaceous earth. (3) Above the Folsom horizon is that of the Portales
Complex, typified by parallel flake points; two radiocarbon dates of
6230 ± 150 (Sample 0-169) and 6300 ± 150 (Sample 0-170 ) years
ago have been obtained on associated bison bones (Krieger, 195 7: 323) .
( 4) Little attention has been paid to the more recent occupations; however, Archaic stemmed and notched points from the upper portion of
the vertically jointed sand were found in association with a burned·
bone (Sample 0-157 ) that gave a date of 4950 ± 150 years (Wendorf
and Krieger, 1959: 77). ( 5) Southwestern pottery that can be dated
ca. 1100-1400 A. D. is found in the uppermost aeolian sand.
The Lubbock Reservoir Site, near Lubbock, Texas, is similar to
Blackwater Locality No. 1 in its stratigraphy (Sellards, 1952) . The
lower sand at Lubbock corresponds in faunal content to the Llano or
Clovis level ·at Blackwater No. 1; however, the diagnostic Clovis points
have not been encountered in situ to date, a large worked flake being
the only tool that has been found. Folsom points come from the overlying diatomaceous earth in association with Bison antiquus. A radiocarbon date of 9883 ± 350 was obtained on charred bison bones (Sample C-558) from the lower diatomite (Libby, 1955: 107) and a date of
9700 ± 450 years ago came from freshwater snail shells (Sample
L-283g) from the middle of the diatomite zone (Camp bell, 1961: 316).
Descriptions of the artifacts from the upper four strata have not yet
been published.
At the Scharbauer Site, fragments of a fossilized human skull were

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

found in a blowout on the Scharbauer ranch south of Midland in 1953
(Wendorf, et al., 1955; Wendorf and Krieger, 1959). Excavations at
the site indicated that the basal white lacustrine sand was overlain by
a gray sand, which in turn, was overlain by red and tan aeolian sands.
Evidence of antiquity, however, does not rest primarily on stratigraphy, association or typology; rather, the possibility f<;>r antiquity depends more directly on a series of chemical and physical tests that
have been run on the various bones and samples of caliche pebbles.
A bewildering and inconsistent array of dates from the Scharbauer
Site has caused Wendorf and Krieger ( 1959) to advance three alternative interpretations of the placement of the site in relation to other
South Plains Early Man sites. ( 1) Their " Group A scheme," which is
the one they favor, utilizes the radiocarbon date of 13,400 ± 1200 B. P .
( Sample L-304C ) for the gray sand to equate this stratum with the
gray sand of the Clovis and Lubbock localities, thereby assigning it to
the Llano or Clovis period. The Folsom date of 9883 ± 350 B. P. from
the Lubbock Site, the Portales dates from Blackwater No. 1 of 6230 ±
150 B. P . and 6300 ± 150 B. P., and the 4950 ± 150 date for Archaic
materials in the jointed sand at Blackwater are used to make a regional
picture interpreted by Wendorf and Krieger as implying a rapid extinction of the large game animals, and as assigning a short life to the
Folsom "culture. " (2 ) The "Group B scheme" uses the most recent
dates from the Schar bauer Site, 8670 ± 600 B. P . (combined samples
M-389, M-390, M-391 ) for the white sand and 7100 ± 1000 B. P .
(Sample M-411) for the gray sand. This means that the arid periods
postulated for the gray and red sands would be post-Pleistocene.
Furthermore, this involves a late survival of extinct fauna, such as the
Capromeryx antelope. ( 3 ) "Group C" uses the oldest radiocarbon date
from the Scharbauer Site, 20,400 ± 900 B. P . (Sample L-347 ) obtained
on caliche pebbles from the gray sand. This allows a greater antiquity
for the Clovis period and a more gradual extinction of the large animals. For this scheme, Wendorf and Krieger accept the carbon-14 date
from the Plainview Site of 9800 ± 500 B. P . (Sample L-303 ) suggesting that the Lubbock Folsom dates may be too late.
Two other interpretations are possible. On the one hand, one can
discredit the dates, as Wormington has done ( 1957: 246 ) , since they
are apparently so conflicting. On the other hand, it is just possible that
some or all of the dates are essentially correct, but that the associations
are not valid. Assigning a radiocarbon date to associated materials or
to geological strata involves the assumption that you are positive about
the point of origin of the specimen dated. It is possible that more mix-

ARCHEOLOGY OF L LANO ESTACADO

5

Fig . 2 . Excavated Paleo-Ind ian sites on the Llano Estacado . !Midland Site is synonymous.
with the Scharbaur Ranch Site). Map drawn by Pat Allgood .

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ing of faunal remains and caliche pebbles occurred at the Scharbauer
Site than was possible to recognize under blowout conditions.
The San Jon Locality in northeastern New Mexico has produced a
Folsom fragment that was apparently weathering out of the same
layer that yielded a San Jon point (Roberts, 1942) . Since only one
San Jon point was found in the type site, and since it falls within the
range of the points from the carbonaceous silt stratum at Blackwater
Locality No. 1, Wormington ( 1957: 113 ) places the San Jon point in
the Portales Complex. Parallel flaked points of the Scottsbluff type
occur in the overlying Zone 2 ( Sand Canyon Formation) with modern
Bison bison. Wormington ( 195 7: 123 ) feels that these points are
probably intrusive since Scottsbluff points are usually associated with
extinct bison.
Milnesand, in eastern New Mexico, is a one period site representing
a bison kill. No definite species identification has been made since
skulls were not found in Sellards' excavations, although he was able
to demonstrate that the bison were larger than modern forms (Sellards,
1955: 336-344). The points were given the name of the type site, and
closely resemble the Plainview type, with which they were probably
contemporaneous.
The Plainview Site, located at the south margin of Running Water
Draw ·close to Plainview, Texas, is a bone bed of Bison antiquus that
has been exposed by commercial caliche operations. Since the bone
bed is at the foot of a bluff, it is postulated that a bison stampede over
the bluff resulted in this concentration of bones. Eighteen points were
found in association with the bison, as well as a scraper (Sellards,
et al., 1947) . Krieger did the analysis of the points, provisionally assigning them to a single type, Plainview .
PosT PALEo-INDIAN REMAINS

There is a noteworthy scarcity of literature dealing with post-Early
Man archeological remains; however, it is possible to say that these
materials are abundantly represented in the amateur collections, and
that these collections are the best sample of South Plains artifacts
available at this time. The South Plains Archaeological Society is currently making site cards and photographing material from each known
site, with some 35 sites recorded at this time. The file will reside in
the Texas Technological College Museum. It is hoped that in the near
future a survey of artifact types and localities can be made from the
information that is now being gathered.

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACADO

7

As of 1959, less than 15 articles dealing with individual finds fro~
various parts of this large area have appeared over the last 30 years.
Five of these articles describe sites on which some excavation has been
done. Holden (1938 ) worked at Blue Mountain Rockshelter close to
Odessa, where the relatively thin deposits produced an extinct horse
bone in the lowest level and artifacts that fall generally into the
Archaic and more recent range . Quinn and Holden ( 1949 ) report on
the excavation of two small rockshelters in Borden and Dawson counties; and Dick ( 1953) dug two rockshelters close to Tucumcari, New
Mexico. Wheat (1955 ) published on a 1939 W. P. A. project on
Johnson Creek where two small, apparently late sites (an unnamed
burial shelter and the Johnson Creek Site) were excavated.
Surface collections have been reported by Watts ( 1939 ) for Rich
Lake, by Jennings ( 1952) for Mound Lake, and by Pearce (1936)
for the Sand-hill area of Lamb and Bailey counties.
Descriptions of flint caches from the northern Llano Estacada have
been made by Green ( 1955 ) and Witte ( 1942) . Amateur collectors
found a cache of blades at Moore 's Lake which has not hitherto been
reported in print. The find of 38 blades was made in February, 1955.
Most of the blades are oval, fairly thick specimens, and some eight to•
ten of the blades have side-notches close to the base. Lengths range
from three to seven inches.
Burials are among the most common finds made by amateur archeologists, but surprisingly few such finds have been described in print.
Newcomb (1955 ) documents a historical burial excavated by Girl
Scouts in the Yellowhouse drainage; Wheat ( 1955) briefly notes two·
fragmentary burials in a shelter close to the Johnson Creek Site; and
Quinn and Holden (1949 ) report an infant burial in Moore's rockshelter.
Two historic burials are on display at the Museum in Lubbock, and
since neither has been published, and so little is known of this period,
a brief description of each is included here.
Civilian Conservation Corps workers reported a burial close to·
Lamesa in 1938. The individual is probably a female about 25 years
old. The body was tightly flexed and laid on the left side. In the grave
were seven iron bracelets, an incised bone tube, two bison bone
fleshers, six pentagonal blue glass beads of about Yz inch in diameter,
and a piece of% inch iron pipe some 20 inches long. In the abdominal
region there was a metal tablespoon and what may have been a long
metal knife.
In 1955, Mr. Claud McKaskle of Midland found a burial in a dry

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shelter at the edge of the Caprock close to the town of Stanton. This
burial is in an exceptionally good state of preservation. The body of
this middle aged male had been placed under a pile of caliche pebbles,
and was wrapped in several layers of robes. The outer wrapping was a
buffalo robe; inside this was a deer skin robe; and inside this was a blue
and natural striped Navajo blanket of the sort made between 1800 and
1850. Next to the upper part of the body was a commercially woven
blue cloth that was decorated with white beads sewed about 1 Yz inches
apart along the border. The individual was wearing a bear claw necklace around his neck, rings on his right hand made of metal, and five
iron bracelets around the upper right arm. A silver concho buckle
was placed on his forehead . He was accompanied by his tools and
weapons, including a straight wooden bow some 3 Yz feet long, two
flint knives , an elbow pipe with a cane stem, a leather paint container,
a stick some seven inches long that was beveled at each end and decorated with incision, and a one-stop bone whistle. A perforated walnut
could have served as a button or decoration. At the foot of the burial
was a slightly charred wooden bowl some six inches in diameter and
21lz inches deep. This bowl contained numerous glass beads in blue,
red, and white. Apparently a tooled leather saddle had been placed
over the burial bundle; on one of the leather leg pieces it is possible to
see a rider on a horse tooled into the design. This burial is of interest for
the unusual state of preservation of perishable materials. One may
assume that it is a middle to late 19th century burial, probably predating 1880 when the Indians were effectively removed from the area.
HISTORIC INFORMATION

Bolton ( 1949 ) has traced Coronado's path after he left winter quarters at a New Mexico pueblo. He charts the route as crossing the northern Llano Estacado, following the Canadian River east, tuming south,
and coming to a series of deep canyons that he identifies as Tule and
Palo Duro canyons. If Bolton is correct, Coronado crossed the northern
part of the area under consideration in the present paper. Holden
(1944 ), using the Relacion del Suceso, routes Coronado's group across
the Southern Plains. In any event, the narrative of Coronado's expedition furnishes valuable information about life on these plains in 1541.
Four or five days after Coronado and his men crossed the Pecos and
began their march eastward, they began to meet buffalo; however, it
was four or five more day s before they reached the fantastically large
herds on the plains. At a place which Bolton locates just west of the

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACADO

9

New Mexico-Texas line close to the Canadian River breaks, and which
Holden located on Blackwater Draw, the Spaniards met a tribe called
the Querechos, so called because of their trade with the Queres pueblos
to the west. They lived off of the buffalo entirely:
With the skins they build their houses; with the skins they clothe and shoe themselves; from the skins they make ropes and also obtain wool. From the sinews they
make thread, with which they sew their clothing and likewise their tents. From the
bones they shape awls, and the dung they use for firewood, since there is no other
fuel in all that land. The bladders serve as jugs and drinking vessels. They sustain
themselves on the flesh of the animals, eating it slightly roasted . .. and sometimes
uncooked. Taking it in their teeth, they pull with one hand; with the other they
hold a large flint knife and cut off mouthfuls, swallowing it half chewed, like birds.
They eat raw fat without warming it, and drink the blood just as it comes from
the cattle . .. They have no other food. (Bolton, 1949: 246)

Castaneda, the chronicler of the Coronado expedition, continues his
description of the Querechos, saying they are a gentle people, skilled
in the use of signs, and trading extensively with the pueblos to the
west to whom they traded buffalo meat and hides for maize, pottery
and cloth. They lived in buffalo hide tepees, these mobile dwellings
being transported by dog travois.
The second group that the Spanish encountered were the Teyas,
who were enemies of the Querechos. They had a similar dependence
on the buffalo. They are reported to have been tall, fine looking people
who tatooed their faces. Tall white tents were their homes, and a
Spanish exploratory expedition reported taking three days to pass
through one of their large tepee villages in a canyon. The Teyas seem
to have had their main camps in the tributaries along the canyons,
sending hunting parties after buffalo. They used the wild vegetable
products that were available, frijoles (possibly mesquite beans?)
grapes, and plums are mentioned (Bolton, 1949: 263) . It is possible
that the large camp that the Spanish noted was an annual gathering
of the tribes, rather than a constant concentration of population.
The occupants of the South Plains during late historic times were
the Comanche, Kiowa, Kiowa-Apache, and the Lipan Apache. All of
these peoples were true horse nomads, and in some cases their place of
origin prior to the acquisition of the horse can be given with reasonable
accuracy. The Comanche were a Shoshone group from the Wyoming
area; the Lipan Apache were a branch of the Southwestern Athapascans; the Kiowa-Apache were another Apache group who attached
themselves to the Kiowa, taking over Kiowa culture to a large extent,
although retaining their Athapascan language. The history of the

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Kiowa is less well known although their linguistic affiliations appear
to lie to the west, with the Tanoan speaking Pueblo Indians.
CLASSIFICATION OF SITES

Site classification can be approached from several points of view.
For instance, if one considers the activities carried on at the site by the
aboriginal inhabitants, the major categories would be campsite, kill
site, and sites representing various specialized activities such as flint
mining. Since this was always a hunting-gathering area prior to the
advent of modern farming, these activities were practiced over several
thousand years, and to date we are unable to differentiate groups on
the basis of subsistence patterns. It is, however, probable that eventually we will be able to see differences in subsistence through time,
such as greater or lesser dependence on large game, small game, or
gathering.
A more meaningful classification of site types approaches the problem from the point of view of the archeologist, and seven broad categories result in this scheme.
( 1) Stratified sites, such as Lubbock Reservoir and Blackwater No. 1,
seem to be fairly rare. Both of these are in lacustrine deposits that
formed in lakes located in older stream beds, and are situated in favorable locations that have not been subjected to severe wind action.
(Z) Sites which represent a single occupation and which are at least
partially buried are important from the standpoint of archeological
interpretation, since materials are not mixed as they are in deflation
or blowout areas. Wheat's ( 1955 ) Johnson Creek locale is such a site.
This category is differentiated from that of stratified sites because it
is felt that sites like Lubbock Reservoir are rare and produce a specialized form of information about a sequence while often not supplying
as complete an artifact assemblage and cultural context as some single
occupation sites that have not been subjected to deflation conditions.
( 3 ) Deflation basins which contain modern playa lakes, and also
the shallower basins that hold no water at the present time, seem to
have been camping centers throughout the period of human occupation.
Most of these remains have been surface finds exposed by wind action,
and it is common to find Clovis, Folsom, Midland, and Plainview
points on the same surface as Pueblo IV pottery. There is the possibility of obtaining stratigraphic information at some of the lakes; but this
would undoubtedly entail a large excavation that would yield only a
few artifacts.

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO EST ACADO

11

( 4) Blowout sites are numerous in the sand dunes that blanket the
western and southern part of the area. These blowouts are the result of
local wind action, as are the deflation basins; but the two categories
are differentiated because the deflation basins or playa lakes are larger
and one is more likely to find artifacts weathering out of their primary
position in the playas than in the sand dune blowouts. Water would
seem to have been a problem to people camping in the dunes. We
know that the water table was periodically high, producing small
lakes ; also, it is possible to dig for water, and wells may have been a
major water source, as indicated by the wells in the post-Portales
period at the Blackwater Locality (Evans, 1951: 1-9). The blowout
sites show a mixture of materials of all ages on the surface.
( 5 ) Rockshelters are found at the east edge of the cap rock where
wind and water erosion have carved recesses in the exposed vertical
walls. Many of these shelters contain pictographs and some are so
shaped as to allow a shallow accumulation of fill. Burials are often
found in these localities. Shallow shelters also occur on the plains at
locations where a vertical escarpment has formed; for example, there
are small shelters in the bluff that forms the west side of Yellow Lake
and also in the canyon walls of some of the drainages toward the
eastern part of the plains where the valleys tend to become better
defined. Preservation of perishable materials sometimes occurs in
these shelters.
(6) Isolated burials are found throughout the area, often located in
shelters or along the edge of promontories. It may be that burials are
more often associated with occupational refuse than our present information indicates, since most investigations have tended to ignore data
that pertain to anything except the removal of the skeleton and accompanying artifacts.
( 7) Miscellaneous sites. This category includes several types of sites
-such as caches of raw flint or blades, or flint mines-that are rare in
occurrence, but worth differentiating as a separate category.
SPECIAL FIELD PROBLEMS

The wind is an integral part of the west Texas scene. The result of
wind action is one of the major problems facing field workers in the
region, and it creates problems in interpretation that are often difficult
to unravel. To begin with, it is necessary to have an understanding of
some of the things that the wind is capable of doing. Wind can uncover
objects, and it can cover them up again. It can move objects, even

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

relatively large ones, laterally across an active dune surface. In the
special situation known as a blowout, all objects heavier than sand are
let down on the surface of the deflation area, while the smaller sand
particles are blown out from under them.
It will readily be apparent that if wind action can alter in so many
ways the context in which artifacts are found, the interpretation of
things found under these conditions must proceed with caution. One
must be able to recognize deflation areas so as to appreciate the limitations imposed. A blowout collection is sure to be a mixed one.
While many localities show mixed collections, and therefore the
archeological techniques of studying stratigraphic sequence and association are useless, it is still possible to extract valuable information on
sequence by using auxiliary methods. As an example, the Scharbauer
Site at Midland had all of the unfortunate aspects of a blowout site,
and yet, because of the importance of the human skeletal material,
the investigators applied other tests of antiquity. Thus the chemical
tests run on bone established a rough scale of age, and a careful analysis of the geologic situation gave further clues as to the ordering of
materials.
In regard to geologic analysis, it is here that I feel the opinion of an
expert is essential. The geology of the dune area , as well as that of the
various deflation basins, is not well understood. The few published
reports on the ages and climatic significance of the different sands and
clays are out of date, according to recent field studies. For instance, the
Judkins red sand figures prominently in the literature as a late Pleistocene feature; however, it has recently been suggested that much of the
sand that has been called Judkins is not late Pleistocene at all (F. E.
Green, ms. ) . Incidentally, the fact that a sand is colored red is not a
sure test of its antiquity; there are several mechanisms by which sand
can become red, and some of these mechanisms are not well understood.
STATUS OF ARCHEOLOGY ON THE LLANO EST ACADO

It has been the assumption of many professionals and amateurs that
there was a neatly compartmentalized sequence which ran Clovis,
Folsom, Plainview, Portales, undifferentiated Archaic, and Recent. In
general, this sequence seems to be valid; however, certain caution
should be sounded. A careful examination of the published photographs
and drawings for any one established type shows a range of point
forms. This is in keeping with the concept of a type as a population

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACADO

13

defined by a range of characteristics, rather than individual specimens
which conform to an ideal set of characteristics. It is expectable that
there will be some overlapping of two types when both are determined
by similar technical traditions. Technical traditions typically have a
long life, often being employed in making several artifact types; for
instance, basal fluting, basal grinding, and parallel flaking are all
techniques that have been used in a variety of point types. Convergence
of the characteristics that distinguish one type from another is theoretically possible at widely differing points in time and space, if the
same technical traditions are used in both. For this reason it may be
difficult to assign a particular specimen to a type on formal grounds
alone.
Several dating techniques have been employed in this area. Earliest
ideas were based on stratigraphic sequence of geological deposits,
faunal remains and point types. The Blackwater Locality has been the
main reference point for the area, since the complete sequence has
been known there since the 1930's. Now that commercial gravel operations have almost destroyed that locality, the sister site of Lubbock
Reservoir will undoubtedly become the pivotal point, as it is still possible to obtain further information there. Correlations of climatic
events and point types in the South Plains with those outside the region
have also influenced the formulation of estimated dates. Radiocarbon
dates have tended to substantiate the sequence as previously established. The Plainview date of 9800 ± 500 is uncomfortably close to
the Lubbock Folsom dates of 9700 ± 450 and 9833 ± 350; however,
the recently published date from Lindenmeier of 10,780 ± 375 years
ago indicates that the Lubbock Folsom is close to the end of the Folsom
period (Haynes and Agogino, 1960) . Radiocarbon dates from the
Scharbauer Site are difficult to interpret, but the rest of the dates from
the Llano Estacada seem to form a reasonable framework.
The basis of most correlations has been an interpretation of geologic
deposits in ecological and climatological terms, so that it is actually
climatic reconstructions that are being compared, not actual deposits.
This is an important distinction, because a considerable margin of
error is possible in dating by climatic correlation. First, it is possible
to be mistaken in the climatic reconstruction, if the data are drawn
from too small an area. For instance, at the present time it is possible
to find ecological conditions that vary from true bog to extensive dunes
within the area under consideration, so that a climatic reconstruction
based on one site could be misleading. Second, once the climatic reconstruction has been accomplished, there is still the problem of assigning

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the local climatic sequence to a regional or even continental sequence
of climatic events. Unfortunately, there was more than one time in
late Pleistocene and Recent climatic history when there was a dry
interval followed by a more moist period. More refined information is
required, such as is provided by pollen percentages, composition of the
invertebrate population, absolute dating, and so forth.
Future orientation of work should include more detailed studies
from allied sciences. Problems of a geologic nature include constructing
a more complete framework of geologic events and tying together the
different types of information that are now available, such as correlating playa deposits with sand sequences. A firmer grasp of what is
implied in ecological and climatic reconstruction is badly needed, inasmuch as this is the backbone of much Early Man research, not only
on the South Plains but all over the New World. Paleobotanists,
paleontologists, and the many specialists in the emerging techniques
of dating are essential in providing the complete picture.
While projectile points are the accepted yardstick of sequential
change, complete assemblages of tools should certainly be collected,
reported and studied in detail. The establishment of sequences has
been the first concern of all archeology, but this is only the skeletal
frame work, and fuller information is needed to allow reconstruction
of past history, P?St life conditions, and a more exact interpretation of
how the people lived. This information will come only with the collection of all available material and information from each site.
The cultural interrelationships between the South Plains and adjacent areas will be an increasingly important problem as studies progress. It is known that Southwestern pottery, primarily of late Pueblo
III, Pueblo IV, and historic types, is common in South Plains campsites.
This pottery originated along the entire eastern boundary of the
Southwest, since northern Rio Grande wares and southern New
Mexico types are represented. There is some difference in the distribution of these pottery types on the plains as regards place of origin,
but the significance of this distribution is not yet understood.
It will be more difficult to chart the trade relationships of South
Plains people with groups to the north, east and south, since many of
these latter groups lacked pottery and other easily identifiable traits.
However, studies of artifact types and distinctive raw materials will
be useful in this regard.
Intemal relationships within the South Plains will be of interest
because the area is unusual in having such a uniform environment,

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACAOO

15

unbroken by barriers of any sort to prevent widespread movements.
It is unlikely that there were widely differing cultures within the area
at any one time, thanks to this similarity of environment. In fact, the
impression at the present limited state of knowledge is that of a basic
similarity of culture through time as well as through space. Where
areal differences do occur, they probably indicate the range of variability that is possible on a relatively homogenous cultural base, giving
due consideration to separate culture histories and to the nearness of
external influences.
With the exception of the Canadian River groups who practiced
agriculture for a short time, it is unlikely that agriculture was ever a
South Plains trait. It is theoretically possible for people to farm in the
sand hills and some of the valleys without a plow; however, there is
no evidence of agriculture either archeologically or from the Spanish
narratives, and certainly there were no sedentary groups who possessed
the other elements usually associated with an agricultural existence,
such as permanent villages or locally made pottery. It is well known
that the sod areas of heavy grass are virtually impossible to farm without the use of an iron plow; however, the possibility of an elementary
sort of agriculture in sandy areas, whereby the planted crops were
left untended to be gathered in the fall, should not be overlooked.
Gourds, squash, and amaranth are possible crops for this sort of agriculture. Rainfall would be a limiting factor; however, crops such as
cotton, sorghum grains, and corn are now grown without irrigation
in this area.
The brief but valuable descriptions of 16th century and early 17th
century plains groups provided by the chronicles of the Coronado
expedition and later Spanish explorers should be used as guides in
projecting ethnographic information back into archeological times.
Some of the subjects that are of particular significance in the use of
such an approach are the trading patterns between the Querechos and
the Rio Grande Pueblos, the subsistence patterns that show a major
dependence on the buffalo with minor use of other animal and plant
food, and the settlement pattern in which the bulk of the population
was concentrated in the more favorable valleys from which hunting
parties were sent forth. It might be possible to reconstruct a fairly
accurate picture of the annual cycle of activities of the prehistoric
peoples of the South Plains by using both historical data and floralfauna information in the interpretation of archeological evidence.

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED
Bolton, Herbert E.
1949. Coronado, Knight of the Pueblos and Plains. University of New Mexico
Press.
Campbell, T . N.
1961. A list of Radiocarbon Dates from Archeological Sites in Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959), pp. 311-320.
Dick, Herbert W.
1953. Two Rock Shelters near Tucumcari, New Mexico. River Basin Surveys
Papers, No. 5, Pt. I. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154.
Evans, Glen L .
1951. Prehistoric Wells in Eastem New Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 17,
No. 1, pp. 1-9.
Green, F . E.
ms.
Geology and Stratigraphy of the Sand Hills of the Southem High Plains.
Green, J. H.
1955. Some Flint Caches, the Alibates Quarry, and a Stone Pestle. PanhandlePlains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 78-81.
Haynes, Vance, and George Agogino
1960. Geological Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lindenmeier
Site. Denver Museum of Natural History, Proceedings, No. 9.
Holden, W. C.
1938. Blue Mountain Rock Shelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 208-221.
1944. Coronado's Route Across . the Staked Plains. West Texas Historical Association Yearbook, Vol. XX, pp. 3-20.
Jennings, Noyce
1952. The Mound Lake Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 309-310.
Krieger, Alex D.
1956. Notes and News: Early Man. American Antiquity, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp.
105-107.
1957. Notes and News: Early Man. American Antiquity, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp.
321-323.
Libby, Willard F.
1955. Radiocarbon Dating. The University of Chicago Press. Second Edition.
Lobeck, A . K.
1922. Physiographic Diagram of the United States, Wisconsin Geographical
Press.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1955. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 186-199.
Pearce, William M .
1936. A Survey of the Sand-hill Camp Sites of Lamb and Bailey Counties.

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO EST ACADO

17

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8,
pp. 184-186.
Quinn, Jean, and Jane Holden
1949. Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties. Bulletin of the T exas
Archeological and, Paleontological Society, Vol. 20, pp. 115-1 31.
Roberts, Frank H . H., Jr.
1942. Archeological and Geological Investigations in the San Jon District,
Eastern New Mexico. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections. Vol. 103,
No.4.
Sellards, H. E.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. The University of Texas
Press.
1955. Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Milnesand, New Mexico.
American Antiquity, Vol. 20, No.4, pp. 336-344.
Sellards, E. H ., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade
1947. Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas (With a
Description of the Artifacts by Alex D. Krieger ). Bulletin of the Geological
Society of America, Vol. 58, pp. 927-954.
Watts, W . C.
1939. Lake Sites of the South Plains of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 11 , pp. 77-91.
Wendorf, Fred, Alex D. Krieger, Claude C. Albritton, and T . D. Stewart
1955. The Midland Discovery. The University of Texas Press.
Wendorf, Fred, and Alex rD. Kriger
1959. New Light on the Midland Discovery. American Antiquity, Vol. 25, No. 1,
pp. 66-78.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1955. Two Archeological Sites near Lubbock, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical
Review, Vol. 28, pp. 71-77.
Witte, Adolph
1942. Certain Caches of Flint from the North Texas Area. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 14, pp. 72-76.
Wormington, H. M.
1957. Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History.
Fourth Edition.
1816 C Street
Lincoln, Nebraska

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford
Reservoir, Hutchinson County, Texas*
LA THEL F. DUFFIELD
ABSTRACT
Three sites-Conner, Medford Ranch, and Spring Canyon-in the Sanford Reservoir, Hutchinson County, Texas, were excavated in the late summer of 1961 by the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project. Each site contained the remains of several
structures partially constructed of stone, as well as small quantities of domestic
refuse. The objects recovered include . 1,308 ceramic, bone, and stone artifacts, all
of which are typical of the Antelope Creek Focus of the Panhandle Aspect. The
architecture, on the other hand, is not typical of this focus, and makes a conclusive
cultural assignment of these sites difficult.

INTRODUCTION

In August of 1961 , the Texas Archeological Salvage Project dispatched a field party to the Sanford Reservoir damsite in the southwestern corner of Hutchinson County (Fig. 1) to excavate three sites
which were in imminent danger of being destroyed by construction.
The sites, Spring Canyon (41 HC 20), Medford Ranch (41 HC 10)
and Conner (41 HC 7), were in proposed borrow areas and were the
first in the reservoir to have been excavated under the Inter-Agency
Archaeological Salvage Program.
All three sites are in or near canyons tributary to the Canadian
River and have, as their most distinctive features, ruins of buildings
that were constructed in part of white dolomite slabs. The Conner Site,
first to be excavated, was small and consisted of two oval-shaped houses
and two very small trash areas. After finishing work at the Conner
Site, the field party moved to the larger Medford Ranch Site and excavated three structures and associated middens. The third and last site
dug, Spring Canyon, had one prominent ruin and several small outlying structures. The excavations were supervised by the author.
• The archeological investigation of the Sanford Reservoir sites was carried out
by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project as a cooperative project of the National
Park Service and The University of Texas. The following report was accepted by
the National Park Service in December, 1962, in partial fulfillment of the terms of
Contract No. 14-10-0333-802 between The University of Texas and the National
Park Service.

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

In the report which follows each site is treated individually, after
which the over-all findings are discussed and compared with the Antelope Creek Focus and with related sites.
ENVIRONMENT

A physiographic map of northwestern Texas shows the entrenched
Canadian River and its short tributaries dividing the panhandle into
northern and southern sections. It also reveals another outstanding
feature, the caprock escarpment, which forms an effective east-west
ecological barrier.
The Texas panhandle, according to Blair ( 1950) , is within the
Kansan Biotic Province, which, in tum, is ilivided into three well
demarcated districts. Each district shares the escarpment as a common
boundary: to the east of the escarpment is the Mixed-grass Plains
District; to the southeast of the escarpment is the Mesquite Plains

4

\~

Sanford
Reservoir

TEXAS

Fig. 1. Map showing location of Sanford Reservoir.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

21

District; and to the west of the escarpment, on the caprock where the
Sanford Reservoir lies, is the Short-grass Plains District.
The Kansan Province has a rainfall deficiency and the available
moisture decreases from the east to the west. The western section,
which includes the Sanford Reservoir area, is classified as semiarid.
The fauna of the Kansan Province includes at least 59 mammalian
species, five of which are restricted to the province, 14 species of lizards,
31 species of snakes, and one species of land turtle.
Blair ( 1950: 111 ) characterized the flora of the Short-grass District
as follows:
A short-grass association, with buffalo grass the principal constituent, is the most
important plant association of the Short-grass Plains district in both T exas and
Oklahoma.

The soils of the Short-grass District are derived principally from
the great mass of alluvium (fan and river deposits) which, in Cenozoic
time, washed down from the Rocky Mountains in New Mexico. The
soils are naturally rich, although the fertility has recently been reduced
by wheat and grain sorghum farming and by erosion. In the Canadian
breaks cattle raising is important, but the current economic foundation
rests mainly upon the scattered oil fields in the area.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

When Krieger ( 1946) defined the Antelope Creek Focus and the
Panhandle Aspect, it was the latest of a series of attempts (Moorehead,
1921; Holden, 1929; Studer, 1931; Holden, 1933; Sayles, 1935) to
classify and organize the archeological data from the Texas panhandle.
Since that time, few reports on sites or problems of the area have been
published, and the definition of the Antelope Creek Focus has not
been elaborated or modified (see, for example, Suhm, et al., 1954:
66-77 ). The Optima Focus of the Oklahoma panhandle (Watson,
1950 ), however, has been added to the Panhandle Aspect.
Recent work in the area, primarily by Jack T. Hughes of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society and members of the Nor-Pan Archeological Society, and secondarily by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, has raised questions about the definition of the Antelope Creek
Focus. In brief, excavations have recovered certain architectural features which are quite unlike the structures described by Krieger.
Hughes (personal communication) proposes that, until further work
can better define the focus or foci involved, the sites in the area should
be assigned to the Panhandle Aspect only. An alternative proposal,

22

TEXAS 'ARC:gEOLOGI<;:AL SOCIETY

based on findings made at the Sanford Reservoir, will be presented in
the concluding section of this report.
METHOD OF ExcAVATION AND ANALYSIS PROCEDURE

Since the three sites had some characteristics in common, the same
general excavation technique could be employed at each. To initiate
work, a cardinally oriented grid was laid out in such a manner as to
confine the majority of the excavation units (largely five-foot squares)
to one quadrant. Each point on the grid was designated according to
its direction and distance from an arbitrary reference point. Each
square was given the designation of the point in its southeastern
corner. The grid system facilitated the recording not only of the
middens and soil profiles but also of the structures.
For vertical control, a reference point was established and was
assigned an assumed elevation of 100 feet at each of the sites. All
elevations were calculated in reference to these points.
Although sometimes widely scattered, the majority of the artifacts
were concentrated in the midden areas. When there was a possibility
of recovering artifacts, the excavation units were dug in half·foot
levels; however, when it was necessary to hurry the excavations, or
when artifacts were absent or scarce, the fill was less carefully removed. All midden areas were excavated by arbitrary levels, but, unfortunately, the amount of material recovered was so small that an
analysis of the vertical provenience was of no interpretive value.
A standard report form was completed for each level dug, and each
excavation unit, either a five-foot square or half of a five-foot square,
was drawn on the plan of excavation. Other records for the sites
include contour maps, ground plans of the structures, profiles, daily
logs, and photographs.
All the materials recovered were placed in sacks on which were
recorded the name and number of the site, the excavation unit, the
level, the names of the excavators, and the date. These were sent to
Austin, where the materials were washed, catalogued, and prepared
for analysis.
Since the artifact yields were low, each site was analyzed as a single
unit and no intrasite distribution studies were attempted. Intersite
comparisons, however, have been made for the more common artifacts
such as arrow points, knives, and pottery. Although the present analysis did not find any major contrasts, there were some minor ones and,
as more data become available for the area, perhaps other differences
will become apparent.

23

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

CONNER SITE (41 HC 7)
SITE DESCRIPTION

The Conner Site, located in a small canyon about 1.5 miles east of
Sanford, Texas, occupies a promontory (Figs. 2; 3, A) in the forks of
a small arroyo on the south side of the Canadian River. The canyon is
wide where it joins the Canadian River valley, but becomes progressively narrower as one moves up the canyon. Flanked by sharply

Mag.

NN

41 HC 7
SANFORD RESERVOIR
Contour Map
contour interval = 1.0 feet
shading indicates area excavated
20

40

60

Fig. 2 . Contour map of the Conner Site.

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

rising canyon walls, the flat valley would, in aboriginal times, have
been suitable for small scale agriculture.
That this canyon was a popular area for settlement in prehistoric
times is attested by the eight sites located in and at the edges of the
valley. A short distance down the arroyo from the Conner Site is a
similar, but larger site, 41 HC 6, which was recently dug by the NorPan Archeological Society. 41 HC 6 had four or five oval to circular
structures and a small amount of associated midden debris. Another
site, 41 HC 3, perched on the canyon rim, had a larger multiroomed
structure which was excavated by Jack T. Hughes of the PanhandlePlains Historical Society. In addition to the sites with stone structures,
several smaller surface sites which are possibly of Archaic affinity
occur in various parts of the canyon.
METHOD oF ExcAvATION

Surface indications of occupation at the Conner Site consisted of a
scattering of flint flakes and a concentration of dolomite slabs. Excavations were initiated in the western part of the slab concentration
where portions of the walls of an oval structure, Room 1, were outlined.
After the wall foundations were defined, the interior fill was excavated
and screened by arbitrary half-foot levels.
While the excavations were in progress in Room 1, the eastern part
of the slab concentration was tested and another, more circular room
(Room 2) was exposed. Its interior fill was also dug by arbitrary halffoot intervals. Once the rooms had been cleaned out, the immediate
area outside of the structures was cleared in hopes of locating cache
pits or large middens, but neither was found.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES

Structures

The two small rooms (1 and 2 ) and two small adjacent middens
were completely excavated. The rooms were oval to circular in shape
(Fig. 4 ) , measured five to six feet in maximum diameter, and each
had a continuous wall foundation of vertical slabs (Fig. 3, B) . Only
one of the rooms had a doorway and neither contained an interior
fireplace. At first these features were believed to be granaries or storage
cists, but at a related site in a nearby canyon, the Nor-Pan Archeological Society excavated a similar structure which contained an interior
fireplace. This suggests that these small buildings were, at least on
occasion, used as dwellings.

THREE PANHAN DLE ASPECT SITES

25

Room 1 had an oval outline with a long axis of about 5.5 feet, and a
short axis of about 4.5 feet (Fig. 4 ). The doorway of this room faced
the northeast (Fig. 3, B) . Since the bottom of the deepest slab was only
.24 feet below the original ground level (Fig. 3, B) and since there
was no evidence of a trench which could have supported these heavy
slabs, this structure was probably built on the original ground surface.
However, it must be admitted that no clearly defined floor could be
recognized.
Room 2 lacked a doorway and was circular, with a diameter of 5
feet (Fig. 4 ). More slabs were used in the construction of Room 2 than
Room 1 (Fig. 4 ), but they too were apparently placed on the original
ground surface. The ground surface in this portion of the site was
sloping and there were no indications that the inhabitants made an
attempt at leveling the interior floor; at least, no prepared floor was
encountered.
There was not a sufficient number of slabs to reconstruct the walls
of either structure above one tier. This strongly suggests that either the
walls were robbed or that the slabs were u sed only in the construction
of the lower sections of the walls. Perhaps the upper parts consisted of
more perishable materials, possibly skins or poles and thatch.

Middens
To the northeast of each structure was a small midden which contained little cultural material (Fig. 4 ). The middens were thin and
approximately 2 to 3 feet in diameter. The refuse consisted of small
flecks of charcoal, flint flakes , bone scraps, mussel shell fragments, and
an occasional artifact. The small size of the refuse accumulations and
the scarcity of cultural debris suggest that these structures were
utilized for only a short period of time.
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

Only three Fresno arrow points, four small cordmarked sherds, two
manos, one circular biface, two utilized flake scrapers, three fragments
of knife blades, one chopper, one metate fragment, and a moderate
quantity of chipping debris were found at this site. Small amounts of
food refuse, principally mussel shells and bison bones, were also
recovered.
Most of the stone artifacts found at the Conner Site, as well as those
from the other two sites, were made of "flint" from the nearby Ali bates
quarry (Shaeffer, 1958 ) . Some of the larger specimens, such as

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

27

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

41 HC 7
STONE STRUCTUR ES
SANFO~O

RESERVOIR

0

bouldtr

~
~

J:P

·~

~

ROOM!

~
...

~

Fig. 4. Stone structures and middens at the Conner Site.

choppers and grinding stones, however, were made of fine-grained
quartzite pebbles and cobbles which occur in the uplands of the area.
Unless otherwise specified, the chipped stone artifacts described below
are made of the Ali bates dolomite.
Fresno arrow points (Fig. 5, E-G ). Three rather crudely made
Fresno arrow points (Suhm, et al., 1954: 498-499) were found-two
in the midden areas and one in Room 1. Two have slightly concave
bases, one has a straight base, and all have convex blade edges. The tips
of two specimens are missing, but all three appear to have been from
2. 7 to 2.9 em. long. The maximum widths vary from 1.5 to 1.8 em.
Knife fragments (Fig. 5, B, C) . Three basal sections of knives, two
with pointed bases and one with a rounded base, were recovered. The
maximum widths of the fragments are 6.5, 4, and 3.7 em., respectively.
Fig . 3 . Conner Site. A, General view of site, looking north with the Canadian River in the
background. A, Room 1 doorway ; arrow pointing north . Scale three feet long.

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Relatively thin, the thickest fragment measures 1.4 em., and the
thinnest .5 em. The flakes removed in the manufacture of these knives
were broad and thin like those usually identified with the billet percussion technique (Honea, ms. ) .
Utilized flake scarpers (Fig, 5, D ) . Two scrapers were made by
retouching the edges of long flakes. Both are 5.6 em. long, but the widths
are 2.8 and 4.0 em. The narrower one (Fig. 5, D ) is much thinner
than the other.
Circular biface (Fig. 5, A ). A moderately thin ( 1.8 em.), medium
size (6.5 em. in diameter) circular biface made from an igneous pebble
was found near Room 2.
Chopper. One chopper made from a tan quartzite pebble was hifacially chipped on the cutting (distal) end while the proximal end
was unaltered. This specimen is 10 em. wide, 7.4 em. long and has a
maximum thickness of 3. 7 em.
Handstones or manos (Fig. 5, H ) . Two manos were found . The
smaller one is an oval-shaped tan quartzite pebble smoothed on one
side and battered along portions of the edge. It has a maximum diameter of 11 em. and is 3.6 em. in thickness. The other grinding stone
(Fig. 5, H ) , also fashioned from a tan quartzitic stone, has a long,
oval outline, is 18.2 em. long, 8.2 em. wide, and 4.2 em. in maximum
thickness. The ends of this latter specimen are battered and one side
is smoothed.
Grinding slab fragment. A fragment of a dolomite grinding slab has
a prominent, basin-shaped depression, 5.6 em. deep. The original size
of the slab cannot be determined.
Sherds. Four small cordmarked sherds-three from the midden
outside of Room 2 and one from inside Room 1-are thin and sand
tempered. The one flat rim fragment resembles that commonly found
on the Borger Cordmarked type ( Suhm, et al., 1954: 390-393 ) . All
are probably of the Borger type, although the sherds are too small to
be certain.
MEDFORD RANCH SITE (41 HC 10)
SITE DESCRIPTION

On the north side of the Canadian River opposite the Conner Site,
and a short distance up Spring Canyon, is the Medford Ranch Site
(41 HC 10 ) . The site is located on a high bench or terrace-like erosional remnant (Fig. 6 ) at the western edge of the valley. To the west,
immediately behind the site, the canyon walls ascend rapidly, while
to the east of the site the bench descends abruptly to the sandy flood

29

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

A

c

B

E

0

4

2

F

G

6

em

Fig. 5 . Slone artifacts from the Conner Site. A, Circular biface. B, C, Knife fragments. D,
Utilized flake scraper. E-G, Fresno arrow points. H, Mano.

plain of a springfed creek (Fig. 7, A). In contrast to the deep arroyo
at the Conner Site, the channel of this creek is alluvia ted.
Spring Canyon and its namesake springs must have attracted several
groups of prehistoric settlers, for there are at least five medium-sized
sites (of which ihe Medford Ranch Site is the most extensive) in the
immediate area. All but one of these sites are larger than those in the
canyon across the river. The Spring Canyon sites occur in the sandy

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

flood plain, on erosional remnants at the edges of the valley, and on the
canyon rims.
A mesquite grove obscured much of the Medford Ranch Site, but,
where clear of vegetation, a sparse pavement of Alibates flint flakes
covered the ground. Among the flakes there were a few flint artifacts
and, less often, potsherds. In four different areas of the site there were
clusters of white dolomite slabs, three of which had been damaged
by potholes.
METHOD OF ExcAVATION

As no well defined outlines of structures were apparent, the excavations were initiated within the slab concentrations in an attempt to
locate the bases of house walls. Once these walls were located and
defined, it was hoped that the interior fill could be removed to a short
distance above the floor and then the floor could be cleaned and recorded as a unit. Although many of the slabs were found somewhat in
line, it became obvious that the houses could not be defined from the
interior without loss of information. Consequently, trenches were dug
(using arbitrary levels and excavation units ) around the exteriors.
Not only did the trenches define the wall foundation, but, in addition,
some unsuspected exterior structural units were located. After the
foundations were cleared, it was apparent that the majority of the
slabs had been moved, and in some cases, several slabs had slumped
into the interior (Fig. 7, B).
STRUCTURES

Although several structures were present at the site, only three were
excavated. Each of these had ( 1) a square to rectangular shape (the
smallest measured 9 X 9 feet, the next 9 X 10 feet, and the largest
10.5 by 12.5 feet ) ; (2 ) predominantly horizontal masonry with only
a few vertical slabs; and ( 3 ) small contiguous structures on the north
and/ or south sides. While they shared these traits, the differences in
detail, especially in House A, were striking.

House A
House A (Figs. 7, B; 8) was the best defined of the three structures
but, nonetheless, was one of the more complicated ones to excavate.
This structure, unlike the others, had been built in a rectangular pit
excavated to a depth of about one foot below the original ground sur-

31

THREE PANHAN DLE ASPECT SI TES

Moq.

NN

M EDFOR D RAN CH S ITE
4 1 H C 10
Contour Mop

=

contour in terval
1.0 feet
shading indicates ar ea excavated

Fig . 6 . Contour map of the Medford Ranch Site.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

face. The sides of the pit had been plastered with puddled adobe (Fig.
7, D ) and part of the adobe extended about half a foot onto the room
floor. The floor of the house, marked by the puddled adobe at its juncture with the walls, had not been prepared, nor did it contain any
concentration of refuse.
In the center of the east wall was a possible entranceway, although
earlier reports (Studer, 1934; Krieger, 1946 ) refer to similar features
as ventilators. Whether this was a ventilator, a low tunnel entrance,
or a taller upright entrance cannot be positively determined with the
present data. The "entranceway" was paved with puddled adobe for
all but the easternmost half foot and sloped slightly upward toward the
"exit" (the east end), where there was a short step up (.32 feet) to
the original ground surface (Fig. 9). Along the north side of the

A

B

c

D

Fig . 7. Medford Ronch Site . A, View of Site, looking northeast. B. House A during excavation . C, Houses B and C during excavation . D, Northeast corner of House A showing adobe
at the base of the wall. Scale three feet long .

..-

..----• I
.'' I

'
-,
\

\

'

~adobe

r"' ,,-""

< ~ --

o/D

"t reosyre "

'

floke cache

,. ... - - ,
0

~~:~:_:)

--

-

pit

-----

adobe
pavem ent

MEDFORD RANCH SITE
41 HC 10
HOUSE

0

0

~ Slanting

slab s

(arrows po int to lowes t end)

[J3

Vert ical sl ab s

•

Pos t holes

--

0

Fig, 8 . House A at the Medford Ranch Site.

A

Ho r iz onta l sl ab s

feet

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

33

entranceway was a row of vertical slabs which extended about one
foot past the exit step, while on the south side there were a few
scattered horizontal slabs which may or may not have been part of
the original structure. Where the entranceway opened into the room
there was a puddled adobe step, .65 feet below the floor level of the
entranceway. A vertical slab riser reinforced the wall at this point
(Fig. 9) .
Evidence of roof and wall ( ?) supports consisted of five postholes,
the largest of which was centrally located. The four other postholes
were smaller and were found in the eastern half of the house: one in
the northeastern corner, one in the southeastern corner, one in the
middle of the north wall, and one in the middle of the south wall
(Fig. 8). In spite of an intensive search, no postholes were found in
the western half of the house.
There was no central fireplace, but a small ash area containing
some quartzite boiling stones was found in the southeastern part of
the house and a second, smaller concentration of boiling stones was
located near the east wall, just north of the entranceway (Fig. 8). No
other interior feature was present.
The slabs used in wall construction were apparently stacked horizontally on the edges of the pit and when the house collapsed the stones,
judging from their slant, had slumped inward toward the center (Figs.
7, B; 8 ) . As was noted for the Conner Site, there were not enough
stones to account for more than two, or possibly three, courses of slabs.
This seems to indicate that the upper portions of the walls were constructed of a more perishable material, possibly animal hides or pole
and thatch.
In contrast with the other walls, the original position of the many
stone slabs (not all are shown in Fig. 8) covering the vertical riser of
the entranceway could not be fully reconstructed. The slabs found
about the entranceway, however, were numerous enough to suggest
that they, like the rest of the wall slabs, had once been higher and had
slipped into the position in which they were found. If this is correct,
then they may have originally been placed along the sides and/ or top
of the entranceway.
The small structure attached to the north side of the house was not
clearly defined, although it appeared to consist of horizontal (? ) , unshaped slabs laid in a semicircular arc. The walls of this secondary
feature joined the main structure at the northeastern corner and at
the north wall about two-thirds the length of the wall from the eastern
corner (Fig. 8) . There was no clearly defined floor and the wall con-

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

struction could not be accurately determined by the position or location of the slabs. There are suggestions, however, that the attached
room was not built in a pit, but rather was constructed on top of an
accumulation of trash.

House B
The unshaped dolomite slabs comprising House B were scattered
more than those of House A and, since we were attempting to leave
most of the construction stones in situ, they made excavating and recording tedious. This was, however, the only difficulty, for there were
no complex architectural features such as house pits or entranceways
present in House B. While there was no well defined doorway, there
was in the east wall an area where the slabs were out of line and were
less numerous (not all are shown in Fig. 10), perhaps indicating a
former opening. The nature of the wall construction was not at all
clear, for some of the foundation slabs were upright, some were horizontal, and others (the majority ) were slanted. A distinct floor was
not evident and the excavations were continued to the base of the slabs.
Once the rectangular house outline had been fully recorded, the
fallen slabs were removed in order to check the floor of the excavation
for features. This resulted in the location of two large pits (the only
ones found at the site ), two ash concentrations with boiling stones, and
one posthole in the center of the west wall (Fig. 10 ).
The small room attached to House B was semicircular and, like
the main structure, was constructed of unshaped dolomite slabs, many
of which were laid horizontally. It extended practically the full length
of the south wall. Another possible addition, even less well defined,

--~E

MEDFORD RANCH SITE
Idealized cross sect ion of House A
0

2

4

6

feet

Fig . 9 . Idea lized cros s se ct ion of Hou se A.

MEDFORD RANCH SITE
41 HC 10
Hou ses 8 and C

D
~

Honzontol slobs

P"l
L2J

Slontmg slobs
poi nI t o lowes t end)
Ve (arrows
r
r ,col slobs

D

Orientation unrecorded

0

,;, "

·

:;:~~--

·Houses B and Cat th e Medford Ranch S't
• e.

'

«<
--~

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

35

seemed to join the north wall. Possibly this northern structure had
been raided for stones for use in other construction activities, or perhaps some of the slabs had inadvertently been removed during the
excavation. These additions, like the one on House A, had no clearly
defined floors and the type of wall construction could not be determined. Beneath the northern addition were trash deposits which indicate that it was built sometime after the main structure.

House C
House C, the rectangular structure attached to the west side of
House B, was badly disturbed, particularly along the north wall (Fig.
10). No doorway or interior features such as hearths, postholes or pits
were found and no details regarding wall construction could be salvaged. Contiguous with the south wall of House C was a long narrow
structure which was much longer than the other "storage" rooms at
the site. Since the excavations were not extensive in this area (because
. of previous disturbance ), this small attached structure was not well
defined. Judging from the remaining slabs, however, it seems to have
been semicircular in outline.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES

Pits
Two pits, the only ones uncovered at the Medford Ranch Site, were
found in House B (Fig. 11 ) . One, Pit 1, was roughly bell-shaped in
cross section and the other, Pit 2, was basin-shaped in cross section.
Pit 1 had undercut sides which gradually curved inward to form a
relatively flat floor about 2 feet in diameter (Fig. 11 ) . It was 1.6 feet
deep and 2.3 feet in diameter at the mouth. A few pottery sherds, a
scraper, an oval knife, some bone fragments, and flint flakes were recovered from this pit.
The basin-shaped pit, No. 2, had an irregular, oval outline. It was
1.15 feet deep, had a maximum diameter of 2.6 feet and a minimum
diameter of 2 feet. In this pit were found two mussel shell scrapers,
a bone awl, an ax? (core) , flint chips, bone fragments, and charcoal
flakes.

Roiling Stone Pits and Caches
Both in and outside of the houses were nests of fire-cracked, spherical
and egg-shaped stones, herein termed boiling stones. When found

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

I--

0

2

I

3

FE ET

oc- ~

D

Fig . 11. Pits 1 and 2 at the Medford Ranch Site.

within the structures these quartzitic or igneous stones were in shallow
rectangular or oblong pits surrounded by beds of gray ash. Houses A
and B each yielded two such caches. When the boiling stone caches
were found on the exterior of the houses (four instances ) they were
not in pits but rather were piled next to the walls. The largest cache
was found outside of House B (Fig. 10 ) and had nine stones which
ranged from 15 .2. em. long, 7.1 em, wide, and 8.1 em. thick to 8 em.
long, 4.2, em. wide, and 4.6 em. thick. The stones in the smaller caches
were similar in size and numbered 3 (three instances ) , 4, 5, 6, and 8,
respectively.

Middens
Middens were located close to the north walls and toward the eastern
corners of both Houses A and B (Fig. 12, ) . The midden associated with
House A extended approximately 12, or 13 feet east-west, 10 feet northsouth, and had a maximum depth of about 1. 7 feet. The one near
House B was nearly 12, feet east-west and 15 feet north-south. In
addition to being larger, the midden near House B was richer, although

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

37

shallower (ca. 1.2 feet deep) than the one near House A. In spite of
a careful search in other areas around and near the houses, these were
the only refuse accumulations found . Both were in basin-shaped depressions (Fig. 13 ) which may represent natural undulations in the
former surface of the ground or borrow areas created by construction
activities. Trash deposits occurred in a similar depression associated
with a larger structure at the Spring Canyon Site.

Flint Flake Caches
Three flint flake caches containing from 29 to 161 flakes were found
near House A . In two of these, utilized flake scrapers were also found:
the largest cache contained three long, utilized flake scrapers, while
the smallest one included one small flake scraper with a concave edge.
In addition to the three flake concentrations, one cache of utilized flake
scrapers was found near House A. The latter specimens are described
in more detail in the artifact descriptions.
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

The artifacts from the Medford Ranch Site resemble those characteristic of the Antelope Creek Focus (Krieger, 1946 ). They include Borger
Cordmarked pottery, triangular arrow points, alternately beveled
knives, oval knives, and snub-nose end scrapers. Sherds constitute considerably more than half of the total assemblage, while stone and bone
objects comprise the rest.
To initiate the analysis, the artifacts were sorted first according to
material-i.e., stone, bone, or ceramic. The stone specimens were
further grouped according to the assumed function, over-all shape, and
size, while the ceramics were subdivided on the basis of temper and
shape. By this procedure of progressively finer sorting, it was possible
to define a series of small groups of specimens which share the majority
of their attributes. In the following section these latter groups are described and the provenience of the specimens is discussed.

Stone Artifacts
Nearly all of the stone specimens from the Medford Ranch Site
were made of Alibates flint, although some, particularly the pecking
pebbles, hammerstones, and manos, were made of quartzite or other
materials.

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

N
NSS~~
midden w ··

~.

slab

midden-~~ .~~~ntratiani~535
NSO~I
w

MEDFORD RANCH SITE
Houses and Middens

I-

0

10

20

40

60

FEET

Fig. 1 2. Houses and middens at the Medford Ranch Site.

ARROW POINTS

All of the arrow points have a triangular shape and, except for one
which is of obsidian, are made from Alibates flint. These points are
separated into smaller groups on the basis of workmanship and the
presence or absence of side-notching.

39

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

Medford Ranch Site
41 HC 7
Profile of

-

E5 09.4 line
4

0

N532.5
E509.4

I

N525
E5fl94

F" EET

f il l

s

N

Fig. 13. Profile of E509.4 line at the Medford Ranch Site.

Fresno points (Fig. 14, J-L ). The three bifacially worked triangular
points classified as Fresno have straight to slightly concave bases and
straight to slightly convex edges. Two of these wer e found near House
B and one was recovered near the entrance to House A.
Side-notched points (Fig. 14, M-0 ). Nine side-notched points resembling the Washita type (Bell, 1958 : 98-99 ) were recovered. They
are basically triangular in shape and have side notches about Y3 to Y5
the distance from the base to the tip . They differ from the Washita
type in that the bases are generally concave; two, however, have
straight bases and another has a convex base. The side-notched points
vary in length from 1. 7 to 3.5 em. and in width from .8 to 1.8 em.
Seven were found in or near House A and two were found in or near
House B.
Young points (Fig. 14, F-H ) . The five Young points (Suhm, et al. ,.
1954: 510-511 ) have triangular outlines with convex edges and
straight bases. Two are bifacially chipped and the other three are
unifacially chipped. The shortest one measures 3 em. long and 1.8 em.
wide, while the longest one measures 3.2 em. long and 1.4 em. wide.
Three were found near House A, one near House B, and one near
House C.
Obsidian arrow point (Fig. 14, I) . An obsidian arrow point was
found near House B. It is triangular in outline and has slightly convex edges and a broken base. The surviving portion of this point is
3.2 em. long and 1.5 em. wide.
Arrow point fragments . Three arrow point fragments , two tips and

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

8

F

J

G

H

M

L

K
0

2

4

N

0

6

em
Fig . 14. Arrow Points and Pottery from the Medford Ranch Site. A, 8, Perforated pottery
discs . C, Unperforated pottery d isc . D, E, Borger Cordmarked rim sherds . F-H , Young arrow
points . I, Obsidian arrow point. J-L, Fresno arrow points . M-0 , Side-notched arrow points.

a mid-section, were found adjacent to H ouse A. None can be identified
as to type.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

41

KNIVES

All the knives from the site are long and relatively narrow. They
are bifacially chipped and the flake scars indicate that generally thin~
wide flakes with only slight bulbs of percussion had been removed in
their manufacture. Four different forms-oval, ovate, straight-based,
and alternately beveled-are recognized.
Oval knives (Fig. 15, F ) . Two crudely chipped oval knives were
recovered in the excavations. The smaller of the two is 6.8 em. long,
5 .1 em. wide, and 1.4 em. thick, and has crude flaking on both face s.
The larger specimen is somewhat better made, and is 9.7 em. long,
7.8 em. wide, and 2.6 em. thick.
Ovate knives (Fig. 15, A-C ) . Although well represented (36 specimens ) , none of the ovate knives is complete. The size range cannot
be determined, but they are generally thin and lenticular in cross
section and have either rounded or slightly pointed bases (or tips).
The workmanship varies from fine to crude, with the majority being
somewhere in between. One is made of fine-grained reddish quartzite,
the remainder are of Ali bates flint .
Knives, straight base (Fig. 15, D, E) . Two straight-based knife
fragments were recovered. Judging from slant of the lateral edges
these knives were probably triangular or subtriangular in outline. One
has well defined basal corners while the other has slightly rounded
corners. The smaller of the two is 2.2 em. wide and is estimated to
have been about 4.9 em. long; the larger one is 3.2 em. wide and was
an estimated 4. 7 em. long.
Alternately beveled knives (Fig. 15, G) . Only one of the four alternately beveled knives found at the Medford Ranch Site is complete.
This specimen is double-pointed and is beveled on the upper left and
lower right (face up ) . Relatively thin, this knife measured .8 em. in
thickness, 12.3 em. in length, and 3.1 em. in width.
The other three knives of this group are also relatively thin, varying
fro_m .6 to .9 em. in thickness. One, broken across the mid-section, has
a broad blade ( 4. 7 em. wide ) with a small bevel on the alternate edges
and opposite sides. This specimen measures 7.7 em. long. A second
knife, also broken across the middle, has the same length, but is narrower (3.5 em. wide ) . The third fragment, 5.8 em. long and 2 em.
wide, lacks part of the blade and the distal end.
SCRAPERS

All of the scrapers from the site are unifacially chipped, with the

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

E

0

0

2

4

6

em
Fig . 1 5 . Kn ives f rom the Medfo rd Ranch Site. A-C , Ovate knives. D, E, Stra ight- based
kn ives. F, Oval knife . G, Alternately beveled knife .

workmanship varying from good to poor. Three varieties of scrapersutilized flake, snub-nose, and oval-are recognized.
Utilized flake scrapers (Fig. 16, I, J ). Near House A was a cache of
five utilized flake scrapers, each of which had fine marginal chipping

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

43

along the lateral edges, and two unworked flakes . The scrapers varied
in length from 6 to 8. 7 em. and in width from 2.4 to 3.5 em. Three
other other caches which contained mainly unmodified flakes have
already been described.
Snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 16, D-F ). Each of the six snub-nosed end
scrapers has sides which taper from the expanded bit or scraping edge
to the rounded base. The bit is generally convex and is either steeply
beveled or finely chipped. These scrapers vary from 2.6 to 5.2 em. in
length and from 1. 7 to 3.1 em. in width. The largest and smallest specimens are made from a flint foreign to this area.
Oval scrapers (Fig. 16, A-C ). Ten scrapers with long, oval outlines
are fa shioned from thin flakes . They range in length from 5.2 to 6.7 em.
and in width from 2.6 to 3.7 em. Their form and good workmanship
suggest that these specimens may also have been used as knives.
MISCELLANEOUS STONE ARTIFACTS

Drills (Fig. 16, G, H ) . The four drills from the site have long,
narrow, slightly tapering blades and relatively unmodified bases. The
blades on three of the drills are unifacially worked, while the fourth
is bifacially chipped. The blades vary in length from 2 to 3.5 em. and
the width at the juncture of the blade with the base varies from .8 to
1.3 em. Three were found near House A ; the provenience of the other
is uncertain.
Large core tools (Fig. 17) . Five large, bifacially chipped, oval-shaped
core tools have one or more battered edges. These range from 12.7 to
17.7 em. in length, from 6. 7 to 9.6 em. in width, and from 2.6 to 4.4 em.
in thickness.
Obsidian flakes. Seven small flakes of obsidian were found scattered
about House A.
Manos. A large, oblong river cobble with a triangular cross section
was pecked and slightly smoothed on one surface. This specimen, found
near House B, is 21 em. long, 10.1 em . wide, and 7.2 em. thick.
Grinding slabs. The five more or less rectangular grinding slabs
were all found in or near the houses (Fig. 8) , or incorporated into the
wall construction (Fig. 10 ) . Each has a long, narrow ( 14.2 to 17.2 em.
wide) depression which varies from 3 to 5.5 em. in maximum depth .
Only three, however, are complete enough to determine the maximum
length ( 34 to 39 em.) of the grinding depression.
Hammerstones. Two globular-shaped hammerstones of fine-grained
quartzite have battered edges. Both were found north of House B. Th~

44

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

A

8

G

F

E

0

H

J
0

4

2

6

em
Fig. 16. Scrapers and Drills from the Medford Ranch Site. A-C, Oval scrapers. D-E, Snubnose end scrapers . G-H, Drills. I, J, Utilized flake scrapers.

larger one is 9.3 em. long and 8.8 em. wide, the other is 7.0 em. long
and 6.3 em. wide.
Pecking pebbles (Fig. 18, D ). Two quartzite river pebbles, less massive than those presumably utilized as hammerstones, have battered
edges which suggest their use as pecking stones. One of the stones has
a thin oval shape, three battered edges, and one smooth side; the opposite side is naturally convex. This specimen measures 7 em. long

45

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

and 5 em. wide. T he other pecking stone is egg shaped, has a circular
cross section, and is battered and pecked all over. It is 4.5 em. long and
4.9 em. wide.

Worked Bone
Worked bone specimens are present but, except for the awls, are too
small and/ or fragmentary to be accurately identified.

A

Q

?

~

'

~

CM.

' ? '

'

~

Fig . 17 . Large core tools from the Medford Ranch Site .

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bison scapula. The largest worked scapula fragment may have been
used as a hoe blade, but it is so badly broken that its original shape cannot be determined. The other smaller fragments came from the scalene
or flat portion of the scapula. Each one has either a beveled edge or a
groove made by a sharp instrument.
Bone awls (Fig. 18, A-C). Two of the eight awls from the site were
manufactured from deer or antelope cannon (metapodial ) bones . One
of these (Fig. 18, A ) the longest awl found, is 16.7 em. in length;
the other cannon bone awl (Fig. 18, C) is considerably shorter, 9.7 em.
Five of the remaining awls, are oval in cross section and were worked
so extensively that the original bone could not be identified. The
longest of these is 11.9 em., while the shortest is 7.8 em. One of the
two other awls was made from a triangular piece of scapula and measures 5.5 em. in length. The last awl is short (4.4 em.), has a rectangular cross section, a short, pointed distal end, and a rounded proximal
end (Fig. 18, B).
Pottery
Most of the pottery at the Medford Ranch Site was cordmarked,
tempered with sand and grit, and can be typed as Borger Cordmarked
( Suhm, et al. , 1954: 390-393). Some sherds had, in addition to the
sand and grit, crushed quartz or bone tempering.
Borger Cordmarked (Fig. 14, A-E). The Borger Cordmarked sherds
(524 specimens) were the largest class of artifacts found at the Medford Ranch Site. These sherds have the following traits: They are
tempered with sand and grit, rarely bone (10 sherds), or crushed
quartz (2 sherds). Their exteriors are cordmarked with the cordmarking placed vertically around the rim and neck. The interiors are rough
and bumpy and the sherds occasionally split between the inner and
outer walls, suggesting that this pottery was made by a paddle and
anvil technique. The vessels were apparently large, globular forms
with rounded bottoms and vertical rims. The lips are flat, rarely sharp,
and are always cordmarked.
Plain sherds. Eleven sherds resemble the cordmarked ones in temper,
paste, and texture, but differ from them in surface finish.
Pottery discs (Fig. 14, A-C). Irregular discs of pottery, ranging in
diameter from 2.4 to 5.4 em., had been fashioned from sherds of cordmarked pottery. Fourteen are from body sherds while two are from
neck sherds. The edges of the discs are rounded and the central perforations, when present, were biconically drilled. Three of the discs had not

47

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

been drilled, althou gh one of these has a small central indentationbeginning of a perforation-in one side. Eleven of the discs were
found near House A, three near House B, one in the attached structure
on the south side of House C, and one in miscellaneous excavations.

D

B

c

A

9

2
I

3 4
I

I

E

5 6
CM.
I

I

7
I

8
I

9
I

10
I

Fig . 1 8. Bone, Stone , and Shell Artifacts from the Medford Ranch Site. A-C , Bone awls .
0 , Pecking pebble . E, Utilized mussel shell.

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

MISCELLANEOUS ARTIFACTS

Paint materials. Two fragments of hematite, a piece of limonite, and
a smoothed sandstone fragment with traces of red hematite indicate
that mineral pigments were used at the Medford Ranch Site. The
pieces of hematite and limonite are well smoothed on one face, but
unmodified on the opposite side.
Utilized shell (Fig. 18, E). Four nearly complete and seven fragmentary mussel shells ( Unio gracilis Barnes ?) have the ventral
edges smoothed and rounded. These shells may have been used as
scrapers or possibly as spoons.
SPRING CANYON SITE (41 HC 20)
SITE DESCRIPTION

The Spring Canyon Site, unlike the Conner and Medford Ranch
sites, lies at the edge of the rolling breaks east of Spring Canyon and
north of the Canadian River gorge. Situated high above these two
canyons, the site provides an impressive panoramic view of the surrounding terrain : To the south can be seen the Canadian Canyon with
its colorful Permian redbeds and, near the top , contrasting white strata
of undulating dolomite. To the west, portions of Spring Canyon are
visible, while to the southwest the juncture of the Spring Canyon and
Canadian River valleys comes into view. To the east, where the sharp
edge of the Canadian Canyon has eroded away, the rolling and rough
terrain smoothly merges with the relatively level uplands.
When approached from the northeast, the site, prior to excavation,
was marked by a large, prominent "mound" littered with white dolomite slabs (Figs. 19; 20, A ) . Some of these stones were still in place
in the mound and the surface outlines of a rectangular structure could
faintly be discerned. Evidence of other former structures consisted of
three concentrations of dolomite slabs (Fig. 25 ), one to the southeast
of the mound, the second a short distance north-northeast of the
mound, and the third slightly farther away, to the northeast of the
mound.
METHOD oF ExcAVATION

After the grid had been established and elevations determined for
the major reference points, excavations were initiated in the slab concentration to the northeast of the mound, where the outlines of a small
oval structure were partially visible. First the exterior walls of this

49

T HREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

w

I-

(i)

z o
~ N
z u

<[I
Ll(!)

z
0::

(l_
(f)

...

l
i

Vi
1:

...
u"
0

1:

"'Q.

.!:

.

"'

-=0

a.

"E
~

.2

1:

0

u
0:

"'

i.i:

structure were completely defined, then the interior was dug by halffoot levels. Additional excavations to the north of this house located
a midden and a large trash-filled pit.
While testing was underway in the oval structure, work was begun

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

on the large rectangular structure which was buried by wind-blown
sand. Excavations in this latter feature attempted ( 1) to reveal the
interior of the east wall since ·t his is where the ventilators and/ or doorways of the Antelope Creek Focus houses are frequently located, (2) to
locate internal features, and ( 3 ) to clear at least half of the house by
removing opposing quadrants. Of these objectives, only the first was
successful.
On the inside and near the north wall of the large structure, a fivefoot test square was dug in half-foot intervals and all of the dirt was
passed through a half-inch screen to determine what might be found
in the house fill and to lcicate the house floor . The fill from the test,
however, was virtually sterile and no floor could be defined. A second
test square in the central part of the house also failed to locate interior
features. On the basis of these findings, the remainder of the fill was
carefully shoveled out down to the lowest edge of the vertical slabs
and dumped without screening.
STRUCTURES

The most outstanding features at the Spring Canyon Site were the
four scattered stone concentrations which contained the remains of
wall foundations. At times, a well-defined wall foundation would suddenly terminate without completing a structure outline; however, in
two cases it was possible to completely outline a structure (Fig. 25 ).
The more extensive of these (Fig. 21) represents one of the largest
rectangular houses yet reported for the area. This structure was fairly
well defined on the surface, even though the bases of the walls were
buried by three to three and a half feet of wind-blown sand. The
smaller structure (Fig. 24, A; 25 ) , northeast of the main one, was
oval and was quite similar to those found at the Conner Site.
Main Structure
Excavations in the wind-blown mound revealed a large rectangular
house approximately 29 feet wide and 32.5 feet long (Fig. 21 ) . The
walls were somewhat irregular (from .8 to 1.2 ft. thick) and frequently
bowed either in or out. The interior faces of the walls were constructed
of large, vertically placed dolomite slabs (Fig. 20, D) with as many as
two tiers found still intact (Fig. 22) . The exterior wall faces , by contrast, consisted of coursed, unshaped, horizontally laid slabs cemented
together with liberal amounts of adobe (Figs. 20, C; 23 ) . Adobe, at least
in the east and north walls, was used as a thick foundation for the hori-

51

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

A

B

c

D

Fig . 20. Spring Canyon Site . A, Wind-b lown mou nd befo re excavation . B, Doorway and
co lumn s a t the ma in structure. C, Exterio r s ide of east wall , ma in structure. D, Interior side
of west wall , main structu re . Scale th ree feet long .

zontal stones and as a cement to secure the rubble to the vertical interior slabs (Fig. 23). The adobe found at or near the original ground
surface was soft, moist, and easily excavated, whereas the adobe from
higher in the walls was very hard and compact.
The floor of the structure, like those of the other houses excavated,
could not be located. Consequently, the exact relationships between the
original ground surface, the floor, and the base of the walls remain
undetermined (Fig. 23 ) . It might be noted, however, that the vertical
slabs (Figs. 20, D; 23) are massive and surely must have required
some support. Possibly, the slabs were placed in a trench, or reinforced with adobe.
All of the corners, except the southwestern one, were rounded and
were constructed much like the walls (Fig. 21 ) . In the southwest

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

corner, however, there was a gap of two feet between the horizontal
wall slabs (Fig. 21 ). On both sides of this opening-and forming part
of the walls-were two roughly oval piles of horizontal slabs coated
with adobe (Fig. 20, B). The position and shape of these piles suggest
that they are the basal remnants of columns. They extended about two
feet a hove the presumed floor level and were approximately three feet
in diameter. The western column was supported by an adobe foundation.
While no interior features were located in the large structure, the
remains of a single wall of horizontal slabs were found attached to
the exterior face of the south side. This exterior wall joined the house
at a right angle, a bout four feet west of the southeast corner (Fig. 25).
Since its full extent could not be determined, the purpose of this wall
remains very much in doubt. Limited excavations about the remainder
of the house exterior did not uncover other features.

Oval Structure
To the northeast of the main building was a small, oval-shaped
structure, the base of which consisted entirely of vertically placed
slabs. The maximum east-west dimension was 8.2 feet, the maximum
north-south dimension, 5.2 feet. A gap in the southwest corner of the
wall foundation may have been a doorway. The only feature recorded in the interior was a shallow, oval-shaped, flat-bottom pit which
had penetrated .3 feet into the subsoil. The shallowness of the pit suggests that it may have been dug after the house had been abandoned
and partially or wholly filled by trash and wind-blown sand. There
was considerable cultural debris in the interior structure fill , but it
cannot be determined whether this refuse was associated primarily
with the pit or with the house.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES

Middens
A concentration of midden debris was found to the north and/ or
northeast of each structure excavated at Sanford Reservior, indicating
that these were preferred areas for dumping refuse. The digging was
concentrated in the midden areas as they generally contained the
greatest number of artifacts and other cultural detritus.
In the Spring Canyon Site, three such midden areas were located
and partially or completely (Fig. 25) excavated. North of the main

~
~

~gp
'~

~

qi~
'0

I

If!
.

.

.
·

''
'
.

.

~
~
\)
fD

~\
\1

~

wu
m

\

~
.
.

fJ

SPRING CANYON SITE
MAIN

STRUCTURE

VERTICAL SLABS

D

HORI ZONTAL SLABS

~

SLANTING
(ARROWS

l!il
0

SLABS

POINT TO THE LOWEST

END)

UNEXCAVATED
I

2

3

4

FEET

Fig . 21. Main structure at the Spring Canyon Site.

53

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES
Nl32

Nl23 .5

:, '!., ~ ,/,,,;;:
adobe

~

h~

~

"'-vert1col
slobs

1/

~
I

l

.L

rubble

~

~

subsoil

SPRING
Profile

CANYON

SITE

of East Wall of Moin Structure
0

2

FEE T

Fig. 22 . Interior profile of east wall of the main structure at the Spring Canyon Site .

structure was a relatively large midden, about 15 feet north-south,
20 feet east-west, and 1.7 feet deep, which had accumulated in a basinshaped depression similar to that found at the Medford Ranch Site.
Although the yield was less than expected, there was sufficient debris
to warrant complete excavation. To the northeast and adjacent to the
main structure, limited excavations tested a second and somewhat
richer midden deposit of undetermined size (see Addendum).
The one midden associated with the oval structure was adjacent to
the northeast corner. An area 10 feet square, believed to be the central
portion of the midden, was dug. In this square a great deal of debris
was encountered, although the presence of a pit in the middle of the
midden complicated its interpretation. This pit had been filled with
refuse before the site was abandoned.

Pits
Two apparently similar pits were found at the site. The basal portion of one was encountered in the floor of the oval structure. It measured 5 feet east-west and 4.25 feet north-south, and had penetrated
only .3 feet into the subsoil. The second pit, found north of the same
structure, was uncovered about .5 feet below the present ground sur-

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

face . It was oval- shaped, had inward slopin g sides and a flat bottom,
and was rounded where the walls joined the bottom (Fig. 26 ) . It was
3.9 feet deep and had a maximu m diameter of 5.3 feet and·a minimum
diameter of 4.4 feet. The second pit yielded a large quantity of cultural
debris, including most of the pottery obtained at the site.

Caches
Flint caches were not as abundant at the Spring Cayon Site as they
were at the Medford Ranch Site. The Spring Canyon excavations
encountered only three flake caches which contained 271, 38, and 15
flakes , respectively, of Alibates dolomite. All of the fla kes have the
characteristics produced by the billet techniqu e: they are long, narrow,
and thin, and have a lipped striking platform. The fla kes in these
caches were concentrated in small piles and at one time could have
been in small bags or some other type of perishable containers. The
largest cache was found in the oval structu re, anoth er was found in
the midden to the north of the oval structure, and th e smallest was

SPRING

CANYON SITE

Generalized Profile Showing
Wall Construction
0

I

2

FEET

Fig . 23 . Generalized profile showing wall construction at the Spring Canyon Site.

55

THREE PANHAND L E ASPECT SI TES

found beneath an unworked fragment of bison scapula in th e midden
to the north of the main structu re.
In addition to the flint cach es, one cache of bison scapulae (one
squ ash knife an d two worked fragments ) was found in the oval structure, close to th e sou th wall (Fig. 24, B) .

A

B

Fig . 24 . Spring Canyon Site. A, Oval structure, looking west. 8, Bison scapula cache along
interior of south wall of the oval structure .

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

The artifacts from the Spring Canyon Site were of three different
classes, stone, bone, and pottery, with the latter being the best represented. There was, however, a greater variety of stone artifacts. (For
additional artifacts from the Spring Canyon Site see Addendum below)

Stone Artifacts
ARROW POINTS

While all of the arrow points from the Spring Canyon Site were
basically triangular in outline, they can be subdivided on the basis of
the presence or absence of side notches and the quality of the workmanship.
Fresno points (Fig. 27, A-C). Fifteen points are unnotched triangular forms with generally straight or, less often, slightly convex lateral
edges. Most of the bases are somewhat concave, but a few are straight
and one is slightly convex. As a group, these points are thin and, with
one exception, bifacially chipped. They vary in length from 2.4 to
2.9 em. (most are 2.8 em. ) and range in width from 1.2 to 1.8 em.
Side-notched points (Fig. 27, G). Only one complete side-notched
point and a fragment of another were found in the excavations at the
site. Both have deeply concave bases and straight lateral edges which
are notched about midway between the base and tip. The width of
the blade between the notches on the complete specimen is .6 em., while
the maximum width is 1.5 em. and the length is 2.1 em. These points
resemble the Washita point (Bell, 1958: 98-99) but the deeply concave base precludes it from that type. It is probably a closely related
variant.
Young points (Fig. 27, D-F). Thirteen arrow points are made from
thin flakes which are retouched primarily along the edges of one face.
The majority have slightly convex edges and straight bases, although
one has relatively straight lateral edges while another has a convex
base. One is made from a fine-grained brown quartzite, another from
moss agate; the remainder are of Alibates flint. The Young points range
in length from 2.1 to 3.8 em. and in width from 2.1 to 1.4 em.
Arrow point fragments . Four arrow point tips were recovered, three
of them bifacially chipped and one unifacially worked. None can be
identified as to type.
KNIVES

Ovate knives (Fig. 28, F ) . Bifacially chipped, ovate-shaped specimens with thin lenticular cross sections are the most common knife

57

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

N

slab
concentrations

SPRING CANYON SITE
Structures and Middens
0
I

20

ao

f'EET

Fig. 25. Structures and middens at the Spring Canyon Site.

form (22 examples) found at the Spring Canyon Site. In spite of the
number of ovate knives, only two are complete. One of the complete
specimens measures 12.9 em. long and 6 em. wide; the other one is 8.7
em. long and 4.3 em. wide. The widths of the fragments vary from
3.1 to 6.4 ern., with the majority falling between 4.3 and 5.4 em. While
most are made from Alibates flint, one is of fine-grained, gray quartzite.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Beveled knives (Fig. 28, A). The three beveled knives from the
Spring Canyon Site are essentially diamond-shaped with one end being
longer than the other end. They vary in over-all length from 10.3 to
13.3 em. The longer end of each knife has relatively straight edges
while the shorter end generally has slightly convex edges. The broad,
thin flake scars suggest that they were chipped by means of the billet
percussion technique (Honea, ms.). When held vertically with the
long end upward, the beveled edges appear on the upper left and lower
right edges of the specimens.
SCRAPERS

Unifacial chipping is characteristic of all the scrapers. Some are
little more than utilized flakes, while others are carefully shaped and
worked over much of one face.
Utilized flake scrapers (Fig. 28, B). The twenty-two utilized flake
scrapers are of various shapes and sizes, but basically they are flakes
with one or more retouched edges-presumably resulting from use.
Most are made from thin, broad flakes .
Tapering base snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 28, D ). Eight scrapers are
triangular in outline, being widest across the bit end and tapering to a
pointed or rounded proximal end. The bit edge is slightly convex on
all specimens, and all are made from flakes which were narrow but
slightly thicker than the flakes used for the other types of scrapers.
The ventral sides are unmodified. A portion of the original cortex has
been retained on the dorsal side of one of the snub-nose scrapers. None
is dorsally and basally thinned as has been noted on similar specimens
found in north-central Texas (Duffield and Jelks, 1961 ) . With one
exception-a miniature specimen which measures 2.9 em. long and
1.9 em. across the bit-these scrapers evenly range from 3.4 to 9.6 em.
in length and from 2. 7 to 4.5 em. in width.
Straight base snub-nose scraper (Fig. 28, C) . With the exception of
the straight base, the one example of this type possesses all of the
characteristics of the tapered base snub-nose scrapers described above.
Ovate scrapers (Fig. 28, E). Ten specimens resemble the ovate
knives in shape, but have unifacial chipping along the marginal edges.
One end is usually wider than the other end, probably a characteristic
of the flakes used in the manufacture of these scrapers. The ovate
scrapers range in length from 5 to 8.5 em.
Triangular flake scrapers (Fig. 29, D-F ) . Fifteen thin, subtriangular scrapers, varying in length from 3.4 to 4.6 em. and in width from

59

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

N

Pit in oval
structure
A

A

I

{;ij,~~~~·~~·~[j~Dt
I

B
0

Pit north of 9
oval structure
2

3

4

5

f~et

Fig . 26 . Pits at the Spring Canyon Site .

1.9 to 2.6 em., have steep bevels along all edges. The presumed proximal end is generally the widest part of the specimen and is straight to
slightly convex. These scrapers resemble Young points but they are
more crudely made and greater in length. They also resemble the snubnose scrapers, but are distinguished from them by their thinness.

60

TE:XAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

8

A

D

E

F

G

0

2

3

4

5 6
CM.

7

8

9

10

Fig. 27.. Arrow Points and Pottery from the Spring Canyon Site. A-C, Fresno arrow points .
0-F, Young arrow points . G, Side-notched arrow point . H, I, Borger Cordmarked rim sherds.

MISCELLAN EOUS STONE ARTIFACTS

Spokeshave (Fig. 29, G). A shallow concavity ( .2 em. deep, 1.4 em.
wide ) in the lateral edge of a small flake suggests that it may have
been used as a spokeshave.
Drills (Fig. 29, A-C). Flake drills are well represented ( 11 specimens ) in the collection from the Spring Canyon Site. The majority
have narrow ( .8 to 1.0 em. ) , long shafts and unmodified bases. Three,
however, lack bases, another three have the edges of the shaft alternately beveled, and one has a slightly retouched base. The lengths of
the drill shafts range from 2 to 2.9 em. , with most measuring 2 to
2.5 em.
Grauer (Fig. 29, H ). One flake has a small angular projection,
possibly a graver point, which has been produced by the intersection

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

61

of two flakes scars. The edges on either side of the point have been
partially retouched.
Stone Disc (Fig. 30, C). Two, crudely chipped stone discs, possibly
used as jar lids, were recovered from the site. The smaller of the two
(approximately 8 em. in diameter ) is made of micaceous quartzite,
has flattened sides and is relatively thin ( 1. 7 em.). The larger disc
(about 10.5 em. in diameter ) is quite similar, but is made of finegrained red sandstone and is 2.4 em. in thickness.
Cores. The 17 cores from the site vary in shape and size, and are,
for the most part, bifacially chipped. Many of the flakes removed from
them were long, wide, and relatively thin. The cores vary from 4.8 to
10.7 em. in length and from 4 to 10.5 em. in width.
Awl sharpeners (Fig. 30, A ). Two fine-grained sandstone awl
sharpeners-one complete and one fragmentary-were recovered. The
complete specimen (Fig. 30, A ) has a rectangular cross section and is
9 em. long and 3 em. wide. One side has a shallow longitudinal
U-shaped groove, about 1 em. wide, which extends almost the full
length of the specimen. On the reverse side the longitudinal groove is
shorter and is not as wide or as deep. The other sharpener is thin ( 1.4
em. thick ) and relatively short (7.1 em. ) , and has three broad, shallow
grooves-two on one side and one on the other side.
Gorget (Fig. 30, B). An irregularly-shaped, red sandstone gorget
has two suspension holes near the upper corners. There is no evidence
of intentional shaping: three edges of the gorget are slightly convex,
while the fourth (the presumed bottom edge) is fairly straight. One
lateral edge is 4.6 em. long, the other is 7 em. long. Both suspension
holes were drilled from the smoother side of the gorget; one of these,
however, consists of two overlapping holes placed side by side.
Manos . Each of the two manos or handstones has one surface pecked
and roughened, and at least one end battered. The opposite sides have
been smoothed by natural stream abrasion. One mano is long and
narrow (24.6 X 9 em. ), has an ovoid cross section and is 6.3 em. thick.
The other specimen is shorter ( 19.1 em. long ) and wider (12.4 em.)
and is approximately the same thickness (6.4 em.). Both are made
from quartzitic stones.
Milling slab. The one milling stone recovered from the site was
collected from the surface. Made from a rectangular slab of sandstone,
it has a shallow, oval-shaped basin which is approximately 21 em.
long and 16.2 em. wide. The slab itself has a maximum width of 24.2
em. , a maximum length of 34 em., and a maximum thickness of 6.1 em.
Hammerstones. In addition to the two manos which apparently

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

CM.
Fig . 28 . Knives and Scrapers from the Sp ri ng Canyon Site . A, Be veled kn ife . B, Utilized
fla ke scrape r. C, Straight base s nub-nos e end scraper. D, Tapering base snub- no se end
sc rape r. E, Ovate scraper. F, Ovate knife .

were sometimes used as hammerstones, there are 10 river pebbles (five
of which are fragmentary ) with battered edges .
Ground Stone Object. A small fragment of fin e-grained sandstone
is smoothed on one side and along one edge. It is too incomplete to
be positively identified, but was presumably used as some type of
smoother.

63

JHREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

c

B

A

0

F

E

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10

CM.

G

H

Fig. 29 . Drills , Scrapers , and Gravers from the Spring Canyon Site . A-C, Drills. D-F,
Triangular flake scrapers . G, Spokeshave. H, Graver.

Worked Bone
The worked bone objects are perhaps the most distinctive artifacts
found at the Spring Canyon Site. They were shaped by breaking,
cutting, and abrading: if the bone was thin, it was heavily scored
from one side and then broken along this line; if thick, a combination
of breaking, hacking, and cutting with an instrument that left shallow,
knife-like grooves was used . With these techniques it was possible to
fa shion bone hoes and squash knives from bison scapulae, digging stick

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

heads from bison tibiae, and other artifacts from cannon bones, ribs,
etc.
For convenience and consistency in describing the bone implements,
they will be oriented as the bones occur in the skeleton. That is, the
joint which is the most distant from the body, the distal end, will be
placed downward, while the joint closest to the body axis, the proximal
end, will be oriented upward. That portion of the bone which faces the
head of the animal is the anterior and that part which is oriented
toward the rear is the posterior. When discussing the shoulder blade
or scapula, however, a more detailed, but nontechnical terminology
will be employed. For a definition of these terms consult Fig. 31 .

A

B

o

2

3

4

s s

7

a

9

10

CM.
Fig . 30. Ground and Chipped Stone Artifacts from the Sprin g Canyon Site. A, Awl
sharpener. B, Stone gorget. C, Stone disc .

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

65

Bone hoes (Fig. 32, C) . Made from flat, triangular sections of bison
scapulae or shoulder blades, the two hoes are relatively short (24 em.
in maximum length ) , and have been trimmed on both ends and along ·
one lateral edge. In the process of manufacture, the articular end of
the scapula was broken off, leaving a jagged edge. About 9 em. 'from
this broken end a shallow (hafting? ) notch 'has been cut into the
anterior edge. The distal end of the scapula was also removed, apparently to produce a sharp " hoeing" edge. This end slants from the longer
posterior edge to the shorter cut edge of the specimen (Fig. 32, C).
Implements of this type have been found at both Antelope Creek and
Optima Focus sites (Krieger, 1946: 45 ; Watson, 1950.: Pl. 2 ) .
Squash knives (Fig. 32, A ). Three squash knives-all fragmentary
and 28 em. long- were made from the central portions of bison
shoulder blades. In the manufacture of these knives, the articular end
of the scapula has been removed, and the higher part of the spine cut
away, leaving the base of the spine to form a central ridge on one face .
The edge on the anterior side has a slight, natural curve and bevel
which could function as a cutting or working edge. The other edge
(posterior side ) of the specimen has been severed and has a faint bevel
produced by a deep cutting scar. On one specimen the remnant of the
spine forms the back or one edge of the knife. All may be a form of
scapula hoe; however, the narrow " handle" (proximal end ) suggests
that they were intended for use as knives.
Digging stick heads (Fig. 32, B) . Digging stick heads , commonly
found in Antelope Creek Focus sites, were manufactured from the
lower leg bones or tibiae of bison. The more complete of the four specimens from the Spring Canyon Site measure 17.5 to 25 em. in length.
In each case, the proximal end and most of the anterior surface have
been removed. The latter was severed diagonally through the shaft
some 8.5 to 12 em. above the distal joint. The resulting working edge
is steeply beveled from the posterior end and is either slightly rounded
or slanted from the upper left to the lower right when viewed from the
anterior. An oval hole through the articular surface into the cavity of
the bone generally has a maximum diameter of 3 em. On two of the
specimens the outer perimeter of the hole is fire blackened, possibly
from attempts to burn though the outer, compact layer of bone. This,.
perhaps, was a preliminary step in making the perforation. Each of the
specimens has a high use polish around the outer surface of the bone,
but lacks signs of wear in the cavity. This, plus traces of the porous,
bony cellular structure, indicates that the digging stick itself extended
to the working edge of the h ead. Perhaps the head not only provided a

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

harder, more lasting edge, but also reduced the wear on the tip of the
stick.
Worked bison scapulae (Fig. 33, F ) . Two long, triangular-shaped
pieces of bison scapula had been cached in the oval structure (Fig. 2.4,
B) . The spine and one lateral edge has been removed on the larger and
more complete specimen (30.5 em. long) . In addition, the posterior
ridge has been trimmed and the articular end, like that of the hoes,
has been broken. The distal end of the blade has been cut straight across
and all that remains of the scapula is the thin blade and part of the
posterior ridge (Fig. 33, F ) . The second specimen is quite fragmentary,
but was perhaps similar to the first. Both may be blanks for bison
scapula hoes or by-products in the manufacture of squash knives . In
connection with the latter, it is interesting to note that squash knives
are made from the spine and anterior edge of the scapula-the sections
which have been removed from these two specimens. Moreover, a
squash knife was found cached with these pieces.
Bone awls (Fig. 33, B, C). One complete awl and two fragmentary
ones were found at the Spring Canyon Site. The complete specimen
(Fig. 33, C) is circular in cross section, fairly straight, and is 16.8 em.
long. The surface, however, is so eroded that it is impossible to identify

BISON SCAPULA
(dorsal view)
Fig. 31 . Mo rpholog ica l features of a b ison scapula.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

67

the bone. One of the fragments is a basal section which is highly
polished and which has a triangular cross section (Fig. 33, B). The
cellular structure of this specimen is fairly dense. The remaining fragment is a distal end which is somewhat plano-convex in cross section.
Cut bone and antler fragments (Fig. 33, A, D, E). Several bone and
horn fragments have been cut or show attempts at cutting. One small
scapula fragment ( 8 em. long ) was cut from the thin section of the
blade (Fig. 33, A ). Three other cut pieces are from deer cannon bones.
Two of these have the central groove of the shaft deepened in an
attempt to split the bone, while the third (Fig. 33, D ) is an articular
end which has been removed from the shaft by cutting a groove about
2.8 em. below the joint. Finally, one rib fragment (Fig. 33, E) and one
horn section have been severed by circumscribing a groove and breaking the specimen along the grooved line. Most of these fragments are
probably residue from the manufacture of bone implements, as none
show indications of having been used.
Pottery
The 394 potsherds recovered from the excavations can be sorted into
several groups principally on the basis of the surface finish and paste
characteristics. Borger Cordmarked, represented by 317 specimens, is
by far the most common type. In general, this type is distinguished by
globular vessel forms, crushed rock and/ or sand temper, and exterior
surfaces roughened by cordmarks ( Suhm, et al., 1954: 390-393).
When examined in detail, however, the Borger Cordmarked sherds
from the site can be divided into two closely related subgroups or
varieties. One variety ( 188 specimens ) is tempered with large, angular
particles of crushed quartzite mixed with sand, has relatively thick
walls, and is dark on the exterior surface. The second variety, by contrast, is tempered with sand (although one has an admixture of bone ) ,
is comparatively thin, and has a more compact paste and a lighter,
often orangish surface color. The latter variety is represented by 129
sherds.
All of the Borger sherds fracture easily, but those with crushed
quartzite hmd to break more readily than the others. The fracture
planes are irregular, and no definite indications of coils can be observed. Both the exterior and interior surfaces are bumpy, although
the cordmarks tend to obscure this exterior roughness. These features,
coupled with the wide variation in the wall thickness of any one vessel,
suggest that this pottery was finished by the paddle and anvil techmque.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

Q

?9 4~1\I{l\'tO

CM.

Fig . 32. Bone Artifacts from the Spring Canyon Site. A, Squash knife . 8 , Digging stick tip .
C, Scapula hoe .

Although the majority of the Borger Cordmarked sherds are from
vessel walls, there are four large rim sherds which provide some
useful data on the juncture of the body wall with the rim (Fig. 2.7, H ,
I ) . In one case, the rim merges with the body in a gentle curve, while
on the others the rim flares out from the body at a much greater angle.
All the larger sherds indicate that the vessels were globular to elongated jars with prominent rims . The cord impressions, presumably
made with a cord-wrapped paddle, are usually oriented vertically.
In addition to the above, there are 67 sherds which have many

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

69

characteristics of the Borger type, but which are poorly smoothed on
the exterior surfaces. The exteriors, however, do occasionally have
faint traces of cordmarks. This pottery is generally thin and is tempered with cemented particles of sand (crushed sandstone? ) . In view
of these features, it seems probable that these sherds are a variation of
the Borger type. In fact, it is possible that many are from the basal
portions of Borger vessels, where the cordmarking is usually faint or
sometimes absent.
Clearly to be differentiated from the above are ten plain sherds
which have fine sand temper, compact, tan-colored paste, thick walls,
light gray exteriors, and dark gray interiors. The exterior surfaces are
smoothed and show no traces of having been cordmarked. No definite
coils are visible, but the regular nature of the fracture planes strongly
suggests the coil technique. The rim and neck sherds indicate that they
are from vessels which, unlike Borger, had short, slightly flaring necks
with rounded lips. Basal sherds may be represented by a few sherds
which have one edge decidedly thicker than the other an d a surface
contour which is different from the body sherds. These sherds suggest
that both conical and rounded bases are present.

Miscellaneous Artifacts
Utilized mussel shells. Twenty mussel shells are ground smooth
along one edge and were possibly used as scrapers or spoons. The only
other worked mussel shell has a groove cut through the umbo. The
purpose of this groove is not known.
Daubing. Two forms of fire-hardened daubing were found at the
site. One group (7 specimens ) is orangish-brown, contains numerous
charcoal flecks , and has preserved small stick and grass impressions.
The others ( 7 specimens ) are thinner and have only grass impressions.
The daubing was found rather widely scattered over the site and
cannot be clearly associated with specific structures.
Paint. Evidence of the use of pigment consists of a fragment of red
ocher and a dolomite palette smeared with red ocher. The ocher fragment is thin, irregularly shaped, and smoothed on one side. The
smoothed surface contains many scratches, presumably produced by
use. The palette is fragmentary, measuring 19.2 em. long and 12.3 em ..
wide, and is heavily coated with ocher on the rougher surface.
Corncob. A small charred corncob fragment was found in the
midden at the northeast corner of the main structure. This specimen,
along with other corn remains from a site ( 41 HC 3, University of

70

TE'XAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

.'
~

fli.
r •

8

'
1,1

.

I
·~

A

c

[·

~

":!
'•
·.l

l

0

0

0

2

3
em.

4

2

4
em.

6

5

Fig . 33. Miscellaneous Worked Bone from the Spring Canyon Site. A, Cut scapula fragment.
B, Bone awl fragment. C, Complete bone awl. D, Cut metatarsal fragment. E, Cut rib fragment . F, Worked bison scapula .

Texas site number; A-61 , Panhandle Plains Museum number ) directly
across the river from the Spring Canyon Site, were examined by Dr.
Hugh Cutler, Executive Director of the Missouri Botanical Garden in
St. Louis, Missouri. Dr. Cutler describes the specimen from the Spring
Canyon Site as a .. . "cob fragment, 14 row, 3.1 mm. kernel thickness,
7 mm. cupule width, glumes short." This specimen is larger than the

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

71

corn remains recovered from Site 41 HC 3 by Jack Hughes of the
Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum. Dr. Cutler points out this and
other differences when he states, "The cobs [from 41 HC 3] with small
cupules 4.8 mm. and 4 mm. are probably pop corns or very small
flint. The larger 14 row cob [from the Spring Canyon Site] is similar
to Southern Plains corn and Pima-Papago and Basketmaker" ( Cutler,
personal correspondence) .
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
CoMPARISON OF THE THREE SANFORD REsERvoiR SITES

The three Sanford Reservoir sites-Conner, Medford Ranch, and
Spring Canyon-are small village sites distinguished principally by
architectural remains and localized accumulations of domestic refuse.
Two of these, Conner and Medford Ranch, are in small side canyons
tributary to the Canadian, while the third, Spring Canyon, is situated
on the eroded edge of the canyon rim.
All three contained the remains of more or less permanent structures, the lower portions of which were constructed of unshaped dolomite slabs. Two such structures were excavated at the Conner Site,
three at the Medford Ranch Site, and two at the Spring Canyon Site.
Remains of additional buildings were in evidence at the latter two
sites, but were not dug. Only the Medford Ranch Site yielded a structure which might be termed a multi-roomed dwelling (Houses B and
C). Several of the houses, however, did have a small, vaguely definable
room (possible storage bins of dry-laid masonry ) attached to either
the north or south wall. The over-all impression nonetheless is that of
small isolated houses, rather than a contiguous pueblo.
The structures were small (with the exception of the main house
at Spring Canyon ) and were either circular to oval or square to rectangular in floor plan. The wall foundations of the more or less circular
ones, including two at Conner and one at Spring Canyon, were constructed of a single row of vertical slabs which may have been set in a
trench or reinforced with adobe. In each case these were isolated rooms
(i .e., they had no attached structures). By contrast, the square or
rectangular houses-three at the Medford Ranch Site and one at
Spring Canyon-were larger, were approximately oriented with the
cardinal directions, and, at the Medford Ranch Site, each had a small
storage (?) structure attached to one wall. The masonry in these
houses was relatively variable and complex. In one instance, House C
at Medford Ranch, some of the slabs had been disturbed and many

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

details of construction are lacking. However, the data for this house
and for House B suggest a mixture of horizontal and, to a lesser extent,
vertical masonry. The other structure excavated at the Medford Ranch
Site (House A ) was unique in that the slabs appeared to have been
laid horizontally on the edges <?fa rectangular pit (Fig. 9). In addition,
this house had a masonry entranceway (or ventilator shaft) which
extended approximately 6 feet beyond the east wall.
The rectangular house at the Spring Canyon Site, the best preserved
and largest structure excavated by the salvage project, had double
walls. The interior side was composed of massive vertical slabs possibly set in adobe ( Fig. 23 ) , while the exterior wall was made of
smaller horizontally placed slabs (or rubble) set in liberal amounts of
adobe.
In all instances, only the bases of the original walls were constructed
of stone. The slabs found intact and those scattered about the walls of
each structure would, at the most, account for two or possibly three
courses of masonry. The upper portions of the walls and roofs must
surely have been of a more perishable material, perhaps poles and
adobe (jacal ), or poles and hide.
There were few interior features: five postholes and two possible
boiling stone concentrations were located within House A, Medford
Ranch; two storage pits, two boiling stone concentrations, and one
posthole were found in House B, Medford Ranch; a storage pit, and a
worked bison scapula, and a flint flake cache were uncovered in the
small oval structure at Spring Canyon. None, however, had well
defined floors, hearths, or notable accumulations of refuse within the
rooms. In connection with the absence of hearths, it is interesting to
note that none of the houses appeared to have burned.
Several exterior features were revealed by excavations about the
structures. To the north or northeast of each was a refuse accumulation
which was generally small in size, but fairly rich in cultural debris.
Two trash deposits at the Medford Ranch Site and one at the Spring
Canyon Site had accumulated in shallow, basin-shaped depressions.
Other occupational features found include four flake and/ or utilized
flake scraper caches and four boiling stone concentrations at the Medford Ranch Site; and one large, basin-shaped pit and two flake caches
at the Spring Canyon Site. In each case, the caches were merely concentrations of objects. All the storage pits-both inside and outside of
the structures-were unlined. They ranged from oval to circular in
outline and from bell-shaped to basin-shaped in cross section.
Specimens recovered from the excavations include chipped and

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

73

ground stone objects, potsherds, and, with the exception of the Conner
Site, worked bone. The artifact y ield, however, was very low ( 17
specimen s) at the Conner Site and, probably as a result, little diversity
was noted in the specimens from this site. Otherwise, the collections
from each site have much in common. Borger Cordmarked was by far
the most common type of pottery recovered. Of the 933 sherds found
at the sites ( four from Conner, 535 from Medford Ranch, and 394
from Spring Canyon ), 845 are identified as Borger Cordmarked. An
additional 57 sherds from the Medford Ranch Site may be Borger; the
remaining 21 sherds are from an unidentified plain ware (or wares ) .
The most characteristic chipped stone artifacts are notched
(Washita-like types ) and unnotched (Fresno and Young types)
triangular arrow points, well made drills with square or T-shaped
bases, snub-nose and side scrapers, and well-made oval and, less often,
diamond-shaped, bevel-edged knives . Almost all of the chipped stone
artifacts had been fashioned from silicified dolomite, so-called Ali bates
"flint. " The ground stone specimens, not numerous at any of the three
sites, include oval- and rectangular-shaped manos, basin-shaped metates, a sandstone gorget, and several awl sharpeners. Worked shell
and bone were found at the Medford Ranch and Spring Canyon sites,
and include mussel shell scrapers, bone awls, and bison bone hoe
blades, digging stick tips, and squash knives.
CuLT U RAL AFFILIATIONS OF THE SITES

Virtually all of the sites in the Texas and Oklahoma panhandles
having masonry walls (or wall foundations ), evidence of an equal
reliance on agriculture and hunting, notched and unnotched triangular
arrow points, a number of bone tools, and cordmarked pottery have
been included in the Panhandle Aspect (Krieger, 1946: 41-49; Watson, 1950; Suhm, et al., 1954: 66-67) . This aspect, in turn, has been
divided into two foci, Antelope Creek and Optima. The former has
been reported along the Canadian River in the Texas panhandle
(Krieger, 1946 : 41-49 ), while the Optima Focus occurs in the Oklahoma panhandle, on the North Canadian River (Watson, 1950 ) .
The differences between the two foci comprising the Panhandle
Aspect seem to be relatively minor and are based mainly, but not
entirely, on variations in architecture. In general, the Antelope Creek
Focus is characterized (Krieger, 1946: 42-43 ) by fairly large multiroomed pueblos having a considerable amount of stone masonry in the
wall construction. The Optima Focus, known only from excavations

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

at the Stamper Site, is distinguished (Watson, 1950: 48-49 ) by isolated square to rectangular rooms, with single rows of vertical slabs
serving as the base of the walls. Other traits said to differentiate these
foci are innumerated by Watson ( 1950: 52-53 ) and need not be
reviewed here, except to note that they are based largely on the presence or absence of certain minor types of stone, bone, and shell
artifacts.
The Medford Ranch, Conner, and Spring Canyon sites can, without
reservation, be identified with the Panhandle Aspect. The focal affiliations , however, are less clear. In nonarchitectural traits, the three sites
show many similarities with both foci, although only Antelope Creek
Focus pottery (Borger Cordmarked ) was recover ed. On the other hand,
the collections from Sanford Reservoir lack certain Antelope Creek
and Optima focus traits (Krieger, 1946; Suhm, et al. , 1954; Watson ,
1950 ). The distinctive, nonarchitectural, Antelope Creek Focus traits
not found are tubular clay pipes, double-bitted axes, wedge-shaped
manos, serrated edge mussel shells, conch ( ?) shell beads, beamers,
eyed needles, tortoise shell rattles, and lined or plastered storage pits.
Distinctive Optima Focus traits not present are : Stamper Cordmarked
(which differs from Borger mainly in having cambered rims and
incised rim decorations ), triangular knives, mussel shell discs, and
cylindrical beads. While the full significance of the absence of these
traits is not clear, it does seem important that only 1,308 artifacts (933
of which are potsherds ) were recovered from all of the Sanford Reservoir sites. Moreover, many of the above traits are minor or rare types
and, consequently, would not be expected to occur in a small sample.
To summarize the nonarchitectural traits, the collections from the
Medford Ranch, Conner, and Spring Canyon sites do not align perfectly with either focus; however, with the exception of pottery, they
seem to agree slightly better with the Optima Focus.
With respect to architecture, the structures at the three Sanford
Reservoir sites, when examined in detail are considerably different
from those described as typical Antelope Creek Focus (Krieger, 1946:
42-43 ). They also differ-but not as markedly-from the houses at
the Stamper Site (Watson, 1950). These comparisons point out the
difficulty in assigning these sites to a particular focus and, in light of
the available data, any of the following cultural alignments could be
made.
( 1) The sites may be variants of the Optima Focus . While the
geographical location does not preclude assignment to the Optima
Focus, the Sanford sites are nevertheless more than 100 miles from the
nearest known Optima Focus component.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

75

(2 ) These may be earlier or later sites of the.Antelope Creek Focus.
The architectural variations observed may be explained in terms of
time differences, although much time depth has not been definitely
demonstrated for the focus.
( 3 ) These sites may represent outlying farming communities and/ or
areas of cultural lag. Perhaps the concept of the Antelope Creek Focus
has been distorted by a concentration on the larger sites in the area.
While none of the above explanations is perhaps adequate in itself,
a combination of the latter two may be nearer the actual situation.
The three sites appear to be more closely related to the Antelope Creek
than to the Optima Focus. If the architectural discrepancies are ignored, these sites can tentatively be assigned to the Antelope Creek
Focus.
The data from these three sites point out that the Antelope Creek
Focus as a working hypothesis needs further refinement and that
future work in the area should attempt to seek answers to these problems.
TEMPORAL PosiTION OF THE SITES

Before 1932, the workers in the Texas panhandle believed that the
many sites there with masonry ruins were an eastern extension of the
earlyPuebloan (Basketmaker) culture (Holden, 1933: 50 ). This thinking, however, was revised that year when Puebloan trade sherds, dated
at about A.D. 1350, were found in the excavation of the Saddle-Back
Ruin. Since 1932, no new dates have been suggested; for example,
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 72-73 ) estimated the age of this
material to be "A.D. 1300-1450 .. . for the period with Puebloan
trade material. The agricultural settlements," they add, "may have
been established earlier. " This last statement hints at some time depth
in the Panhandle Aspect (specifically the Antelope Creek Focus ). In
the following, a highly tentative--and somewhat tenuous-attempt is
made at a temporal ordering of several sites in Texas (two from Sanford Reservoir ) and Oklahoma. This approach is based on the relative
frequency of unnotched triangular points and the assumption that this
style, in very late times, replaced notched triangular points. If correct,
then a site with 25% plain triangular points would be earlier than one
with 75% plain triangular points.
The evidence-admittedly still scant-favoring a late position for
the plain triangular points (Fresno type) is derived principally from
the southern plains, where historic and protohistoric sites have yielded
more plain than notched triangular points and, conversely, where
earlier prehistoric sites have yielded more notched than unnotched

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

triangular arrow points (Wedel, 1959; Duffield and Jelks, 1961 ) . As a
possible check on this sequence, arrow point frequencies for several
Washita River (Lawton, 1958; Oaks, 1953; Schmitt, 1950; Schmitt
and Toldan, 1953; Sharrock, 1959a, 1959b, 1961 ) and Custer (Brighton, 1951; Buck, 1959; Gallaher, 1951 ) Focus sites in central and
western Oklahoma have been examined (Fig. 34).
Percent plain Total
triangles arrow points

Sites

440
33
109

70.2
66.6
51.3
39.5
35.7
33.3
29 . 1

Grant
Thomas
Brol.-.'11

Lacy
Van Schuyver
Willingham
Lee

38

14
24
117

Fig . 34. Triangular arrow point frequencies in Washita River Focus sites.

In the Washita River Focus it was found that the popularity of plain
triangular points increased gradually from 29.1% of the total arrow
points in the older Lee Site (Sharrock, 1961: 30, Fig. 34) to 70% in
the more recent Grant Site. In the Custer Focus, plain triangular
arrow points increased from 22% in the earlier Phillips Site to 66.7%
in the later Shahan I Site (Buck, 1959: 30). Unfortunately, the arrow
point sample is limited in some of the sites in this latter sequence but
nevertheless the trend is convincing.
Assuming that the same arrow point sequence existed in the Texas
panhandle just to the west of the Oklahoma foci, it might be possible
to arrange temporally some of the excavated sites. Currently only
three sites, the Medford Ranch Site, the Spring Canyon Site, and CR-1
(Glasscock and Glasscock, 1955), have been reported in sufficient
detail to enable a comparison to be made. The small Conner Site has
TABLE 1
Relative percentage of arrow point forms in various sites
Medford Ran ch Site
No.
Percent

Plain trianguar
Side-notched
Young points
Side-notched with
basal notch
Miscellaneous
Totals

3
9
5

1
18

16.66
50.00
27.77

5.55
99.98%

No.

625
637
151
15
14
1442

CR-1
Percent

Spring Canyon Site
No.
Percent

43.34
44.17
10.47

15
2
13

50
6.66
43 .33

1.04
.97
99.99%

30

99.99%

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

77

only three arrow points (all Fresno) and it is excluded from this
analysis (Table 1).
Judging from these data, the Spring Canyon Site is the youngest of
the three while the Medford Ranch Site is the oldest.
Again it should be emphasized that this ordering is highly tentative
and until further work can validate or repudiate this approach no firm
reliance should be made on the sequence. Perhaps as more sites in the
area are worked, this approach to temporal ordering may prove fruitful.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

From the inception of the project, various individuals and institutions have given valuable assistance and co-operation. To all who have
had a part in this undertaking I am deeply indebted, particularly to
the following: Mr. Jack T. Hughes from the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society Museum at Canyon, Texas. Jack Hughes made several
visits to the digs and offered valuable suggestions on various approaches
to our archeological problems in the area and, in addition, he furnished
corn remains recovered from Site 41 HC 3. He also made available
the materials that the Panhandle-Plains Museum expedition recovered
from the Spring Canyon Site after the completion of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project dig. Dr. Hugh Cutler, Executive Director of
the Missouri Botanical Garden identified the corn from the Spring
Canyon Site. Mr. Hall Medford gave us permission to excavate two of
the sites (41 HC 10 and 41 HC 20) on his ranch. The personnel of the
Bureau of Reclamation field office at Borger and the main office in
Amarillo were very co-operative in helping locate landowners and
permitting us the use of maps and aerial photographs. Messrs. K. C.
Travis and C. B. Wade, citizens of Stinnett, Texas, provided conversation during many of the evenings and helped make our visit to the
area an enjoyable one.
Thanks also go to the crew-James Robert Conner, Bill Robert
Harrison, Dan Herman Jackson, Kenneth R. Lane, and Gary G.
Tunnell, students at West Texas State College; Mark Lemual Parsons
and Jack Daniel Scurlock, students at The University of Texas-who
were instrumental in recovering the data presented in this report.
Special acknowledgment is due assistant archeologist W. A. (Bill)
Davis, who was plagued with the minutiae of recording and other
excavation problems.
Finally, my sincere thanks for constructive suggestions and advice
are due the staff archeologists of the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project in Austin, especially Edward B. Jelks, whose fund of knowl-

78

TEXAS ARCH E OLOGICAL SOCIETY

edge of Texas archeology was frequently tapped in our discussions of
the problems of the area.
ADDENDUM

After the Texas Archeological Salvage Project completed their investigations at the Spring Canyon Site, the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society Museum excavated a midden area to the northeast of the
main structure (Fig. 21). The specimens recovered by the PanhandlePlains Historical Society Museum were not available at the time of the
original analysis, but have recently been loaned to The University of
Texas. While a detailed description of these specimens is not possible
at the present time, the more interesting artifacts are briefly noted below.
Among the arrow points are six Fresno, four Washita-like, four
Young and four unclassified fragments. Two additional arrow points
deserve special mention. One of these is the basal portion of a Washitalike point which has been broken across the blade at the upper edge of
the notches. The distal part of the remaining stub has been reworked
into a short, blunted tip. The other unusual arrow point is a narrow,
unnotched triangular specimen made from a thin flake. The basal
corners of this point protrude from the blade, and the left edges of the
blade (tip oriented upwards ) are beveled while the right edges are unmodified.
One barbed dart point fragment with slightly concave blade edges
was recovered. Both the proximal and distal ends are missing, but the
stem of this specimen appears to have been formed by corner notches.
Included in the unifacially worked implements are three snub-nose
scrapers, one of which is unusually small. This small specimen is made
from a narrow, thin flake, and is worked along all edges of one face .
From the bit end, where it measures .8 em. wide, the lateral edges
taper (specimen 3. 7 em. long ) to a sharply pointed base. Other chipped
stone artifacts include one diamond-shaped, alternately beveled knife
(9 em. long), two complete ovate knives, 17 ovate knife fragments,
four drills, seven triangular fla·k e scrapers, and nine utilized flake
scrapers .
Pecked and ground stone artifacts are represented by two grinding
slab fragments, two manos, two awl sharpeners made of unshaped
pieces of sandstone, five hammerstones, one pestle-like hammerstone,
and a thick ( 3 em. ), chipped and partially ground stone disc that varies
from 10 to 11 em. in diameter.

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

79

Bone artifacts include six small needle-like awl fragments , one short
( 4.5 em. long) metapodial awl, one digging stick tip fragment ( articular end) , one possible squash knife fragment, and part of the working
edge of a bison scapula, perhaps from a hoe.
Six worked shell specimens were also discovered. One has a longitudinal slit in the umbo, while the ventral edges of all examples are
ground smooth, evidently use. On the interior of several of these
shells are scratches which are generally oriented parallel with the long
axis of the shells . These scratches suggest that the shells may have
served both as scrapers and as knives .
No attempt has been made to analyze, or even to tabulate, the large
number of cordmarked sherds found by the Panhandle-Plains Historical Society Museum. Three sherds, however, are interesting since they
provide information not recovered by the Texas Archeological Salvage
Project. One of these is an unperforated cordmark pottery disc which
measures 4 em. in diameter; another is a sherd from the neck-shoulder
area of a small cordmarked vessel. The vessel represented by the latter
sherd, like some of its larger Borger Cardmarked counterparts ( Suhm,
et al., 1954: 390-392), was globular (ca. 8.5 em. in maximum diameter) with a short, slightly flaring rim. The fracture lines of this sherd
suggest that the vessel wAs mAde hy the coil method. The third sherd
in this group is small ( 1.8 em. in diameter) and has impressions of at
least four rows of coiled basketry. The coil impressions measure .6 em.
from edge to edge.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1.
Blair, W . Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,.
pp. 93-117.
Brighton, Harold D.
1951. Archaeological Sites in Custer County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 164-187.
Buck, Arthur Dewey
1959. The Custer Focus of the Southern Plains. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 1-31.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 4, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gallaher, Art
1951. The Goodman I Site, in Custer County, Oklahoma . Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 22, pp. 188-216.
Glasscock, Keith, and Alma Glasscock
1955. Report on Cr-1, An Indian Campsite in Moore County, Texas. PanhandlePlains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 96-106.
Holden, W. C.
1929. Some Recent Explorations and Excavations in Northwest T exas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 1, pp. 23-35.
1933. Excavation of Saddle-Back Ruin. Bulletin of the T exas At·cheological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 5, pp. 39-52.
Honea, Kenneth H .
ms.
Techniques and Analysis of Stone Flaking. Unpublished manuscript.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publication No. 4640.
Lawton, Sherman P.
1958. The Max Thomas Site, Gd-4. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological
Society, Vol. 6, pp. 83-88.
Moorehead, Warren K.
1921. Recent Explorations in Northwestern Texas. American Anthropologist,
Vol. 23, No.1, pp. 1-11.
Oaks, John Underhill
1953. The Lacy Site, Garvin County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 1, pp. 17-24.
Sayles, E. B.
1935. An Archaeological Survey of T exas. Medallion Papers, Vol. 17.
Schmitt, Karl
1950. The Lee Site, Gv3, of Garvin County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 21, pp. 69-89 .
Schmitt, Karl , and Raymond Toldan, Jr.
1953. The Brown Site, Gd-1, Grady County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 24, pp. 141-176.
Shaeffer, James B.
1958. The Alibates Flint Quarry, Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 24, No. 2,
pp. 189-191.
Sharrock, Floyd W.
1959a. Preliminary Report on the Van Shuyver Site, Pottawotami County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 33-40.
1959b. Test Excavations at the Willingham Site, Ml-5, McClain County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 7, pp. 41-50.
1961. The Grant Site of the Washita River Focus. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. 9, pp. 1-66.
Studer, Floyd V.
1931. Archeological Survey of the North Panhandle of Texas. Bulletin of the

THREE PANHANDLE ASPECT SITES

81

Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 3, pp. 70- 75.
1934. Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 6, pp. 80-96.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Watson, Virginia
1950. The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 21,
pp. 7-68.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin, No. 174.
Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas

Two Burials From the Jim Arnold Site
in Northwest Texas
CURTIS D. TUNNELL
ABSTRACT
Two human burials were removed from the edge of a gravel pit in Hall County,
Texas after they had been exposed and heavily disturbed by machinery. Associated
artifacts were few, but included bone awls and awl blanks made from split deer
metapodials, fresh water mussel shells, and a small flint knife. Since none of these
specimens is distinctive, the exact chronological placement of these burials is not
possible at the present time.

INTRODUCTION

On August 29, 1962, a county highway crew encountered human
bones in a gravel pit on the Jim Arnold property in southwestern Hall
County. This discovery was called to the attention of the Texas Memorial Museum, and subsequently the author investigated the site
(Texas Memorial Museum Accession No. 1853, and University of
Texas Archeological Site No. 41 HL 2) .
Hall County lies just below the eastern escarpment of the Llano
Estacada and is characterized by heavily eroded topography drained
by the upper forks of the Red and Pease rivers. Vegetation is rather
sparse, being composed primarily of mesquite on the flats and juniper
in the canyons, with short range grasses and scattered clumps of cactus
appearing throughout the area. The fauna and flora are typical of the
Kansan biotic province (Blair, 195 0: 109-112) .
The gravel pit in which the bones were discovered is situated near
Turkey, Texas, on a low hill just south of Kent Creek, a spring-fed
tributary of Pease River. The hill is composed of commercially valuable gravel capped with three to four feet of brown sandy topsoil. At
the time of the burials' discovery, a pit about 100 feet long (northsouth), 50 feet wide, and eight to 12 feet deep had been cut into the
north slope of the hill. Scraps of human bones were scattered along
the south wall of the gravel pit, and, when cleared, the south profile
revealed outlines of two graves extending down into the gravel (Fig. 2).
During the first day of investigation, most of an adult cranium
(Burial 1) and parts of two postcranial skeletons were collected from

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the surface. On the following day both of these graves were excavated.
The contents of one had been completely removed by the gravel operations, but the other (Burial 2 ) produced an adult cranium, upper
postcranial skeleton, and 10 associated artifacts (Fig. 1). A careful
examination of the slumped gravel beneath the pit of Burial1 produced
four artifacts and additional fragments of that skeleton.
ZONE DESCRIPTION

Two geologic zones were exposed in the side of the gravel pit. Zone I
was a very compact sand and gravel bed which formed the low hills
bordering Kent Creek. The stream-rolled gravels of Zone I were as
much as 0.4 feet in diameter, and they were rather heavily coated and
cemented with caliche. This zone, which was tan to light brown in
color, contained some caliche nodules, but it was sterile of cultural

J IM ARNOLD SITE
4 1 HL 2
T EXAS

2

ooo~~FJ»»»~

9ravet

2

0

N

A = bo ne ow l s
B = m u ssel s h el l s
C = fli n t knif e

f. ee f
Fig . 1. General location of site and plan of Burial 2 .

85

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

debris. The depth of Zone I was not determined. The two burial pits
extended from one to two feet down into the top of this gravel layer
(Fig. 2 ) .
Zone II, a very compact sandy soil, capped Zone I in a layer from
two to four feet thick (Fig. 2 ) . This dark brown soil contained scattered
flint flakes, broken animal bones, and tiny fragments of charcoal, but
no concentrations of these materials were found. The grave outlines
did not extend up into this zone, indicating that the graves must have
been dug before, or soon after, this soil began to accumulate. Local
collectors are said to have found both arrow and dart points on the
surface of this hill in the vicinity of the burials. Assorted fragments
of chipped stone tools and grinding stones were picked up on the surface above the burials at the time of the excavation, and during a later
visit to the site expanding stem dart points were found .

DESCRIPTION OF THE BURIALS
BuRIAL

1

The south portion of this grave was visible in the south wall of the
gravel pit (Fig. 2 ) . The outline was about 4.5 feet long (east-west) ,
1.0 foot to 1.5 feet deep, and extended from 0.5 foot to 1.0 foot back
into the bank. All of the artifacts and skeletal material had been dislodged from the grave by machinery, but most of a cranium, other
skeletal fragments, and four bone artifacts were collected from loose
talus fill beneath the remaining grave outline. The grave fill (a mixture
of Zones I and II was a compact soil, light brown in color, sandy in
texture, containing numerous small gravels and some caliche nodules.
The grave had been dug down into Zone I from at or near the base of
Zone II. Zone II dipped down slightly into the grave pit at the east
end. T he bottom of the grave was uneven, sloping downward for several inches toward the west end. The position and orientation of the
skeleton and the artifacts could not be determined.
Two complete bone awls and two fragments were found in the disturbed talus accumulation below Burial I (Fig. 4, E-H) . The two complete specimens are made from the outside (lateral) posterior edges of
a right and left deer metapodial. Both specimens are smoothed on all
edges and taper to highly polished points. These two implements, and
the six similar bone artifacts from Burial 2, were made by splitting
deer metapodials into four longitudinal splinters of approximately
equal size. The distal end of each splinter was ground and polished into

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

w

~
(f)

0
_j

0

z

C\J
_j

I

0::

<( '¢

~
J

.,

·a..
D

·;:
::>

...
..c
0

c

-~
~
.,.,

g

~.,
>
...;

"'

;;::

3

~
<I>

!
w

a sharp point while the proximal end, showing traces of the articular
surface, was left essentially unaltered ( Fig. 3, A ).

87

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

Dimensions:
Length
Basal width
Basal thickness
Average shaft width
Average shaft thickness

Fig. 4
Specimen E
15.3 em.
1.7 em.
9mm.
1.1 em.
7mm.

Fig. 4
Specimen F
12.6 em.
1.3 em.
6mm.
1.1 em.
5mm.

A basa l fragment of a third bone awl (Fig. 4, G ) is made from an
unidentified mammal bone sliver. It is 1.4 em. wide, 4 mm. thick and
has a smooth hole 3 mm. in diameter drilled through it centrally 9 mm.
above the base. This fragment is well smoothed and parallel striations
run lengthwise on both faces.
A bone awl tip is the other artifact from Burial 1. This thin sliver
of mammal bone (Fig. 4, H ) is well polished and finely pointed on
one end. Its maximum width is 8 mm., and the thickness averages
3 mm. The dimensions and general surface finish of this artifact
indicate that it may have been part of the same implement represented
by the basal fragment described above.
BuRIAL

2

The outline of this grave was clearly visible in the south wall of the
gravel pit just east of Burial 1. The grave pits were separated by only
about 1.0 foot of undisturbed gravel (Fig. 2 ). The outline was about
5.5 feet long (east·west ), from 1.0 foot to 2.0 feet deep, ar.d extended
back into the wall about 2.5 feet . The cranium, mandible, and articulated vertebrae and ribs of an adult skeleton were exposed, recorded,
and removed from this pit. The machinery had scattered most of the
arms and lower portion of the burial, fragments of which were recovered from the disturbed earth. The in situ portions of the skeleton were
lying on the right side with the head toward the west and facing southeast (Fig. 1 ). The position of the limbs could not be determined. On
the floor of the grave, just to the west of the cranium, were the following artifacts: three bone awls, three bone awl blanks, three mussel
shells (one with a serrated edge), and one small flint knife (Fig. 1).
The grave fill was the same as in Burial 1. It is interesting to note
that, as in Burial 1, Zone II extended down into the grave outline
several inches on the east end. There was also several square feet of
unused space in this part of the grave. It is possible that perishable
material such as basketry, leather, or wood was put into this portion

88

TEXAS ARCH EOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

8

1

I

I

2

,

D

l

~

s

F

E

I

I

I

I

6

7

6

9

G·

10

CM
Fig . 3 . Bone Artifacts. A, Deer melapodial showing section (solid line) used for manufacturing awls . B, D, F, Awl blanks associated with Burial 2 . C, E, G, Awls associated with
Bu rial 2 .

of the grave and its deterioration left a depression in the grave fill.
This grave was dug into Zon e I from the base of Zon e II.

89

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

The artifacts described below were found in situ just west of the
cranium in Burial 2 (Fig. 1). Two complete bone awls and one broken
specimen are made from split deer metapodials as described for the
Burial 1 specimens (Fig. 3, C, E, G ). Two of these are made from the
inside (medial ) and outside posterior edges of a right metapodial and
the other is an inside anterior left fragment. Each specimen is finely
pointed on the distal end and the shafts are well smoothed. The bases
of these awls are not as well smoothed as the bases of those from
Burial 1. The surfaces of these implements are irregularly pitted by
the solution action of ground water.

Dimensions:
Length
Basal width
Basal thickness
Average shaft width
Average shaft thickness

Fig. 3
Fig. 3
SpecimenE
Specimen G
18.2 em.
16.3 em.
(incomplete )
1.7 em.
---- - ------9mm.
9mm.
9mm.
7mm.
6mm.

Fig. 3
Specimen C
9.1 em.
1.6 em.
8mm.
1.0 em.
7mm.

Three bone awl blanks (Fig. 3, B, D , F ) were lying with the bone
awls described above. These are long, thin, slivers of a left deer metapodia!. One is an outside anterior edge, one an outside posterior edge,
and the other is an inside anterior sliver. The surfaces of these specimens are etched by ground water, but they are otherwise unaltered.

Dimensions:
Length
Basal width
Basal thickness
Average shaft width
Average shaft thickness

Fig. 3
Fig. 3
Specimen F Specimen D
19.2 em.
19.9 em.
1.6 em.
1.7 em.
1.0 em.
1.2 em.
1.1 em.
9mm.
7mm.
7mm.

Fig. 3
Specimen B
21.7 em.
1.7 em.
8mm.
1.1 em.
8mm.

Three valves of fre sh water mussels were associated with Burial 2
(Fig. 4, A, B, D ) . There are two right valves and one left valve, all
from different individuals. The two smaller shells are unworked, but
the larger shell has seven small V-shaped notches cut into the lower
ventral edge. These notches, spaced at 3 mm. intervals, are about 1 mm.
in depth.

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c
A

H

D

F

E
I

l

1

2

I

I

'

<f

.s

t
6

7

1- I
8
9

G

r
10

CM
Fig . 4 . Shell, Stone, and Bone Arlifacts . A, B, Unworked mussel shells associated with
Burial 2. C, Knife associaled with Burial 2 . D, Worked mussel shell associated with Burial 2 .
E-H, Awls associaled with Burial 1.

The other associated object is a small knife (Fig. 4, C) made from
red-orange Quitaque flint-a distinctive material which outcrops a
few miles to the west along the escarpment of the Llano Estacado. This
implement is made from a long narrow flake which has been bifacially

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

91

chipped along both of the long parallel edges. The base of the knife
is composed of the faceted striking platform of the flake. The tip of the
knife is thin , roughly pointed, and bifacially sharpened. This specimen
is 4.5 em. long, 2.0 em. wide, and 8 mm. thick.
COMMENTS AND COMPARISONS

The two burials from the Jim Arnold Site are quite similar, and
they reflect an interesting mortuary custom. Each of the two individuals was placed in a shallow grave which was considerably larger than
was required to accommodate the body. The excess space may have
been occupied by perishable offerings of one sort or another, but no
traces of such materials were found. Burial 1, a young woman in her
early twenties, and Burial 2, a man in his middle thirties (see article
by Thomas W. McKern in this volume), were both accompanied by
several bone awls made from split deer metapodials. It seems there
was no sexual distinction where these particular objects were concerned. In addition, Burial 2 contained bone awl blanks, mussel shells,
and a flake knife.
The absence of diagnostic artifacts, such as projectile points, and
datable radiocarbon material makes it impossible, at the present time,
to determine the chronological placement of the burials at the Jim
Arnold site. In fact, it is not even known what broad cultural stage
they represent. This immediate area is almost completely unkown
archeologically, and literature on the entire Texas panhandle is quite
limited.
A search of the archeological literature from northwestern Texas,
western Oklahoma, southwestern Kansas, and eastern New Mexico
failed to produce evidence of a comparable cluster of burial traitslarge, shallow grave pits containing single skeletons of either sex accompanied by bone awls, mussel shells, and flake knives. Awls similar
to those found with these burials are reported occasionally in Texas
in the Antelope Creek Focus ( Studer, 1934: Pl. 16; Watson, 1950:
Pl. 2, G; Duffield, 1964: Fig. 18, B-C ) ; the Henrietta Focus (Krieger,
1946: Pl. 8, J-L); the Kyle Site (Jelks, 1962: Fig. 25, A); in Oklahoma
at the Lee II Site (Pillaert, 1962: Pl. 27, 13); at various sites in Kansas
(Wedel, 1959: Fig. 46, A; Pl. 32, J-L; Pl. 59, E; Pl. 70, M); and at
Pecos Pueblo (Kidder, 1932: Figs. 174, 175) in New Mexico. But they
neither occur very commonly nor are they associated with burials.
Wedel does report (1959: 472, 521 ) mussel shells in burials in a few
instances. All of these occurrences of somewhat similar artifacts are
in cultural components of the Neo-American stage, but they are so

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

far removed from the Jim Arnold Site and so varied in context that
the similarities may well be fortuitous. I suspect, for example, that
deer metapodials lend themselves readily to the manufacture of sturdy
awls and were widely used for that purpose.
The dark sandy soil (Zone II) which had accumulated to a depth
of several feet above the graves indicates they are of some antiquity,
but this could mean that they might range anywhere between several
hundred and several thousand years. Fragments of flint artifacts, bison
bones, and other bits of cultural debris are present throughout Zone II,
and a test of this portion of the site might give some clues to the age
of the interments that lie beneath this soil. The dart points found on
the surface of the site could indicate that an Archaic occupation is
present in Zone II.
Unfortunately, we will have to await future work in the area and
additional work at the Jim Arnold Site to learn the age of these burials
and if they represent a widespread burial custom.
The author wishes to acknowledge the cooperation of the following
local people: Jim Arnold, the landowner, E. L. Hill, Dan Gibson, Dale
Garner, Eugene Ferguson, who reported the discovery, and Mr. and
Mrs. Curtis Tunnell who assisted in the excavation. Figures 3, A and
4, C were drawn by Hal Story of the Texas Memorial Museum.
REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 93-117.
Duffield, Lathe! F.
1964. Three Panhandle Asp ect Sites at Sanford Reservoir, Hutchinson County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35 (this issue ) .
Jelks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Kidder, Alfred V.
1932. The Artifacts of Pecos. The Robert S. Peabody Foundation for Archaeology, Papers of the Southwestern Expedition, No.6.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of Texas
Publication No. 4640.
Pillaert, Elizabeth
1962. Test Excavation at the Lee II Site, Gv-4, Garvin County, Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 79-101.

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

93

Studer, Floyd V.
1934. Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 6, pp. 80-96.
Watson, Virginia
1950. The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 21,
pp. 7-68.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin, No. 174.
Texas Memorial Museum
Austin, Texas

Indian Skeletal Material from
the Jim Arnold Site
THOMAS W. MCKERN
ABSTRACT
Two partial human skeletons, a male and a female, were found at the Jim Arnold
Site. Cranial measurements and observations are discussed, and comparisons are
made with skeletal material from other T exas Indian sites.

INTRODUCTION

Skeletal material taken from the Jim Arnold Site ( 41 HL 2) consists of two burials, each containing the remains of one individual.*
Methods employed to describe these two burials are those in standard
use by American physical anthropologists. The data were recorded
on the standard anthropometric blanks used in the Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas. Identification of age and
sta lure was aided by the most recent techniques of McKern and
Steward ( 1957 ), and Trotter and Gieser ( 1958 ). Due to the generally
poor condition of the postcranial material for both burials, only cranial
measurements and observations will be considered in detail.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION

BuRIAL 1 (Catalogue No. 2133 )
Burial 1 is represented by both cranial and postcranial material. The
bone is in good condition but unfortunately the skull and most of the
postcranial skeleton is incomplete. The individual can be identified as
a young female in her early twenties. Cranial measurements and
indices are shown in Table 1.
Although not complete, the metric and morphological observations
demonstrate a fairly short, gracile somatotype of moderate proportions. Alveolar prognathism is pronounced. Both maxillary and man-dibular dentition deserve special attention. Wear for both arcades is
excessive for a young adult, even under Texas Indian standards.
• For a description of the Jim Arnold Site and the artifacts associated with the
burials, see Curtis Tunnell's article in this issue of the Bulletin.

96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Crowding is exceptional, especially in the maxilla where this condition
is accentuated by the presence of an extra medial incisor. The tooth
is not present but from the conformation of the alveolus it seems likely
that it was peg shaped. Both mandibular third molars are impacted
and have extensive abcesses at the root level.
Slight lipping of the anterior margins of the fourth and fifth lumbars demonstrates the only bone pathology.
BuRIAL 2 (Catalogue No. 2134 )
Burial 2 is that of an adult male in his middle thirties. A complete
skull in excellent condition (Fig. 1) with some fragmentary postcranial material represents the remains of this individual. Table 2
shows the cranial measurements and indices.
The general cranial picture reflects an individual with a long, narrow
head, high vault, a short but wide face, wide nose, and low rectangular
orbits. It is interesting to note that the combination of narrow vault
and short, wide face with rectangular orbits is one that was diagnostic
of the late Paleolithic populations of :Europe. Dolichocranies sharing
such disharmonic proportions are not common among known samples
of prehistoric Texas Indians. Table 3 demonstrates the unique position
of this individual when compared to other Texas crania.
Lipping of the lower lumbar anterior borders represents the only
pathology.
TABLE 1
Crarual measurements and indices for Burial 1
Measurements (in millimeters)
Bicondylar breadth
107
Nasion-prosthion
71
Nasal height
50
Nasal breadth
Z3
Orbital height (right)
33
Orbital breadth (right)
37
Palate breadth
60
Palate length
54
Height of symphysis
34
Bigonial
85
Height of ascending ramus (left)
49
Mandible thickness betweeen M1-Z
14
Indices
Nasal index
46.0 (leptorrhine)
Orbital index
83 .3 (mesoconch )
Palate index
90.0 (brachystaphyEne)

SKELETAL MATERIAL FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

'97

Fig . 1. Side and front view of skull from Burial 2 .

Whether this individual from the Arnold Site demonstrates extragenetic influences, individual variability beyond what is presently

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

known, or a new morphological strain not yet witnessed in Texas cannot be decided at this time. It must be remembered that we know very
little about the prehistoric populations of Texas and accentuating new
morphological types or intrusive biological elements on the basis of
isolated discoveries is certainly premature.
Burial 2 remains an interesting case and as our knowledge of early
populations in the same geographic area and similar time period begins
to accumulate, our ability to interpret its importance will become more
realistic.
TABLE 2
Cranial measurements and indices for Burial 2
Measurements (in millimeters)
Glabello-occipitallength
Maximum breadth
Basion-bregma height
Auricular head height
Minimum frontal
Bizygomatic breadth
Bicondylar breadth
Nasion-menton
Nasion-prosthion
Nasal height
Nasal breadth
Basion-prosthion
Basion-subnasale
Basion-nasion
Orbital height (left )
Orbital breadth (left)
Palate breadth
Height of symphysis
Gonion-menton (left )
Bigonial
Height of ascending ramus (left)
Mandible thickness between M1-2
Indices
( dolichocranic )
Cranial index
( orthocranic)
Length-height index
Upper facial index
( hypereuryeme)
Total facial index
( euryprosopic)
Nasal index
(chamaerrhine)
Orbital index
(mesoconch)

187
125
139
117
96
131
115
111
67
52
28
99
91
110
32
40
62
30
82
128
61
14

66.8
74.3
50.7
84.1
51.8
80.0

99

SKELETAL MATERIAL FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

TABLE 3
Comparative cranial measurements and indices for Texas Indians

Am old
(Burial 2 )

Glabello-occipitallength
Maximum breadth
Basion-bregma height
Bizygomatic breadth
Upper facial height
Total facial height
Cranial index
Upper facial index
Total facial index
Nasal index
Orbital index

187
125
139
131
67
111
66.8
50.7
84.1
51.8
80.0

Kyle
(Burial 2 )

188
136
132
137
62
117
72.3
45.2
85.4
56.5
91.5

l\1ean measurem ents for
Central
lVIorhiss
Texas

184
132
137
135
70
117
72.0
56 .1
87.2
49.6
95.1

Oso

187
137
136

190
134
137

69
119
73.0

73
120
71.0

50.0
85.7

44.9
94.7

REFERENCES CITED
McKern, T. W., and T. D. Stewart
1957. Skeletal Age Changes in Young American Males. Quartermaster Research
and Development Center Command, EP-45, Natick, Mass.
Trotter, M., and G. C. Gieser
1958. A Re-evaluation of Estimation of Stature Based on Measurements of
Stature Taken during Life and of Long Bones after Death. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 16, No.1, pp. 79-123.
Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

The Garza Site: A Neo-American
Campsite Near Post, Texas
FRANK A. RUNKLES
ABSTRACT
A small archeological site in Garza County, Texas was dug in 1959 by the South
Plains Archeological Society to salvage materials threatened to be destroyed by
highway construction. The excavations yielded tubular bone beads, bone awls, wolf
teeth pendants, chipped stone knives, scrapers, drills , arrow points (including a
new type herein called Garza) , and numerous broken bison bones. These artifacts
and the occupational features, mainly hearths, are described, and the distribution
of the Garza type arrow point is discussed.

INTRODUCTION

The Garza Site, recorded as 41 Ga 40 in the files of the West Texas
Museum at Texas Technological College, is located about 16 airline
miles south of Post, Texas, in Garza County. It consists of a buried
occupational zone (Figs. 1, 2) which contains a distinctive type of
arrow point (for which the name Garza is suggested) along with a
limited amount of other cultural debris.
The site lies about one mile east of the Llano Estacado (Staked
Plains ), a vast, relatively featureless plain which extends from the
west some five to 15 miles into Garza County. Below the caprock-an
erosional escarpment that marks the edge of the Llano Estacadathere are many small, intermittent streams which make up the headwaters of the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River. At the present time, rain water rushing down these normally dry creeks is causing considerable erosion of their alluvial banks .
The Garza Site was discovered in just such an eroded bank by
several state highway engineers in November 1958, while surveying
the proposed right-of-way for State Highway 669. The engineers observed a hearth containing stones and charcoal in a creek bank about
3.5 feet below the surface. They reported the find to J. M. Baylis (then
secretary of the Garza Chapter of South Plains Archeological Society),
and during the excavations they were most cooperative in making
possible the first known archeological highway salvage in the State
of Texas.

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

103

GARZA SITE

The site is buried in a low terrace on the west side of a bend in a
dry, unnamed creek (Figs. 1, 2). Overlain by approximately 16 to 42
inches of sterile soil, the occupational zone lies in the first and only
terrace of a shallow and narrow valley. This zone has been exposed
and partly removed by recent erosion. The terrace deposit, or more
properly the valley fill, consists primarily of slope wash derived from
the easily eroded Triassic clays which outcrop nearby. Although generally very thin ( 2 inches on the average), the occupational zone did
reach a maximum of about 6 to 14 inches in thickness where hearths
and other features were encountered.
EXCAVATION ·

The excavation was begun in January 1959 and continued intermittently until June 1959. It was conducted by members of the South
Plains Archeological Society under the general direction of Drs. Earl
F. Green and David H. Kelley of the West Texas Museum, Texas
Technological College. The actual field work, however, was supervised by the author and Emmett Shedd.
A horizonal datum point, designated as ON-OE, was established
140 feet west of the hearth discovered by the highway engineers. A
grid composed of 10 foot squares was extended 140 feet east and 100
feet north of the datum (Fig. 2 ) .
The excavations concentrated on the occupational zone, which appeared clearly as a layer of discolored earth with bits of charcoal,
flint flakes , and splintered bone. It was buried as much as 42 inches
below the surface at the creek bank, but became shallower (as little
as 16 inches below the surface ) toward the western part of the site,
at the base of a low hill. Apart from the lateral cutting of the stream,
the only disturbance to the site consisted of slumpage which had been
produced by deep water erosion underneath the surface (Fig. 2).
Evidence obtained from the excavation suggested that the hearths
and other features uncovered had been anchored in place by gently
deposited silts. It seems probable that this deposition initially occurred
shortly after the site was abandoned.
Forty-two squares were worked (Fig. 2 ) . Of these 26 were completely

Fig . 1. The Garza Site. A, Looking west at alluvial bank in which the site was first discovered; hearth and occupation zone are exposed where the worker is kneeling. B, Over-alf
view of the site, looking east, after the mesquite trees and sterile overburden had been.
bulldozed off.

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

6DN~~tr~~~~~-k-+--~+-~~

X-------------r-~H--k~~~~~~-+~--~-

40Nr-~+r~~k-~~~~--~4.-t~A

0

'>O

eo

GARZA SITE

GA-40

GARZA COUN TY, TEXAS
[Sl = Grid
• · = Test

MAP BY :

s~uare s

pits

worKed

fRANK A.RUNKLH

Fig . 2 . Garza Site. Plan of excavation and generalized cross section .

excavated, and 3,734 square feet of occupation area were uncovered.
With the generous aid of Mr. John F . Lott, the landowner who furnished an operator and earth-moving equipment, approximately 8,000
cubic feet of overburden were dozed off (Fig. 1, B) and an eight foot

105

GARZA SITE

deep trench (Fig. 2 ) was dug to make certain that there was not an
earlier occupation represented at the site. Man hours-all of which
were volunteered-actually spent digging by hand totaled 1,692. It is
estimated that 1,867 cubic feet of hard, dry clay soil, much too compact
to be troweled, were chipped away by picks, shovels, and ice picks.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS AND OTHER
OCCUPATIONAL REFUSE

A total of 238 artifacts was collected from the Garza Site by members of the South Plains Archeological Society. In analyzing these
materials, they were first sorted into three broad groups: objects of
bone, chipped stone, and pecked and ground stone. Within these
general groupings a number of presumed functional categories (such
as bone awls, arrow points, scrapers, etc.) were recognized. In many
instances, it was possible to distinguish even more discrete categories
which are based primarily on comparisons of morphological features.
These final groupings are largely of a descriptive nature, although
two distinctive cultural types- the Harrell and Garza arrow point
types- are included.
As a group the artifacts from the Garza Site strongly suggest that
the occupants had an economy based largely on hunting. Among the
most common types of artifacts recovered are chipped stone arrow
points, knives, and scrapers-implements which were probably used
to kill and butcher animals. Confirmation of this interpretation was
readily obtained from the numerous bison bones which occurred in
the occupation zone.
OBJECTS oF BoNE

Splinter awls (Fig. 3, C, D ) . The two awls recovered are made from
bone splinters, possibly from bison leg bones that were initially broken
open to obtain marrow. Both specimens are essentially complete. One
(Fig. 3, C) tapers to a keen, slightly ground point, but is otherwise
unaltered. The other awl (Fig. 3, D ) is much larger and more extensively smoothed, apparently from greater use. It lacks only a small
portion of the distal end. The first specimen is 7.6 em. long, .8 em.
wide, and .4 em. thick; the second is 15 em. long, 2 em. wide at the
basal end, and 1 em. in maximum thickness.
Tubular beads (Fig. 3, E-G; Fig. 8, A ) . Four cylindrical beads,
each of which has been ground smooth on both ends and shows polish
from use, appear to have been fashioned from bird and/ or small mam-

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mal bones. They are 3 em. long, and from .5 to . 7 em. in diameter.
None shows indications of having been decorated, alth ough the surfaces of two are somewhat eroded.
Wolf teeth pendants (Fig. 3, A, B) . Two wolf canine teeth, probably from the same individual, have a shallow groove about .5 em .
below the enamel end. T h e remaining portions are not modified. T he

•

0

'0

A

8

c

E

F

G

0

2

4

6

CM

Fig . 3 . Artifacts of Te eth and Bone. A, B, Wolf teeth pendants. C, D, Spl inter bo ne aw ls.
E-G, Tubula r bone beads .

107

GARZA SITE

two teeth were found together in a position which suggested that they
may have been tied together and presumably worn as a necklace. Each
is 5.5 em. long and 1.3 em. in maximum width.
CHIPPED STONE ARTIFACTS

Arrow Points
Unidentified triangular points (Fig. 4, J -L, N-P ). Twenty·seven
triangular points, many of which are broken, cannot readily be identified with a recognized type. They have straight to convex lateral edges
and straight or concave bases. Several of the larger specimens (Fig.
4 , N-P) are crudely made, and most (22 ) are essentially unifacially
worked. Two (Fig. 4, 0 , P ) of the crude points are large enough to
be classified as Matamoros points ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 215), except
that the blades are not beveled. Perhaps these, and many of the others,
are unfinished points or small knives. At the other extreme, the smaller
and better chipped examples (such as Fig. 4, J ) could possibly be
identified as Fresno points ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 273) . The complete
specimens range from 2 to 4 em. in length, from 1.5 to 2 em. in maximum width, and .3 to .6 em. in thickness.
Harrell points (Fig. 4, F-I). Fifteen triple-notched arrow points
can be classified as the Harrell type ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 275).
Each has two lateral notches and one basal notch. The lateral edges
vary from straight to convex, and are sometimes finely serrated (Fig.
4 , G ). One point (Fig. 4, H ) has a straight base; the remainder have
slightly to markedly concave bases, and all have sharply defined basal
corners. Approximately half of the Harrell points are well worked on
both faces, while the others are made from plano-convex flakes which
are chipped principally on one (the convex ) face. All were fashioned
from stream worn flint and chert nodules probably obtained at or
near the site. They range from 2 to 4 em. in length, 1 to 2 em. in width,
and .2 to .3 em. in thickness.
Garza points (Fig. 4, A-E) . The name Garza is suggested for 13
triangular points, each of which has a centrally-placed basal notch. It
is felt that these points are distinctive enough to warrant establishing
them as a new type. (Additional distributional data on the Garza type
are presented in the concluding section.)
Both the lateral edges and the bases vary from straight to convex.
Serrations are often present on the blade edges (Fig. 4, A, B, D , E ),
and two (Fig. 4, D, E) have shallow, token notches near the tip end
of one lateral edge. Both of the latter specimens are well made and

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

G

c

B

D

H

M

J

N
0

E

K

0
4

2

F

L

p
6

CM
fig . 4 . Projectile Points. A-E, Garza points . F-1 , Harrell points . J- L, N-P, Unidentified
triangular po ints. M, Unidentified dart point.

GARZA SITE

109

have the same outline shape, with deeply serrated edges. The majority
of the Garza points exhibit fine workmanship, even though almost
half of them are only unifacially worked. One point is of obsidian, the
others are of local flints and cherts which, in the form of smoothed
stream pebbles, are abundant at the site.
The Garza points range from Z to 4 em. in length, although only
one (Fig. 4, E) is over 3.5 em. long. The maximum width occurs
across the base and is 1 to 2 em. These points are generally thin, with
the thickness varying from .1 to .3 em.
Arrow point fragments. Unidentifiable fragments of points, most of
which are well worked arrow point tips, total 19. One is made of
obsidian, the rest of local flint and chert.

Dart Point
Only one dart point (Fig. 4, M), an unclassifiable expanding stem
form, was recovered from the site. It has slightly convex blade edges,
pronouncedly barbed shoulders, and a straight base. The edges of the
blade have fine retouching which has produced faint serrations. This
dart point was found immediately below a layer of packed ash, on
what was the ground surface at the time of the original occupation.
The tan flint from which it was made is rarely found in Garza County,
suggesting that this specimen is intrusive to the site. It is 5.5 em. in
total length, 2.3 em. wide across the barbs, and .5 em. in maximum
thickness. The stem is . 7 em. long and 1. 7 em. wide at the base.

Drills
Bifacially worked drill (Fig. 5, J ) . One complete drill has an expanded base and is flaked across both surfaces. The shaft is . 7 em. wide,
lenticular in cross section, and shows wear on the edges, perhaps a
result of drilling stone. The drill measures 5.3 em. long, 2.2 em. wide
across the base, and .6 em. in maximum thickness.
Flake drills (Fig. 5, D-I ) . Nine drills are distinct from the above in
that they are smaller and have less well worked bases and shafts. Most
were formed by minimal alteration of thin flakes, with the majority
of the chipping being confined to the shafts. Even on the shafts the
flaking is primarily along the edges. All distal ends taper to a point,
but one (Fig. 5, H ) is especially keen. Several, but not all, are wom
along the lateral edges of the shaft. These flake drills vary from 3.1 to
5.4 em. in total length and 1 to 1.9 em . across the base. The shafts

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

G

0

E

H
J

N
0

2

4

CM
Fig . 5 . Knives, Drills, and Scrapers. A-C , Flake knives. D-1, Flake drills . J, Bifacial drill.
K-N, Side scrapers.

are 1.5 to 2.8 em. in length, .3 to .6 em. in width, and .1 to .5 em. in
thickness.

Knives
Slender, triangular knife (Fig. 6, H ). One bifacially worked knife
has a convex base and straight blade edges which recurve very slightly

GARZA SITE

111

near the distal end. Because of its narrowness, this specimen approaches
the shape of a drill; its inclusion in the knife category is therefore
somewhat arbitrary. Both lateral edges show secondary retouching
possibly intended to sharpen the specimen. It measures 6 em. in length,
1.5 em. in maximum width, and .4 em. in maximum thickness.
Alternately beveled knife. Although only the distal ( ?) end of this
specimen was recovered, it has all the earmarks of the diamond-shaped,
alternately beveled-edged knives which are commonly found in this
portion of Texas. It is made from a dark gray, translucent flint that
is not native to the area . The surviving part of the knife is 5.5 em.
long and 1.8 em wide at the broken end.
Flake knives (Fig. 5, A-C ) . Ninety-seven relatively thin flakes retouched along one or more marginal edges are termed flake knives .
They could also be regarded as flake scrapers, since most are worked on
only one face. The term knife, however, has been chosen because they
were found among splintered bones and because so few (only two )
other probable knives were found at the site. Finally, these flakes seem
too thin to have functioned effectively as scrapers. They vary considerably in size, from 2.2 to 5. 7 em. in length and 1 to 2.6 em. in width.

Scrapers
End scrapers (Fig. 6, A-G) . Twenty-one end scrapers have been
made from medium-sized, generally thick flakes. Each has a steep,
convex scraping bit at the distal end. All are plano-convex in cross
section and many have retained portions of the weathered cortex on
the convex surface. The flat surface is unaltered and often has a bulb
of percussion. Several are made from initial cortex flakes, and most,
if not virtually all, appear to have been removed from the core by
means of a hammerstone. Both prepared and unprepared striking platforms are present. These end scrapers range from 3 to 8 em. in length,
3 to 4 em. in width at the bit, and .7 to 1.8 em. in maximum thickness.
Large end scraper·chopper (Fig. 7, D) . This specimens has been
made from a large nodule of locally-obtained, coarse-grained quartzite.
Approximately the lower two thirds of both faces are flaked. The
proximal end of one face is unworked and retains the nodular cortex,
while the opposite face of this end has been fashioned to form a rather
steep scraping edge. Both the lateral edges and the scraping bit show
battering, presumably from use. This specimen is 15.6 em. long, 8.8
em. across the bit end, and 5.1 em. in maximum thickness.
Side scrapers (Fig. 5, K-N ) . Made from long, narrow flakes, nine
specimens have been chipped along one or both lateral edges to form

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

D

A

E

F

G

K

J
0

H

2

4

6

6

CM

Fig. 6 . Scrapers and Knife . A-G , End scrapers . H, Possible knife. 1-K, Concave-edged side
scrapers .

prominent scraping bits. A few (su ch as Fig. 5, M ) also have one end
worked into a scraper, and one (Fig. 5, K ) terminates in a sharp point.
The side scrapers range from 4 to 7.5 em. in length, Z to 5 em. in
width, and .5 to .9 em. in maximum thickness .
Concave-edged side scrapers (Fig. 6, I-K ). Four small flint flake s
have intentionally-produced concave edges. These range from a small,
distinct concavity-so-called spokeshave-to broad and very slightly

113

GARZA SITE

concave scraping edge. Most of these flakes are roughly rectangular
in outline, measuring 2.6 to 4.9 em. in length, 1.5 to 2.2 em. in maximum width, and .3 to . 7 em. in maximum thickness. Two (Fig. 6, I,
K ) have retained portions of the cortex.

Choppers
Four choppers or hand-axes (Fig. 7, A-C, E ) have been fashioned
from water worn pebbles. Each is bifacially worked on the distal end
so as to produce a convex cutting or "chopping" edge. The upper portions of the pebbles are not altered. These specimens exhibit a considerable range in size: 4 to 11 em. in length and 3 to 5 em. in width
across the distal end. Only the largest one ( Fig. 7, E ) shows extensive
signs of use.
PECKED AND GROUND STONE OBJECTS

Hammerstones. Five stream worn pebbles of flint and quartzite
show some evidence of having been used as hammerstones. One with
quite extensive battering may have been an exhausted core that was
re-utilized. The other four are only slightly worn.
Grinding stones. An irregular slab of hard limestone has a shallow
natural depression which shows polish from use. Found associated
with this slab was a quartzite pebble which is somewhat worn on one
surface. Otherwise the latter is unaltered. The grinding slab is approximately 3.9 em. thick and a maximum of 56 em. across; the handstone
is 10.2 em. long, 7.6 em. wide, and 5 em. thick.
MiscELLANEous Occu PATIONAL REFUSE

Ocher
Four small pieces of red ocher were recovered during the excavations. These do not show definite signs of use, but may have been
intentionally brought to the site and used as sources of pigment.

Chipping Debris
Twenty-six flint or chert cores were recovered. A few resemble
crude, keel-backed scrapers, but the edges do not show evidence of
having been used. In addition to the cores, 10,444 flakes were found
in the occupational zone. Many of these have sharp edges and could
have served as knives. All of local material, except for four translucent
obsidian chips.

'-

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B

c

E
0

2

4

6

e

CM

Fig. 7 . Choppers. A-C, E, Choppers. D, Combination end scraper and chopper.

Miscellaneous Stones
Nine large quartzite pebbles, all of which can easily be held in the
hand, were found among splintered pieces of bison bone. It seems
likely that these unmodified, stream worn stones were utilized to
break open animal bones.

115

GARZA SITE

Faunal Remains
Bison. A total of 67 bison teeth and mandible fragments were found
scattered throughout the occupational level. The front incisor teeth
were quite numerous and, interestingly, none was intact in the mandible, although several were often found together. Perhaps they may
have served as simple cutting tools, in spite of the fact that none
appeared to be modified in any way.
In addition to the teeth and jaw fragments , the excavations recovered
2,026 pieces of bison bone, most of which had been broken into
splinters of various size, apparently by pounding. Recognized in this
collection were long bones, foot and toe bones, shoulder blades, and a
few rib bones. Four sets of foot bones (each consisting of the first
through third phalanx ) were found articulated in such a manner as to
indicate that the foot had been intentionally severed from the rest of
the leg. One hundred and three pieces show cuts and scratches that
appear to have been made with flint scrapers and knives.
Turtle. Several leg bones and carapace fragments of land terrapin
were found concentrated in one place. The species represented has not
yet been identified.
Rodent. Several rodent bones, none of which have been identified,
were found at the site. They are not altered and may be intrusive.
Snake. One shed fang of a snake belonging to the pit viper family
was recovered in the excavation. The only member of this family to
be found in the area today is the western diamond-back rattlesnake.
l!ackberrySeeds
Hackberry seeds were occasionally found scattered throughout the
occupational zone. It is quite possible that their occurrence in this
zone is fortuitous.
OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES

During the course of excavation, 10 occupational features were
recognized at the Garza Site. These include six hearths, two concentrations of bone splinters, one accumulation of small flint chips, and a
possible grinding stone cache. The location of each of the features is
shown in Figure 9; and a typical, although somewhat idealized hearth,
is given in Figure 10, and one of the bone accumulations (Feature H )
is illustrated in Figure 11.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B

Fig . 8 . Excavation of Site. A, Arrow point to tubular beads found in situ . B, Cleani ng
one of the hearths, Feature A.

117

GARZA SITE
FEATURE

A

This feature , a hearth which had been exposed and partially
removed by stream erosion, consisted of three layers of fire-cracked
sandstone and charcoal (Fig. 8, B) . It was found approximately three
feet below the present ground surface. Considerable charcoal, sufficient for an excellent radiocarbon sample, and an occasional leg bone
of a bison calf were the only cultural debris associated with this feature.
The hearth appeared to have been built on the original occupational
surface and that portion remaining was 22 inches long, 18 inches wide,
and 10 inches thick.
FEATURE

B

A second and somewhat disturbed hearth which measured 6.5 inches
in thickness was found partially exposed in one edge of the sink area
(Figs. 2 and 9). That part remaining contained broken fragments of
fire-blackened sandstone and, immediately east of these stones, an
inch thick layer of gray ash with burned and splintered bones and
two bison teeth. At the eastern edge of this ash layer the shattered
lOON

)

9DN

I

BON

1

70N

J(

I

60N
50N

E

1\

.;or;

\

o]

H

oON

\4

2DN
G
JON

ON

c
OE

IDE

2-0E

30E

40£

50£

eO£

70£

0£

9Qf

D

\

8
lODE

liD I

1ur

F
zos )OS

Fig. 9. Location of the occupation features found at the Garza Site.

.~

I5Df

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

remains of the right half of a bison mandible were recovered. The
incisor teeth in the mandible appear to have been intentionally removed. Seven inches from the mandible, a scraper and one incisor
tooth were found , while approximately 1.5 feet further to the east there
was a second scraper and two more bison incisor teeth. Although somewhat speculative, it seems possible that the scrapers may have been
used to extract and clean the incisor teeth and that the teeth, in turn,
may have served as chisel-like tools.
FEATURE

c

Approximately five feet southwest of Feature B, a concentrated area
of flint chips was encountered. Containing 7,972 flakes, several fragments of arrow points, and portions of two bison leg bones, this roughly
circular concentration was 18 inches across, 16 inches below the surface, and a maximum of 2. 7 inches thick. The flakes were all smallthe largest was about fingernail size-and appear to have been derived
from three different cores of local material. The arrow point fragments, none of which was complete enough for typological identification, were made of the same stones. The majority of the flint chips
were so small that they could be recovered only by taking out blocks
of clay and dissolving the clay with water on a fine screen.
FEATURES

D

AND

E

Although found a considerable distance from one another (Fig. 9),
these two hearths are so similar that they can conveniently be described
together. Both consisted primarily of burned sandstone and limestone
slabs, some of which were as much as 10 inches in diameter. Like
Feature A, these slabs were stacked in layers. Charcoal was present in
both hearths, as were a few small fragments of burned bone. Each
measured 20 inches in diameter; FeatureD was found 22 inches below
the surface and was 7 inches thick, while Feature E was 17 inches
below the surface and was 8 inches thick.
FEATURE F

A fifth hearth, also consisting of sandstone slabs and charcoal, was
approximately 18 inches in diameter, 7.5 inches thick, and 20 inches
below the surface. Adjacent to this feature, on the northeastern edge,
was a packed layer of ash which yielded several pieces of burned bison
bone, a few bison bone and teeth fragments, and several flint flakes.

119

GARZA SITE

HEARTH

ASH
CROSS SECTION

TYPICAL HEARTH AT THE GARZA SITE

1

TOP VIE\.V

I FOOT
Fig. 10. Idealized plan view and cross section of typical hearth.

Underneath the ash layer was a dart point (Fig. 4, M ) and, at the
eastern edge of the layer, remains of a land terrapin. Other objects
found in the general vicinity of the hearth include: 37 bison leg bone
splinters, one bison incisor tooth, 336 flint flakes (most of which are

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

very small ) , four obsidian chips, two flint cores, one quartzite hammerstone, eight flake knives, one flake drill, one drill shaft, two Harrell
points, one Garza point, three small triangular points, one large triangular point or knife (Fig. 4, 0 ) , and four arrow point fragments.
The presence of this much cultural debris clearly indicates that this
hearth had been built in a comparatively heavily occupied portion of
the site.
FEATURE

G

A quartzite pebble and a limestone slab appear to have been associated and, consequently, are designated as a feature (see also the artifact
descriptions above ). Both show some slight signs of use as grinding
implements. They were encountered at a depth of 19 inches below the
surface. Nearby a few hackberry seeds, a chopper (Fig. 7, E ), and a
medium-sized end scraper were collected.
FEATURE

H

Perhaps the most interesting feature recorded at the Garza Site was
a pile of bison bone splinters which were surrounded on three sides by
small, well spaced stones (Fig. 11). The bone concentration was found
17 inches below the surface, measured 12 inches in diameter and 3
inches in thickness. The nine stones about the bones were placed five
to 10 inches apart and formed a nearly complete square which measured 22 inches across. Seven of these stones were of fire-fractured
sandstone, one (which marked the northeast corner) was a tan quartzite pebble, and one (which marked the northwest corner ) was a glossy
black quartzite pebble. The seemingly careful arrangement of three
stones on each side suggests special significance, perhaps of a ceremonial nature. There are no indications that the fourth or south side
(Fig. 11) was ever "closed."
FEATURE

I

The sixth and only other hearth found at the site was quite similar
to those described a hove. It was encountered at a depth of 16 inches
below the surface and reached a maximum thickness of 6.5 inches.
Feature I consisted of several layers of sandstone and limestone slabs
and, on the northeast side, a small concentration of packed ash. This
hearth was found in the occupation zone and the materials from the
general area include: a flake drill, an end scraper, two side scrapers,

121

GARZA SITE

1
s

c
22 INCHES

Fig . 11. Unusual accumulation of bone !Feature H) . A, Concentration of splintered bison
bone. 8, Fragment of dark tan, water-worn pebble. C, Fragmentary , glossy black quartzite
pebble.

three flake knives, two Harrell points, two triangular points, four
arrow point fragments, and a snake fang. Curiously, no flint flakes nor
bone fragments were recovered from the vicinity.
FEATURE

J

At a depth of 18 inches below the surface a neat, circular accumulation of splintered bison bones was encountered. It measured 21 inches
in diameter and three inches in thickness at the center. While no other
cultural debris was found nearby, it was quite evident that the bones
had been carefully placed in a pile.

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The Garza Site is a small campsite which yielded 238 artifacts, 10
occupational features , and numerous bison bones. The bison were
clearly killed and partially butchered elsewhere, for among the thousands of bone fragments found, only leg bones and lower jaws were
represented. Apparently, the forelimbs were detached in such a
manner as to include the scapulae and the upper ribs . The hind limbs
were probably separated from the body at the pelvic socket, as evidenced by knife marks found on the femurs. All bones, except those
of the foot, had been shattered by blows from a dull object (choppers
or hammerstones? ) probably to obtain marrow. Mandibles are well
represented in the collection and may have been removed from the
skull with tongues attached to make transporting the tongues to camp
easier. It is also possible that the incisor teeth, with their chisel-like
edges, may have been used as cutting and scraping implements.
The six hearths were the most common occupational features uncovered by the excavations. All were a bout the same size ( 18 to 22
inches in diameter ), had been built on the surface, and were composed
of two to three layers of small stone slabs. In several instances (Feature B, F, I ) a packed layer of ash was found just east or northeast of
the hearths. These ash accumulations perhaps resulted from cleaning
the hearths. Their consistent easterly occurrence may reflect the direction of the prevailing winds at the time of occupation.
The unusual arrangement of splintered bone and stones designated
as Feature H may be indicative of some form of "bison spirit" worship.
A similar arrangement of bones (but without stones) was labelled
Feature J. No artifacts were directly associated with either accumulation.
The concentration of flint flakes , Feature C, very likely represents
the chipping debris left by a single knapper fashioning arrow points.
Several fragmentary and unclassifiable triangular points were recovered among the flakes . Perhaps these points were broken during the
manufacture. Interestingly, 82 percent of all of the triangular points
are fragmentary, a condition which suggests that they may have been
only an intermediate step in the production of other point forms, such
as Harrell, or Garza.
Regards the intrasite distribution of certain artifacts, it is the opinion
of those who worked at the site that many of the tools were found in
contexts which provide some data on their use. In particular, the
consistent occurrence of triangular " points" in association with flake

GARZA SITE

123

knives and/ or scrapers seems to suggest that they served as cutting,
scraping, and punching tools as well as points for arrows.
Of the 238 artifacts found at the site, the triangular arrow point
with a basal notch is of particular interest and is defined as a new
type, Garza. The evidence from this site indicates that it is associated
primarily, or perhaps even exclusively, with the triple notched Harrell
points, and not with the side-notched Harrell (Suhm and Jelks, 1962:
275, Pl. 138, I-P ) or Washita (Bell, 1958 : 98, Pl 49 ) type. Holden
( 1938: 211 ) found a basally-notched triangular arrow point (now
identifiable as the Garza type ) at the Blue Mountain Rockshelter in
Winkler County, in the same level that produced both forms of Harrell
points. However, the associational data here are not tight and, more
importantly, the deepest stratum at Blue Mountain yielded four unnotched triangular points and two Garza points.
At the Johnson Site, a buried campsite in Lubbock County, Wheat
( 1955: 73-74 ) found a single Garza point in association with scrapers,
a flake knife, a triangular point, drills, a bone awl, a wolf canine tooth,
obsidian flakes , and bison bones. This assemblage is much like that
from the Garza Site and, notably, there were no Harrell points present.
Earl Green (personal communication ) found a Garza point and a
probable tripled-notched Harrell point at the Lubbock Reservoir Site,
in an occupational zone 24 to 30 inches below the surface. In the same
layer there were scrapers, tubular beads, pieces of hematite, an unworked ( ?) mussel shell, and probable manos and milling slabs.
Twelve inches above this layer there was another occupational zone
which contained pottery. Dr. Green, on the basis of his work at the
Lubbock Reservoir Site, suggests that the date for the Garza point level
should date prior to A.D. 1500.
Several surface collections have been made in Garza and nearby
counties which contain materials similar to those from the Garza Site.
Also included in some of these collections are Perdiz points and a distinctive expanding stem form with a basal notch (known locally as
"Lott" points ) . As Garza points also occur at these sites, it is possible
that they are of the same age as are both Perdiz and "Lott" points.
Since 1955 the author has been collecting information concerning
the distribution of Garza points . Approximately 450 points of this
type have been recorded as a result of questionnaires and personal
research. Over 200 of these, mostly surface finds, have been catalogued
for Garza County alone. No other area has yet reported this concentration. While these findings are not to be considered as final, the known
extent of the Garza type in Texas is bound on the north by Lamb and

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

NE W MEX ICO

TEXAS

Fig . 12 . Approximate extent of the d istribution of Garza arrow po int type shown by
dotted li ne .

Bailey counties, on the east by southern Floyd to Taylor counties, on
the southwest by Crane County and on the west by El Paso County.
A few points of this type have been reported from widely scattered

125

GARZA SITE

areas in eastern New Mexico, west to the Pecos River and south to
Donna Ana and Otero counties (Fig. 12 ) .
Although more work is needed on the cultural associations, temporal
placement, and geographic extent of the Garza point, the findings at
this and other sites clearly indicate that it represents a distinctive and
significant new type.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identification of certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Special Bulletin No. 1, Oklahoma Anthropological Society.
Holden, W . C.
1938. Blue Mountain Rock Shelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 208-221.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology : Ty.p~ Descriptions. Special Publication
No. 1 of the Texas Archeological Society and Bulletin No. 4 of the Texas
Memorial Museum.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1955. Two Archeological Sites near Lubbock, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical
Review, No. 28 pp. 71-77.
Post, Texas

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian
Burial in Fisher County, Texas
CYRUS N. RAY AND EDWARD B. JELKS
ABSTRACT
An Indian burial in Fisher County, T exas, excavated in 1960, contained a number
of European trade items (glass beads, brass hawk bells, brass bracelets, and other
objects) . Comparison with Europea n trade items from other sites suggests that: ( 1)
the burial dates from the first half of the 19th century, and (2 ) recognizable typologica l changes probably took place in some classes of trade good s that were bartered
to Indians of the southern plains in the 18th and 19th centuries.

INTRODUCTION

In November, 1960, a young man named Marshall Billingsley found
a human tibia and several heavy brass bracelets eroding out of a dry
creek bank in southwestern Fisher County, Texas. Recognizing that
his find might be of scientific importance, he brought the tibia and
bracelets to the senior author Df the present paper and generously
agreed to show him the site and help him excavate it. Accordingly,
permission was obtained from the landowner, Mr. W . H . Watson, and
young Billingsley and the senior author excavated the remainder of
what proved to be a historic Indian burial. The site has been named
in honor of the landowner and has been assigned the number 41 FS 1
in The University of Texas files.
The burial was of a middle-aged Indian woman who had apparently
been placed in a crevice in the ground in a standing position, her face
to the southwest. The lower part of the buriaL including a tibia
and several brass bracelets, had been exposed by erosion in the upper
part of a vertical cut-bank some 10 feet high at the edge of the dry
creek. The senior author dug out what was left of the burial, passing
the bones and other objects as they were recovered to Billingsley, who
transferred them to a box in the dry creek bed below.
The Indian had been so covered with brass omaments that many of
the bones were stained green with verdigris over large areas, and
sizable pieces of flesh and cloth were so well preserved that the weave
of the cloth could still be seen. The flesh had dried out as in a mummy
and was light and odorless even when damp.

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Most of the skeleton was recovered in a good state of preservation.
Associated artifacts included an iron axe, 20 brass bracelets, nine brass
finger rings, a small mirror, a quantity of glass beads, and a rather
large section of clothing consisting of several layers of cloth to which
were sewn many light-weight brass hawk bells and one small brass
button. Unfortunately, the section of clothing (with most ~f the hawk
bells ), four of the bracelets, one of the tibias, the right humerus, and
an unknown quantity of glass beads were stolen by an unknown
bystander while the excavation was in progress. The surviving artifacts
are described in detail below.
OBSERVATIONS ON THE SKELETAL REMAINS

1

Skeletal material from the W. H . Watson site consists of the almost
complete skeleton of one individual. The pelvis and feet are the principal areas missing. The left humerus is circled by three copper bracelets,
and owing to impregnation of the metal much of the tissue on the
humerus and on the left second phalanges was preserved.
The skeleton is that of a female approximately 45 years of age at
the time of death. Age determination was based on cranial sutures,
long bone epiphyses, and the medial epiphyses of the clavicles. Most
of the extremity bones were present and used for stature estimation.
Living stature was approximately 5'1".
Table 1 shows the more important measurements of the skull.
Measurements plus observations demonstrate a skull that is broad
( mesocranic ) and low ( chamaecranic ) . The face is short and wide
with an upper facial index of 48.9 and a total facial index of 74.4
(actually, hypereuryprosopic ) . The glabella is small, the bridge arch
is medium and the orbits are square. The nasal aperture is triangular
and fairly wide yielding a nasal index of 54.2 (chama errhine ) . All
muscle attachment areas are small and the back of the skull ends in a
pronounced occipital bun.
The mandible is delicate, with gonial angles slightly everted. The
chin is round and the mylo-hyoid ridge is medium.
Dental wear is extreme but caries are not present. However, abscessed alveolar pockets are evident in both maxilla and mandible.
There is nothing distinctive about the postcranial skeleton. General
muscularity is moderate. Squatting facets are present.
Evidence of temporomandibular osteo-arthritis deformans is manifested by a flattening of the mandibular condyle and erosion and
1 This section was prepared by T. W . M cKern, physical anthropologist at The
University of T exas.

129

W . H. WATSON SITE

lipping of the articular fossa. Furthermore, exostoses were formed in
the central parts of the condyle, thus producing deformation in the
longitudinal axis. Actually, the mandibular condyle was not normally
seated in the fossa but up on the articular eminence. This relationship
probably resulted in what is commonly called "snapping jaw." This
pathology is purely derived from trauma, either functional or extrinsic.
Some lipping of the anterior borders of the thoracic vertebrae was
observed.
TABLE 1
Cranial measurements (in mm.) and indices
Maximum length
Maximum breadth
Basion-bregma height .
Auricular head height .
Minimum frontal .
Bizygomatic breadth
Bicondylar breadth
Nasion-menton .

. 176
. 139
119
. . 104
91
133
125
99

Nasion-prosthion
Nasal height
Nasal width
Orbital height, right
Orbital width, right
Palate breadth
Palate length

65
48
26
36
36
59
54

Indices
Cranial index
Length-height index
Total face index .

79.0
67.6
74.4

Upper face index
Nasal index
Palate index

48.9
54.2
109.1

DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS
GLASS BEADS

(approximately 19,900 specimens; Figs. 1, 2)

Numerous glass trade beads in a variety of shapes, sizes, and colors
were found in the grave. The beads may conveniently be divided into
two basic classes : ( 1) relatively large beads that were presumably
strung into necklaces, and (2) small "seed" beads of the kind customarily used for making embroidered headwork designs on clothing or
other articles. Most of the beads are patina ted to some degree.
Necklace beads (83 specimens: Fig. 1, A-E). These are all of prolate
spheroid shape (that is, shaped more or less like a football) and all are
of simple structure; 2 most specimens have a swirled appearance, evidently having been twisted around a wire while molten. Two colors
are present-an opaque milky white and a transparent ruby redand there are three distinct size groups: large, medium, and small. The
2 As here defined, a simple bead is one of monolithic stru cture; a compound bead
has two different structural components (see Duffield and Jelks, 1961 : 40-41).

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

A

F

c

.8

E

0

G

H

0

2
r--1---r-----=r---1
--.-----,14 CM.

Fig. 1 . Glass Beads. A-C, Red necklace beads. D, E, White necklace beads . F, G, Blue seed
beads . H, Clear/ Opaque White seed beads .

large or~es are 9 to 12-.5 mm. long and 6 to 8 mm. in maximum diameter; the medium ones are 8 to 9 mm. long and 5 to 5.5 mm. in diameter; the small ones measure 6 to 8 mm. long by 4 to 5 mm. in
diameter. There are 2,3 large white necklace beads and 15 large red
ones. Of the 41 small necklace beads, 2,4 are white and 17 are red. All
four of the medium-sized necklace beads are red. The perforations of
all the necklace beads are between 1 and 2, mm. in diameter.
Seed beads (approximately 19,850 specimens: Fig. 1, F-H, Fig. 2-,
A-E). There are four different colors of these tiny beads: white, amber, aquamarine ( blue-green ), and several shades of blue. Except for
a Clear/ Opaque White" variety, all are of simple construction. The
3 A Clear/Opaque White bead is one that has an opaque white core which is
covered by a superficial layer of clear glass (see Duffield and I elks, 1961: 40-41 ).
To the casual observer a Clear/ Opa qu e White bead appears to be made entirely of
opaque white glass. However, if an end of the bead be viewed from an oblique
angle its compound n 01 ture is usually apparent on close inspection: the superficial
clear layer still looks white, but the core looks even whiter. The only way the clear
glass can be seen is to look at a section of a cut or broken bead, and even then the
dear glass is often visible only under magnification.

131

W. H . WATSON SITE

seed beads were m ade by drawing out a th in tube of molten glass,
breaking the tube (after it had cooled ) into bead lengths, and then removing the sharp edges of the beads, probably by heating them in arevolving drum . T hus, prior to rounding off of their sharp edges, the
beads were all essentially cylindrical in shape, albeit some were longer
than others. Longitudinal sections of the finished beads tend to be
curvilinear rather than angular in outline (see Fig. 2), the degree of
curvature on a particular specimen depending on the intensity of the
final heating and rolling operation as well as on the length of the bead.
The variations in shape of the seed beads found at the Watson Site
are shown in Figure 2 and their dimensions are given in Table 2. Although the basic shape of all th e seed beads is pretty much the same,
there are some differences in size between beads of different colors
(see Table 2) .
HAwK BELLS ( 45 specimens; Fig. 3, A -B')
These tiny subsph erical bells consist of four structural parts : ( 1) an
obverse body half made of thin sheet brass and pierced by two round
holes that are connected by a narrow slit; (2 ) a reverse body half, also
of thin sheet brass and shaped like the obverse half, but w ithout the
holes or the slit; ( 3) a narrow strip of sheet brass bent to form a small
loop and riveted through the center of the reverse body half; ( 4 ) a tiny
pellet of iron enclosed within the body of the bell to make it jingle.
The iron pellets are all highly oxidized and their original form cannot
be determined. The two halves of the body were soldered together, and
a small drop of solder was placed at the juncture of the attachment
loop and the body of the bell. The solder, both for joining the two body
halves and for securing the attachment loop, is of a silver-colored
metal.

wa\
\

I I

I

I

8ift1./
A

I

-\ era,
-/
\

l

I

)

I

}

B

0

I

2

I

~'\ o/22><',
-~/ &gj/ w/
')

\

\

I I

I

) I

c

0

4

6 MM .

I

I

I

I I

I/

E

I

Fig . 2 . Cross se ct ions of glass seed beads , showing va riations in form and s ize.

.......

w

l:<l

TABLE 2
Seed beads: Significant data (dimensions to nearest

Yz

millimeter )

Diameter of

No. of
specimens

Diameter

Simple beads
Opaque pale blue

136

2 + - 3-

1- -

2Yz

Opaque amber

210

2- - 3

1- -

2

Yz - 1Yz

Appears black or dark brown to naked
eye. Total sample measured.

Opaque white

6,600
(est.)

2- - 3-

1

-

2

Yz

-1

Surface usually looks chalky. Sample
of 262 measured.

7,400
(est.)

2

1- -

3

Yz

-

Conspicuous longitudinal striations
visible on surface. Glass very bubbly
(microscopic examination). Sample of
approx. 300 specimens measured.

Bead

va1·ieties

Translucent
aquamarine

-

3

Lenglh

performation

1- -

1+

1+

Hem arks

Total sample measured.

Compound beads
Clear/ Opaque white

~

>
>
::0

(J)

Translucent blue
(several shades)

..,

406

2

-

4-

1- -

3+

1-

- 1Yz

These run larger in diameter than the
other simple seed beads. Sample of
approx. 200 specimens examined.

(')

li1
~

0
1:"'
0
c;l

.....

5,100
(est.)

2Yz - 4

1Yz -3

1- -1+

Somewhat larger than the simple seed
beads. Surface is shiny. Sample of 238
measured .

(')

>

1:"'
(J)

0

(')

.....

..,
~

><:

133

W. H. WATSON SITE

T h e hawk bells are of two sizes. The smaller ones ( 39 whole and
fragmentary specimens, Fig. 3, A, A') are 1.5 em. in diameter and 8
to 9 mm. in maximum body thickness. The two holes on the obverse
side are approximately 2 mm. in diameter and between 6 and 7 mm.
apart. The attachment loops average 1 to 2 mm. in diameter and the
brass strips from which they are made are approximately 1 mm. wide.
The edges of the two body halves are pressed together in such a manner as to form a narrow flange, slightly less than a millimeter wide,
which encircles the equatorial circumference of the bell. A hawk bell
that is apparently identical in size and structure to the smaller bells
from the Watson Site has been reported from Kipp's Post, a North
Dakota trading post of the 1820's, by Woolworth and Wood (1960:
282, Pl. 60, n ) .
The larger hawk bells (Fig. 3, B, B') , represented by two complete
and four fragmentary specimens, are constructed similarly to the
smaller ones except that the two body halves are soldered together
with their edges flush rather than flanged outward as in the case of the
smaller bells. The diameter of the one measurable specimen is 1.6 em.;
maximum body thickness is 1.1 em. The two holes on the obverse side

A

8

c

A'

8'

c'

0

I

2

4

6 CM.

I

l

I

Fig . 3 . Brass Hawk Be ll s and Button . A, A', Sma ller fo rm of hawk bel l. B, B', La rge r fo rm
of ha wk bell. C, C', Button .

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are about 3 mm. in diameter and 7 mm. apart. The attachment loops
measure 3 to 4 mm. in diameter, and the brass strips from which they
are formed are about 1.5 to 2.0 mm. wide.
BRASS BuTTON (1 specimen; Fig. 3, C, C')
This, the only button found at the Watson Site, is roughly hemispherical in shape and is of hollow, compound construction. It is 1.2
em. in diameter and the maximum body thickness is 8 mm. There is
no decoration. The body of the button consists of two pieces that are
joined together so that the edges of the obverse piece overlap those of
the reverse piece. An attachment loop fastened to the center of the
reverse side has an interior diameter of 3 mm. This specimen appears
identical to a form termed "bullet button" by Olsen (1963: 552, Fig.
1, F), said to date between 1812 and 1830 A.D.
FINGER RINGS (9 specimens; Fig. 4)
All of the rings were still in place around the finger bones when
found . There are two kinds: those made of wire and those made of
flattened brass straps.
Wire rings (7 specimens; Fig. 4, A). Six complete finger rings and
a fragment of a seventh are made of brass wire that is approximately
semicircular in cross section with the flat side of the semicircle facing
inward toward the center of the ring (Fig. 4, A). These were probably machine-stamped in one piece: at least no seams can be seen as
would be expected if they were made of lengths of wire with the ends
soldered or welded together. Also, they are all of precisely the same
dimensions, which are: ring diameter (measured from the inside edge
of the wire), 2.0 em.; width of wire, 2.0 mm.; thickness of wire,
1.5mm.
Strap rings (2 specimens; Fig. 4, B, C). Two rings-made of brass
straps that are lenticular in cross section-are much heavier than the
wire rings. They appear to be homemade affairs that were probably
hammered out of heavy brass wire. They are formed of strips bent into
circles; on one specimen the ends of the strip meet, but on the other
there is a gap about a millimeter wide between the ends. Both rings
have a diameter of 2.0 em., the same as that of the wire rings. The
brass strips are respectively 9 and 10 mm. wide; both are 2 mm. thick.
A similar strap ring from the Yellowhouse Canyon burial is illustrated
by Newcomb (1955: Pl. 25, D).

W . H.

135

WATSON SITE

c

8

A

0

I

2

I

4

I

6 CM.

I

Fig. 4. Brass Finger Rings . A, Wire ring. 8 , C, Strap rings.

BRASS BRACELETS ( 16 specimens; Fig. 5 )
Fifteen of the bracelets are made of heavy brass wire, the wire diameters all falling between 5 and 7 mm. ( 1 to 5 gauge). The sixteenth is lenticular in cross section and appears to have been hammered out of a piece of brass wire like that from which the others are
made. The latter bracelet is bent into an oval shape, the long axis of the
oval measuring 6.3 em. and the maximum width 3.8 em. In section
this specimen averages slightly more than 1 em . wide, with a maximum thickness of about 2 mm. There is a gap 1.0 em. wide between
the two ends of the metal strip from which the bracelet is formed .
Four of the wire bracelets (Fig. 15, A ) were made by bending sections of wire into circles. The two ends of the wire meet on one specimen so as to form a closed circle, but there are gaps 2 to 3 mm. wide
left between the ends of the wire in the other three examples. The wire
is of round cross section, and all four specimens are of the same size,
about 7.5 em. in diameter (measured from the inside edge of the
wire) .
The other eleven wire bracelets are oval in shape, with gaps 2.2 to
2.9 em. across left between the ends of the wire (Fig. 5, B-F) . The long
axes of the oval bracelets are from 5.7 to 8.0 em. long; maximum
width ranges from 3.7 to 5.2 em. (measurements made from the inside edges of the wire) . On some specimens the wire sections are
round; on others they are slightly flattened on two opposite sides of

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

136

c

B

A

E

D

F

o•

G
0

5

10 CM.

I I I I I I I I I I I

W.

H.

137

WATSON SITE

the wire ; on still others they are flattened on four sides (approximately
square ).
Four of the oval bracelets have designs on their outside surfaces.
Three of the designs (Fig. 5, D, D', E, E', G) were produced by filing
notches perpendicular to the long axis of the wire; the fourth (Fig. 5,
F, F' ) consists of stamped figures that were applied with a die.
The bracelets were positioned on the body as follows : four around
each humerus and groups of not less than four around each tibia.
MIRROR ( 1 specimen )
This flat, rectangular plate of glass, which is 12.0 em. long, 8.5 em.
wide, and slightly more than 1 mm. thick, is evidently a mirror from
which the silvering has disappeared. It is lightly patinated on both
faces.
IRoN AxE ( 1 specimen; Fig. 6)
This light axe was probably hafted with a short handle in the manner of a hatchet. The blade is subtriangular with a convex bit; the
" eye" where the handle was inserted is ovate in shape, measuring
approximately 4 em. long by 3 em. wide. Maximum length of this
specimen is 14.0 em. The shape and size can be seen in the illustration (Fig. 6 ) .
The axe was found at the very bottom of the grave, but it could
have dropped downward appreciably after having been placed with
the burial, especially if this was a crevice burial as the circumstances
suggest.
TEXTILES ( 19 fragments; Fig. 7)
Fragments of cloth recovered from the Watson Site appear to have
come from two separate pieces of woolen fabric. Presumably the fragments are remains of clothing, but the original design cannot be
determined. Both fabrics are probably of commercial manufacture.
One fabric (Fig. 7, A ), represented by 7 fragments , is composed of
Z-twisted threads in a plain, warp-faced weave, with 23 warps and
14 wefts to the inch. The weft threads are tightly twisted; the warp
threads are loosely twisted and somewhat smaller than those of the
weft. The second fabric (Fig. 7, B) is a plain weave made from loosely

Fig . 5 . Brass Bracelets. Designs that appear on the decorated specimens are reproduced in
the drawings , which represent straightened-out bracelets, in the lower half of the figure.
The drawings were made by Chris Jelks.

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

5
......-T,....,.,__,._,

r-1..-,

10
1. CM.

-r-1..,......,......,.,......

Fig . 6 . Iron Axe . Side and top views .

S-twisted threads, with both warp and weft running 14 threads to the
inch.
LEATHER ( 4

fragments; Fig. 8)
Four small pieces of tanned leath er are possibly parts of a saddle.
Three of them are painted red on one side, and one of the painted
ones (Fig. 8) bears a tooled decoration.

8

A

or---r------=?r-----,.----;4r--_____,-____:;E? c M.

I

I

I

Fig. 7 . Textile Fragments .

I

139

W. H. WATSON SITE

DISCUSSION

Because, with our present knowledge, none of the items associated
with the Watson burial can be dated precisely, it is difficult to assign
a narrow date to the burial. Typological comparison with material
from other historic sites, however, offers evidence that the Watson Site
almost certainly dates between 1800 and 1860, and it ;_s our opinion
that the actual date probably is between 1820 and 1840. The reasons
for arriving at this estimate are given in the following brief discussion.
Two historic burials have been reported in the same general region
of western Texas as the Watson Site: the Yellowhouse Canyon burial
in Lubbock County (Newcomb, 1955 ) and the White Site in Yoakum
County (Suhm, 1962) . The White Site clearly dates from the middle
to late nineteenth century while the Yellowhouse Canyon Site certainly dates after 1858 (an associated pistol is a model first manufactured in that year) and probably before 1875. A comparison of
beads and other trade objects from the Watson, White, and Yellowhouse Canyon sites suggests that the Watson Site predates the other
two by a few years.
Specific stylistic changes appear to have taken place in the seed
beads traded to Indians in the southern Plains during the 18th and
19th centuries. Seed beads of the 18th century tend to be of somewhat larger size than those of the 19th century; also, certain forms
that were in common use during the late 18th century evidently had
disappeared from the trader's stock of goods before the middle of the
19th century. A quantity of white seed beads found at the Pearson
Site in Rains County, Texas, for example, are all of compound Clear/
Opaque White structure (Duffield and Jelks, 1961 : 41-48). This site
dates somewhere in the 1700 to 1835 period, probably between 1750
and 1820 (ibid.: 76-79 ). The white seed beads from the White Site,
in contrast, are all of simple rather than compound form ( Suhm, 1962:
95) as are those from Yellowhouse Canyon (the latter have been examined personally by the junior author) . There is much unpublished
data from an extensive series of sites which support the conclusion
that there was probably a change through time from compound to
simple white seed beads.
Since the white seed beads from the Watson Site are about evenly
divided between compound and simple forms, it appears likely, on
this basis, that the Watson burial dates later than the Pearson Site
but earlier than the White and Yellowhouse Canyon sites. Similarly,
the size range of the seed beads from Watson falls between those from
Pearson on the one hand and those from the White and Yellowhouse

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0

2

4

-r,-.___,6,

1..---r-,r----,.----r-1

CM.

Fig. 8. Tooled Leather.

Canyon sites on the other. The seed beads from Pearson are from 1 to 3
mm. long and 2 to 4 mm. in diameter; but a large majority fall between 2 and 3 mm. long by 3 to 4 mm. in diameter (Duffield and
Jelks, 1961: 43-50 ). The seed beads from the White Site are appreciably smaller, being from slightly less than 1 to a maximum of
1 Y2 mm. long, and from 2 to 2¥2mm. in diameter ( Suhm, 1962: 95 ).
The seed beads from Yellowhouse Canyon are of similar size. The
Watson seed beads are from slightly less than 1 to slightly more than
3 mm. long and from slightly less than 2 to a maximum of 4 mm. in
diameter. Thus, their size range falls between that of the relatively
large Pearson seed beads and the significantly smaller ones from the
White and Yellowhouse Canyon sites.
The bracelets from the Watson Site are made of considerably larger
wire (5 to 7 mm. in diameter) than those from some late 19th century sites of the region. The White Site bracelets, for example, all
measure between 2 and 3 mm. in wire diameter (Suhm, 1962: 94 ).
This suggests the possibility that the gauge of the wire used for making
bracelets may have some chronological significance; but this is, of
course, conjectural at present.
The hawk bells also suggest a date between 1800 and 1850 as they
are identical to a specimen from Kipp's Post, a North Dakota trading
station of the 1820's (Woolworth and Wood, 1960: Pl. 60, n ). Most
of the hawk bells from the White Site (Suhm, 1962: 87, Fig. 1, A) ,
represented by 49 examples, differ from the Watson specimens in
these respects: they are larger, they are spherical rather than oblate,
they have wire instead of strap attachment loops, and they have
crossed slits in the obverse face rather than a single slit with a round

141

W. H. WATSON SITE

hole at each end. Perhaps these differences are indicative of stylistic
changes through time. Two fragmentary hawk bells from the White
Site are generally similar to the Watson specimens, but they are
larger and possibly also differ in structural details.
In summary, there are suggestions that certain typological changes
took place in some kinds of European trade goods that were bartered
to the Indians of the southern plains in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Although firm typologies-including accurate chronological ordering-have not yet been established, certain trends can be discerned,
trends which suggest that the Watson burial dates from the first half
of the 19th century, probably between 1820 and 1840. There are no
specific indications as to the tribal affiliation of the buried woman,
but in view of the site location, the mode of interment, and the estimated time period, it is our guess that she was Comanche.
REFERENCES CITED
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1961. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series, No. 4.
Newcomb, W . W ., Jr.
1955. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 186-199.
Olsen, Stanley J .
1953. Dating Early Plain Buttons by Their Form. American Antiquity, Vol. 28,
No. 4, pp. 551-554.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1952. The White Site: An Historic Indian Burial in Yoakum County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32, pp . 85-119 .
Woolworth, Alan R. , and W. Raymond Wood
1960. The Archeology of a Small Trading Post (Kipp 's Post, 32MN1 ) in the
Garrison Reservoir, North Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 20.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin, No. 176, pp. 239-305.
Abilene, Texas
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites,
Proctor Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas
ELTON R. PREWITT
ABSTRACT
The Terri and Lightfoot sites, at Proctor Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas,
were partially excavated in 1963 by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project. Both
sites contained numerous milling stones in their lower levels and materials of
Edwards Plateau Aspect, Central Texas Aspect, and Henrietta Focus association
in their upper levels.

INTRODUCTION

During the summer of 1963 (from June 13 to July 10) the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project (T.A.S.P.) conducted excavations at
two sites in Proctor Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas. This work
was carried out in partial fulfillment of Memorandum of Agreement
No. 14-10-0333-956 between the National Park Service and The
University of Texas, providing for salvage excavations in advance of
construction at Proctor. Previously, a preliminary survey of the Proctor Reservoir area had been made by the T.A.S.P. in the fall of 1959
(Jelks and Tunnell, 1960). This survey succeeded in locating a total
of 40 archeological sites, most of which were shallow and extensively
damaged by plowing and erosion. Two of them, however, seemed
worthy of investigation, and therefore they were partially excavated
in 1963. They are the Eli Terri Site, located on the Sabanna River
and the F. H. Lightfoot Site on the Leon River (Fig. 1). The excavations at those two sites are reported herein.
The results were not spectacular. Relatively few artifacts were
obtained, and the only occupational features were several concentrations of sandstone fragments. Since the loose, sandy soil of the area
does not tend to be geologically stratified, the recognition of meaningful artifact sequences is difficult. Nevertheless, the data indicate that
both sites were occupied earliest by peoples who used relatively large
numbers of milling stones, and later by peoples who had fewer milling
stones but a relative abundance of projectile points, scrapers, and
knives . Although "pure" components could not be isolated in the
poorly stratified deposits, elements considered more or less diagnostic

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the Edwards Plateau Aspect, the Central Texas Aspect, and the
Henrietta Focus were found in the upper levels of both sites.
Proctor Dam, a large earthen structure, is under construction near
the mouth of Rush Creek, approximately three miles southwest of the
small town of Proctor in Comanche County. Some water has already
been impounded, and the reservoir will shortly be filled to the level
of the conservation pool, 1162 feet above sea level. The five-year flood
pool will attain a maximum elevation of 1172 feet, which will inundate
major portions of both the Terri and Lightfoot sites.
Proctor Reservoir is located just east of the Edwards Plateau, a division of the Great Plains Physiographic Province (Fenneman, 1931:
50-54) . In the immediate vicinity of the reservoir the topography is
characterized by low, rolling hills, and the soil is an unconsolidated
sand, normally held in place by vegetation. Sub-soil formations are
clays or thinly bedded sandstone. ·The reservoir area falls within the
Balconian Biotic Province (Blair, 1950: 112-115), a region containing a mixture of Eastern and W estem faunal elements. Characteristic
upland trees are Mexican juniper, Texas ash, and stunted live oaks,
while in the stream valleys the most common trees are various oaks,
elms, hack berries, and pecans. Average annual precipitation, measL EON

R.

Fig . 1. Sketch map of Proctor Reservoi r and vicinity , s howing the locatio n of t he Te rri
and lightfoot sites.

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

145

ured at the Comanche station, is 33 inches; the annual mean temperature is 65 degrees (U. S. Department of Commerce, 1958: 357-360 ).
Prior to the 1959 survey (Jelks and Tunnell, 1960 ) there had been
no systematic archeological investigation in Comanche County. Relic
collectors have been active in the region for many years, but, fortunately, most of them have confined their activities to surface hunting. The materials from the Terri and Lightfoot sites reported herein
constitute the only controlled data for an area that, before 1963, was
virtually unknown archeologically.
THE TERRI SITE

The Terri Site ( 41 CJ 2) is situated on a low hill just south of the
Sabanna River, a tributary of the Leon River (Fig. 2). A county road
crosses the site. Artifacts and other cultural debris are scattered over
about four acres of sandy soil, extending from a wooded area west of
the road eastward through a cultivated field to a deeply eroded gully
just south of the Sabanna flood plain. This site is well knmvn locally as
a source of Indian artifacts, and relatively large numbers of hearthstones, milling stone fragments, and broken flints were observed by
the survey party (Jelks and Tunnell, 1960: 8 ). Since this was one of
the few sites visited during the Proctor survey which appeared to
have sufficient depth for investigation, excavations were carried out
there from June 14 through June 26, 1963.
In the wooded area west of the road, 10 five-foot pits were put down
in a checkerboard grid pattern (Fig. 2) . The excavated pits were
labeled from A through J , from north to south. Excavation reached
a depth of four feet in this portion of the site, which was designated Area A. Approximately 550 feet east of Area A, three five-foot
pits were excavated near the bank of the gully, in what was labeled
Area B. Excavation there reached a depth of five feet below the present
surface.
All of the excavated soil in both areas was passed through quarterinch mesh screen, and excavation proceeded by arbitrary half-foot
vertical intervals.
The soil zones in Areas A and B were virtually identical. The upper
element was a zone of dark gray midden sand extending from the
surface to an average depth of two feet. Sandstone fragments, apparently remnants of fire hearths, were scattered through this midden
deposit, and several concentrations of sandstone rocks were found at
the base of the midden zone. At about two feet deep the midden zone

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

~o '

.

·-: _:

;i[~ ~;i.i}:!/!;- /iJ;··(,~·~.:;.\~i~~~~~~
Fig. 2. Sketch map of the Terri Site, with excavated areas shown in black.

gave way to tan sand, which contained fewer occupational remains.
This tan sand stratum extended down to the maximum (five feet)
depth of the excavation pits.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES

The six features found at the Terri Site (Fig. 3) all consisted of
concentrations of sandstone fragments . In five cases the fragments
occurred in roughly oval-shaped piles (Figs . 4, B; 5, B) but in Feature IV they formed a circular basin (Fig. 5, A). The feature s ranged
in length from about 1.5 to about 4.0 feet; width was 1.0 to 2.2 feet;
thickness was near 0.5 foot in all features . The purpose of these concentrations of stones remains undetermined.
Feature I. Feature I was a roughly oval-shaped heap of stones about
four feet long by two feet wide. It was in the dark sand layer, approximately 0.5 to 1.0 foot below the surface, in the southeast corner
of Pit H. Although several of the stones were standing on edge, they
seemed to be arranged in no particular pattern.
Feature II. Feature II (Fig. 4, B) was a concentration of sandstone
fragments in the south side of Pit G. Extending from a depth of 1.2 to

147

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

FEATURE Ill

FEATURE V I

FEATURE II

FEATURE I
FEATURE V

OF FEATURES

PROVEN IENCE

41C J2

0

s'

10 '

Fig . 3 . Plan o f Area A at the Terri Site , showing location of occupa tio na l featu res.

1. 7 feet below the surface, this feature measured 1.5 feet wide by 3.5
feet long. The fragments did not seem to form an orderly pattem.
Feature Ill. Feature III (Fig. 5, B) was a concentration of sandstone fragments located in the southwest portion of Pit D. Measuring
3.3 by 2.2 feet, this feature was 2.0 to 2.5 feet below th e surface. A
number of the stones were slanted in a southeasterly direction, but
they were in no kind of orderly arrangement. A piece of a grinding
slab lay among the stones.
Feature IV. Feature IV (Fig. 5, A) was a round, basin-shaped con-

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

centration of sandstone fragments in the extreme southwestern corner
of Pit C. This feature, approximately two feet in diameter, lay at the
base of the dark sand zone, 1.5 to 2.0 feet below the surface. There
were no artifacts, charcoal, or other associations.
Feature V. Feature V was a rock concentration in the north wall of
Pit I; it extended into the next square which was partially excavated
in order to expose the feature (see Figs. 3 and 4, A ) . It measured 2.8
feet long by 1.6 feet wide, and was 1.0 to 1.5 feet below the surface.
Feature VI. Feature VI was a small sandstone concentration in the
south wall of Pit E. Approximately 1.5 feet long, 1.0 foot wide, and
0.5 foot thick, it was in the upper part of the dark, sandy midden soil.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS

The 288 artifacts found at the Terri Site are all of stone. Included
are these classes: arrow points, dart points, knives, crude bifacials,
drills, gravers, spokeshaves, burins, scrapers, cores, choppers, hammerstones, and milling stones.

Arrow Points
Of the 34 arrow points and arrow point fragments found , 16 are
too fragmentary to permit accurate description. The other 18 comprise
four triangular, five subtriangular, and nine stemmed specimens.
Triangular Arrow Points. Three of the four triangular arrow points
(Fig. 6, A-C) are of the Harrell type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 275, Pl.
138). They have straight blade edges, deep lateral notches above the
base, and straight ( 2 specimens) or concave ( 1 specimen) bases.
Length ranges from 21 to 27 mm.; width, 13 to 16 mm.; thickness,
2.5 to 3 mm. The fourth triangular arrow point (Fig. 6, D ) is unnotched and has a V -shaped, deeply indented base. This point, which
lacks its distal portion, is 20 mm. wide and 3 mm. thick.
Subtriangular Arrow Points. Two of the five subtriangular arrow
points (Fig. 6, E-F ) seem to be variants of the Young type (Suhm
and Jelks, 1962: 295, Pl. 148 ). Both have convex lateral edges, but
one (Fig. 6, E) has a convex base, the other an irregularly concave
base. These points have been worked primarily from one face, although the other face shows light retouche along the edges on both
specimens. The convex-based specimen measures 21 mm. long, 14
mm. wide, and 2.5 mm. thick; the other Young-like point is 25 mm.
long, 12 mm. wide, and 3 mm. thick.
Another of the subtriangular points (Fig. 6, I) has a convex-edged,
serrated blade, shallow lateral notches, and a straight, unmodified base.

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

149

It has been ·worked from one face only. It is 14 mm. long, 9 mm. wide,
and 2 mm. thick.
The two remaining subtriangular points seem to be of the Granbury
type (Jelks, 1962: 35-36, Fig. 14, M-W). One (Fig. 6, G) is of the
bono variety (Ibid.: 35-36, Fig. 14, M-0) . Its lateral edges are mildly
convex and its base is straight. The workmanship is crude except for
fine retouche along the lateral and basal edges. Length is 24 mm.,
thickness 4 mm. As one corner of the base is lacking, the width cannot
be accurately determined. The other Granbury point (Fig. 6, H ), of
the joshua variety (Ibid. : 36, Fig. 14, P-T ), has straight lateral edges
and a convex base. One face of the blade has been worked, but only
around the edges. Lacking the distal tip, this specimen measures 20
mm. wide and 2 mm. thick.
Stemmed Arrow Points. The nine stemmed arrow points from the
Terri Site are classed in three groups: Scallorn ( 7) Cliffton ( 1), and
miscellaneous ( 1 ) .
The single Cliffton point (Fig. 6, J ), which lacks its tip and much
of its medial section, appears originally to have had straight blade
edges, relatively long barbs, and a rudimentary, pointed stem. It is
chipped bifacially. The only dimension that can be determined accurately is the thickness, which is 3.5 mm.
Two of the seven Scallorn points (Fig. 6, P, Q) seemingly belong
to the eddy variety (Jelks, 1962: 28-30, Fig. 13, M-R ). Their blades
have straight or concave edges, as well as prominent barbs. The stems
expand slightly and have straight to slightly convex bases. One specimen measures 35 mm. long by 1 7 mm. wide. The other is 20 mm.
wide, but its length cannot be ascertained. Both specimens are 3 mm.
thick.
The other five Scallorn points (Fig. 6, K-0 ) cannot be assigned
to any of the recognized varieties of the type. They all have straight
to convex blade edges, short barbs, expanding stems, and straight to
concave bases. Their length ranges from 14 to 32 mm. , width is 11 to
14 mm., and thickness is 2 to 4 mm.
The remaining stemmed arrow point (Fig. 6, R ) resembles Seallorn in some respects, but is too divergent for definite assignment to
that type. It has a wide, triangular blade with convex edges and short
barbs, and a wide, expanding stem (formed by deep corner notches)
with a convex base. It is 21 mm. long, 16 mm. wide, and 3 mm. thick.

Dart Points
The 11 dart points from the Terri Site are divided into five groups:

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

Fig. 4 . Terri Site. A, Profile of east wall of Pit A. 8, Feature II .

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

151

unstemmed points, straight-stemmed points, points with slightly expanding stems, points with strongly expanding stems, and miscellaneous specimens.
Unstemmed Dart Points. One of the two unstemmed dart points
(Fig. 7, A ) is similar to the Plainview type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962:
239, Pl. 120). The blade is lanceolate in form , with the lateral edges
approximately parallel to each other. The base is concave and a long
thinning flake has been removed from each face . The basal edge and
the proximal portion of the lateral edges show evidence of grinding.
The workmanship is good, although the flake scars are generally not
parallel. Lacking the distal tip, the surviving portion measures 57 mm.
in length, 26 mm. in width, and 8 mm. in thickness . The main distinction between this point and classic Plainview points is its relatively great weight.
The second unstemmed point (Fig. 7, B) is of the Meserve type
(Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 217, Pl. 109) . The blade is lanceolate and is
beveled on the left edge of each face . The stem edges grade imperceptibly into the blade and are ground. The base is deeply indented, but
the usual long thinning flake scars of the Meserve type are absent.
Lacking much of the distal portion, this specimen measures 19 mm.
in width and 5 mm. in thickness. It is smaller and uf poorer workmanship than most Meserve points.
Parallel-Stemmed Dart Po:nts. The two parallel-stemmed dart
points (Fig. 7, C, D ) may be assigned to the Pedernales type (Suhm
and Jelks, 1962: 235- 237, Pls. 118, 119 ) . One specimen ( Fig. 7, C) is
too fragmentary to allow detailed description. The other specimen
(Fig. 7, D ) has a short stubby blade with straight edges . The shoulders
are squared, the stem edges are straight, and, although one corner is
missing, the base originally was deeply indented.
Dart Points With Slightly Expanding Stems. Two of the three points
assigned to this group are of the Marshall type (Suhm and Jelks,
1962: 211 , Pl. 106 ) . One (Fig. 7, E ) has convex, finely serrated blade
edges that are lightly beveled on the right edge of each face. The blade
is broad and has barbs extending downward, approximately paralleling the stem. The stem edges are nearly straight, but expand slightly
towar\ the base. The base is slightly concave, and the corners are rectangular. The base has been thinned by the removal of several long
flakes from each face . Lacking a small part of the distal tip, this specimen is 68 mm. long, 36 mm. wide, and 7 mm. thick.
Only the proximal portion of the second Marshall point (Fig. 7, F )
is present. The blade is broad with convex edges and exhibits slight

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

A

B

Fig . 5 . Terri Site. A, Feature IV. B, Feature Ill .

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

153

beveling on the right edge of each face. The stem has straight edges
that expand slightly toward the base. The base is concave and has
been thinned by the removal of several long flakes from each face . The
width of this specimen is 40 mm. and its thickness is 7 mm.
The third dart point with a slightly expanding stem (Fig. 7, G) does
not fit any recognized type. The blade edges are straight to slightly
convex, while the shoulders are squared. The stem edges are slightly
concave and flare out somewhat toward the base. The base is concave
and was thinned by short flakes removed from both faces . The distal
portion is lacking, and a small burin facet is present on one blade edge
adjacent to the transverse break. The width of the remaining portion
is 38 mm., and its thickness is 7 mm. The workmanship is excellent,
with occasional parallel flake scars.
Dart Points With Strongly Expanding Stems. Two of the three
specimens in this group (Fig. 7, H, I) are basal fragments-one of
them (Fig. 7, H) scarred by thermal fracture--which will not be
described in detail. The stem of the unscarred fragment (Fig. 7, I)
is markedly expanding, ar:d its base has been thinned on one face by
the removal of several long flakes.
The third specimen with a strongly expanding stem (Fig. 7, J) is
triangular in shape, with straight blade edges that are beveled to the
right on each face. The shoulders are weakly barbed and the neck of
the stem is wide. The stem edges are straight and expand rapidly toward the base; the shoulders are slightly wider than the base. The base
is irregular and has been thinned on only one face. Length is 40 mm.
(the tip is missing) ; width at the shoulders is 21 mm.; width of the
base is 20 mm.; maximum thickness is 7 mm.
Miscellaneous Dart Point. This dart point (Fig. 7, K ), fashioned
from a thin flake, is worked only along the right edge of each face.
The stem is irregular in shape. The blade edges are convex curving
somewhat at the tip and at one shoulder. The shoulders are fairly
prominent, and one of them exhibits a slight barb. The length of this
specimen is 48 mm., the width is 21 mm., and the thickness (at the
base) is 6 mm.

Drill
One distal fragment of a drill (Fig. 7, L) was found. The edges of
the bit are straight and taper to a sharp tip. The workmanship is
fairly good, the flake scars meeting in the center to create a medial
ridge on each face. Lacking the basal portion, this specimen measures
31 mm. long, 9 mm. wide, and 4 mm. thick.

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

B

D

E
I

I

. ,.. .. ..,,

F

H

J

G

M

L

N

:•

p
0
I

Q

2

4

I

I

R
6
I

em.
Fig . 6 . Arrow Points from the Terri Site. A-C , Harrell . D, Indented-base, triangular point.
E, F, Probable Young points . G, Granbury bono. H, Granbury joshua. I, Serrated blade,
subtriangular point. J , Clillton . K-0, Miscellaneous Sea/lorn . P, Q, Sea/lorn eddy. R, Miscellaneous stemmed point.

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

155

Knives
The 10 knives from the Terri Site are divided into two groups: triangular (2 specimens) and subtriangular (8 specimens).
Triangular Knives. One of the two triangular knives (Fig. 8, A) is
a small implement with convex lateral edges and a convex base.
Pressure retouching is evident along the edges, but the general workmanship is poor. Width is 25 mm. and thickness is 6 mm. Since the
distal part is missing, the length cannot be measured.
The other triangular knife (Fig. 8, B) exhibits slightly convex blade
edges and a practically straight base. The workmanship is good on one
face but crude on the other. Both faces are faintly beveled on the right
edge, and the base has been thinned by the removal of several longitudinal flakes. The original length cannot be determined because the
distal end is lacking; however, the remaining portion is 23 mm. wide
and 5 mm. thick.
Subtriangular Knives. Four of the eight subtriangular knives (Fig.
8, C-E) are assigned to the Cleburne type (Jelks, 1962: 44, Fig. 18 ) .
The blade edges vary from slightly concave to convex, and the bases
are convex to straight. The workmanship is generally crude, although
occasional pressure retouching can be seen along the blade edges, and
two specimens show basal thinning. All the specimens lack their distal
tips, and consequently their original lengths cannot be accurately
determined. Width and thickness are very consistent: three are 29
mm. wide; the other is 30 mm. wide; all are 6 mm. thick.
Two of the untyped subtriangular knives (Fig. 8, F) are relatively
large forms with convex blade edges. Although workmanship is very
crude, there is occasional pressure flaking along the lateral edges and
the base. The length of the one complete specimen is 57 mm. , its width
is 38 mm., and its thickness 7.5 mm. The width of the other specimen
is 45 mm., its thickness is 11 mm.
Another of the untyped subtriangular knives ( Fig. 8, G) has essentially straight lateral edges and a convex base. The shoulders are indented slightly, forming a weak stem. The general workmanship is
crude, although some pressure flaking is evident along the blade edges
and portions of the stem. Lacking much of the distal portion, this specimen measures 25 mm. wide and 5 mm. thick.
The remaining subtriangular knife (Fig. 8, H) has one straight
blade edge, one strongly convex blade edge, and a convex base. The
workmanship is fairly good with pressure flake scars visible along
most of the lateral edges and along the base. This specimens is 39 mm.
long; 23 mm. wide; and 5.5 mm. thick.

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

I

I

c

8

D

F

G

E

I

'

H

J

0

2

K

4

L

6

Fig . 7 . Dart Points and Drill from Terri Site. A, Plainview- like . B, Meserve . C, D, Pederna/es
points . E, F, Marshall points . G, Slightly expanding stem point (arrow indicates direction of
burin blowl. H-J, Strongly expanding stem points . K, Miscellaneous dart point. L, Drill .

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

157

Knife Fragments
Although too fragmentary for typological study, these 17 specimens
were probably similar to those described above.

Crude Bifacials
These two artifacts (Fig. 8, I, J) are similar to the knives, but seem
to be too crude and the edges too dull for effective use as cutting implements . Both specimens have irregular, convex lateral edges that
are sinuous and blunt. Neither specimen is complete but they appear
originally to have been long and narrow. One specimen is 30 mm.
wide and 15 mm. thick; the other is 32 mm. wide and 11 mm. thick.

Scrapers
The 119 scrapers are divided into seven groups: utilized flakes,
cortex flake scrapers, large flake scrapers, oval scrapers, small side
scrapers, spokeshaves, and plano-convex scrapers.
Utilized Flakes. A total of 89 utilized flakes (Fig. 9, A-C) comprise
the largest group of scrapers. These are flakes that seem to have been
used without modification for scraping purposes and then discarded.
Small pressure flake scars can be seen on one, or less commonly, on
two edges. The dimensions of the utilized flakes vary greatly, length
ranging from 13 to 82 mm. and the width from 10 to 47 mm.
Cortex Flake Scrapers. These 14 scrapers (Fig. 9, E, F ) were
fashioned from large flakes which retain much of the cortex (patina)
of the original nodules. Most of them show signs of heavy use on one
or, occasionally, on two edges. The outlines of these specimens are
very irregular and appear to reflect variations in the shape of the stone
nodules used. The length varies from 38 to 80 mm., the width from
25 to 53 mm. , and the thickness from 10 to 26 mm.
Large Flake Scrapers. One of these two large scrapers (Fig. 9, G )
has been worked around the edges and across part of one face . The
lateral edges are convex and converge to form a rounded tip. Since it
lacks one end, the original length of this specimen cannot be determined. The width is 63 mm., and the thickness is 20 mm. The other
large flake scraper (Fig. 9, H ) has irregular edges, two of which show
pressure flaking. The workmanship is extremely crude, due perhaps
to the nature of the chert. The length of this specimen is 50 mm., the
width 45 mm. , and the thickness 16 mm.
Oval Scraper. This scraper (Fig. 9, D) is fashioned from a long, thin

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

8

A

G

F

L

J

M

0
I

2I

N

4

dn.

D

I

:.,.....

6I

Fig . 8 . Knives, Crude Bifacials, Gravers, Spokeshave, and Burins from the Terri Site. A, 8,
Triangular knives . C-E, Cleburne knives . F-H, Subtriangular knives . I, J, Crude bifacials.
K, Graver. L, Spokeshave. M-0, Burins (arrows indicate direction and number of blows) .

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

159

flake which was worked into a more or less oval shape. Pressure flaking
is evident around the entire circumference except at the bulb of percussion. The edges are convex save near the bulb of percussion, where
they are quite irregular. This specimen measures 51 mm. long, 33
mm. wide, and 10 mm. thick.
Small Side Scrapers. Seven of the nine small side scrapers (Fig. 9,
I-M) have convex scraping edges, while the other two have concave
scraping edges. Workmanship is fairly good. All are too fragmentary
to permit accurate measurement of length, but width varies from 20 to
25 mm. and thickness from 5 to 9 mm.
Spokeshaves. These two flakes (Fig. 8, L) have concavities that
seem suitable for dressing arrow shafts or other wooden objects. The
concavities on the two specimens are 13 and 18 mm. wide respectively.
Both show evidence of pressure flaking along their edges beyond the
spokeshave concavities.
Plano-Convex Scrapers. These two unusual specimens (Fig. 9, N)
are plano-convex in cross section and have been worked entirely over
the convex face. The lateral edges are essentially straight and show
evidence of heavy use. Unfortunately, both specimens are medial
fragments and their length cannot be accurately determined. The
width of one specimen is 24 mm. and its thickness is 11 mm.; width
of the other is 22 mm. , its thickness 11 mm.

Gravers
These three artifacts have tiny, beak-like projections which occur on
largely unmodified flakes (Fig. 8, K ). The projections range from 2
to 5 mm. in length.

Burins
Three burins (Fig. 8, M-0 ) (Epstein, 1963 : 70) were recovered
from the Terri Site. Specimen 1 (Fig. 8, M) was fashioned from a
fragmentary knife or dart point blade. The burin tip was resharpened
several times, as can be seen by the large number of flake scars. The
width of the burin tip is 5 mm., and the length of the flake scars,
which extend downward from the tip, ranges from 14 to 20 mm. A
second specimen (Fig. 8, N) is similar to the first, but does not show
as much evidence of use as the first. The width of the burin tip is 5
mm. and the flake scars range from 25 to 29 mm. in length. The third
specimen (Fig. 8, 0) has burin flake scars at two different loci. At
one locus, the burin tip is 6 mm. wide and the flake scars are 33 mm.

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

F

G

0

2

M

L

K

J

H

4

N

6

Fig. 9 . Scrapers from the Terri Site. A-C , Utilized flakes . D, Oval scraper. E, F, Cortex
flake scrapers . G, H, Large flake sc rapers . 1-M, Small side scrapers . N, Plano-convex scraper.

in maximum length. The other burin tip is 4 mm. wide, the maximu m
length of the flake scars being 46 mm. T his burin also seems to h ave
been sharpened several times.

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

161

H ammerstones
These seven artifacts (Fig. 10, E, F ) are large cobbles of chert or
quartzite which bear evidence of battering. Some of them have fairly
large scars where flakes were apparently detached as a result of the
battering.

Choppers
Large bifacially worked implements with irregular, sinuous cutting edges are termed choppers (Fig. 10, C, D) . All13 choppers from
the Terri Site retain portions of the original cobble cortex at their
proximal ends. One specimen is of quartzite; the others are of chert.

Cores
Eighteen large, crude cobbles (Fig. 10, A, B) bear scars where several large flakes were removed from them, and thus they are classified as cores. These cores may have been used secondarily as tools,
but primarily they were a source of flakes.

Milling Stones
Fifty milling stones were recovered from the Terri Site, 38 grinding slabs and 12 manos. Both the manos and the slabs appear to have
been employed with a rotary grinding motion.
Manos. Five manos (Fig. 11, B) show signs of use on two surfaces,
while seven (Fig. 11 , A) were used on one face only. The majority
are relatively small, and they are generally unmodified except for use
wear. Since most specimens are fragmentary, their dimensions will
not be given. All12 specimens are of sandstone.
Grinding Slabs. All 38 of the grinding slabs are of sandstone, but
only two are complete. The grinding surfaces of some fragments seem
to be relatively flat although one of the complete specimens (Fig. 11 ,
C) has a pronounced bowl-shaped grinding area. The rest of the fragments and the other complete specimen exhibit a general gradation
between flat and deeply concave grinding surfaces.
DISTRIBUTION OF THE ARTIFACTS

Distributional analysis of artifacts at the Terri Site was begun by
plotting the frequency of each artifact category in areas A and B respectively. No significant distributional difference between the two
areas was noted. Next, the artifact groups were plotted by six-inch

16Z

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

B

D

F

E

0

2

4

6

em .
Fig. 1 0 . Cores, Choppers, and Hammerstones from the Terri Site. A, B, Cores. C, D,
Choppers. E, F, Hammerstones .

levels of the various squares. Trends in the vertical provenience of
certain kinds of artifacts were discernible, trends which can best be
shown by a tabulation of all artifacts by six-inch levels from the site
as a whole (Table 1) .

163

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

TABLE 1
Distribution of artifac ts, Terri Site

""'.2l

~

~

g
«!

"
~

Arrow P oints
Triangular
Subtriangular
Stemmed
Arrow point fragments
Dart Points
Unstemmed
Parallel-Stemmed
Slightly expanding stem
Strongly expanding stem
Miscell aneous
Drill
Knives
Triangular
Subtriangular
Knife fragments
Crude bifacials
Scrapers
Utilized fl akes
Cortex flake
Large fl ake
Oval
Small side
Spokeshaves
P lano-Convex
Gravers
Burins
Hammerstones
Ch oppers
Cores
Milling Stones
Manos
Grinding Slabs
TOT AL ARTIFACTS

o:l

"'=
=

" "~

< <"

<

~

§
v

1'l
0
f-<

3

4

5

5

8
13

2

1
2
1
3

1l

0

;;

~

:3

~

;-,., 0
6

I

0

6

2

5

9
16

2

4

I

"'
0

3
3
2
8

2
2
3
3

1
12
2

2

1
2
3

80
12

2

7

6

2
8
17
2
89
14

7
2
1
3
3

6
4
14

2
3

10
30

1
8

7
1

2·
1
9
2
2
3
3
7
13
18
12
38
288

~

I

0

;-,.,

~}

~l

~

0

"' -

0

"'I
;-,.,

oi

oi

6

2

;-,., 0

0

j

"'I

cO
I

0

"'

"'cO

"'...

1
2

1
2

1
2
3

6

4
1

3
4

1
2

1 17 17 19
2 1 4 1

2

2

2

6

8
4

7
2

3

1
2
7

1
3

1
2

1

5
1

5
3

1

6 2

6 17

2

5
5

The major significant trends in vertical distribution are : ( 1) milling stones occur most commonly in relatively deep levels; (2 ) projectile points, knives, and scrapers tend to occur at relatively high
levels (in comparison to milling stones) ; (3) dart points occur gen-

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

erally deeper than arrow points. Some of the other artifact classes are
distributed in possibly meaningful vertical patterns (e.g., the two
spokeshaves are relatively deep and the one drill is relatively high ) ,
but samples are too small in most cases for significant interpretation.
The evidence suggests that the Terri Site was first occupied by a
culture that subsisted to a large extent by gathering seeds, roots, or
other vegetable foods which were ground on the numerous milling
stones found in the lower levels. Later occupants were oriented es-

A

8
0

2

4

6

em .

c
0I

I

2I

I

4I 6I ! 8I 10
1I2
I
em .
I

I

I

Fig . 11. Milling Stones from the Terri Site. A, B, Manos. C, Grinding slab .

TERRI AN D LIGHTFOOT SITES

165

sentially toward a hunting economy, as attested by the r elatively large
number of projectile points, knives, and scrapers in the upper levels.
Two periods of hunting culture occupancy are equated respectively
with the dart points and the arrow points.
THE LIGHTFOOT SITE

The Lightfoot Site ( 41 CJ 23) is situated near several perennial
springs on the slopes of a small hill at the western edge of the Leon
River flood plain. Surface indications of occupation-mussel shells,
bone fragments, flint flakes, and other debris-are spread over an area
of som e two acres, the greatest concentration being at the western edge
of the site. Prior to excavation, part of the site had been damaged by
the con struction of a stock pond, and cultivation had disturbed the
upper few inches of another part; nevertheless, much of th e cultural
deposits were completely undisturbed. Unlike most sites in the Proctor area, there had been little observable damage by erosion. Since
the site seemed rich in artifacts and appeared to have substantial
depth, excavations designed to salvage a representative sample of artifacts and other data were carried out there in late June and early
July, 1963 .
Three different areas-designated as areas A, B, and C respectively
- were tested as indicated in Figure 12. In Area A (west of the stock
pond in a wooded area ) 12 five-foot squares were excavated to a maximum depth of 2.5 feet below the surface. In Area B (east of the stock
pond ) four five-foot squares were dug to a depth of 2.5 feet. About 65
feet northeast of the Area B test, in Area C, a single five-foot square
was dug to a depth of 4.5 feet.
All squares were dug by arbitrary half-foot vertical intervals, and
all excavated soil was passed through screens of quarter-inch mesh.
The uppermost stratum in Area A was a gray -brown soil, averaging a bout 8 inches thick, much of which had been disturbed by plowing. Mussel shells, bone fragments, and flint debris were scattered
throughout. This stratum gave way to a lighter-colored soil of grayish
hue which contained cultural debris similar to that in the overlying
stratum. At approximately two feet below the surface the gray soil
changed gradually to a sterile clay in the northern portion of the excavation and into sterile sand in the southern portion. The clay and
sand continued downward to the maximum (2.5 feet) depth of the
excavation pits.
In Area B, the upper soil stratum consisted of unplowed dark,

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

WOO DE D AR EA

AREA

A

CULT IVATED

F IELD

LEON RIV ER
FLOO D PLAI N

AREA
.· .· .·:,

•

C

Fig . 12 . Sketch map of the Lightfoot Site . Areas excavated (A, 8, Cl shown in black.

humus-stained soil containing a large quantity of small, pea-sized
gravel. At a depth of 10 to 12 inches this stratum changed abruptly
to a compact clay and gravel deposit which extended downward to
the maximum (2.5 feet ) depth of the excavation. Most of the cultural
debris was concentrated in the upper stratum, but a few flint flakes
were found as deep as two feet below th e surface.

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

167

The uppermost stratum of Area C was a grayish-tan, humusstained soil about 6 inches thick, with admixture of sand and small
gravel. Below that lay a stratum of gray sand mixed with pea-sized
gravel which extended to a depth of 3 feet below the surface, at which
level the soil started to become more and more clayey until, at 3.5
feet, a formation composed entirely of compact, gravelly clay was
reached. The latter formation extended down to the maximum ( 4.5
feet ) depth of excavation. Artifacts were found in all levels excavated
at Area C, but the quantity decreased from the higher to the lower
levels.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS

The artifacts recovered from the Lightfoot Site are (with one exception, a bone awl) made of stone. Included are the following
classes : arrow points, dart points, drills, knives, crude bifacials, scrapers, gravers, burins, burin spalls, hammerstones, choppers, cores, and
milling stones.

Arrow Points
Altogether 106 arrow points and arrow point fragments were recovered from the Lightfoot Site; however, 33 of them are too incomplete for accurate typological identification. Of the more complete
specimens, seven are triangular in over-all outline, seven are subtriangular, and the remaining 59 are stemmed.
Triangular Arrow Points. The seven triangular arrow points show
considerable variation. Five (Fig. 13, J-N ) are small, bifacially
worked points, probably of the Fresno type ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962:
273, Pl. 137 ) . Their edges vary from straight to convex, while the
bases are straight or slightly concave. Length varies from 20 to 31
mm.; width (at the base) is 12 to 16 mm.; thickness is 2 to 5 mm.
The two other triangular arrow points are of the Harrell type
(Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 275, Pl. 138 ). They have prominent side
notches above the base, lateral edges are straight, and bases are
slightly concave. The most complete specimen (Fig. 13, I) measures
26 mm. in length, 14 mm. in width (at the base), and 3 mm. in thickness. A less complete specimen (Fig. 13, H) is 16 mm. wide and 3 mm.
thick (at the base).
Subtriangular Arrow Points. Seven arrow points are subtriangular
in outline, with convex edges and bases. Three of them (Fig. 14, L-N )
were made from thin, curved (plano-convex or concavo-convex) flakes

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with little modification on the concave or plane face. Faint pressure
flaking, however, can be observed on the edges of both faces. Length
ranges from 24 to 40 mm., width from 17 to 21 mm., and thickness
from 3 to 5 mm. These specimens seem to conform to the description of the Young arrow point type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 295, Pl.
135; Jelks, 1962: 35, Fig. 14, K-L) .
Three of the subtriangular points (Fig. 14, J, K ) are carefully
flaked examples of Granbury joshua (Jelks, 1962: 35, Fig. 14, P-T ).
Lacking the distal tips, these points range in width from 21 to 24 mm.
and in thickness from 3 to 4.5 mm.
The remaining subtriangular arrow point (Fig. 14, I) is a thin,
carefully flaked example of the Granbury parker type (Jelks, 1962:
35, Fig. 14, V-W ) . This specimen is 30 mm. long and 4 mm. thick; its
maximum width cannot be measured because one corner of the base is
lacking.
Stemmed Arrow Points. A great deal of variety is exhibited by the
stemmed arrow points, which range from specimens with short,
pointed stems, to specimens with long, straight, contracting stems and
others with expanding stems.
A total _of 21 arrow points (Fig. 13, 0-U ) have small, broad, contracting stems and roughly triangular blades with concave, convex,
and (more commonly) straight edges. These belong to the Cliffton
type ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 269, Pl. 135; Jelks, 1962: 26, Fig. 12,
M -Q ) . These specimens are crudely chipped, and four are modified
on only one face . Length ranges from 27 to 38 mm. , width from 16 to
26 mm. , and thickness from 3 to 6 mm.
Fourteen arrow points are assigned to the Perdiz type (Suhm and
Jelks, 1962: 283, Pl. 142). Of these, six (Fig. 13, C, D ) appear to be
of the whitney variety (Jelks, 1962: 24-25 , Fig. 12, A-F), three (Fig.
13, A. B) are of the morgan variety (Ibid.: 26, Fig. 12, G-I ), and five
( Fig. 13, E-G) are miscellaneous Perdiz points. The Perdiz whitney
points exhibit straight to slightly convex blade edges, prominent to
weak barbs, and relatively broad stems with straight to mildly convex
edges. The bases of the stems are rounded. The only complete specimen
is 31 mm. long; width ranges from 13 to 20 mm.; all three specimens
are 3 mm. thick. Five miscellaneous Perdiz points, which cannot
readily be assigned to any recognized variety, have unusually small
stems. These specimens range in length from 23 to 24 mm., in width
from 19 to 22 mm. , and in thickness from 2 to 3 mm.
Six of the stemmed arrow points belong to the Scallorn type ( Suhm
and Jelks, 1962: 285, Pl. 143). Their blades are triangular with ap-

169

TERRI AN D L I GHTFOOT SI TES

..,,

I
I

A

8

H

0

v

p

c

D

E

F

J

K

L

M

Q

w

2

T

z

y

X
0

s

R

4

AA

G

N

u

88

6

Fig . 13 . Arrow Points from the Lightfoot Site. A, B, Perdiz morgan . C, D, Perdiz wh itney.
E-G, Miscellaneous Perdiz. H, I, Harrell . J-N, Fresno . 0-U , C/iffton . V, Sea/lorn eddy. W-Y,
Sea/lorn saltier. Z, Miscella neo us Sea/lorn. AA , BB, Untyped.

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

proximately straight edges, and short to relatively long barbs are
present. Two of these with long, very slightly expanding stems (Fig.
13, V) may be assigned to the eddy variety (Jelks, 1962: 28-30,
Fig. 13, M -R ). Three others (Fig. 13, W-Y) have strongly expanding stems, slightly convex bases, and slight barbs-hallmarks of the
sattler variety (Ibid. : 30-31, Fig. 13, S-U). The remaining Scallorn
point (Fig. 13, Z) can be assigned to no recognized variety. It has
a strongly expanding stem made by deep corner notches and a weakly
concave base. As a group, the Scallorn points from the Lightfoot Site
vary in length from 23 to 38 mm. , in width from 11 to 21 mm. , and
in thickness from 3 to 3.5 mm.
Two unusual fragmentary specimens, (Fig. 13, AA, BB ) , unidentified as to type, exhibit long expanding stems produced by shallow
lateral concavities. The shoulders are rounded and indistinct. Width
at the base measures 11 and 12 mm. respectively, thickness 4 and 3.5
mm. Lengths cannot be ascertained as the distal portions of both
specrmens are m1ss1ng.
The remaining 16 stemmed arrow points (Fig. 14, A-H ) are not
assigned to specific types even though they resemble generally several
recognized types including Alba, Bonham, and Perdiz. There is a
gradation in the group from specimens with rectangular stems to
others with slightly contracting, slightly expanding, or bulbous stems.
Their blades are triangular, with straight, concave, or recurved edges
and moderate to pronounced barbs. Length varies between 21 and
41 mm.; width is 13 to 23 mm.; thickness is 2 to 4 mm. Although the
specimens in this group are, in general, rather similar to one another,
it would be unwise and, indeed, arbitrary to attempt a typological
segregation of such a small sample.

Dart Points
The 17 dart points from the Lightfoot Site are distinguished from
the arrow points primarily on the basis of their larger size. They are
divided into five groups: unstemmed, parallel-stemmed, slightly expanding stem, strongly expanding stem, and miscellaneous.
Unstemmed Dart Point. The single unstemmed point (Fig. 15, A)
seems to fit the Abasolo type ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 165, Pl. 83). The
blade edges are slightly convex, as in the base. The left face of each
side is beveled, and the base is thinned. The specimen is 47 mm. in
length, 26 mm. in width, and 7 mm. in thickness. The workmanship
is fairly good.

171

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

c

8

A

E

0

F

I

I

1\
I'

G

M

H

J

p

0

N

0

K

2

4

L

Q

6

Fig. 14 . Arrow Po in)s and Dri lls from t he Lig h tfoot Site . A-H , Miscella ne ous stemmed
po ints . I, Granbury par:<er. J, K, Gra n bury ;osh ua . L- N, Youn g . 0-Q, Drill s.

Parallel-Stemmed Dart Points. Of the two fragmentary parallelstemmed points (Fig. 15, B, C), one (Fig. 15, B) seems to be of the
Pedernales type ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 235-23 7, Pls. 118, 119 ). It
has the characteristic deeply concave base of Pedernales, the shoulders
are weak, and the stem has been thinned by the removal of a single,

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

long flake . One corner of the base is missing, but the fragment is still
identifiable.
The other fra gment has one weakly developed shoulder and one
well developed shoulder set at right angles to the long axis of the point.
One corner of the base is absent, but it seems originally to have been
straight or slightly concave. Several small longitudinal flakes have
been removed from the base.
Dart Points With Slightly Expanding Stems. Two of the eight dart
points with slightly expanding stems are of the Darl type ( Suhm and
Jelks, 1962: 179, Pl. 90). The blades are slender and roughly triangular. On one specimen (Fig. 15, D) the right edges on both faces
are steeply beveled; the blade edges of the other specimen are beveled
to the left on both faces , but not steeply. The stems expand slightly
toward the base and are beveled: one specimen (Fig. 15, E ) to the
left on both faces, the other on both edges of one face only. The
shoulders are weak, the stem edges are straight, and the bases are indented somewhat by the removal of several longitudinal flakes . The
stem edges of both specimens and the base of one (Fig. 15, D ) are
ground. One specimen that is missing its distal portion is 18 mm.
wide at the shoulders and 5 mm. thick. The other is 38 mm. long, 1 7
mm. wide at the shoulders, and 7 mm. thick. Base widths are 18 and
17 mm. respectively.
The remaining six dart points with slightly expanding stems (Fig.
15, F-K) are classified in a single descriptive group even though
three of them consist only of blade fragments. The group is characterized by long, slender blades that are alternatively beveled to either
the right or the left. The blade edges are generally straight but may
be slightly convex or slightly concave. The shoulders are well developed and occasionally have short, lateral barbs (Fig. 15, F, K) .
The stems expand moderately, and their edges tend to be straight or
nearly so. The bases vary from mildly convex to mildly concave.
Stem necks are relatively wide, and the stem edges of two specimens
have been smoothed. The two measurable specimens are respectively
60 and 64 mm. long; width at the shoulders is 21 to 29 mm.; thickness
is 7 to 8 mm. Stems are 11 to 13 mm. long and bases are 14 to 19 mm.
wide.
Dart Points With Strongly Expanding Stems. One of the points in
this group (Fig. 15, L) has a triangular blade with mildly convex
edges and well developed shoulders. The stem expands strongly, and
there is broad notch in the center of the base. The basal corners are

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

173

rounded. Over-all length is 43 mm., width is 23 mm., and thickness
is 8mm.
One of the expanding stem dart points (Fig. 15, M ) is assigned to
the Martindale type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 213, Pl. 107 ) . The blade
is triangular with convex edges and has strong barbs at the shoulders.
The stem edges are straight, and the base is recurved in the characteristic Martindale manner. The stem has been thinned by the removal
of several small flake s. This specimen is 3 7 mm. long, 30 mm. wide,
and 7 mm. thick.
Another specimen (Fig. 15, N ) has a triangular blade with straight
edges and barbed shoulders. The stem expands very strongly so that
the base-which is approximately straight-is almost as wide as the
shoulders. This specimen is 36 mm. long (lacking the distal tip ) , 20
mm. wide, and 6.5 mm. thick. The base is 18 mm. wide.
The fourth dart point of this category (Fig. 15, 0 ) has a short triangular blade that seems to have been resharpened. The resharpening
produced steep beveling along the blade edges and created a barb on
one side. The blade edges are irregular, perhaps owing to the resharpening operation. The expanding stem has been thinned by the removal
of several small flakes , and the base is slightly convex. This specimen
is 32 mm. long, 24 mm. wide, and 6 mm. thick.
Miscellaneous Dart Points. One of the miscellaneous dart points
consists of a fragment, possibly the lower portion of the stem from a
Pedernales point. The edges are straight, and the base is indented by
the removal of several small flakes. This specimen is 16 mm. wide and
6 mm. thick.
The other miscellaneous dart point is too badly scarred by thermal
fracture to permit meaningful description.

Drills
One of the three drills (Fig. 14, 0) has recurved lateral edges and a
roughly rectangular base. The bit edges have been beveled in such a
manner as to form a medial ridge on each face . The length of the drill
(which is lacking the tip) is 50 mm., maximum width of the bit is 10
mm., thickness is 5 mm., and the width of the base is 11 mm.
Another of the drill specimens (Fig. 14, P) consists of a slender bit
fragment. It tapers gently to a sharp point, the edges being mildly convex, and one face of the bit exhibits a slight medial ridge where the
flake scars meet.

174

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

·.
8

c

F

G

H

K

L

M

A

D

E

J

N

0

Fig. 1 5 . Dart Points from the Lightfoot Site . A, Abasolo . B, Probable Pedernales . C,
Parallel-stemmed point. D, E, Dar/. F-K, Sl ighlly expanding stem points . L-0, Strongly
e xpand ing stem points .

The third drill (F ig. 14, Q) was fas hioned from a dart point that
had a m oderately expanding stem and an alternately beveled blade,
much like th e specimen illustrated in Figure 15, K. The dart point has

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

175

been worked down into a small bit that is difficult to measure since it
merges gradually with the blade of the point.

Knives
Relatively thin, unstemmed, bifacially-worked implements that
have sharp edges suitable for cutting purposes are, somewhat arbitrarily, classified as knives . Relatively crude bifacials that resemble knives,
but which are thicker and have more sinuous edges, are here classed
as crude bifacials since they seem unsuitable for use as knives. Of the
56 knives, 33 are too fragmentary to classify into descriptive groups.
Triangular Knives. Of the three triangular knives, one (Fig. 16, C)
exhibits somewhat finer workmanship than the other two (Fig. 16, A,
B) which are crudely chipped by the percussion technique. The blade
edges of this group are straight to convex; the bases are convex
( 1 specimen) to irregular ( 2 specimens) . One specimen lacks the
distal tip and another has been broken along one edge of the blade. The
three specimens range in length from 45 to 61 mm. ; width at or near
the base is from 30 to 35 mm.; thickness is 7 to 12 mm.
Subtriangular Knives. There are 9 specimens in this group. One of
them (Fig. 16, F) has convex blade edges and a convex base, the base
retaining a patch of nodular cortex. The chipping is very crude, and
there is pressure retouching (or possibly use scarring) along the blade
edges. The length of this specimen is 40 mm. , its width 29 mm., and
its thickness 8 mm.
Two of the subtriangular knives (Fig. 16, D, E) might be described
as roughly crescent shaped. One blade edge of each is convex while the
other is slightly concave. The base of one (Fig. 16, D ) is pointed while
the other (Fig. 16, E ) is convex. The length of the former is 50 mm.,
its width 29 mm. , and its thickness 13 mm. The latter is 56 mm. long,
29 mm. wide, and 11 mm. thick.
Six of the subtriangular knives (Fig. 17, A-F ) are assigned to the
Cleburne type (Jelks, 1962: 44, Fig. 18 ) . The length of the only complete specimen (Fig. 17, A ) is 54 mm. Within the entire group, width
ranges from 26 to 32 mm. and thickness from 5 to 9.5 mm. Blade edges
are straight to convex, and bases are convex. General workmanship
tends to be crude, but there is some pressure retouching (or use scarring ) along the lateral edges and, occasionally, on the base.
Rectangular Knives. Two fragmentary specimens (Fig. 16, G, H )
have more or less rectangular outlines. Their blade edges are straight
to slightly convex; the base of one specimen (Fig. 16, G) 1s concave,

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

while that of the other is convex. The width of the former is 29 mm. ,
its thickness 4 mm. The other is 22 mm. wide and 5 mm. thick. The
workmanship on both specimens is good. Fine pressure retouching
along the lateral edges tends to produce light beveling of the edges.
These resemble somewhat the Friday type of Jelks (1962: 42, Fig. 17,
A-C ).
Resharpened Knife Fragment. This fragment (Fig. 16, I) consists
of the distal end of a knife that has been resharpened, from one face
only, along the broken proximal edge. The lateral edges have also been
resharpened from the same face, and, in addition, occasional flakes
were removed from the other face. This specimen is 46 mm. long, 27
mm. wide, and 8 mm. thick.
Miscellaneous Knives. These eight specimens (Fig. 17, G, H) are
more or less oval in outline, the blade edges being generally convex
with occasional irregularities. Maximum length ranges from 25 to 48
mm., width from 21 to 35 mm., and thickness from 3 to 13 mm. The
workmanship is fairly crude, although there is pressure flaking around
the blade edges.

Knife and Dart Point Fragments
Thirty-three bifacially worked specimens are too fragmentary to
classify. They include distal, medial, and basal fragments of dart
points and/ or knives.

Crude Bifacials
This category includes two crudely chipped bifacial implements.
One (Fig. 18, I) consists of a distal fragment with a gently rounded tip.
The blade edges are slightly convex. Although workmanship is crude,
the edges appear to have been resharpened by pressure flaking. Patches
of the original cortex are visible on the tip. This specimen is 42 mm.
wide and 15 mm. thick.
The other crude bifacial (not illustrated) is roughly triangular in
outline with mildly convex lateral edges and a convex base. There is
no evidence of pressure resharpening. Patches of the original cortex
are visible on both lateral edges and on the base. This specimen is 64
mm. long, 44 mm. wide, and 19 mm. thick.

Scrapers
One hundred and two unifacially chipped stone implements are clas-

177

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SI TES

A

8

c

0

E

F

G

H

.o

2

4

6

Fig . 16. Knives from the Lightfoot Site. A-C, Triangular. 0-F, Subtriangular. G, H, Rectangular. I, Resharpened.

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sified as scrapers. They are divided into six groups: snub-nose end
scrapers, utilized flakes , side scrapers, spokeshaves, oval scrapers, and
miscellaneous scrapers (including unclassifiable fragments ).
Utilized Flakes. This, the largest group of scrapers, numbers 65
specimens (Figs. 17, K, L; 18, J-L). They are fairly small to mediumsized, sharp-edged flakes that seem to have been used without modification for scraping purposes. Fine flaking along the edges evidently is
largely a result of pressure applied during u se (Jelks, 1962: 51). The
scraping edges, which range from concave to convex, often are slightly
beveled as a result of use. The dimensions are : length, 22 to 61 mm. ;
width, 8 to 41 mm.
Snub-nose End Scrapers. These two implements (Fig. 17, I, J ) are
elongated flakes with a convex, unifacial, steeply beveled scraping edge
at one end. The flake tapers in two dimensions so that the working
(distal ) end is considerably wider and thicker than the proximal end.
The upper face is markedly round at the distal end, and the lateral
edges are slightly convex to concave. One specimen (Fig. 17, I ) is 34
mm. long, 20 mm. wide, and 6 mm. thick. The other is 59 mm. long,
36 mm. wide, and 18 mm. thick.
Side Scrapers. These seven implements (Fig. 18, A, B) were made
by unifacially chipping one or more lateral edges of large cortex flakes.
Six specimens have scraping edges that are convex, while one has a
concave scraping edge. These implements range from 37 to 76 mm.
long, from 30 to 56 mm. wide, and from 8 to 16 mm. thick.
Spokeshaves. Each of these eight implements (Fig. 18, E, F ) has a
concavity in one edge that seems suitable for dressing arrow shafts or
other wooden objects . The concavity was formed by detaching a large
percussion flake from a suitable (usually cortex ) flake . Pressure applied during use apparently removed small flakes from the scraping
edge. Workmanship is crude, with pressure flaking evident only on
the spokeshave bits and occasionally along convex edges that also were
probably used for scraping. Length of the spokeshave bits ranges from
11 to 17 mm.; maximum length of the complete implements ranges
from 35 to 56 mm. , width from 21 to 43 mm. , and thickness from 10
to22mm.
Oval Scrapers . The four specimens in this group (Fig. 17, M-P ) are
roughly oval-shaped, thin flakes that have been worked over one entire
face . Heavy use has produced steep beveling around the edges. Length
is 24 to 31 mm., width 18 to 28 mm., and thickness 4 to 6 mm.
Miscellaneous Scrapers and Scraper Fragments. These 16 scrapers
(Fig. 18, C, D ) are either too fragmentary to be classified or too irregu-

179

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

c.

8

A

M

0

H

G

F

E

0

J

K

N

0

4

2

L

p
6

em .
Fig. 17. Knives and Scrapers from the Lightfoot Site. A-F, Cleburne knives. G, H, Miscellane ous knives. I, J , Snub- nose scrapers . K, L, Utilized flakes . M-P, Oval scrapers .

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lar to be included in any of the above categories . Some specimens are
steeply beveled on one face, while others show signs of only light use.

Gravers
There are two distinct groups of gravers. The first group ( 7 specimens; Fig. 18, G) consists of small beak-like projections on crude
flakes that are generally unmodified otherwise except that occasionally
additional scraping edges may be present. The beaks are 2 to 4 mm.
long.
The three specimens comprising the second group of gravers (Fig.
18, H) have longer beaks than those of the first group. They are made
from thin flakes that have no modifications other than the graver
beaks. The beaks range from 9 to 15 mm. in length; length of the complete implements varies from 25 to 33 mm. , width from 18 to 27 mm. ,
and thickness from 4 to 7 mm.

Burins and Burin Spalls
A bifacially worked implement (Fig. 18, P) which has had two long
flakes removed from its long axis is identified as an angle burin (Epstein, 1963: 70) . One spall scar is 54 mm. long by 10 mm. wide. The
other spall scar is 27 mm. long by 13 mm. wide. The width of the
burin tip is 8 mm.
Two burin spalls were found (Fig. 18, N, 0). They measure 31 and
42 mm. in length by 9 and 10 mm. in width, respectively. Both spalls
seem to have been struck from heavily-used burins.

H ammerstones
Six cobbles (Fig. 19, C, D) exhibit evidence of battering along the
edges and therefore are classified as hammerstones. Three are of chert
and three are of quartzite. Two of them are unmodified except for
use wear; the other four have had large flakes removed so as to form
angular edges, and the signs of battering are along these edges.

Choppers
Twenty-nine of the thirty choppers (Fig. 19, A, B) are made of
chert; the other one is of quartzite. These implements were made by
removing large flakes from cobbles in such a manner as to form sinuous cutting edges. They are generally bifacially worked but usually
retain much of the original cortex of the cobbles.

181

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

c

0

B

A

E
G

J

0

2

4

H

K

6

Fig . 18. Scrapers, Gravers, Crude Bifacials, Bone Awl, Burin Spalls, and Burin from the
Lightfoot Site. A, B, Side scrapers . C, D, Miscellaneous scrapers . E, F, Spokeshaves. G, H,
Gravers (arrow indicates graver beak on Gl. I, Crude bifacial . J-L, Utilized flakes . M, Bone
awl. N, 0, Burin spalls . P, Burin (arrows indicate number and direction of burin blows).

18Z

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Cores
These 48 specimens all appear to have served as sources of large
flakes that presumably were desired for working into tools. Some of
the cores themselves seem also to have been used secondarily as tools.

Milling Stones
Of the 43 milling stones from the Lightfoot Site, ZO are manos and
Z3 are grinding slabs. All are made of sandstone, and some show evidence of having been burned.
Manos . All but six of the twenty manos are fragmentary . Ten of
them (Fig. 19, E ) have been used on two sides, the other ten (Fig. 19,
F) on one side only.
Grinding Slabs. All Z3 of the grinding slabs are fragmentary. The
surviving portions indicate that the grinding surfaces varied from flat
to concave, perhaps depending on the intensity or duration of use.

Bone Awl
The one bone awl recovered from the Lightfoot Site (Fig. 18, M) is
fashioned from a long bone of a mammal and retains part of an articular surface at the basal end. The body is polished, apparently from use,
and is oval in cross section. Lacking the distal tip, this specimen is 108
mm. long.
U NWORKED

BoNE AND SHELL

The bone residue from the Lightfoot Site is largely the remains of
bison, deer, and terrapin. A few small mammal bones were recovered,
but they are too fragmentary to be identified. Mussel shell was present
in some abundance.
DISTRIBUTION OF THE ARTIFACTS

The distributional analysis of artifacts at the Lightfoot Site was
carried out in much the same manner as at the Terri Site. The artifacts
were plotted on a graph by the different areas of the site (this is, areas
A, B, and C; see Fig. 1Z ) and by levels of individual five-foot squares
within the respective areas. The samples were too small to permit significant comparisons between areas, although it might be noted that
the vertical distribution of artifacts in areas A, B, and C followed the
same general pattern.

183

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

B

A

c

D

F

E
0

2

4
em .

6

8

Fig . 19. Choppers, Hammerstones, and Manos from the Lightfoot Site. A, B, Choppers.
C, D, Hammerstones. E, F, Manos.

Despite physical mixing of the cultural remains and their shallowness, two major periods of occupation could be discerned in the general pattern of artifact distribution : ( 1) an early occupation char-

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 2
Distribution of artifacts, Lightfoot Site

c

]

c

"

::0

<

u

"'~
" "
< < <" ~
"
~

Arrow Points
Triangular
Subtriangular
Stemmed
Arrow point fragments
Dart Points
Unstemmed
P arallel-stemmed
Slightly expanding stem
Strongly expanding stem
Miscellaneous
Drills
Knives
T r iangula r
S u btriangular
Rectangular
Resharpened
Miscellaneous
Knife and dart point
fragments
Crude bifacials
Scrapers
Utilized fl akes
Snub-n :Jse
Side
Spokeshaves
Oval
Miscellaneous
Gravers
Burin
Burin spalls
H ammerston es
Choppers
Cores
Milling stones
Manos
Grinding slabs
Bone awl
TOTAL ARTIFACTS

3 3
5
46 11
25 7

5

1
3

2

2
3
1
2
2

2

4

2
1

1

4

3

20 12

48 11
3
8
3
13
6
1
2
5
24
35
16
18

3
3

5
,...
0

~

~
~

:3 ;;

2
1
3

4

1
2
8
4
2
3

1
3

3
2

2

20
23
427

6

I

~

I

~

6

3

"'

I

~

0

"!'

~

-4
2

,,~I

0

ci

0

~

0

"">nI '?0 1
"'
ol
"' "'

2

4

2
2

3
9
2
1
8

65
2
7
8
4
16
10
1
2
6
30
48

V"'

~

4 2
2 3
2 25 25
17 12

7
7
59
33

1
2

33
2

1
3
4

2
8

=

""=
;:;

3

1
2

4

4

2

17 10

4

23 24
1
4
2 3
2 2
5 9
4 2

9

3
2

2
2
2

2

2
2 2 1
2 4 7 9
1 14 14 10

1
6
8

1
2

5

6
4

8
6

5
4
1

2

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

185

acterized by milling stones and (2) a late occupation marked by a
relative abundance of projectile points, scrapers, and knives (see
Table 2). The other classes of artifacts appear to have been more or
less evenly shared by the two occupations.
The artifact distribution pattern at the Lightfoot Site compares favorably with that of the Terri Site. The evidence indicates the same
general sequence at both sites: earlier occupation by gatherers, later
occupation by hunters.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

From the preceding descriptions and analyses we may draw certain
limited conclusions regarding the cultural prehistory of the Terri and
Lightfoot sites.
At both sites, milling stones were generally found stratigraphically
lower than projectile points . Physical mixing and the shallowness of
the cultural remains prevented clean stratigraphic separation of dart
points and arrow points and make it necessary to lump them under
one general heading. In short, two major periods of occupation are recognizable: a milling stone occupation and a projectile point occupation.
The earlier occupation, characterized by an abundance of milling
stones, may have been a seasonal habitation of the site by a culture
oriented toward gathering. Roots, nuts, berries, and other edible vegetal foods that are readily available in the locality today were probably
dietary staples of these earlier occupants. In addition, small game was
probably hunted, although almost no projectile points occur in the
deeper levels of either site. No attempt will be made to assign this component to any formal classificatory unit.
The second major occupation is characterized by the presence of
projectile points in relatively large numbers. This suggests an important change in the local economic pattern from a predominantly
gathering mode of existence to one based primarily on hunting. The
few bison and deer bones preserved in the upper levels of the Lightfoot
Site attest to this. Also, milling stones are relatively rare in those same
levels.
Three previously defined cultural units appear to be represented in
the material remains of the Terri and Lightfoot sites, although they
are not stratigraphically separable from one another at either site.
These units are identified by the presence of certain projectile point
types that-on the basis of data from other sites-are considered diagnostic of the respective culture units.

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The Archaic Edwards Plateau Aspect, as defined by Suhm, Krieger,
and Jelks ( 1954: 102-112 ) , is weakly represented at both sites by a
few Pedernales, Marshall, Martindale, and Darl dart points. The NeoAmerican Central Texas Aspect, as defined by Jelks ( 1962: 84-99 ), is
strongly represented, by Cliffton, Scallorn, and Granbury arrow points
at both sites and by Perdiz arrow points at the Lightfoot Site. The Henrietta Focus, as defined by Krieger (1946: 121-142), is lightly represented by Harrell, Fresno, and Young arrow points.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We wish to thank those who made this report possible :
Mr. LeRoy Johnson, Jr. who supervised the excavations and who
contributed much assistance and encouragement during the writing
of this report;
the field crew, in addition to the author, consisting of assistant
archeologists Mark L. Parsons and Harry J. Shafer, and shovel hands
John Clark, Stanley Orman, and Jay Wise;
Mr. Charlie A. Smith, Jr. of the Dallas Archaelogical Society, who
contributed two days of free labor and pleasant company;
Mr. Eli Terri and Rev. F. H. Lightfoot, who graciously permitted
us to excavate on their properties;
Dr. Jeremiah F. Epstein, for confirming our identification of burins
and burin spalls;
Mr. Harry J. Shafer and Dr. Dee Ann Story, both of whom offered
helpful suggestions during the preparation of this report;
the United States Army Corps of Engineers, for supplying maps of
the reservoir area ;
the National Park Service, for financial support of the project.
REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of T exas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 93-117.
Epstein, J eremiah F .
1963. Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1963 ),
pp. 1-125.
Fenneman, Nevin M .
1931. Physiography of Western United States. McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,

TERRI AND LIGHTFOOT SITES

187

Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 5. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D . Tunnell
1960. Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Proctor Reservoir, Comanche
County, Texas. Mimeographed report submitted to the National Park
Service by The University of Texas.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology m Northern Texas. University of
Texas Publication No. 4640.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25 .
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks (editors)
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society, Special Publication No. 1; and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No.4.
U. S. Department of Commerce
1958. Climatological Data, Texas, 63, No. 13. Annual Summary for 1958.
Weather Bureau.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

West Indian Seal Remains From Two Historic
Sites in Coastal South Texas
GERALD G. RAUN
ABSTRACT
West Indian seal remains, represented by canine teeth only, are reported from
two historic sites in southern Texas. These teeth were probably trade items and do
not definitely established the West Indian seal as a former inhabitant of the Texas
coast. Their occurrence in pre-Columbian sites has not been recorded.

The occurrence of several interesting mammalian teeth from two
historical sites in southern Texas has been brought to my attention by
Mr. D. E. Kilgore of Clarkwood, Texas. Mr. Kilgore obtained a single
hollow canine tooth (Fig. 1) from a site on the Nueces River, about 20
miles inland from the mouth, in Nueces County. This specimen was
shown to Mr. Aalbert Heine, Director of the Corpus Christi Museum,
who referred it to me for examination. My tentative identification of
the West Indian seal (Monachus tropicalis) has been confirmed by
Dr. Richard G. Van Gelder of the American Museum of Natural History. I am indebted to these gentlemen for their kind cooperation and
interest, and particularly to Mr. Kilgore for permission to publish this
note.
The Nueces County locality is referred to by Mr. Kilgore as the
Rancho Diexmero Site and the following historical information was
fumished largely by him. Rancho Diexmero was the headquarters of a
Spanish ranch, the second recorded European habitation in Nueces
County. It was occupied by Europeans in the early 1800's (Bolton,
1910), which is quite early for this part of the country. An excellent
campsite here was probably utilized by Indians prior to the Spanish
occupation. Artifacts are present which match many of those found at
Goliad and at Falcon Dam. The area is now included within an oil
field and the site has been greatly disturbed by bulldozing. Unfortunately, it is impossible to determine whether the tooth came from the
Spanish occupation zone or from an earlier period.
The second locality is the mission Nuestra Senora del Espiritu Santo
de Zuniga (La Bahia) at Goliad. I am indebted again to Mr. Kilgore
for calling this to my attention. At least five hollow canine teeth are

190

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8
Fig. 1. West Indian seal IMonachus tropica/is) tooth. A, Top view. 8, Side view. Scale 10
em . long .

WEST INDIAN SEAL REMAI NS

191

exhibited in the Goliad State Park Museum and while I have not carefully examined these specimens I have no hesitancy about assigning
them to Monachus tropicalis. Both young and adult individuals appear to be represented. No provenience is available for the teeth, but
they are purported to have come from La Bahia and probably date
from the Spanish occupation which began in 1749 (Webb, 1952: 699) .
Monachus tropicalis might be included provisionally in the T exas
fauna on the basis of questionable sight records from the lower Laguna
Madre (Gunter, 1947 ); however, the range as normally outlined does
not include the Texas coast (Hall and Kelson, 1959: 986). It would be
most unwise to assume that the two locality records reported here authenticate the West Indian seal as a former resident of the Texas coast.
In view of the fact that both known Texas records probably date from
a time of Spanish settlement and since only the canine teeth are
present it seems more likely that the teeth were u sed as trade items.
Mammalian canine teeth were frequ ently used as ornaments by
various Indian peoples and the relatively large size of the seal teeth
would be expected to enhance their ornamental value. While M. tropicalis is now rare it was formerly quite common in the West Indies
(Matthiessen , 1959 : 39) and the teeth may have b een exported by
the Spaniards. None of the teeth show evidence of having been bored
for stringing as a n ecklace, but all are broken across the base.
I would like to appeal to archeologists who are working in the coastal
areas of Texas to be on th e alert for additional seal teeth. The hollow
canines m ight easily be mistaken for the more common alligator teeth
and be overlooked in collections. It would be of great interest to obtain
specimens of known provenience antedating the European invasion .
This would clearly establish M. tropicalis as a former member of the
Texas fauna.
REFERENCES CITED
Bolton, H . E.
1910. Note in the Quarterly of th e Texas State Historical Association. Vol. 14,
pp . 164-166.
Gunter, G.
1947. Sight Records of the West Indian Seal, Monachu s tropicalis (Gray) from
the T exas Coast. Journal of Mammalogy, Vol. 28, pp. 289-290.
Hall, E. R. , and K. R. Kelson
1959. The Mammals of North America, Vol. 2. Ronald Press.

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Matthiessen, P .
1959. Wildlife in North America. Viking Press.
Webb, W . P. (editor)
1952. The Handbook of Texas. Texas State Historical Association.
T exas Memorial Museum
Austin, Texas

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel From
the Vicinity of Corpus Christi, Texas
W. S. FITZPATRICK, JOAN FITZPATRICK,
AND T. N. CAMPBELL
ABSTRACT
A reconstructed Rockport Black-on-gray vessel, found in isolation near Corpus
Christi, is described. This vessel, the fourth of its type to be reported but the first
to be described, is a small-mouthed, short-necked, globular olla decorated with a
loose network of undulating lines in asphaltum paint. As the Rockport Black-on-gray
type has been attributed to the Karankawa and associated Indian tribes on the Texas
coast, Karankawa pottery as reported in ethnological documents is compared with
Rockport ware described in archeological literature. This comparison shows that,
although the similarities are sufficient to permit reliable linkage, the two bodies
of ceramic data are not in full agreement.

Pottery is associated with only one culture in the central section of
the Texas coast. This is known as the Rockport Focus, a late prehistoric
and early historic culture whose most distinctive trait is a type of pottery named Rockport Black-on-gray. The type is widely distributed
along the Texas coast. It has been reported as far east as Galveston
Bay (Campbell, 1957: 467) and as far south as the Rio Grande delta
( Anderson, 1932: 30). However, at these extreme limits of its distribution it appears to be rare and possibly intrusive. The area of heaviest
representation lies between Matagorda and Baffin bays (Campbell,
1952: 74-75; 1956: 35-40; 1958: 435-438; Suhm, et al., 1954: 126,
384; SuhmandJelks, 1962: 131-132) .
Most of what is known about Rockport Black-on-gray pottery is derived from analysis of potsherds. Complete, undamaged Rockport
Black-on-gray vessels are rare, and only one has thus far been reported, a hemispherical bowl from Arrowhead Island (also known as
Webb Island ) just southeast of Corpus Christi. A drawing of this
specimen has been published by Potter (1930: Plate 8, No. 15 ), who
provides no descriptive details. His sketch (scale is not indicated)
shows that the lip of this bowl is painted black and that widely spaced,
narrow, undulating black lines extend downward from the painted lip
about halfway to the base.
Also rare are fragmentary vessels complete enough to permit re-

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

construction of the original form . Sketches of two such reconstructed
vessels, both globular ollas from Live Oak Peninsula, Aransas County,
have been published by Potter ( 1930: Plate 9, Nos . 16-17 ). Unfortunately, measurements and descriptive details are not presented, and
there is no way to check the accuracy of each reconstruction. One olla
(Potter's No. 16) is from the Blink Bonnie Site north of Rockport
(Martin, n . d.: 5, Site 38 ). Although it is globular and has a short
neck, the maximum diameter of this vessel is greater than its height.
The width of the mouth appears to be about one-third of maximum
body diameter. A narrow band of paint covers the lip and adjacent exterior portion of the neck, and extending downward from this band are
several rows (five rows are visible in the sketch ) of very large black
dots. The number of dots in these rows ranges from three to five; some
rows of dots are straight but others are slightly curved. The second
olla (Potter's No. 17), which is from a site at the northern end of Live
Oak Peninsula, has a larger mouth (its diameter is about half the body
diameter ) and also has two opposed, vertically oriented loop handles
on the shoulder. The lip bears deep, closely spaced, V-shaped notches,
and a narrow band of black paint encircles the lip exterior, extending
downward no farther than the angles of the lip notches. No other decoration appears on this specimen.
To these three Rockport Black-on-gray vessels we can now add a
fourth that comes from a locality on the King Ranch southwest of
Corpus Christi. This vessel, the three vessels reported by Potter, and
the Rockport polychrome vessel described by Calhoun in this issue of
the Bulletin all come from localities that are less than 50 miles from
the city of Corpus Christi.
The fragmented vessel to be described here was found by VV. S. and
Joan Fitzpatrick in January, 1949, on an eroded slope overlooking
Agua Dulce Creek in northern Kleberg County (Fitzpatrick site designation: 77 A9-1). This intermittent stream flows eastward across the
flat coastal plain into Baffin Bay. Mrs. Fitzpatrick noted that potsherds
were eroding at the head of a small gully some 80 feet west of the
stream and at a level six to seven feet above the stream bed. An area of
approximately nine square feet was excavated at the spot where sherds
were still in place, and about half of the vessel was recovered by troweling and use of a screen. The potsherds were found in a relatively
small area (approximately four square feet ). The excavation was carried downward to a depth of 16 inches below the surface, but no potsherds were found at a depth greater than four inches. The vessel was
buried in sandy clay that extended downward to a depth of eight
inches. Below this level the clay contained no sand.

ROCKPORT BLACK-ON-GRAY VESSEL

195

Fig . 1. Restored Rockport Block-on-gray vessel, side view.

Farther down slope, and in the same gully, sherds from the vessel
were also collected from the surface all the way to the bank of Agua
Dulce Creek. Additional sherds were recovered by screening the fill
in the bottom of this small gully. Many of the sherds collected from
the surface and from the gully fill were noticeably eroded. No other
archeological materials were seen in the immediate area, but a small
campsite was found some 600 feet north of the buried vessel. From the
surface of this site flint flakes, burned-clay fragments, and a few potsherds were collected. The sherds, identifiable as Rockport ware, are
very small, eroded fragments from one or more thin-walled, buff to
reddish-buff vessels.

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Shortly after the sherds were recovered the vessel was reconstructed
by Fitzpatrick as shown in Figs. 1-3. In this form it was very weak
and fragile. As the specimen was to be placed on display in the Corpus
Christi Museum, it was strengthened by filling in the open spaces with
plaster of Paris. Today it is displayed in this condition at the Waelder
Wildlife Refuge near Sinton, Texas. The vessel has been illustrated in
two newspaper articles. In the first article (Anonymous, 1949 ), which
is based on an interview with Fitzpatrick, it is shown as originally
reconstructed; in the second article (Fitzpatrick, 1 959) it is shown
after treatment with plaster of Paris.
The Agua Dulce vessel is represented by 167 sherds, of which 161
are included in the reconstruction. It is estimated that about 50 sherds
were not recovered. These figures provide a rough measure of the total
number of sherds (215 to 225) likely to result from breakage of a
Rockport vessel of this shape and size.
This vessel appears to have been constructed by the coiling method
(see horizontal fracture patterns in Figs. 1 and 2). The paste includes
enough fine sand (perhaps as much as 10% ) to give it a gritty feel
when rubbed with the fingers. It is possible that this sand was added
to the clay as tempering material, but it seems more likely that the
sand was present in the clay selected for use. Sandy clays occur in the
Corpus Christi area. The paste also includes small white particles (all
less than 1 mm. in diameter) that are not evenly distributed over the
vessel surface. In areas of maximum frequency the number of white
particles never exceeds one per square centimeter. These particles
were not discolored by firing, and magnification reveals that they are
not laminated, which leads us to conclude that the white particles are
not pulverized bone or shell. As some local clays contain hard particles
of white calcareous material, we are inclined to believe that the particles in the paste of this vessel do not represent a tempering additive.
In general the paste is fine and homogenous. No lumps or laminations are observable. Occasionally small vacant spaces occur; 11 of
these were noted, and seven of them are in one area about 5 em. square
near the base. Paste color ranges from buff to gray near interior and
exterior wall surfaces, but a gray core appears in most sherds.
Exterior surface color is variable, ranging from buff (about 80%)
to light gray (about 20%) . The exterior surface is slightly uneven.
Except for five or six very shallow grooves (2 mm. in width and about
6 em. in length), no tool marks are observable. The interior surface
shows no scoring and no trace of asphaltum.
The body of this vessel is spherical and has a maximum diameter

ROCKPORT BLACK-ON-GRAY VESSEL

197

Fig. 2. Restored Rockport Black-on-gray vessel, side view.

of 18.2 em. The neck is very short (height above body, 1.5 em. ) and
has a narrow mouth (diameter, 3.6 em.). The distance from the center
of the base to level of the lip is 19.8 em. The lip is rounded and has not
been altered by nicks or notches or by the addition of asphaltum paint,
common attributes of Rockport ware vessels. The base is well-rounded
and shows no localized thickening to form the basal knob sometimes
found on vessels of Rockport ware. Wall thickness averages about 5

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mm., ranging from a minimum of 3.5 mm. at the neck to a maximum
of 9 mm. near the center of the base.
Decoration consists of a network of broad lines made by application
of black asphaltum paint. These lines are variable in width (maximum
14 rum.) and range from sinuous to almost straight. They appear to
have been made hastily and carelessly with some sort of brush. Seven
unequally spaced vertical lines extend downward from the lip of the
large circular area of solid asphaltum paint that covers the base of the
vessel (Fig. 3). The vertical lines are intersected by four horizontal or
slightly diagonal lines, mainly on the upper half of the vessel. The
horizontal lines are not as distinct as the vertical lines. Two of the
horizontal lines (Fig. 2) may have been the result of mending cracks
(paint extends across the fractured edges of the sherds). A short, vertical crack on the neck also seems to have been mended by application
of asphaltum. The large asphaltum-covered area on the base is of
special interest because it shows that some coastal sherds with asphaltum-coated exterior surfaces may be from Rockport Black-on-gray
vessels.
As Rockport Black-on-gray pottery has been attributed to the Karankawa and other closely associated Indian tribes of the Texas coast, it is
pertinent to review the ethnological data on Karankawa ceramics.
This does not seem to have been done before. Three published sources
contain primary information on Karankawa pottery- Joutel (Stiles,
1906), Gatschet ( 1891 ), and Dyer ( 1917 ). Joutel refers to Karankawa
groups in the year 1685, but both Gatschet and Dyer refer to Karankawa between the years 1817 and 1848. Joutel merely mentions pottery and one of its uses , but Gatschet and Dyer present information of
considerable value. In Gatschet, the best of the three sources, the de·
scription of Karankawa pottery is dispersed and occurs in twelve different places. Those who refer to Gatschet's description of Karankawa
pottery seldom cite ( Schaedel, 1949: 123, 126; Suhm and Jelks 1962:
131) more than one of these isolated references, possibly because Gatschet's index gives only two page references to pottery (and one of
these is incorrect! ). No one seems to have called attention to the brief
statement about Karankawa pottery made by Dyer. These sources are
of special significance because they not only provide a basis for identifying Rockport ware as Karankawa in provenience but also give information on specific uses of pottery in Karankawa culture.
We have said that references to Karankawa pottery occur in twelve
places in Gatschet's publication. As most of these are easily overlooked
because of their brevity, we will reproduce all of them here. This will

ROCKPORT BLACK- ON-GRAY VESSEL

199

Fig . 3 . Restored Rockport Black-on-gray vessel, bottom view.

allow us to inspect the various statements and see how well they support conclusions that may be drawn from the ethnological sources. The
following extracts are presented in chronological order.
Joutel merely says that:
.. . she [an old woman] return'd to h er Cottage, where we found some Pitchers
of water, of which we all drank ( Stiles, 1906: 85 ).

Gatschet's ( 1891 ) statements are given below in the order of their
appearance in his monograph:

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Their food,-venison, fish, oysters, turtles, etc.,-was always either boiled in rude
earthen pots or roasted in the ashes of their fire (p. 11).
Their utensils were few and simple . .. including a few clay vessels of different
sizes with bottoms rounded-never flat (p. 12) .
. . . and a few cooking utensils . .. (p. 17).
This " tea" [a kind of "black drink" made from yaupon leaves and used on certain
ceremonial occasions], contained in a vessel of clay of their own manufacture, was
handed round occasionally and all the Indians drank freely (p. 18) .
. . . the chief ... [presented] ... a large jug [of water to a European settler whose
daughter ~as ill] (p. 20).
[Summarizing from Joutel] They . . . made some pottery for cooking their
victuals . . . (p. 24) .
Mrs. Oliver [Gatschet's informant] stated that asphaltum was often washed ashore
and used by the Indians for black paint after mixing it with oil .. . (p. 54).
The cookery of these natives was a rather simple affair. Every lodge had but one
iron kettle, but several made of pottery, all unwashed ... They prepared but one
kind of pottery from clay, the bases having a globular bottom, so that they had to
be placed into a hole in the sand. They had no handles and measured in diameter
about twelve inches. Mrs. Oliver observed their manufacture but once; then it was
a man who made some pots and ornamented them on the outside with little designs,
faces, scrolls, scallops, etc., in black paint (p. 59).
[In their houses] .. . cooking vessels, were lying on the ground (p. 63) .
. . . but made coarse pottery . .. (p. 67).
Although the women were not manufacturers of mats or blankets, cooking pots
with rude ornaments were seen in their camps (p. 68) .
Besides some rude attempts at wood-carving a beginning of the plastic arts
could be seen in the appliance of a paint, which was either red or black, and of a
clay producing a black color. With these they painted figures of animals and human
faces upon their skins and upon pots and articles of wood. These paintings were far
remote from any artistic finish and were but seldom seen (p. 68).

In describing the Atakapa of southwestern Louisiana and adjoining
southeastern Texas, Dyer ( 1917: 5) has the following to say about
Karankawa ceramics:
Their [the Atakapa] pottery was made by tribes to the north of them, except a
few of the globular or conical oil jugs of the Carancahuas, so serviceable, fitted in
cane frames, to the canoe voyager.

Although the above statements are brief and somewhat ambiguous
in places, they represent all that we now know about Karankawa
ceramics during the historic period. Analysis of these statements permits the following generalizations: Karankawa vessels varied in size,

ROCKPORT BLACK-ON-GRAY VESSEL

201

12 inches being the average diameter; they had rounded or conical
bases and lacked handles; some small-mouthed vessels were encased
in cane frames; designs in black paint or a combination of black and
red paint were applied to vessel exteriors; pigments used for decoration
of pottery consisted of clay or asphaltum collected from Gulf beaches;
asphaltum was prepared for use as paint by mixing with oil; the
painted designs included poorly executed animal figures, human
faces, scrolls, and scallops; these vessels were used for such purposes
as cooking food, storage and transportation of water and oil, and serving beverages on ceremonial occasions.
How well does this generalized description of Karankawa pottery
match descriptions of Rockport ware derived from archeological sites?
Such data as we now have on vessels and vessel fragments from these
sites indicate more variation in both vessel shape and size ( Suhm and
Jelks, 1962: 131-136) than is suggested by ethnological data. Demonstrable forms include bowls, jars or vases, ollas, and bottles. Bases are
rounded as a rule, but occasionally base sherds indicate a vessel tapered sufficiently toward the base to be characterized as conical (Campbell, 1952: Plate 8, JJ). Gatschet says that Karankawa vessels lacked
handles, but sherds with handles are sometimes found in archeological
sites (Campbell, 1956: 40; 1958: 437; Potter, 1930: Plate 9, No. 17) .
Potsherds from sites indicate both undecorated and decorated vessels
(Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 131-136), the latter exhibiting a variety of
decorative techniques-painting, incising, punctating, and inlaying
(with asphaltum; Corbin, 1963: 18). However, most of the decorated
sherds from Rockport sites bear parts of what appear to be very simple
designs in black paint. A fugitive red paint has occasionally been noted
on plain sherds and on sherds bearing black designs (Campbell, 1956:
40; Corbin, 1963: 13; Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 131), but it is only recently that Calhoun ( 1964) has demonstrated a polychrome tradition
which involves the use of both black and red paint on an unslipped exterior vessel surface. So far as we are aware, most of the painted designs mentioned by Gatschet are not present or at least not recognizable on fragmented archeological specimens. No animal figures,
human faces, or scrolls have been noted, but it is likely that Gatschet's
"scallops" refer to the undulating lines in black paint commonly
found on sherds from Rockport sites.
From these observations we may conclude that the ethnological data
and the archeological data agree in some instances (vessel forms, pigments used for painting designs, and at least one kind of design) but
do not agree in others (handles, decorative techniques other than

202

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

painting, and most of the painted designs named by Gatschet ). However, we think that there is enough agreement to support the identification of Rockport ware as mainly Karankawan in origin. It must be
realized, of course, that we are comparing ceramics made during a 30year period in the 19th century with ceramics made during a late
prehistoric and early historic period that may have covered as much as
1,000 years. Allowance should be made for the changes in ceramics
that must have taken place during such a long period. It is likely that
incising and punctating were not common decorative techniques in
the later part of the historic period.
The published descriptions of Karankawa pottery raise other questions. For example, Gatschet says that all Karankawa pottery was of
one kind. It would be of interest to know if the vessel used to hold the
ceremonial "black drink" was in any way different from other vessels.
One would suppose that it was a form from which men could drink
easily and that it was distinctive in some way because of ritual usage.
The polychrome vessel reported by Calhoun ( 1964) is a vase whose
globular lower portion is separated from a widely flaring rim by a
marked constriction, an ideal form for drinking purposes. We are
tempted to interpret this polychrome vessel as a special form made for
ceremonial use only. The Karankawa male potter observed by Mrs.
Oliver may have been making cere:r:nonial vessels. In a culture like
that of the Karankawa we would expect culinary vessels to be made
by women, as seems to be implied by Gatschet ( 1891 : 68 ) .
The cane frame mentioned by Dyer also raises a question. Did the
Atakapa add frames to Karankwa vessels or did the vessels come thus
equipped from the Karankawa? Dyer's statement is so brief and ambiguous that we cannot be sure of the answer. However, in this connection it is of interest to note the network of painted lines on the
Fitzpatrick vessel. These lines form a pattern which suggests a frame
like that mentioned by Dyer. We examined these painted lines closely
to see if there is any evidence that asphaltum was used as a gum to
attach such a frame more tightly to the vessel, but the results of this
examination were negative. Perhaps this loose network design is an
imitation of the cane carrying frame . Incidentally, Dyer's statement
that Karankawa pottery reached the Atakapa through trade helps to
explain the rare occurrence of Rockport ware in sites east of Galveston
Bay (Campbell1957: 467).
As for pottery from sites of the Rockport culture, the fugitive nature
of the red pigment used by Rockport potters poses one rather disturbing question. Just how frequently did vessels bearing designs in both

ROCKPORT BLACK-ON-GRAY VESSEL

203

black and red paint lose their red designs through repeated use or
through exposure to rainfall, percolating ground waters, or chemical
reactions in the soil? It is doubtful if this question can be answered
without resorting to such special techniques as X-ray diffraction,
fluorescence, or complex chemical analysis. Until an answer is forthcoming, it is wise to hold certain reservations about Rockport Blackon-gray as a pottery type.
The vase described by Calhoun and the olla described here provide
substantial additions to knowledge of form and decoration in Rockport
ware. Recovery of these two specimens shows that by patience, perseverance, and some good fortune it is possible to find reconstructable
Rockport vessels. The form of the Fitzpatrick specimen was predictable
on the basis of known rim and base sherds and the two reconstructed
ollas illustrated by Potter, but this is not true of the Calhoun specimen,
which has a more complex form. As Calhoun points out, a rim sherd
from his vase would surely have been identified as part of a bowl with
flaring rim. When additional specimens of complete or restorable
vessels are recovered, we can begin to make reliable descriptive statements about the pottery associated with Rockport culture and also
continue the comparison with Karankawa ceramics as known from
ethnological sources.
REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, A . E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Anonymous
1949. Piece of Rockport Indian Pottery Found near Creek. The Corpus Christi
Caller-Times, February 15, 1949, Section B, p. 1.
Calhoun, C. A.
1964. A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 35 (this issue ) .
Corbin, James
1963. Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of the Corpus Christi
Bay, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp. 5-30.
Campbell, T. N .
1952. The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1957. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 448-471.
1958. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423-442.

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Dyer, J. 0.
·1917. The Lake Charles Atakapas (Cannibals): Period 1817-1820. Galveston.
Fitzpatrick, Sam
1959. Earliest Man Came 8,000 Years Ago. The Corpus Christi Caller-Times,
January 18, 1959 (Centennial Edition ).
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891. The Karankawa Indians, the Coast People of Texas. Archaeological and
Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Harvard University, Vol. 1,
No.2.
Martin, George C.
n.d. Preliminary Archaeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast Made
by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929. Privately
printed.
Potter, Wendell H .
1930. Ornamentation on the Pottery of the Texas Coastal Tribes. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 41-44.
Schaedel, Richard P.
1949. The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 5, No.2, pp. 117-137.
Stiles, Henry Reed , editor
1906. Joutel's Journal of La Salle's Last Voyage, 1684--7. Albany, New York.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. The Texas Archeological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1 and The Texas M emorial Museum ,
Bulletin No. 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Corpus Christi, Texas
University of Texas
Austin, Texas

A Polychrome Vessel From the
Texas Coastal Bend
C.A.CALHOUN
ABSTRACT
A small, restorable polychrome jar recently found at a campsite on the southcentral coast of Texas is described in detail. It is one of the few complete vessels
known from the area and, even more importantly, it confirms the existence of a
polychrome decorative technique in the native (Rockport) ceramics. The several
artifacts r ecovered from the same occupational stratum as the jar suggest that it
dates from th e historic phase of the Rockport Focus.

INTRODUCTION
In March of 1962, the writer and Dee Ann Story (then Curator of
Anthropology, Texas Memorial Museum ) visited a campsite buried in
a low sand and clay dune on the south-central coast (or Coastal Bend )
of Texas, near the city of Corpus Christi. At that time, a compact group
of sherds was found weathering from a buried occupational zone exposed in an erosion gully. The sherds were collected and a nearly complete vessel, the subject of this report, was subsequently reconstructed.
Encouraged by the success in restoring the vessel, the author returned
to the site to carry out limited excavation. Although this work is still
underway and full evaluation of the site is not yet possible, a few of
the more pertinent finds can briefly be noted. A test in the immediate
area where the sherds of the jar were recovered indicated that the
uppermost zone consisted of a culturally sterile, sandy-clay that
reached a maximum thickness of nine inches. Below this layer was a
thin (generally about five inches thick ), darkly-stained occupation
zone which yielded two additional sherds of the jar (the only other
ones found to date). The soil beneath the occupational zone was lighter
in color and devoid of cultural refuse; excavations were terminated at
a depth of 30 inches below the surface.
The findings made in the above-mentioned test were disappointing,
for no diagnostic artifacts were found in association with the sherds
from the vessel. However, additional work in an area about 35 feet
from where the jar was found, in the same darkly-stained occupational
layer, has provided some useful information. Here, a small and shallow

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

basin-shaped hearth was uncovered and nearby were found the top and
shoulders of a small bronze ( ?) bell of European manufacture, a fragment of badly oxidized iron, a section of a large Rockport Black-ongray olla, a few flint chips, marine shells, fish scales, and small animal
bones. These data strongly suggests that the polychrome jar is quite
late, possibly belonging to the Historic Stage of the Rockport Focus.
DESCRIPTION OF THE VESSEL

The vessel form is best described as a small jar (Fig. 1, A-C ). Its
globular body rises into a constricted neck, which in turn recurves
smoothly to form a widely flaring rim. The rim is only slightly thinned
and the lip is rounded. The base is gently convex and slightly thicker
(Fig. 1, C) than the remainder of the vessel. The over-all height is
18.9 em.; the height from the base of the constricted area of the neck
is 12.6 em. The greatest diameter of the body is 12.8 em. and the
smallest diameter of the neck is 7. 4 em. The rim is not complete, but
the projected outside diameter of the orifice measures 12.8 em. The
wall thickness is generally 3.5 mm. for the body, neck, and the rim,
although just below the lip it is 3 mm. The maximum thickness at the
base is 5 mm.
An occasional horizontal fracture plane and slight beveling of the
sherd edges suggest that the vessel was manufactured by the coiling
technique. The angles of the bevels further suggest that the successive
coils were pressed down from the vessel exterior. The sherds in general indicate that a very good bond was effected between the plastic
increments.
The vessel appears to have been made from a light-colored clay possibly obtained at the site, where erosion has partially exposed the
kaolin-like clay of the Beaumont Formation. The tempering material
consists of a very fine, white sand of the type commonly found on offshore barrier islands and in sand dunes on the mainland littoral. Two
minute voids were noted in the cores of two sherds. One of these is a
cylindrical mold less than 1 mm. in diameter and approximately 2.5
mm. in length. The second mold was made by a tiny capsular object
with distinct longitudinal corrugations. Both appear to represent impurities, grass or the like, inadvertently included in the clay or tempering material, and burned out during firing.
The paste is quite hard and has a uniformly fine texture. The exterior and interior surfaces are well smoothed, but unslipped, and some
bumpy areas remain as a result of slightly uneven wall thickness. In

POLYCHROME VESSEL

207

one area of the basal interior, faint tool marks are visible in the form
of light striae or scoring. Some erosion and spalling have occurred near
the base, but the fractured edges of the sherds are characteristically
sharp and have resisted weathering well.
The surface color of the vessel is a light grayish-buff on both the
exterior and interior. A small area of yellow and orange on the exterior surface of the rim is a result of fire-mottling. The core is generally dark tan, although orangish tinges sometimes occur at fresh
fractures.
By far the most outstanding feature of the vessel is the combined
application of asphaltum and a fugitive red wash, which intentionally
or accidentally has produced a polychrome decoration. Much of the
exterior and interior surfaces of the body are heavily coated with
asphaltum, presumably to waterproof the vessel. On the exterior, the
asphaltum extends from the base to about 13 em. above the base, and
terminates in a ragged, uneven perimeter (Fig. 1). The interior coating appears to be somewhat thicker than that on the exterior, but there
are several small holidays on the inside of the base. The asphaltum on
the inside surface extends upward to an average height of 12 em.,
and ends very irregularly.
The random, detached spots of asphaltum above the irregula~ edges
of the body coating (Fig. 1, A, C), as well as the visible evidence of
overlapping brush strokes and the small area left uncoated on the basal
interior, must have resulted from the asphaltum being brushed on
while in a fluid state. The author is familiar with other samples of
asphaltum-coated Rockport pottery where the solid asphaltum was
apparently placed inside the vessel, melted, and the vessel rotated to
coat its interior. This latter procedure is usually evident by the presence of thick "puddles" of asphaltum. Such is not the case with the
small polychrome jar.
Asphaltum was also used as decoration, for the upper part of the
rim and lip are painted with a black band. On the exterior of the rim
this band averages 4 mm. wide, on the interior it averages 3 mm. wide.
It is somewhat irregular and poorly executed, although the asphaltum
has been more carefully applied than that on the body of the vessel.
The asphaltum used to waterproof and to decorate the vessel could
easily have been obtained near the site. All of the asphaltum found
on the Texas coast is a heavy, bituminous residue of petroleum from
which the more volatile hydrocarbon fractions have been lost by exposure to the sun and air. The crude petroleum rises to the surface in
the Gulf of Mexico and, possibly, the Caribbean Sea. Directed by the

5

CM

B

A

c
0

10

CM
Fig . 1. Restored Polychrome Jar. A, 8, Side view. C, Drawing showing vessel profile .

209

POLYCHROME VESSEL

prevailing winds and currents, some of it floats to the Texas Gulf
coast, where it commonly appears as small , coagulated lumps along
the beaches and in sand dune blowouts.
The fugitive red was only sparingly used, being confined to a decorative band immediately below the black band. The red band varies
only slightly in width, with an average of 1 em. The color appears to
have originally been dark red, but in most places it h as weathered t o
a thin, cinnamon brown stain. It is the writer's opinion that the red
decoration was applied before the black, and subsequent to the firing
of the vessel.
Unlike the asphaltum, the origin and exact nature of the red pigment
are unknown. On the basis of the color (as well as the confirmed
utilization in other areas ) r ed ocher is a possibility. However, examples of this material are rare in the central section of the coast.
Moreover, the few (intrusive ?) specimens of ocher known thus far
have been recovered from archeological sites on the northeastern section of the central coast. Another possible source is suggested by the
lumps of fired clay which appear in abundance in many Coastal Bend
sites. These are sometimes bright red and it seem s conceivable that
they could have been used as pigment.
DISCUSSION

The occurrence of native-made polychrome pottery in the Rockport
Focus has been suspected but not satisfactorily demonstrated until the
present find. T. N. Campbell in a recent paper ( 1962: 335) hinted
at the existence of a polychrome tradition in the Rockport Focus; while
Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954: 384) have noted that a polychrome
effect sometimes results in rare sherds of Rockport Black-on-gray which
have black asphaltum lines applied over a surface previously covered
with a thin, red wash. Campbell (personal communication) has also
pointed out the possibility of Spanish influence, since the early Spaniards in this region made common use of polychrome china and earthenware. There are yet other sources that might account for this polychrome technique (i.e., the use of red and black pigment on Rockport
ware) including the historic Goliad ware from the central coast. This
pottery utilized the two basic colors, red and black, on two different
pottery types, Goliad Red-on-buff and Goliad Black-on-buff (Mounger,
1959; Campbell, 1962: 332- 334). However, no examples of Goliad
ware are known on which the two colors have been combined. Another
possible source was from the south, on the lower Texas coast and

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

northeastern Mexico, from whence the painted pottery may have
originally diffused to the Rockport Focus (Campbell, 1960: 168; 1962:
335 ). Several instances of Huastecan polychrome trade ware have been
recorded among the artifact inventories of Brownsville Focus sites
(Suhm, et al. , 1954: 133), and sherds of Rockport Black-on-gray have
been reported from sites in the same area (Anderson, 1932: 30 ) .
There remains a dearth of complete and restored vessels attributable
to the Rockport Focus (Fitzpatrick, et al., 1964). The recognized vessel
forms have necessarily been based primarily on rim sherds and basal
sherds, and, to a lesser extent, upon the suggestive contours of larger
neck and body sherds. The form represented by the vessel under consideration cannot be closely correlated with other forms mentioned or
illustrated in literature dealing with the Texas coast. This anomaly
suggests a limited distribution, both chronologically and geographically.
Only two other rim sherds are known to this writer which seem to
parallel the rim section of the polychrome vessel. Both of these sherds
are surface finds and they came from the same site as the polychrome
vessel. The lip of one is rounded and that of the other is slightly
flattened. Both are dark gray in color, one nearly blue. The texture,
temper, hardness, and projected diameters of both rim sherds are quite
similar to the reconstructed vessel, but neither of these sherds bears
any traces of asphaltum or red pigment. Significantly, these sherdsas well as those from the jar-would have earlier probably been identified as coming from the rim of a bowl.
Perhaps the shape was designed for some specialized function. There
can be little doubt that it was intended as a container for liquid, especially in view of the thorough asphaltum coating over most of the body.
The large mouth and funnel-shaped rim of the jar raises speculation
regarding its use for collecting water. Such a receptacle would seem
particularly efficient in securing water from slow seeps, or even rainwater dripping from a large surface. Because of the polychrome decoration and shape it is also possible that this vessel was used as a
ceremonial drinking vase (Fitzpatrick, et al. , 1964) .
Eventually pottery of this style may constitute a new type which
might be called "Rockport Polychrome." However, by present definition, the vessell is considered to be Rockport Black-on-gray. It is recommended that it remain so classified until further research provides
more data regarding the distribution and frequency of the polychrome
decoration.

211

POLYCHROME VESSEL

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, A. E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Campbell, T. N.
1960. Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 29 (for 1958 ) , pp. 145-175.
1962. Origins of Pottery Types from the Coastal Bend Region of Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32 (for 1961) , pp. 331-336.
Fitzpatrick, W. S., Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N. Campbell
1964. A Rockport Focus Vessel from the Vicinity of Corpus Christi, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35 (this issue) .
Mounger, Maria Allen
1959. Mission Espiritu Santo of Coastal Texas: An Example of Historic Site
Archeology. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, The University of Texas.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Port Lavaca, Texas

The Zavonian Springs Site: An ArchaicNeo-American Site in McGee Bend
Reservoir, San Augustine
County, Texas
W. A. DAVIS AND HELEN RUTH HORN
ABSTRACT
The Zavonian Springs Site, located in the McGee Bend Reservoir area in southeastern Texas, was excavated by members of the Sabine-Neches Archeological
Society from October 15, 1961 to October 14, 1962. "This work resulted in the recovery of one burial and 1,869 artifacts. An analysis of the vertical distribution of
the artifacts indicates that the site was occupied first by Archaic peoples and later
by Neo-American peoples. Within each of these major periods, several significant
changes in the material culture can be recognized. These are pointed out and compared with the findings made at other sites in the McGee Bend Reservoir area.

INTRODUCTION

The Zavonian Springs Site ( 41 SA 83) is located west of Indian
Creek and north of the Angelina River in San Augustine County,
Texas (Fig. 1) . It is within the McGee Bend Reservoir and near to the
Sawmill and Runnells (No. 1 and No. 2) sites, where salvage excavations were carried out by the National Park Service in 1957 (Tunnell, 1961: 123). Nearby springs (and, in turn, the site) derive their
name from a group of migratory people who passed through this area
in late 1800's and early 1900's. The true nationality of these people is
unknown, but they are assumed to have been of Slavic origin and are
referred to locally as the "Zavonians."
Excavation of the Zavonian Springs Site was carried out largely on
week ends during the fall of 1961 and throughout most of 1962, under
the sponsorship of the Sabine-Neches Archeological Society. The
major part of the work was accomplished by the Oscar Horn family
(Oscar, Helen, Sandra, Neil, and Patti ), although the site was frequently visited by W. A . (Bill) and Nita Davis.
Others who assisted in various phases of the work, and to whom the
authors are indebted include: J . Dan Scurlock, then of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, who provided invaluable aid in staking

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

_,...-

Me Gee Bend

ZAVONIAN

SPRINGS

SITE

(41 SA 83)

0

N

4000

Maeww I

8000

12000

I

I

FEET

Fig. 1. Maps showing the location of the Zavonian Springs Site and the McGee Bend
Reservoir.

out the first excavation pits; and D . T. Kent, Jr., Mike McDonald,
Glen and Peggy Dodson, Claude Hall, the B. I. Boyett family (of the
Gulf Coast Archeological Society), Bobby Nelson, Gene Samford, and
the Lee Moody family, all of whom acted as diggers at one time or
another. Finally, special thanks are extended to: J . D. Mayberry of
Mayberry and Associates, Land Surveyors, who generously loaned us

ZA VONIAN SPRINGS SITE

215

a transit and level rod for mapping and contouring the site; Chester
Norris of Broaddus who trenched portions of the site with a front-end
loader ; D. T . Kent, Jr., who serves as editor of the Sabine-Neches
Archeological Society ; and Nita Davis who typed the manuscript.
DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

McGee Bend Reservoir (soon to be known as Lake Sam Rayburn )
lies within the Eastern Timber Region of the Gulf Coastal Plain
Physiographic Province (Atwood, 1940: 25) . The major stream in the
immediate area is the Angelina River, which flows in southeasterly
direction until it turns abruptly to the south and joins the Neches
River. The Angelina flood plain is relatively broad (as much as one to
two miles across) and flat, but the adjacent uplands-made up of rolling, sand-capped clay ridges-sometimes reach an elevation of 200 to
250 feet above mean sea level. Dominant geologic formations are the
sands and clays of the Eocene Jackson group ( Sellards, et al., 1932:
677-699 ) .
The average annual rainfall is between 40 and 60 inches, and the
climate in general can be characterized as moist and subtropical.
These conditions make the region ideal for large forests. The uplands
are covered with varieties of pine and hardwood, typical of hill country, while the bottomlands contain oak, beech, ash, magnolia, gum,
cypress, and less commonly, loblolly pine. Both the flora and the fauna
are typical of the Austroriparian Biotic Province (Blair, 1950: 98100 ).
Very little agriculture is being carried on at present, though at one
time it was widespread. Today the main source of livelihood is provided by forest products and livestock.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

With the exception of a brief reconnaissance made by Gus E.
Arnold in 1939-1940 for The University of Texas-W. P . A. , the
archeology of this part of the state is known primarily from salvage
work carried out by the Smithsonian Institution ( Stephenson, 1948 ),
by the National Park Service (Tunnell, 1961 ), and by the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project (Duffield, 1963 ). The salvage investigations were initiated in 1948 when Robert L. Stephenson, working
out of the Austin office of the River Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Instition, made an extensive survey of the area to be effected by the McGee
Bend Reservoir. Then in 1956 and 1957, National Park Service crews,
under the direction of Edward B. Jelks, undertook excavations at nine

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the McGee Bend sites (Tunnell, 1961 ) . Finally, in 1960 and again
in 1962, the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of
Texas, carried out excavations at five additional sites.
Much of the McGee Bend material is still being analyzed by Jelks
(personal communication ), although Duffield ( 1963 ) has published
the findings made at the Wolfshead Site, and Tunnell ( 1961 ) has
reported, in part, on the Runnells Site No. 1, Runnells Site No.2, and
the Sawmill Site. Both Tunnell and Duffield have presented data
which help to establish a basic chronology and which indicate that
the major cultural affiliations lie to the north, with Caddoan area
cultures, and to the south, with an undefined Archaic complex (or
complexes ) and the Galveston Bay Focus.
Excavations at the Zavonian Springs Site recovered cultural materials that indicate the presence of Archaic and Neo-American occupations. The Neo-American ceramics tended to occur more commonly
in the upper levels, and are indicative of affiliation with both the Gibson and Fulton aspects. The lower levels of the site, on the other hand,
give evidence of Archaic occupations that cannot be satisfactorily
identified with previously defined Archaic complexes in eastern Texas.
The Archaic remains at the Zavonian Springs Site, however, are similar to those reported by Tunnell and Duffield.
THE SITE
DESCRIPTION

The Zavonian Spring Site lies buried in a sand-capped clay ridge
at the northeastern edge of the Angelina River flood plain. Several
springs are located just south of the site and Indian Creek passes to
the north and east (Fig. 1) . A considerable portion of the artifactbearing deposits have been removed in clearing for road construction
and for obtaining fill dirt. On the western side of the road (Figs. 1, 2 ),
recent cultivation has caused a fair amount of damage, while to the
east disturbances from an old sawmill are visible. However , the area
near the former sawmill seemed less disturbed and the soil appeared
midden-like; it was in this portion of the site that the excavations
described below w ere carried out.
ExcAvATION

Work was initiated by placing a stake, designated as N500-E500,
at what was believed to be the southeastern edge of the site. From

217

ZA VONIAN SPRINGS SITE

this stake, squares and trenches of various sizes were laid out by means
of triangulation. Due to the horizontal extent of the site, and the limited time and personnel available for excavation, no detailed grid was
staked out; rather, the squares and trenches were set up only as they
were required (Fig. 2).

I

I
I
I
I

I

I
I
I

I

I
I

I
I
I
I

I

,.._

I
I
I

:!

I

:V

,_.

I

3::
:to

c

--J

0

~0

I

I

"'

I
I

I

I
I

. _____ . ---- ...
Dirt

---

ZAVONIAN SPRINGS SITE

R"

ood to

...... ____

.... "'

,-- .... -- ---

1Zl
0

Controlled

Excavat io n

Excavated by Front-end Loader

SPRINGs

0

20

._ M

40

60

...,_I

FEET

Fig. 2 . Contour map of the Zavonian Springs Site showing the location of the excavations.

218

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Vertical control was maintained by establishing a datum point at
an assumed elevation of 100 feet (Fig. 2), and by digging in arbitrary levels which varied from six inches to two feet in thickness. The
rich sandy loam made excavation relatively easy, but the depth of the
site proved to be a problem. We were especially eager to sample the
Archaic remains, but these generally occurred at depths varying
from 2.5 to 4.5 feet below the surface. Thus, after a number of squares
and trenches had been carefully dug and the deposit screened (usually
through a half-inch mesh), attempts were made to hasten the excavations. This was accomplished by 1) not using screens, and 2 ) by having Mr. Chester Norris use a front-end loader to cut three trenches
( 7.5 feet wide and from 60 to 102 feet long) across the site (Fig. 2) .
Because of obstructions such as trees and line poles these trenches
could not always be oriented in the cardinal directions. Each trench
was carefully bladed down in 0.25 foot levels, usually to a depth of
2.5 feet below the surface. Their main purpose was to sample more
of the site before extensive damage was done by pothunters.
During the course of the investigations, field notes were kept and
a contour map was constructed (Fig. 2). In addition, the walls vvere
frequently cleaned, profiles drawn, and the floors of the excavations
carefully checked for possible occupational features .
STRATIGRAPHY

Exclusive of the spoil dirt overburden encountered near the road
construction (Figs. 2 and 3), there were five lithologically distinct
zones found throughout the site. There are (numbered from top to
bottom):
Zone V: This, the uppermost zone, consisted of a gray-brown sand with numerous grass roots and other organic matter. It generally extended from the surface
to a depth of between 0.2 and 0.4 foot below the surface. Zone V was devoid of
aboriginal cultural refuse, but did contain some modern debris.
Zone IV: The matrix of this zone was a uniform medium brown sand which
contained flecks of charcoal, many small scraps of bone, and considerable evidence
of rodent disturbance. Contact with the underlying Zone III was irregular, but
clearly distinguished by a thin band of reddish-brown, sandy-clay, the origin of
which is unknown. Zone IV varied in thickness from 1 to 1.5 feet. The upper
portion contained modem objects, while the lower portion had Neo-American
materials.
Zone I II: Consisting of a medium brown, mottled sand, this zone was somewhat
lighter in color than Zone IV. There were signs of some rodent activity, largely
in the upper parts of the zone. Reddish-brown, sandy-clay bands-very similar
to the one described above-occurred in the lower portion of Zone III, and some-

219

ZAVONIAN SPRINGS SITE
N 477. 75

RECENT

(not

SPOIL

pres.ent

in

all parts

of

site)

v
IV
le ns

II

0

2

3

I

WI I I 8 I
F EET

Fig . 3 . Profile of wall at N477.75-E455 , looking north.

times at the level of contact with Zone II. Zone III varied from 1.0 to Z.O feet in
thickness, and it yielded both Archaic and Nee-American materials.
Zone I!: This zone was made up of a pale, mottled sand which contained
numerous bands of sandy-clay. It tended to become slightly lighter in color as
more depth was obtained. The thickness varied in different parts of the site, with
a maximum range of 1.5 to Z.5 feet. Zone II produced only Archaic artifacts.
Zone !: The excavations terminated in the upper part of this zone, a relatively
dense, yellow-orange, sandy-clay. The thickness of Zone I was not determined,
for none of the excavations extended more than five feet below the surface. The
little cultural refuse obtained from this zone is probably intrusive from the lower
part of Zone II.

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Largely because of variations in the thickness of each zone, it has
been impossible to relate the arbitrary excavation levels to the abovedescribed zones. The artifact distributions and analysis of the site as
a whole, has consequently been in terms of the excavation levels (see
Table 1) .
BURIAL

The one burial recovered from the site consists of a poorly and incompletely preserved skeleton of an adult, probably representing a
male. The lower limb bones were first encountered during the cleaning of the southeastern wall of Test Trench No. 2; additional excavations in two contiguous squares exposed the remainder of the burial
(Fig. 2 ) . The skeleton was full y extended in a supine position, with
the head to the southeast and the feet to the northwest. The skull was
tilted and faced the north.
Despite careful trowelling, no grave outline could be observed:
the skeleton was found lying in a m edium brown, mottled sand (Zone
III ), with no visible change from the surrounding matrix. A large ant
colon y h ad somewhat disturbed the area about the burial, and made
exposure of the bones tedious and uncomfortable. The top of the skull
was 1.61 feet below the surface (9 7.59 elevation), while the lower
limb bones were first exposed at 1.94 feet below the surface (97. 15
elevation ) .
There was no evidence of offerings, but cultural refuse-presumably inadvertently included in the grave fill-was found about the
burial, especially adjacent to the hip and lower extremities. Artifacts
from the two squ ares excavated during recovery of the burial have
been listed separately in Table 1.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ARTIFACTS

The 1,869 artifacts recovered from the Zavonian Springs Site have
been broadly grouped according to the materials from which they were
manufactured: clay, stone, and bone. Within these general categories
a number of presumed functional groups have been distinguished,
including pottery, dart points, arrow points, scrapers, knives, drills,
etc. Each of these functional groups has, in turn, been further divided,
and sometimes even subdivided, into morphologically similar categories (such as engraved, clay-tempered pottery) . Whenever possible,
the resultant groups have been identified with an already established
typology. For the most part, the types defined by Suhm, Krieger, and

221

ZA VON IAN SPRINGS SITE

Jelks ( 1954), by Bell ( 1958; 1960), and by Tunnell ( 1961 ) have been
employed. The sections which follow are devoted to detailed descriptions of the most discrete groups recognized. Provenience data are
presented in Table 1 and are briefly discussed in a later portion of the
paper.
ARTIFACTS OF CLAY

Objects of baked clay number 1427 and are by far the most common
class of artifacts found at the Zavonian Springs Site. Included are 1,048
clay-tempered potsherds, 229 sand-tempered potsherds, a pipe bowl
fragment, a possible vessel effigy fragment, and 148 pieces of baked
clay.

Clay-Tempered Pottery
Clay, sometimes combined with grit, bone, and pulverized sherds,
is the dominant tempering agent in 1,048 sherds. Of these, 541 are
plain and 507 are decorated.
PLAIN SHERDS

Included in this category are 46 sherds from jar and bowl rims, three
sherds from bottle necks, 36 sherds from bases, and 456 sherds from
various body sections. Most are probably from the lower portions of
decorated vessels and plain, undecorated pottery as such was clearly
rare or perhaps even absent. Three of the plain sherds have a red or
orangish slip.
The plain sherds vary in texture from fine and compact to coarse
and crumbly, with the majority being moderately fine. Surface colors
range from cream to buff, and from gray to black and chocolate brown.
Cores are generally darker than the surfaces, but occasionally no sharp
color differentiation can be observed. Both the interior and exterior
surfaces show a considerable variation in the degree of finishing, from
rough to polished. The wall thickness falls between 3 and 9 mm.
The range of rim profiles is shown in Fig. 7 (G-N, W) , with most
being turned out or vertical and rounded or flattened lips. The most
unusual sherd (Fig. 7, W) is abruptly everted and reminiscent of the
rims sometimes found on Belcher Ridged (Webb, 1959: 136, Fig. 114 ).
Several of the rim sherds have small perforations, possibly cracklacing or suspension holes. All of the larger base sherds suggest that
the bottoms were flat, and definite indications of convex-based vessels
are lacking.

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

D

F

E

G

cl

c

H
0

2

4

6

8

CM
Fig. 4 . Engraved and Incised Sherds. A, 8, Engraved body sherds . C, C', Engraved rim
sherd and profile (exterior surface to the right) . D-1 , Incised body sherds .

DE CORATED SH ERDS

Almost 50 percent of the clay-tempered pottery found at the site is
decorated. Techniques represented are those widely distributed in
eastern Texas : engraving, incising, punctating, brushing, pinching,

ZA VONIAN SPRINGS SITE

223

appliqueing, and various combinations of these. Design elements and
layouts are, in general, very similar to comparable features on Gibson
and Fulton Aspect pottery. In spite of these obvious ceramic relationships with Caddoan area, the typological identification of the pottery
from the Zavonian Springs Site poses certain problems. Types described
by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks ( 1954) are similar to the locally-made
pottery, yet are sufficiently different to make direct correlation impossible. Thus, in the descriptions which follow, none of the sherds
has been assigned to a specific type, although resemblances to appropriate Caddoan ceramics are noted.
Engraved. Of the 507 decorated sherds, 44 bear engraved designs.
Seven of these are from rim sherds, one from a bottle neck, and 37
are from body areas (one having red pigment in the engraved lines ) .
While the temper is predominately clay or clay -grit, 10 sherds also
have pulverized sherds and/ or bone particles. Interior surfaces vary
from poorly smoothed to polished, with ripple marks left by smoothing
implements being visible in several instances. Exterior surfaces are
generally better finished, varying from well smoothed to highly
polished. The surface colors are from tan to dark brown, while the
cores are from gray to gray-brown. Wall thickness ranges from 4 to
7mm.
Five of the engraved sherds have scroll designs with crosshatched
fields enclosing the scrolls (Fig. 4, A)-a decorative technique somewhat reminiscent of type Ripley Engraved (Suhm, et al. , 1954: 346,
Pl. 57, L ) . An additional six sherds have vertically engraved lines
which are stepped off with horizontal lines and crosshatched fields
(Fig. 4, B) . This design compares most favorably with that occasionally
found on bottles of Poynor Engraved (Suhm, et al., 1954: 342, Pl. 56,
F ). The remaining 33 sherds have various engraved lines and crosshatched areas, but are generally too small to determine the design
layout. Included are four rim sherds which appear to have come from
carinated bowls. The lip-rim area on these specimens is either tapered
and rounded, or vertical and flattened (including one which rises to
form a peak ) . A fifth rim sherd (Fig. 4, C, C' ) is rolled outward and
has a slightly flattened lip. It has a good polish on both surfaces, with
a single horizontal line approximately 5 mm. below the lip. In some
respects, this rim sherd is similar to those found on Ripley Engraved
vessels.
·
Incised. This category is represented by 71 sherds, 11 of which are
from rims, and one from a bottle neck. In addition to the clay-grit
temper, 10 specimens contain pulverized sherds, 26 have finely ground

224

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

bone, and several have traces of an unidentified carbonized material.
Surfaces are generally smoothed, but only rarely well polished. The
texture varies from medium-coarse and firm to coarse and crumbly,
while the surface colors range from buff and orange-red to a dark
gray-brown. Cores are gray to black, or practically the same shade as
the surfaces. Wall thickness is from 4 to 9 mm.
The incised decorations consist largely of vertical, horizontal, and
diagonal lines with no distinguishing patterns. Eleven sherds (Figs. 4,
D , E and 5, A), however, have diagonal crosshatched designs similar
to those found on Maydelle Incised ; two sherds (Fig. 4, F, G) with
vertical lines intersected by diagonal lines are reminiscent of Pease
Brushed-Incised; and three sherds with circles sometimes flanked by
inclined bands (Fig. 4, H , I) suggest Crockett Curvilinear Incised.
Since many of the sherds are small, very little can be determined
about vessel shape. Rims generally vary from straight to moderately
outflaring; the lips are usually flattened or rounded, the latter sometimes having an exterior flange.

Punctated-Incised. Forty-one sherds have incised lines combined
with stick puntations. All are clay-grit tempered, but 14 have, in
addition, pulverized bone and four have crushed sherds. Texture
ranges from compact to, in a few specimens, crumbly. Considerable
variation can be seen in the surface finish, from poorly to well
smoothed. Surface colors range from cream to chocolate brown; cores
are usually a bit darker.
The more distinctive designs (on 18 sherds ) consist of stick punctations, arranged into curvilinear or triangular patterns (Fig. 5, B, C,
E-G) which are generally similar to types Crockett Curvilinear Incised
(Suhm, et al., 1954: 262, Pls. 14-16) and Pennington PunctatedI ncised ( Suhm, et al., 1954: 340, Pl. 54) . The remaining 23 sherds are
too small to recognize distinctive designs. Punctations on all examples
have been made with sharply pointed (Fig. 5, B, G ) or blunt (Fig. 5,
C, E, F ) tools.
Punctated. There are 73 sherds from the site decorated with random
punctations which have been produced by the fingernail or, less often,
a pointed or blunted instrument. Clay-grit is the major tempering
agent, with some bone and/ or crushed sherds appearing in 18 sherds.
In addition, eight specimens have traces of unidentified carbonized
materials-probably accidental inclusions in the clay which burned
during firing. The paste ranges from fine and compact to medium
coarse, but is not crumbly. Interiors are poorly smoothed to polished,

225

ZA VONIAN SPRINGS SITE

A

A'

c

0

s'

B

E

F
0

2

4

6

8

CM
Fig . 5 . Incised, Trailed, and Punctated-incised Sherds. A, A', incised rim sherd and profile.
8, 8' , G, G', Punctated-lncised rim sherds and profiles. C, E, F, Punctated-lncised body sherds.
D, Sand-tempered, trailed body sherd . Exterior surfaces to the right on rim profiles .

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8'

B

----

o'

c'

c

)~(f)~) --~
~

(I

(J)

E

E
0

I

F
2

4

G
6

G'

8

CM
Fig . 6 . Punctated-lncised, Fingernail Impressed , and Brushed Sherds. A-C' , Sand-tempered,
punctated-incised (trailedl sherds . D, E', Fingernail impressed rim sherds. f , Brushed body
sherd . G, G', Brushed rim sherd . Exterior surfaces to the right on rim profiles.

while the exteriors are roughened over-all with punctations. Surface
colors range from cream to dark brown or black; cores are the same or
somewhat darker. Wall thickness is between 3 and 8 mm. The 17 rim

ZA VONIAN SPRINGS SITE

227

sherds are vertical or turned outward, with simple rounded lips (Fig.
6,D) orevertedandroundedlips (Fig. 6,E).

Brushed. Represented by 225 sherds, brushing is the most common
decorative technique found at the site. In addition to the clay-grit
temper, 78 of the brushed sherds have pulverized bone and 14 have
crushed sherds. The texture is often rather coarse, with a number of
specimens containing distinct lumps of clay and small pieces of carbonized material. Interior surfaces are poorly to well smoothed, and
the exterior surfaces are roughened by brushing. Surface colors -r ange
from buff to gray and chocolate brown. Wall thickness is from 4 to
9mm.
The brushing varies from vertical (Fig. 6, G) or horizontal to
diagonal, as well as various combinations of these (Fig. 6, F ) . On some
specimens it is deep and poorly executed; on others, it is faint and
well spaced, almost as if the surface has been "combed."
The 19 sherds from vessel rims indicate that the rim-lip area was
flared out and rounded, or vertical and flattened. Three of the body
sherds contain perforations, probably crack-lacing holes.
Brushed-Punctated. There are 35 brushed-punctated sherds, seven
of which are from vessel rims. In addition to the clay or clay-grit
temper, seven sherds contain pulverized bone and two have crushed
sherds. Texture is from fine and compact to coarse. Interior surfaces
are smoothed, but not polished; the exteriors are covered with brush
marks and punctations. The surface colors vary from buff to orange
and chocolate brown, while the cores are gray or slightly darker than
the surfaces. Wall thickness is from 4 to 7 mm., and the rim-lip area
is uniformly outcurved and rounded (Fig. 7, A' ).
Six of the sherds having neat horizontal brushing and small stick
punctation (Fig. 7, A ) are similar to type Pease Brushed-Incised. A
seventh specimen (Fig. 7, B) is somewhat reminiscent of Maydelle
Incised, in that it displays random brushing with a small field of
punctations set off by a horizontal row of larger, but shallower, punctations. The remaining 28 sherds are nondescript and too small (Fig.
7, C) to compare with established types.
Pinched. The six specimens in this category appear to have come
from two vessels. In each case, the exterior surface is covered with
horizontally or vertically pinched ridges and fingernail impressions
which have been somewhat smoothed over (Fig. 7, D, E). The interior
surfaces are smoothed and black, while the exterior surfaces are buff

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c
B

D

F

E

~ ~a~ ~ ~
H

G

I

K

J

Q~
p

@

Q

T

0

R
0

2

M

~

~

j

L

u

s
4

6

N

v

w

8

CM
Fig . 7 . Brushed-Punctated, Pinched, and Appliqued Sherds; and Rim Profiles . A-C, Brushedpunctated rim and body sherds . D, E, Pinched body sherds. F, Appliqued-brushed body sherd.
G-N, W, Plain, clay-tempered rim profiles. 0-V, Plain, sand-tempered rim profiles . Exterior
surfaces to the right on rim profiles.

ZAVON IAN SPRINGS SITE

229

with some fire-mottling. Texture is coarse, but firm. Wall thickness
is uniformily 8 mm.

Appliqued. Twelve body sherds are decorated with vertical, appliqued fillets which seem to separate panels of brushed or incised lines,
much like the lower portions of Pease Brushed-Incised vessels. In
addition, punctations sometimes appear on the fillets and other parts
of the body (Fig. 7, F ). Surface colors are from orange to brown and
chocolate brown, while the cores are usually a bit darker. Texture is
medium fine and compact. Interior surfaces are smoothed and the
exterior ones are covered, or nearly covered, with decoration.
Sand-Tempered Pottery
Sand, with no other visible tempering agent, appears in the paste of
229 sherds from the Zavonian Spring Site. Of these, 220 are plain
and nine are decorated.
PLAIN SHERDS

The undecorated sand-tempered specimens include 19 rim sherds,
one basal sherd, and 200 body sherdsli; two of which have crack-lacing
holes. Texture is generally fine, although on some specimens the surfaces are so sandy that they feel much like sandstone. On others, the
surfaces are well smoothed and relatively firm . Surface colors range
from gray to brown and buff to chocolate brown. Cores are slightly,
but consistently, darker. The major vessel form appears to have been a
cylindrical jar with straight or slightly convex sides. The range of rim
profiles is shown in Fig. 7 (0-V).
In general characteristics, the plain, sand-tempered pottery bears
relationships with Goose Creek Plain, a major type of the Galveston
Bay Focus.
DECORATED SHERDS

Only a limited number (nine ) of the sand-tempered sherds-unlike
the clay-tempered ones-are decorated. Four of these have broad,
incised or trailed lines made with a blunt tool (Fig. 5, D ). Each of the
remaining five specimens has a horizontal, trailed line separating one
to two rows of punctations from diagonal or semi-circular, trailed lines
(Fig. 6, A-C). The punctations are typically hemispherical in shape,
having been made by pressing a stick at an angle against the plastic
clay. Although only one rim sherd (Fig. 6, A, A') was recovered, it
is clear that the decoration was confined to the upper portion of the

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

vessels. In general treatment and design layout, these sherds are similar to Goose Creek Incised.

Miscellaneous Ceramic Objects
PIPE

A fragment of an undecorated pipe bowl has clay-grit temper and
a medium fine texture. The exterior wall is vertical, terminating in a
fl<;~t lip; while the exterior surface is polished and dark tan in color
with some fire-mottling. The interior wall slopes inward toward the
base and is not as well finished- as the exterior. Reconstructed, the
outside diameter at the rim was 33 mm. The concavity of the bowl
was about 18 mm. in diameter at the rim, tapering to 11 mm. at the
base, and a maximum of 13 mm. deep.
EFFIGY

A small, roughly cylindrical object of baked clay may represent a
piece broken off an effigy vessel. It is tempered with clay-grit, and the
surface color ranges from light gray to black. Incomplete, this specimen now measures 33 mm. long and 8.5 mm. in diameter.
BAKED CLAY

One hundred and forty-eight, irregularly-shaped lumps of baked
clay (sometimes containing considerable quantities of sand ) were
recovered from the site. Approximately one-third of these have reed
or grass impressions and are presumably fragments of wattle-impressed
daub. The presence of these pieces of daub suggests the existence of
structures at the site, although none was recognized during excavation.
Significantly, the wattle-impressed daub was most common in the
second (0.5 to 1.0 foot ) excavation level.
ARTIFACTS OF STONE

The 329 lithic specimens from the Zavonian Springs Site include
a gorget, arrow points, dart points, knives, drills, scrapers, gravers,
choppers, hammerstones, milling slabs, a pitted stone, cores, smoothed
and pecked stones, and pieces of ocher. Most were manufactured from
locally-obtained materials (cherts, petrified wood, and sandstone); the
only specimens made from foreign materials being the gorget, one
dart point, two knife fragments, and several flint flakes.

ZAVONIAN SPRINGS SITE

231

Polished Stone
GORGET

A nearly complete gorget has been fashioned from a hard and finegrained, black stone. It is highly polished, has an ovoid outline and
two, biconically-drilled holes (Fig. 8, A, A'). Small, irregularlyspaced notches have been cut into the upper and lower marginal
edges. The reconstructed length of the gorget is estimated at 105 mm.;
the maximum width occurs midway between the holes and is 57
mm.; the maximum thickness is 7 mm. The suspension holes have
been placed along the long axis of the gorget, 48 mm. apart from one
another.
Recovered in situ, the gorget was found at N555-E495.8, at a depth
of three feet below the surface. However, approximately two feet of
the overburden had been formed by the log deck or skidway of the
old sawmill.

Chipped Stone
ARROW POINTS

Thirty-five small, chipped stone specimens with distinct stems have
been classified as arrow points. Five of these are too fragmentary for
further description, while the remainder have been sorted into the
four types (Alba, Cliffton, Friley, and Perdiz) briefly described below.

Alba. This type is represented by four points, each of which has a
triangular blade with straight lateral edges (Fig. 8, B, C). The shoulders are at right angles to the stem and are prominent, bnt not barbed.
The lateral edges of the stem are straight, while the base varies from
straight to mildly convex. Length ranges from 16 to 23 mm., and the
width at the shoulders from 16 to 20 mm.
Cliffton. Each of the three arrow points identified as Cliffton has
been crudely chipped from a small flake. The one complete example
(Fig. 8, D) has an asymmetrical blade, one edge of which is concave,
the other straight and faintly serrated. This specimen is 23 mm. long
and 15 mm. wide at the shoulders; the two remaining points are too
fragmentary for meaningful measurement.
Friley. Nine points with rectangular or slightly expanding stems are
classified as Friley (Fig. 8, E-G) . Their most distinctive features, however, are the upturn or reversed barbs. As a group, these points are thin

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

....

'" '

'

®

'\
I
I

I

I
I

/

/
;'

A'

A

,.

, .\

~
'

c

B

t

~

{

E

0

..
' ..

F

',

'

I

:'
'

G

1',

I

'

'."
~
'

'

T
H
2

4

6

'

'

'

K

J
0

4
.

B

CM
Fig . 8. Gorget and Arrow Points. A, A', Polished stone gorget. B, C, Alba . D, Clifflon .
E-G, Friley . H-K, Perd iz.

and well made. The bases are rather variable, ranging from straight or
convex, to concave. The length is from 17 to 24 mm., while the width
at the shoulders is from 10 to 18 mm.
One of the Friley points was found in place at N588.5-E477.5 , 2.5
feet below the surface, and about one foot from the burial. Because of

ZA VONIAN SPRINGS SITE

233

its distance from the skeleton, it seems unlikely that it was intended
as an offering.

Perdiz. Represented by 14 specimens, Perdiz is the most common
arrow point type found at the site. The blades are triangular with
straight, concave, or slightly convex lateral edges which are sometimes serrated (Fig. 8, H-K). The shoulders may extend outward at
right angles to the stem or have downward projecting barbs, while the
stems contract to rounded or pointed bases. All are made from locallyobtained cherts and petrified wood, and the workmanship, on the
whole, is good. Lengths range from 24 to 34 mm. , width (at the shoulders) from 15 to 22 mm.
DART POINTS

The 64 specimens identified as dart points are differentiated from
the arrow points primarily on the basis of their larger size. Twentynine of these are grouped into 10 types, and 35 cannot be identified
with any established type, largely because of their fragmentary condition.

Desmuke. A small, roughly lozenge-shaped dart point (Fig. 9, B)
appears to fit the Desmuke type, although it could conceivably be an
aberrant form of Gary. It has slightly convex blade edges which are
alternately beveled to the right. The stem contracts to form an essentially pointed base. Workmanship is crude, probably because of
the quality of the petrified wood used. The length is 32 mm.; width
across the shoulders 16 mm.
Ellis. There are two expanded stem dart points (Fig. 9, C, D) which
fall within the range of variation of the Ellis type. Distinctive features include a triangular blade with slightly convex edges and prominent, but unbarbed shoulders, and an expanded stem with a straight
base. These specimens are 36 and 38 mm. long, 21 and 26 mm. wide
at the shoulders, respectively.
Ensor. Only one of the dart points from the Zavonian Springs Site
appears to be of the Ensor type. It (Fig. 9, E) has deep side-notches
and a long, leaf-shaped blade. The stem is short and only slightly narrower than the shoulders. Workmanship is only fair, most of the
point has been crudely fashioned by the removal of percussion flakes.
The lateral edges of the blade, however, have been retouched by
evenly-spaced pressure flakes. The specimen is 68 mm. long, 22 mm.
wide at the shoulders, and 18 mm. wide at the base.

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Epps. A rather crudely made point of petrified wood (Fig. 9, F) ,
agrees very favorably with Ford and Webb's (1956: 58, Fig. 20, CG) definition of the Epps type. The blade is slender and triangular,
with mildly convex edges; the stem is expanded and has a convex
base. Incomplete, the length is estimated to have been about 60 mm. ;
width across the shoulders is 20 mm. , and across the base 15 mm.

Gary. The eight Gary dart points from the site have triangular
blades with slightly convex or concave blade edges. Shoulders are
distinct, but not prominent, and the stems contract to form rounded
bases. However, in size and quality of workmanship, these points
exhibit a considerable range of variation (see, for example, the illustrated specimens, Fig. 9, G-I ). The lengths vary from 27 to 48 mm. ,
the widths at the shoulders from 19 to 27 mm.

Kent. Eleven dart points correspond, in part, with the description
given for the Kent ty pe ( Suhm, et al. , 1954: 432, Pl. 95) , and for
" Type I" (Tunnell, 1961 : 127, Fig. 2 ). They are somewhat arbitrarily
and, certainly only provisionally, classified as Kent.
The blades are roughly triangular in outline and usually have well
developed, but unbarbed, shoulders (Fig. 9, J-L ) . Stems display a considerable range, varying from parallel-sided to expanded, to slightly
contracted. The bases are either straight or mildly convex, with some
retaining the original nodular cortex. Crude flaking is common on
these points, and the cross sections are often fairly thick. The lengths
range from 26 to 40 mm., the width across the shoulders from 19 to
27mm.
Lange. Each of the two dart points identified as Lange has a large
triangular blade with straight edges and prominent shoulders (Fig.
9, M ) . The stem is slightly expanded, while the base is mildly convex.
Both points have been made from a poor grade of petrified wood and
the flake scars are irregular. The total lengths are 52 and 72 mm. ,
width at shoulders 26 and 28 mm., the stem length is 16 mm. (both
specimens) , and widths at the base are 16 and 18 mm.
Palmillas. A crudely made specimen (Fig. 10, A) of reddish-brown
chert falls within the range of variation of the Palmillas type ( Suhm,
et al. 1954: 462, Pl. 110 ) . It has a leaf-shaped blade with convex lateral edges and very poorly developed shoulders. The stem is small and
expanded with a convex base. The length is 46 mm. and the width at
the shoulders is 15 mm.
Pedernales. This type is represented at the site by a dart point (Fig.

ZA VON IAN SPRINGS SITE

235

10, B) which has a short, triangular blade and an essentially rectangular stem with a notched base. Lateral edges of the stem are
slightly constricted at the base, and the base has been thinned by the
removal of one large longitudinal flake on one side and two on the
opposing side. The shoulders are pronounced, but lack barbs. Flaking
is generally crude and appears to have been by the hammerstone
percussion technique, although some evidence of secondary pressure
chipping appears along the lateral edges. The distal end of this point
is missing, but it is estimated to have originally been approximately
51 mm. long. The width across the shoulders is 24 mm., and the length
of the stem is 23 mm.

Yarbrough. One point (Fig. 10, C) with a more or less parallel-sided
stem is classified as the Yarbrough type. Made from a pink and yellow
chert, it has a small and slender, triangular blade with slightly convex
edges and rather weak shoulders. The base of the stem is straight, and
both the stem edges and the base have been smoothed. This specimen is
45 mm. long, 21 mm. wide at the shoulders, and 15 mm. wide at the
base of the stem.
Unidentified and Fragmentary Dart Points. Included in this category are two complete, but untyped dart points, and 33 unclassifiable
fragments of dart points. One of the untyped specimens (Fig. 9, A)
does not have a clearly off-set stem, although the lateral edges of the
blade do recurve near the base. Except for its small size (54 mm. in
length and 20 mm. in maximum width), it resembles a Copena knife
(Newell and Krieger, 1949: 173-174, Fig. 60, A-H); indeed, it could
be a diminutive form of that type. The surface of this specimen has
been damaged by heat, but it appears to have originally been rather
thin and well made.
The second untyped point (Fig. 10, D) has a large, leaf-shaped
blade and a short, contracting stem. Lateral edges of the blade are convex and the base of the stem is faintly concave. Perhaps because it is
made from a coarse-grained petrified wood, the workmanship is very
poor. This specimen measures 58 mm. in length, 27 mm. in width at
the shoulders, and 16 mm. in width at the base.
None of the 33 fragmentary specimens is complete enough for identification. Specifically, they include 16 distal end pieces, 10 fragments from proximal ends, and seven medial sections.
KNIVES

Including fragmentary and unclassifiable pieces, 130 knives were
recovered from the Zavonian Springs Site. As a group, they are

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

8

A

D

I

...

I

L

K

J
0

2

I

H

G

F

E

I

4

CM

6

8

M

Fig . 9 . Dart Points . A, Un identified . B, Desmuke. C, D, Ellis . E, En sor. F, Epps . G-1 , Gary.
J-L, Kent. M, Lange .

crudely made from petrified wood and chert, with much of the hifacial chipping being confined to the marginal edges. Most of the 90
complete or nearly complete specimens can be identified with three of

ZAVONIAN SPRINGS SITE

237

the five provisional blade types recognized by Tunnell (1961: 129133, Figs. 5 and 6 ) .

Type I. Each of the eight specimens comprising this group has been
made from a long, thin rectanguloid slab of pertified wood (Fig. 10, E).
Only one lateral edge has been worked and, on some examples, one
end is altered. The cutting edges vary from straight to convex, having
been shaped by removal of fairly large, randomly-spaced percussion
flakes. The length ranges from 49 to 63 mm., the width from 27 to
39 mm., and the maximum thickness from 6 to 7 mm.
Type II. This type is represented by 18 knives having trianguloid
outlines and unaltered bases which sometimes retain the natural cortex of the stone (Fig. 10, F ) . Most are fashioned from thin slabs of
petrified wood, although a few, generally better made specimens, are
of chert. The lateral edges of the blade vary from straight to convex,
to concave. Some have fairly sharp tips, but most are rounded, while
the bases are consistently straight. The length ranges from 60 to 80
mm., width at the base (usually the widest part of the knife ) from 32
to 44 mm., maximum thickness from 6 to 11 mm.
T y pe III. Represented by 47 specimens, this is by far the most
common knife type found at the site (Fig. 10, G ). Type III knives are
bifacially worked blades with ovoid to (more often ) triangular outlines. Both the base and the lateral edges vary from straight to convex.
While flaking is usually rough with no evidence of pressure retouching, these knives are often better made and smaller, than those of
Type II. The length ranges from 28 to 73 mm., the maximum width
from 24 to 25 mm., and the maximum thickness from 6 to 22 mm.
Miscellaneous. There are 17 specimens which are complete, or reasonably so, but which do not readily agree with the categories established by Tunnell. Moreover, there is so much individual variation that
they cannot satisfactorily be sorted into meaningful descriptive groups.
The outline varies and the workmanship is generall poor. Lengths
range from 26 to 92 mm., maximum width from 22 to 44 mm., and
maximum thickness from 5 to 22 mm.
Fragmentary. Forty pieces of knives, including distal, proximal,
and medial sections, are too fragmentary to classify into finer groups.
It might be noted, however, that two appear to have been made from
foreign stones. One is of a fine grained, olive-drab colored stone, while
the other is of a cream colored quartzite.

238

TEXAS AR CHEOLOGICAL SOCIET Y

A

c

B

E

0

G

F

H

J
0

2

4

K
6

CM
Fig . 10. Dart Po ints , Kn ives , and Drills . A, Palm i/la s. B, Pedernales. C, Yarbrough . D,
Un identified dart point. E, Knife Type I. F, Kn ife Type II. G, Knife Type Ill. H, I, Drill Type I.
J, K, Drill Type II.

ZAVONIAN SPRINGS SITE

239

DRILLS

There are seven long, slender chipped stone artifacts classified as
drills. Five of these are identifiable as Tunnell's Type I ( 1961: 139,
Fig. 4, L, M), and two as his Type II (Ibid. , Fig. 4, P, Q) . The Type
I drills are also similar to those described for the Jake Martin Site
(DavisandDavis, 1960: 114,Fig.14,A,B).

Type I. All examples included in this group are bifacially worked,
have essentially lanceolate outlines, and are lenticular in cross section (Fjg. 10, H , I) . The wedge-shaped base is either straight or convex, and the lateral edges of the blade (or shaft ) are convex. Relatively
large flake scars along the edges appear to represent marginal retouching. All are made of a locally-obtained, yellowish chert. The
length ranges from 26 to 45 mm., the maximum width from 8 to 10
mm., and the maximum thickness from 5 to 8 mm.
Type II. The two specimens (Fig. 10, J, K) representing this type
are distinguished from the above drills largely on the basis of their
thin, expanded stems. Both are bifacially chipped, although one (Fig.
10, K) has retained the nodular cortex across the base. The cross section is lenticular, lateral edges are slightly convex, and the base is
either convex or mildly concave. One of these drills (Fig. 10, J) is
made of chert, the other (Fig. 10, K ) of petrified wood. The former
specimen measures 41 mm. long, 15 mm. wide at the base, and 7 mm.
in maximum thickness; the latter specimen is 45 mm. long, 18 mm.
wide at the base, and 7 mm. thick.
GRAVERS

There are two small artifacts from the site-both from the surface
-that have tiny, beak-like projections. One of these (Fig. 11 , A, A')
is made from an orangish-red, plano-convex chert flake which has a
quite irregular outline. Fine marginal, pressure retouching is confined
to the distal end, where the lateral edges converge to form a graver.
This specimen has a maximum length of 25 mm. and a maximum
width of 16 mm. The second graver (Fig. 11, B, B') is somewhat larger
( 35 mm. long and 17 mm. wide) and has been fashioned from a
roughly triangular-shaped flake of petrified wood. The distal end has
been made into a small, but finely-pointed graver by means of pressure
flaking. A relatively high ridge appears on the dorsal surface of this
specimen. Both gravers are quite similar to those described by Tunnell
( 1961: 139) fortheRunnellsSiteNo.2.

240

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

SCRAPERS

Only four artifacts identifiable as scrapers were obtained from the
Zavonian Springs Site. One of these falls within the range of variation of Tunnell's ( 1961: 139) scraper Type I, while three are similar
to his Type II (ibid.: 139-140).

Type I. This type is represented by a small, plano-convex end
scraper made from a flake of orangish-red chert. It is roughly circular
in outline and has along one edge a steep scraping bit produced by
pressure flakjng. The dimensions are: length 30 mm., width 29 mm.,
and thickness 17 mm.
Type II. Three small flake scrapers displaying unifacial pressure
retouching along one or more edges are included in this group. One
of these has a convex scraping bit at the distal end. Its dimensions are:
length 19 mm., width 16 mm., and thickness 3 mm. The second specimen is worked along one edge and both ends; it is 26 mm. long, 18
mm. wide, and 4 mm. thick. On the third example, the marginal
chipping is confined to one lateral edge. This scraper is 18 mm. long,
18 mm. wide, and 4 mm. thick.
UTILIZED FLAKES

In addition to the scrapers described above, there are 35 flakes (almost exclusively of chert and petrified wood) showing evidence of
use. Twenty of these have limited bifacial chipping, and 15 have
unifacial flaking along the marginal of one or more edges. As a group,
however, they are considerably less modified than either the knives
or the scrapers; in fact, some of the flake scars may have resulted from
use rather than intent. One of the unifacially modified flakes is of a
cream colored flint, possibly obtained from central Texas.
CHOPPERS

Included in this group are seven specimens which are worked
primarily along one edge and which have retained a considerable
portion of cortex at the opposing edge (Fig. 11, C-F). Three are fashioned from chert, three from petrified wood, and one from ferruginous
sandstone. The chipping is crude, and consists of large, percussionproduced flake scars. The length ranges from 46 to 90 mm., the width
of the cutting edge from 32 to 62 mm., and the maximum thickness
from 11 to 50 mm.

241

ZA VONIAN SPRINGS SITE

A

c

8

0

2

4

6

8

CM
f ig . 11. Gravers, Choppers, and Milling Slab. A-8 ', Gravers. C-F, Choppers . G, Milling Slab.

242

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Miscellaneous Stone
HAMMERSTONES

Thirteen irregularly-shaped nodules of chert and petrified wood
have one or more edges battered from use, but are otherwise unmodified . Maximum dimensions are: length 44 to 138 mm. , width 29 to 97
mm., and thickness 23 to 41 mm. In general, the chert hammerstones
tend to be smaller than those of pertrified wood.
MILLING SLABS

Two fragmentary milling slabs, both of ferruginous sandstone,
were recovered from the site. One (Fig. 11 , G ) is roughly diamondshaped in outline, and has a grinding basin in each face. These basins
vary from 3 mm. to 10 mm. in depth; the total length of the slab is
143 mm. , maximum width 100 mm., and maximum thickness 46 mm.
The second milling slab has a triangular outline and a shallow ( 4 .5
mm. deep) , basin-shaped concavity in one face. This specimen now
measures 128 mm. long, 87 mm. wide, and 51 mm. thick.
PITTED STONE

A nearly complete circular-shaped piece of ferruginous sandstone
has two small depressions, one in each opposing flat surface. The flat
surfaces are smooth, possibily from use as a mano. This specimen is
80 mm. in diameter and a maximum of 28 mm. in thickness. One pit
is 20 mm. in diameter and 1.5 mm. in depth, while the opposing depression is 22 mm. in diameter and 2 mm. in depth.
CORES

There are 16 small nodules of chert which show evidence of having been used primarily as cores. Most retain some of the weathered
cortex surface, but all bear at least several flake scars. The outlines are
roughly circular, with diameters ranging from 30 to 51 mm.
SMOOTHED AND PECKED STONES

Twelve small stones have worn facets and/ or pecked surfaces. They
are highly variable in outline form, with some being squarish to ovoid,
and others trianguloid to crescent-shaped. None, however, appears to
have been intentionally shaped. Most are of sandstone (fine-grained,
coarse-grained, and ferruginous ), although a few are of petrified wood.

243

ZAVON IAN SPRINGS SITE

The purpose of these stones is unknown; perhaps some may have been
polishing stones, some diminutive handstones, and others incipient
hammerstones. Their dimensions are: length 25 to 39 mm., width 22
to 25 mm., thickness 15 to 22 mm.
OCHER

A number ( 110) of small bits of ocher were found at the site,
especially in the deeper levels. Included are 32 pieces of limonite
and 78 pieces of hematite. Most were probably introduced into the site
and several smoothed pieces were almost certainly used as sources
of pigment.
ARTIFAcTs OF BoNE

Very little bone was recovered from the site, and each of the three
pieces that appears to be worked is in fragmentary condition. One of
these modified bones is a small, unidentifiable piece which has a "V"shaped notch in one edge. This piece is now 25 mm. long and 15 mm.
wide; the notch is 3 mm. wide and 2.5 mm. deep. A second specimen
appears to be a bone bead which has broken longitudinally. Both ends
have been cut and somewhat smoothed. This bead is 16 mm. long and
was about 15 mm. in diameter. The remaining bone artifact is possibly from the proximal end of an atlatl hook, since one end rises 10
mm. to form a triangular-shaped peak. Incomplete, this piece is presently 33 mm. long and 23 mm. wide.
ARTIFACTS OF METAL AND GLASS

The three upper levels (0.0 to 1.5 feet) at the site yielded various
objects of recent origin, such things as cartridge cases, shotgun shells,
bits of glass, nails, harness buckles, buttons, and the like. It is probable
that these represent articles lost by picnickers and various remains
from the sawmill. They have not been listed in Table I, although it
might be noted that the more deeply buried specimens were very
likely transported by rodents.
PROVENIENCE OF THE ARTIFACTS

In analyzing the distribution of the artifacts from the Zavonian
Springs Site, only the vertical proveniences were found to display
significant differences. These data are summarized in Table 1, where
-with the exception of specimens recovered from squares near the

1:0
~
~

TABLE 1
Provenience of the artifacts
~

"'
c:i
I
c:i

c:i

ARTIFACTS OF CLAY
Clay-tempered pottery
Plain
Engraved
Incised
Puncta ted-incised
Puncta ted
Brushed
Brushed-punctated
Pinched
Appliqued
Sand-tempered pottery
Plain
Trailed
Puncta ted-trailed
Pipe fragment
Effigy(?) fragment
Baked clay lumps
ARTIFACTS OF STONE
Gorget
Arrow points
Alba
Clifjton
Friley
Perdiz
Fragments

i i"'
<::::.

""
c:i

33 41
4
4
2
5
1
1
6
6
10 26
3
1

<;:,

~

<::::.

1 I'"' I' I'"' 1 1"'
""
""
"" ...,:
"" "" "' "'
<::::.

<;:,

<::::.

<;:,

<;:,

~

42 57
1
8
6 10
3
8
7
3
15 25
2
3
1
1
1

47

13

2
4
9
36
5

1
1
5
1

2

<::::.

"'.... .,

<::::.

ic:i 6"'
c:i
~

<;:,

"'
I

<;:,

c:i

11
3
2

4

60

2

2
3

1

1
2

1

9
6
3
18
7
1
1

5

12

"<:<::::.

-<'i

.::!

I

::; .
"-""

~:q:::_

C'J

]_"'....
::;
C'J

'-l

"<:

f-..

0

f-..

37
5
8
4
6
16
2

196
19
24
14
30
70
12
2
4

541
44
71
41
73
225
35
6
12

19

72

220
4
5
1
1
148

>-3

6

3

15
1
1
1
40

5
1
1

30

22

17

25

7
1

1

1
19

13

5

8

11

24
1
1
6

1
3

1

1

1

~

>
>
~

(J)

(')

D:1

tt1

0
t:"'
0
c;J

....

(')

1

1
1

l

:3

3
2

1
1
1

1
1

1
1

1
1

2
1
3
8

4
3
9
14
5

>
t:"'

(J)

0

(')

....

tt1

>-3
>-<

Dart points
Desmuke
Ellis
Ensor
Epps
Gary
Kent
Lange
Palmi !las
Pede males
Yarbrough
Unidentified and fragmentary
Knives
Type I
Type II
Type III
Miscellaneous
Fragmentary
D rills
Type I
Type II
Gravers
Scrapers
Utilized flakes
Choppers
Hammerstones
Milling slabs
Pitted stone
Smoothed and pecked stones
Cores
Ocher
ARTIFACTS OF BONE
TOTALS

N
;>

1
1
1

1
1

1
1

2

2
2

1
1

1

1

1

1

1

4
1
1
1

1

..

1
13

8
11
2
1
1
1
35

2
2
11
3
15

8
18
47
17
40

1
1
2
2
11
2
4

5
2
2
4
35
7
13
2

1

2

2

3

2

3

1

1
2
3
2

1
3
4
2

6

6

4
1

3

3

2

2

3
1

3
3
2
2

5
2

..

2

2
1
2

1
1
4

1

1

2
4

..

2
3

6

1

4

2
1

1

2

1

1

1

2

1

1
6

1

1
5

2

1

1
1

1

6

3

1
2
18

1

1
2
1

1
1
6

1
1
2
2
2
1
16

4

1
1
1

1
1

3

3
1

1

1

1
5
3
14

9

2

2

2
22

6
6

2

83 172 129 219 174 82

1
2
1

<:

0

~

>-<

>
~

Ul

"d

~
>-<

~

0

Ul
Ul

>-<

>-l

1':1

12
16
110
3

33

34

4

42

44

167

132

554

1869

to

+
Ul.

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

burial (Fig. 2 )-the artifacts are plotted according to their vertical
occurrences (i.e. , surface and six-inch, one foot, and two-foot levels ) .
Among the more notable distributions is the tendency for dart points
to occur below pottery and arrow points. To be sure there are overlaps,
but dart points decidedly increase in frequency in the deeper (more
than two feet below the surface) levels. With the possible exception of
the Gary type, which is probably slightly later, there do not appear to
be meaningful differences in the distribution of the dart points. Other
specimens which occur in significant numbers in the lower levels are
the knives (especially Types II and III), drills, milling slabs, choppers,
and pieces of ocher.
The upper three feet of the deposit, on the other hand, contained
numerous potsherds, arrow points, and pieces of baked clay. Of these
specimens, the arrow points tended to be slightly shallower than the
pottery and the lumps of clay (some wattle-impressed ) were most
common in the six-inch to one-foot level. The clay-tempered, engraved
decorated sherds occurred at significantly shallower depths than the
other types of pottery-a stratigraphic position in keeping with the
engraved design similarities with later Caddoan types (especially
Poynor and Ripley Engraved). Possibly associated with the engraved
pottery is the Perdiz arrow point. Rectangular and expanded stem
arrow points (types Friley and Alba ) at the Zavonian Springs Site
may be slightly earlier than the pointed stem forms (Perdiz and
Cliffton ), but the evidence is admittedly weak. Likewise, there are
suggestions that the sand-tempered pottery may have appeared at the
site somewhat earlier than the clay-tempered wares, and moreover,
that it may be, in part, associated with Gary dart points.
To summarize the distributions of artifacts at the Zavonian Springs
Site, it should be noted that there are no clear-cut breaks in the provenience data, but rather trends which seem to be meaningful. Difficult
as they may be to factor out, these trends indicate significant changes
in the culture of the peoples who occupied the site.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Working mainly on weekends from the fall of 1961 through the fall
of 1962, the Sabine-Neches Archeological Society carried out extensive
test excavations at the Zavonian Springs Site in San Augustine County,
Texas. The site is buried in a sand-capped clay ridge adjacent to the
Angelina River bottoms and lies well within the McGee Bend Reservoir.
As a result of the excavations, 1,869 artifacts were recovered. The

ZAVONIAN SPRINGS SITE

247

vertical distribution of these specimens, presented in Table 1 and
briefly discussed in the preceding section, indicate that the site was
occupied over a considerable period of time and that certain changes
occurred in the material culture of the occupants. However, these
changes are manifested only as statistical trends, perhaps, because of
the deposition and/ or the disturbances caused by man and rodents .
They include :
1. Side-notched and parallel-sided or expanding dart points ( especially of the Kent type ) are generally found in deepest levels at the
site. Other possibly early traits include Knife Type III and drill Type L
2. Although there is overlap in their distribution, Gary dart points,
Knife Type II, drill Type I, and choppers, appear to be slightly later
than the above.
3. The arrival of sand-tempered pottery and Knife Type I mark
the next major change in the material culture. It is probable that Gary
points and Knife Type III continued in use.
4. Arrow points along with predominantly clay-tempered pottery
are consistently found in the upper three feet of the deposit, and, while
the evidence is not clear-cut, they appear to be, at least in part, later
than sand-tempered pottery.
5. Of the clay-tempered ceramics and arrow points, engraved
decorated pottery and Perdiz and Cliffton arrow point's are perhaps
the most recent types.
In general, these findings agree with the sequences outlined for the
McGee Bend area by Tunnell ( 1961 : 155-157 ) and Duffield (1963 :
137-140). Tunnell ( 1961 ), as a result of his analysis of selected remains from the Runnells No. 1, Runnells No. 2, and Sawmill sites,
distinguished three major periods of occupation. The first of these he
identified as late Archaic, and indicated the diagnostic traits as being
crudely made parallel-sided or expanding stem dart points (Kent-like
specimens ) and Knife Type I. Tunnell's subsequent period marks the
end of the Archaic and is distinguished principally by the arrival of
sand-tempered pottery and Type II Knives or blades. His final division
is marked by the appearance of arrow points and various clay-tempered
and bone-tempered types of pottery. The sequence of artifacts at the
Zavonian Springs Site is much the same, except that Knife Type I
appears to be later than indicated by Tunnell and the Gary dart point
perhaps should be added to this second period.

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Recently Duffield (1963: 137-140) has published a somewhat more
detailed sequence for the McGee Bend area, based largely on data
obtained at the VVolfshead Site. Duffield's temporal ordering of artifact
types compares very favorably with the data from Zavonian Springs.
Significantly, his earliest material, identified as early Archaic, is not
present at the Zavonian Springs Site; nor were the latest types at
Zavonian Springs (engraved pottery and pointed stem arrow points)
found at theWolfshead Site.
While the details of the cultural sequence in the McGee Bend area
need verifying and refining, the broad developments seem reasonably
well established. The cultural affiliations, on the other hand, have
received much less attention and are much less well known. In terms
of general characteristics, both the Archaic and Neo-American remains
found in the McGee Bend Reservoir, are similar to materials found to
the north in the Caddoan area (Davis and Davis, 1960; Johnson, 1962;
Newell and Krieger, 1949; Suhm, et al., 1954) and to the south in the
Addicks Reservoir (Wheat, 1953 ) . The dart and arrow points types
occur over most of eastem Texas, while sand-tempered pottery is
abundantly found in southeastern Texas and decorated clay-tempered
wares are typical of the Caddoan cultures. The local Archaic remains,
however, are sufficiently distinct to make identification with a known
complex, such as the East Texas Aspect (Suhm, et al. , 1954: 148-151),
impossible. Of the later artifacts the clay-tempered pottery is perhaps
the most unique. In modes of decoration and general designs it bears
obvious relationships with Caddoan pottery, both Fulton and Gibson
Aspect types. Nonetheless, in design layout, crudeness of design execution and vessel shape, the McGee Bend pottery is clearly distinct from
that of the Caddoan area.
The cultural ties briefly reviewed above, hint at a fairly complex
situation, with far-flung relationships that appear to shift in direction
through time. The data from the Zavonian Springs Site clearly reflect
these varying influences, although much additional research is needed
to define their exact nature.

REFERENCES CITED
Arnold, Gus E.
MS. Monthly Reports, October, 1939-July, 1940. Manuscripts on file in Department of Anthropology, The University of T exas.
Atwood, Wallace W.
1940. The Physiographic Provinces of North America. Ginn and Company.

ZA VONIAN SPRINGS SITE

249

Bell, Robert E.
1958. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1.
19:50. Guide to the Identification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin No. 2.
Blair, W . Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 93-100.
Davis, William A., and E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir
Area, Northeastern Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 3, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1963. The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic-Neo-American Site in San Augustine
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp.
83-141.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, pt. 1.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962. The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, With a Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 32 (for 1961 ) , pp. 141-284.
Newell, H . Perry, and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archaeology, No. 5.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932. The Geology of Texas, Vol. I: Stratigraphy. University of Texas Bulletin
3232.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1948. Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir: A Preliminary Report.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19,
pp. 57- 73.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25 .
Tunnell, Curtis D .
1961. Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites in the McGee Bend
Reservoir, San Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959), pp. 123-158.
Webb, Clarence H .
1959. The Belcher Mound: A Stratified Caddoan Site in Caddo Parish, Louisiana.
Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, No. 16.

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 154,
No.4. 143-252.
The Sabine-Neches Archeological Society
Jasper, Texas

Obituary
GUSTAV EDMUND CRANZ, JR.

1908-1963
Gus Cranz was in many ways a most unusual man. From his selection by the very popular College Humor magazine for its Hall of Fame,
through a career as a highly successful businessman to his competence
as an amateur archeologist and photographer of historic Texas buildings his career was more than ordinary.
Born in Fort Worth, Gus Cranz was intimately associated with that
city throughout his life. He was graduated from Paschal High School
and from Rice University, after which he went into the family business, the Terminal Grain Company of which he later became president. He married Lynn Foster, of Houston, by whom he had two sons.
After three years in the Army Air Corps for which he volunteered in
1942, he returned to Fort Worth and his business, later becoming president of the Fort Worth Grain and Cotton Exchange.
Gus Cranz exemplified the best qualities of the enlightened andresponsible American businessman and civic leader. President of the
Tarrant County Historical Society, member of the Publications Committee of Tarrant County Archeological Society, he w as also a Lay
Reader in St. Andrews Episcopal Church. He was a member of many
archeological societies, local, state, and national, including the Texas
Archeological Society, the Archeological Institute of America, and the
Society for American Archaeology. He was an accomplished photog·
rapher and two of his photographs are included in the current Texas
Guide Book. His archive of historic Texas buildings is a most valuable
record of this architecture which is fast disappearing.
Gus Cranz preferred that his philanthropies remain unsung, nevertheless, many persons have been helped over a bad spot by some assistance from Gus. His understanding, sympathy, and encouragement
were as important in many cases as his more tangible financial assistance.
Gus Cranz will live long in the memory of the Texas Archeological
Society.

Book Reviews
The Ham Creek Site, by Robert E. Forrester. A Publication of the
Tarrant County Archeological Society, Fort Worth, Texas, 1964.
46 pp., 22 plates, 20 figs.
In this thorough, detailed report, Robert E . Forrester presents the study of an
Archaic Edwards Plateau Aspect site located in Johnson County, Texas. The publication is of particular importance because it is the first comprehensive site report
from this northern section of central Texas. What makes the site of unusual interest
is its location far north of the usual midden of this type and the association there
of several overlapping Archaic cultures-the La Harpe and Trinity, as well as the
Edwards Plateau aspects. In fact, Ham Creek could be more accurately described
as a "multi-component Archaic site" rather than an Edwards Plateau Aspect site.
The site was excavated over a period of several years, beginning in 1951. The
author worked alone at first but later was assisted by individual members of the
Tarrant County Archeological Society and by two organized group digs conducted
by the Society. In the absence of natural geological or cultural strata the excavation was carried out vertically in arbitrary three-inch levels, reaching its greatest
depth at thirty-six inches. A grid of five-foot squares, subdivided into 25 one-foot
squares provided horizontal control. A demonstration dig, conducted during a separate field trip, uncovered a late burial of a small child.
Forrester's evaluation of the findings is dependent largely on his vertical distributional analysis of projectile points as offering the most productive method of correlating relationships with neighboring Archaic sites. His study of horizontal distribution having proved fruitless, he eliminated it from consideration, assuming for
his analysis that all artifacts were broadcast from a theoretical central point. By
dividing the site vertically into Upper, Middle, and Lower thirds (based on cubic
feet of soil), he discovered what he believed to be valid relationships for comparison. Although he recognizes the Trinity Aspect as a source of possible influence, he
found very little evidence of the Carrollton Focus of that aspect. Because the dart
point type list of the Elam Focus very nearly duplicates that of the La Harpe Aspect,
and in view of the scarcity of Carrollton Focus items at Ham Creek, he ascribes
the Ellis, Yarbrough, Elam, and Gary points (diagnostic of the Elam Focus) to the
La Harpe Aspect. He therefore restricts his comparative analysis of projectile points
to the relationship between the Ham Creek Site and the Edwards Plateau and La
Harpe aspects. The Ham Creek occupation is thus determined as extending from
the Middle Archaic to the Transitional Archaic of the Edwards Plateau Aspect, or
from La Harpe Period 2 through Period 3-ranging from about 2200 B.C. to
A.D. 400.
Despite the fact that the number of artifacts from the Neo-American Central
Texas Aspect and the Historic period was considered insignificant for purposes of
interpretive analysis, it would have been advantageous to include an account of
them and their horizontal distribution in the report as long as the upper six inches
of the midden, in which they were discovered, was included in the vertical analysis.
In addition to the projectile points, detailed descriptions of other flint artifacts

254

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

such as blades, perforators, gravers, scrapers and gouges add much to the completeness of the report. The description of typed projectile points would have been more
valuable if the differences between the less typical examples and the recognized
types had been brought out to include the range in size, shape, and other divergent
characteristics. That this was done meticulously and graphically in the discussion
of the Ham Creek gouges contributes a great deal to the importance of this study.
The author has provided a significant examination of the Godley point, which he
separates into two varieties-klondike and kimball. He differentiates these especially
on the basis of over-all dimensions, width and shape of stems, proportion of basal
width to shoulder, and sharpness of basal corners.
·
Numerous excellent charts and graphs show numerical and percentage distribution of the flint tools, not only in relation to one another but to the site as a whole.
Other categories of artifacts are also treated with painstaking attention; these include polished stone specimens, bone objects, and food grinding tools. C. U. Orchard
analyzed and classified the many varieties of mollusca, which included four worked
specimens.
The various groups believed to have occupied the site, concurrently or alternately,
subsisted for the most part on deer and bison with other small game supplementary,
although fresh water mussels provided an important addition to the diet. Metate
fragments and manos furnished evidence that vegetal food was used , but the specific
plants have not been identified.
The Ham Creek Site report is attractively presented and well written. There are
many illustrations of the artifacts but there are no pictures of the site itself, and it
would have been helpful to the reader in visualizing the location if one had been
included . A more thorough checking of the bibliography would have increased its
usefulness. For example, Jelks (1962) and Long (1961) are cited without corresponding entries in the bibliography. The Limerick, Wunderlich, and other reports
are mentioned with no reference to authorship, although the bibliographic references are listed by authors' names. Such are minor faults, however. The paper as
a whole is carefully prepared, and the interpretation of the archeological findings
is convincing.
The Ham Creek Site offers much of interest and value, not only for itself as a
unique site but by adding to our knowledge and evaluation of relationships with
other Archaic sites. Mr. Forrester and the Tarrant County Archeological Society
are to be congratulated on an excellent and informative publication.
Dorris L. Olds
Texas Memorial Museum

Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol. 1 for 1963.
Published by the Society at Floydada, Texas, 63 pages.
This, th e first issue of the Bulletin to be published by the Society, presents four
articles covering an interesting variety of South Plains archeological activities. We
look forward with pleasure to the forthcoming issues.
In the first paper, "Distribution of Pottery in Surface Sites on the South Plains
of Texas," W . C. W atts has mapped and described the sites where each of the

BOOK REVIEWS

255

major pottery types has been located. Using both published materials and personal
collections as sources for his research, he gives a comprehensive picture of pottery
distribution and fumishes brief descriptions of the individual types, as well. His
source list of sites and private collections, arranged by county, should be very useful for further ceramic distribution studies.
The author discovered that almost all identifiable surface pottery could be traced
to New Mexico and attributes its presence in the South Plains to Puebloan Indians
on hunting forays. Most abundant and widespread of these ceramics are the undifferentiated brown wares, found throughout the South Plains and extending northward to an undetermined limit.
Dan E. Cockrum, in the next article, reports a multiple burial site in northeastern
Garza County. Four skeletons-determined to be an adolescent and three small
children-were interred at various levels beneath sandstone slabs. A large, notched,
lunate-shaped stone, ground and polished, and a small oval limestone pebble were
the only accompaniments to the burials. Inasmuch as brownware pottery and
Harrell and Fresno arrow points were found on the surface, a late date for the
burials is assumed, but no more conclusive date lias been determined.
" Early Man in Northeast Yoakum County," by Cote Trout, describes three sites
that give evidence of very early occupation. They are located on the shores of
ancient lakes which are now dry lake beds under cultivation. All the artifacts
attributed to the Paleo-Indian period are from surface finds . Trout identifies one
complete Folsom point and some Folsom-like fragments, and Plainview and Plainview-like points, but is uncertain of the identification of what may be fragmentary
Clovis points. Basal fragments of other points resemble Folsom to some extent, but
the author suggests that they may represent a transitional type between Clovis and
Folsom . He notes additional artifacts resembling those associated with fluted points
at the Lindenmier Site and describes a fragmentary white flint artifact that is not
reported from either the Folsom type site or the Lindenmier Site.
In the concluding paper, James H. Word reports on his investigation and excavation of the Floydada Country Club Site in Floyd County. This important site is of
special historic interest because it is believed to be the point where Quanah Parker
led the Commanches across Blanco Canyon in MacKenzie's campaigns of 1870 and
1874.
Most of the materials discovered indicate Neo-American occupations, of which
at least two have been differentiated. There are a few dart points from the Archaic
and Paleo-Indian periods, as well as some scattered items of European manufacture.
However, although Archaic artifacts are scarce, Word believes that more extensive investigation would show conclusive evidence of Archaic occupation.
The reader's understanding and interpretation of the archeological materials
presented in this publication would have been greatly improved by larger illustrations and a readable scale in a number of instances. Typographical errors throughout, and mixed-up references to the figures in the Floydada Country Club report
cause some confusion.
Dorris L. Olds
Texas Memorial Museum

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Early Navajo Migrations and Acculturation in the Southwest. By
James J. Hester. Museum of New Mexico Papers in Anthropology No. 6, Santa Fe, 1962. 138 pp., 50 figs., 14 tables, appendix. $2.00.
The subject under consideration in this monograph was first presented as a Ph.D.
dissertation in the Department of Anthropology, the University of Arizona . The
study itself grew out of the author's participation in the Navajo Project, an archeological salvage project of the Museum of New Mexico under contract to the National Park Service.
The study was to be a synthesis of archeological, historical, and ethnological information in an effort to reconstruct past events in regard to the Navajo. Specifically,
the problems under consideration in the monograph are : ( 1) what area the Navajo
occupied before they came to the Southwest; (Z) when and where they entered the
Southwest; (3 ) the subsequent direction of their movements; (4) what archeologically recognizable cultural items they possessed upon arrival; (5 ) which
traits were later acquired from the Pueblo Indians or other cultural groups; and
(6) how these traits were assimilated by the Navajo.
The following premises, made at the beginning, determined the direction of the
study.
"1. The concept of culture used is that of Osgood . .. : Culture consists of all ideas
of the manufactures, behavior, and ideas of the aggregate of human beings which
have been directly observed or communicated to one's mind and of which one is
conscious.
Z. The Southwest comprises all of Arizona and New Mexico plus the southeast
portion of Utah and southwest portion of Colorado.
3. The Navajo and Apache were a single ethnic group sharing a common 'culture core' during the period prior to that described in this study.
4. The Navajo are distinct from the Apache archeologically during the time
period studied in this paper.
5. The Navajo are distinct archeologically from the Pueblo Indians, except during the Refugee period after the Pueblo revolt of 1680-1696 when the Navajo and
some Pueblo Indians lived together." (p. 4)
In order to evaluate the author's manipulation of the data one must make his
own decision as to the degree of validity that can be placed on these underlying
premises. However, assuming that we accept the basic premise that some archeological sites manifest definite Navajo cultural items, we are free to examine the
data presented.
As is true of most well organized research projects, limitations were imposed on
the present study. The main one being that of temporal consideration, for the study
only covers the period ca. A.D. 1500 to A.D. 1800. The 1500 date was selected as
the earliest definable date in historical documents for the existence of the Navajo
in the Southwest. The 1800 terminal date was selected because of the studies of the
Navajo themselves in their land grant projects and the profusion of historical and
ethnographic documents after this time.
In pursuing his study, Hester has done a great deal of research into the climatic
fluctuations of the area in an effort to reproduce an ecological setting for the
Navajo. This section also serves as another key in establishing the Navajo in the
area by correlating their subsistence patterns and the environmental conditions
existing at the time of their migrations.

BOOK REVIEWS

257

Early Navajo culture, that is prior to 1800, is dealt with by the author according to four sources of data: (1) historical documents between 1582, and 1824, which
are mainly Spanish ; (Z) prior publications on Navajo archeology and ethnology;
(3) old, non-reported collections; and (4) newly discovered archeological material,
primarily from the excavations of the Navajo Project. During a discussion and
summary of these different sources the author subtracts traits which are demonstrably Puebloan or Spanish in origin, leaving only Early Navajo traits. In the
next chapter where the archeological phases are discussed, Hester brings together
the traits from these different sources.
In further examination of his initial problem of where the Navajo originated,
the author draws comparisons between the Navajo area and adjacent areas, using
the traits previously established by documentary and archeological evidence. His
comparisons suggest a Plains origin for the pre-Southwest Navajo. With this suggestion, the author proceeds to a "Functional Reconstruction of Pre-Southwestern
Navajo Culture." However, this reconstruction of early Athapascan way of life depends primarily upon two sources: a Plains Apache group described by the Coronado
expedition of 1541, and a report on the Dismal River Aspect, an archeological complex purported to be Plains Apache. The time of this culture is probably prior to
1500 to about 1700. The Navajo are viewed as a loosely knit group of these Athapascans who broke off and entered the Southwest.
In the section "Navajo Acculturation," Hester attempts to examine each of the
known contact situations in terms of the conditions of the encounter (friendly or
hostile), the nature of the participating cultures, and the results of that contact.
He deals primarily with contacts as presented by Puebloan, Spanish, and AngloAmerican influences.
Hester has not established conclusively the answers to any of his initial problems; however, he has certainly done admirable work with the material at hand and
he states that . . . "due to omissions in the r ecord . . . reconstru ction is in fact not
more than a studied opinion ... .'' (p. 102).
Having outlined and commented on various portions of the monograph, it is the
opinion of the reviewer that this is an excellent study in the art of combining
different sources of information for the reconstruction of culture history. It should
be read by anyone interested in the Navajo, in acculturation in general, or m
historic archeology.
Richard E. Ross
The University of T exas

Sun Father's Way, The Kiva Murals of Kuaua, by Bertha P . Dutton.
The University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque, The School
of American Research, Santa Fe, Museum of New Mexico Press,
Santa Fe, 1963. 237 pp., 30 text plates, 115 figs ., 2 appendix
plates, appendix, index, and glossary. $15.00.
Sun Father's Way is a handsome book, the sort bibliophiles are apt to fondle
lovingly, thumbing the glossy pages, admiring the fine illustrations and attractive

258

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

format. It is impressive in other ways too-as an example of what painstaking and
<:omplicated archeological field methods can achieve, and as an example of the
daring wedding of archeological evidence with ethnographic data.
In 1934 the five-year excavation of Kuaua, a pueblo ruin on the west bank of the
Rio Grande near Bernalillo, New Mexico, was begun under the joint auspices of
the School of American Research, the Museum of New Mexico, and the University
of New Mexico. Early in the investigations a rectangular kiva was discovered whose
walls were ornamented with murals. Or rather, it would be more accurate to say
that there was a series of murals, earlier ones being plastered over to make way
for later ones. In all, some 87 plastered layers were recorded from Kiva III, about
25 of which bore recognizable figures; murals were also discovered in Kiva VI.
Subsequent excavations at Kuaua centered around recovering and recording this
subterranean mural art. The description of how the plastered layers were stripped
·Off one by one and preserved is by itself an entrancing story.
Dr. Dutton set for herself the task of presenting " these mural paintings in their
proper perspective" by reviewing "briefly the history of the region and of the
excavations conducted," discussing the Kuaua paintings in detail, and indicating
«something of how they may be ethnologically interpreted" (vii). Such aims are
large, and the business of relating the pictorial evidence to the ethnographic data
( derived in large part from a Zuni informant) is particularly complicated and
fraught with difficulty. By and large the author has reached her goals, even though
some of the facile correlations seem a little too pat and the reader is seized by the
uneasy feeling that much data has not been well digested. The author recognizes
the latter defect (p. 37) , but because of the discovery of other kiva murals, particularly at the Pottery Mound site on the Rio Puerco, she has realized that the
Kuaua materials had to be published. I think she is to be commended for this course,
though she thus opens wide the gates to her critics.
Unfortunately, Dr. Dutton's style is opaque and often tortured; the dreary
writing is relieved only occasionally, as, for example, when we learn that "over
600 skeletons were unearthed-reflecting a high mortality . . ." (p. 2,6 ) . Why Dr.
Dutton failed to get in touch with some of the immortal Kuauans is not explained.
Less hilarious are such passages as : "Full-size copies of the murals were painted on
canvas by Indian artists, largely, although some of the painting was done by nonIndians" (p. 31 ) . By the time the reader has decided what the "largely" refers to,
has reflected on the shortcomings of copy editors, and the state of the writing in
America, he has lost interest in who copied the murals in whatever size.
But these and the other criticisms which might be made are relatively minor.
Sun Father's Way is heartily welcomed; the specialist and general reader alike will
be delighted that these late 15th and early 16th century murals have been so skillfully reproduced and generally are so intelligently explained.
W. W . Newcomb
Texas Memorial Museum

