BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Vol. 35 I Published by the Society I Austin, Texas, 1964

·

Offtce of the State Areheo!og!

.·~~·;. . . ._.___ Library

~-.,-~4!o-: .;'• -~ · · · : - ~ .

'

"

__ -:S
. ,(

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man and
the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement
of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of researches
incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1964
President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
President Emeritus: CYRUS N. R,w (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAMES H. WoRD (Floydada)
Secretary-Treasurer: DoRRIS L. 0LDS (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL A. CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W. C. HoLDEN (Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), IsABELLE R.
LoBDELL (Fort Worth), and E. A. WHITE (El Paso).
Trustees: 0. L. SrMs (San Angelo), MARDITH K. ScHUETZ (San Antonio), and
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CHARLES W. BANDY (Brownfield), JAy C. BLAINE
(Richardson), CHARLES N. BoLLICH (Beaumont), ADA BRANCH (Victoria),
W. A. DAVIS (Jasper), JoHN HENDRICK (El Paso), ELBERT D. HELM (Fort
Worth), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.), and DoN R. WILLIAMS (San Marcos).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership
at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5.00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin, Texas 78712. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is
the same.

Cover design by Mark L. Parsons; taken from petroglyph panel at the Verbena
Site, Garza County, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, I 991

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Editor: Dee Ann Story ,
Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D . Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1964

Office of the ~tate Archeologist J·
"" . .. ......

~;.1

--

..._____ Library

I

Table of Contents
Artic(es
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacada
By Jane Holden Kelley .

1

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield .

19

Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas
By Curtis D. Tunnell .

83

Indian Skeletal Material from the Jim Arnold Site
By Thomas W. McKern

95

The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas
By Frank A. Runkles .

101

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher
County, Texas
By Cyrus N. Ray and Edward B. Jelks .

127

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor
Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas
By Elton R. Prewitt

143

West Indian Seal Remains from Two Historic Sites in
Coastal South Texas
By Gerald G. Raun

189

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of
Corpus Christi, Texas
By W. S. Fitzpatrick, Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N.
Campbell .

193

A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

205

The Zanonian Springs Site: An Archaic-Nee-American
Site in McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Texas
By W. A. Davis and Helen Ruth Horn

213

Obituary
Gustav Edmund Cranz, Jr. ( 1908-1963 )

251

Book Reviews
Forrester, Robert E., The Ham Creek Site
By Dorris L. Olds .

253

Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol. 1
By Dorris L. Olds .

254

Hester, James J., Early Navajo Migrations and
Acculturation in the Southwest
By Richard E. Ross .

256

Dutton, Bertha P., Sun Father's Way, The Kiva Murals
of Kuaua
By William W. Newcomb .

257

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel From
the Vicinity of Corpus Christi, Texas
W. S. FITZPATRICK, JOAN FITZPATRICK,
AND T. N. CAMPBELL
ABSTRACT
A reconstructed Rockport Black-on-gray vessel, found in isolation near Corpus
Christi, is described. This vessel, the fourth of its type to be reported but the first
to be described, is a small-mouthed, short-necked, globular olla decorated with a
loose network of undulating lines in asphaltum paint. As the Rockport Black-on-gray
type has been attributed to the Karankawa and associated Indian tribes on the Texas
coast, Karankawa pottery as reported in ethnological documents is compared with
Rockport ware described in archeological literature. This comparison shows that,
although the similarities are sufficient to permit reliable linkage, the two bodies
of ceramic data are not in full agreement.

Pottery is associated with only one culture in the central section of
the Texas coast. This is known as the Rockport Focus, a late prehistoric
and early historic culture whose most distinctive trait is a type of pottery named Rockport Black-on-gray. The type is widely distributed
along the Texas coast. It has been reported as far east as Galveston
Bay (Campbell, 1957: 467) and as far south as the Rio Grande delta
( Anderson, 1932: 30). However, at these extreme limits of its distribution it appears to be rare and possibly intrusive. The area of heaviest
representation lies between Matagorda and Baffin bays (Campbell,
1952: 74-75; 1956: 35-40; 1958: 435-438; Suhm, et al., 1954: 126,
384; SuhmandJelks, 1962: 131-132) .
Most of what is known about Rockport Black-on-gray pottery is derived from analysis of potsherds. Complete, undamaged Rockport
Black-on-gray vessels are rare, and only one has thus far been reported, a hemispherical bowl from Arrowhead Island (also known as
Webb Island ) just southeast of Corpus Christi. A drawing of this
specimen has been published by Potter (1930: Plate 8, No. 15 ), who
provides no descriptive details. His sketch (scale is not indicated)
shows that the lip of this bowl is painted black and that widely spaced,
narrow, undulating black lines extend downward from the painted lip
about halfway to the base.
Also rare are fragmentary vessels complete enough to permit re-

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

construction of the original form . Sketches of two such reconstructed
vessels, both globular ollas from Live Oak Peninsula, Aransas County,
have been published by Potter ( 1930: Plate 9, Nos . 16-17 ). Unfortunately, measurements and descriptive details are not presented, and
there is no way to check the accuracy of each reconstruction. One olla
(Potter's No. 16) is from the Blink Bonnie Site north of Rockport
(Martin, n . d.: 5, Site 38 ). Although it is globular and has a short
neck, the maximum diameter of this vessel is greater than its height.
The width of the mouth appears to be about one-third of maximum
body diameter. A narrow band of paint covers the lip and adjacent exterior portion of the neck, and extending downward from this band are
several rows (five rows are visible in the sketch ) of very large black
dots. The number of dots in these rows ranges from three to five; some
rows of dots are straight but others are slightly curved. The second
olla (Potter's No. 17), which is from a site at the northern end of Live
Oak Peninsula, has a larger mouth (its diameter is about half the body
diameter ) and also has two opposed, vertically oriented loop handles
on the shoulder. The lip bears deep, closely spaced, V-shaped notches,
and a narrow band of black paint encircles the lip exterior, extending
downward no farther than the angles of the lip notches. No other decoration appears on this specimen.
To these three Rockport Black-on-gray vessels we can now add a
fourth that comes from a locality on the King Ranch southwest of
Corpus Christi. This vessel, the three vessels reported by Potter, and
the Rockport polychrome vessel described by Calhoun in this issue of
the Bulletin all come from localities that are less than 50 miles from
the city of Corpus Christi.
The fragmented vessel to be described here was found by VV. S. and
Joan Fitzpatrick in January, 1949, on an eroded slope overlooking
Agua Dulce Creek in northern Kleberg County (Fitzpatrick site designation: 77 A9-1). This intermittent stream flows eastward across the
flat coastal plain into Baffin Bay. Mrs. Fitzpatrick noted that potsherds
were eroding at the head of a small gully some 80 feet west of the
stream and at a level six to seven feet above the stream bed. An area of
approximately nine square feet was excavated at the spot where sherds
were still in place, and about half of the vessel was recovered by troweling and use of a screen. The potsherds were found in a relatively
small area (approximately four square feet ). The excavation was carried downward to a depth of 16 inches below the surface, but no potsherds were found at a depth greater than four inches. The vessel was
buried in sandy clay that extended downward to a depth of eight
inches. Below this level the clay contained no sand.

ROCKPORT BLACK-ON-GRAY VESSEL

195

Fig . 1. Restored Rockport Block-on-gray vessel, side view.

Farther down slope, and in the same gully, sherds from the vessel
were also collected from the surface all the way to the bank of Agua
Dulce Creek. Additional sherds were recovered by screening the fill
in the bottom of this small gully. Many of the sherds collected from
the surface and from the gully fill were noticeably eroded. No other
archeological materials were seen in the immediate area, but a small
campsite was found some 600 feet north of the buried vessel. From the
surface of this site flint flakes, burned-clay fragments, and a few potsherds were collected. The sherds, identifiable as Rockport ware, are
very small, eroded fragments from one or more thin-walled, buff to
reddish-buff vessels.

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Shortly after the sherds were recovered the vessel was reconstructed
by Fitzpatrick as shown in Figs. 1-3. In this form it was very weak
and fragile. As the specimen was to be placed on display in the Corpus
Christi Museum, it was strengthened by filling in the open spaces with
plaster of Paris. Today it is displayed in this condition at the Waelder
Wildlife Refuge near Sinton, Texas. The vessel has been illustrated in
two newspaper articles. In the first article (Anonymous, 1949 ), which
is based on an interview with Fitzpatrick, it is shown as originally
reconstructed; in the second article (Fitzpatrick, 1 959) it is shown
after treatment with plaster of Paris.
The Agua Dulce vessel is represented by 167 sherds, of which 161
are included in the reconstruction. It is estimated that about 50 sherds
were not recovered. These figures provide a rough measure of the total
number of sherds (215 to 225) likely to result from breakage of a
Rockport vessel of this shape and size.
This vessel appears to have been constructed by the coiling method
(see horizontal fracture patterns in Figs. 1 and 2). The paste includes
enough fine sand (perhaps as much as 10% ) to give it a gritty feel
when rubbed with the fingers. It is possible that this sand was added
to the clay as tempering material, but it seems more likely that the
sand was present in the clay selected for use. Sandy clays occur in the
Corpus Christi area. The paste also includes small white particles (all
less than 1 mm. in diameter) that are not evenly distributed over the
vessel surface. In areas of maximum frequency the number of white
particles never exceeds one per square centimeter. These particles
were not discolored by firing, and magnification reveals that they are
not laminated, which leads us to conclude that the white particles are
not pulverized bone or shell. As some local clays contain hard particles
of white calcareous material, we are inclined to believe that the particles in the paste of this vessel do not represent a tempering additive.
In general the paste is fine and homogenous. No lumps or laminations are observable. Occasionally small vacant spaces occur; 11 of
these were noted, and seven of them are in one area about 5 em. square
near the base. Paste color ranges from buff to gray near interior and
exterior wall surfaces, but a gray core appears in most sherds.
Exterior surface color is variable, ranging from buff (about 80%)
to light gray (about 20%) . The exterior surface is slightly uneven.
Except for five or six very shallow grooves (2 mm. in width and about
6 em. in length), no tool marks are observable. The interior surface
shows no scoring and no trace of asphaltum.
The body of this vessel is spherical and has a maximum diameter

ROCKPORT BLACK-ON-GRAY VESSEL

197

Fig. 2. Restored Rockport Black-on-gray vessel, side view.

of 18.2 em. The neck is very short (height above body, 1.5 em. ) and
has a narrow mouth (diameter, 3.6 em.). The distance from the center
of the base to level of the lip is 19.8 em. The lip is rounded and has not
been altered by nicks or notches or by the addition of asphaltum paint,
common attributes of Rockport ware vessels. The base is well-rounded
and shows no localized thickening to form the basal knob sometimes
found on vessels of Rockport ware. Wall thickness averages about 5

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mm., ranging from a minimum of 3.5 mm. at the neck to a maximum
of 9 mm. near the center of the base.
Decoration consists of a network of broad lines made by application
of black asphaltum paint. These lines are variable in width (maximum
14 rum.) and range from sinuous to almost straight. They appear to
have been made hastily and carelessly with some sort of brush. Seven
unequally spaced vertical lines extend downward from the lip of the
large circular area of solid asphaltum paint that covers the base of the
vessel (Fig. 3). The vertical lines are intersected by four horizontal or
slightly diagonal lines, mainly on the upper half of the vessel. The
horizontal lines are not as distinct as the vertical lines. Two of the
horizontal lines (Fig. 2) may have been the result of mending cracks
(paint extends across the fractured edges of the sherds). A short, vertical crack on the neck also seems to have been mended by application
of asphaltum. The large asphaltum-covered area on the base is of
special interest because it shows that some coastal sherds with asphaltum-coated exterior surfaces may be from Rockport Black-on-gray
vessels.
As Rockport Black-on-gray pottery has been attributed to the Karankawa and other closely associated Indian tribes of the Texas coast, it is
pertinent to review the ethnological data on Karankawa ceramics.
This does not seem to have been done before. Three published sources
contain primary information on Karankawa pottery- Joutel (Stiles,
1906), Gatschet ( 1891 ), and Dyer ( 1917 ). Joutel refers to Karankawa
groups in the year 1685, but both Gatschet and Dyer refer to Karankawa between the years 1817 and 1848. Joutel merely mentions pottery and one of its uses , but Gatschet and Dyer present information of
considerable value. In Gatschet, the best of the three sources, the de·
scription of Karankawa pottery is dispersed and occurs in twelve different places. Those who refer to Gatschet's description of Karankawa
pottery seldom cite ( Schaedel, 1949: 123, 126; Suhm and Jelks 1962:
131) more than one of these isolated references, possibly because Gatschet's index gives only two page references to pottery (and one of
these is incorrect! ). No one seems to have called attention to the brief
statement about Karankawa pottery made by Dyer. These sources are
of special significance because they not only provide a basis for identifying Rockport ware as Karankawa in provenience but also give information on specific uses of pottery in Karankawa culture.
We have said that references to Karankawa pottery occur in twelve
places in Gatschet's publication. As most of these are easily overlooked
because of their brevity, we will reproduce all of them here. This will

ROCKPORT BLACK- ON-GRAY VESSEL

199

Fig . 3 . Restored Rockport Black-on-gray vessel, bottom view.

allow us to inspect the various statements and see how well they support conclusions that may be drawn from the ethnological sources. The
following extracts are presented in chronological order.
Joutel merely says that:
.. . she [an old woman] return'd to h er Cottage, where we found some Pitchers
of water, of which we all drank ( Stiles, 1906: 85 ).

Gatschet's ( 1891 ) statements are given below in the order of their
appearance in his monograph:

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Their food,-venison, fish, oysters, turtles, etc.,-was always either boiled in rude
earthen pots or roasted in the ashes of their fire (p. 11).
Their utensils were few and simple . .. including a few clay vessels of different
sizes with bottoms rounded-never flat (p. 12) .
. . . and a few cooking utensils . .. (p. 17).
This " tea" [a kind of "black drink" made from yaupon leaves and used on certain
ceremonial occasions], contained in a vessel of clay of their own manufacture, was
handed round occasionally and all the Indians drank freely (p. 18) .
. . . the chief ... [presented] ... a large jug [of water to a European settler whose
daughter ~as ill] (p. 20).
[Summarizing from Joutel] They . . . made some pottery for cooking their
victuals . . . (p. 24) .
Mrs. Oliver [Gatschet's informant] stated that asphaltum was often washed ashore
and used by the Indians for black paint after mixing it with oil .. . (p. 54).
The cookery of these natives was a rather simple affair. Every lodge had but one
iron kettle, but several made of pottery, all unwashed ... They prepared but one
kind of pottery from clay, the bases having a globular bottom, so that they had to
be placed into a hole in the sand. They had no handles and measured in diameter
about twelve inches. Mrs. Oliver observed their manufacture but once; then it was
a man who made some pots and ornamented them on the outside with little designs,
faces, scrolls, scallops, etc., in black paint (p. 59).
[In their houses] .. . cooking vessels, were lying on the ground (p. 63) .
. . . but made coarse pottery . .. (p. 67).
Although the women were not manufacturers of mats or blankets, cooking pots
with rude ornaments were seen in their camps (p. 68) .
Besides some rude attempts at wood-carving a beginning of the plastic arts
could be seen in the appliance of a paint, which was either red or black, and of a
clay producing a black color. With these they painted figures of animals and human
faces upon their skins and upon pots and articles of wood. These paintings were far
remote from any artistic finish and were but seldom seen (p. 68).

In describing the Atakapa of southwestern Louisiana and adjoining
southeastern Texas, Dyer ( 1917: 5) has the following to say about
Karankawa ceramics:
Their [the Atakapa] pottery was made by tribes to the north of them, except a
few of the globular or conical oil jugs of the Carancahuas, so serviceable, fitted in
cane frames, to the canoe voyager.

Although the above statements are brief and somewhat ambiguous
in places, they represent all that we now know about Karankawa
ceramics during the historic period. Analysis of these statements permits the following generalizations: Karankawa vessels varied in size,

ROCKPORT BLACK-ON-GRAY VESSEL

201

12 inches being the average diameter; they had rounded or conical
bases and lacked handles; some small-mouthed vessels were encased
in cane frames; designs in black paint or a combination of black and
red paint were applied to vessel exteriors; pigments used for decoration
of pottery consisted of clay or asphaltum collected from Gulf beaches;
asphaltum was prepared for use as paint by mixing with oil; the
painted designs included poorly executed animal figures, human
faces, scrolls, and scallops; these vessels were used for such purposes
as cooking food, storage and transportation of water and oil, and serving beverages on ceremonial occasions.
How well does this generalized description of Karankawa pottery
match descriptions of Rockport ware derived from archeological sites?
Such data as we now have on vessels and vessel fragments from these
sites indicate more variation in both vessel shape and size ( Suhm and
Jelks, 1962: 131-136) than is suggested by ethnological data. Demonstrable forms include bowls, jars or vases, ollas, and bottles. Bases are
rounded as a rule, but occasionally base sherds indicate a vessel tapered sufficiently toward the base to be characterized as conical (Campbell, 1952: Plate 8, JJ). Gatschet says that Karankawa vessels lacked
handles, but sherds with handles are sometimes found in archeological
sites (Campbell, 1956: 40; 1958: 437; Potter, 1930: Plate 9, No. 17) .
Potsherds from sites indicate both undecorated and decorated vessels
(Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 131-136), the latter exhibiting a variety of
decorative techniques-painting, incising, punctating, and inlaying
(with asphaltum; Corbin, 1963: 18). However, most of the decorated
sherds from Rockport sites bear parts of what appear to be very simple
designs in black paint. A fugitive red paint has occasionally been noted
on plain sherds and on sherds bearing black designs (Campbell, 1956:
40; Corbin, 1963: 13; Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 131), but it is only recently that Calhoun ( 1964) has demonstrated a polychrome tradition
which involves the use of both black and red paint on an unslipped exterior vessel surface. So far as we are aware, most of the painted designs mentioned by Gatschet are not present or at least not recognizable on fragmented archeological specimens. No animal figures,
human faces, or scrolls have been noted, but it is likely that Gatschet's
"scallops" refer to the undulating lines in black paint commonly
found on sherds from Rockport sites.
From these observations we may conclude that the ethnological data
and the archeological data agree in some instances (vessel forms, pigments used for painting designs, and at least one kind of design) but
do not agree in others (handles, decorative techniques other than

202

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

painting, and most of the painted designs named by Gatschet ). However, we think that there is enough agreement to support the identification of Rockport ware as mainly Karankawan in origin. It must be
realized, of course, that we are comparing ceramics made during a 30year period in the 19th century with ceramics made during a late
prehistoric and early historic period that may have covered as much as
1,000 years. Allowance should be made for the changes in ceramics
that must have taken place during such a long period. It is likely that
incising and punctating were not common decorative techniques in
the later part of the historic period.
The published descriptions of Karankawa pottery raise other questions. For example, Gatschet says that all Karankawa pottery was of
one kind. It would be of interest to know if the vessel used to hold the
ceremonial "black drink" was in any way different from other vessels.
One would suppose that it was a form from which men could drink
easily and that it was distinctive in some way because of ritual usage.
The polychrome vessel reported by Calhoun ( 1964) is a vase whose
globular lower portion is separated from a widely flaring rim by a
marked constriction, an ideal form for drinking purposes. We are
tempted to interpret this polychrome vessel as a special form made for
ceremonial use only. The Karankawa male potter observed by Mrs.
Oliver may have been making cere:r:nonial vessels. In a culture like
that of the Karankawa we would expect culinary vessels to be made
by women, as seems to be implied by Gatschet ( 1891 : 68 ) .
The cane frame mentioned by Dyer also raises a question. Did the
Atakapa add frames to Karankwa vessels or did the vessels come thus
equipped from the Karankawa? Dyer's statement is so brief and ambiguous that we cannot be sure of the answer. However, in this connection it is of interest to note the network of painted lines on the
Fitzpatrick vessel. These lines form a pattern which suggests a frame
like that mentioned by Dyer. We examined these painted lines closely
to see if there is any evidence that asphaltum was used as a gum to
attach such a frame more tightly to the vessel, but the results of this
examination were negative. Perhaps this loose network design is an
imitation of the cane carrying frame . Incidentally, Dyer's statement
that Karankawa pottery reached the Atakapa through trade helps to
explain the rare occurrence of Rockport ware in sites east of Galveston
Bay (Campbell1957: 467).
As for pottery from sites of the Rockport culture, the fugitive nature
of the red pigment used by Rockport potters poses one rather disturbing question. Just how frequently did vessels bearing designs in both

ROCKPORT BLACK-ON-GRAY VESSEL

203

black and red paint lose their red designs through repeated use or
through exposure to rainfall, percolating ground waters, or chemical
reactions in the soil? It is doubtful if this question can be answered
without resorting to such special techniques as X-ray diffraction,
fluorescence, or complex chemical analysis. Until an answer is forthcoming, it is wise to hold certain reservations about Rockport Blackon-gray as a pottery type.
The vase described by Calhoun and the olla described here provide
substantial additions to knowledge of form and decoration in Rockport
ware. Recovery of these two specimens shows that by patience, perseverance, and some good fortune it is possible to find reconstructable
Rockport vessels. The form of the Fitzpatrick specimen was predictable
on the basis of known rim and base sherds and the two reconstructed
ollas illustrated by Potter, but this is not true of the Calhoun specimen,
which has a more complex form. As Calhoun points out, a rim sherd
from his vase would surely have been identified as part of a bowl with
flaring rim. When additional specimens of complete or restorable
vessels are recovered, we can begin to make reliable descriptive statements about the pottery associated with Rockport culture and also
continue the comparison with Karankawa ceramics as known from
ethnological sources.
REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, A . E.
1932. Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 4, pp. 29-31.
Anonymous
1949. Piece of Rockport Indian Pottery Found near Creek. The Corpus Christi
Caller-Times, February 15, 1949, Section B, p. 1.
Calhoun, C. A.
1964. A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 35 (this issue ) .
Corbin, James
1963. Archeological Materials from the Northern Shore of the Corpus Christi
Bay, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp. 5-30.
Campbell, T. N .
1952. The Kent-Crane Site: A Shell Midden on the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 39-77.
1956. Archeological Materials from Five Islands in the Laguna Madre, Texas
Coast. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 7-46.
1957. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 448-471.
1958. Archeological Remains from the Live Oak Point Site, Aransas County,
Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 423-442.

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Dyer, J. 0.
·1917. The Lake Charles Atakapas (Cannibals): Period 1817-1820. Galveston.
Fitzpatrick, Sam
1959. Earliest Man Came 8,000 Years Ago. The Corpus Christi Caller-Times,
January 18, 1959 (Centennial Edition ).
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891. The Karankawa Indians, the Coast People of Texas. Archaeological and
Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Harvard University, Vol. 1,
No.2.
Martin, George C.
n.d. Preliminary Archaeological Survey of a Portion of the Texas Coast Made
by George C. Martin and Wendell H. Potter in 1927-1928-1929. Privately
printed.
Potter, Wendell H .
1930. Ornamentation on the Pottery of the Texas Coastal Tribes. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 2, pp. 41-44.
Schaedel, Richard P.
1949. The Karankawa of the Texas Gulf Coast. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 5, No.2, pp. 117-137.
Stiles, Henry Reed , editor
1906. Joutel's Journal of La Salle's Last Voyage, 1684--7. Albany, New York.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. The Texas Archeological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1 and The Texas M emorial Museum ,
Bulletin No. 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Corpus Christi, Texas
University of Texas
Austin, Texas

