BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Vol. 35 I Published by the Society I Austin, Texas, 1964

·

Offtce of the State Areheo!og!

.·~~·;. . . ._.___ Library

~-.,-~4!o-: .;'• -~ · · · : - ~ .

'

"

__ -:S
. ,(

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man and
the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement
of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of researches
incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1964
President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
President Emeritus: CYRUS N. R,w (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAMES H. WoRD (Floydada)
Secretary-Treasurer: DoRRIS L. 0LDS (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL A. CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W. C. HoLDEN (Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), IsABELLE R.
LoBDELL (Fort Worth), and E. A. WHITE (El Paso).
Trustees: 0. L. SrMs (San Angelo), MARDITH K. ScHUETZ (San Antonio), and
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CHARLES W. BANDY (Brownfield), JAy C. BLAINE
(Richardson), CHARLES N. BoLLICH (Beaumont), ADA BRANCH (Victoria),
W. A. DAVIS (Jasper), JoHN HENDRICK (El Paso), ELBERT D. HELM (Fort
Worth), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.), and DoN R. WILLIAMS (San Marcos).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership
at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5.00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin, Texas 78712. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is
the same.

Cover design by Mark L. Parsons; taken from petroglyph panel at the Verbena
Site, Garza County, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, I 991

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Editor: Dee Ann Story ,
Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D . Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1964

Office of the ~tate Archeologist J·
"" . .. ......

~;.1

--

..._____ Library

I

Table of Contents
Artic(es
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacada
By Jane Holden Kelley .

1

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield .

19

Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas
By Curtis D. Tunnell .

83

Indian Skeletal Material from the Jim Arnold Site
By Thomas W. McKern

95

The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas
By Frank A. Runkles .

101

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher
County, Texas
By Cyrus N. Ray and Edward B. Jelks .

127

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor
Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas
By Elton R. Prewitt

143

West Indian Seal Remains from Two Historic Sites in
Coastal South Texas
By Gerald G. Raun

189

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of
Corpus Christi, Texas
By W. S. Fitzpatrick, Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N.
Campbell .

193

A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

205

The Zanonian Springs Site: An Archaic-Nee-American
Site in McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Texas
By W. A. Davis and Helen Ruth Horn

213

Obituary
Gustav Edmund Cranz, Jr. ( 1908-1963 )

251

Book Reviews
Forrester, Robert E., The Ham Creek Site
By Dorris L. Olds .

253

Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol. 1
By Dorris L. Olds .

254

Hester, James J., Early Navajo Migrations and
Acculturation in the Southwest
By Richard E. Ross .

256

Dutton, Bertha P., Sun Father's Way, The Kiva Murals
of Kuaua
By William W. Newcomb .

257

Comments on the Archeology of
the Llano Estacado *
JANE HOLDEN KELLEY
ABSTRACT
Although the Llano Estacada is relatively rich in prehistoric remains, there have
been very few systematic investigations into the archeology of the area. Moreover,
the bulk of the work done thus far has concentrated on Early Man sites. The later
materials have been much ignored and are known principally from surface collections made by amateurs. From the point of view of the archeologist, one of the major
problems is the scarcity of stratified sites; many of the known sites occur in wind
blown areas where artifacts are almost invariably mixed.

THE AREA

The geographic area that is designated as the Llano Estacado (or
Staked Plains) covers some 50,000 square miles, being bounded on the
north by the Canadian River, on the west by the Pecos River, and on
the east by the erosional escarpment known as the Caprock; the southern boundary fades into the Edwards Plateau (Fig. 1) . This region
has remarkably little in the way of topographic relief. Shallow surface
lakes are a dominant feature in the flat expanse, as are the shallow
valleys that form the upper reaches of the Red, Brazos and Colorado
rivers. Short grass is the dominant form of vegetation over much of
the area, with the valleys and canyons occasionally supporting some
heavier growth of cottonwood, hackberry, and other plants that need
more moisture than the Llano Estacada normally offers. The fauna,
prior to 1880, was always dominated by large herd animals such as
bison and antelope. Smaller animals such as fox, coyote, prairie dogs
and rabbits were also common.
REVIEW OF ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

There has been little in the way of professional archeological field
work in the area, and what has been done has emphasized studies of
Early Man. The extensive work of amateur archeologists is largely
• This paper, submitted in 1958, was originally scheduled to appear in a proposed
Part II of "A Review of Texas Archeology."

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Fig . 1 . The Llano Estacado and adjacent regions . After A. K. Lebeck, 1922 ,

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACADO

3

unpublished and is only now being put into an organized frame of
reference. Since the bulk of the systematized information is published
elsewhere, only a brief summary will be presented here.
PALEO- INDIAN STAGE

Six of the major published Early Man sites of North America fall
within this area (Fig. 2 ) . It should be noted that virtually every surface lake and every valley have produced finds of Early Man materials, but these finds are largely unpublished.
Blackwater Locality No. 1 is located between Portales and Clovis,
in eastern New Mexico, and has produced artifacts from five horizons
(Sellards, 1952 ) . ( 1) The oldest of these horizons is represented by
the Llano or Clovis complex which has Clovis points in association
with extinct fauna, of which the most diagnostic form is the elephant.
(2) The next cultural horizon is the Folsom horizon, characterized
by the fluted Folsom points in association with Bison antiquus in a diatomaceous earth. (3) Above the Folsom horizon is that of the Portales
Complex, typified by parallel flake points; two radiocarbon dates of
6230 ± 150 (Sample 0-169) and 6300 ± 150 (Sample 0-170 ) years
ago have been obtained on associated bison bones (Krieger, 195 7: 323) .
( 4) Little attention has been paid to the more recent occupations; however, Archaic stemmed and notched points from the upper portion of
the vertically jointed sand were found in association with a burned·
bone (Sample 0-157 ) that gave a date of 4950 ± 150 years (Wendorf
and Krieger, 1959: 77). ( 5) Southwestern pottery that can be dated
ca. 1100-1400 A. D. is found in the uppermost aeolian sand.
The Lubbock Reservoir Site, near Lubbock, Texas, is similar to
Blackwater Locality No. 1 in its stratigraphy (Sellards, 1952) . The
lower sand at Lubbock corresponds in faunal content to the Llano or
Clovis level ·at Blackwater No. 1; however, the diagnostic Clovis points
have not been encountered in situ to date, a large worked flake being
the only tool that has been found. Folsom points come from the overlying diatomaceous earth in association with Bison antiquus. A radiocarbon date of 9883 ± 350 was obtained on charred bison bones (Sample C-558) from the lower diatomite (Libby, 1955: 107) and a date of
9700 ± 450 years ago came from freshwater snail shells (Sample
L-283g) from the middle of the diatomite zone (Camp bell, 1961: 316).
Descriptions of the artifacts from the upper four strata have not yet
been published.
At the Scharbauer Site, fragments of a fossilized human skull were

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

found in a blowout on the Scharbauer ranch south of Midland in 1953
(Wendorf, et al., 1955; Wendorf and Krieger, 1959). Excavations at
the site indicated that the basal white lacustrine sand was overlain by
a gray sand, which in turn, was overlain by red and tan aeolian sands.
Evidence of antiquity, however, does not rest primarily on stratigraphy, association or typology; rather, the possibility f<;>r antiquity depends more directly on a series of chemical and physical tests that
have been run on the various bones and samples of caliche pebbles.
A bewildering and inconsistent array of dates from the Scharbauer
Site has caused Wendorf and Krieger ( 1959) to advance three alternative interpretations of the placement of the site in relation to other
South Plains Early Man sites. ( 1) Their " Group A scheme," which is
the one they favor, utilizes the radiocarbon date of 13,400 ± 1200 B. P .
( Sample L-304C ) for the gray sand to equate this stratum with the
gray sand of the Clovis and Lubbock localities, thereby assigning it to
the Llano or Clovis period. The Folsom date of 9883 ± 350 B. P. from
the Lubbock Site, the Portales dates from Blackwater No. 1 of 6230 ±
150 B. P . and 6300 ± 150 B. P., and the 4950 ± 150 date for Archaic
materials in the jointed sand at Blackwater are used to make a regional
picture interpreted by Wendorf and Krieger as implying a rapid extinction of the large game animals, and as assigning a short life to the
Folsom "culture. " (2 ) The "Group B scheme" uses the most recent
dates from the Schar bauer Site, 8670 ± 600 B. P . (combined samples
M-389, M-390, M-391 ) for the white sand and 7100 ± 1000 B. P .
(Sample M-411) for the gray sand. This means that the arid periods
postulated for the gray and red sands would be post-Pleistocene.
Furthermore, this involves a late survival of extinct fauna, such as the
Capromeryx antelope. ( 3 ) "Group C" uses the oldest radiocarbon date
from the Scharbauer Site, 20,400 ± 900 B. P . (Sample L-347 ) obtained
on caliche pebbles from the gray sand. This allows a greater antiquity
for the Clovis period and a more gradual extinction of the large animals. For this scheme, Wendorf and Krieger accept the carbon-14 date
from the Plainview Site of 9800 ± 500 B. P . (Sample L-303 ) suggesting that the Lubbock Folsom dates may be too late.
Two other interpretations are possible. On the one hand, one can
discredit the dates, as Wormington has done ( 1957: 246 ) , since they
are apparently so conflicting. On the other hand, it is just possible that
some or all of the dates are essentially correct, but that the associations
are not valid. Assigning a radiocarbon date to associated materials or
to geological strata involves the assumption that you are positive about
the point of origin of the specimen dated. It is possible that more mix-

ARCHEOLOGY OF L LANO ESTACADO

5

Fig . 2 . Excavated Paleo-Ind ian sites on the Llano Estacado . !Midland Site is synonymous.
with the Scharbaur Ranch Site). Map drawn by Pat Allgood .

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ing of faunal remains and caliche pebbles occurred at the Scharbauer
Site than was possible to recognize under blowout conditions.
The San Jon Locality in northeastern New Mexico has produced a
Folsom fragment that was apparently weathering out of the same
layer that yielded a San Jon point (Roberts, 1942) . Since only one
San Jon point was found in the type site, and since it falls within the
range of the points from the carbonaceous silt stratum at Blackwater
Locality No. 1, Wormington ( 1957: 113 ) places the San Jon point in
the Portales Complex. Parallel flaked points of the Scottsbluff type
occur in the overlying Zone 2 ( Sand Canyon Formation) with modern
Bison bison. Wormington ( 195 7: 123 ) feels that these points are
probably intrusive since Scottsbluff points are usually associated with
extinct bison.
Milnesand, in eastern New Mexico, is a one period site representing
a bison kill. No definite species identification has been made since
skulls were not found in Sellards' excavations, although he was able
to demonstrate that the bison were larger than modern forms (Sellards,
1955: 336-344). The points were given the name of the type site, and
closely resemble the Plainview type, with which they were probably
contemporaneous.
The Plainview Site, located at the south margin of Running Water
Draw ·close to Plainview, Texas, is a bone bed of Bison antiquus that
has been exposed by commercial caliche operations. Since the bone
bed is at the foot of a bluff, it is postulated that a bison stampede over
the bluff resulted in this concentration of bones. Eighteen points were
found in association with the bison, as well as a scraper (Sellards,
et al., 1947) . Krieger did the analysis of the points, provisionally assigning them to a single type, Plainview .
PosT PALEo-INDIAN REMAINS

There is a noteworthy scarcity of literature dealing with post-Early
Man archeological remains; however, it is possible to say that these
materials are abundantly represented in the amateur collections, and
that these collections are the best sample of South Plains artifacts
available at this time. The South Plains Archaeological Society is currently making site cards and photographing material from each known
site, with some 35 sites recorded at this time. The file will reside in
the Texas Technological College Museum. It is hoped that in the near
future a survey of artifact types and localities can be made from the
information that is now being gathered.

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACADO

7

As of 1959, less than 15 articles dealing with individual finds fro~
various parts of this large area have appeared over the last 30 years.
Five of these articles describe sites on which some excavation has been
done. Holden (1938 ) worked at Blue Mountain Rockshelter close to
Odessa, where the relatively thin deposits produced an extinct horse
bone in the lowest level and artifacts that fall generally into the
Archaic and more recent range . Quinn and Holden ( 1949 ) report on
the excavation of two small rockshelters in Borden and Dawson counties; and Dick ( 1953) dug two rockshelters close to Tucumcari, New
Mexico. Wheat (1955 ) published on a 1939 W. P. A. project on
Johnson Creek where two small, apparently late sites (an unnamed
burial shelter and the Johnson Creek Site) were excavated.
Surface collections have been reported by Watts ( 1939 ) for Rich
Lake, by Jennings ( 1952) for Mound Lake, and by Pearce (1936)
for the Sand-hill area of Lamb and Bailey counties.
Descriptions of flint caches from the northern Llano Estacada have
been made by Green ( 1955 ) and Witte ( 1942) . Amateur collectors
found a cache of blades at Moore 's Lake which has not hitherto been
reported in print. The find of 38 blades was made in February, 1955.
Most of the blades are oval, fairly thick specimens, and some eight to•
ten of the blades have side-notches close to the base. Lengths range
from three to seven inches.
Burials are among the most common finds made by amateur archeologists, but surprisingly few such finds have been described in print.
Newcomb (1955 ) documents a historical burial excavated by Girl
Scouts in the Yellowhouse drainage; Wheat ( 1955) briefly notes two·
fragmentary burials in a shelter close to the Johnson Creek Site; and
Quinn and Holden (1949 ) report an infant burial in Moore's rockshelter.
Two historic burials are on display at the Museum in Lubbock, and
since neither has been published, and so little is known of this period,
a brief description of each is included here.
Civilian Conservation Corps workers reported a burial close to·
Lamesa in 1938. The individual is probably a female about 25 years
old. The body was tightly flexed and laid on the left side. In the grave
were seven iron bracelets, an incised bone tube, two bison bone
fleshers, six pentagonal blue glass beads of about Yz inch in diameter,
and a piece of% inch iron pipe some 20 inches long. In the abdominal
region there was a metal tablespoon and what may have been a long
metal knife.
In 1955, Mr. Claud McKaskle of Midland found a burial in a dry

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

shelter at the edge of the Caprock close to the town of Stanton. This
burial is in an exceptionally good state of preservation. The body of
this middle aged male had been placed under a pile of caliche pebbles,
and was wrapped in several layers of robes. The outer wrapping was a
buffalo robe; inside this was a deer skin robe; and inside this was a blue
and natural striped Navajo blanket of the sort made between 1800 and
1850. Next to the upper part of the body was a commercially woven
blue cloth that was decorated with white beads sewed about 1 Yz inches
apart along the border. The individual was wearing a bear claw necklace around his neck, rings on his right hand made of metal, and five
iron bracelets around the upper right arm. A silver concho buckle
was placed on his forehead . He was accompanied by his tools and
weapons, including a straight wooden bow some 3 Yz feet long, two
flint knives , an elbow pipe with a cane stem, a leather paint container,
a stick some seven inches long that was beveled at each end and decorated with incision, and a one-stop bone whistle. A perforated walnut
could have served as a button or decoration. At the foot of the burial
was a slightly charred wooden bowl some six inches in diameter and
21lz inches deep. This bowl contained numerous glass beads in blue,
red, and white. Apparently a tooled leather saddle had been placed
over the burial bundle; on one of the leather leg pieces it is possible to
see a rider on a horse tooled into the design. This burial is of interest for
the unusual state of preservation of perishable materials. One may
assume that it is a middle to late 19th century burial, probably predating 1880 when the Indians were effectively removed from the area.
HISTORIC INFORMATION

Bolton ( 1949 ) has traced Coronado's path after he left winter quarters at a New Mexico pueblo. He charts the route as crossing the northern Llano Estacado, following the Canadian River east, tuming south,
and coming to a series of deep canyons that he identifies as Tule and
Palo Duro canyons. If Bolton is correct, Coronado crossed the northern
part of the area under consideration in the present paper. Holden
(1944 ), using the Relacion del Suceso, routes Coronado's group across
the Southern Plains. In any event, the narrative of Coronado's expedition furnishes valuable information about life on these plains in 1541.
Four or five days after Coronado and his men crossed the Pecos and
began their march eastward, they began to meet buffalo; however, it
was four or five more day s before they reached the fantastically large
herds on the plains. At a place which Bolton locates just west of the

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACADO

9

New Mexico-Texas line close to the Canadian River breaks, and which
Holden located on Blackwater Draw, the Spaniards met a tribe called
the Querechos, so called because of their trade with the Queres pueblos
to the west. They lived off of the buffalo entirely:
With the skins they build their houses; with the skins they clothe and shoe themselves; from the skins they make ropes and also obtain wool. From the sinews they
make thread, with which they sew their clothing and likewise their tents. From the
bones they shape awls, and the dung they use for firewood, since there is no other
fuel in all that land. The bladders serve as jugs and drinking vessels. They sustain
themselves on the flesh of the animals, eating it slightly roasted . .. and sometimes
uncooked. Taking it in their teeth, they pull with one hand; with the other they
hold a large flint knife and cut off mouthfuls, swallowing it half chewed, like birds.
They eat raw fat without warming it, and drink the blood just as it comes from
the cattle . .. They have no other food. (Bolton, 1949: 246)

Castaneda, the chronicler of the Coronado expedition, continues his
description of the Querechos, saying they are a gentle people, skilled
in the use of signs, and trading extensively with the pueblos to the
west to whom they traded buffalo meat and hides for maize, pottery
and cloth. They lived in buffalo hide tepees, these mobile dwellings
being transported by dog travois.
The second group that the Spanish encountered were the Teyas,
who were enemies of the Querechos. They had a similar dependence
on the buffalo. They are reported to have been tall, fine looking people
who tatooed their faces. Tall white tents were their homes, and a
Spanish exploratory expedition reported taking three days to pass
through one of their large tepee villages in a canyon. The Teyas seem
to have had their main camps in the tributaries along the canyons,
sending hunting parties after buffalo. They used the wild vegetable
products that were available, frijoles (possibly mesquite beans?)
grapes, and plums are mentioned (Bolton, 1949: 263) . It is possible
that the large camp that the Spanish noted was an annual gathering
of the tribes, rather than a constant concentration of population.
The occupants of the South Plains during late historic times were
the Comanche, Kiowa, Kiowa-Apache, and the Lipan Apache. All of
these peoples were true horse nomads, and in some cases their place of
origin prior to the acquisition of the horse can be given with reasonable
accuracy. The Comanche were a Shoshone group from the Wyoming
area; the Lipan Apache were a branch of the Southwestern Athapascans; the Kiowa-Apache were another Apache group who attached
themselves to the Kiowa, taking over Kiowa culture to a large extent,
although retaining their Athapascan language. The history of the

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Kiowa is less well known although their linguistic affiliations appear
to lie to the west, with the Tanoan speaking Pueblo Indians.
CLASSIFICATION OF SITES

Site classification can be approached from several points of view.
For instance, if one considers the activities carried on at the site by the
aboriginal inhabitants, the major categories would be campsite, kill
site, and sites representing various specialized activities such as flint
mining. Since this was always a hunting-gathering area prior to the
advent of modern farming, these activities were practiced over several
thousand years, and to date we are unable to differentiate groups on
the basis of subsistence patterns. It is, however, probable that eventually we will be able to see differences in subsistence through time,
such as greater or lesser dependence on large game, small game, or
gathering.
A more meaningful classification of site types approaches the problem from the point of view of the archeologist, and seven broad categories result in this scheme.
( 1) Stratified sites, such as Lubbock Reservoir and Blackwater No. 1,
seem to be fairly rare. Both of these are in lacustrine deposits that
formed in lakes located in older stream beds, and are situated in favorable locations that have not been subjected to severe wind action.
(Z) Sites which represent a single occupation and which are at least
partially buried are important from the standpoint of archeological
interpretation, since materials are not mixed as they are in deflation
or blowout areas. Wheat's ( 1955 ) Johnson Creek locale is such a site.
This category is differentiated from that of stratified sites because it
is felt that sites like Lubbock Reservoir are rare and produce a specialized form of information about a sequence while often not supplying
as complete an artifact assemblage and cultural context as some single
occupation sites that have not been subjected to deflation conditions.
( 3 ) Deflation basins which contain modern playa lakes, and also
the shallower basins that hold no water at the present time, seem to
have been camping centers throughout the period of human occupation.
Most of these remains have been surface finds exposed by wind action,
and it is common to find Clovis, Folsom, Midland, and Plainview
points on the same surface as Pueblo IV pottery. There is the possibility of obtaining stratigraphic information at some of the lakes; but this
would undoubtedly entail a large excavation that would yield only a
few artifacts.

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO EST ACADO

11

( 4) Blowout sites are numerous in the sand dunes that blanket the
western and southern part of the area. These blowouts are the result of
local wind action, as are the deflation basins; but the two categories
are differentiated because the deflation basins or playa lakes are larger
and one is more likely to find artifacts weathering out of their primary
position in the playas than in the sand dune blowouts. Water would
seem to have been a problem to people camping in the dunes. We
know that the water table was periodically high, producing small
lakes ; also, it is possible to dig for water, and wells may have been a
major water source, as indicated by the wells in the post-Portales
period at the Blackwater Locality (Evans, 1951: 1-9). The blowout
sites show a mixture of materials of all ages on the surface.
( 5 ) Rockshelters are found at the east edge of the cap rock where
wind and water erosion have carved recesses in the exposed vertical
walls. Many of these shelters contain pictographs and some are so
shaped as to allow a shallow accumulation of fill. Burials are often
found in these localities. Shallow shelters also occur on the plains at
locations where a vertical escarpment has formed; for example, there
are small shelters in the bluff that forms the west side of Yellow Lake
and also in the canyon walls of some of the drainages toward the
eastern part of the plains where the valleys tend to become better
defined. Preservation of perishable materials sometimes occurs in
these shelters.
(6) Isolated burials are found throughout the area, often located in
shelters or along the edge of promontories. It may be that burials are
more often associated with occupational refuse than our present information indicates, since most investigations have tended to ignore data
that pertain to anything except the removal of the skeleton and accompanying artifacts.
( 7) Miscellaneous sites. This category includes several types of sites
-such as caches of raw flint or blades, or flint mines-that are rare in
occurrence, but worth differentiating as a separate category.
SPECIAL FIELD PROBLEMS

The wind is an integral part of the west Texas scene. The result of
wind action is one of the major problems facing field workers in the
region, and it creates problems in interpretation that are often difficult
to unravel. To begin with, it is necessary to have an understanding of
some of the things that the wind is capable of doing. Wind can uncover
objects, and it can cover them up again. It can move objects, even

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

relatively large ones, laterally across an active dune surface. In the
special situation known as a blowout, all objects heavier than sand are
let down on the surface of the deflation area, while the smaller sand
particles are blown out from under them.
It will readily be apparent that if wind action can alter in so many
ways the context in which artifacts are found, the interpretation of
things found under these conditions must proceed with caution. One
must be able to recognize deflation areas so as to appreciate the limitations imposed. A blowout collection is sure to be a mixed one.
While many localities show mixed collections, and therefore the
archeological techniques of studying stratigraphic sequence and association are useless, it is still possible to extract valuable information on
sequence by using auxiliary methods. As an example, the Scharbauer
Site at Midland had all of the unfortunate aspects of a blowout site,
and yet, because of the importance of the human skeletal material,
the investigators applied other tests of antiquity. Thus the chemical
tests run on bone established a rough scale of age, and a careful analysis of the geologic situation gave further clues as to the ordering of
materials.
In regard to geologic analysis, it is here that I feel the opinion of an
expert is essential. The geology of the dune area , as well as that of the
various deflation basins, is not well understood. The few published
reports on the ages and climatic significance of the different sands and
clays are out of date, according to recent field studies. For instance, the
Judkins red sand figures prominently in the literature as a late Pleistocene feature; however, it has recently been suggested that much of the
sand that has been called Judkins is not late Pleistocene at all (F. E.
Green, ms. ) . Incidentally, the fact that a sand is colored red is not a
sure test of its antiquity; there are several mechanisms by which sand
can become red, and some of these mechanisms are not well understood.
STATUS OF ARCHEOLOGY ON THE LLANO EST ACADO

It has been the assumption of many professionals and amateurs that
there was a neatly compartmentalized sequence which ran Clovis,
Folsom, Plainview, Portales, undifferentiated Archaic, and Recent. In
general, this sequence seems to be valid; however, certain caution
should be sounded. A careful examination of the published photographs
and drawings for any one established type shows a range of point
forms. This is in keeping with the concept of a type as a population

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACADO

13

defined by a range of characteristics, rather than individual specimens
which conform to an ideal set of characteristics. It is expectable that
there will be some overlapping of two types when both are determined
by similar technical traditions. Technical traditions typically have a
long life, often being employed in making several artifact types; for
instance, basal fluting, basal grinding, and parallel flaking are all
techniques that have been used in a variety of point types. Convergence
of the characteristics that distinguish one type from another is theoretically possible at widely differing points in time and space, if the
same technical traditions are used in both. For this reason it may be
difficult to assign a particular specimen to a type on formal grounds
alone.
Several dating techniques have been employed in this area. Earliest
ideas were based on stratigraphic sequence of geological deposits,
faunal remains and point types. The Blackwater Locality has been the
main reference point for the area, since the complete sequence has
been known there since the 1930's. Now that commercial gravel operations have almost destroyed that locality, the sister site of Lubbock
Reservoir will undoubtedly become the pivotal point, as it is still possible to obtain further information there. Correlations of climatic
events and point types in the South Plains with those outside the region
have also influenced the formulation of estimated dates. Radiocarbon
dates have tended to substantiate the sequence as previously established. The Plainview date of 9800 ± 500 is uncomfortably close to
the Lubbock Folsom dates of 9700 ± 450 and 9833 ± 350; however,
the recently published date from Lindenmeier of 10,780 ± 375 years
ago indicates that the Lubbock Folsom is close to the end of the Folsom
period (Haynes and Agogino, 1960) . Radiocarbon dates from the
Scharbauer Site are difficult to interpret, but the rest of the dates from
the Llano Estacada seem to form a reasonable framework.
The basis of most correlations has been an interpretation of geologic
deposits in ecological and climatological terms, so that it is actually
climatic reconstructions that are being compared, not actual deposits.
This is an important distinction, because a considerable margin of
error is possible in dating by climatic correlation. First, it is possible
to be mistaken in the climatic reconstruction, if the data are drawn
from too small an area. For instance, at the present time it is possible
to find ecological conditions that vary from true bog to extensive dunes
within the area under consideration, so that a climatic reconstruction
based on one site could be misleading. Second, once the climatic reconstruction has been accomplished, there is still the problem of assigning

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the local climatic sequence to a regional or even continental sequence
of climatic events. Unfortunately, there was more than one time in
late Pleistocene and Recent climatic history when there was a dry
interval followed by a more moist period. More refined information is
required, such as is provided by pollen percentages, composition of the
invertebrate population, absolute dating, and so forth.
Future orientation of work should include more detailed studies
from allied sciences. Problems of a geologic nature include constructing
a more complete framework of geologic events and tying together the
different types of information that are now available, such as correlating playa deposits with sand sequences. A firmer grasp of what is
implied in ecological and climatic reconstruction is badly needed, inasmuch as this is the backbone of much Early Man research, not only
on the South Plains but all over the New World. Paleobotanists,
paleontologists, and the many specialists in the emerging techniques
of dating are essential in providing the complete picture.
While projectile points are the accepted yardstick of sequential
change, complete assemblages of tools should certainly be collected,
reported and studied in detail. The establishment of sequences has
been the first concern of all archeology, but this is only the skeletal
frame work, and fuller information is needed to allow reconstruction
of past history, P?St life conditions, and a more exact interpretation of
how the people lived. This information will come only with the collection of all available material and information from each site.
The cultural interrelationships between the South Plains and adjacent areas will be an increasingly important problem as studies progress. It is known that Southwestern pottery, primarily of late Pueblo
III, Pueblo IV, and historic types, is common in South Plains campsites.
This pottery originated along the entire eastern boundary of the
Southwest, since northern Rio Grande wares and southern New
Mexico types are represented. There is some difference in the distribution of these pottery types on the plains as regards place of origin,
but the significance of this distribution is not yet understood.
It will be more difficult to chart the trade relationships of South
Plains people with groups to the north, east and south, since many of
these latter groups lacked pottery and other easily identifiable traits.
However, studies of artifact types and distinctive raw materials will
be useful in this regard.
Intemal relationships within the South Plains will be of interest
because the area is unusual in having such a uniform environment,

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO ESTACAOO

15

unbroken by barriers of any sort to prevent widespread movements.
It is unlikely that there were widely differing cultures within the area
at any one time, thanks to this similarity of environment. In fact, the
impression at the present limited state of knowledge is that of a basic
similarity of culture through time as well as through space. Where
areal differences do occur, they probably indicate the range of variability that is possible on a relatively homogenous cultural base, giving
due consideration to separate culture histories and to the nearness of
external influences.
With the exception of the Canadian River groups who practiced
agriculture for a short time, it is unlikely that agriculture was ever a
South Plains trait. It is theoretically possible for people to farm in the
sand hills and some of the valleys without a plow; however, there is
no evidence of agriculture either archeologically or from the Spanish
narratives, and certainly there were no sedentary groups who possessed
the other elements usually associated with an agricultural existence,
such as permanent villages or locally made pottery. It is well known
that the sod areas of heavy grass are virtually impossible to farm without the use of an iron plow; however, the possibility of an elementary
sort of agriculture in sandy areas, whereby the planted crops were
left untended to be gathered in the fall, should not be overlooked.
Gourds, squash, and amaranth are possible crops for this sort of agriculture. Rainfall would be a limiting factor; however, crops such as
cotton, sorghum grains, and corn are now grown without irrigation
in this area.
The brief but valuable descriptions of 16th century and early 17th
century plains groups provided by the chronicles of the Coronado
expedition and later Spanish explorers should be used as guides in
projecting ethnographic information back into archeological times.
Some of the subjects that are of particular significance in the use of
such an approach are the trading patterns between the Querechos and
the Rio Grande Pueblos, the subsistence patterns that show a major
dependence on the buffalo with minor use of other animal and plant
food, and the settlement pattern in which the bulk of the population
was concentrated in the more favorable valleys from which hunting
parties were sent forth. It might be possible to reconstruct a fairly
accurate picture of the annual cycle of activities of the prehistoric
peoples of the South Plains by using both historical data and floralfauna information in the interpretation of archeological evidence.

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

REFERENCES CITED
Bolton, Herbert E.
1949. Coronado, Knight of the Pueblos and Plains. University of New Mexico
Press.
Campbell, T . N.
1961. A list of Radiocarbon Dates from Archeological Sites in Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959), pp. 311-320.
Dick, Herbert W.
1953. Two Rock Shelters near Tucumcari, New Mexico. River Basin Surveys
Papers, No. 5, Pt. I. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 154.
Evans, Glen L .
1951. Prehistoric Wells in Eastem New Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 17,
No. 1, pp. 1-9.
Green, F . E.
ms.
Geology and Stratigraphy of the Sand Hills of the Southem High Plains.
Green, J. H.
1955. Some Flint Caches, the Alibates Quarry, and a Stone Pestle. PanhandlePlains Historical Review, Vol. 28, pp. 78-81.
Haynes, Vance, and George Agogino
1960. Geological Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date from the Lindenmeier
Site. Denver Museum of Natural History, Proceedings, No. 9.
Holden, W. C.
1938. Blue Mountain Rock Shelter. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 208-221.
1944. Coronado's Route Across . the Staked Plains. West Texas Historical Association Yearbook, Vol. XX, pp. 3-20.
Jennings, Noyce
1952. The Mound Lake Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 309-310.
Krieger, Alex D.
1956. Notes and News: Early Man. American Antiquity, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp.
105-107.
1957. Notes and News: Early Man. American Antiquity, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp.
321-323.
Libby, Willard F.
1955. Radiocarbon Dating. The University of Chicago Press. Second Edition.
Lobeck, A . K.
1922. Physiographic Diagram of the United States, Wisconsin Geographical
Press.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1955. An Historic Burial from Yellowhouse Canyon, Lubbock County. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, pp. 186-199.
Pearce, William M .
1936. A Survey of the Sand-hill Camp Sites of Lamb and Bailey Counties.

ARCHEOLOGY OF LLANO EST ACADO

17

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 8,
pp. 184-186.
Quinn, Jean, and Jane Holden
1949. Caves and Shelters in Dawson and Borden Counties. Bulletin of the T exas
Archeological and, Paleontological Society, Vol. 20, pp. 115-1 31.
Roberts, Frank H . H., Jr.
1942. Archeological and Geological Investigations in the San Jon District,
Eastern New Mexico. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections. Vol. 103,
No.4.
Sellards, H. E.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. The University of Texas
Press.
1955. Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Milnesand, New Mexico.
American Antiquity, Vol. 20, No.4, pp. 336-344.
Sellards, E. H ., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade
1947. Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas (With a
Description of the Artifacts by Alex D. Krieger ). Bulletin of the Geological
Society of America, Vol. 58, pp. 927-954.
Watts, W . C.
1939. Lake Sites of the South Plains of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society, Vol. 11 , pp. 77-91.
Wendorf, Fred, Alex D. Krieger, Claude C. Albritton, and T . D. Stewart
1955. The Midland Discovery. The University of Texas Press.
Wendorf, Fred, and Alex rD. Kriger
1959. New Light on the Midland Discovery. American Antiquity, Vol. 25, No. 1,
pp. 66-78.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1955. Two Archeological Sites near Lubbock, Texas. Panhandle-Plains Historical
Review, Vol. 28, pp. 71-77.
Witte, Adolph
1942. Certain Caches of Flint from the North Texas Area. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 14, pp. 72-76.
Wormington, H. M.
1957. Ancient Man in North America. Denver Museum of Natural History.
Fourth Edition.
1816 C Street
Lincoln, Nebraska

