BULLETIN OF THE TEXAS
ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Vol. 35 I Published by the Society I Austin, Texas, 1964

·

Offtce of the State Areheo!og!

.·~~·;. . . ._.___ Library

~-.,-~4!o-: .;'• -~ · · · : - ~ .

'

"

__ -:S
. ,(

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
(Formerly Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society)
The Society was organized and chartered in pursuit of a literary and scientific
undertaking; for the study of history, prehistory, and the major artifacts of man and
the fossils representing the past floras and faunas of Texas; for the encouragement
of the proper collection and preservation of such artifacts and fossils in museums
and their study and classification and the publication of the results of researches
incident thereto.
The Bulletin is published annually for distribution to members of the Society.
Opinions expressed herein are those of the writers, and do not necessarily represent
the views of the society or the editorial staff.

Officers of the Society for 1964
President: T. N. CAMPBELL (Austin)
President Emeritus: CYRUS N. R,w (Abilene)
Active Vice-President: JAMES H. WoRD (Floydada)
Secretary-Treasurer: DoRRIS L. 0LDS (Austin)
Editor of Publications: DEE ANN STORY (Austin)
Directors (in addition to the above): CECIL A. CALHOUN (Port Lavaca), R. K. HARRIS
(Dallas), W. C. HoLDEN (Lubbock), EDWARD B. JELKS (Austin), IsABELLE R.
LoBDELL (Fort Worth), and E. A. WHITE (El Paso).
Trustees: 0. L. SrMs (San Angelo), MARDITH K. ScHUETZ (San Antonio), and
R. B. WoRTHINGTON (Houston).
Regional Vice-Presidents: CHARLES W. BANDY (Brownfield), JAy C. BLAINE
(Richardson), CHARLES N. BoLLICH (Beaumont), ADA BRANCH (Victoria),
W. A. DAVIS (Jasper), JoHN HENDRICK (El Paso), ELBERT D. HELM (Fort
Worth), C. H. WEBB (Shreveport, La.), and DoN R. WILLIAMS (San Marcos).

Membership and Publications
Active and Institutional Memberships in the Society are $5.00 per year. The
Society also offers Contributing Annual Membership at $25.00 and Life Membership
at $100.00. All members of the Society receive the Bulletin, which is published
annually, and Texas Archeology, a newsletter that is sent out about four times a
year. Back issues of the Bulletin that are still in print may be obtained at $5.00
per volume.
Address orders for publications and membership applications to Secretary-Treasurer, Texas Archeological Society, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Austin, Texas 78712. The mailing address of the Editor of Publications is
the same.

Cover design by Mark L. Parsons; taken from petroglyph panel at the Verbena
Site, Garza County, Texas.

DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, I 991

BULLETIN

of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Editor: Dee Ann Story ,
Assistant Editors:
Lathel F. Duffield
Curtis D . Tunnell

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1964

Office of the ~tate Archeologist J·
"" . .. ......

~;.1

--

..._____ Library

I

Table of Contents
Artic(es
Comments on the Archeology of the Llano Estacada
By Jane Holden Kelley .

1

Three Panhandle Aspect Sites at Sanford Reservoir,
Hutchinson County, Texas
By Lathel F. Duffield .

19

Two Burials from the Jim Arnold Site in Northwest Texas
By Curtis D. Tunnell .

83

Indian Skeletal Material from the Jim Arnold Site
By Thomas W. McKern

95

The Garza Site: A Neo-American Campsite Near Post, Texas
By Frank A. Runkles .

101

TheW. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian Burial in Fisher
County, Texas
By Cyrus N. Ray and Edward B. Jelks .

127

Excavations at the Terri and Lightfoot Sites, Proctor
Reservoir, Comanche County, Texas
By Elton R. Prewitt

143

West Indian Seal Remains from Two Historic Sites in
Coastal South Texas
By Gerald G. Raun

189

A Rockport Black-on-Gray Vessel from the Vicinity of
Corpus Christi, Texas
By W. S. Fitzpatrick, Joan Fitzpatrick, and T. N.
Campbell .

193

A Polychrome Vessel from the Texas Coastal Bend
By C. A. Calhoun .

205

The Zanonian Springs Site: An Archaic-Nee-American
Site in McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Texas
By W. A. Davis and Helen Ruth Horn

213

Obituary
Gustav Edmund Cranz, Jr. ( 1908-1963 )

251

Book Reviews
Forrester, Robert E., The Ham Creek Site
By Dorris L. Olds .

253

Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol. 1
By Dorris L. Olds .

254

Hester, James J., Early Navajo Migrations and
Acculturation in the Southwest
By Richard E. Ross .

256

Dutton, Bertha P., Sun Father's Way, The Kiva Murals
of Kuaua
By William W. Newcomb .

257

Two Burials From the Jim Arnold Site
in Northwest Texas
CURTIS D. TUNNELL
ABSTRACT
Two human burials were removed from the edge of a gravel pit in Hall County,
Texas after they had been exposed and heavily disturbed by machinery. Associated
artifacts were few, but included bone awls and awl blanks made from split deer
metapodials, fresh water mussel shells, and a small flint knife. Since none of these
specimens is distinctive, the exact chronological placement of these burials is not
possible at the present time.

INTRODUCTION

On August 29, 1962, a county highway crew encountered human
bones in a gravel pit on the Jim Arnold property in southwestern Hall
County. This discovery was called to the attention of the Texas Memorial Museum, and subsequently the author investigated the site
(Texas Memorial Museum Accession No. 1853, and University of
Texas Archeological Site No. 41 HL 2) .
Hall County lies just below the eastern escarpment of the Llano
Estacada and is characterized by heavily eroded topography drained
by the upper forks of the Red and Pease rivers. Vegetation is rather
sparse, being composed primarily of mesquite on the flats and juniper
in the canyons, with short range grasses and scattered clumps of cactus
appearing throughout the area. The fauna and flora are typical of the
Kansan biotic province (Blair, 195 0: 109-112) .
The gravel pit in which the bones were discovered is situated near
Turkey, Texas, on a low hill just south of Kent Creek, a spring-fed
tributary of Pease River. The hill is composed of commercially valuable gravel capped with three to four feet of brown sandy topsoil. At
the time of the burials' discovery, a pit about 100 feet long (northsouth), 50 feet wide, and eight to 12 feet deep had been cut into the
north slope of the hill. Scraps of human bones were scattered along
the south wall of the gravel pit, and, when cleared, the south profile
revealed outlines of two graves extending down into the gravel (Fig. 2).
During the first day of investigation, most of an adult cranium
(Burial 1) and parts of two postcranial skeletons were collected from

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the surface. On the following day both of these graves were excavated.
The contents of one had been completely removed by the gravel operations, but the other (Burial 2 ) produced an adult cranium, upper
postcranial skeleton, and 10 associated artifacts (Fig. 1). A careful
examination of the slumped gravel beneath the pit of Burial1 produced
four artifacts and additional fragments of that skeleton.
ZONE DESCRIPTION

Two geologic zones were exposed in the side of the gravel pit. Zone I
was a very compact sand and gravel bed which formed the low hills
bordering Kent Creek. The stream-rolled gravels of Zone I were as
much as 0.4 feet in diameter, and they were rather heavily coated and
cemented with caliche. This zone, which was tan to light brown in
color, contained some caliche nodules, but it was sterile of cultural

J IM ARNOLD SITE
4 1 HL 2
T EXAS

2

ooo~~FJ»»»~

9ravet

2

0

N

A = bo ne ow l s
B = m u ssel s h el l s
C = fli n t knif e

f. ee f
Fig . 1. General location of site and plan of Burial 2 .

85

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

debris. The depth of Zone I was not determined. The two burial pits
extended from one to two feet down into the top of this gravel layer
(Fig. 2 ) .
Zone II, a very compact sandy soil, capped Zone I in a layer from
two to four feet thick (Fig. 2 ) . This dark brown soil contained scattered
flint flakes, broken animal bones, and tiny fragments of charcoal, but
no concentrations of these materials were found. The grave outlines
did not extend up into this zone, indicating that the graves must have
been dug before, or soon after, this soil began to accumulate. Local
collectors are said to have found both arrow and dart points on the
surface of this hill in the vicinity of the burials. Assorted fragments
of chipped stone tools and grinding stones were picked up on the surface above the burials at the time of the excavation, and during a later
visit to the site expanding stem dart points were found .

DESCRIPTION OF THE BURIALS
BuRIAL

1

The south portion of this grave was visible in the south wall of the
gravel pit (Fig. 2 ) . The outline was about 4.5 feet long (east-west) ,
1.0 foot to 1.5 feet deep, and extended from 0.5 foot to 1.0 foot back
into the bank. All of the artifacts and skeletal material had been dislodged from the grave by machinery, but most of a cranium, other
skeletal fragments, and four bone artifacts were collected from loose
talus fill beneath the remaining grave outline. The grave fill (a mixture
of Zones I and II was a compact soil, light brown in color, sandy in
texture, containing numerous small gravels and some caliche nodules.
The grave had been dug down into Zone I from at or near the base of
Zone II. Zone II dipped down slightly into the grave pit at the east
end. T he bottom of the grave was uneven, sloping downward for several inches toward the west end. The position and orientation of the
skeleton and the artifacts could not be determined.
Two complete bone awls and two fragments were found in the disturbed talus accumulation below Burial I (Fig. 4, E-H) . The two complete specimens are made from the outside (lateral) posterior edges of
a right and left deer metapodial. Both specimens are smoothed on all
edges and taper to highly polished points. These two implements, and
the six similar bone artifacts from Burial 2, were made by splitting
deer metapodials into four longitudinal splinters of approximately
equal size. The distal end of each splinter was ground and polished into

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

w

~
(f)

0
_j

0

z

C\J
_j

I

0::

<( '¢

~
J

.,

·a..
D

·;:
::>

...
..c
0

c

-~
~
.,.,

g

~.,
>
...;

"'

;;::

3

~
<I>

!
w

a sharp point while the proximal end, showing traces of the articular
surface, was left essentially unaltered ( Fig. 3, A ).

87

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

Dimensions:
Length
Basal width
Basal thickness
Average shaft width
Average shaft thickness

Fig. 4
Specimen E
15.3 em.
1.7 em.
9mm.
1.1 em.
7mm.

Fig. 4
Specimen F
12.6 em.
1.3 em.
6mm.
1.1 em.
5mm.

A basa l fragment of a third bone awl (Fig. 4, G ) is made from an
unidentified mammal bone sliver. It is 1.4 em. wide, 4 mm. thick and
has a smooth hole 3 mm. in diameter drilled through it centrally 9 mm.
above the base. This fragment is well smoothed and parallel striations
run lengthwise on both faces.
A bone awl tip is the other artifact from Burial 1. This thin sliver
of mammal bone (Fig. 4, H ) is well polished and finely pointed on
one end. Its maximum width is 8 mm., and the thickness averages
3 mm. The dimensions and general surface finish of this artifact
indicate that it may have been part of the same implement represented
by the basal fragment described above.
BuRIAL

2

The outline of this grave was clearly visible in the south wall of the
gravel pit just east of Burial 1. The grave pits were separated by only
about 1.0 foot of undisturbed gravel (Fig. 2 ). The outline was about
5.5 feet long (east·west ), from 1.0 foot to 2.0 feet deep, ar.d extended
back into the wall about 2.5 feet . The cranium, mandible, and articulated vertebrae and ribs of an adult skeleton were exposed, recorded,
and removed from this pit. The machinery had scattered most of the
arms and lower portion of the burial, fragments of which were recovered from the disturbed earth. The in situ portions of the skeleton were
lying on the right side with the head toward the west and facing southeast (Fig. 1 ). The position of the limbs could not be determined. On
the floor of the grave, just to the west of the cranium, were the following artifacts: three bone awls, three bone awl blanks, three mussel
shells (one with a serrated edge), and one small flint knife (Fig. 1).
The grave fill was the same as in Burial 1. It is interesting to note
that, as in Burial 1, Zone II extended down into the grave outline
several inches on the east end. There was also several square feet of
unused space in this part of the grave. It is possible that perishable
material such as basketry, leather, or wood was put into this portion

88

TEXAS ARCH EOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

8

1

I

I

2

,

D

l

~

s

F

E

I

I

I

I

6

7

6

9

G·

10

CM
Fig . 3 . Bone Artifacts. A, Deer melapodial showing section (solid line) used for manufacturing awls . B, D, F, Awl blanks associated with Burial 2 . C, E, G, Awls associated with
Bu rial 2 .

of the grave and its deterioration left a depression in the grave fill.
This grave was dug into Zon e I from the base of Zon e II.

89

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

The artifacts described below were found in situ just west of the
cranium in Burial 2 (Fig. 1). Two complete bone awls and one broken
specimen are made from split deer metapodials as described for the
Burial 1 specimens (Fig. 3, C, E, G ). Two of these are made from the
inside (medial ) and outside posterior edges of a right metapodial and
the other is an inside anterior left fragment. Each specimen is finely
pointed on the distal end and the shafts are well smoothed. The bases
of these awls are not as well smoothed as the bases of those from
Burial 1. The surfaces of these implements are irregularly pitted by
the solution action of ground water.

Dimensions:
Length
Basal width
Basal thickness
Average shaft width
Average shaft thickness

Fig. 3
Fig. 3
SpecimenE
Specimen G
18.2 em.
16.3 em.
(incomplete )
1.7 em.
---- - ------9mm.
9mm.
9mm.
7mm.
6mm.

Fig. 3
Specimen C
9.1 em.
1.6 em.
8mm.
1.0 em.
7mm.

Three bone awl blanks (Fig. 3, B, D , F ) were lying with the bone
awls described above. These are long, thin, slivers of a left deer metapodia!. One is an outside anterior edge, one an outside posterior edge,
and the other is an inside anterior sliver. The surfaces of these specimens are etched by ground water, but they are otherwise unaltered.

Dimensions:
Length
Basal width
Basal thickness
Average shaft width
Average shaft thickness

Fig. 3
Fig. 3
Specimen F Specimen D
19.2 em.
19.9 em.
1.6 em.
1.7 em.
1.0 em.
1.2 em.
1.1 em.
9mm.
7mm.
7mm.

Fig. 3
Specimen B
21.7 em.
1.7 em.
8mm.
1.1 em.
8mm.

Three valves of fre sh water mussels were associated with Burial 2
(Fig. 4, A, B, D ) . There are two right valves and one left valve, all
from different individuals. The two smaller shells are unworked, but
the larger shell has seven small V-shaped notches cut into the lower
ventral edge. These notches, spaced at 3 mm. intervals, are about 1 mm.
in depth.

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c
A

H

D

F

E
I

l

1

2

I

I

'

<f

.s

t
6

7

1- I
8
9

G

r
10

CM
Fig . 4 . Shell, Stone, and Bone Arlifacts . A, B, Unworked mussel shells associated with
Burial 2. C, Knife associaled with Burial 2 . D, Worked mussel shell associated with Burial 2 .
E-H, Awls associaled with Burial 1.

The other associated object is a small knife (Fig. 4, C) made from
red-orange Quitaque flint-a distinctive material which outcrops a
few miles to the west along the escarpment of the Llano Estacado. This
implement is made from a long narrow flake which has been bifacially

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

91

chipped along both of the long parallel edges. The base of the knife
is composed of the faceted striking platform of the flake. The tip of the
knife is thin , roughly pointed, and bifacially sharpened. This specimen
is 4.5 em. long, 2.0 em. wide, and 8 mm. thick.
COMMENTS AND COMPARISONS

The two burials from the Jim Arnold Site are quite similar, and
they reflect an interesting mortuary custom. Each of the two individuals was placed in a shallow grave which was considerably larger than
was required to accommodate the body. The excess space may have
been occupied by perishable offerings of one sort or another, but no
traces of such materials were found. Burial 1, a young woman in her
early twenties, and Burial 2, a man in his middle thirties (see article
by Thomas W. McKern in this volume), were both accompanied by
several bone awls made from split deer metapodials. It seems there
was no sexual distinction where these particular objects were concerned. In addition, Burial 2 contained bone awl blanks, mussel shells,
and a flake knife.
The absence of diagnostic artifacts, such as projectile points, and
datable radiocarbon material makes it impossible, at the present time,
to determine the chronological placement of the burials at the Jim
Arnold site. In fact, it is not even known what broad cultural stage
they represent. This immediate area is almost completely unkown
archeologically, and literature on the entire Texas panhandle is quite
limited.
A search of the archeological literature from northwestern Texas,
western Oklahoma, southwestern Kansas, and eastern New Mexico
failed to produce evidence of a comparable cluster of burial traitslarge, shallow grave pits containing single skeletons of either sex accompanied by bone awls, mussel shells, and flake knives. Awls similar
to those found with these burials are reported occasionally in Texas
in the Antelope Creek Focus ( Studer, 1934: Pl. 16; Watson, 1950:
Pl. 2, G; Duffield, 1964: Fig. 18, B-C ) ; the Henrietta Focus (Krieger,
1946: Pl. 8, J-L); the Kyle Site (Jelks, 1962: Fig. 25, A); in Oklahoma
at the Lee II Site (Pillaert, 1962: Pl. 27, 13); at various sites in Kansas
(Wedel, 1959: Fig. 46, A; Pl. 32, J-L; Pl. 59, E; Pl. 70, M); and at
Pecos Pueblo (Kidder, 1932: Figs. 174, 175) in New Mexico. But they
neither occur very commonly nor are they associated with burials.
Wedel does report (1959: 472, 521 ) mussel shells in burials in a few
instances. All of these occurrences of somewhat similar artifacts are
in cultural components of the Neo-American stage, but they are so

92

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

far removed from the Jim Arnold Site and so varied in context that
the similarities may well be fortuitous. I suspect, for example, that
deer metapodials lend themselves readily to the manufacture of sturdy
awls and were widely used for that purpose.
The dark sandy soil (Zone II) which had accumulated to a depth
of several feet above the graves indicates they are of some antiquity,
but this could mean that they might range anywhere between several
hundred and several thousand years. Fragments of flint artifacts, bison
bones, and other bits of cultural debris are present throughout Zone II,
and a test of this portion of the site might give some clues to the age
of the interments that lie beneath this soil. The dart points found on
the surface of the site could indicate that an Archaic occupation is
present in Zone II.
Unfortunately, we will have to await future work in the area and
additional work at the Jim Arnold Site to learn the age of these burials
and if they represent a widespread burial custom.
The author wishes to acknowledge the cooperation of the following
local people: Jim Arnold, the landowner, E. L. Hill, Dan Gibson, Dale
Garner, Eugene Ferguson, who reported the discovery, and Mr. and
Mrs. Curtis Tunnell who assisted in the excavation. Figures 3, A and
4, C were drawn by Hal Story of the Texas Memorial Museum.
REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1,
pp. 93-117.
Duffield, Lathe! F.
1964. Three Panhandle Asp ect Sites at Sanford Reservoir, Hutchinson County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35 (this issue ) .
Jelks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Kidder, Alfred V.
1932. The Artifacts of Pecos. The Robert S. Peabody Foundation for Archaeology, Papers of the Southwestern Expedition, No.6.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. University of Texas
Publication No. 4640.
Pillaert, Elizabeth
1962. Test Excavation at the Lee II Site, Gv-4, Garvin County, Oklahoma.
Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 10, pp. 79-101.

BURIALS FROM JIM ARNOLD SITE

93

Studer, Floyd V.
1934. Texas Panhandle Culture Ruin No. 55. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 6, pp. 80-96.
Watson, Virginia
1950. The Optima Focus of the Panhandle Aspect: Description and Analysis.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 21,
pp. 7-68.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin, No. 174.
Texas Memorial Museum
Austin, Texas

