DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VoLUME

36

Editor: Dee Ann Story
Assistant Editors :
Harry J. Shafer
Marsha F . Jackson

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1965

Table of Contents
Articles
Anderson's Mill ( 41 TV 130 ): A Historic Site in Travis
County, Texas
By E. Paul Durrenberger

1

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas
By Daymond D . Crawford .

71

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas
By Frank H. Watt .

99

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave, Bosque
County, Texas
By Dorris L. Olds

111

Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site ( 41 GV 5 ),
Galveston County, Texas
By L. E. Aten .

153

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas
By Dee Ann Story .

163

The Bipolar Flaking Technique in Texas and New Mexico
By Kenneth H. Honea .

259

A Guide to the Drafting of Archeological Maps
By Vaughn M . Bryant, Jr. and Robert K. Holz

269

A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas
By R. K. Harris, In us Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine,
and Jerrylee Blaine

287

Book Reviews
Cosgrove, Mr. and Mrs., The Cosgrove Report.
By Curtis Tunnell .

365

Nowothny, Karl A. , Tlacuilolli: Die mexikanischen Bilderhandschriften Stil und I nhalt mit einem Katalog der
Codex-Borgie-Gruppe
By John A. Graham

366

A Preliminary Archeological and
Documentary Study of the
Womack Site, Lamar
County, Texas
R. K. HARRIS, INUS MARIE HARRIS, JAY C. BLAINE, AND
JERRYLEE BLAINE

ABS1RACT
Intermittently over the past 35 or so years, amateur and professional archeologists
have been collecting artifacts and other scientifically valuable data from the Womack
Site, an important historic Indian village on the Red River, Lamar County, Texas.
This paper, the first to report in any detail on the site, is concerned exclusively with
an ana lysis of those artifacts and documents which are most useful in placing the
Womack Site in a meaningful historic context. The findings indicate that it can be
identified as a component of the Norteno Focus, very probably being the Quidehais
(Kichai ) village contacted by Du Rivage in 1719. If correct, this interpretation is
contrary to the widely held view that Wichita-speaking Indians did not come south
to the Red River until the middle 1740's.

IN1RODUCTION
The Womack Site lies in the northern part of Lamar County, Texas,
on a high bluff overlooking the Red River. It consists of midden debris,
burials, and probable house remains buried in a sandy layer which
appears to average about 18 inches thick. Below this zone is a red clay
stratum which is devoid of occupational refuse but does occasionally
preserve the outline of certain structural features. Covering an area
of about 30 acres, most of the site has been under cultivation for anumber of years, and some parts are considerably eroded. The uncultivated portions of the site support a fairly luxurious growth of cedar,
bois d'arc, persimmon, ash, willow, hackberry, dogwood, pecan, several species of oak, hickory, sycamore, and grass, and the wild Cherokee rose. A grove of tall, slim, straight cedars, which could well have
furnished poles for house construction, grows near the northern edge
of the site. More than ample water for the domestic needs of the villagers could have been obtained from the Red River, or from the numerous springs that outcrop at the base of the bluff.
Despite the archeological importance of the Womack Site, it has

288

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

never been intensively excavated. In the late summer of 1931, personnel from the Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, made limited tests which uncovered eight burials and sampled
some of the midden refuse (Krieger, 1946: 164; notes on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas).
The remainder of the investigations at the site have been carried out
primarily by interested amateurs who have made surface collections,
dug a number of small test pits, and salvaged burials disturbed by
plowing or fence building.
In the report whcih follows, the authors have not attempted a comprehensive analysis of all the specimens and features from the site.
Rather, this study is based almost exclusively on the notes and artifacts
recovered by amateurs, and only two artifacts, a bow fragment from a
trigger guard and a flintlock cock, from The University of Texas
collection are described. Even the descriptions of the specimens included are variable, with the greatest attention being given to those-mainly certain European-made goods-which are most useful in placing the Womack Site in a meaningful historic context. It is hoped that,
in the near future, extensive controlled excavations will be made at the
site, and that a detailed report will be published.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

For a number of years, persons interested in historic archeological
remains in the southern Plains, especially in north-central Texas, have
been at least vaguely aware of the existence of several culturally related sites. Formalization of these data came in 1961, when Lathel F.
Duffield and Edward B. Jelks published a report on the Pearson Site in
Rains County, Texas. In this paper they provisionally defined a complex of native traits which they termed Norteiio Focus and tentatively
attributed to protohistoric and historic southern Wichita Indian groups
(mainly the Taovayas, Tawakoni, and Yscani, but also the Waco and
Kichai ) . In addition to Pearson, components of the Norteiio Focus are
recognized at the Spanish Fort Site on the Red River in Montague
County, Texas and Jefferson County, Oklahoma; the Sanders and
Womack sites on the Red River in Lamar County, Texas; the Stansbury Site on the Brazos River in Lamar County, Texas; the Stone Site
on the Brazos River in McLennan County, Texas; the Vinson Site between the Brazos and Trinity rivers in Limestone County, Texas; and
the Gilbert Site on the Sabine drainage in Rains County, Texas (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 70-71; Harris and Harris, 19621: 2-9; Jelks, ms.).
Of the known Norteiio Focus sites, Stansbury, Pearson, Gilbert,

289

WOMACK SITE

Womack, Sanders, and Vinson have been at least partially excavated;
however, only Pearson has been described in detail (Krieger's 1946 report on the Sanders Site deals most exclusively with the prehistoric
Sanders Focus) . Understandably many problems of interpretation yet
surround the Norteiio Focus. Despite the surge of research in historic
archeology, even the dating of these sites is difficult and rests mainly
on still poorly known European trade goods. Matching the Norteiio
Focus sites with historically documented Wichita villages is, of course,
most important. To date, only three-perhaps four-can, with a meaningful measure of confidence, be linked to the southern Wichita: Spanish Fort with a large 18th century Taovayas village, Stansbury with a
late 18th century Tawakoni village, Pearson-more tentatively-with
an 18th century Tawakoni-Y scani village (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:
69 and 76-79), and, as this paper attempts to demonstrate, Womack
with an early 18th century Kichai village. Some of the other problems
which remain are: 1) refining the definition of the Norteiio Focus, 2)
distinguishing, if possible, variations in this complex through time and
space, and 3 ) relating the Norteiio Focus to the Wichita remains (the
Big Bend Aspect) recognized in central and southern Kansas by Wedel
(1959: 571-589) .
OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES
Finds designated as occupational features are of two types: 1) circular concentrations of bone, shell, artifacts, burned daub, and stone, and
2) burials. None of the former has been fully investigated, but it is
believed that they represent the remains of houses.
Eight burials have been unearthed by The University of Texas (but
are not included in this study) , and four have been found by amateurs.
In each case, the latter burials were partially disturbed prior to excavation, and the skeletal remains were in a poor state of preservation,
apparently a result of the high acid content of the sandy soil (animal
bones recovered from the site were also in poor condition).
BURIAL

1

Excavated by R. K. Harris and his father, the late S. W. Harris, this
burial was found in August, 1938, just after the site had been plowed.
The plow damaged one edge of a vessel found in the grave, and destroyed the face of the skull. As the interment had been made in a
darkly stained midden deposit, it was impossible to trace the outlines
of a burial pit, although the bottom of the grave appeared to be roughly

290

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

eight to 10 inches below the surface. The skeleton was extended on its
back, with the head to the north. In too fragile a condition to be recovered, the bones seemed to represent an adult male, approximately 25 to
35 years of age at the time of death.
Two vessels were the only grave offerings. One of these, a bowl (Fig.
4, A) which has the shape and design of Womack Engraved (Duffield
and Jelks, 1961 : 36-39 ) but is incised, was recovered from the right
side of the skeleton, just below the pelvis. The other, a shell-tempered
bowl of type Natchitoches Engraved (Fig. 4, B), was found on the left
side of the burial, roughly midway between the shoulder and the elbow.
BURIAL

2

This burial was found in the spring of 1940, essentially under the
same circumstances as Burial 1. Excavated by R. K. Harris, it too had
been placed in what appeared to be an extensive midden accumulation.
The exact grave outline could not be distinguished because of the uniformily dark nature of the soil, but the base of the burial pit appeared
to lie about 10 inches beneath the surface. Too deteriorated to determine sex, the skeleton appeared to be that of an adult. It was extended
on its back, with the head to the northeast.
The only grave goods found with the burial were three vessels. Two
of these, a Simms Engraved bowl (Fig. 4, C ) and a bowl (Fig. 4, D )
which has the attributes of both Simms Engraved and Womack Engraved, were found near the right shoulder of the skeleton. The third
vessel (Fig. 4, E ), found near the opposite shoulder, is of type Emory
Punctated.
BURIAL

3

Burial 3 was discovered by Rex Housewright during the 1940's, but
it was so severely disturbed by plowing that very little information
could be salvaged by its excavation. However, remains of seven vessels,
all of which could be restored, were associated with the skeleton. Included are a water bottle (Fig. 5, A ) of type Hudson Engraved, a somewhat aberrant example (Fig. 5, B) of Simms Engraved, two Emory
Punctated vessels (Fig. 5, C), and three Womack Engraved bowls
( Fig. 5, D , E ).
BURIAL

4

In the summer of 1963, a fence was built near the south end of the
site and, in digging one of the post holes, the back of a skull was disturbed. The remainder of the burial was excavated by R. K. Harris and

291

WOMACK SITE

Jay C. Blaine, who found it to consist of an elderly female placed extended on her back, with the head to the northeast. The grave, like
those of the other three burials, had been dug into a midden accumulation, with the pit extending for approximately 15 inches below the
surface, into the upper part of the underlying red clay. A later fire pit
had been dug through the right side of the burial, between the hips and
knees. The skeletal material was in very bad shape and could not be
removed. No grave goods were associated with Burial 4.
THE ARTIFACfS

Numerous specimens of both European and native origin have been
recovered from the site. While the present analysis of these materials
is only preliminary and incomplete, it is reasonably clear that two
components are represented. In terms of the interests of this paper, as
well as the number of specimens which-on typological grounds-can
be assigned to it, the most important of these components is the historic
Nortefio Focus (Duffield and Jelks, 1961). The second occupational
component, apparently assignable to the Archaic Carrollton Focus, is
known from about 60 artifacts recovered from a limited portion of the
site. Since these specimens have no bearing on the historic period, they
are excluded from the discussions which follow.
NATIVE-MADE ARTIFACTS

Included in this category are items of stone, clay, shell, and metal
which, on the basis of their morphological and/ or technological characteristics, are believed to have been fashioned into useful forms by
the historic Indian occupants of the site. While the distinction between
native and European manufacture is not always easily made, it is a
convenient and, for the most part, meaningful dichotomy.
The majority of the specimens of stone herein linked with the Nortefio Focus agree favorably with those described for this complex by
Duffield and Jelks ( 1961 : 71-7 3 ) . These, and all other, types or descriptive groups that have already been well defined in print will not
be treated in detail, and the reader should assume that the specimens
from the Womack Site are within the range given in previous reports.
Materials from which the chipped stone artifacts are made include
Alibates flint from the Texas panhandle, Kay County Flint, a beautiful
banded stone found near Springtown, Oklahoma, Novaculite from Arkansas, and various local flints and jaspers which occur in the Red
River gravels. Most of the pecked, ground, and polished stone objects

292

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are made from locally-occurring sandstone, basalt, quartzite, and limestone. The exceptions, a pipe fragment of catlinite and three turquoise
beads, indicate trade with the former probably coming from the central Plains and the latter from New Mexico.
SPEAR POINT

The one large projectile, perhaps spear, point (Fig. 1, A ) from the
site has a triangular outline, deep side notches, and a straight base. It
is much like the Harrell arrow point type in outline form but is far too
large, 12.0 em. in length and 4.0 em. in maximum width, to be so classified. The material from which this specimen is made is the banded
flint found near Springtown, Oklahoma.
ARROW POINTS

The 928 arrow points collected from the site vary from 1.0 to 4.2 em.
long. At least six types are included, with the well made, triangular
Fresno (Suhm, et al. , 1954: 498-499 ) being unquestionably the dominant form . Of the 863 examples of this type, 478 have straight bases
(Fig. 1, B, C) and 385 have concave bases (Fig. 1, D , E ) . Among the
remainder of the typed points there are 20 examples of Harrell (Fig. 1,
F, G; Suhm et al., 1954: 500-501), eight examples of Morris (Fig. 1,
H; Bell, 1958: 60-61 ), two examples of Bassett (Fig. 1, I; Suhm et al. ,
1954: 494-495 ) , two examples of Bonham (Fig. 1, I; ibid.: 496-497 ),
12 examples of Scallorn coryell (Fig. 1, K; Jelks, 1962: 28 ), and six
examples of Scallorn sattler (Fig. 1, L; ibid. : 30 ) . The other 15 arrow
· points from the site are of styles which cannot be identified with an
established type.
The Fresno and Harrell types have been linked with the Norteiio
Focus by Duffield and I elks ( 1961 : 71) . Whether or not the other
forms represented at the Womack Site should also be included is not
dear. It is possible, however, that the Bassettt points indicate trade
from the east, while the Scallorn and Morris points may be carry-overs
from an earlier period, or may have been collected from earlier sites.
The Bonham type, a major form at the nearby Sanders Site (Krieger,
1946 : 185 ), is perhaps also intrusive at the Womack Site.
KNIVES

Eighty-nine chipped stone knives have been recovered from the site.
They include 28 small triangular specimens (Fig. 1, M ) , 35 small leafshaped specimens (Fig. 1, N) , 15 large leaf-shaped specimens (Fig. 1,

293

WOMACK SITE

8

F

c

D

G

H

A

K

J

0

p
0

L

N

M

Q

5 CM .

R

Fig . 1. Points, Knives, and Axe. A, Possible spear point. B-E, Fresno points . F, G, Harrell
points . H, Morris point. I, Bassett po int . J , Bonham point. K, Sea/lorn eorye/1 point. L, Sea/lorn
sattler point. M, Small, triangular knife . N, Small , leaf-shaped knife. 0, Large, leaf-shaped
knife. P, Diamond-shaped, alternately beveled knife. Q , Jowell knife. R, Double-bitted axe-

294

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0), six diamond-shaped, altemately beveled specimens (Fig. 1, P), and
five slender, bipointed specimens (Fig. 1, Q). Of these, the bipointed
knives are of the greatest interest as they are of a type which appears
to be characteristic of the Allen Focus, a historic Caddoan complex
found to the south, on the Angelina and Neches rivers. They have not
been well described but are sometimes referred to as lowell knives
(Suhm, et al., 1954: 220).
DOUBLE-BITTED AXE

A rather small, roughly chipped, double-bitted axe (Fig. 1, R) was
found at the site. It may not, however, belong to the Nortefw Focus
occupation, as it came from that part of the site which yielded mainly
Archaic artifacts. In addition to having a bit at each end, this specimen
has a broad, shallow notch on each lateral edge, probably for hafting.
SCRAPERS

Numerous scrapers (872 specimens) principally of the snub-nose
variety, occur at the site. They have been fashioned from a range of
siliceous materials, which, in addition to locally-occurring flints and
cherts, includes stones from central Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and
the Texas panhandle. In over-all length the scrapers fall between 1.2
and 9.5 em., and the majority conform quite well to the descriptive
groups recognized by Duffield and Jelks ( 1961: 24-30) for the Pearson
Site collection. These include 35 tapering base snub-nose scrapers (Fig.
2, A), 205 rounded base snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 2, B) , 65 subtriangular snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 2, C), 186 straight base snub-nose scrapers
(Fig. 2, D), 105 rectangular snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 2, E), 25 miscellaneous-largely fragmentary-snub-nose scrapers, 18 spokeshaves
(Fig. 2, F, G), 47 flakes scrapers (Fig. 2, H , I), and 20 semilunar
wedge-shaped scrapers (Fig. 2, J). Forms present at the Womack Site,
but not at the Pearson Site, are 142 side scrapers (Fig. 2, K, L), three
scrapers rechipped from small Gary dart points ( Fig. 2, M), and 21
snub-nose scrapers with graver beaks (Fig. 3, A-C). The lastmentioned group appears to represent an early Nortefio Focus trait,
perhaps one which predates the occupation at the Pearson Site. It has
also been found at the Gilbert Site in Rains County (Jelks, ms.), an
unmixed Nortefio site excavated in the summer of 1962 by members
of the Texas Archeological Society. The small graver on these specimens occurs sometimes on the comer of the steeply beveled distal end
(Fig. 3, A) , as well as along other portions of this beveled edge (Fig. 3,

B, C).

295

WOMACK SI TE

c

B

A

E

F

D

G

J

L

K

M

0

5 CM.

I

I

Fig. 2 . Scrapers. A, Tapering base snub-nose. B, Rounded base snub- nose . C, Subtriangular snub-nose. 0 , St raight base snub-nose. E, Rectangular snub-nose. F, G, Spokeshaves. H, I, Flake. J , Semilunar wedge-shaped . K, L, Side . M, RechipFed Gary point. Arrows
indicate spokeshave concavities .

296

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DRILLS

Each of the 68 drills possesses a long, narrow, pointed projection on
the shaft which has been carefully shaped by pressure flaking. They
can be readily divided into two groups : 43 with expanding, but unworked bases (Fig. 3, D ) , and 25 with expanding, carefully flaked
bases (Fig. 3, D ) . The high frequency of drills at the Womack Site is
interesting in that Duffield and Jelks ( 1961: 71-73) do not mention
this among their Norteiio Focus traits. The Womack Site appears to be
earlier than the Norteiio Focus components known on the Sabine
(Pearson and Gilbert sites) , Brazos (Stone, Stansbury, and Vinson
Sites), and Upper Red River (Spanish Fort) . In these apparently later
sites stone drills are rare, or even absent, although metal awls do occur
in some numbers. Significantly, only one metal awl (see below) was
found at theW omack Site.
GRAVERS

In addition to the graver beaks found on the snub-nose scrapers, 14
flakes have small graver projections (Fig. 3, F). The data from the
Womack Site indicates that gravers on otherwise unaltered flakes
should also be added to the Norteiio Focus trait list.
GUNFLINTS

Twenty-three of the 31 definite gunflints from the site appear to be
of native manufacture (Fig. 18). Most of native specimens have been
fashioned from locally-obtained flint, although one is made of Novaculite from Arkansas. In outline form these specimens vary from square
to rectangular (Fig. 17, A-G) , while in size they are from 0. 75 by 0.81
in. to 0.97 by 1.22 in. They are biconvex in cross section and, although
thinned on all edges, show no battering. Interestingly, many native
gunflints (approximately 60%) appear to be unused and were probably held in reserve for use when European flints could not be obtained.
POSSIBLE GUNFLINTS

Five faceted blade fragments from the site have what appear to be
intentionally produced rectangular or almost square (Fig. 17, H-J )
outlines. In cross section they arc plano-convex, much like the snubnose scrapers. On their convex surfaces two, .occasionally three facets,
are present. While a single break across a blade is not unusual, a second one which produces a square or rectangular outline, is noteworthy.

A

c

B

F

D

E

G
\

\

--.->J
K

H

0L

0

0

5

L

I

CM .

M

Fig. 3 . Scrapers, Drills, Gravers, Celts , Abrader, Pipes , and Beads. A-C , Snub-nose
scrapers with graver beaks . D, E, Drills. F, Graver. G, H, Celts . I, Arrow shaft abrader. J ,
Limestone pipe. K, Catlinite pipe. l, Crinoid bead . M, Turquoise bead . Arrows indicate graver
beaks .

298

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

There are, however, no indications that these pieces have been used as
gunflints and perhaps they, too, were kept in reserve. They vary in size
from 0.63 by 0.66 in. to 1.03 to 1.07 in.
CELTS

Very similar to specimens from the Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks,
1961 : 32--34) each of the nine polished stone celts from the Womack
Site has a rectanguloid outline and a chisel-like bit at one end (Fig. 3,
G, H ). In cross section they are rectangular with somewhat rounded
edges. Both sandstone and basalt was used in their manufacture.
MANOS

The six manos from the site are of a compact sandstone. Most are
fragmentary, but all seem to have been of the type used in a back-andforth motion . Similar specimens have been reported for the Henrietta
Focus ( Suhm,etal. , 1954: 83-84).
ARROW SHAFT ABRADERS

Fourteen rectangular-shaped pieces of fine-grained sandstone have
one or more longitudinal grooves across one of their flat surfaces (Fig.
3, I). In cross section they vary from square to rectangular. Although
arrow shaft abraders occur in many prehistoric sites, they should probably be added to the Nortefio Focus trait list.
HAMMERSTONES

The 28 hammerstones from the site consist of river rolled cobbles
which have battering marks suggestive of use in hammering and pecking. Most are of quartzite, and all are between 4.0 and 9.0 em. in diameter.
PIPES

Three fragmentary stone pipes have been recovered from the
Womack Site. All appear to have been of the elbow type, with two being made from limestone (Fig. 3, J ) and one of catlinite (Fig. 3, K) .
BEADS

The seven stone beads include four fashioned from fossil crinoids
(Fig. 3, L) and three (Fig. 3, M) made from turquoise. Both types
were probably worn on necklaces. The turquoise beads indicate con-

WOMACK SITE

299

tact (either direct or indirect) with Puebloan peoples to the west, probably in New Mexico.
QUARTZ CRYSTAL

A small, unworked quartz crystal was recovered from the site and
perhaps represents a trade item from Arkansas , or a piece picked up
during an excursion to Arkansas for Novaculite. A small flake or two
has been detached from the crystal, but this is probably accidental.

Artifacts of Clay
Among the native-made ceramic objects from the site there are complete vessels, unrestorable vessel fragments, pipes, and a figurine fragment.
POTTERY VESSELS

Thirteen complete or restorable vessels have been recovered, 12
from Burials 1 through 3, and one from a midden deposit. One of those
(Fig. 4, A ) from Burial 1 is a large, grit-tempered bowl which has an
in curved rim and rounded shoulders, and an incised, but Womack
style, design. Of the four major designs, A, B, C (Duffield and Jelks,
1961 : Fig.10 ), andD (HarrisandHarris, 1962: 9), foundon Womack
Engraved (Fig. 6, A-D ) this vessel (Fig. 4, A ) has Design B-a motif
dominated by rather broad, meandering, negative scrolls and, through
the center of the scroll, a ticked line. The other vessel (Fig. 4, B) from
Burial 1 is a rather small, shell-tempered bowl of type Natchitoches
Engraved (Suhm, et al., 1954: 334-335 ) .
One (Fig. 4, C) of the three vessels from Burial 2 is a typical shelltempered Simms Engraved bowl (ibid.: 354-355 ). The second bowl
(Fig. 4, D ), however, has attributes of both Simms Engraved and
Womack Engraved. It is shallow like Simms, but the curve of the
shoulder is more like Womack; the design includes engraved horizontal lines and triangles which are reminiscent of, but not identical
to, those found on Womack. The third vessel associated with Burial 2 is
a shell-tempered jar (Fig. 4, E) which, at the juncture of the rim and
body, has a row of punctations and, just below the rim, two equally
spaced nodes. It falls within the range of a new type, Emory Punctated,
which has been recognized mainly on the basis of the findings at the
Gilbert Site (Jelks, ms.) .
The largest number of vessels, seven, were found with Burial 3, the
one so badly damaged by plowing. One of the vessels (Fig. 5, A ) is a

300

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

c

E

D
0
I

IOCM.

I

Fig . 4 . Vessels . A, Incised bowl from Burial 1, B, Natchitoches Engraved bowl from
Burial 1 . C, Simms Engra ved bowl from Burial 2 . D, Bowl from Buria l 2 . E, Emory Punctated
jar f rom Bu rial 2 .

small, shell-tempered water bottle of type H udson Engraved (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 304-305). It has the characteristic Hudson spool-shaped
spout and curvilinear, cross-hatched band design. Another shelltempered specimen (Fig. 5, B) from Burial 3 is not typical of any one
type, but rather it has the shape of the Simms Engraved bowl, and a
design (Type A ) like that found on Womack Engraved. The remaining four vessels from this burial include two shell-tempered Emory
Punctated jars (Fig. 5, C) and three grit-tempered Womack Engraved
bowls (Fig. 5, D, E ).
Two vessels have been found in the midden area, not associated with
any burial. One of them is of European origin and is discussed in more
detail in a later section. The other (Fig. 5, F), found by Henry Hanna,

301

WOMACK SITE

is a shell-tempered hemispherical vessel of type Nocona Plain (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 389).
POTTERY SHERDS

The 2,570 sherds from the surface of the site have been analyzed
with the following results:

Womack Engraved
grit-tempered, D esign A-------- ---------- --- -- -- ----- -----shell-tempered, Design A- ------ -------------··--------····
TOTAL DESIGN A

54
7
61

grit-tempered, Design B ------------------------------------ 559
shell-tempered, Design B ----------------------- -- -- ------ - 48
TOTAL DESIGN B
grit-tempered, Design C ------------------- ----- -- ------ -- -shell-tempered, Design C --------------- -- ---- ------- -----TOTAL DESIGN C

64
8

grit-tempered, Design D --- ----- -- -------------------------TOTAL DESIGN D

4

607

72

TOTAL WOMACK

4
744 sherds

Emory Punctated
grit-tempered ---------------------------------------------------- 78
shell-tempered -------- -- --- ----- --- -- ------------------------ -- - 485
TOTAL EMORY

563 sherds

Natchito-::hes Engraved, shell-tempered-------------- -------- -- -8
Simms Engraved, shell-tempered ·············----------------------5
5
Hudson Engraved, shell-tempered ---------------------------------Avery Engraved, shell-tempered ------------- ----------------------7
Nocona Plain, shell-tempered .... __________________________________ ____ 10
Untyped engraved, incised, and punctated ---- ---- ------------ 118
Plain, strap handles, shell-tempered
(probably from Emory vessels) ------ --- ·-- ·--------------------2
Plain, shell-tempered

f

p;~b~bi·y·f~~~-~-~d~~~;~-t~d·- ---

487

portions of Womack and
Emory vessels

Plain, grit-tempered

J ---------------------------------------------------GRAND TOTAL

621
2,570

302

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

8

A

c

0

E
0

5

10 CM.

F

Fig . 5 . Vessels. A, Hudson Engraved bottle from Burial 3 . B, Bowl from Burial 3 . C,
Emory Pu nctated jar from Buria l 3 . D, E, Womack Engra ved bow ls from Buria l 3 . F, Nocona
Plain bow l from mi dden .

From the above tabulation it is apparent that Womack Engraved and
Emory Punctated are the resident pottery types at the Womack Site.
The writers have noticed that Womack vessels show very little evidence of having been used in cooking and appear, instead, to have

WOMACK SITE

303

served as storage containers. By contrast, a large number of the Emory
vessels and sherds have smudged carbon on their outside surface, presumably a result of their having been used in cooking.
It is also evident from the above frequencies that Design B was the
most popular, occurring on 607 of the 744 sherds of Womack Engraved.
To judge from the writers' collections, the same design is the most
common in the Nortefio Focus component at the Sanders Site. Significantly, Sanders and Womack appear to be the earliest of the known
Nortefio sites on Red River. While much less frequent, Design C seems
to occur along with Design A at both of these sites. Design A , a very
minor motif at Womack, becomes more important at Nortefio sites
located on the Sabine, Brazos, and upper Red rivers, apparently at the
cost of Designs B and C. Design D , so far as presently known, occurs
only at the Gilbert and Womack s.ites, where in both cases it is a very
minor form (one and four examples, respectively).
Probable trade pottery is represented by Natchitoches Engraved,
Simms Engraved, Hudson Engraved, Avery Engraved, and Nocona
Plain . All but Nocona Plain, which is linked principally with the
Henrietta Focus to the west, are generally thought of as Caddoan
types . Conversely, Emory occurs, probably as trade ware, as far down
Red River as the Angola Farm (Ford, 1936), a historic Tunica site
near the mouth of that river.
FIGURINE FRAGMENT

A small piece of a baked figurine (Fig. 6, E), possibly representing
the leg of an animal, was recovered. It is too fragmentary for detailed
description, although it might be noted that portions of figurines have
been recovered from other Norteii.o Focus sites.
PIPES

Twenty-seven, largely fragmentary, ceramic pipes are included in
the collection. They are of the elbow type, with the lip of the bowl and
the stem being flat, and a projection, usually an angular spur, commonly appears at the outside juncture, or heel, of the stem and the
bowl. Fourteen of the pipes have small, engraved, crosshatched triangles and ticked circles (Fig. 6, F , H) , one has single engraved lines
(Fig. 6, G) , nine are undecorated (Fig. 6, I), and three are much like
those usually associated with the Allen Focus ( Suhm, et al., 1954:
220). The one complete example (Fig. 6, J) of the last-mentioned
group has punctations covering the body of the bowl and two small feet
at the base of the bowl.

304

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCI ETY

,

wvvvvw

I

AA& AAAA.

· ~
B

vxr ((022 JDII ((
c

E

F
G
H
0

;

I

5 CM .
I

I

I

I

I

WOMACK SITE

305

Artifacts of Shell
CONCH SHELL BEADS

Three rather large beads which were probably worn on necklaces
have been fashioned from conch shell columellae. Two are tube-shaped
and one is barrel-shaped.
CONCH SHELL GORGET

The two gorgets made from conch shell whorls are undecorated
discs. The larger of the two (Fig. 7, A ) has a hole drilled in the center
and two holes near the presumed upper edge. One large central perforation occurs on the other gorget ( Fig. 7, B).

Artifacts of Metal
Included in this category are brass beads and tinklers which appear
to be of native manufacture, although the raw material was obviously
obtained from Europeans. Numerous other metal objects were recovered from the site but these retain most or all of the European design.
A very different situation prevails at later Nortefio sites where both
scrap metal and worn out tools were frequently reworked.
BEADS

Fifteen beads have been made by rolling pieces of sheet kettle brass
into either short (Fig. 7, D) or long (Fig. 7, C) tubes. Twelve are made
of 25 gauge (0.018 inches) brass and three from 19 gauge (0 .036
inches) brass. The 25 gauge metal was apparently obtained from
small kettles, while the 19 gauge brass probably represents large kettles
(for a fuller description of brass kettles see descriptions in a later section ).
TINKLERS

The 77 cone-shaped tinklers from the site have also been made from
scrap pieces of kettle brass. Two different shaped blanks were used to
form most of them. One is trapezoidal in outline and, when rolled, it
produces a tinkler like those shown in Figure 7, E , F ; the other is recFig. 6. Designs on Womack Engraved Pottery, Possible Figurine Fragment, and Pipes .
A, Design A. B, Design B. C, Design C. D, Design D. E, Possible Figurine Fragment. F-J,
Ceramic pipes .

306

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIET Y

c

•
0

B
A

E

,

F

A
H

)~.

I'

l

G

...... ·v . _

...

\i

~

•
K
0

I

Fig . 7 .
tinklen.

5 CM .

I

Gorgets, Beads, and Tinkl e rs. A, B, Shell gorgets. C, D, Brass beads. E- L, Brass

tangular or square in outline and, when rolled, it produces a tinkler
like those shown in Figure 7, G-I.
The site yielded an extra large tinkler (Fig. 7, J) which upon cleaning, was found to contain two somewhat smaller tinklers (Fig. 7, K, L )
within the hollow cone. Brass salts had preserved buckskin thongs in-

307

WOMACK SITE

side all three, and it appears that these specimens constituted a bell,
possibly an item of horse paraphenalia. All three of these tinklers are
of 19 gauge brass. The other 74 specimens include 42 of 25 gauge
brass, 21 of 22 gauge brass, and 11 of 19 gauge brass.
In examining collections from other historic sites, the authors have
noticed that the tinklers from Womack and Angola Farm are loosely
rolled, while those from later historic sites are tightly rolled. Also there
are no iron tinklers known from the Womack Site, but they are common at the later Norteiio Focus site of Spanish Fort.
EuROPEAN-MADE ARTIFACTS

Objects of European origin and design make up an important segment of the collection from the Womack Site. Most apparently represent items the Europeans exchanged for native goods and favors, or
simply gave to the Indians to win their friendship . Included are glass
trade beads, gun parts, various specimens of iron, brass, lead, pewter,
and clay.

Glass Beads
The 2,123 beads from the site examined by the authors are believed
to be of considerable importance in determining the dates of the historic Indian occupation. Hence, in the sections which follow, they are
classified in detail, and several pertinent documentary materials are
reviewed. In analyzing the beads the authors have employed the same
terminology of structure and size as Duffield and Jelks (1961: 40-50) .
Included are simple beads which have a monolithic structure, compound beads which have two different structural components, and
complex beads which have three or more component parts. The sizes
range from large (greater than 6 mm. in diameter) and medium (4
mm. to 6 mm. in diameter), to small (less than 4 mm. in diameter).
Documentary evidence (Du Pratz-quoted in Swanton, 1911: 56)
suggests that the larger beads were used mainly on neckla'ces, while the
small and medium-sized ones were used principally on skins, garters,
and the like.
The various shapes recognized are also essentially the same as those
employed in the Pearson Site descriptions, except for some of the
larger (necklace) beads where the term olive-shaped is used. It is taken
from an early 18th century document (Thwaites, 1959 : 143) and was
apparently widely used by the French to describe certain of the trade
beads. A standard color chart (Bustanoby, 1947: 28-29) has been
used to indicate the hues of beads . It should be noted that the surfaces

308

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the beads are frequently altered by age and weathering and it is
sometimes difficult to determine the original color. However, the color
can be restored by immersing the beads in a weak solution of muriatic
acid for about two hours and then washing them in water. It is surprising how many beads that would otherwise have been classified as
dirty white turn out to be red, green, yellow, etc. when cleaned. An
example of each of the 56 different kinds of beads recognized in the collection is shown in Figure 8. The number which appears opposite each
r efers to the type designation given below.

'"

30

2.

17

31

4-5

3

18

32.

4*'
-4-7

4-

I~

5
b

2_0

1

2..1

8

2.2.

<)

Z.3

10

Z.+

II

-+8

3+

+9

35

50

3~

51

37

l.5

52.

38

53

3~

2."

4-0

12.

13

2..1

4l

•+

z.s

42.

5+
55

.

0

2..~
Fig .

33

43

5""
I

CM

.

2.

8 . Glass Trade Bead s. Num be rs 1- 56 refe r to the types defi ned in the text.

WOMACK SITE

309

BEAD TYPES

No. 1: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 141 specimens.
No. 2: Large, white, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead
of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 125 specimens.
No. 3: Large, white, opaque, round necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 105 specimens.
No. 4: Large, white, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of compound construction. The inner layer of glass has a porcelain-like texture, while the outer layer has a slightly frosted appearance. 70 specimens.
No. 5: Medium, white, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead, of compound construction. The two layers of glass in this bead are the same
as those described above for type No.4. 105 specimens.
No. 6: Medium, white, opaque, olive-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 75 specimens.
No. 7: Large, grayish-white, semitranslucent, olive-shaped necklace
bead of simple construction. The glass has a frosted-like appearance.
31 specimens.
No. 8: Large, light grayish-white, semitranslucent, donut-shaped
necklace bead of simple construction. The glass has a frosted-like appearance similar to No. 7. 17 specimens.
No.9: Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, elongated olive-shaped necklace
bead of simple construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving it a texture reminiscent of stripped sugarcane. 15 specimens.
No.10: Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped, necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass is the same as No. 9. 45 specimens.
No. 11: Medium, Peacock Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. The glass is the same as No. 9. 27 specimens.
No . 12: Large, Turquoise Blue, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead
of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 3 specimens.
No. 13: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is often cane-like in appearance. 9 specimens.
No. 14: Medium, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped,
garter bead of simple construction. 5 specimens.

310

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

No. 15: Medium, Gobelin Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped, garter bead
of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 62 specimens.
No. 16: Large, clear glass, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is clear but, due to age, sometimes appears frosted.
3 specimens.
No. 17: Large, black, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. The glass is somewhat cane-like in appearance. 2 specimens.
No. 18: Large, black, opaque, round necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in appearance. 3 specimens.
No. 19: Large, Dandelion Yellow, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace
bead of simple construction . The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 1
speomen.
No. 20: Large, white, opaque, elongated olive-shaped necklace bead
of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with four dark
blue stripes which are evenly spaced and extend along the long axis.
The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 4 specimens.
No. 21 : Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with three blue stripes
which are evenly spaced and are parallel to the long axis. The white
glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 7 specimens.
No. 22: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with two red and two blue
alternating stripes. The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.
No. 23: Large, bluish-white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of
complex construction. The bead surface is covered with three longitudinal sets of three blue stripes spaced evenly around the bead. The
bluish-white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 21 specimens.
No . 24: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. Extending longitudinally across the surface of the bead
are three sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two red stripes
and, between these, a blue stripe. The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 4 specimens.
No. 25: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with three sets, each of which
is composed of two brown stripes and, between these, a blue stripe. The
white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.

WOMACK SITE

311

No. 26: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with three sets of three
blue stripes which are twisted in an S-shape fashion around the bead.
The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 8 specimens.
No. 27: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The surface of the bead is covered with six, more or less
evenly spaced, blue stripes which are twisted in an S-shape fashion
around the bead. The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 2 specimens.
No. 28: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with six, rather evenly distributed, red stripes which are twisted in an S-shape fashion around
the bead. The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 2
specimens.
No. 29: Large, Emerald Green, translucent, barrel-shaped necklace
bead of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with eight
white stripes, rather evenly spaced and parallel to the long axis. 3 specimens.
No. 30: Large, Brittany Blue, opaque, elongated olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered
with three evenly spaced sets of stripes, each of which is composed of
two white stripes and, between these, a red stripe. 3 specimens.
No. 31: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered
with five white stripes, twisted around the bead in an S-like fashion.
1 specimen.
No. 32: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. Parallel to the long axis of the bead
are more or less evenly spaced crescent-like white stripes. 1 specimen.
No. 33: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered
with three sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two white
stripes, and, between these, a red stripe. 2 specimens.
No. 34: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, barrel-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered
with eight, evenly spaced white stripes. 1 specimen.
No. 35: Large, clear glass, donut-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. Eight twisted white stripes appear embedded in the body
of the glass. In making this bead, a layer of clear glass was used for the
core, then the white stripes pressed into the surface of glass, and an-

312

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

other layer of clear glass was added to finish the bead. The white
stripes are twisted in an S-shaped fashion. 1 specimen.

No. 36: Large, black, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with twelve white
stripes running lengthwise with the bead. The surface of this bead
type, and that of No. 35, sometimes appears frosted, probably due to
age. 5 specimens.
No. 37: Large, black, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface is covered with eight white longitudinal
stripes, spaced more or less evenly. The black glass of the bead is
porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.
No. 38: Large, black, opaque, donut-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with eight white
stripes twisted around the bead in an S-shape pattern. The black glass
of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.
No. 39: Large, black, opaque, round necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with six ivory-colored,
crescent-shaped stripes which run perpendicular to the core. The black
glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 3 specimens.
No. 40: Large, Bluebird Blue, translucent, eight-faceted necklace
bead of simple construction. The surface of the glass sometimes appears
to be frosted, probably due to age. 2 specimens.
No. 41: Large, clear glass, eight-faceted necklace bead of simple construction. The surface of this bead sometimes appears frosted, probably
due to age. Both this bead and bead No. 40 are wire-wound and the
facets were pressed. 2 specimens.
No. 42: Large, clear glass, barrel-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. This bead is wire-wound with a surface which is pressed
into a pattern which resembles that of hobnail glass. This type is often
called the "mulberry bead." 1 specimen.
No. 43: Large, clear glass, barrel-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. The bead is wire-wound and the surface pressed into six
spiral-shaped elements which give a corrugated effect. 1 specimen.
No. 44: Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead (sometimes
called "seed bead") of simple construction. The glass has a porcelainlike texture. This is the smallest type of bead found at the Womack
Site, and is similar in size to those commonly found at later historic
sites. 75 specimens.
No. 45: Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of com-

WOMACK SITE

313

pound construction. The two layers of glass in this bead, are the same
as those in bead Type 4. 685 specimens.

No. 46: Small, Peacock Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. The glass of this bead has the sugar cane-like texture of bead Types 9, 10, and 11. 201 specimens.
No. 47: Small, Gobelin Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. The glass has a porcelain-like texture. 175 specimens.
No. 48: Small, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, donut-shaped garter
bead of simple construction. The glass in this bead is the same as Nos.
13 and 14. 37 specimens.
No. 49: Small, clear glass, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass of this bead is the same as that of Nos. 16, 35, 36,
41,42 and 43. 5 specimens.
No. 50: Small, black, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
The glass of this bead is porcelain-like in texture. 5 specimens.
co~struction.

No. 51: Small, red, opaque (outer layer) , donut-shaped garter bead
of compound construction. The outer layers of opaque glass is brick
red, and the inner layer is a translucent light green. This bead is generally referred to as "Comaline d'Aleppo" (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:
48) . 8 specimens.
No. 52: Large, amber, translucent, barrel-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The bead is wire-wound. 2 specimens.
No. 53: Extra large ( 19 mm. in diameter), milk-glass, translucent,
round necklace bead of simple construction. The bead is wire-wound.
3 specimens.
No. 54: Large, milk-glass, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The bead is wire-wound. 2 specimens.
No. 55: Large, red, opaque (outer layer) , tube-shaped necklace bead
of compound construction. The outer layer of opaque glass is birck red
and the inner layer is a translucent light green. This bead is generally
referred to as "Comaline d'Aleppo," but in this case, the bead stock was
broken into tube-shaped beads, instead of the small, donut-shaped
beads described under No. 51. 2 specimens.
No. 56: Small, but long (bugle type, 9 mm. long and 4 mm. in diameter), Brittany Blue, opaque, tube-shaped, probably a necklace bead,
of simple construction. The glass of this bead is porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.

314

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Beads Nos. 55 and 56 usually occur on sites dated in the middle 18th
century (Jelks, ms.). Inasmuch as only three specimens of the tube
beads have come from the Womack Site, they could have been introduced into the site towards the latter part of the occupation.
DOCUMENTS AND COMPARATIVE DATA PERTINENT TO BEAD STUDY

The beads from the Womack Site, when viewed as a whole, contrast
significantly in shape, size, and variety of stripes with bead types found
at the later Norteiio Focus sites ( Spanish Fort, Pearson, Gilbert, Vinson, Stansbury, and Stone). To be sure, some of the beads recovered
from Womack also occur at these later components, but they are much
less frequent then at Womack. These comparative data suggest that,
shortly after the 1730's, an important change was taking place in the
bead industry. Indeed, according to Rogers and Beard ( 1937: 40) the
island of Murano, located in the lagoon of Venice and long famous
for the production of glass, in the 1730's began to decline. The fall of
Murano, of course, was intimately linked to the fall of the commercial
Republic of Venice. Thus by about 1735 what had once been a flourishing enterprise supporting 300 glass houses was quickly reduced to less
than 20 glass houses. Because of the secrecy that surrounded the manufacture of beads, it is difficult to unravel the historical details. However, it is quite possible that other glass houses in Europe took over
the market served by the Murano bead makers. With this shift in
locus of manufacture, there must have been some changes in the types
of beads traded to the Indians.
Three documents cited below give some insights into the sizes,
colors, and uses of some of the glass beads traded to the Indians by the
French in the lower Mississippi Valley between 1700 and 1740. In
one of these, an invoice dated March 5, 1702, and addressed to Father
Jean de Lamberville (Thwaites, 1959: 29), a Catholic priest ordered
certain trade goods for the missions up river, about Fort St. Louis of
Louisiana (present day St. Louis, Missouri ). Among the items requested are:
Ten livres [probably a pound of 12 ounces] of large glass Beads ... black, white and
striped.
Ten livres of small glass Beads ... white, green and transparent.

The second document is a letter written from Fort St. Louis of
Louisiana, dated February 23, 1708, and signed by Father Jacques
Gravier. In this letter he ordered, among other items," . . . 10 livres of
white Beads, olive-shaped and large-sized, 4 livres of small beads ...
blue, green, and white .. ." (Thwaites, 1959: 142).

WOMACK SITE

315

In the third document, LePage du Pratz's The History of Louisiana,
published in 1758, is to be found one of the few early descriptions of
trade beads among the Indians:
When they have beads (rassade ) they make necklaces composed of one or more
rows. They make them long enough for the head to pass through. The rassade is a
bead of the size of the end of a finger of a small infant. Its length is greater than its
diameter. Its substance is similar to porcelain. There is a smaller one, ordinarily
round and white. They value it more than the other. There is a blue one and one
of another style which is banded (bardelee) with blue and white. The medium
sized and the smallest are strung to ornament skins, garters, etc. (quoted in Swanton,
1911: 56).

The word rassade in Old French means "little bits of colored glass,"
and it was commonly used with reference to the beads traded to
Africans (glass beads were traded to Africans long before they were
traded to North American Indians ) . Bardelee, on the other hand,
comes from the Old French word, barde, which during the Middle
Ages, referred to a covering of horse armor, sometimes placed in strips
or stripes over the horse. Bardelee means "the act of covering with
strips or stripes."
It is possible that Father Gravier's large, olive-shaped beads are
represented by Types 1, 2, 6, 7, 12-14, 16, 17, 20-28, and 30-33 at
Womack; while LePage du Pratz's rassade bead with a porcelain-like
surface seems to describe Nos. 1-6, 15, 18-28, 37-39, 44, 45, 47, and
56. The bardelee bead is mentioned as being banded with blue and
white, although Du Pratz does not state whether it was white with blue
stripes, or blue with white stripes, At Womack, Types 20, 21, 23, 26,
and 27 are white with blue stripes, and Types 31 , 32, and 34 are blue
with white stripes.
Of the 56 bead types described for Womack, 47 have been found in
burials at the Angola Farm, a historic Tunica village in Louisiana,
near the mouth of the Red River (Ford, 1936). Thirty-one of the types
occur at the Fish Hatchery Site (personal observation; Gregory,
1962) , a former Natichitoches Indian village near Natchitoches, Louisiana, and 29 have been found at Fort St. Louis de Kadohadacho (the
Roseborough Lake Site near present day Texarkana and the probable
location of the N assoni te Post established in 1 719 by La Harpe;
Harris, et al., ms.). As will be brought out in later sections, Womack
and these three sites all appear to date from the same time period and,
more importantly, appear to have been visited by the La Harpe party
during the course of its journey up Red River.

316

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gun Parts
BACKGROUND

To many gun authorities and collectors, the Indian trade gun,
easily identified as a distinctive type after 1800, is characterized by a
combination of features: the brass serpent or dragon side plate, the
deep "ox bow" trigger guard, the ribbed rampipe, and flat butt plate.
In reality, such guns and their definitive characteristics represent the
culmination of certain developments in the English trade gun that
took place in the 1700's. During various periods in time, the common
name was the Hudson's Bay Company fuke or fusil, the Mackinaw
gun, and, the most famous of all, the Northwest gun (Hanson, 1955).
Supplied by the English, the Nor:thwest flintlock became so well
known to the Indians by the 19th century that often they would not
accept a weapon in trade that did not fit this type. While some imitations were made in Belgium and in the United States after 1800, the
Northwest gun was manufactured mainly in England from its inception in the late 1600's until after 1860. It is probably the single best
known item of English trade. Although the Northwest gun is well
identified as a type after 1800, it is quite another matter in the period
prior to that time. Some of the elements that eventually became characteristic of this type appear to be present earlier, but it is clear that
the stylistic evolution was not complete.
Then French were also producing trade guns. According to Russell
( 195 7: 22--24) , something like 200,000 French trade guns were manufactured in 100 years (ca. 1650-1750) . These, however, have virtually
disappeared and to our knowledge not one has been identified in a
museum or a private collection. This is of considerable importance to
the present study, as the Womack Site lies in an area which during
the 18th century was served primarily by French trade. At this, and
many other historic Texas Indian sites, there are many gun parts
which do not appear to be of English origin, even in view of the indefinite characteristics of the 18th century trade gun. Since the
Spanish policy of trade did not encourage traffic in weapons during
this period, it is improbable that the guns at the site were obtained
from this source.
If some of the parts labeled herein as coming from French flintlocks
are not of domestic French origin, it is very likely that they were at
least produced by manufacturers on the European Continent who
supplied common arms for the French market and who were certainly
influenced by French master gunsmith designs. Thus, in this report,
when we say French trade gun, we simply mean a specimen probably

~

0

s;

>
(')
~

Sode pla.te
fonoal

~pper

front

ta.nq

Q

lock

-heel

plate s cr e w

~

....U1...,

~C.l"e:W

loc k plate

M

-oosta.l

screwhole

toe

Thumb plc1te

Touch hole

/)Butt pl<1te

Muzzle

front

Barrel
I

sect ton

r

r.. rmonal

I

rdmpope

I

I
I

Dostal-

I

Butt

1 Interoor Surface
I

I

Ramrod

\
\
\

\

Upper

ro.mptpe

611=:=1

Intermedt<1~e

I

\

~.\

ro.mpope

bo~
j
Ftnta.l

I

front

Reo.r ftnt<>.l
f

X

to.n9

ten

or

surf O.Ce

Fig .

9.

lllustrotions showing component ports of fusil class weapon.
(.>.)

......
'1

318

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

designed for use in the French trade but not necessarily of French
manufacture.
When a recognizable, repetitive pattern occurs among the apparent
trade gun parts from Norte:iio Focus sites, it seems invariably to involve hardware suitable to the fusil (light weight) type flintlock.
Other, non-fusil type parts, are infrequent and fail to exhibit a clear or
consistent pattern. Since all the guns from the site have been disassembled and component parts (see Figs. 9 and 10 for a definition of
these parts ) are often broken, there is no way of being sure that any
two parts were associated with the same gun. This is an unfortunate
but common occurrence. As we have already mentioned, there is no
known example of the 18th century French trade gun. Almost nothing is known of the components of such a weapon beyond Hamilton's
( 1960a: 208 ) tentative linking of certain breech dimensions and bores
with the late 17th and early 18th century French trade gun. Other
probable French gun components have been recognized in the collection from the Gilbert Site (Jelks, ms. ) , but this material is not yet
published. However, library and field research carried out over the
past two years by the authors have strengthened the tentative assignments made in the Gilbert Site report. These assignments are made
after a careful study of the literature available concerning the characteristics of properly identified flintlock guns of the periods assumed
represented in the sites under study. Particular attention was focused
on those fusil specimens held to be typical products of a particular
country and period.
Among the major manufacturers, the English guns are among the
best detailed in the literature, and the French ones among the least
detailed . We know from history that trade items from these two
countries are the ones that archeologists are most likely to encounter
in 18th century Indian sites in Texas and adjacent areas. The Spanish
colonial policy was not to trade weapons to Indians, and when they
finally did grudgingly issue guns-usually, on a token basis-they
appear, at least during the late 1700's, often to have been supplied
through French sources.
The writers have no argument with the experienced gun authorities
who state that guns of these early times cannot be definitely identified
by any of their component parts. Indeed, it is difficult in most cases to
identify positively the age and source of a complete specimen. We do,
nonetheless, firmly believe that useful information can ultimately be
obtained by the recognition of repeatedly occurring patterns and by
adequate description of gun parts recovered from archeological sites.
In the section which follows reference will be made to certain

319

WOMACK SITE

A

cover

spnnq

l.lpp tr lock plate ,,,.,_ l'la.l•

8

JCB

Fig .

10.

Illustrations showing a flintlock mechanism.

decorations and design features which, to the authors, appear to have
been based on French pattern books (Hayward, 1963). These books
were used throughout Europe by fashionable gun decorators and gunsmiths. There are indications that even the common grade of gun may
reflect some of these patterns, albeit in simplified form and technique.
As aids to dating, they can at least indicate a possible starting date for

320

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a particular design. Fortunately, for our study, the 18th century
English gunsmiths, unlike those on the Continent, were generally
not so prone to adopt all the French designs. In dealing with common
grade guns, this tendency among the English seems to offer a useful
point of comparison. However, it will take a good deal more study to
determine the full value of this approach.
FLINTLOCK COCK

The one flintlock cock (Fig. 11 , A, A' ) collected from the site thus
far is in The University of Texas collections. It is complete with top
vise jaw and vise screw. The vise screw has a slotted head and the wide
comb has been vertically grooved (mortised ) for receipt of a tenon on
back of the top vise jaw. With an over-all sharp curvature, the cock is
of the gooseneck form and is not reinforced. The cock base is flat in
cross section, and has beveled edges and a square hole for the tumbler
shaft. No major cleaning has been attempted and the measurements
(see Fig. 11, B for locus of measurements) are: A, 1.45 in.; B, 2.87 in.
Remarks: Hamilton ( 1960b: 166 ) has illustrated cocks with combs
and central grooves, stating that they were most popular ca. 1750, and
that they could be from England, France, or the Low Countries. A
cock combining these features with a flat, beveled base is illustrated in
a French encyclopedia for the years 1751-65 (Held and Jenkins, 1957:
115) . The same combination of attributes can also be seen in two
French guns of the 1720's, a fowling piece and a pistol, which are
illustrated by Hayward ( 1963: Pls. 8c, 9b). Hayward notes (ibid.:
49, 200 ) that, as a French characteristic, the flat cock (usually combined with flat, rather than plano-convex, lock plate) continues from
its introduction in the late 17th century until the mid-18th century,
when the plano-convex cock and lock plate were again produced during the same period as the flat cock and lock plate. In England, the
plano-convex cock base persisted through this period and was not
superseded as a standard in fine guns until the 1770's (ibid. : 200).
In short, we seem to have a period, 1700-1750, in the production of
first quality guns when the presence of a flat cock and lock would seem
to eliminate an English source. S. James Gooding ( 1960: 85 ) makes a
case for the persistence of the round or plano-convex form in the
English trade gun from the end of the 17th century through the next
200 years. This is also substantiated in the English fusil and sporting
class guns by Joel Shiner's findings at Fort Frederica on Simons
Island, Georgia (Shiner, ms.) . At this site there were four flat musket
cocks identified with the early 1700 period. All thirteen of the round

WOMACK SITE

321

base cocks from Fort Frederica are of the smaller fusil and pistol class.
According to Manucy's ( 1959: 49, 51) description, the blacksmith
shop in which they were found should date between 1736 and 1743certainly not later than 1760. While there is always the possibility
that a French weapon or two might be represented in this group of
parts from Fort Frederica, there can be little question, in view of the
nature and history of the site, that most are of English origin.
If the data from the above sources have been correctly interpreted,
then, regardless of the quality or class of the weapon, the English
flintlock cock made between the late 17th century and ca. 1750
appears best characterized by the rounded face on the base of the
cock. This period can be extended to about 1770 for fine arms, and,
to the end of the flintlock era (ca. 1875 ) for the trade gun class.
As a possible indication of how useful this cock feature may be, at
the Gilbert Site, dated ca. 1750, the bases of all 13 cocks recovered had
flat cross sections. Present evidence indicates that the bulk of the
European trade at this site was with the French.
Conclusions : The flintlock cock from Womack is probably from a
French trade gun which dates between 1700 and approximately 1750.
It is of a size suitable for use on a fusil class weapon.
FRIZZ EN

The term frizzen, as used in this report, refers to the combination
of steel and fla sh pan cover in one part.
The one frizzen (Fig. 11, C, C') from the site is of iron or steeL
It has a rounded top and a slightly curved striking surface. The front
~ surface is beveled, with two major facets being present. No major
cleaning has been done and the measurements (see Fig. 11, D for
locus of measurements) are: A, 1.78 in.; B, 0.98 in.; C, 1.03 in. ;
D, 0.31 in.
Remarks: This frizzen is too large to have been used in the same
gunlock as the flashpan from the site (see below). It is also larger than
the average-sized specimen from the Gilbert Site (Jelks, ms.) .
Conclusions: Of a rather generalized type, such a specimen could
date anytime from about 1690 to the close of the flintlock trade period
in North America, ca. 1875.
FLASHPAN

This iron flashpan (Fig. 11, E-E') was made separate (removable )
from the lock plate. The flashpan is shallow with the underside
formed in three facets . Contact with the face of the lock plate was

322

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

A'

~

c

C'
D

I

E

E'

0

5 CM .

I

I

323

WOMACK SITE

made by a flange w hich projects from this bottom side. The rear of
the pan was fastened to the inside of the lock plate by a screw (still in
place ) which was passed through a tang, or tail, and into the inside
of the lock plate. A front section of the pan has an oblique surface to
key into the lock plate. The powder trough is essentially parallelsided, and there is a low flash shield at the r ear of the pan. There is no
waterproof feature, nor a bridle (supporting strap ) for the frizzen.
After major cleaning, this specimen measures, 0.97 in. wide (measurement taken same place as frizzen dimension "C") and 1.22 in. long
(front of oblique "key" surface to end of tail).
Remarks: Flash pans that are shallow and faceted on the undersidevery similar to this one-may occur shortly after 1705. They were extensively used by the French between about 1720 and 1750 (Hayward, 1963: 297, 347 ; Pls. 8c, 93, 95b) . The military used them from
1717 until1766, when they returned to rounded (rather than faceted)
forms (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1717, Modele 1766 ). The military
version had added the supporting strap (a metal projection from the
outer edge of the flash pan to the head of the frizzen pivot screw) for
the frizzen screw to flashpan in 1728 (ibid.: Modele 1728 ). However,
a book of gun decoration designs, first published shortly after 1705 and
republished in 1730 (Hayward, 1963 ) , has the strap still missing on
the pan of the civilian style lock. This absence continues in French
civilian guns until 1750 (ibid.: Pls. 11a, 12; H eld and Jenkins, 1957:
115 ) .
Conclusions: This flashpan is smaller and lighter than seems suitable for a military weapon . It is probably from a Fren ch trade gun
which was made between 1720 and 1750.
MAI N SPRING

The one mainspring from the site is of steel or iron and consists only
of the upper leaf section , having been broken in the bend. It is beveled
on the outside edge (side away from the lock plate). There is a screw
hole in the tang and on the inside of the spring there is a small boss
which fits into a hole in the lock plate. No major cleaning has been
attempted and this specimen has maximum width of 0.52 in.; and a
maximum thickness of 0.19 in.

Fig .

11 . Cock, Frizzen, and Flashpan . A, A' , Cock . B, Drawing of cock showing wher<>

measurements were ta ken. C,

c',

ments were taken . E, E', Flashpan.

Frizzen. D, Drawing of frizzen showing where measure-

324

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TRIGGER

Included in the collection is an iron trigger (Fig. 12, A) of long,
graceful form. The lower end terminates in a full circle or loop. This
specimen is quite similar to two of the triggers from Fort Michilimackinac (Maxwell and Binford, 1961: Pl. IV ). No major cleaning
has been attempted and this trigger is 1.84 in. long.
TRIGGER GUARDS

Briefly described below are 17 trigger guards, 15 of which have been
collected by the authors, one of which is from The University of Texas
Womack Site collection, and one of which is from the Fort St. Louis
Site in Texarkana. The last-mentioned specimen (Fig. 12, L') is included because it fits onto the broken end of one of the trigger guard
tangs (Fig. 12, L ) from the Womack Site.
Trigger Guard No . 1. This undecorated, cast brass trigger guard (Fig. 12, B, B')
has been broken across the front tang (forestock plate) and across a countersunk
screw hole in the rear (proximal) tang. The front tang has a tongue on the upper
surface with a pin hole in the tongue. This tongue was inserted into a slot in the
bottom of the gun stock and held into place by a pin passed through the stock. Both
tangs are plano-convex in cross section, w hil e the bow is biconvex in cross section.
Maximum width of bow, 0.89 in.; thickness of bow at point of maximum width,
0.13 in.
Trigger Guard No. 2. Consisting of only the bow section, this brass, cast trigger
guard (Fig. 12, C) had been broken across both ends. The lateral edges of the outside surface are bordered by two parallel grooves, while the center part is engraved
with a simple design which is reminiscent of the Chevrolet trade mark. At each end
of this design there are two small circles. The bow is biconvex in the cross section.
Maximum width of bow, 0.82 in. ; thickness of bow at point of maximum width,
0.17 in.
Trigger Guard No . 3. The bow piece (Fig. 12, D) is almost identical to No. 2,
differing from that trigger guard only in that it is broken near the midsection and
lacks the small circles at the ends of the engraved design.
M aximum width of bow, 0.81 in.; thickness of bow at point of maximum width,
0.17 in.
Trigger Guard No. 4. Broken across the front tang at the base of the finial and
across the bow, this piece was also cast in brass. Its front tang is trapezoidal in cross
section, with wide lateral bevels being present on the exterior face. A tongue with
a pin hole projects from interior surface of this tang. The margins of exterior surface
of the bow are engraved with a single line design which is lost beyond the break in
the bow.
Maximum width of front tang, 0.67 in. ; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11
Ill.

Trigger Guard No. 5. This specimen (Fig. 12, E, E') is similar to No. 4, except
that no decoration is present. A small, identical flaw appears in the metal of both
suggesting the possibility that Nos. 4 and 5 were cast in the same mold.

325

WOMACK SITE

F

,'

F

: '=

I

G

..

••
H

..

..

J
0

I

L

L.

5 CM.

I

M

Fig . 12 . Trigger and Trigger Guards . A, Trigger. 8, 8 ' , Trigger guard No . 1, C,
Trigger guard No. 2. C, Trigger guard No . 3 . E, E', Trigger guard No . 5. F, F' , Trigger
guard No . 6 . G, Trigger guard No . 7 . H, Trigger guard No. 8. I, Trigger guard No . 11. J,
Trigger guard No . 12 . K, Trigger guard No. 13 . L, L' , Trigger guards Nos. 15 and 16. M,
Trigger guard No. 17. Arrow points to mold flaw on E. The proximal or rear ends of the
trigger guards are to the right, except for C, D, and L, L' which are too fragmentary to orient.

Maximum width of front tang, 0.66 in.; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11
m.

Trigger Guard No. 6. This trigger guard (Fig. 12, F, F') is much like No. 4, except that it has been broken at the foot of the bow section and no details of the bow
can be determi ned.

326

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Maximum width of front tang, 0.64 in.; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11
ln.

Trigger Guard No. 7. Cast in brass, this specimen (Fig. 12, G) consists of a front
tang section. It is trapezoidal in cross section and has wide, lateral bevels on one
face. The finial is missing and the broken tang has been bifacially sharpened on the
distal end and along the two sides. The proximal end is broken. No measurements
were taken.
Trigger Guard No. 8. Broken across the rear tang and rear section of the bow,
this cast brass tang fragment (Fig. 12, H) has a trapezoidal cross section and wide
lateral bevels.
Maximum width of section present, 0.61 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.11 in.
Trigger Guard No. 9. Cast in brass, this specimen consists of a rear tang section
broken across both ends. It is trap e zoid~! in cross section and has wide bevels.
Maximum width across shoulders, 0.58 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.09 in.
Trigger Guard No . 10. This cast brass trigger guard is the same as No. 9, except
that it has the tongue with a pin hole.
Maximum width across shoulders, 0.58 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.09 in.
Trigger Guard No . 11. This incomplete, cast brass specimen (Fig. 12, I) consists
of a rear finial section broken across the rear tang. It is trapezoidal in cross section
and has wide lateral bevels on one face.
Maximum width across shoulders, 0.58 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.09 in.; maximum width across finial, 0.59 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.09 in.
Trigger Guard No. 12. Cast in brass, this specimen (Fig. 1'2, J) is a front finial
section which has been broken across the neck of the front tang. It is trapezoidal in
cross section and has wide bevels.
Maximum width across finial, 0.51 in.; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11
m.
Trigger Guard No. 13 . This tang section (Fig. 12, K)has been cast in brass. It is
broken across both ends and has a plano-convex cross section.
Maximum width of tang, 0.76 in.; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11 in.
Trigger Guard No. 14. Consisting of a cast brass tang section with a plano-convex
cross section, this piece has battered lateral edges. One break crossed the edge of a
screw hole that is countersunk into the exterior surface. No measurements were
taken.
Trigger. Guard No. 15. Also a cast brass tang section, this fragmentary specimen
(Fig. 16, L) has a plano-convex cross sect:on. The exterior surface of one end has
the remnants of a countersunk screw hole. No measurements were taken.
Trigger Guard No. 16. Although not from the Womack Site, this specimen (Fig.
16, L') .fits one broken end of No. 15. It is from the Fort St. Louis Site at Texarkana,
100 miles down river from Womack. Undoubtedly, they are part of the same trigger
guard. No measurements were taken.
Trigger Guard No. 17 . From The University of Texas collection, this cast brass
bow section (Fig. 16, M) is broken across both ends. Parallel to each lateral edge is

WOMACK SITE

327

a groove and, in the center, there is a simple engraved design much the same as that
on No. 2. It is, however, a slightly more stylized vers:on of that motif. This bow has
a maximum width of 0.81 in .

Remarks: Trigger Guard No. 1 resembles some of the French military specimens made between 1717 and 1746 (Boudriot, 1963 : Modele
1717-1746), and Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 16 may be tang fragments from
similar guards. Specimens No. 2, 3, and 17 are engraved with designs
like those found at the Angola Farm Site which ·dates between 1709
and 1729. This Chevrolet trademark-like element can be traced to
French pattern books of 1705 and 1730. It also occurs as a more complex, but still recognizable element, on Type I trigger guards from the
Gilbert Site (estimated to date at about 1750). However, the Womack
trigger bows (Nos. 2, 3, and 17), and those from the Angola Farm, are
somewhat thicker and wider than specimens from the Gilbert Site.
A comparison of the front and rear tangs found at Womack, Gilbert,
and Angola does not reveal any major differences . Trigger Guard No.
12, the only front finial section from the Womack Site, is longer, but is
of a simpler form, like those from the Gilbert Site. Finials from the
Anglo Farm end in an acanthus leaf. Only two of this type were found
at Gilbert, and, on these, the acanthus leaf has been depicted in a
slightly different manner.
The use of the pinned tongue for fastening the front of the guard
onto the stock of English fowling pieces dates from the early 18th
century (George, 1947: 104) . A tongue on the front tang and hook on
the rear tang are shown on a French trigger guard illustrated for the
period 1751-1765 (Held and Jenkins, 1957: 115).
Conclusions: Trigger guard bow sections 2, 3, and 17 probably represent French trade guns of about 1720. The same could be true of Nos.
4-12, although we believe that they were still in style in ca. 1750.
SIDE PLATES

The 15 side plates from the site are described individually below.
The thickness measurements in each case were taken at the ends of the
long axis. The use of the term upper for the upper lock or side screw
hole which occurs in the upper edge of the side plate, at the point of
maximum width, is to avoid the use of the term middle, and its possible
implication of a three screw plate.
Side Plate No. 1. This cast brass. apparently complete side plate consists of two
fragments that seem to fit together (they are shown together in Fig. 13, A) . The
break occurs across the rear section of the plate, along a transverse decorative groove.
The broken end of the larger piece has been bifacially resharpened, making perfect
matching of the two fragments impossible. The margins of the exterior, engraved

328

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

B

--.
0

E

F

H

G

K

J

L
M

N

0

Fig. 13. Side Plates. A, No . 1. B, No. 2. C, No . 3 . D, No. 4 . E, No. 5 . E, No . 6 . G, No.
7 . H, No . 8 . I, No . 9. J, No. 10. K, No . 11. L, No . 12 . M, No. 13 . N, No . 14. 0, No . 15 . P,
Side plate from pistol in Texas Memorial Museum collections . The proximal or rear ends of
plates are to the right.

surface of b::Jth sections are beveled, while the lateral edges of the plates are undercut toward the interior surface-evidently to facilitate inlaying.
The larger of the two pieces is extensively engraved, with the central design consisting of a trophy of arms and a boar's head. An arch-like design appears on each

WOMACK SITE

329

side of this central element. The one on the front side vaguely resembles the Chevrolet trade mark (similar motifs were found on three of the trigger guard bows ) , while the one on the rear side combines this design with small scroll elements. An elliptical-shaped element with a circle at each end and a leaf scroll, vaguely of acanthus
form, finish out the pattern. The upper and lower edges are bordered by a double
row of small, essentially triangular-shaped, marks. The piece has oxidized to a black
color.
The other section, evidently from the same plate, is a triangular-shaped rear (or
proximal ) piece. It also has a double row of triangular-like marks. Assuming that
the two do belong to the same specimen, it is a two-screw side plate, with the distance between the front and upper screw holes being ZU inches. The larger section
is 0.05 to 0.08 in. in thickness; the small section is 0.06 to 0.08 in. in thickness.

Side Plate No. 2. This incomplete side plate (Fig. 13, B ) is of cast brass, flat in
cross section, beveled on the sides of the exterior surface, and undercut at the lateral
edges. It is transversely broken across the distal, or front, section. Included in the
engraved design is a double row of triangular-like marks which, on the main body
of the plate, are parallel to the top edge and extend down the border of a transverse
groove which sets off the triangular-shaped proximal section. The proximal part of
the plate also has a double row of triangles, but these parallel both the upper and
lower edges. The central engraved design is a chase scene consisting of a stag and
two collared dogs, one with a curled tail. On the lower margin of the rear piece there
is a small hole which was probably for the trigger pin. The upper side plate screw
hole is present, and, although the part which would be expected to contain the front
screw hole is missing, there is no doubt that this was a two screw hole side plate .
The thickness is 0.04 to 0.05 in.
Side Plate No. 3. This cast brass side phte fragment (Fig. 13, C) is flat in cross
section, is slightly beveled along the sides of the exterior surface, has undercut
lateral edges, and is transversely broken at both ends. The engraved design in the
central portion consists of two opposing acanthus, or leaf-scroll, elements joined by
several parallel lines. The break along the front end cuts through a small circle.
Parallel to each lateral edge is a single engraved line and a row of triangles. The
upper screw hole is present and the thickness is from 0.04 to 0.05 in.
Side Plate No. 4. Consisting of a small part of the central section, this cast brass
side plate (Fig. 13, D) is flat, slightly beveled along the margins of the exterior
surface, and undercut along the lateral edges. It is broken across both ends, with
rear break passing through the upper screw hole. Rather badly battered, it appears
to be engraved with an acanthus scroll design. The thickness is 0.05 to 0.06 in.
Side Plate No. 5. Made of cast brass this central section fragment (Fig. 13, E) is
flat, beveled along the margins of the exterior surface, and undercut at the lateral
edges. It is broken across both ends, with the break at the rear edge passing through
the upper screw hole. The poorly executed engraved design consists of a drum
flanked by banners, and, along the borders of the plate, an engraved line. The plate
has oxidized to a black color and is 0.05 to 0.06 in. in thickness.
Side Plate No. 6. Of cast brass, this piece (Fig. 13, F ) is apparently from the front
section of a side plate. Its exterior surface is slightly convex and beveled. on the sides;
the lateral edges, however, are not undercut. An engraved line parallels each border,
with one of these (the lower line) terminating in a scroll. The intact distal end
contains a side screw hole, while the other end is broken across the edge of a
cartouche-like element. The thickness is from 0.06 to 0.08 in.

330

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Side Plate No. 7. This und ecorated cartouche fragment (Fig. 13, G) is of cast
brass, flat in cross section, beveled along the margins of th e exterior surface, and
undercut at the lateral edges. It is 0.08 in. in thickness.
Slide Plate No.8. Broken at each end, this cast brass side plate fragment (Fig. 13,
H ) has und ercut lateral edges, and is essentially flat in cross section , although the

oval-shaped escutcheon has a slightly convex exterior surface. This plate is a simple
version of the pierced or fretted type, and the outlined leaf-scroll elements are
emp hasized by engraved lines. It is 0.06 to 0.07 in. in thickness.

Side Plate No. 9. This specimen (Fig. 13, I ) is the proxim al section of a s:de plate
decorated in the same manner as No. 8. It is of cast brass, is fl at in cross section, and
h as been broken across the upper end. Only one edge appears to be under cut. The
thickness is from 0.07 to 0.08 in.
Slide Plate No. 10. This specimen (Fig. 13, J) is almost identical to No. 9. It is a
pro xim al section of a cast brass side plate which was flat in cross section but not
und ercut. Although broke~ across both ends, only a small portion of the proximal
part of the decorative scroll is missing. Because of the ext ent of oxidation, it is difficult to be sure, but one edge of the upp er screw hole may be present along portions
of the distal break. The thickn ess is from 0.05 to 0.06 in.
Side Plate No . 11. This piece (Fig. 13, K) is of cast brass, is flat in cross section,
and lacks undercut lateral edges. Evidently representing the front part of a pierced
type side plate. it is outlined and engraved to depict the h ead of a serpent (or
dragon) . The distal screw hole is present in front of the serpent's m outh. The plate
h as been broken across an excised area in the serpent's neck. The thickness is from
0.07 to 0.08 in.
Side Plates Nos. 12 and 13. Both of these quite fragmentary and badly oxidized
pieces (Fig. 13, L, M ) are of iron. As a r esult, their identifica tion is tentative and
no significant measurements can be m ade. H : > wever , they were probably fretted.
Side Plate No . 14. Thi s specimen (Fig. 13, N ) is of cast brass and has a flat ext erior surface which is beveled along the edges. The lateral edges, h owever, are not
undercut. Broken across both ends, the distal break appears just beyond the upper
screw hole, while the proximal brea k occurs just above a small, right-angled corner
on the bottom of the plate. There are two round punch m arks on the interior surface.
They are 0.07 in. in diameter and 0.11 in. apart. The thickness is from 0.11 to 0.3 in.
Side Plate No. 15. Probably of sheet brass, th' s undecorated proxim al fragm ent
(Fig. 13, 0 ) is transversely broken on the distal side. At the edge of the other end
is what appears to be the proximal hole of a two-holed side plate. The thickness is
uniform at 0.025 in.

Remarks: The flat, unfretted side plate of simple outline form, and
decorated chiefly by means of engraving, began to be used on fashionable weapons by the French about 1715-1720 (Hayward, 1963: 297,
Pl. 92) . The English, by contrast, did not adopt this style until about
1750 ; they abandoned it between 1798 and 1800 (George, 1947: 111,
112) .
. Note the curvature of the bottom edges of side plates Nos. 1 and 2.
According to Peterson ( 1956: 36, Pl. 38) lock plates with such a curve

WOMACK SITE

331

would generally date prior to 1770. Whether or not a lock plate used
with this type of side plate would normally have a matching curve
along its lower edge has not been determined. It does, at least, seem
possible. A pistol illustrated by Hayward ( 1963: Pls. 9b, 10b) with a
side plate comparable to No. 1 from Womack does have a matching
curve along the lower edge of the lock plate. The apparent absence of
this style side plate at the Angola Site makes it seem unlikely that they
were common on guns traded prior to 1730. This general style of side
plate is present at the Gilbert Site which is dated at ca. 1750 (Jelks,
ms. ) .
The design on the side plate of a French pistol dated at about 1720
(Hayward, 1963: Pl. 10b) is so similar to that found on specimen No.
1 from the Womack Site, that both could have been copied from the
same basic pattern. Designs based on military trophies and the chase
were used by European gunmakers and are rather difficult to pin down
as to source and age. On the other hand, the Chevrolet trademark-like
element (i.e. , a design made of essentially parallel, but offset lines) ,
represented in a stylized form on side plate No. 1, and trigger guards
Nos. 2 and 3, and the opposing leaf scroll elements, found on side plate
No. 3, are motifs that repeatedly occur at other Texas sites where
French trade is indicated (Jelks, ms.) .
Side plate No. 14 (Fig. 13, N) , while quite fragmentary, gives the
impression of having had a markedly curved lower edge. This possibly
suggests an early 18th century date, while the thickness and lack of
decoration suggest a military weapon. The outline form of side plate
No. 15 (Fig. 13, 0) resembles the 1767 model fusil made for French
infantry lieutenants (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1767 ), although it does
appear to be smaller and perhaps too thin for use on a military weapon.
Side plate No. 6 (Fig. 13, F) may be transitional between the fretted
(pierced) and the non-fretted styles. It has the symmetrical cartouche
and elaborated outline of the fretted style, but it is not pierced. Side
plate No. 7 appears to be similar to No.6. Side plates Nos. 8, 9, 10, and
11 (Fig. 13, H-K) are fragments of fretted or pierced side plates and
are of a type that was in use at the Angola Farm which is dated at 1709
to 1729 (Ford, 1936; Swanton, 1911). According to Hayward (1963:
45), the pierced side plate on expensive (fine class ) French guns was
going out of fashion by about 1710.
Side plate fragments 8, 9, and 10 (or 8, 9, and 11) could be from the
same specimen. If true, then only the head of the serpent would be
rendered in reptilian form; the remainder, the "body," would consist
of a pierced leaf scroll design. A possibly similar side plate from a pistol
in the Texas Memorial Museum Collections (catalogue No. 1721-270)

332

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

is illustrated in Figure 13, P. This weapon is badly rusted and no identification marks can be seen, but the style is French, and the authors
believe that it probably dates from the period 1700-1725.
A generally similar pierced type side plate was found on a gun associated with Burial 7 at Angola Farm. The butt plate tang on this
Angola specimen was shortened and the finial was of the acanthus leaf
style-both of these appear by 1710 as general features of the leading
French fashion (Hayward, 1963: 45). The trigger guard bow from
this gun is engraved with a design (much like the Chevrolet trademark) similar to those found on some of the specimens from the Womack Site. Portions of this decorative element can also be found in the
French Pattern books of De Lacollombe which date from 1705-1730
(ibid.: 297). The pierced side plate had evidently disappeared by the
time the Gilbert Site was occupied, probably about 1750 (Jelks, ms.).
It would seem from the foregoing data that gunsmiths producing
weapons used in the French trade followed the leading French fashions
when these designs were suitable for reproduction in a relatively inexpensive manner. Since fashion change is represented, it seems possible that these weapons were being made for the ordinary French
market and not solely for the Indian trade.
Conclusions: The pierced type side plate, Nos. 8 through 11, probably represents the French trade gun of ca. 1720. The solid type side
plate of simple outline, Nos. 1 through 5, represents the French trade
gun of ca. 1750, and quite possibly earlier.
GUN BARRELS

Including a specimen containing the breech section, nine iron barrels :were recovered from the site. Five of the barrel pieces were originally round but are broken across both ends and flattened. The other
four have retained more diagnostic features and are more fully described below.
Gun Barrels Nos. 6 and 7. Barrel section No.6 (Fig. 14, A) is 12 inches long, bent,
and broken on both ends. One end, however, is still round and approximately og .55
caliber after major cleaning. A flat, longitudinal facet, averaging 0.19 inches in
width, extends the full length of this piece. In the absence of a sight or pin (barrel
mounting) lug, there is no sure way of properly orienting this piece.
Barrel section No. 7 (Fig. 14, B) is 5.25 inches long, round in cross section, and
bro~en at both ends. After major cleaning the caliber measures approximately .58.
There is a flat, slightly raised sighting rib, averaging 0.16 inches wide and extending the entire length of the upper side. On the underside a short flat for a mounting
lug has been filed in the barrel. One end of this flat is undercut and interrupted by
a break. A pin lug was probably set into the bottom of the barrel at this point. It is
possible, but we believe unlikely, that a sight was dove-tailed into the barrel at this

333

WOMACK SITE

..
A

B

c

-1

:

0

,'

E

I

G

E'
0
I

5 CM.

I

Fig. 14. Gun Barrels and Rampipes . A, Section of gun barrel No. 6 . B, Gun barrel No . 7 .
C, Section of gun barrel No. 8. D, Gun barrel No. 9 , with breech section . E, E' , Rampipe No.
1. F, Rampipe No. 2 . G, Rampipe No. 3.

point. If we have correctly assumed the pin lug location, then the rib would be on
the top of the barrel.

Remarks: Among the features of the first standard French mu sket, model of 1707,
Peterson (1956: 172) lists a flat face, which extends to within five inches of the
muzzle, on top of a round barrel. The caliber of this model, .69, is considerably
larger than any of those from the Womack Site. The use of a slightly raised rib by
the French dates from about 1685 to 1720 (Hayward, 1963 : 44, 49, and 78 ). This
characteristic does not generally appear on English guns ( ibid.: 78 ).

334

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gun Barrel No.8 . This fragmentary barrel (Fig. 14, C) is 6.13 inches long, round
in cross section, and has a pin lug brazed into the underside. A round pin passed
through the forestock and this lug, keeping the barrel in place. No major cleaning
has been done, but the caliber appears to be .55.
Gun Barrel No. 9. This octagonal barrel fragment (Fig. 14, D) includes the
largely intact breech section. Exclusive of the breech plug it is 6.38 inches long and
is .58 caliber after major cleaning. Across the flats this piece is a maximum of 1.125
inches in diameter. The breech plug is intact, although the tail of the tang is broken
off. The back of the breech plug is notched for the upper lock plate screw. A touch
hole is present on the side of the breech.
Remarks: The breech section of this piece measures 1.13 inches in diameter across
the flats. According to Hamilton (1960a: 208; 1960b: 126) a breech diameter in
excess of one inch should eliminate the 19th century Northwest gun and may be
assumed to in:licate an 18th century trade gun, an 18th or 19th century_mili.ta.ry
musket, or Colonial smoothbore. Since the bore size of the Womack specimen does
n::>t match those common to the French, English, or Colonial muskets of the 'p eriod,
it appears probable that this is from an 18th century trade gun. We cannot determine
the origin, but the caliber is larger than those believed by Hamilton (ibid.) to be
typical of the late 17th and early 18th centuries. We believe bores of caliber .58 and
.60 represent the French trade gun of a slightly later period, ca. 1750.
At the Gilbert Site (Jelks, ms.) , where the guns represant principally items of
French trade, all, but two, of the measurable bores were approximately caliber
.58-.60. The exceptions were smaller, approximately .55. At least one earlier
association of a breech measuring over one inch in diameter with balls of .58 caliber
can be n::>ted: At the Angola Farm such a barrel and 11 balls of approximately
caliber .58 were found with Burial No. 4 (personal observation). It is a highly
conjectural process to determine the probable bores in which any particular size ball
was used, except, that it is usually safe to assume that the ball was intended for a
bore larger than itself. Depending on the thickness of the patch (a piece of greased
cloth or leather used as wrapping for a rifle ball), a ball may often be intended for
use in a bore considerably larger. Hamilton (1960b: 132) believes a useful estimate
of caliber for smoothbores can be obtained by adding 0.02 in. to the actual ball size
-we tend to agree.
Conclusions: This breech section probably represents an 18th century trade gun
and could date from ca. 1720 to ca. 1750.
RAMROD GUIDES

The site yielded three ramrod guides or rampipes-essentially
tubular-shaped pieces of brass afixed to the forestock and used to hold
the ramrod in place.
Ramrod Guide No. 1. This complete specimen (Fig. 14, E, E') of cast brass is a
lower or terminal guide; so-called because it was afixed to the proximal portion of
the forest6ck. The proximal end consists of a long pointed tail or tang which has
recurved lateral edges and which was probably inlaid into the lower surface of the
forestock. The distal section of the guide is tubular-shaped, although the edges are
not joined. The upper edges of this portion are flanged and pierced for a pin which
secured the guide to the forestock. Five longitudinal facets have been filed on the

WOMACK SITE

335

exterior suri ace of the tubular part, an:l a ring encircles each end of the tube. These
two presumed decorative rings appear t :> have been formed in the casting process
and r etouch 2d by filing. The lower external surface at the proximal end is damaged,
possibly from wzar pnduced in balancing the gun across a saddle. This guide has
an external d:ameter of 0.34 in. and a length of 2.75 in.

Ramrod Guide No . 2. This quite fragmentary piece (Fig. 14, F ) is from the
tubular portion of a cast sheet termin al ramrod guide. It is too incomplete for
further description and meaningful measurement.
Ramrod Gu:de No. 3. Representing an intermediate or upper guide, this tubularshaped piece (Fig. 14, G ) of sheet brass is complete. Annular ribs are present on
the exterior surface, with only the center rib having a matching groove on the interior surface. The upper edges are brought together, flanged, and pierced. This
specimen is 0.42 in. in diameter and 1.03 in. in length.

Remarks: The recurved tail of specimen No. 1 closely resembles a
ramrod guide obtained from Burial No. 7 at the Angola Farm Site
(personal observation ). Of the examples of ramrod guides from the
Gilbert Site, it is similar to only one, a large specimen of iron. Ramrod
guide No. 3, on the other hand, does not resemble in detail the typical
intermediate guide from either Angola or Gilbert. It is more like those
from the 19th century English trade gun, although it lacks the distinctive CC marking found on guides from that weapon. Ribbed rampipes
of this general form were fairly common in the early 18th century,
appearing on both English and French arms.
Conclusions: Ramrod guides Nos. 1 and 2 are probably from French
trade guns, with the former most probably dating about 1720 and the
latter between 1720 and 1750. The third specimen is of a more generalized type which was present throughout the 18th century and lasted
on into the 19th century, where it occurs on the Northwest gun.
THUMB PLATE ESCUTCHEONS

Four thumb plate escutcheons were recovered from the site. A
thumb plate escutcheon is set into the upper surface of the stock between the proximal end of the breech plug tang and distal end of the
comb of the stock, if used on a shoulder weapon. This position is the
same if used on a pistol, except of course, there would be no comb.
Thumb Plate Escutcheon N o. 1. Complete, this cast brass specimen (Fig. 15, A,
A') has a concave inner surface and convex external surface. The exterior side is cast
or filled in low relief, beveled on the edges, and bears an engraved design. An acanthus leaf element appears at the top of the design, and a series of curvilinear lines
and triangles from the remainder of the motif. A solid cylindrical peg is molded into
the inner surface.
Thumb Plate Escutcheon No . 2. Quite similar to the above, this cast brass escut-

336

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

G'

0
I

Fig.

15.

8

8"

D

D. .
5 CM.
I

Thumb Plate Escutcheons. A, A', No. 1. B, B', No.2. C, C', No.3. D, D', No.4.

cheon (Fig. 15, B, B') is also concave-convex in cross section. On the external surface there is an engraved design which is basically similar to that on specimen
No. 1. A s~lid cylindrical peg is molded into the inner surface.
Thumb Plate Escutcheon No. 3. Broken across the lower edge, this cast brass escutcheon (Fig. 15, C, C') has a concave internal surface and convex exterior surface.
A solid cylindrical peg is molded onto the internal surface, while the exterior surfaces is molded in low relief and retouched with engraving. The design at the top
vaguely resembles an inverted plume, although we believe that it is an adaption of
the acanthus pattern. Double ridges border each side.
Thumb Plate Escutcheon No. 4. This cast brass specimen (Fig. 15, D,D') is concave on the interior surface and convex on the exterior surface. There is a hollow
cylindrical peg molded onto the inner surface while the exterior surface is molded

WOMACK SITE

337

in low relief and retouched by means of engraving. This resulting design is dominated by a lion-like mask. The edges and lower portion of the escutcheon are
adorned with a curving ridge which ends in scrolls just below this mask.

Remarks: The occurrence of the four thumb plate escutcheons at
the Womack Site is unusual, as they have not been observed by the
writers in any of the collections from other historic sites in Texas.
Moreover, they do not conform to any of the illustrations of English
escutcheons which J. N. George (1947: Fig. XVII) indicates as being
standard for the period between 1720 and 1750.
Escutcheon No. 3 is topped with a stylized floral element which
strongly resembles a distal end lock plate design taken from patterns
by De Lacollombe and published in Paris about 1705 and again in
1730 (Hayward, 1963: 297, Pl. 93). This is rendered in a crude form
suggestive of "mass" production-perhaps supplied by a large brass
founding center such as that at Liege (Hayward, 1963: 165). (Indeed,
it is quite possible that most of the brass mounts on the French trade
guns are from these foundries.) The decorative escutcheon No. 4 is
quite similar to a trigger f9re tang pattern in the same pattern book.
Conclusions: The design motifs on the escutcheons, especially No.4,
were possibly based on French patterns available as early as 1705. It
must be noted, however, that these pattern books were widely used on
the European continent.
BUTT PLATES

During the period apparently represented by the Womack flintlock
parts, a butt plate was a sheet of metal fastened across the end and
portion of the top or comb of the butt stock. It was secured by various
combinations of screws and pins, and, in some English guns, with small
spikes. Thirteen butt plates are recognized in the collection from the
Womack Site.
Butt Plate No. 1. Incomplete, this cast brass butt plate (Fig. 16, A) is broken
across the finial (decorative projection at the upper end) and lower part of the heel
(the curved area of the plate). A tongue, for attaching the plate to the wooden stock,
is molded onto the interior surface of the finial and has been broken across the pin
hole. The finial area is flat on the interior surface and convex on the exterior surface. The tang and heel areas are also convex on the outside surface but concave on
the interior. The lateral edges of the heel are beveled. Decoration on the exterior
consists of four longitudinal grooves which tend to converge toward the finial. The
toe area (missing here) of such a plate was usually secured by one screw.
Butt Plate No. 2. Broken across the neck (constricted p:)rtion) of the finial and
across the heel, this specimen (Fig. 16, B) is also of cast brass. The tang area (the
upper, tapered projection between the heel and the finial) is plano-convex in cross
section, while the heel is concavo-convex in cross section. The decoration on the

338

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

8

c

A

E

···-·]

~

~--~
G

H

G'

K

0

5 CM .

L

Fig . 16. Butt Plates. A, No. 1 . 8, No. 2 . C, No. 3. D, No. 4 . E, No. 5 . F, No . 6. G, No . 7 .
H, No . 8 . I, No . 9 . J, No . 10. K, No. 11. L, No . 12 .

339
convex exterior surface is basically similar to the above, differing from that specimen only in having two additional lines inside of, and parallel to, the two inner
grooves. The grooves terminate just above the break across the heel.

Butt Plate No . 3. This specimen (Fig. 16, C) is of cast brass, is broken across the
heel, across the upper edge of the finial, and though restored, across the juncture of
the finial and the tang. A tongue is present on the interior surface of the finial , but
it has been broken across the pin hole. The exterior surface of the tang is convex and
formed into three longitudinal facets. Five parallel grooves cross the tang just below
the finial, angling down from each side and extending straight across the center
facet. The exterior surface of the heel is beveled at the sides, while the interior
surface is concave.
Butt Plate No. 4. This cast brass plate (Fig. 16, D ) has been broken just below
the finial and across the beginning of the heel area. It is concavo-convex in cross
section. There is a groove across the tang (just below the missing finial) and three
longitudinal facets below this.
Butt Plate No . 5. Consisting only of a tang section, this piece (Fig. 16, E ) has
been pounded flat. However, marks typical of a contouring tool are present on the
interior surface, and there is no doubt that this tang was once concavo-convex in
cross section. A single engraved line, superimposed by small triangular-shaped
marks, appears along each side and terminates in a scroll at the top of the design. A
small oval is engraved just below the scroll and, below this, is the main design: an
unstrung bow, quiver, and two clubs.
Butt Plate No . 6. Of iron, this tang section (Fig. 16, F ) is broken just below the
finial and across the top of the heel. The lateral edges of the heel that are intact are
beveled and there is a countersunk screw hole in the center edge of the lower break.
The cross section is concavo-convex, and three longitudinal facets are formed on
the tang.
Butt Plate No . 7. Consisting of a finial section which ends in an acanthus leaf
pattern, this specimen of cast brass (Fig. 16, G, G' ) is broken at the p:>int of juncture
with the tang. There is a tongue with a pin hole on the under surface. In cross
section it is slightly concavo-convex.
Butt Plate No. 8. This finial section (Fig. 16, H) is of cast brass and has been
broken across the lower part of the finial. It is topped with an acanthus leaf pattern
and is slightly concavo-convex in cross section.
Butt Plate No . 9. Of cast brass, this piece (Fig. 16, I ) represents the lower section
of a butt plate. The outer edges are beveled, while the exterior surface is convex
and the interior one is concave. A screw hole is countersunk into the exterior surface, and on the interior surface a ring-shaped area about this hole has been deliberately cast thicker than the remainder of the plate. A mark, apparently a crown
over an R, is stamped on the exterior, just above the bottom edge.
Butt Plate No. 10. This lower part of a butt plate (Fig. 16, J) is essentially the
same as No. 9, although it lacks the interior reinforcement around the screw hole,
as well as the mark at the lower edge.
Butt Plate No. 11. Also from the lower section of a butt plate, this piece (Fig. 16,
K) is broken across a screw hole countersunk into the exterior surface. The plate has
been pounded flat and the exterior lateral marginal edges are beveled.
Butt Plate No. 12. Apart from battermg on the lower edge of the toe and a
concavo-convex cross section, this p1ece (F1g. 16, L) lS much like No. 11.

340

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Butt Plate No. 13. This iron tang sectwn-it IS broken just below the finial and
across the heel area-has been hammered almost flat but was probably once concavoconvex in 1cross section. The edge across what was the heel area has been bifacially
sharpened, probably for use as a scraper.

Remarks: For purposes of analysis, butt plate sections 1 and 2 can
be combined with finial pieces 7 and 8. Their decorative patterns match
and, combined, they are in close agreement with the complete brass
butt plates from the Angola Farm. A similar tang decoration-i.e.,
longitudinal grooves-occurs on a butt plate from the Fish Hatchery
Site near Natchitoches, Louisiana (Gregory, 1962: 60-61). The short
tang (as opposed to the long tang variety found on late 17th century
guns) with the finial ending in an acanthus leaf was in general vogue
in France by 1710 (Hayward, 1963: 45) . Its occurrence at Angola indicates that it had been used as a design motif on French trade guns
before 1730.
Butt plates 3 and 4, of brass, and No. 6, of iron, each have three
longitudinal facets-a feature which does not appear on corresponding
gun parts from the Gilbert Site. While No. 3 differs from Nos. 1, 2, 7,
and 8 in decorative detail, we believe that it is essentially of the same
type.
The engraved bow, quiver, and arrow design on specimen No. 5 is
generally similar to decorations found on five butt plates and two
side plates at the Gilbert Site. As noted in the report on that site
(Jelks, ms.), the English were using similar motifs on fine weapons in
the period between 1702 and 1720. The bow and quiver can be traced
back at least as early as 1685 in French gun design (Hayward, 1963:
91). A French pattern book first issued in about 1705 and republished
in 1730, shows a design combining an unstrung bow, an arrow, and a
club (ibid.: Pl. 93) . Its use on fine French weapons of about 1720 is
illustrated by a fowling piece made by Germain (ibid. : Pl. 8c) . Hamilton (1960b: Pl. 52) shows a basically similar design for an historic
Osage site dated between 1730 and 1775. Like patterns can also be
seen on specimens from Fort Michilimacknac which dates from the
latter half of the 18th century (Maxwell and Binford, 1961: 101102). Two such designs also occur on an early 19th century trade gun
made by P . Bond (Russell, 1957: 113-114) . As a decorative motif,
then, the bow, arrow, quiver, and club were in use for more than 100
years. In regard to French use, these design elements were originally
employed on sporting weapons of fine grade. Their presence on five
of the Gilbert Site butt plates, as well as two of the side plates, suggest
that they were also at least one of the major designs used on the
French trade gun of 1750.

WOMACK SITE

341

Butt plate No. 9, with a possible maker's mark, matches the butt
plate from the Fish Hatchery Site, as well as those from Angola Farm
(personal observation) . All are approximately 0.25 in. wider than the
specimens from the Gilbert Site. By contrast, butt plates Nos. 10, 11,
and 12 are narrower and more nearly resemble the Gilbert pieces.
Butt plate No. 13 is similar to No. 6, although it lacks the screw hole
and any facets that might have been present would have been obliterated by hammering.
Conclusions: Specimens Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, and 9 probably represent
French trade guns which date about 1720. Butt plates, Nos. 3, 4, and 6,
with their faceted tangs, suggest a variant form which appears to predate specimens from the Gilbert Site. On the other hand, Nos. 5, 10, 11,
and 12 do not differ in any important detail from those found at Gilbert
and could, therefore, represent French trade guns of ca. 1750; they
could also be earlier. In view of the length of its tang, butt plate No.
13 is possibly of a form earlier than those from Gilbert.
GUNFLINTS

In addition to the 23 native-made gunflints, there are eight gunflints
believed to be of European manufacture. These can be sorted into two
categories,-spall gunflints and conventional gunflints. Both types were
mounted in a cock vise and, when the cock was released by the trigger,
were struck against the striking surface of the frizzen, thus producing
a spark to ignite the priming powder in the flash pan.
Spall Gunflint . Three spall type gunflints (Hamilton's gunspalls) can be recognized in collection largely on the basis of their wedge-shaped or plano-convex longitudinal sections (Fig. 18 ) . One of these (Fig. 17, M ) is made of pinkish-tan chert
and is extensively reworked. The other two (Fig. 17, K, L ), of light gray chert, have
retained their original form. They are 1.03 and 1.ZZ in. wide, and 0.88 and 1.0 in.
long.
Remarks: According to Hamilton (1960c: 76- 77; 1964: 5Z-53) , gunspalls were
produced by detaching wedged-shaped spalls from a small, rounded cobble of chert
( Subtype A ) or flint of unknown source (Subtype B), as well as from core remnants
of flint from known quarries (Subtype C). Our examination of a large number of
spall gunflints from Texas sites suggest that at least some of them (including specimens from Womack, Gilbert, Spanish Fort, and Fort St. Louis at Texarkana ) were
produced by techniques which involved rudimentary preparatiOn of a core. Many
of these specimens have little or no secondary flaking along the lateral edges, nor
a bulb of percussion visible on the plano surface. However, thi s plano surface usually
has at least one transverse flake scar, apparently produced in dressing the original
core. Also in the heel area of these gunspalls a prepared fa cet or striking platform
often is still apparent. In these ways, the cited Texas specimens appear to bridge the
technological (and poss1bly chronological) gap ·b etween the Subtype A spall gun-

342

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

D

F

E

G

J

H

N

M

L

K

0
0
l

p

Q

5 CM.

I

Fig . 17. Gunflints . A-G, Native-made gunflints. H-J, Possible native-made gunfl ints.
K-M, Spall gunflints . N-P, Convent ional French gunflints . Q, Conventional English gunflint.

WOMACK SITE

343

flints produced from and unprepared pebble core acc::>rding to the method described
by Hamilton, and the conventional gunflint produced from blades removed from a
carefully prepared core.

Conclusions: The three, probably French, gunspalls from Womack could date
anytime from the early 17th century to about 1750.
Conventional Gunflints. Five gunflints are included, four of which appear to be
of French origin and one (Fig. 17, Q) of English origin. Three (Fig. 17, N-P) of
the probable French ones are of the characteristic blond color, while the fourth is
grayish-white. Two of these have D-shaped outlines, with rounded backs (Fig. 17,
N, P) and one (Fig. 17, 0 ) is square with two edges. The latter has the distinctivel.y
French "gnawed" retouching (secondary flaking) on the sides (Fig. 18). One blond
flint (Fig. 17, P) is reworked in the Indian fashion.
The fifth gunflint (Fig. 17, Q) is rectangular in outline and dark gray in color.
Its recognition as English rests mainly on technique of manufacture which is identified by single blow undercut fracture (Woodard, 1960: 30-31; Hamilton, 1964: 53 ) .
The French gunflints are from 0.94 to 1.0Z in. wide, and from 0.75 to 0.88 in .
long. The probable English one is 0.69 in. wide and 0.94 in long. •
Remarks: As Hamilton (1960c: 75) makes clear, the occurrence of French gunspalls and gunflints at the sites is not, by itself, a reliable indication of direct trade
with the French.
According to Witthoft (cited in Hamilton, J960c : 74-79; 1964: 5Z), the conventional gunflint began to displace the spall gunflint about 1750, and, by 1775, almost
all were of the conventional type. However, the conventional gunflint was apparently first introduced into the Western Hemisphere about 1680 (Hamilton, 1964:
55 ). We note (personal observation) in the collection of offerings from a burial at
the Angola Farm Site that there were eight spalls and one honey colored gunflint.
This burial probably dates about 17ZO, and it is to our knowledge, the earliest date
example of a honey colored French gunflint from the sites discussed in this reportConclusions: The French gunflints could easily have been present at the Womack
Sie by 17ZO, and possibly earlier. We have no estimate concerning the English specimen, but we seriously doubt a pre-1700 origin.
SPHERICAL BULLETS

Six spherical bullets, molded lead balls (Fig. 19, A, B), were recovered from the Womack Site. All are oxidized, and all, but one,
deformed. This exception shows mold marks and flat sprue cut. Following the system devised by Hamilton (1960b: 128-129), calibers and
gaugest can be worked out for five of the spherical bullets.
• No attempt has been made to indicate what size guns these gunflints (and the
gunspalls ) were intended to be used with; it remains a difficult problem (Woodard,
1960: 36 ) .
t The gauge is the interior diameter (bore ) of a barrel expressed by the number
of spherical lead bullets fitting it required to make a pound.

344

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Grains
149.6
215.4
218.0
232.2
267.7

Approximate Caliber
.49-.50
.53-.55
.53-.55
.55
.55-.58

Gauge
56-36
32-28
32-28
28
28-24

LEAD SHOT

The site yielded two oxidized and deformed specimens of lead small
shot. These shots were weighed and assigned sizes (see below) which
correspond with the weight classes listed in an early table (George,
1947: 211). Early size designations often do not match modern ones.
Since the early sorting was based on the use of graded screens, shot of
different weights may receive the same label.
Grains
Size
5.1
#1 shot
13.0
Duck shot
QUESTIONABLE GUNPART

Included in this category is a slender, bent piece of iron which may
represent a gun pin. Its fragmentary condition, however, makes positive identification impossible.

Possible Sword Guard
Of cast brass, this broken specimen (Fig. 19, C) appears to be from
a hemispherical- or spherical-shaped object, possibly a sword guard.
The external surface is convex and the interior one is concave. A light,
probably engraved, design appears on the exterior surface. Although
incomplete, it seems to have consisted of a centrally placed circle
-formed by two concentric lines and, radiating out from this element, a
series of panels separated from one another by sets of parallel lines.

Remarks: This specimen could be from the cup of Caribbean cuphilted type sword. If so, it probably dates back to the 17th century
(Peterson, 1956: 74) .
Trade Axes and Wedges
Three complete and three fragmentary axe heads and a wedge have
been found at the site. All are of iron and some have been cleaned of
rust in an effort to locate maker's marks or names. Unfortunately none
was found, although several did show use scars.

~
~

Spall G.unfl1nt

(onventtonal Enqltsh G.unfltnt
"'.' ~ r4,J

fl.ect.dton

1

8 lb 5

'

"

:';(,!,~

!V', I •
I

fd~e

LJ"l

-~·cl

-Bevel

t'

Undercut

lndtan

·r

fclce-

t'<l

Edqe , - - -

I

Heel

!;;J':« w

·,,

-~-6c1ck
.

-Stde

>-<

j;<ij'/7/'\R u . e t t o n bulb of p01Ycuss1on

Convent1ono.l french Ciunfl1nt

SIde -

1

. •'

11 11

~

..,

(f>

04ck

B .. lb of

>

(')

Ed'le-

fro.d:ures

G.unfltnt

~_
..,,lbl
~,

~I
f

c~k)

fdC~t

w

-t>-

fi$1.

18. Idealized $ketche$ llf the malor type$ Qf eunfllnts found In Norteiio f11cus sites.

U\

346

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

One of the complete axes (Fig. 19, D), which has not been cleaned
because of extreme rusting, does not have a hafting eye for a handle.
It is single-bitted and has a swept back blade. Similar specimens have
been found in Pennsylvania at historic sites which yielded French
trade items dated between 1650 and 1718 (Cadzow, 1936: 218, Pl. 90 ) .
A second complete single-bitted axe head (Fig. 19, E) is of the camp
or belt (i.e., light) type. It has a broad, swept back blade and a rounded
hafting eye. It was cleaned of rust, but no marks were found. One of
the fragmentary specimens (Fig. 19, F) , lacking only the cutting edge,
is of the same type. After breakage the remaining portion of this specimen was straightened out, inadvertently revealing the method of manufacture: the iron was forged, shaped, and then bent to form an eye for
the handle, and, finally, the two ends were forged together to form
the cutting edge (All belt axe heads examined by the authors have been
fashioned in this manner, while the blades of regular axes and wedges
are of simpler construction.). When cleaned this fragmentary camp
axe was found to contain small cut marks on one face, possibly a result
of use as an anvil. Similar scars have been observed on axes and
wedges from the Gilbert and Spanish Fort sites.
The specimen shown in Figure 19, G is a single-bitted camp axe
that was probably forged by a blacksmith at one of the trading post
sites. Apparently made from a flat, rectangular-shaped piece of iron,
the blade was first shaped then the lateral edges above the blade were
bent to receive a handle. Since this hole, unlike those of the other axes,
parallels the long axis, it would require a handle bent at an angle of
about 70 to 75 degrees, or, a limb with a branch extending out at about
the same angle. A small perforation in one side was evidently made to
receive a pin and, thus, to secure the handle.
The two remaining axes are single-bitted blade fragments which, in
each case, appear to be of the camp type. At least, they have the same
blade form and were constructed by forging together the ends of a long
piece of iron.
The blade of the one rim wedge (Fig. 19, H ) from the Womack Site
differs from those of the axe heads in that both lateral edges are flared.
The top of this wedge has signs of extensive battering, perhaps from
being hammered or from use as an hammer. When cleaned this piece
showed the same type of cut marks as noted for one of the fragmentary
camp axes . Similar wedges from the Gilbert and Spanish Fort sites
have also been observed to have like scars. In many instances, it seems
as if one wedge was used as an anvil and another as a cutting implement, possibly for working brass for tinklers and other artifacts.

347

WOMACK SITE

A

8

c
0

5 CM .

F

H

Fig . 19. Spherical Bullets , Poss ible Sword Guard , Axe Heads, and We dge. A, B, Spherical bullets . C, Possible sword gua rd . 0-G , Axe head . H, Wedge .

348

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Knives
BACKGROUND

After several years of studying collections mainly from Nortefio
Focus sites it has been possible to recognize six different types of iron
knives (Fig. 20) which, in tum, can be subdivided into clasp (folding)
and case knives. Only two of the six forms are known for the Womack
Site, but all six are present at the Spanish Fort Site and several of the
types are found at Fort St. Louis at Texarkana and at the Gilbert Site.
The three types shown in Figure 20, A-C are French clasp knives.
Types 1 and 2 differ only in outline form, as both have a small basal
flange or boss which extends over the upper edge of the blade and
which served as a stop to make the knife rigid when open. Type 3 has
a different form of stop, a small perforated tang at the back of the blade,
which is similar to that found on present day knives. All three types
are identified as French on the basis of names found on them after
cleaning.* In some cases, crowns or emblems have been noted following the names.
The other three types (Fig. 20, D-F) are case knives. All three are
ridged and designed either for a handle to be held in place by pins or a
tang tightly inserted into a solid handle. The tang on Type 2 is square
in cross section. Types 1 and 3 of the case knife may have two, sometimes three, pins for the handle, while Types 2 and 3 have raised bosses
for the handle to fit against. Type 3 has a "fish-scaler" on top of the
knife blade. Type 1 can be identified as French or English on the basis
of the names found after cleaning. Examples of the other two forms
have been cleaned, but no names have been located thus far.
KNIVES FROM THE WOMACK SITE

One complete, one reworked, and five fragmentary knife blades have
been recovered from the site. To judge from their shape or from the
names found on them, six are definitely of French manufacture.
The complete specimen (Fig. 21, A) is a French clasp knife of Type
1. When it was cleaned, two sets of letters, one above the other, could
be distinguished. The top row consists of . . NNET .. and is too incomplete to reveal the full name. On the bottom row the letters
• A word of caution should be given on the cleaning of knives and other specimens of iron for the purposes of securing names and designs. One should not attempt
to clean such an artifact by the electrochemical method unless he has had experience, as this method will often destroy weak letters and designs. Use only a slow acid
acid method and do not leave the specimen in the acid longer than 20 or 30 seconds.
The proper cleaning of th e iron is a very slow process and may take two m· three
days per specimen.

WOMACK SITE

349

.. LA VD .. can be made out. Since CLA VDE, a good French name,
has been found on several knives from Gilbert and Spanish Fort, there
can be no doubt that it is the name imperfectly preserved on this knife
from Womack. (Incidentally, in reading these names the V can represent either a V or aU. )
Three specimens (Fig. 21, B-D ) lacking the ends of the blades are
fragments of French clasp knives . Although their incompleteness
makes precise identification impossible, they are either of Type 1 or 2.
The letter E was raised one one (Fig. 21, D ).
A fourth fragmentary blade (Fig. 21, E ) is from a rather large Type
3 clasp knife. The blade on this piece was resharpened after breakage.
No letter could be located on this specimen, but similar specimens from
the Gilbert and Spanish Fort sites have yielded French names.
Another fragmentary specimen (Fig. 21, F) cannot be identified as
to type, as it is from the center part of the blade. When cleaned, however, it produced two rows of letters and an emblem. Both names are
French and are complete as follows: On the top row, MATHIEVR,
and on the bottom row, CALLE LAVNE. A heart-shaped emblem
appears after these names. It is turned at a 90 degree angle to the names
and the bottom of the "heart" is missing. Similarly shaped emblems
have been found on knives from the Gilbert Site.
The only other knife blade (Fig. 21, G) from the site is a medial
fragment. It is too incomplete for further classification, and no letters
were detected in cleaning.
·
Remarks: The names on iron knives probably represent the names
of the Guilds that manufactured them. When a number of examples
have been found and identified with the iron guilds in Europe, they
will undoubtedly be excellent means of dating historic sites. The writers now have matching names on knives from Gilbert and Fort St.
Louis at Texarkana, and on knives from Fort St. Louis and Spanish
Fort. These data suggest that Fort St. Louis (the possible site of the
Nassonite Post) was a trading center for the upper Red and Sabine
rivers (Harris and Harris, 1961: 4; Harris, Miroir, McVey, and Blaine,
ms.) .

Awl
A fairly long, but incomplete, iron punch or awl (Fig. 21 , H ) is
pointed at one end. When cleaned, it was found to contain the letters
RENA . ., being broken just beyond the A. It might be noted that a
French knife from the Gilbert Site bears the name RENARD. Perhaps
it is the same name that is only partially discernible on this punch.

350

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

---~ ~

:7

~---~----------------------:;
NAME

TYPE 1

c
B

TYPE~

~·------------N-A_M_E----~~
TYPE3

~

NAME

_0

0
0
r--__ _

TYPE
--------------~'

_____]J-->

L~
E

iYPE 2.

TYPE 3
Fig.

20.

Sketch Showing Knife Blade Types . A-C , Clasp knives . D-F, Case knives.

Bridle Bit Fragments
Two specimens (Fig. 21, I , J) appear to be fragments of the distinctive Spanish ring bits (Tunnell, ms.). This type is, in a sense, an elaboration of the curb bit, as it has a prominent port (curve in the horizontal bar placed into the horse's mouth). However, unlike the curb
bit it has: 1) a large ring which attaches to the proximal end of the
port and encircles the lower jaw of the horse, 2) two chains which
extend from this ring to the lower portion of the bit legs (or shanks),

WOMACK SITE

351

3) two small, flat bars which are placed across the port, and 4), on
these bars, three to four small rings which cause the horse to salivate.
One of the pieces from Womack (Fig. 21 , J) can definitely be identified as coming from the central part of such a bit. It has the port and
cannons (horizontal extensions on either side of the port) intact, as
well as the flange through which the large ring was attached. The
other, more fragmentary specimen (Fig. 21, I) may possibly represent
a portion of one of these large rings . It is perhaps from the same bit, or
from yet another bit.
Tunnell ( ms.) has noted that the Spanish ring bit occurs at almost
all historic sites in Te'!'~as . This is in agreement with observations made
by explorer La Harpe who, on September 3, 1719, met a high chief of
the Touacaras (Tawakoni) near the Arkansas River. He stated that
this chief rode a horse that was saddled and bridled according to the
Spanish mode (Smith, 1959: 525) . Then, on September 8, 1719, La
Harpe gathered with the chiefs of the Touacara nation and they told
him of the route to the Spanish dwellings in the west. The presence of
the Spanish bridle bit fragments at Womack provides material evidence of the trade between the Spanish in New Mexico and Witchitaspeaking peoples.

Miscellaneous Horse Trappings
Eight fragments of sheet brass from the site appear to be from
harness or horse trappings of some sort. Four are of 25 gauge brass and
four of 22 gauge brass. Each consists of two pieces of sheet brass joined
by native-made, brass rivets (Fig. 21, K) with leather or rawhide strips
between the sheets of brass. The leather has been preserved by the
brass salts. The writers have seen similar specimens in all of the
collections from Nortefio Focus sites.

Strike-A-Light
A roughly C-shaped fragment of iron is believed to be from a strikea-light. It is shown in Figure 22, A.

Probable Fragment of Armor
An elongated, slightly curved piece of iron (Fig. 22, B) has a hole
drilled in each end. It cannot be positively identified but may be a
piece of armor.

352

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

A

8

c
D

F

K
5CM .
H

Fif. 21 . Knife Blades, Awl, and Horse Trapp ings . A, Type I clasp knife blade. B-D,
Fragments of clasp knife blades . E, Type 3 clasp knife blade . F, G , Medial blade fragments .
H, Iron awl. I, J , Brid le b it fragments . K, Possible piece of harness trapping .

Miscellaneous Iron Scrap
Nine pieces of iron scrap have been recovered from the site. In view
of its low frequ en cy of occu rrence, it is u n likely that the Indians were
working much iron. This is in marked contrast with later Norteiio sites,
such as Gilbert, Spanish Fort, and Stone, wh ere large amounts of iron
scrap occur. It is pertinent to note that after having collected from the

WOMACK SITE

353

Womack Site for about 35 years, the authors have never found an iron
or brass arrow point. However, metal projectile points are numerous
in their collections from later Nortefio Focus components.

Brass Kettle Fragments
No complete kettle has been found at Womack, although numerous
fragments of sheet brass appear to be from worn out kettles (Fig. 22,
C, D). In studying these pieces, it was noticed that they are of three
different thicknesses which, by using an American Standard Wire
Gauge, can be converted as follows :
Measurement
Gauge
.018 in .
25
.025 in.
22
.036 in.
19
Apart from the probable kettle fragments reworked into tinklers and
described earlier (scrap kettle brass was often used by the Indians to
manufacture a variety of artifacts), included in the collection are:
Number of
Specimens
Gauge
Type
2
25
Rim fragments
22
3
Rim fragments
4
19
Rim fragments
67
Side or bottom fragments
25
40
Side or bottom fragments
22
22
19
Side or bottom fragments
1
22
Kettle lug
19
1
Kettle lug
140total
Inasmuch as kettle brass from historic sites appears to be of several
sizes, it seems quite plausible that the differences in thickness, or
gauge, reflect differences in size. If correct, then small, medium, and
large kettles appear to be represented at Womack.
There is very little direct indication of shape of the kettles, although
one of the rims (Fig. 22, C) is rolled (similar rims occur at Gilbert and
Spanish Fort ) . At the contemporaneous Angola Farm Site, however,
there were complete kettles. These have flat bottoms and essentially
straight sides (Ford, 1936: 136-137).
The writers have noticed that a kettle rim in their collection from
the Spanish site of Los Adais in Louisiana is of red brass, while kettle
brass from all known Nortefio sites is yellow. It may be that this differ-

354

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ence in color will, if reinforced by more extensive research, prove to be
useful for distinguishing between French and Spanish kettles.

Hawk Bells
There are two fragments of hawk bells in the collection (Fig. 22, E).
Both are of the soldered type and are made from 25 gauge brass.

Brass and Lead Discs
Two discs (Fig. 22, F, G), one of lead and one of brass, were found
together at the site. They are of an identical size and each contains four
matching holes. Their function is unknown, although very similar
specimens have been illustrated (Cadzow, 1936: Pl. 39) for a site in
Pennsylvania which had French contact between 1675 and 1718.

Pendant
A small, disc-shaped pendant of pewter (Fig. 22, H) has a perforation near one, the presumed upper, edge. Pendants of this type, but of
brass, have also been found at the above-mentioned historic site in
Pennsylvania (Cadzow, 1936: Pl. 88). They have not, however, been
reported from other Norteiio Focus components.

Medal
A disc-shaped medal cast in pewter (Fig. 22, I) has an attachment
hole in a flange at the top and a small perforation along each side. Presumably, a ribbon to suspend the medal from the neck was passed
through the flange, while small ribbons or streamers may have dangled
from the lateral perforations. The exterior surface is covered with a
design which has as a central element the head of an Indian with long
hair and streamers. About this is a typical French godroon border and,
along the edge of the medal, a French laurel leaf wreath-both of
which are usually found on 18th century French blanket or baling
seals. It is possible that this medal was presented to a chief at the
Womack Site, perhaps to induce him to send two guides to help La
Harpe find the best route to the Arkansas River.

Buttons
Six of the ten buttons from the site can be identified with types
recently defined by Olsen (1963: 551-554). These include: one example (Fig. 22, J) of his Type A which is dated at 1700-1765, two

355

WOMACK SITE

E

'·

F

5
I

-

J
N

K

G

H

L

M
10

0

I

I
CM.

Fig . 22 . Artifacts of Iron, Brass, and Pewter. A, Fragment of a strike-a-light. B, Possible
fragment of armor. C, Fragment of kettle rim . D, Fagment of kettle lug. E, Hawk bell fragment. F, G, Brass and lead discs . H, Pewter pendant. I, Pewter metal. J-M, Buttons. N, Unidentified fragment of brass. J-M reduced twice as much as A-1 ond N .

356

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

examples (Fig. 22, K, L) of his TypeD which is dated at 1760-1785,
and three examples (Fig. 22, M) of his Type G which is dated at 17851800. Three of these buttons are English and have the words Gilt or
Trebble (letters mainly in Old English script) on their back sides. The
four unclassified specimens include:
1) A compound brass button which resembles half of a hawk bell.
The front is concave and decorated with a design composed of four
lines and a floral pattern. The attachment loop is the same as that found
on many hawk bells.
2) A compound brass button which has four holes and a cut out
pattern on the front. This pattern consists of multi-pointed star-like
element with a (leur-de-lis on those points oriented toward the cardinal
directions.
3) A compound brass button which is decorated on the exterior
surface but too badly damaged to discern the pattern.
4) A badly damaged brass button which is too fragmentary for
further description.

Miscellaneous Brass Fragment
A small unidentifiable fragment of cast brass (Fig. 22, N) has
been sawed across one end and broken diagonally across the other end.
Its exterior surface is engraved and stamped, possibly to represent the
scales on an animal figure which may have been the central design
element. A small beveled area along portions of the broken end may
represent a screw hole countersunk from the exterior (decorated)
surface.

Glass Fragments
Two small fragments of crown glass from the site are probably from
mirrors traded to the Indians.

Vessel
Found eroding out of the midden depost, this wheel-made vessel
(Fig. 23, A) represents the only European ceramic container found
to date at the site. Although the neck is broken, and the edge of the
break subsequently smoothed, it appears to have been a water bottle.
The body is globular and the base is convex. Somewhat porcelain-like
in texture, the paste is very white and compact. The interior is glazed
while the exterior has four painted lines which encircle the body. In

357

WOMACK SITE

B'

5 CM.

A

Fig.

23.

I

European Ceramics . A, Wheel-made vessel. B, B', Pipe.

addition, reddish-black lines and splotches of red and black paint appear on the outside surface.
Pipes
Five fragments of European-made, ceramic pipes have been recovered from the site. All appear to be of the elbow type and the most
complete example is shown in Figure 23, B, B' .
THE JOURNEY OF BERNARD DE LA HARPE

The historic Nortefio Focus component at the Womack Site can
tentatively be identified with the early 18th century Quidehais
(Kichai) village visited in 1719 by Du Rivage, a member of the La
Harpe expedition. Of the four criteria Duffield and Jelks ( 1961: 96)
recommend be met before a field location can accurately be related to
a documented historic site, at least three-1) location agree with documentary sources, 2) physical evidence of occupation be present, and
3) cultural remains be of appropriate age and character-can be satis-

358

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fied. The second and third are abundantly present and are the subject
of the preceeding section. Of concern in this section is the first criterion,
and it is the documentary evidence, the journal left by the French
explorer and trader Benard de la Harpe, that will be briefly reviewed.
This journal records La Harpe's 1718-1719 sojourn up the Red River,
made for the purpose of establishing a trading post, known as the Post
of the Nassonites because of its location near a Nassoni (or Nasoni)
village in Kadohadacho territory .
The English translation of La Harpe 's journal u sed in this paper
was made by Dr. Ralph A. Smith and published in the Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. LXII, Nos . 1-4. It was first printed in
French in Pierre Margry's Decouvertes et establissements des Francais
dans l'Ouest et dans le Sud del' Amerique septentroinale ( 1614-1754 ).
Whenever deemed desirable, the writers have checked Margry's
French version of La Harpe's journey against Smith's translation.
As was typical of the period, La Harpe stated distance in terms
of leagues. He sometimes used leagues by river, and at other times, by
land. According to an Encyclopaedia Britannica published in 1888
(Vol. 24: 485 ) the value of a league as used in 1719 is equivalent to
1.59 miles.
To improve the French position in their rivalry with the Spanish
over control of the Indians, Benard de la Harpe was charged by MM.
de Bienville and Hubert with the exploration of the Kadohadacho
territory and the establishment of a post in that region. With these
goals in mind, the La Harpe expedition left New Orleans on December
18, 1718, and reached the mouth of the Red River on January 10, 1719.
At this point La Harpe left his boats and took a pirogue to visit the
Tunica Indians, arriving at the village of the Tunicas on January 12,
1719 (Smith, 1958: 78-80 ) . This Tunica village has been identified as
the Angola Farm Site excavated by James A . Ford in 1934. It was
occupied by the Indians from a bout 1709 until 1729 (Swanton, 1911:
311-313).
After this brief excursion La Harpe returned to his boats, and, on
January 15, 1719, entered the mouth of the Red River. On February
21, he reached the French post at Natchitoches, noting that from the
mouth of Red River to Natchitoches they had traveled 83 leagues to
the northwest (Smith, 1958: 80-85). Using the conversion value of
1.59 miles to a league, La Harpe journeyed 131.97 river miles from
the mouth of Red River to Natchitoches. This distance today measures
126.5 river miles and the minor discrepancy between the two figures
(only 5.47 ) is of no significance, especially in view of the changes in
the Red River channel that have occurred in the intervening 245 years.

WOMACK SITE

359

Significantly, the Natchitoches village near this post has been identified as the Fish Hatchery Site (Gregory, 1962).
On March 6, 1719, La Harpe left Natchitoches, taking with him a
detachment of six soldiers and senior sergeant assigned to him by M.
Blondel, the commandant at Natchitoches. He entered the mouth of
the Bear River (now known as the Sulphur River), journeyed onto
the Nassonite village, giving these Indians 2,000 livres of merchandise
in a big festival. On April 21 and 22, he established nearby Nassonite
Post. La Harpe has left a good description of this area about the post
(Smith, 1958: 245). If one will check this, visit the Rosen borough Lake
Site near Texarkana, then consult the astronomical observations made
on July 26, 1806, at the Nassonite Post by the Freeman-Custis expedition (Swanton, 1952: 80), he will note that the Roseborough Lake Site
(also known as the Rochelle Place) closely matches La Harpe's description, and is only 12 seconds off the reading given by the Freemaneustis party. It seems, therefore, that the Roseborough Lake Site near
present Texarkana, is the Nassonite Post of 1719, and Fort St. Louis de
Kadohadacho (San Luis de Cadodacho) are one and the same (Harris,
Miroir, MeV ey, and Blaine, ms.) .
While La Harpe was erecting the Nassonite Post, he did not lose
sight of his desire to open trade with New Mexico. The Indians told
him about the wild tribes to the west, and the Toucaras (Tawakoni)
to the north, on the banks of a great river. La Harpe resolved to send
M. du Rivage, along with 1500 livres of merchandise, up Red River to
contact the nomadic tribes and to make an alliance with them (Smith,
1959: 372).
On July 29, 1719, Du Rivage returned from his sojourn with two
savages of the Quidehais (Kichai) nation. He reported to La Harpe
that at 70 leagues by land (de chemin) to the westward and from the
west a quarter northwest, he encountered members of several nomadic
tribes-including the Quidehais, Naouydiches (Nabedachi?), Joyvan
(Yojuane), Huanchane (Waco), Ruane (Waco), Tancaoye (Tonkawa)-by whom he had been well received (ibid.: 375-376).
Du Rivage states that he traveled 70 leagues by land which, using
the 1.59 mile conversion, is 111 .3 miles. Today, if one will start at the
Roseborough Lake Site, come out of the Red River bottoms (it is doubtful that Du Rivage went through the dense thickets of the river bottomland), and follow present Hwy. 82 to Paris, Texas, then turn northwest to the Womack Site, one would have gone about 108 miles- only
3.3 miles less than the distance covered by Du Rivage. The age and
nature of the Womack Site, coupled with its distance and direction
from the Roseborough Site, argue for its identification as the village

360

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

where Du Rivage obtained the two Kichais who guided La Harpe north
to the Toucaras on the great river (Arkansas River) in September
1719.
It has been stated that the Indians told La Harpe of the nomadic
tribes to the west of the Nassonite Post. It is possible that La Harpe
had some advance knowledge where to locate these people, as two
Frenchmen, MM. de Bienville and St. Denis, had preceded him up
the Red River in 1700 (French, 1875: 73). Significantly, it was Bienville who gave La Harpe the order to journey up the Red River.
SUMMARY

The journal left by Benard de la Harpe has made possible the tentative identification of the Womack Site with a Kichai village and, thus,
places Wichita-speaking Indians on the Red River as early as 1719.
Expeditions by Bienville and St. Denis to the upper Red River suggest
that at least some Wichita may have been there as early as 1700.
Additionally, it has been stated that the Kichai were south of Red River
by 1701 (Swanton, 1952: 321).
With a reasonably firm cut off date of 1729, the Angola Farm Site
is of considerable importance in the interpretation of historic sites
extant on the upper Red River between 1700 and 1729. To judge from
the trade bead types and some of the gun parts, there appears to be a
definite connection between Angola Farm, Fish Hatchery Site, the
Nassonite Post, and Womack Site. It is possible that some of the items
common to these sites represent goods distributed by the La Harpe
party.
The complete absence of metal projectile points and the relatively
high incidence of chipped stone drills and gravers suggest that the
Womack Site was occupied earlier than Norteii.o Focus components on
the Sabine, Brazos, and upper Red rivers. Most of the trade goods found
at the site place it between 1700 and 1730. There are, however, several
European objects which appear to date between 1675 and 1718; at least
they have been found in this temporal context in Pennsylvania.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Although most of the specimens studied are in the authors' collections, a number of cooperative individuals and institutions have made
available their artifacts. These include: Mr. and Mrs. R. B. Hicks, Mr.
and Mrs. J . R. Parsons, Loyd Harper, Rex Housewright, Lester Wilson, Henry Hanna, J. B. Sollberger, E. J. Ruhland, Clifford Ray Allen,

361

WOMACK SITE

Mark Huff, and the Texas Memorial Museum and the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas. Thanks are
also due Louisiana State University and William G. Haag, and Northwestern Louisiana State College of Natchitoches and H. F. Gregory
for permitting the writers to examine collections from sites in Louisiana. T. M. Hamilton of Missouri and Joel Shiner of Southern Methodist University have also helped by graciously allowing the writers to
use unpublished research material.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, R. E.
1958. Guide to the identification of certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1.
Boudriot, J.
1963. Armes A Feu Francaises-Modeles Reglementaires. L. Petitot.
Bustanoby, J. H.
1947. Principles of Color and Color Mixing. McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Cadzow, Donald A.
1936. Archaeological Studies of the Susquehannock Indians, Vol. III. Pennsylvania Historical Commission.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1951. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology,
Archaeology Series No. 4.
Encyclopa edia Britannica
1888. Vol. 24.
Ford, James A.
1936. Analysis of Indian Village Site. Collections from Louisiana and Mississippi.
Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey.
French, B. F.
1875. Historical Collections of Louisiana and Florida.
George, J. N.
1947. English Guns and Rifles. The Stackpole Co.
Gooding, James S.
1960. A Preliminary Study of the Trade Guns Sold by the Hudson's Bay Company. In Indian Trade Guns (compiled and arranged by T. M. Hamilton ) .
Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp. 81-95 .
Gregory, H. L.
1962. Louisiana Studies, Vol. 1, No.2. Northwestern State College.
Hamilton, T. M.
1960a. Concluding Comments and Observations. In Indian Trade Guns (compiled
and arranged by T. M. Hamilton ). Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp.
207-209.

362

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1960b. Some Gun Parts from 18th Century Osage Sites. Ibid. , pp. 120-171.
1960c. Additional Comments on Gunflints. Ibid., pp. 73-79.
1964. Recent Developments in the Use of Gunflints for Dating and Identification.
In Diving Into The Past (edited by June Drenning Holmquist and Ardis
Hillman Wheeler), pp. 5Z-57. Published by the Minnesata Historical
Society and the Council of Underwater Archaeology.
Hanson, Charles E., Jr.
1955. The Northwest Gun. Nebraska State Historical Society, Publications m
Anthropology No. 2.
Harris, R. K., and Inus Marie Harris
1961. Spanish Fort, A Historic Trade Site. The Record, Vol. 16, No. 1. Published
by the Dallas Archaeological Society.
1962. Another Marker on the Trail of the Nortefio : A Preliminary Report on
the Gilbert Site. Ibid. , Vol. 17, No.1.
Harris, R. K., M.P. Miroir, J. L. McVey, and Jay C. Blaine
ms. Fort St. Louis de Kadohadacho. Unpublished manuscript.
Hayward, J. F.
1963. The Art of the Gunmaker, Vol. II. St. Martins Press.
Held, Robert, and Nancy Jenkins
1957. The Age of Firearms- A Pictorial History. Harper and Brothers.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series No. 5.
Jelks, Edward B. (editor)
ms. The Gilbert Site. Unpublished manuscript.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas, with Extension of
Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi Valley. The University of Texas,
Bulletin 4640.
Manucy, Albert
1959. The Fort at Frederica . Publication of the National Park Service, The U. S.
Department of Interior.
Maxwell, Moreau S., and Lewis H. Binford
1961. Excavations at Fort Michilimakinac. Publications of the Museum, Michigan State University, Vol. 1, No. 1.
Olsen, Stanley J.
1963. Dating Early Plain Buttons by Their Form. American Ant:quity, Vol. 28,
No. 4, pp. 551-554.
Peterson, Harold L.
1956. Arms and Armor in Colonial America. Bramhall House.
Rodgers, Frances, and Alice Beard
1937. 5000 Years of Glass. Frederick A. Stokes Co.
Russell, Carl P.
1957. Guns on the Early Frontiers. University of Califomia Press.

363

WOMACK SITE

Shiner, Joel L.
ms. The Excavation of Fort Frederica. Unpublished manuscript.
Smith, Ralph A .
1958-59. Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discovery Made by Him
of Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. LXII, Nos. 1-4. Texas State Historical Association.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of T exas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1911. Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the
Gulf of Mexico. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin No. 43.
1952. Indian Tribes of North America. Ibid. , Bulletin No. 145.
Thwaites, Reuben Gold
1959. The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. LXVI. Pageant Book Co.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
ms. A Description of Spanish Ring Bit Fragments from Some Historic Archeological Sites in Texas. Unpublished manuscript.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 174.
Woodard, Arthur
1960. Some Notes on Gun Flints. In Indian Trade Guns (compiled and arranged
by T . M. Hamilton). Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp. 29-39.

9024 San Fernando Way
Dallas, Texas
827 Ravenwood
Dallas, Texas

