DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VoLUME

36

Editor: Dee Ann Story
Assistant Editors :
Harry J. Shafer
Marsha F . Jackson

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1965

Table of Contents
Articles
Anderson's Mill ( 41 TV 130 ): A Historic Site in Travis
County, Texas
By E. Paul Durrenberger

1

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas
By Daymond D . Crawford .

71

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas
By Frank H. Watt .

99

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave, Bosque
County, Texas
By Dorris L. Olds

111

Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site ( 41 GV 5 ),
Galveston County, Texas
By L. E. Aten .

153

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas
By Dee Ann Story .

163

The Bipolar Flaking Technique in Texas and New Mexico
By Kenneth H. Honea .

259

A Guide to the Drafting of Archeological Maps
By Vaughn M . Bryant, Jr. and Robert K. Holz

269

A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas
By R. K. Harris, In us Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine,
and Jerrylee Blaine

287

Book Reviews
Cosgrove, Mr. and Mrs., The Cosgrove Report.
By Curtis Tunnell .

365

Nowothny, Karl A. , Tlacuilolli: Die mexikanischen Bilderhandschriften Stil und I nhalt mit einem Katalog der
Codex-Borgie-Gruppe
By John A. Graham

366

Anderson's Mill (41 TV 130):
A Historic Site in Travis County, Texas
E. PAUL DURRENBERGER
ABSTRACT
Working intermittently on week ends fr om the fall of 1963 to the fall of 1964,
members of The University of Texas Archeological Society carried out small scale
excavations at Anderson's Mill, a historic mill and house site apparently built in
the early 1860's. The history of the mill and the structural remains are briefly
noted; the main part of the paper is devoted to a description of the artifacts recovered from the surface and the excavations.

INTRODUCTION

Anderson's Mill is the site of a mill and house dating from the early
1860's to possibly as late as the 1920's. In this paper a description of
the structural features and artifacts recovered from the site are presented. The main emphasis, however, is placed on the artifacts, as
little remained of the structures. Moreover, the artifact analysis provides a general picture of what might be found at other historic sites
of the same period. Whiie structures may vary widely in function
(for instance, forts, houses, trading posts, missions, mills ) many of the
same kinds of specimens (for example, dishes, nails, bottles, etc.) can
be recovered from them.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Having traveled through Virginia from Pennsylvania, Thomas
Anderson arrived in Texas in 1859 (Upton, 1941: 3 ) , bringing with
him some furnishings such as china, silver, and linens (Anderson,
1959: 2). Shortly after reaching Texas, Anderson built a log dwelling
to house his family while he and others constructed a mill. When the
miU was finished-apparently in 1862 or 1863-he built a more comfortable house which had a basement where many jams, jellies, pickles,
and preserves were stored. The house had a wide central hall with
a fireplace on either side. Around the house area Anderson built a
rock wall with front, back, and side gates. Somewhat later he added
an irrigation system which consisted in part of a stone tank on high

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ground and which furnished water for a garden behind the house
(Anderson, 1959 ).
The purpose for which the mill proper was erected is not entirely
clear, as some (Anderson, 1959 ; M·c Donald, 1959 ) state that it served
initially as a grist mill, while others (Upton, 1941 ; Brown, n.d. )
indicate that it was built expressedly to manufacture gun powder for
the Confederacy. Regardless, it seems certain that by 1863, under the
direction of the Texas State Military Board, the mill was producing
gun powder for the Confederate cause in Texas and not until after
the Civil War was the mill used extensively to grind corn. Still later,
apparently in the 1870's, Mr. Anderson began ginning cotton. According to Upton ( 1941: 3 ) :
In the early seventies the hill people began raising cotton, and Mr. Anderson
built a gin. This. building was m ade of n ative stone and its w alls still stand. The
grist mill ran on certain days of the w eek and the g in on the others. A large belt
connected the mill-wheel with each mill.

The subsequent history is poorly documented, but after Mr. Anderson's death his family moved to Austin and the mill and house fell
into decay. In about 1942 much of what remained of the mill was
razed by the Lower Colorado River Authority in preparation for the
rising waters of Lake Travis. Then, in 1964, a road was constructed
in the area, destroying most of the structural remnan ~s of Anderson's
house.
THE SITE
Anderson's mill and house were built on Cypress Creek-a small
northern tributary of the Colorado River-which flows approximately
south in a valley surrounded by gently rolling hills (Fig. 1) . The
valley is about two miles north of Mansfield Dam and about 17 miles
northwest of Austin. The valley floor, now occasionally flooded by the
waters of Lake Travis, is covered with short grass and weeds, while
the surrounding hills support scrub brush and small trees.
Three low (ca. one foot high ) stone walls which form an open
rectangle are situated on the west bank of Cypress Creek (Fig. 1).
They are oriented the same way as two early photographs of the mill
show the then-standing mill walls (Fig. 2 ) . Since there are no other
evidences of a structure near the creek for a distance of about one half
a mile in either direction, these must be the remains of the mill.
Historic references indicate that a house was situated somewhere on
the east side of the creek and, indeed, about 720 feet north and east of
the mill three rock walls were located (Figs. 1, 3, B). These walls lie

3

AN DE RSON'S M I L L

110

100

50

I
Scale

in

100

150

I

I

Feet

MILL
41 TV 130
Rood

VMB

E2l

Tonk

b>!;;J

Mill
Roc k wal l

• Tes t pits
tSSJ Ash

de posit

Fig . 1 . Map of Anderson 's Mill (41 TV 130) showing features , areas excavated, and
contours .

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

at the foot of a hill that slopes upward to the east of the valley floor.
Within their confines were found a cement-lined stone tank (Fig. 3, A )
and a concentration of limestone boulders. The former is likely part
of Mr. Anderson's irrigation system, and the latter residue from the
fireplaces alluded to in the historic accounts. Both serve to fix the
locus of the main house.
THE ExcAVATIONs

The site fell readily into three (at first it was thought four) rather
distinct areas (Fig. 1) . That lying to the west of the creek and marked
by the structural remnants of the mill complex was designated as
Area 1. To the east of creek, where the documents record both the log
cabin and the main home, were found house remains. What was
initially thought to have been the older of these (the limestone boulder
concentration) was labeled Area 2, while what appears to be the later
house, to the east of Area 2, was designed as Area 3. The limestone
boulders, it was assumed, were the remains of the chimney of the log
cabin. It was later discovered that Areas 2 and 3 were both associated
with the later house; the initial designations, however , w ere retained
(Fig. 1) . In addition to these areas, surface material was collected
from a large region, designated as Area 4, to the south of 2 and 3.
Work at the site was begun by making extensive surface collections
at the above-mentioned areas. This was followed by two excavations
made in Area 1. One of these explored an extension which appeared
along portions of the nori;hern wall of the mill and which had been
observed on the surface. This still unidentified structural remnant was
labeled Feature 1. The second excava tion consisted of a 2-foot wide by
approximately 15.5-foot long tr0nch dup; along the outside of the
southern wall. Called Feature 2, this trench was dug to bedrock, which
was encountered from 6 to 18 inches below the surface.
A grid system oriented on an approximate magnetic north line was
superimposed over Area 2. The north-south base line was marked
off at five-foot intervals which were numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., from
south to north. The approximate east-west line was also divided into
five-foot segments lettered A, B, C, D, etc., from east to west. The
designation of the southeast corner of a square (such as A-1 , B-2, etc. )
named that square. No vertical controls were maintained for most of
the excavations, since the first three units dug made it quite obvious
that there was only one component at the site.
While the archeological investigations were in progress, the concentration of limestone boulders situated roughly in the center of Area 2

5

ANDERSON'S MILL

was bulldozed in preparation for a road. This bulldozing exposed two
ash deposits and thereby confirmed the hypothesis that the boulders
were the remains of fireplaces. The artifacts exposed by the road construction were treated as a surface collection.
Squares C-2, G-5, B-11 , and C-14, in Area 2 (Fig. 1) were excavated
to bedrock, which varied from 8 to 25 inches below the surface. As it
was removed from a square, the dirt was screened through a quarterinch mesh hardware cloth.
The digging, mapping, and other field work was done by members
of The University of Texas Archeological Society on week ends, under
the direction of the author. All investigations took place during the
period October 20, 1963 to October 10, 1964, exclusive of the summer
months. I should like to thank John Clark, Elton Prewitt, Emory
Whipple, and Charles R. Nance for their assistance in the field work;
and Dorothy Burr for her help in both the field and the laboratory.
My thanks also to Dr. E. Mott Davis who offered many valuable
suggestions.
STRUCTURAL FEATURES

The Mill
The mortared stone walls of the mill were standing to a height of
from 4 to 14 inches when work at the site was initiated. A trench
(Feature 2 ) dug along the outside of the southern wall of the mill
revealed that this wall now stands a maximum of from 7 to 16.5 inches
high (top to bedrock) . This and the other two remaining walls are
from 15 to 17 inches thick and were constructed of roughly shaped,
generally rectangular, limestone blocks.
The mill as it exists at the present (Fig. 2) measures 18 feet wide
from north to south and 20 feet long from east to west. Surrounding
the outside of the north, south, and west walls are mounds of rubble
formed when the walls of the mill collapsed. The eastem end of the
structure fades out into a talus slope and no wall was located there. The
present floor of the r:1ill consists of limestone bedrock which descends
toward the creek in three steep, step-like ledges (Fig. 2). The bottom
ledge grades into the rock talus that extends to the creek edge. This
bedrock foundation was probably originally floored with wood to give
a level surface.
Extending to the north of the eastern end of the northem wall were
a number of irregularly-shaped limestone blocks set in a matrix of
gray mortar (Feature 1) . The smooth bedrock floor enclosed on three
sides by this wall (?) measures 37 by 50 inches, while the wall itself

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

<

Fig . 2. Anderson's Mill. Above, Mill as it appeared shortly after construction (sketch
adapted from photograph in Travis County Collection , Austin Public Library( . Below, Mill
site as it appeared in 1964.

is from 6 to 8 inches high . The eastern end of Feature 2 is unwalled
and extends downward to a mass of talus debr is.
Associated with th e mill were pieces of wood and glass, as well as a
few fragmen ts of light gray, powdery mortar.

7

ANDERSON's MILL

The House Complex
The house complex (Areas 2 and 3 ) includes the rock wall or fence,
tank, and house proper situated to the east of the mill, well above the
creek. The wall is about 2 feet thick, a maximum of 3.5 feet high, and
is composed of unquarried limestone boulders piled without mortar
(Fig. 3, B) . The partially enclosed area is now roughly trapezoidal in
shape. The eastern wall is about 145 feet long, the northern wall approximately 205 feet long, and the southern wall roughly 140 feet long;
no western wall was found. There is a poorly delineated opening about
midway in each wall.
Approximately 36 feet to the west of the eastern rock wall is a
cement-linked tank made of quarried limestone blocks which are mortared together (Fig. 3, A ). The tank is 9.2 feet east-west, 15 feet northsouth, and 2.8 feet high; its walls are 1.8 feet thick. This tank is almost
certainly part of Anderson's irrigation works.
About 200 feet to the west of the eastern rock wall were located
two deposits of ash, one about 20 feet south of the other (Fig. 1) . The
southernmost ash deposit is about 15 feet across and the northern one
is about 10 feet across. Several large quarried limestone blocks were
found in this area, but their relationships to the ash deposits did not
seem to be meaningful. It is thought, nonetheless, that the ash deposits
represent fireplaces and that the limestone boulders thickly strewn
over this area very probably are remains from the chimneys and
hearths. Most of the cultural material from the site was found in this
area.
THE ARTIFACTS

Each of the four areas from which surface collections were made,
as well as each feature and square excavated, was assigned a lot number, and all artifacts from each of these proveniences were labeled
accordingly. When the specimens were examined in the laboratory,
however, it was obvious that there were few significant differences in
their distributions and, hence, there is no need to present these data
here. The one exception is the nails: round nails were found about
the house but not the mill.
Most of the objects recovered from the site can be conveniently
sorted into four broad categories: ceramics, glass, metal, and miscellaneous (rubber, shell, etc. ). The only exception to this scheme is the
metal jar lids which are discussed with the glass jar parts to preserve
functional continuity. Each of the major categories has been further
divided into a number of subgroups, some of which serve purely de-

Fig. 3. A, Section of cement-lined tank. 8, Portions of one of the walls that surround
the house complex .

9

ANDERSON'S MILL

scriptive ends, while others (especially the ceramics, pressed glass, and
nails) are of both descriptive and chronologie value.

CERAMICS

Two major criteria have been used to classify the ceramics: 1) certain physical properties of the paste, and 2) the techniques by which
the surfaces were decorated. On the basis of the paste the following
groups are recognized:
1. Earthenware. These ceramics are distinguished most readily by the porosity of
their paste (it sticks to the tongue when licked ) and, as a result, permeability. They
absorb a relatively high volume of liquid, generally 4 to 10 per cent (Norton, 1956:
208-~418) . The earthenware from Anderson's Mill shows a considerable range and
can be further sorted into two subgroups: soft-paste and hard-paste ( the latter is also
sometimes referred to as semi-p3rcelain ) .

2. Stoneware. The paste of this group is harder and more compact than the above.
It absorbs relatively little moisture (generally between 1 and 6 p 3r cent) and will
mt stick to the tongue (ibid.).

3. Porcelain. Like the stoneware, the paste of porcelain is impermeable to liquids,
absorption being less than 3 per cent. In addition , the paste is typically smooth, quite
compact, white, and, especially in the case of the thinner pieces, translucent. Porcelain is often referred to as china or chinaware.

These categories may be seen primarily as progressions in the firing
temperature, with the absorption decreasing as the temperature increases. They are, of course, not always sharply defined (as indicated
by the overlap in percentage of absorption), and the classification of
some specimens is perhaps arbitrary. Most, however, can be placed
into the appropriate group with a minimum of difficulty.
The techniques of decoration are: transfer printing, decalcomania,
gilding, respousse, and painting. Transfer printing is a process for
transferring a design to a vessel. The design is etched onto a copper
plate which in turn is inked with a pigment in a suspension of oil.
The inked plate is pressed on a thin piece of linen paper, which is
placed on the surface of the biscuit or once-fired vessel to be decorated.
The back of the paper is rubbed with a piece of flannel cloth to make
the pigment adhere to the surface of the biscuit, then the paper is removed, leaving the design on the vessel. The vessel is heated to drive
off the oil base of the pigment, glazed, and refired. Because of the
rubbing process and the removal of the paper, the transfer printed
designs do not often retain their sharpness. Another inherent limita-

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tion is in the number of colors that can be used due to the problem of
aligning the different sheets that bear the designs (Binns, 1930: 222224).
With the invention of lithography several colors could be printed
on one surface. The technique of making decalcomanias (decals ) was
developed in the mid-19th century (Encyclopedia Americana, 1963:
553). It was but a short step from the development of multi-colored
decalcomanias to the application of these to pottery. A design is printed
on a layer of thin tissue paper which is backed with heavier paper.
The tissue paper is then coated with an adhesive. The unit can be
dampened and the decal slid off onto the surface to be adorned-in
this case the glazed vessel. With the decalcomania technique many
colors can be used and there is no chance of smearing the lines. Another distinguishing feature between the decalcomania and the transfer printed vessels is that the former is applied over the glaze, so when
a sherd is held up to the light, the surrounding areas appear more
glossy than the decorated area (Encyclopedia Americana, 1963: 553).
By contrast, the glaze is applied over the transfer printed designs and
the surface is uniformily glossy (Nichols, 1878: 72 ).
Gilding is the process of applying gold in some medium of suspension, then heating it to a relatively low temperature to drive off
the suspending medium, but not so as to vaporize the metallic gold
(Binns, 1930: 263). This technique was often used in conjunction
with one or more of the others, but in the present collection it occurs
only with repousse and decalcomania.
Repousse decoration is a method of making a relief design by use of
a mold (Nichols, 1878: 75), while painting here refers to the application of paints by some means other than transfer printing.
In addition to the obviously decorative techniques mentioned above,
all of the ceramics are covered with a glaze. It is consistently present
on the exterior surfaces and common on the interiors. In the case of
the permeable earthen wares, this coating ungoubtedly made the vessels
more serviceable as containers for liquids. Secondarily, it may have
enhanced their appearance, since the glaze on some of the soft-paste
the hard-paste earthenwares, the stonewares, and the porcelain-the
glaze gives the surfaces an attractive, clean-looking shine. Jelks ( 1958)
in his discussion of the ceramics found at James town has summarized
the various techniques of glazing. Since his statements seem germane
to the Anderson's Mill material they are repeated here:
Glazes are applied to ceramic objects by three basic methods: (1) by coating the
object with ground glass before firing, (2) by coating the object with the unfused ingredients of glass prior to firing (for example, red oxide of lead, ground to a powder

ANDERSON's

MILL

11

and mixed in water with sand or other silicious material, was frequently employed
in England for this kind of glaze), or (3) by coating the object with a flux whrch
combines with silica from the body of the clay object itself to form the glaze under
the heat of firing. The most common fluxes used in the latter process (with special
reference to the ceramics found at Jamestown) were sulfide of lead (PbS)-usually
in the form of powdered galena-and sodium chloride (NaCl), or common table
salt. The powdered lead sulfide was dusted on the clay body before it was put into
the kiln, sometimes with the addition of copper salts which imparted a greenish cast
to the otherwise amber lead glaze, or occasionally with manganese salts which
rendered it black or brown-black and sometimes almost completely opaque.
The customary way of applying sodium chloride glaze is to bring the molded
clay objects to a white · heat, then to cast a quantity of salt through the kiln door
directly onto the fire. The heat vaporizes the salt and the vapor sticks to the hot
clay in a thin film which acts as a flux and combines with silica from the clay to
form the transparent glaze. Salt glazes are clear and thin, but have an uneven pitted
surface resembling the surface of an orange peel (Jelks, 1958: 202).

Earthenware
SOFT-PASTE (79 Sherds)
All of the specimens comprising this group have a relatively soft
and quite porous paste which varies in color from almost white to
shades of tan and gray. Temper particles are sometimes visible, but
none of these has been identified. Virtually all of the soft-paste sherds
are thicker (between 6 and 13 mm.) than the other ceramics from the
site. Throwing rings (Fig. 4, C) and other wheel marks are frequently
found on the interior surfaces. Most appear to represent rather heavy
utility vessels, especially large cylindrical jars or crocks with flat bottoms (Fig. 4, A) and thickened rims (Fig. 4, B). All have been glazed
on at least the exterior surfaces, and many are glazed on the interiors.
The identification of the type of glazing, however, is often difficult
and is only tentatively indicated in the section which follows. The
soft-paste earthenware sherds show some variation, particularly in the
color and placement of the glaze. They include:
Brown Exterior and Interior. Twenty-two of the soft-paste fragments have a heavy, very dark brown glaze on both the exterior and
interior surfaces (Fig. 4, A, B). The glaze appears to have been produced by dusting lead sulfide onto the vessel, while the color was possibly achieved by the addition of manganese salts. Wheel marks and
faint throwing rings are frequently present on the interiors. Two, possibly three, large cylindrical vessels are represented.
Gray Exterior/ Brown Interior. Twenty-eight sherds from one or
possibly two large crocks are distinguished by a gray exterior and a
chocolate brown interior. The base of the vessel (or vessels), how-

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D
0,

IN.

eM.

--s

Fig . 4 . Soft-Paste Earthenware . A, Base sherd . B, Rim sherd . C, Interior of body she rd
show ing th row ing rings . D, Pai nted body she rd .

ever, was unglazed. The exterior surfaces have a rather pitty texture
and are covered with what appears to be a naturally gray salt glaze.
The insides of the sherds, by contrast, are quite smooth (throwing
rings nonetheless are prominent ) and have been coated with the dark
brown lead glaze noted above.

ANDERSON'S MILL

13

Cream Exteriorj Browninterior. One fairly small sherd has a creamcolored lead glaze on the exterior surface and a rich, chocolate-colored
lead glaze on the interior surface. An appliqued strip, possibly part of
a handle, appears over much of the outside surface.
White Exterior and Interior. An easily distinguished group of 14
specimens has a white to slightly gray glaze applied on both surfaces of
the vessel walls but not on the base (Fig. 4, C). Although it is difficult
to be certain, the exterior appears to have been salt glazed and the
interior lead glazed. Throwing rings are present on three sherds, and
one sherd is a fragment of a large loop handle. Two large cylindrical
vessels, or crocks, are represented.
Olive Green Exterior and Interior. A small group of four sherdsall from the same vessel-are coated on both wall surfaces (but not the
base ) with a greenish-brown salt glaze. A thin, almost purple line
appears in the paste of each sherd, near the surfaces, and probably
represents improper or incomplete firing.
Glazed Exterior/ Unglazed Interior. Nine sherds are glazed on only
the outside surface, six with a brown lead glaze and three with a
grayish-white salt glaze. Most of these may be from narrow-mouthed
vessels, although one is clearly a fragment of large cro ~k lid.
Painted Exterior/ Brown Interior. The most unusual soft-paste earthenware sherd is a small body fragment (Fig. 4, D) which has a dark
brown, lead-glazed interior and a painted and salt-glazed exterior. The
design motif cannot be reconstructed, but it is a duochrome, with the
natural gray of the salt glaze contrasting with the rich blue (cobalt
blue) on the painted decoration.
HARD-PASTE

(363 Sherds)

The specimens comprising this, the single most numerous group of
sherds, have a somewhat porous paste which sticks to the tongue when
licked. They are slightly harder and less porous than the soft-paste
earthenware. In addition, most, if not all, appear to be covered on the
exterior and interior with either a white slip and a clear glaze, or a
white glaze. Surfaces are typically quite smooth, lacking throwing
rings and wheel marks, but they are frequently crazed. Sherds are
generally thinner than the soft-paste earthenware fragments, ranging
frcm 3 to 9 mm. in thickness. In view of their relative abundance at
Anderson's Mill it seems likely that the hard-paste earthenware represents the everyday dishes-the plates, cups, saucers, and serving bowls.
On the basis of variations in the treatment of the surface, these ceram-

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ics can be sorted into a number of subgroups, each of which is briefly
described below.
Decalcomania. Twenty-three of the sherds have been decorated by
means of the decalcomania technique. Six of these, probably from
one plate or a set of plates, are distinguished by a green and white decal
applied to the interior or upper surface (Fig. 5, A, B). The design
appears to have covered much of the plate, the central part consisting
of a stylized floral pattern and the rim or border area containing a geometric motif composed of a dashed line inside of which are a wavy
line and numerous small dots.
Five other sherds represent a deep bowl which is decorated with a
single recurring flower pattern in dark green, light green, red, yellow,
pink, and black (Fig. 5, C, D ) . The rim of the vessel and one panel
of the decal design are decorated with a repousse basket-like pattern.
An additional two fragments from a single plate or saucer have a vine
pattern which divides the vessel into a series of panels (Fig. 5, E, F ) .
Clusters of small flowers in blue, green, yellow, red, and pink appear
in and around these panels. Polychrome floral motifs occur on the
remaining 10 sherds, all of which are too small to reveal details about
design layout (Fig. 5, G ), although one (Fig. 5, H , H') has traces of a
maker's mark.
Transfer Printed. The five specimens decorated with transfer designs seem to represent a minimum of two vessels, possibly a plate and
a cup or small bowl. The two plate fragments (Fig. 5, I, J) have a
rather poorly preserved green floral pattern, a gently scalloped lip, and
a faint repousse vine design; while the cup ( ?) fragments have a blue
dentile pattern (Fig. 5, K ) on the rim exterior. One of the latter sherds
also contains portions of a green and blue leaf ( ?) design just below
the dentile decoration.
Painted. The painted sherds include one specimen with a dark blue
exterior and a white (undecorated) interior, as well as six specimens
from a bowl which had a narrow aquamarine-colored band encircling
the interior of the rim. The dark blue painted sherd also has a repousse
pattern of indeterminate nature.
Gilded. Five sherds have traces of gilded decorations. Included is one
fragment of a plate rim which contains two encircling vine-like lines
and, between these, the partially complete letters OV (Fig. 5, L) .
Among the remaining sherds is a small rim piece with a gilt band on
the interior near the lip (Fig. 5, M ), two rim fragments with what
appear to be stylized floral designs (one has the design on the exterior
surface, the other-Fig. 5, N-on the interior surface), and, lastly, a
tiny rim sherd with only traces of gilt on the interior surface.

15

A N DERSON 'S MILL

F

H

J

K

M
L

N
oc-=-o

- ~N.

CM.

Fig . 5 . Decorated Hard-Paste Ea rthenwa re Sherds . A- H, Deca l. H', Maker's ma rk. 1-K,
Transfe r printed. L-N , Gilded .

Repousse. Twenty-two sherds of hard-paste earthenware have only
repousse decoration. Included are 13 rim pieces, six body fragments,
two basal pieces, and a cup handle fragment . The repousse designs

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 6, A-C ) occur on the exterior of some sherds and interior of
others, and include floral and geometric (fluted and radial largely )
motifs. One of the basal sherds contains an incomplete and indecipherable maker's mark on the exterior (Fig. 6, D ) .
Plain. Sherds from either plain white vessels or from undecorated
vessel areas are by far the most common type ( 300 specimens ) of
hard-paste earthenware. Shapes are not particularly distinctive with
cups, bowls, plates, and saucers being well represented. Four basal
fragments (Fig. 6, E-H ) do, however, contain maker's marks on their
exterior surfaces. Only one of these (Fig. 6, G ) can be identified. It is
the mark of Johannes Lehman who in about 1830 operated a pottery
factory at Tyler's Port, Pennsylvania (Thorn, 1947: 134).
Stoneware ( 6 Sherds )
This small group of sherds is characterized by a hard, compact
paste which appears to be impermeable (i.e., it does not stick to the
tongue when licked) . The color of the paste varies from grayish-white
to dark gray and the wall thickness is uniform, from 4 to 5 mm. All
exterior surfaces were evidently painted and then glazed, although
it is possible that the glaze was mixed with pigment. In addition to
the all-over painted decoration, the outside surface of three specimens
have repousse fluted or radial designs (Fig. 6, I). The interiors of all
but one, a possible ginger beer bottle fragment, are glazed. Three,
however, are lighter on the interior and none has a repousse design on
the inside. Jars and vases appear to be the most common vessel form.
Porcelain (57 Sherds )
The second type of impermeable ceramics, the porcelain or chinaware, is distinguished by a very hard and compact white paste which
can frequently be penetrated by light. Most specimens are relatively
thin, about 5mm. in thickness on the average. On the basis of variations
in the treatment of the surface the porcelain can be broken into a
number of subgroups, each of which is briefly described below.
Decalcomania. Eight of the procelain sherds are adorned with a decal
floral pattern. One of these (Fig. 7, A), a partially restored saucer
estimated to have been roughly 15 em. in diameter, has, in addition to
the decals, two gilt bands. One of the bands appears on the lip, the
other around the center depression. The colors of the decal are blue,
pink, coral, maroon, yellow, and black.
Six of the remaining sherds-three basal pieces and three body
fragments-have prominent polychrome flowers in green, yellow,
pink, and red (Fig. 7, B-D). On four of these (three bases and one body
fragment ) the decoration is on the interior; on the other two it appears
on the exterior.

17

ANDERSON ' S MILL

H

0
0

IN.

CM.

6

Fig . 6. Hard- Paste Earthenware and Stoneware Sherds. A-C, Repousse, hard-paste
earthenware. 0-H , Maker's marks, hard-paste eathenware. I, Stoneware.

A final sherd (Fig. 7, E ) in this group, possibly from a small mug
or pitcher, contains both a decal and a repousse decoration on the
exterior surface. The repousse design, a highly stylized vine and dot
pattern, appears just below the lip; while the polychrome decal is im-

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mediately beneath this-indeed, it partially overlaps the repousse
pattern.
Transfer Printed. Each of the five transfer printed porcelain sherds
is monochrome. Two of these bear delicate Chinese or Japanese na cu ralistic (landscape and figure) designs in brown (Fig. 7, F, G ) , and a
third (Fig. 7, H) is decorated with a scalloped blue band around the
inside of the rim. This band is not unlike that often combined with
the more delicate naturalistic patterns. The remaining two sherds (Fig.
7, I , J ) are rather small and are decorated on the interior w.ith a green
floral design. It is likely that they are from the same plate.
Painted. Five sherds are painted on one surface only, three on the
exterior and one on the interior. Two are lavender colored and appear
to be from the same set of dishes. One of these, a probable saucer fragment, has a wide band around the inside of the rim; the other, possibly from a cup, appears to have been painted over much (or perhaps
all) of the exterior surface. The two remaining sherds are unusual in
form and are very likely from the face of a doll. Both are pink and one
(Fig. 8, A) has traces of small brown lines, evidently eyelashes.
Gilded. Included in this group are four fragments decorated with
one or more straight to slightly wavy lines (Fig. 8, B-E) , and one
sherd with a stylized floral or vine design (Fig. 8, F) . Two are from
plate rims, two from thick cups or mugs, and one from the base of a
possible shaving mug. One of the rim fragments has portions (Fig.
8, D) of a handle and could be.from the same vessel as the base sherd.
In addition to the gilded decoration, one of the plate rims (Fig. 8, F)
has a geometric repousse design and one of the cup fragments (Fig.
8, E) has portions of green floral decal (?).
Repousse. Eight specimens-three rim and five body sherds-have
only repousse decorations, most of which are geometric patterns. Included are fluted and radial lines, as well as curvilinear (possibly
stylized floral) designs. Most sherds are small and difficult to orient
properly, but the decoration appears to be on the outside surface of
two pieces and on the inside surface of the other six.
Plain. The 26 specimens comprising the undecorated porcelain include four rim fragments, eight basal sherds, and 16 body pieces. Cups
and small bowls appear to be most common forms represented. One
of the basal sherds (Fig. 8, G) has an unidentified maker's mark which
reads rmany.
Miscellaneous Ceramic Objects (6 Specimens )
Included in this group are one complete (Fig. 8, H) and two fragmentary door knobs, a wire insulator (Fig. 8, I) a baked but unglazed
marble (Fig. 8, J), and a thick, unidentifiable piece of glazed porce-

19

ANDERSON's MILL

E

H
0

I N.

0

CM.

'=1

J
Fig . 7 . Decorated Porcelain Sherds . A-D, Decal. E, Decal and repousse. F-J, Transfer
printed.

lain. The door knobs are of glazed, opaque porcelain, with the complete specimen measuring 5.6 em. in diameter and 2.6 em. in thickness.
The insulator, also of glazed porcelain, is constricted in the middle and
has a central perforation. It is 4.2 em. high and has a maximum diam-

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

D

c

8

F

E

•

G

J

0

IN.

0

CM.

3

Fig . 8 . Porcelain and Miscellaneous Ceramic Objects . A, Painted sherd from doll face ;
arrow points to traces of eye lashes . ll-F, Gilda d . G, Basal sherd w ith por iions of maker' s
mark . H, Door knob . I, Wire insulator. J, Marble .

eter of 4 em. and a minimum diameter of 2.6 em. The central perforation is 8 mm. in diameter. The marble appears to have been home
made and measures 1.3 em. in diameter.
Interpretations
In doing correlative studies which would help to place the Anderson's Mill ceramics into a broader picture I have been faced with the
perplexing problem of differing terminologies. Terms such as china,
ironstone, semiporcelain, whiteware, and the like are often used but

21

ANDERSON's MILL

generally not adequately defined. Fortunately, however, the most important features for this study are not the characteristics of the paste,
but rather the techniques of decoration. Both the styles and methods
of decoration are somewhat better defined and their histories a bit
better known.
Up to 1865 American potters had produced only an insignificant
amount of ceramics, and what few were being manufactured were
largely copies of European (mostly English) wares (Ramsay, 1947:
95-96 ). Since few of the domestic pieces were of good quality, most
ceramics were imported from Europe, chiefly from England. The
source of the Anderson's Mill ceramics is, of course, not known (the
one identifiable maker's mark was from a Pennsylvania factory), but
it is possible that they were, at least in part, imported.
During the first half of the 19th century English potters were producing large quantities of transfer printed (especially in blue ) vessels
with pseudo-romantic oriental scenes copied from Chinese and Japanese wares (such as shown in Fig. 7, F , G) being quite popular
(Ramsay, 1947: 106-115 ; Camehl, 1916: xi-xii ). About 1850, however, a number of new varieties of whitewares, known variously as
semiporcelain, White Granite, Ironstone, etc., began to be introduced.
Referred to herein as hard-paste earthenware and stoneware, these
ceramics were often undecorated (Ramsay, 1947: 106-115 ), although
designs of wheat or grapes were occasionally applied in low relief
(ibid.). About the same time (1850) , the process of decalcomania was
developed by Minton's pottery in England.
In light of the developments briefly outlined above, the frequency
of decalcomania, transfer printed, repousse, gilded, and plain hardpaste earthenware is presented below. The figures on the left of the
slash are the sherd counts, while those on the right indicate the minimum number of vessels represented.
Transfer
Decalcomania printed Painted Repousse

Hard-paste
earthenware
Porcelain

Gilded

Plain

23/ 12

5/ 2

7/ 2

22/ 14

5/ 4

300/?

8/ 8

5/ 5

4/ 2

8/ 6

6/ 6

26/ ?

The preponderance of the decalcomania vessels over the transfer
printed ones and the number of repousse decorated pieces indicate that
most of the porcelain and the hard-paste earthenware from Anderson's
Mill date after 1850. Allowing even for the possibility that many of

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the plain sherds are from undecorated vessel areas, their frequency
of occurrence also suggests a post-1850 date. The transfer printed
sherds-especially those with oriental-inspired designs-could date
from an earlier period, but it is possible that these motifs and transfer
printing were retained for some time after the introduction of decalcomania. It is also possible that they were vessels long in the possession
of the Anderson family .
GLASS

The glass artifacts have been divided into three large groupsbottles, jars, and pressed glass--on the basis of their morphological
characteristics.

Bottles
For descriptive purposes the bottles have been classified into panel
bottles, snuff bottles, and miscellaneous bottles. The last-named category is further sorted into bottle necks and bottle bottoms.
PANEL BOTTLES ( 48

Specimens)

Included in this group are bottles that have rectangular panels recessed into their fronts , backs, and/ or sides (Fig. 9). Each is rectangular in cross section on a plane parallel to the base. The longer
sides in this sectional view are referred to as the faces, the shorter
as the sides. The panels usually bear low relief letters that indicate
the maker and/ or the product.
At least five Rawleigh's medicine bottles are represented in the collection. These are of two types. One type (Fig. 9, A, A') has the word
Rawleigh's in script on one face and below this the words trade mark
in upper case Roman letters, no inscription on the other face, the words
Freeport, Ill. in upper case Roman letters on one side, and the words
W. T . Rawleigh Co. in upper case Roman letters on the opposite side.
The second type (Fig. 9, B) has the word Rawleigh's in script on one
face with the words trade mark in upper case Roman letters within the
space formed by two lines of the tail of the R which underscores the
rest of the word Rawleigh's. On the basal part of the same face below
the panel are the words Made in U.S.A. in upper case Roman letters.
There are no panels or words on the sides or the other face. There is
one complete bottle and one fragment of the first type, and one complete bottle and one fragment of the second type, as well as one untyped neck fragment and one unlettered panel. There are two different
Fig . 9 . Panel Bottles. A, A', Type 1 Rawleigh l:ottle . B, Ty~·e 2 Rawleigh bottle. C, C',
Fletcher's Castoria bottle . D, D', Three-In-One Oil bottle. E, Hand finished neck . F, Machine
finished neck.

c·

c

0

eM.

E

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sizes represented. The two complete specimens and one of the fragments are 15.9 em. tall, 2.8 em. thick, and 5.7 em. wide. Their necks
are 2.1 em. in diameter and 4.5 cin. tall. The panel fragments are
from bottles that were somewhat larger, but they are too incomplete
to obtain the exact dimensions. The three necks are machine finished.
One bottle (Fig. 9, C, C') is 14.2 em. tall, 2.4 em. thick, 4.45 em.
wide and has a neck 4.6 em. tall, 2.2 em. in diameter at the shoulders
tapering to 1.6 em. at the point below the thickened portion. It has
two unlettered face panels and two side panels one of which has Castoria in upper case Roman letters, the other Cha. H. Fletcher's in script.
The neck is machine finished.
Another complete bottle (Fig. 9, D, D') has no panels on its faces,
but one on either side lettered THREE IN ONE and 3-in-ONE OIL
COMPANY.
One of the bottle fragments has a panel on both its face and side. The
one on the face is lettered:
. .. Y & HOREHOUND

URES
COLDS, CROUP.
Another sixteen inscribed panel bottle fragments were recovered.
They are inscribed as follows :

co.

ELIXR
ER

AL.

DR
FS

PRE
DICIN

AR

YRUP

OIS.

co

EW

DR
UST

ALD
ER

EDI
LO

s

HAM
WIZAR

:~;

CHATTAN

All of the above are printed in Roman letters except CHATTAN
which is in upper case italics. Eighteen unlettered body fragments of
panel are also in the collection, but are too incomplete for further
description.
Of the seven necks recovered two are hand finished (Fig. 9, E) , two
machine finished (Fig. 9, F ) , and three too incomplete to determine
the method used. Both of the hand finished necks are 2 em. in diameter; one is 4 em. tall; the other 4.5 em. tall. The machine finished
necks are 2.45 and 2.35 em. in diameter, but of indeterminable height.

ANDERSON's MILL

25

SNUFF BOTTLES (25 specimens)
The snuff bottles are square in cross section on a plane parallel with
that of the base and, more importantly, lack necks (Fig. 10, A-C ) .
The mouths project about . 7 em. above the shoulders. The complete

0
B

c

A

E
Q

INC

0

&i.

3

Fig . 10. Snuff Bottle ond Bottle Necks . A, Complete snuff bottle. B, Snuff bottle neck.
C, Snuff bottle base. D, E, Group I bottle necks . F, Group II bottle necks.

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

example (and probably most or all those represented by fragments) is
11 em. high and 6.15 em. wide; the outside diameter of the mouth is
3.45 em. The six bottom sherds and the one complete specimen indicate
that at least 7 bottles are included in the collection.
MISCELLANEOUS BOTTLE NECKS

(22 Specimens )

Three criteria have been used in grouping these specimens: 1) presence or absence of wire rim, 2) size of the mouth orifice and neck
diameter relative to the probable height of the bottle, and 3) general
configuration of the thickened upper area of the neck just below the
mouth. The wire rim is the ledge or rim that protrudes from the neck
just under the thickened portion of the neck. The characteristic of being hand finished or machine finished is not considered as a criterion
for descriptive classification; however, it has been taken into account
as it is important for dating the bottles.
Group I (Fig. 10, D, E)
Number of specimens : 5
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Present
Inside diameters of mouths: 1.45 to 2.2 em.
Diameter of necks measured below wire rim : 2.1 to 3.1 em.
General configuration of thickened area: The wire rim is rounded and protrudes
only slightly (not more than .5 em.). Above the wire rim the neck expands
slightly to form a thickened area that does not extend laterally (on a plane parallel to the base) beyond the rim. This thickened portion tapers toward the center
of the mouth. The outer sides of the tapered portion are straight.
Height of the thickened area from the bottom (nearest the base of the bottle) of the
wire rim to the rim of the mouth: 2.3 to 3.2 em.
Over-all height of neck: 3.7 to 10.2 em. (intermediary ones are 8.1 and 5.7 em.; the
other is indeterminable) .

Group II (Fig. 10, F)
Number of specimens: 3
Color: Clear (2) and amber ( 1)
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameters of mouths: 1.4, 1.5, and 1.7 em.
Diameters of necks below thi·c kened portion: 2.1, 2.2., and 2.5 em.
General configuration of thickened area : Similar to Group I except that they lack
wire rims. One specimen has slightly curved sides.
Over-all height of necks: 4.1, 3.1, and 9.25 em.
General configuration of bottles: All three specimens have pronounced seam marks.
One appears to have had a cylindrical body; another a rectangular body. All of
the n ecks were hand finished.

ANDERSON'S MILL

27

Group III (Fig. 11, A)
Number of specimens :
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Present
Inside diameter of mouth: 1.6 em.
Diameter of neck below thickened portion: 2.4 em.
General configuration of thickened area: Wire rim is edged or diamond-shaped in
cross section. Above the wire rim the thickened area is rounded or roughly semicircular in cross section. The neck was hand finished.
Over-all height of neck : 4.25 em.

Group IV (Fig. 11, B)
Number of specimens:
Color: Amber
Wire rim : Present
Inside diameter of mouth: 2 em.
Diameter of neck below wire rim : 2.85 em.
General configuration of thickened area: Rounded wire tim as in Group I. Area
above the wire is trapezoidal in cross section. The trapezoidal area is 1.15 em . t all.
Over-all height of neck: More than 4.1 em.
General configuration of neck: Striations run at a slight angle to an axis perpendicular to the base of the bottle. Neck is probably hand finished .

Group V (Fig. 11, C)
Number of specimens:
Color: Amber
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameter of mouth: Indeterminable
Diameter of neck: Indeterminable
General configuration of thickened area : Roughly semi-circular m cross sect ion
General configuration of neck: Hand finished

Group VI (Fig. 11, D, E)
Number of specimens: 5
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameters of mouths: ca. 4.25 em., greater than 3.1 em., and indetermina b le
Diameters of necks below thickened portions: 5 em., and indeterminable
General configuration of thickened area: One fragment has a stippled band 1.45 c :rn.
wide around the neck below the thickened area. The neck juts straight out fo r a
distance of about .4 em. and slants toward the mouth at an angle of about 4 5 ° .
One fragment has a thickened area 1.45 em. in height that is roughly semi-circular in cross section. The third piece has a thickened portion that is rectangular in
cross section and is .7 em. across the long side (height of the thickened area ) .
Above the thickened portion is a rim that goes straight up to the mouth for .35

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

em. The mouth orifices are large relative to the size of the bottle. Two necks are
hand finished, one is machine finished.
Over-all height of necks: 3.45 and 2.2 em., and indeterminable.
General configuration of the bottles: Probably wide mouth jars not adapted to take
screw on lids.

B

F

E

~

~y r
..

-I

.-.,·
···~!.

· ~~~·..

...

H
0

g=

!N
CM.

Fig. II . Bottle Necks. A, Group Ill. 8, Group IV. C, Group V. D, E, Group VI. F, H, Group
VII. G, Group VIII. I, Group IX.

29

ANDERSON's MILL

Group VII (Fig. 11, F, H)
Number of specimens: 3
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameters of mouths: 1.7 em. and indeterminable
Diameter of neck below thickened portion: 2.45 em. and indetenninable
General configuration of thickened areas: Like the thickened areas of modern soda
water bottles.
Over-all height of necks: Indeterminable
General configuration of necks: They were made to take crown cap closures. One is
hand finished, one incomplete, and one machine finished.

Group VIII (Fig. 11, G)
Number of specimens: 2
Color: Clear and amber
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameters of mouths: .35 and 2.4 em.
Diameter of necks below thickened portions: 1.7 and 2.95 em.
General ·configurations of thickened areas: These two fragments have only one
characteristic in common that separates them from the other bottle necks: they
are made to take screw caps. The one with the smaller mouth appears to be from
a flavor extract bottle. Both are machine finished.

Group IX (Fig. 11, I)
Number of specimens:
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Present
Diameter of neck below thickened portion: 2.75 em.
General configuration: Neck for a screw on cap

MISCELLANEOUS BOTTLE BOTTOMS ( 48

Specimens)

The bottle bottoms are sorted into two large classes according to their
shapes. The first group, those with round bottoms, are further divided
into specimens: 1) with no markings, 2) with simple markings, and
3) with complex markings. The second large class, those lacking round
bottoms, were divided into finer groups according to the shape of the
base. All of these categories are purely descriptive.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The following bottles have round bottoms:
Group I (Fig. 12, A, B)
Number of specimens: 8
T y pe of marking: None
D escription : One bottom (Fig. 12, A) has a very slightly conically-indented base
which forms a kick-up of about 1.2 em. This bottom appears to be one made with
a snap case (a device for grasping the bottom of the bottle during th e finishing
process). The lower portion of the body (not the bottom ) ha s words CONTENTS
1/:; QUART in low relief, suggesting this piece is probably a fragm ent of a spirits
or wine bottle. It is 7.8 em. in diameter.
Another bottle bottom ha s a slightly indented base which is not conical but
rather is slightly curved. A h eavy seam encircles the basal part of the body about
.95 em . above th e bottom. The bottom is 8 em. in diameter. A third fragment ha s
a slightly incurved bottom and a h eavy seam which encircles the basal part of the
body about .4 em. above the bottom. The bottom is 7 em. in diameter. There is a
ring around the base of th e fourth bottom sherd. The center is downcurved or
convex, and the bottom is 6.5 em. in diameter.
The last four sherds in thi s group are of the sam e type. The bottoms are slightly
upcurved or con cave to form a kick-up of about 1 em. The surfa ces are irregular,
and at about the center is a circle in low relief which appears to be a result of the
manufacturing method rather than an intentional mark. Th e one complete example is 10.2 em. in diameter.

Group II (Fig. 12, C, D )
Number of specimens: 12
Type of marking: Numera ls in low relief
D escription: Seven of these sherds are of the sam e type. The ki ck-up varies from .3
to .6 em., and all except two have circles which contain numbers approximately
at their centers. The circles are 2.2 em. in diameter; and the numbers are 1.2 em.
high in all cases except one which is 1.6 em. All of th e surfaces are slightly irr egular. The one complete bottom (Fig. 12, D ) has a diamet er of 11.5 em. The
two sherds with portions of th e body have seams around the basal part of the body.
The remaining five specimens in this group have slightly concave bottoms.
Th eir dimensions are as follows:

Diameter

H eight of number

Possible basal body seam

4.15 em.

.40cm.

yes

7.8 em.

.45 em.

yes

.3 em .

no

.3 em.

no

.3 em.

no

4.5 em.

31

AN D ERSON's M I LL

B

A

D

c

G
E

F

0

eM.

Fig . 12. Round Bottle Bottom s. A, B, Group I. C, D, Group II . E-G, Group Ill.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Group III (Fig. 12, E-G)
Number of specimens: 14
Type of marking: Complex
Description:

Diameter
14.4cm.
14.3

9.1

8.0

ca. 6.5
8.2
6.25

ca . 6.2
5.85
6.2

Symbol
14 circle-diamond 3
1 circle-diamond 3
4
Diamond containing letter I
D23
65-S circle-diamond
3 Rivers
32
6
A
MGCo
8
Se~ Fig. 12, G
Dr. S.B .H.
PR. 0 ....
AB
16
9-B -383
68-7
15 circle 8
9Duraglas (Fig. 12, F )
F
0-1217
4
12 circle-diamond 9
10
(Fig. 12, E )

Possible
basal body
seam

Color

no
no

amber
amber

yes

amber
clear

yes

clear

no

amber
frosted

no

clear

yes
no

amber
clear

no
yes

amber
amber

no

clear

yes

clear

The following groups of bottle bottoms are rectangular, oblong, square,
or hexagonal:
Group IV (Fig. 13, A )
Number of specimens: 1
Description: Several sherds have been reconstructed to form the b etter part of a
bottle which has an oblong base and parallel panels on each side which are 2.25
em. wide and run the length of the bottle. The neck has threads to take a screw
cap. The bottle is blue in color and was probably a milk of magnesia container.
The short axis of the base is 6.05 em. long; the long axis, 8.45 em. The neck is 3.1
em. in diameter and 3.5 em. high .
The total height of the bottle is indeterminable.

33

ANDERSON'S MILL

Group V (Fig. 13, B-E)
Number of specimens: 11 (includes one complete bottle)
Description: In this group are specimens which have rectangular or near rectangular bases but which cannot be classed as panel bottles (Fig. 13, B). Three of the
10 base sherds are straight on one side and have curved ends and one curved side
(Fig. 13, C). One of these is marked on the bottom with a diamond and, inside
this, an I; the other two are unmarked. The marked fragment als:J has the letters

ESS
. .. ED BY
. . . C.
in low relief on the flat face. This piece is 3.5 em. wide; the others, 2.8 em. and
indetenninable.
Four bottle bottoms are quite fragmentary, but appear to have had straight
sides and curved ends. None is marked and the only one complete enough to measure is 4.15 em. by 2.15 em.
An eighth bottom sherd is rectangular in shape, but the sides are slightly
curved. On the bottom there is an equilateral triangle enclosing the letters W and
Tin low relief. Below the apex of the triangle are letters U. S. A. To the right of
th= triangle is the letter I. This base was more than 9 em. long and greater than
6.5 em. wide.
Another bottle bottom (Fig. 13, D) is hexagonal in shape. The bottom is marked
with a Heinz 57-like shield within which is the letter J. To the right of this
symbol are the numbers 4 and 50. One other sherd of the same general shape has
the letters J. B. W. Co. and the numbers 118 2 on its base in low relief.
In addition to the above fragments , one complete bottle (Fig. 13, E ) is included
with this group because it has a rectangular base and is marked with a diamond
and, inside this, an /. The neck, however, looks like the necks of the panel bottles.
The bottle is 14.7 em. high, 3.1 em. wide, and 5.4 em. long; the neck is 4.4 em.
high and 1.9 em. in diameter. The base of the neck on one face has 3 iv in low

r~lief.

Group VI (Fig. 13, F )
Number of specimens : 2
Description: Both of these are square bottoms. One (Fig. 13, F ) looks rather like
the base of a snuff bottle, but it is clear, not amber, and is too incomplete to determine the size of the bottle. The other fragment is also clear and has the letter
H near its center in low relief. The bottle it is from was over 8 em. wide.

Jars

The jar parts are here considered under four headings: nms, lid
liners, tops, and miscellaneous.
JAR RIMS

(27 Specimens)

The characteristics used to separate the jar rim sherds into a number
of descriptive groups include: the shape of the shoulder, the presence

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

c

A

D

E
0

F

0

IN.

CM.

6

Fig . 13. Miscellaneous Bottle Bottoms. A, Group IV. B-E, Group V. F, Group VI .

ANDERSON's MILL

35

or absence of a wire rim, the shape of the wire rim when it is present,
and the shape of the lip.
Group I (Fig. 14, A )
Number of specimens: 5
Wire rim: Absent
Shape of shoulders : Square
Dimensions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth: 1.7 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: 6.2 em. Thickness of glass at rim: from .4 to .5 em.
Rim shape: Rounded, but ridges remain on the outside-the rounded part is centered
on the rim's surface leaving a ledge on either side.

Group II (Fig. 14, B)
Number of specimens: 1
Wire rim: Absent
Shape of shoulders: Squared
Dimen sions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth: 1.5 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: indeterminable. Thickness of glass at r im: .35 em.
Rim shape: Squared

Group III (Fig. 14, C)
Number of specimens : 1
Wire rim: Present; protrudes . 7 em.
Shape of shoulders: Squared
Dimensions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth: 2.55 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: indeterminable. Thickness of glass at rim : .35 em .
Rim shape: Squared

Group IV (Fig. 14, D , E )
Number of specimens: 5
\iVire rim : Present; protrudes .55 em.
Shape of shoulders: Rounded
Dimensions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth: 2.55 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: about 6.4 em. Thickness of glass at rim: .3 em.
Rim shape: Slightly rounded and beveled

Group V
Number of specimens: 2
Wire rim: Present; protrudes about .3 em.
Shape of shoulders: Rounded
Dimensions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth : 2 .3 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: indeterminable. Thickness of glass at rim: .35 em.
Rim shape: Rounded

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

c

F
Fig. 14 . Jar Rims . A , Group I. B, Group II. C, Group Ill. D, E, Group IV. F, Miscellaneous .

Two sherds may belong to either Group II or III. Their rims are
squared, but they are not large enough to ascertain the presence or
absence of a wire ri:tn. Ten other sherds have the necks or restricted

ANDERSON's MILL

37

areas of the jars made for screw lids, but are too incomplete to classify.
One additional rim fragment (Fig. 14, F) is from a jar with no shoulders. The threads for the cap on this piece are on the rim of the straight
sides.
JAR LID LINERS ( 47 Specimens )
Jar lid liners (Fig. 15 ) are discs of white glass that fit into the tops
of screw tops for wide mouth jars. They have been divided into five
groups on the basis of what is written on their surfaces, or, in one case,
an absence of any wording.
Group I
Number of specimens: 8
Diameter: 6.65 em.
Thickness at center: .35 em.
General features: A set of two concentric circles in relief is placed in the center.
The words GENU !NE BOYD app ear in low r elief around the outside of the liner,
on the rim. One specimen has 56 BOYD'S in that position.

Group II
Number of specimens : 4
Diameter : ca. 6.4 em.
Thickness: .35 to .45 em.
General features: The words Celain lined occur on the outside edges of one;
. . . VINE PORC . .. on another.

Group III
Number of specimens: 2
Diameter: 6.4 and 6.5 em.
General features: Two concentric circles in the center which contain no wording.
Both l:ners were found inside screw on tin caps.

Group IV
Number of specimens: 3
Diamet ~ r: Indeterminable
General features: Words FOR M . . . on one; FOR MA .. . on the second; and
MASON JAR CAP on the third. The words are around the outer edges of the
discs.

Group V
Number of specimens:
Diameter: Indeterminable
Thickness at center: ca. 5.0 em.

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

General features: Words ... AR CAP NN . . . around the edge, inside rim. Number
2 toward the center of the disc in low relief.

An additional twenty-nine lid lines sherds are too incomplete to
classify.
JAR TOPS

( 15 Specimens )

Although the jar tops are of metal, they are discussed here in order
to maintain the continuity of the jar parts. Fourteen of the lids and lid
fragments are of tin and one is of iron. The iron specimen, a discshaped piece, represents the top part of a compound lid. The missing
part, a threaded rim section, fits over this piece and is screwed onto the
mouth of a jar. The disc is about 8 em. in diameter and is inscribed
with KERR WIDE MOUTH MASON PAT. *-31-.. .
The remaining 14 lids are one piece tin lids which were used with
the jar lid liners (Fig. 15 ). One is inscribed GENUINE BOYD CAP
MASON JAR around the top of its rim. All of the six complete lids are
about 6.5 em. in diameter. At least ten lids are represented by the fragmentary and whole specimens.

Miscellaneous Jar Parts (6 Specimens)
In addition to the above, there are two glass jar bases and four glass
jar body sherds. Each of the bases is 9.2, em. in diameter and contains
the words KERR GLASS MFG COM SAND SPRINGS, OKLA around
the outside, and PAT AUG 3,1915 in the center.
Three of the body fragments , all probably from Ball jars, are inscribed in upper case script: one has . . . ALL, and two have BAL ...
The one remaining piece is decorated with intersecting lines (a gridlike pattern ) done in low relief and placed .6 em. apart from one another. This sherd is probably from a pickle jar.

Pressed Glass
The criterion for the classification of the pressed glass (i.e., glass
pressed into a mold while still plastic) has been the design. The terminology has been taken primarily from Lee ( 1933).
IDENTIFIED PATTERNS

(50 Specimens )

Crystal (Fig. 16, A)
Number of specimens: 2
Color: Clear
Design: Included in this group are a large rim sherd (Fig. 16, A ) and a small body

39

ANDERSON's MILL

Fig. 1 5. Jar Lids a nd Liners .

fragment, both of which h ave on the exterior surface a series of rather broadlyspaced (m aximum of '2.7 em. ), raised vertical lines. On the rim piece the lines
begin at indentations formed by a scalloped lip and continue toward the base of
the vessel, becoming more closely-spaced (i.e., somewhat converging) .
Vessel form : Probably a small bow l

Daisy and Button (Fig. 16, B, C)
Number of specimen s: 5
Color: Clear
Design : The design on each of these specimens consists of a geometric figure, usually
an octagon or a hexagon, composed of a number of wedge-shaped segments done

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in high relief. One of the sherds has the octagon divided into 12 wedge-shaped
segments, and 2 others have patterns in which hexagons are divided into 6 segments. In the classic daisy and button pattern the stylized "daisies" (the wedged
geometric figures) are interspersed with smaller geometric elements which may
or may not be subdivided by wedges. The sherd that is decorated with the octagonal stylized daisies has one "button" that is an octagon in high relief and is
surrounded by four daisies. On the two sherds having hexagonal daisies, there are
equilateral triangles whose bases are sides of the hexagons between the daisies.
The over-all effect of this pattern is that of a set of interlocking, six-pointed stars.
Thes ~ two sherds have been considered in this group because they seem to represent a set. The wedges of another· sherd are ranged in a circle about a central
daisy that has a round button in the middle of it. The two remaining pieces
exhibit the daisy pattern, but are too incomplete to determine the exact style of
decoration.
Vessel form: One sherd is a rim from what appears to have been a steep-sided
vessel, while another fragment is probably from the top or lid of a vessel. The
similarity of the patterns on these two sherds suggests that they belong to a set.
The other pieces are too incomplete to yield particulars about form , but they
appear to represent 3 different vessels.

Pressed Block (Fig. 16, D)
Number of specimens: 1
Color: Clear
Design: The pressed block design consists of a number of truncated pyramid-shaped
elements placed side by side, row upon row.
Vessel form: Unknown

Ribbed (Fig. 16, E)
Number of specimens: 1
Color: Amethystine
Design: Ribs in high relief radiate from a raised central circle (ca. 3 em. in
diameter and :6 em. high ) which app ears to be a knob for lifting.
Vessel form: Probably a bowl lid

Fine Cut (Fig. 16, F)
Number of specimens: 1
Color: Pale, clear yellow-green
Design: Four-sided pyramid-shaped projections cover the face (exterior) of the
vessel. The apex of each pyramid is truncated and has an indented cross, the arms
of which are perpendicular to the basal sides of the pyramid. The bases of the
pyramids are about .5 em. square.
Vessel form: Probably a rim of a glass, cup, or goblet

Grape (Fig. 16, G)
Number of specimens:
Color: Clear
Design: A bunch of grapes and two leaves are represented in high relief on the

41

ANDERSON'S MILL

B

E

G

J

0

IN.

o

tM.

K

Fig . 16. Pressed Glass. A, Crystal. B, C, Daisy and button . D, Pressed block. E, Ribbed .
F, Fine cut. G, Grape . H, I, Bellflower ribbed. J , K, Hobnail.

exterior. A vertica l line in low relief appears just below the grapes, and may be
one of a set that divided the vessel into panels. If this were the case, the sherd
wou1d be of the paneled grap e type.
Ve3s : l brm: Unknown

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bellflower Ribbed (Fig. 16, H, I )
Number of specimens: 5
Color: Clear ( 1) and amethystine ( 4)
Design: Characterized by raised ribs which radiate from a central point or circle.
These ribs differ from those of the above-m entioned ribbed type in that they are
pointed on the ends, are in lower relief, and are more triangular in cross section
(th e ribs of the ribbed type are nearly square in cross section).
Vessel form : Unknown, but at least 4 vessels are represented.

Pointed Hobnail (Fig. 16, J, K)
Number of specimens: 5
Color: Clear ( 4) and ameth ystine ( 1)
Design: All of these sherds are from rims, each of which has been thickened and
indentations made to achieve the effect of a scalloped edge. On three of the pieces
the indentations are on a plan2 that is probably parallel to the base, but on one
the indentations are on a plane that appears to be perpendicular to the base.
Vessel form: Unknown, but at least 4 vessels are represented.

Bull's Eye (Fig. 17, A-C )
Number of specimens : 6
Color: Clear
Design. One sherd exhibits a pattern composed of partially contiguous rings (ca.
1.5 em. in diameter) in high relief. In the center of each ring is a raised hemisphere. The area between the inside of the ring and the outside of the hemisphere
-as well as the space between each ring-is stippled. Four other sherds exhibit
the classic hull's eye pattern of a rounded circle in high relief inside an indented
circle (Fig. 17, A, B). The one remaining specimen (Fig. 17, C) is decorated
with a pattern that may be a variation of the hull's eye style. On this piece a
slightly elliptical-shaped area in high reHef is outlined by two crescents, one
above and one below the ellipse. The surface of the ellipse is decorated in diamond
point, while the surfaces of the crescents are scored.
Vessel form: Unknown; at least 3 vessels are present in the collection.

Icicle (Fig. 17, D, E)
Number of specimens:
Color: Clear
Design: Two of these
pointed (Fig. 17, D ,
point.
Vessel form: Probably

3
pieces have long, parallel indentations or lines which are
E); the third has the lines (also indented) radiating from a
drinking glasses.

White Glass (Fig. 17, F-I)
Number of specimens: 20
Color: White ("milk" glass)
Design: Primarily floral, with both naturalistic (Fig. 17, F, G; 3 sherds ) and styl-

ANDERSON's MILL

43

Fig . 17. Pre ssed Glass . A-C , Bull ' s eye. D, E, Icicle . F-1 , Wh ite glass .

ized (Fig. 17, H , I; 4 sherds ) patterns recognizable. Eight specimens, including
a handle fragment, are undecorated; and one-a plate fragment- is painted on
its interior surface.
V essel form: Those with floral designs represent 2 plates, those with a stylized floral
pattern a plate and a cup. The painted sherd is from a plate.

44
UNIDENTIFIED PATTERNS (3 1

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Specimens )

Stylized Floral (Fig. 18, A, B)
Number of specimens : 4
Color : Clear, light green
Design: A stylized floral pattern appears on the exterior surfaces.
Vessel form: Two vessels are represented. One is a small, footed bowl. 4.85 em. high
and a minimum of 5.25 em. in diameter. The other vessel has a similar design,
but appears to be from a vase or decanter which was more than 6.15 em. high
and had a minimum diameter of 4.2 em .

Floral
Number of specimens:
Color: Amethystine
Design : Sherd is too small to determine any details.
Vessel form: Unknown

Panel (Fig. 18, C)
Number of specimens: 4
Color: Clear
Design: A number of contiguous, rectanguloid panels
Vessel form : Three of the sherds appear to be from bottle shoulders; a minimum of
3 vessels are represented.

Circular (Fig. 18, D)
Number of specimens: 2
Color: Amethystine
Design: Each sherd contains portions of large raised circle.
Vessel form: Unknown, but both pieces may be from the same vessel.

Octagonal (Fig. 18, E, E')
Number of specimens : 1
Color: Amethystine
Design: Appears on the interior surface and consists of a central octagon which
contains an 8 pointed star composed of wedge-shaped triangles. Numerous small
triangles surround this central motif.
Vessel form: Possibly a lid or decanter top, as a long stem having a hexag:mal cross
section projects from the exterior surface.

Striated (Fig. 18, F)
Number. of specimens: 2
Cqlor: Clear
Design: Short, closely-spaced vertical striations (or ticked lines) appear just below
the rim. On the larger piece the upper portions of two panels are visible.
Vessel form: Unknown

45

ANDERSO N 'S MILL

B

c

A

E

F

E'

D

G

H
0

0

IN.
6

Fig. 18 . Pressed Glass . A, B, Stylized floral. C, Panel. D, Circular. E, E', Octagonal. F,
Striated. G, Rad iating lines . H, Concentric circles. I, Multi- pointed star.

Radiatin g Lines (Fig. 18, G)
Number of specimens: 1
Color: Amethystine
Design: Done in high relief on both the exterior and interior, and con sists of lines

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which r adiate from a centr al point. The lines from each surface converge at the
edge and produce a sawtooth-like rim.
Vessel for m : This specimen is solid and was elliptical in cross section. It was an
estima ted 2.2 em . in diameter an d is 1.1 5 em . in m aximum thickness. It is probably part of a lid knob.

Con centric Circles (Fig. 18, H )
N umber of sp ecim ens: 1
Color: Amethystin e
D esign : A series of horizontal, con centric circles
Vessel form : This piece is a complete knob, 2.2 em . high and 2.4 em. in maximum
di am eter.

Multi-Pointed Star (Fig. 18, I )
Number of specimens: 1
Color : Amethystine
Design: Incomplete, but appear s to h ave a multi-pointed star.
Vessel form : Appar ently a shallow, w ide-mouth vessel of thick ( .75 em .) glass.

In addition to the above, there are 16 pieces of pressed glass which
ar e so small that their design elements cannot be accurately ascertained.

Miscellaneous Glass Objects
Included in this category are:
1) One hundred and twelve fragments of window glass (Fig. 19,
A, B). These range from .15 to .3 em. in thickness, and are coated with
fl ecks of gold and blue, as a result of corrosion.
2 ) A flat fragment of glass with a smooth, wavy edge (Fig. 19, C) .
It is possible that this piece is from a glass table top cover .
3) Nine pieces of ver y thin (.05 to .1 em.) glass, probably from
lamp chimneys (Fig. 19, D, E ) .
4 ) Three fragments of white, opaque glass possibly from a cosmetic
(cold cream? ) container (Fig.19, F ).
5 ) Two beads, one of which is a molded red bead with a geometric
design. The other is a plain, spheroid-shaped blue bead. The red one
is 1.5 em . long and. 7 em. in diameter ; the blue one is .55 em. in
diameter.
6) A basal fragment (Fig. 19, G ) of a small salt bowl. The diameter
of the base is 2.65 em. and the maximum thickness is .45 em.
7) Three buttons, each with four holes. One (Fig. 19, I ) is 2.3 em.
in diameter and two (Fig. 19, H ) are 1.1 em. in diameter.
8 ) Fragments of what appear to be a faceted bottle (Fig. 19, J ),
possibly a perfume container.

47

ANDERSON's MILL

.c

6

Fig. 19. Miscellaneous Glass . A, B, Window glass fragments . C, Table top cover 1?1 fragment. D, E, Fragments of lamp chimneys. F, Fragment of cosmetic container. G, Basal fragment of possible salt bowl. H, I, Buttons. J, Fragments of faceted perfume I?J bottles.

Interpretations
BOTTLES

Hand blowing of bottles-the earliest technique of bottle making
known-consisted of 1) gathering a glob of molten glass on the end
of a metal blowing tube or blowpipe, 2 ) roughly shaping the viscous

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

glass by rolling it on a hard, flat surface (marvelling), 3 ) blowing the
bottle to its desired size, 4) attaching a punty rod to the incipient bottle
at the end opposite that where the blowpipe was attached, 5) detaching
the blowpipe by cutting the glass with shears, and shaping the neck
and body with hand tools while another workman rotated the bottle
with the punty rod, and 6) breaking off the punty rod and annealing
the bottle. The characteristics of a bottle produced by this method are
as follows: there are no seams or mold marks, the surface is irregular,
and there is a pontil mark (sharp scar of broken glass) on the bottom
where the punty rod was broken off (Knittle, 192.9: 22-24).
By the beginning of the 19th century, molds which aided in the
shaping of bottles had come into use. After the glass had been gathered
on the end of the blowpipe and marvelled, the bottle was shaped with
the assistance of a wooden or clay mold. The mold formed only the
base and body of the bottle, so the neck had to be drawn out and
finished by hand. Diagnostic characteristics of bottles produced in this
type of mold are seams on the sides of the body, but not on the neck,
and the pontil mark on the base (Scoville, 1948: 18).
Shortly after 1800 the two-piece hinged mold came into common
use. This mold formed all but the mouth of the bottle. The bottle, after
it had been extracted from the mold was attached to a punty rod so
that it could be manipulated while the mouth was formed. Bottles
produced in this fashion have seams along both the sides and the neck,
but not on the upper portions of the neck and the mouth, which were
hand finished as the bottle was rotated by the punty rod. The point of
attachment is marked by a pontil mark (Scoville, 1948: 16-17).
As early as 1820, three and four piece molds were in use. The
earliest ones were made of hardwoods, but these were replaced later
with brass, copper, and, particularly, cast iron molds. The upper portions of the necks still had to be hand finished. These bottles have as
many seams as there were pieces in the mold, pontil marks on their
bases, and smooth ( unseamed ) upper necks and mouths (ibid.: 17 ) .
Between 1850 and 1860 the snap case was introduced. The snap case
fitted around the basal portion of the bottle and enabled the workman
to manipulate the bottle without using a punty rod. Bottles made with
snap cases have no pontil marks, but rather they have smooth, hollow
bases (Van Rensselaer, 1926: 10).
Chilled iron molds began to be employed immediately after the
Civil War. They gave the bottles more regular surfaces than the older
types of molds; this characteristic, however, is difficult to recognize
(Van Rensselaer, 1926: 12) .
In 1881 a process was invented that mechanically finished the

ANDERSON'S MILL

49

mouths of bottles. Viscous glass was dropped into a "blank mold" that
gave the glob of glass a shape somewhat like that of the bottle to be
produced. After the glass was placed in the blank mold, a plunger was
pressed down to press the glass up around the portions of the mold that
would form the mouth. The second, or " blowing" mold was put in
place of the blank mold and compressed air was forced through the
formed mouth. This method was first used successfully in 1892 when
Dos Taylor began to make wide mouth ware at his plant in Huntington, West Virginia. In 1892 C. L. Flaccus started production of wide
mouth Vaseline jars at the Enterprise Glass Co. at Beaver Falls,
Pennsylvania. These first jars that were completely machine formed
have seams that run the entire height of the vessel. They also have
rough, sharp edges along their mouths (Scoville, 1948: 329 ) . Before
1900, however, refinements had been made in the basic idea of
machine jars and their quality improved (ibid.: 325 ).
By 1903 this general principle had been adapted to bottle making
at the Owens Bottle Co. Improved machines were designed and sold
by Mr. Owens in 1909, 1911 , 1912, and 1917. About the time of the
First World War the machines were widespread. Bottles produced on
these machines have seams that extend the whole length of the bottle
and neck, and no pontil marks (Scoville, 1948: 324-329).
None of the bottles from Anderson's Mill has a pontil mark on it;
therefore, they all must date after 1860. One of the bottle bottoms was
finished in a snap case, so it dates from between 1860 and 1914. The
other bottle bottoms may have been finished with snap cases, but I
am not sure that they were.
The 13 bottle necks that were hand finished date from the period
between the invention of the two piece mold ( early 1800's ) and the
first use of machinery to finish bottle necks in 1914. One of the hand
finished necks (Group VII ) was made to accommodate a crown cap
closure. This type of closure (same as used on modem beer and soda
water bottles ) was introduced in 1907 (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962:
73); therefore, this neck dates from between 1907 and 1914.
All but two of the panel bottles are machine finished; therefore, most
of them date from after 1914. The two exceptions date from before
1914. Rawleigh's products were first introduced into Texas in 1904
(Milton Babcock, personal communication) so the five Rawleigh's
bottles date from 1904 at least, and the two complete ones (with machine finished necks ) date from after 1914, The first lettered panel
bottles began to be produced about 1867 (Moore, 1924: 255- 256 ) so
the other lettered panel bottle fragments date from around 1867 at the
earliest. None of the Rawleigh's bottle necks from the site were made

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

for screw caps. Presently-used Rawleigh's bottles do have screw caps,
but it is not known when they were first introduced.
JARS

The Mason wide mouth jar with the screw cap was patented in 1858
(Glass Containers, 1963). No other meaningful dates could be obtained for the jars.
PRESSED GLASS

The first experiments with pressed glass were carried out in New
England in the 1820's (Lee, 1933: 4; Watkins, 1950: 84-87 ) . As the
processes and machinery were perfected, more and more plants for
pressing glass were founded, until by 1840 there were factories in
several states (Lee, 1933: 5 ) . Before 1850 the vessel forms and designs
used seem to have been rather limited, but after this date changing
styles and greater demand for different sorts of vessels led to a number of innovations (ibid.: 6) . The production of pressed white or milk
white glass was probably begun between 1830 and 1850, but it was
not produced commercially for a large market until 1870 (ibid.: 614615) .
The pressed glass from Anderson's Mill has been compared with
illustrations and descriptions in several texts. Most of the nomenclature and chronology, however, have been taken from Lee (1933).
It is realized that dates based on design alone are not as accurate as
could be desired, largely because they sometimes refer to the first date
of manufacture, and other times to the period during which the pattem
was in vogue. In the latter case, a particular vessel could have been
purchased either before, after, or during the period indicated. In the
former case, the vessel could have been purchased at any time after the
first date of manufacture. Some of these patterns can still be purchased
today. The dates presented, then, give only a general idea of the age
of a particular vessel or design, although in some instances fairly good
dates have been obtained. The arrangement presented below is on the
basis of the age that has been indicated (Lee, 1933) for the particular
design, going from the earliest to latest:
The bellflower ribbed pattern was popular from the 1830's to the 1850's;
The pressed block designed vessels probably do not date much before 1853;
Vessels of the crystal patterns are listed in the 1859 and 1868 catalogues of the
M'Kee Bros. Co. of Pittsburg;
The fine cut pattern probably dates from the 1870's;
The pointed hobnail pattern was popular in the late 1870's and the 1880's;

51

ANDERSON ' S MILL

In the early 1880's the daisy and button pattern came into vogue. Several examples of this style are illustrated in the 1888 catalogue of Otto Young & Co.;
Production of the paneled grape design was begun in the 1890's;
The hull's eye pattern and its variants were produced from the 1850's to the
1880's;
The icicle pattern dates from the 1870's.

The above suggest that the pressed glass from Anderson's Mill date
from the 1830's to the 1890's.
METAL

A wide range of metal artifacts was found at the site. Only a relatively few of these (expanded cartridges, nails, tin cans, and lids),
however, are similar enough to each other to warrant classification.
The other, more diverse, specimens are lumped and briefly discussed
individually under the heading of miscellaneous metal artifacts.

Expended cartridges
Twelve metallic cartridges and three metal shotgun shell cases (or
paper cartridges ) were recovered. Two (Fig. 20, A,B) are Winchester
Repeating Arms Co. .30-.30 cartridges. The primer of one of these
(Fig. 20, B) has been removed, and the mouth of the case is compressed
and wrinkled in such a manner as to suggest that a fairly uniform
pressure had been exerted against it-possibly the result of an accident
in reloading the expended case.
Two Union Metallic Cartridge Co. cases are in the collection: one
(Fig. 20, D ) for a Colt .45 and one (a metal base and primer) for a
12 gauge shotgun. The shotgun shell has the words NEW CLUB
inscribed on it. Another shotgun base is from a Remington-Union
Metallic Cartridge Co. 16 gauge shotgun shell ; while a second 12 gauge
shotgun shell base (Fig. 20, C) is inscribed WESTERN FIELD.
Six of the cartridge cases are .22 long (Fig. 20, E), four of which
have the word SUPER inscribed on their bases; one has U, and another
has H . The U indicates that the shell was produced either by the Union
Metallic Cartridge Co., or by the Remington-Union Metallic Cartridge
Co. Another expended cartridge is a .22 short (Fig. 20, F ) with the
letter N inscribed on its base.
A rim fire brass cartridge (Fig. 20, G ) is badly bent and there is no
inscription on the base. It is probably a 59, 60, or 61 caliber cartridge.
It is 2.3 em. high.
One center fire metallic cartridge is a .30 caliber shell that represents military ammunition of a late date. Its base is inscribed with
FA 34, indicating that it was produced in 1934.

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

0

E.

F

G

H

ll
0

0

IN.

CM.

6

J

Fig . 20 . Cartridges and Nails . A, 8 , Winchester .30-.30. C, Western Field 12 gauge
shotgun shell base. D, Colt .45. E, .22 long. F, .22 short. G, Unidentified cartridge. H, Wire
nails. I, Thin headed cut nails . J, Thick headed cut nails .

53

ANDERSON ' S MILL

Nails
All of the nails from Anderson's Mill are either cut nails or wire
nails (Fig. 20, H ); no hand wrought nails were found. There are two
types of cut nails : 1) those with thin, irregular heads (Fig. 20, I ), and
2) those with more regular, thick square heads (Fig. 20, J). Horseshoe
nails (Fig. 21 , A-E) and wire staples (Fig. 21 , F-H ) were also recovered. The distribution of the nails and staples is presented in the
chart below.
Staples

Cut thin
heads

Cut thick
heads

Wire

Horseshoe

Associated with house

7

6

164

81

7

Associated with mill

0

34

54

1

0

It is significant to note that there are few thin headed cut nails from
the house, but there are many from the mill; conversely, there are a
negligible number of wire nails from the mill, but there are many
from the house.

Tin Cans
The 15 tin cans and can fragments can be divided into three groups :
soldered, crimped, and flat tobacco.
Soldered (Fig. 21, I-K )
Number of specimens: 5
Description: Side seams are crimped and lightly soldered, while the tops and bottoms
have rims whi ch are fitted over the ends of the body of the can and soldered but
not crimped. Small holes in the tops of the cans have been sealed with a drop of
solder.
Dimensions: Three specimens, two complete cans and a top , are approximately th e
size of modern, medium-sized condensed milk cans, measuring 6.3 em. in diameter
and 6.95 em. tall (Fig. 21, I ). The one other measurable specimen (Fig. 2 1, K )
is 7.3 em. in diameter, and was greater than 9.5 em. tall.
Remarks: One of the complete small cans and the small lid piece have been opened
by punching two small holes in the top, while the other small can (Fig. 21, J )
was opened by making two diagonal cuts across the top and lifting up one of the
wedge-shaped segments thus formed.

Crimped (Fig. 22, A)
Number of specimens : 8
Description: Four of the five fragments that have part of the top attached had their
lids crimped on with no use of solder. The fifth fragment is quite incomplete,

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

F

A

c

B

D

G

H

E

K

0

CM.

J
Fig . 21 . Nails, Staples, and Tin Cans . A-E, Horseshoe nails. F-H , Staples . 1-K , Soldered
cans .

but perhaps had the top crimped on over a thin band of solder that was later
heated. Five body fragments indicate that side seams were crimped without the
use of solder.
Dimensions : Indeterminable
Remarks: At least five cans appear to be represented.

ANDERSON'S MILL

55

Flat Tobacco (Fig. 22, B)
Number of specimens: Z
D escription : These are tobacco ·cans with hinged lids, crimped seam s, and rectangular cross sections. One (Fig. ZZ, B) h as a partially preserved yellow and black
label which reads PRINCE A LBERT CRIMP CUT. Between the words PRINCE
A LBERT and CRIMP CUT is a faintly visible standing figure. The bottoms of
both cans are lettered in low relief with PRINCE ALBERT.
Dimensions : H eight, 10.9 em. ; thickness, Z.Z5; width, 7.65 em .

Lids
The thirteen metal lids (exclusive of the jar lids described earlier)
recovered from the site represent four different types of closures:
friction or slip-on, snap, crown, and screw. Each of the eight friction
type lids is made from thin sheet metal and is designed to slip on over
the top of a container. Seven have circular outlines, and one has a
rectangular outline. Four of the former are baking can lids (Fig. 22, C)
which are inscribed as follows :

CLABBER GIRL DOUBLE ACTING BAKING POWDER
( 2 specimens)
. . . KC BAKING POWDER . . .
KC BAKING POWDER SAME PR . .. TODAY 45 YEARS AGO
None of the other friction lids bears any mar ks. The circular specimens are between 3 and 12.75 em. in diameter; the rectangular one is
3 em. by 7 em.
One of the two snap lids is circular, m easuring 5.2 em. in diameter;
the other is rectangular and measures 4.5 em. by 3.5 em. The crown
cap (Fig. 22, E ) is identical to those used on modern soda water and
beer bottles. The two screw caps are, of course, circular, one (Fig. 22,
D ) 5.2 em . in diameter, the other 4.3 em. in diameter.

Miscellaneous M etal
Itemized below are a number of metal objects which do not lend
themselves to detailed classification. They are briefly described individually below and include :
1) A spring holder for a wagon (Fig. 23, A, A' ) . This piece is flat
on one side and has two unthreaded lugs protruding from that side;
on the opposite face there is a slot that extends across the short axis
(Fig. 23, A' ) . A perforation appears in the center of the holder.
2) A lock washer with wings that are bent downward .
3) A probable coffee grinder handle (Fig. 23, B) .

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

A

B

E
D

c
Fig . 22 . Cans and Lids . A, Crimped can . B, Tobacco ca n. C, Clabb e r Girl ba:<i ng ca n lid .
D, Screw lid . E, Crown cap lid .

4 ) A right angle iron brace with four screw attachment holes.
5) A nearly complete Ford Model T taillight (Fig. 23, C).
6) A fine, round screen filter for a gas tank or a gas funnel.
7) Apossiblethumbknobplate (Bald:winCo. , 1891 : 555 ) -asheet
metal object engraved with a scroll-like pattern (Fig. 23 , D ) .
8) A common carriage bolt. The head is round, 2.6 em. in diameter,
and the total length is estimated to have been approximately 13.25 em.
(Fig. 23, E).
9) A bolt with a hexagonal head and a lock nut. The lock nut has
slots around its base which permit use of a cotter key.
10) Two machine bolts. The head is broken off of one, but it has a
square nut which is 2.65 em. on a side and 1.85 em. thick. This bolt

57

ANDERSON ' S MILL

is 1.55 em. in diameter. The other specimen has an octagonal head
which is 2.3 em. in diameter and 1.0 em. thick. This bolt is 1.25 em.
in diameter and 7.55 em. long (it may, however, be broken ) .
11 ) Three other bolts are fragmentary. Included is one with a
hexagonal head, one with an octagonal head, and one (Fig. 23, F ) with
a thin, flat, rectangular head.
12) A U -shaped iron bolt ( ?) that resembles a beam clip illustrated

A

A'

D

0=

F

!N,

CM.

E

c
Fig. 23 , Metal Artifacts . A, A', Spring holder for a wagon . B, Poss ible coffee grinder
handle . C, Model T tail light . D, Possible thumb plate. E, F, Bolts.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the 1893-94 Mansur & Tebbets Implement Co. catalogue. It measures 4.25 em. long and 4.25 em. wide (Fig. 24, A).
13 ) A Twitchel pneumatic tire pressure gauge (Fig. 24, B ) .
14) An iron object (Fig. 24, C) which is rectangular with rounded
ends. Tapered holes are present at either end, and a rectangular opening appears in the center. This was perhaps used to support a set of
box springs or a platform to support box springs. It resembles a specimen which the 1891 Baldwin & Co. catalogue (page 463) illustrates
as a "bedstead fastener."
15 ) A brace lacking the wooden handle and knob. At the distal end
is an orifice to receive a bit and a sleeve to secure the bit.
16) Four metal handles, including aU-shaped one still riveted onto
part of an iron vessel. Two of the other handles are of wire; the third
appears to be a drawer pull.
17) A cast iron poker handle (Fig. 24, D) which may have belonged to a fireplace set.
18 ) Twenty-nine iron stove parts, including 3 round grill fragments and a grill lifter handle.
19 ) A clothespin spring.
20 ) A fragment of rake prong.
21 ) A horseshoe fragment.
22 ) A tin stove pipe fragment.
23 ) A pipe fitting.
24 ) A tire valve anchor (Fig. 24, E ) .
25) A copper object (Fig. 24, F) which may have been a top to
a pill or snuff box. It is decorated with a stylized floral pattern inside
a narrow band that encircles the rim. This piece is 4 em. in diameter.
26) A spring hinge.
27 ) Three pieces of barbed wire.
28) A fragment of sheet tin.
29 ) A segment of iron pipe, 2.75 em. in diameter.
30 ) Portions of a bolt type door latch (Fig. 24, G).
31 ) Two spoon handles, one (Fig. 24, I) of pewter, one (Fig. 24, H )
silver plated.
32) A fragment (Fig. 24, J) of what appears to be a cast iron
wheel from a toy.
33) A spiral bedspring.
34) Two round washers.
35) A clock gear, probably for a minute hand.
36 ) Two parts of a foot-operated sewing machine frame.
37) Four vest or suspender buckles (Fig. 24, L ) , according to
Fontana and Greenleaf ( 1962: 87).

59

ANDERSON ' S MILL

A

c

8

D

E
F
G

J

K

H

L

Fig . 24. Metal Artifact> . A, Possible beam clip . B, Pressure gauge . C, Possible bed spring
fastener. D, Poker handle. E, Valve anchor. F, Possible snuff or pill box lid. G, Part of a bolt
type door latch. H, I, Spoon handles . J, Wheel for a toy . K, Upper jaw of monkey wrench .
L, Vest or suspender buckle.

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38 ) Upper jaw of monkey wrench (Fig. 24, K) .
39 ) Three iron chain links.
40 ) A cuff link (Fig. 25, A ) .
41 ) A snap.
42) A rivet type button for work clothes.
43) Eleven shoe eyes.
44) Two metal buttons.
45 ) Two (Fig. 25 , B) spur strap buckles (Baldwin Co., 1891 : 619 ) .
46 ) A square sheet copper object (Fig. 25, C) 4.6 em. on a side. It
is stamped with an image of a bird.
47 ) A screw.
48 ) An iron ring, outside diameter 2.5 em.
49 ) A fragment of flexible tubing, possibly part of an electrical
conduit; approximately .4 em . in diameter.
50 ) A fragment of a large iron magnet.
51 ) Part of a chain-type bed spring (Fig. 25 , E).
52) A ball bearing cage (Fig. 25, D).
53) Approximately 50 unidentifiable metal objects, many of which
are fragmentary.
Interpretations
EXPENDED CARTRIDGES

The two .30-.30's made by the Winchester Repeating Arms Co.
were produced for use in the Winchester Lever Action Model 1894
rifle, the first sporting rifle adapted for use of smokeless powder ammunition. The Winchester Repeating Arms Co. began production of
the ammunition for this rifle in 1895 (Williamson, 1952: 450 ) . The
rifle is still being produced and is Winchester's most popular model
(ibid.: 161-162) . These data simply indicate that the two Winchester
Center Fire .30-.30 cartridge cases that were found at the site date
after 1895. It is one of these cases that has had the primer removed
and the mouth compressed, suggesting that an attempt had been made
to reload the expended cartridge. There are reloading equipment sets
listed in Baldwin's 1891 catalogue that may have, if carelessly handled,
caused a cartridge case to be so deformed.
The Union Metallic Cartridge Company began production in 1867
and merged with Remington in 1910 to form the Remington-UMC
Co. Any cartridge marked UMC would, then, date from the period
between 1867 and 1910 (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 80) . One of
the UMC products recovered is a .45 cartridge for a Colt weapon. The
earliest such weapon was the Colt Frontier, introduced in 1873. A

ANDERSON'S MILL

61

double action Colt .45 was introduced in 1877, but it was not very
popular. The cartridge was probably used in the 1873 model Frontier;
if so, this case would date from the period between 1873 and 1910.
The other UMC product from the site is a 12 gauge shotgun shell
base which is marked NEW CLUB. UMC Club shotgun shells are
listed in Baldwin & Co.'s 1891 catalogue, but no New Club shells are
listed. It is possible that the New Club was a development of the Club
shell that came later, or that the Baldwin Co. did not carry the New
Club shells. At any rate, the shotgun shell base surely dates from
between 1867 and 1910, and perhaps from after 1891 to 1910.
The 16 gauge Remington-UMC shotgun shell base dates from after
1910, and the large caliber rimfire cartridge probably dates from the
Civil War period. It is interesting to note that a cartridge case identical
to the Winchester Repeating Arms Co.'s .30-.30 case recovered from
Anderson's Mill was reported from the Johnny Ward Ranch (Fontana
and Greenleaf, 1962: 80 ) . The Johnny Ward Ranch Site dates from
1859 to 1903. It would be expected that cartridge cases from the popular Winchester Model '94 would be widespread. A cartridge from a
Colt Frontier ( .45 ) was also reported from the Johnny Ward Ranch
(ibid. : 81 ) . Again, from the popularity of the model Colt revolver one
would expect cartridges from it to be widely distributed.
NAILS

Before 1825 machine cut nails were headed by hand. They were
placed in a vise and struck with a hammer to flatten the end of the
nail and thus produce the head. This manufacturing process resulted in
nails with thin, irregularly-shaped heads. About 1825 water-powered
machinery came into use that would cut and head the nails. Until1830
or 1840, however, the nail heads continued to be thin and somewhat
irregular. By 1840 processes had been perfected that resulted in thicker
and more uniform heads on nails. In 1855 the technique of manufacturing wire or round nails was invented, but the wire nails did not
outnumber the square cut ones until about 1890 (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 46-55).
Three time periods are represented by the nails from Anderson's
Mill: before 1840, between 1840 and 1890, and after 1890. I think,
however, that these dates-especially the 1840 one-should not be
taken too seriously. It is quite possible that the suppliers kept stocks
of earlier types of nails on hand until they could be sold, or that some
naileries continued to make the earlier type for a while after the thick

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B

c

D
E

""
~

F

(]

G
0
0

H

IN.
CM.

2
6

Fig . 25 . Metal Artifacts. A, Cuff link. B, Spur buckle. C, Unidentified copper object. D,
Ball bearing cage. E, Possible bed . spring fragment. F-H, Shell buttons. I, Carbon rod.

headed ones had become widespread. It is useful, nonetheless, to have
an estimation of their dates of manufacture.
The sequence of construction of the structures at Anderson's Mill
was as follows: 1 ) a log cabin (unlocated) , 2) the mill, and 3) the
main house. Anderson probably obtained the thin headed nails that
were used in constructing the mill from a supplier that had them on
hand either because they were still being made, or because he had

63

ANDERSON'S MILL

them in stock. Thick headed nails were also used in the mill, but only
one wire nail was recovered from the mill area.
At the house site few (six) thin headed nail were found, but many
thick headed cut and wire nails were recovered. This would be expected considering the later date of the main house. The presence of
the wire nails probably indicates that the occupation and construction
(or repair) lasted into the 1890's.
The relatively small number of thick headed cut nails and the
absence of wire nails at the mill confirm its earlier date of construction.
TIN CANS

The three small, soldered cans were probably condensed milk containers. Sine:! this type has been made in the same fashion from Civil
War times (they were not, however, widely marketed until about
1898 ) until the present (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 74 ), not much
can be said about their age except that they probably postdate 1898.
The process of crimping all of the seams came into use about the time
of World War I, while the process by which the carr's side seams could
be lightly mechanically soldered was introduced in the 1880's. A
diagnostic trait of these cans is the slotting of the four sides where they
came together to form which would be the side seam (Fontana and
Greenleaf, 1962: 71 ). The larger soldered can from the site does not
have these notches, so it was not made in that manner. As early as
1859, however, a machine was in use to lap solder cans (Fontana and
Greenleaf, 1962: 71 ). At any rate, the large soldered can probably
predates the World War I; at least if it is like the one Hunt ( 1959: 9 )
illustrates.
If the one fragmentary crimped lid does have solder within the
crimped top seam, it probably dates from between 1860 and 1890
(Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 72 ) . All of the other fragments of this
type have crimped seams and therefore date from about 1914 (ibid.:
73; Hunt, 1959 : 9).
Fragments of at least two hinged lid tobacco cans similar to the ones
from Anderson's Mill were found at the Johnny Ward Ranch (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 77 ). However, the same sort of can is in use
today.
OTHER ARTIFACTS

Leather
Objects of leather include four shoe sole fragments, two fragments

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from the upper portions of shoes, one boot top, two heel fragments, a
possible visor from a cap, and eight small, unidentifiable pieces of
leather.

Rubber
Two small, unidentifiable fragments of rubber were recovered from
the site.

Shell
The only artifacts of shell are three buttons (Fig. 25 , F-H) which
are: 1) 2.2 em. in diameter with two holes, 2 ) 1.2 em. in diameter
with four holes, and 3) 1 em. in diameter with four holes. A button
quite similar to No. 2 above was found at the Johnny Ward Ranch.

Miscellaneous
Included in this group are a cloth fragment and two carbon rods,
possibly from old batteries. One of these rods (Fig. 25 , I) is 2.3 em. in
diameter and has ridges running its length; the other is 2.2 em. in
diameter and has a smooth exterior. Neither specimen is complete.
CHRONOLOGY

Sherds from an estimated 20 vessels are decorated by the decalcomania method, and at least another 20 vessels are adorned by means
of repousse. Both of these decorative techniques became popular after
1850. Sherds representing an estimated 10 vessels are gilded, while
seven are transfer printed. These techniques were in use before 1850,
and persisted after this period only in diminishing quantities. One
sherd bears a maker's mark that probably dates from the 1830's. No
meaningful dates could be obtained for the stoneware or the soft-paste
earthenware. The ceramics indicate that the site could have been
occupied as early as 1830. On the other hand, most of the material
suggests a later date and it is perhaps reasonable to assume that the
earlier pottery was obtained before the site was occupied.
The pressed glass from Anderson's Mill falls between the 1830's
and the 1890's, 'w ith most the dates clustering between the 1850's and
the 1880's. It has, however, been dated on the basis of the time periods
when certain patterns were popular, a method not as precise as might
be desired.
The 48 panel bottle specimens probably date from after 1867. Five
of them, the Rawleigh's bottles, date from 1904 at the earliest, and

65

ANDERSON ' S MILL

more probably from after 1914. Two of the panel bottle necks are hand
finished, so they date from before 1914. None of the bottle bottoms has
a pontil mark, so all of them fall after the invention of the snap case
( 1850-1860 ) . Thirteen of the miscellaneous bottle necks are hand
finished and 13 are machine finished. Therefore, it appears that half
of the bottle necks predate 1914 and half postdate 1914. Since all of
the bottle bottoms date from after 1850, it is probably a good guess to
say that the hand finished necks date from between 1850 and 1914.
The most significant point is that the bottle necks indicate that the
occupation extended until sometime after 1914.
The absence of round nails from the mill structure reveals that it
was constructed before 1890, just as the presence of round nails at the
house indicates that it was occupied after 1890. The square nails used
on the house and the mill are mostly of a type introduced after 1840.
The nails, then, provide evidence suggesting that the occupation took
place after 1840 and lasted until1890.
The earliest cartridge case is one that can be assigned to the Civil
War period; while the latest associated with the occupation dates after
1910. There are several cartridges that date from period in between
these two.
The archeological materials as a whole present a picture of an
occupation that lasted from the 1850's to after 1914.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Anderson's Mill is a historic site consisting of two major structural
components, the mill and the house. Limited excavations were carried
out at each of the areas. On the basis of the archeological materials
recovered from the site (principally ceramics, bottles, pressed glass,
nails, and expended cartridges ) , it is concluded that the occupation
extended from the mid-1800's to sometime after 1914. These dates
confirm the historical accounts that state Anderson established himself
at the site in the mid-1800's.
The archeological materials confirm other statements about the
Anderson household. The fact that many jar parts were found indicates that the occupants were indeed doing home canning. The fact
that two ash deposits were located evidence that there were two fireplaces. The statement that there was an irrigation system was verified
by the location of a tank on high ground (so that there would be
sufficient water pressure).
In addition to revealing certain details about the lifeways of the
occupants, the analysis of the cultural refuse indicates that the arti-

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

facts clearly reflect the vogues of that time. Several articles that are
listed in late 19th century trade catalogues ( 1888 catalogue of the Otto
Young & Co.; 1891 catalogue of the Baldwin Co. ) were found at the
site. Pressed glass fragments of pattems that Lee ( 1933 ) states date
from the mid-19th century to the early 20th century were found, as
were types of pottery that are said to have been popular ( decalcomania, repousse ) from the mid-19th century (Eberlein and Ramsdell,
192J5; Ramsay, 1947; Spargo, 1926 ). Kinds of bottles that Knittle
(1929) and Van Rensselaer ( 1926 ) state were being made after the
mid-19th century (hand finished necks, no pontil marks ) were also
recovered. The archeological findings, in general, reveal a picture
quite in keeping with the times.
Finally, it might be noted that the materials from Anderson's Mill
also correlate well with the specimens reported from other historic
sites of the same general time period-such sites as the Johnny ward
Ranch, Fort Lookout (Miller, 1960 ), Ft. Pierre -II (Smith, 1960a),
and Ft. Stevenson (Smith, 1960b).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, W. D.
1959. Kingdom in the Hills. Pamphlet published by the Anderson's Mill Garden
Club.
Babcock, Milton
1964. Letters dated October 6 and October 29 from the advertising department
of the W . T. Rawleigh Company, 223 E. Main St., Freeport, Illinois.
Baldwin Company
1891. Trade catalogue by firm of this name.
Barkley, Mary Starr
1963. History of Travis County and Austin, 1839-1899. The T exian Press.
Beard, F. R.
1937. 5000 Years of Glass. Frederick Stokes Co.
Binns, Charles F.
1930. The Story of the Potter. Hodder & Stroughton.
Brown, Frank
n .d.
Annals of Travis County and of the City of Austin. Manuscript in Travis
County Collection, Austin Public Library.
Camehl, A. W.
1916. The Blue China Book. Crown Publishers.
Cochran, Thomas C.
1948. The Pabst Brewing Company. New York University Press.
Combes, J . D.
1964. Excavations at Spokane House-Fort Spokane Historic Site. Laboratory of
Anthropology, Washington State University.

ANDERSON ' S MILL

67

Cox, Warren E.
1953. The Book of Pottery and Porcelain, Vols. I and II. Crown Publishers.
Dyer, Walter A .
1928. Stoneware for the Collector. Arts and Decoration. July issue, pp. 58-59,
88, 101.
Eberlein, H. D., and R. W. Ramsdell
1925. The Practical Book of Chinaware. J. B. Lippincott Co.
Encyclopedia Americana
1963. Decalcomania. Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. 8, p. 553 .
Fisher, S. W.
1945. The Decoration of English Porcelain. D. Verschoy le.
Fontana, Bernard L., and J. Cameron Greenleaf
1952. Johnny Ward's Ranch : A Study in Historic Archaeology. The Kiva , Vol.
·28, Nos. 1-2. Arizona Archaeological and Historical Society.
Gaines, Edith
1961. Dictionary of American Glass. Woman's Day, August issue, pp. 19-34.
1962. Dictionary of Pottery and Porcelain. Woman's Day, August issue, pp.
19-34.
Glass Containers, 1963
n.d.
Pamphlet published ·by the Glass C::mtainer Manufacturers, Inc.
Hunt, C. B.
1959. Dating of Mining Camps With Tin Cans and Bottles. Geo Times, Vol. 3,
No. 8. American Geological Institute.
Jelks, Edward B.
1958. Appendix A: Ceramics from Jamestown. In Archeological Excavations at
Jamestown, Virginia, by John L. Cotter. Archeological Research Series No.
4, National Park Service, U. S. Department of Interior.
Knittle, Rhea Mansfield
1929. Early American Glass. The Centu ry Company.
Lee, R. W.
1933. Early American Pressed Glass. Framingham Centre, Mass.
Mansur and Tebbets Implement Co.
1893-94. Trade Catalogue by firm of this name.
McDonald, Mrs. Robert E.
1959. Kingdom in the Hills. Pamphlet prepared by the Anderson Mill Gardeners
for the Austin Area Garden Center Flower Show, April 18-19·, 1959.
McKearin, George S., and Helen McKearin
1941. American Glass. Crown Publishers.
M 'Kee Bros. of Pittsburg
1859 and 1868. Trade catalogue by firm of this name.
Miller, C. F.
1960. The Excavation and Investigation of Fort Lookout Trading Post II
(39LM57 ) in the Fort Randall Reservoir, South Dakota. River Basin
Surveys Papers, No. 17. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 176.
Moore, N. Hudson
1924. Old Glass, European and American. Hodder and Stoughton, Ltd.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Nichols, George W .
1878. Pottery, How it is Made. Putnam's Sons.
Northend, Mary H.
1926. American Glass . Dodd, Mead & Company.
Norton, F. H .
1956. Ceramics for the Artist Potter. Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc.
Otto Young & Co.
1888. Trade ·c atalogue by firm of this name.
Phillips, Charles J .
1941. Glass: The Miracle Maker. Pitman Publishing Corp.
1950. Get Acquainted with Glass. Pitman Publishing Corp.
Powell, B. Bruce
1962. Classification of Ceramics from Historic American Sites. Newsletter of the
Southeastern Archaeological Conference, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 34--45.
Prescott, Samuel C., and Bernard E. Proctor
1937. Food Technology. McGraw Hill.
Ramsay, John
1947. American Potters and Pottery. Tudor Publishing Company.
Scoville, Warren C.
1948. Revolution in Glassmaking. H arvard University Press.
Smith, G. Hubert
1960a. Fort Pierre II (39ST217) , A Historic Trading Post in the Oahe Dam Area,
South Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 18. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin No. 176.
1960b. Archeological Investigations at the Site of Fort Stevenson (32ML1), Garrison Reservoir, North Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 19. Bureau
of American Ethnology, Bulletin, No. 176.
Spargo, John
1926. Early American Pottery and China. The Century Company.
Thorn, C. Jordan
1947. Handbook of Old Pottery and Porcelain Marks. Tudor Publishing Company.
Upton, Elsie
1941. Article in Austin Daily Tribune, August 17, p. 3.
Van Rensselaer, Stephen
1926. Early American Bottles and Flasks. Transcript Printing Co.
Von Loesecke, Harry W .
1942. Outlines of Food Technology. Reinhold Publishing Co.
Vulte, Hermann T., and Sadie B. Vanderbilt
1916. Food Industries. The Chemical Publishing Company.
Watkins, Laura
1950. American Glass and Glassmaking. Chanticleer Press.
Williamson, Harold F.
1952. Winchester: The Gun That Won the West. A Sportsman's Press Book.
Combat Forces Press.

ANDERSON'S MILL

69

Woolworth, Alan R. , and W. Raymond Wood
1960. The Archeology of a Small Trading Post (Kipps Post, 3ZMN1) in the
Garrison Reservoir, North Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. ZO.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 176.
Washington State University
Pullman, Washington

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, T exas
DAYMOND D. CRAWFORD
ABSTRACT
Between the summer of 1952 and the winter of 1964, when the level of Lake
Buchanan was far below normal, a number of archeological sites were exposed.
One of these, the Granite Bea ch Site, proved to be of special interest, as it yielded
a number of dart points which suggest occupation during Paleo-Indian and early
Archaic times. This locality and m ateria ls collected or observed on the surface are
briefly described.

INTRODUCTION

At normal pool level, approximately 1020 feet above sea level, Lake
Buchanan in Burnet and Llano counties, Texas, covers an area roughly
32 miles long and a maximum of eight miles wide. However, in the
summer of 1962 through the winter of 1964, the level of the lake was
reduced to as low as 986 feet above sea level, temporarily exposing
many acres of land. In the early part of June, 1962, the writer made
an archeological survey of portions of the exposed area at the southern
end of Lake Buchanan. Several previously unrecorded Indian sites
(Jackson and Woolsey, 1938 ) were located, but only one, the Granite
Beach Site ( 41 LL 2) appeared to be of special interest. Here artifacts
were fairly numerous and, even more importantly, many of the more
diagnostic specimens-the dart points-seemed to be affiliated with
the Paleo-Indian Stage (Suhm, et al., 1954: 16-18 ). Because of the
obvious importance of the site, it was frequently visited by the writer
and surface collections were made from the summer of 1962 to the
winter of 1964, when portions of the area of occupation were last
exposed.
The following report briefly describes the Granite Beach Site, the
extent of the investigations, the occupational features recorded, and
the specimens collected from the surface. In carrying out this study,
the author is indebted to Lathel F. Duffield, formerly with the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas, and Curtis D.
Tunnell, Curator of Anthropology, the Texas Memorial Museum.
Both of these persons gave freely of their time and information, and
without their assistance this report would have been impossible to
complete.

72

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DESCRIPTION OF THE SITE

The Granite Beach Site, usually inundated by the waters of Lake
Buchanan, lies on the westem shore of the lake, about half of a mile
southwest of the former Colorado River channel. At its maximum
exposure, when the lake level was at an elevation of approximately
986 feet, the site extended over about 180 by 120 feet of a gentle slope,
now a beach formed by wave action (Fig. 1) . To judge from tree
stumps in the immediate vicinity, erosion has removed six to 12 inches
of topsoil, uncovering artifacts and other evidence of occupation.
Hearth and several unusual concentrations of stones have been exposed, while many, if not all, of the artifacts seem to have been let
down onto the surface. Indications are that, before the lake was
created, the site was covered with post oak and juniper. A small,
spring-fed stream which once ran just to the northeast of the site
probably served as a source of water for the inhabitants.
As there was no apparent depth to the occupation, all artifacts and
features are from the surface. The artifacts, as well as the occupational
features, were found on the surface and by wading along the shallow
shores of the lake. Approximately 70 percent of the specimens collected are from the exposed part of the site; the remainder are from
the then-existing margins of the lake.
OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES
HEARTHS

The Granite Beach Site contained the remains of at least 51 hearths
(Fig. 1), all of which seemed to be of the same general type. They
consisted of roughly circular to oblong concentrations of hearthstone,
and averaged about 48 inches in diameter (Fig. 2, A). One, however,
was 72 inches by 48 inches, while another measured only 14 by 18
inches (consult Table 1 for other dimensions). None of the hearths
was excavated, so the thickness and the method of construction remain
undetermined. They were simply recorded as surface features, having
been exposed to various degrees by wave action.
Locally-obtained, pink granite rocks were used as hearthstones,
with the individual stones varying in size from small fragments only
two to three inches in maximum dimensions, to fairly large pieces that
were six to eight inches across and from four to five inches thick. Many
of the hearthstones had been cracked by exposure to heat, and the soil
in and about the hearths was typically light gray in color, possibly
stained by ash and charcoal (no actual flecks of charcoal, however,

73

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

GRANITE BEACH SITE

41 LL 2

39• • 37
. 38

,,o
.

. 46

47

45 .
.

48

.

40

43 • • 41
44 • •42

. 51
. 50

N

..

I

29 • •30

• 49 .

.

28 •

27

.

MAGNETIC

.

26

25

'
'

'

Sto ne
Gronite

Piles
Outc rop

He or t h {not drown to sca l e )

Burned

Rock

0

10

20

30 Feet

Concentrollon

1965

VMS

Fig. 1. Sketch map of the Granite Beach Site showing shoreline of Lake Buchanan at 986
elevation and the distribution of occupational features .

74

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

X

y

X

y

2

0

LEGEND

SCALE IN FEET

fire cracked
granite rocks
grayish soil

X

A

-0'"~~~-Lrk~
~ UC':N~E XC;:'A;-cV:A'-;=:0TE;o~:D ~~~~s:-":Jcr--Y
0

I

2

3

SCALE IN FEET

B
Fig. 2 . Idealized Sketch of Occupational Features . A, Hearth. B, Stone pile.

75

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

TABLE 1
Maximum surface dimensions of hearths, in inches
Hearth No.

North-South

East-West

H earth No.

North-South

East-VVest

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

60
36
36
48
36
48
48
48
36
48
60
48
60
24
24
36
48

36
24
24
48
24
24
24
36
36
36
36
36
36
24
24
24
36
48
Z8
28
28
42
42
28
64
36

27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43

43
27
36
24
19
48
48

36
28
36
48
24
24
26
Z8
28
36
64
48
42
35
48
48
48
26
19
36
54

11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

72

32
24
14
42
26
28
18
42

44

45
46
47
48
49
50
51

48

24
36
72
48
42
18
42
42
44

26
19
36
69
72
42
14
15

72

48
18
24

were noted ). This matrix contained a few flint chips but no mussel
shells or animal bones.
While the lack of detailed information prohibits close comparison,
it is possible that the Granite Beach hearths are structurally similar
to those recorded at a nearby Lake Buchanan site, B-3, found by the
author and briefly described by Tunnell and Newcomb ( 1962). The
artifacts collected from B-3 are quite different from those found at the
Granite Beach Site and would seem to indicate that B-3 dates primarily
from the late Archaic period. This raises the important, but unanswerable, question as to the exact cultural affiliations of the Granite
Beach hearths.
BuRNED STONE CoNCENTRATION

In the southern part of the site a large, somewhat crescent-shaped
concentration of burned granite rocks was observed (Fig. 1). This

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

feature seemed clearly to have been man-made and it is differentiated
from the hearths chiefly because of its larger size. It was generally
about 36 inches wide and a maximum of roughly 10 feet long. The
soil within and around the concentration was gray in color, and contained a few flint chips but no food refuse. The thickness of this concentration was not determined.
STONE PILES

Also found at the site were two roughly circular accumulations of
granite rocks (Figs. 1 and 2, B). Each of these was approximately 72
inches across and extended about 30 inches above the ground surface.
Stones comprising the piles were a maximum of 10 to 15 inches across
and six to eight inches in thickness. Neither the stones nor the soil
about them showed evidence of fire. These features were not systematically excavated and their purpose is problematical-they may
postdate the Indian occuption, or they have served as stock piles for
hearthstones.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIMENS

Eighty-one artifacts, all of stone, were collected from the Granite
Beach Site by the author. Included are 73 recognizable dart points
and dart point fragments, four apparently rechipped dart points, two
scrapers, a grooved piece of sandstone, and a grinding slab. In the
section which follows all of the specimens are described, although only
the dart points have been sorted into a number of finer groups. Each
of these has been given a numerical designation (labeled I-XI),
even though many of them compare rather favorably with established
typologies. It is felt that this approach conveniently and accurately
describes the dart points, as well as calls attention to the difficulties
encountered in attempting to use existing types.
DART POINTS

Group I (Figs. 3, A-L' and 4, A-B' )
No. of specimens: 14 (8 complete and 6 nearly complete ) .
Outline form: Each of these specimens can be described as a generally
short, broad point with a triangular blade, a roughly rectangular
stem, and a deeply-indented base. The blade has straight to slightly
convex or concave lateral edges and weak (Fig. 3, H-I') to pronounced, but only rarely barbed (Fig. 3, G), shoulders. Lateral edges

77

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

A

J

A'

D

D'

E

G

G'

H

J'

c

8

E'

C'

F

F'

H'

K'
K
O~~IN;:·~""'
o

L

CM.

Fig . 3 . Group I Dart Points. Arrows indicate burin blows.

of the blade are typically beveled, seven to the right and five to the
left. The bases on all specimens have a deep, roughly U-shaped
concavity, while the lateral edges of the stem vary from parallel
to slightly expanding. On at least four specimens there is some sug-

78

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

gestion of very light smoothing along the edges of the stem. The
corners of the stem vary from rounded (such as Fig. 3, I ) to sharply
pointed (such as Fig. 4, B) and are frequently asymmetrical (Fig.
3, D-L' ) .

Dimensions: Total length, 3 to 5 em.; stem length, 1.6 to 1.9 em.; width
across shoulders, 1.8 to 3 em.; width across base, 1.4 to 2 .4 em.;
maximum thickness, .5 to .8 em.; maximum depth of basal concavity, .4to 1.1 em.
Weight: 2.8 to 10.4 grams.
Material: Group I points have been fashioned from fine-grained flint
or, more commonly, chert with an occasional impurity; colors
range from cream through brown to blue-gray.
Workmanship: The chipping is generally rather crudely done, though
long, oblique flake scars often appear across the blade. Marginal
retouching is poor and served mainly to produce the beveled blade
edges. Remnants of large, crescent-shaped flake scars consistently
appear along the basal concavity (especially clear in Fig. 3, I, I' ) .
Remarks: These points are very similar to the tentative new Gower
type as well as some of the Gower variants (Shafer, 1963 : 64-65,
Fig. 7, A-E); Group I specimens differ from Gower only in that they
are slightly larger and usually have more prominent shoulders. In
addition, one of the points (Fig. 3, A, A' ) is much like a small,
stemmed point found in the deepest occupation zone at the Devil's
Mouth Site (Johnson, 1964: 55, Fig. 17, J ) . In outline form, Group
I points also resemble the Pedernales type ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962:
235, Pls. 118 and 119 ) but are cruder, tend to be smaller, and more
often have beveled blades.
One of the points (Fig. 3, I , I') has a possible burin along the
proximal portion of a lateral edge; it extends from the corner of the
base to 2..4 em. toward the distal end.
Group II (Fig. 4, C-D' )
No . of specimens: 2 (both complete).
Outline form: These are rather slender points with expanding stems
and concave bases. The blade is long and triangular and has straight
to slightly convex lateral edges which are alternately beveled (to
the right) on one specimen (Fig. 4, C, C' ). Shoulders are present,
but they are not prominent. The lateral edges of the stem are from

79

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

B

A

D

o'

c

B'

F'

F

E

C'

H

G

G'

J

J'

Fig . 4. Dart Points . A-8' , Group I. C-D', Group II. E-G', Group Ill . H-1', Group VI. J, J ',
Group V.

80

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

slightly (Fig. 4, C, C' ) to markedly (Fig. 4, D, D' ) flaring while
the basal concavity is broad and fairly deep. On both specimens the
lateral edges of the stem are faintly smoothed.

Dimensions: Total length, 4.3 and 5.1 em.; stem length, 1.2 and 1.3
em.; width across the shoulders, both 2 em. ; width across the base,
2 and 2.1 em.; maximum depth of basal concavity, both .3 em. ;
maximum thickness, .5 and .6 em. , respectively.
Weight: 5.4 and 5.8 grams.
Materials: Both specimens are made from locally-occurring cream to
grayish chert.
l'Vorkmanship: In general these points are fairly well made, although
the flake scars are typically short and narrow. Marginal retouching
occurs on only one specimen (Fig. 4, C, C' ) .

Remarks: Of the recognized point types, these specimens are most
similar to Uvalde (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 255, Pl. 128) .
Group III (Fig. 4, E-G')
No . of specimens: 3 (2 complete, 1 fragmentary).
Outline form: Each of these long, slender points has weak shoulders
and a faintly contracting stem. The edges of the blade are slightly
(Fig. 4, G, G' ) to markedly convex and tend to merge gently with
the edges of the stem. The treatment of the base is variable, ranging
from straight (Fig. 4, E, E') , to convex (Fig. 4, F , F' ), to mildly
concave (Fig. 4, G, G' ) . The edges of the stem and the base are
lightly smoothed.
Dimensions: Total length (complete specimens only), 7 and 9.3 em. ;
stem length, 1. 4 to 1. 7 em.; width across the shoulders, 2.2 to 2.6
em.; width across the base, 1.2 to 1.4 em.; maximum thickness, .6
to .8 em.; depth of basal concavity (one specimen only), .1 em.
Weight: 12.2 and 22.3 grams.
Material: All are apparently fashioned from locally-obtained cherts
and/ or very fine-grained quartzite varying in color from cream to
brown and brownish-gray.
Workmanship: On the whole the chipping is good, with regular,
obliquely-parallel flake scars appearing across two specimens. On
the third point (Fig. 4, F, F' ) the flake scars tend to be broader and

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

81

somewhat more irregular. All edges have been marginally retouched.

Remarks: Two (Fig. 4, E, E' and G, G' ) of the Group II points fall
within the range of the Travis type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 251,
Pl. 126). The concave base of the third (Fig. 4, F , F' ), however,
excludes it from that type.
Group IV (Fig. 4, H-I')
No . of specimens: 2 (both complete)
Outline form: Each of these specimens has a long, slender blade and
very poorly differentiated, but roughly rectangular, stem. On one
point (Fig. 4, H, H') the shoulders are very weak, while on the
other (Fig. 4, I, I') no shoulders can be distinguished. The lateral
edges of the blades on both points are gently convex, and in one
case (Fig. 4, I, I') serrated. The edges of the stem on one (Fig. 4,
I, I') are smoothed, while both bases are straight.
Dimensions: Total length, 7.5 and 5.7 em,; stem length, 2 em. and
approximately 2.4 em.; width across the shoulders, 2.4 and 2 em.;
width across the base of the stem, 1.8 and 1.7 em.; maximum thickness , 1.2 and .8 em.
Weight: 22.1 and 11.9 grams.
MateriaL Both of the Group IV have been chipped from cream-colored
chert.
Workmanship: One (Fig. 4, H, H' ) is quite crudely flaked, while the
other is fairly well made and exhibits some marginal retouching.
Both have a markedly plano-convex cross section.
Remarks: Neither of the Group IV points fits an established type, although their outline forms are generally reminiscent of Travis
points. The stems, however, are too poorly differentiated from the
blades to permit inclusion in that type.
Group V (Fig. 4, J, J' )
No. of specimens: 1 (complete ) .
Outline form: This unusual point has a broad, triangular blade with
convex lateral edges and pronounced, but barbless, shoulders. The
short, broad stem has noticeably rounded corners and a convex base.

82

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Dimensions: Total length, 4.4 em.; stem length, 1.1 em.; width across
the shoulders, 3.4 em.; width across the base of the stem, 2.2 em.;
maximum thickness, .5 em.
Weight: 8.6 grams.
Material: A good quality, grayish chert or flint was used in the manufacture of this specimen.
Workmanship: The flaking is quite skillfully done and several broad,
shallow scars appear across both surfaces. Marginal edges show
alternate retouching which gives the impression of narrow beveling.
Remarks: The roundness of the stem is suggestive of Morhiss points;
however, this specimen is much too short, to be included in that type.
Group VI (Fig. 5, A-C' )
No. of specimens: 3 (1 complete, 1 essentially complete, 1 fragmentary ) .
Outline form: Each has a lanceolate outline with a markedly contracting proximal end. On two specimens (Fig. 5, A, B) the proximal
end is almost pointed, while on the third (Fig. 5, C) it is more
gently contracting. The base is very faintly concave on each point,
and both lateral edges are mildly convex for the entire length of the
point. The two complete examples have serrated blades, and all
three have very slightly concave bases.
Dimensions (the complete and essentially complete specimens only) :
Total length, 12.7 em. and an estimated 11.5 em.; maximum width,
2.7 and 3.1 em.; maximum thickness, .7 and 1 em. respectively.
Weight: (complete specimen only) 26.6 grams.
Material: Two are of a grayish-brown chert, while the third (Fig. 5,
C) is made from a very fine-grained quartzite.
Workmanship: Skillfully chipped, horizontal to slightly oblique flake
scars appear across both surfaces, and all marginal edges are neatly
retouched.
Remarks: The two examples with markedly contracting, proximal
ends are reminiscent of the Lerma type (MacNeish, 1958: 62, Fig.
23, 22--27; Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 207, Pl. 104), but are better made
than the typical Lerma. All three are similar to Agate Basin points

83

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

B

A'

A

o'

c

B'

E'

E

C'

F'

F

I'
G

G'

H

H'

0

IN.

0

CM.

Fig . 5 . Dart Points . A-C ', Group VI. D-1 ', Group VII . Dashes indicate extent of lateral
smoothing ; arrows indicate burin blows .

(Wormington, 1957: 141 and 269, Fig. 7), in both workmanship
and outline form.
One of the Group VI points (Fig. 5, B, B' ) has a possible burin

84

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

facet along one lateral edge. It extends from the tip toward the
proximal end for a distance of 5.3 em. There are no indications of
resharpening, although the distal edge is perhaps smoothed from use.

Group VII (Figs. 5, D -I , and 6, A-E' )
No. of specimens: 11 ( 7 complete, 1 nearly complete, and 3 basal fragments ) .
Outline form: Each of these points has a somewhat lanceolate outline.
The upper half the blade on the complete specimens, however, tends
to be triangular in outline, while the lower half is generally contracting. The lateral edges vary from straight to slightly convex or
concave. On one (Fig. 6, B, B') the corners are slightly flaring, on
the others they are essentially straight and are either sharply
pointed or rounded. Of the eight examples with the distal portion
of the blade intact, seven are alternately beveled, six to the right,
one to the left. The bevel typically begins at the midsection-the
widest point-and continues to the tip. The base is gently concave
on each specimen, although on some (Fig. 5, F, G), the concavity is
quite shallow. All proximal edges, including the concavity, are
smoothed, often very heavily so.
Dimensions: Total length, 4.5 to 7 em.; maximum width, 2 to 2.3 em. ;
maximum thickness, .7 to 1 em.; maximum depth of basal concavity, less than .1 to .2 em.
Weight: 7.1 to 16.7 grams.
Material: These points are made from cream to brownish-gray, very
fine-grained chert or flint.
Workmanship: As a group these points are well made and frequently
exhibit long parallel, usually oblique, flake scars across the blade
surface. The only exception (Fig. 5, E, E' ) has numerous, irregular
scars which have created marked relief. Marginal edges are consistently retouched and occasionally appear to be lightly serrated.
The distal ends of two (Fig. 6, A, B) are somewhat blunted, onepossibly both-from rechipping.
Remarks: With the possible exception of the point that has slightly
flaring basal corners, the outline form of these specimens falls within the range of the Angostura type. The high incidence of beveling,
however, is not generally regarded as being typical of Angostura
(SuhmandJelks, 1962: 167, Pl. 84) .
The bases of two of these points have burin facets, both of the

85

THE GRA N ITE BEACH SITE

'-

I

0

G

o·

E

G'

H

J'

c'

I

F'

F

E'

I'

H'

K

J

c

8'

8

A

0\..=~
' N.?~
o
r=
Cit

K'
L

Fig . 6. Dart Points . A- E', Group VII . F-L', Group VIII. Dashes indicate extent of lateral
smoothing; arrows indicate burin blows .

lateral-to-medial type (Epstein, 1963 : 189-191, Fig. 2 ) . One (Fig. 6,
C, C' ) occurs as a double burin, one at each corner, with each burin
facet measuring .4 em. in length. T he other point (Fig. 5, F, F' ) has

86

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a single burin facet which measures .5 em. in length. In terms of
smoothness and presence of minute flake scars, each of these burin
facets shows extensive signs of use .

Group VIII (Fig. 6, F-L' )
No . of specimens: 7 (1 complete, 1 nearly complete, and 5 basal fragments ).
Outline form: The most distinctive features of these points are their
slightly concave proximal edges and usually pronounced basal concavity. All but one are rather wide. Three of the four examples (Fig.
6, J-L ) having all or portions of the blade intact have lateral edges
alternately beveled to the right. The others may also have been
beveled, but they are too incomplete to be certain of either the
presence or absence of this feature. The comers of the base tend to
flare, sometimes rather markedly. Basal and lateral smoothing occurs
on all examples.
Dimensions: Total length (complete specimen only ), 4.8 em.; maximum width (across the base ) , 1.9 to 3 em.; maximum thickness,
between .6 and .65 em.; maximum depth of basal concavity, .3 to
.8 em.
Weight: (complete example only; it has, however, been badly thermal
fractured ) 5.5 grams.
Material: These points were apparently made from locally-obtained
chert and flint.
Workmanship: Generally, the chipping is well done with regular f1ake
scars predominating. Lateral edges are retouched and the base is
thinned either by the removal of several long, narrow flakes, or
more often, rather large, crescent-shaped flakes.
Remarks: In outline form these points resemble the golondrina variety
of Plainview (Johnson, 1964: 46-52, Fig. 15, A-J ). However, Group
VIII specimens are typically better made and, at least some, are
beveled. Both the beveling and outline form, on the other hand, are
similar to the Meserve type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 218, Pl. 109 ).
Two of the Group VIII points (Fig. 6, F, K ) have burin facets
along the lateral edge of the distal end. Both seem to be incomplete,
but it is possible that they were of simple angle type (Epstein, 1963:
189). One (Fig. 6, K ) has evidence of two removals, the other (Fig.

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

87

6, F ) has scars suggesting three removals. None is complete enough
for meaningful measurements.

Group IX (Fig. 7, A-L' )
No . of specimens: 1Z (3 complete, 1 rechipped, Z nearly complete, and
6 basal fragments) .
Outline form: The over-all outline is generally lanceolate with the
lateral edges at the proximal end tending to be straight (su ch as
Fig. 7, A ) or slightly concave and fla ring (such as Fig. 7, E ) . The
widest part is typically just below midpoint or across the base. On
the three complete examples the distal end is sharply pointed, being
formed by gently curving edges. The upper portions of the blade on
two of the points (Fig. 7, A, K ) are alternately beveled to the
right, while on a third (Fig. 7, C) the blade has been rather crudely
rechipped. All bases are con cave, usually markedly so. All lateral
edges at the proximal ends are smoothed, and on four specimens
(Fig. 7, D , E , H , L), the basal con cavity is smoothed.
Dimensions: Total length ( 3 complete examples only ), 3.4 (rechipped )
to 7.4 em.; maximum width, 1.7 to Z.Z em.; maximum thickness,
.5 to .7 em.; maximum depth of basal concavity , .Z to .6 em.
Weight: 5.6 to 12.4 grams.
Material: The specimens are made from locally -obtained flint or finegrained cherts which are from cream to rather dark, grayish-brown
in color.
Workmanship: Most of the Group IX exhibit excellent chipping, with
long narrow, oblique flake scars often extending across the blade.
The bases on all but two have been thinned by the removal of one
or, more commonly, several longitudinal flakes which sometimes
superficially resemble fluting. The two exceptions have been thinned
by the removal of a large crescent-shaped flake, the scar of which
has been rechipped, apparently to thin the base further. Fine marginal retouching is a common feature.
Remarks: The majority of these points conform fairly well to the
Plainview type, although two (Fig. 7, K, L ) are rather narrow- but
similar specimens have been so classified (Baker, et al., 1957, Pl. 1,
D -X ) . Another two specimens (Fig. 7, F , J) which are less well
made than the others in this group show some similarity with the

88

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

C
A

D

G

J

A'

D'

G'

8

C'

8'

E

E'

H

H'

F

J'

O~=;i;
lN
;:.~=:
o
GM.

K

K'

L

Fig . 7 . Group IX Dart Points. Dashes indicate extent of lateral smoothing ; arrows indicate
burin blows.

Group X described below; however, unlike Group X specimens
they do not tend to contract at the base.
Two of the Group IX points exhibit a single burin facet, each

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

89

evidently having been produced by one blow. Both are on a lateral
edge, one (1.45 em. long) at the proximal end and the other (1.5
em. ) at the distal end. Minute flake scars, as well as suggestions of
smoothing, evidence use.

Group X (Fig. 8, A-H')
No . of specimens: 8 (all incomplete).
Outline form: Each of these specimens has straight to gently convex
lateral edges which tend to contract slightly at the proximal end.
The basal comers vary from rounded (Fig. 8, F) to pointed (Fig. 8,
A, C, D, H) and are occasionally asymmetrical (Fig. 8, D). The
basal concavity is usually pronounced and sometimes smoothed.
Proximal portions of the lateral edges are smoothed on all specimens.
Dimensions: Total length, estimated at about 6.5 to 7.5 em.; maximum
width (roughly at the midsection ) , 1.8 to 3 em.; maximum thickness, .5 to 1 em.; maximum depth of basal concavity, .4 to .7 em.
Weight: None complete enough to determine.
Material: The locally-obtained chert and flint from which these artifacts were produced vary in color from light tan to grayish-brown.
Workmanship: Although some specimens have long, narroW flake
scars extending across the flat surfaces, the workmanship, on the
whole, is only fair. Several have quite thick cross sections and marginal retouching is not a typical feature. The base has been thinned
-often rather poorly-by the removal of small, roughly crescentshaped flakes.
Remarks: Group X, points (especially those illustrated in Fig. 8, B, C,
D ) do not compare favorably with any established type, but they
do in some respects resemble a tentative group that Shafer (1963:
65, Fig. 7, K ) called Gower, Variant D. Another similar, though
shorter point, came from the deepest stratum at the Devil's Mouth
Site (Johnson, 1964: 54, Fig. 17, I ) .
Five of the eight examples of the group have burin facets and one
also has a graver. Three of the burins appear along a lateral edge,
two (Fig. 8, A, D) are at the distal end and are of the simple angle
type. These measure 1.5 and 1. 7 em. in length. In addition, the blunt
distal end of one of these specimens (Fig. 8, A, A') appears to have
served secondarily as a scraping or gouging tool-at least this end
has a number of small, possible use-produced flake scars. The third

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

F

B

c'

0

0'

G

G'

B'

H

F'

Fig. 8 . Group X Dart Points . Dashes indicate extent of lateral smoothing; arrows indicate
burin blows; and X indicates graver beak.

lateral burin facet (Fig. 8, E ) is quite small, only .6 em. long, and
appears to have been formed by a single blow.
The two remaining burins also appear at the proximal end, but

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

91

both are of the lateral-to-medial type. Each is .5 em. long. Finally,
it should be noted that, in addition to a burin facet, one of these
specimens (Fig. 8, B, B' ) has a very small graver projection at the
juncture of a lateral edge and a diagonal medial fracture . The tiny
beak (it projects approximately .2 em.) has been produced by
minute retouching and seems a bit smoothed, perhaps from use.

Group XI (Fig. 9, A-E')
No . of specimens: 5 (none complete)
Outline form: Because of the incompleteness of these specimens, it is
difficult to be sure of their exact form, although it is clear that each
had essentially parallel lateral edges which extended from the base
to approximately the midsection of the blade. Basal concavities are
consistently broad and very shallow. The lower portions of all the
lateral edges, and two of the basal concavities, are smoothed. On one
example (Fig. 9, B, B' ) the lateral smoothing is so extensive that it
has produced suggestions of a definable stem.
Dimensions: Total length, none complete enough to estimate accurately; maximum width, 1.8 to 2.6 em.; maximum thickness, .4 to
.7 c~.; maximum depth of basal concavity, all are less than .3 em.
Weight: Cannot be determined.
Material: The flint varies from tan to light, grayish-brown.
Workmanship: These are exceptionally well made points with long,
obliquely-parallel flake scars being very common. Their cross sections are thin and flat, and the bases have been thinned by the removal of a number of small, longitudinal flakes.
Remarks: The rectangular nature of the proximal ends of Group XI
points, as well as their thinness, are suggestive of Milnesand points
(Sellards, 1955 ). However, most of Milnesand specimens have
straight bases and points similar to Group XI points are often classed
as Plainview (Sellards, et al., 1947: Pl. 3, 4; Ochard and Campbell,
1954: Fig. 2, B).
Only one of these points exhibits a burin facet. It appears along
a lateral edge at the proximal end, has been produced by a single
blow, is .8 em. long, and seems to have been dulled by use.

92

TEXAS ARCHEOL OGICAL SOC I E T Y

A

D

D'

B

B'

E

E'

c

C'

F

H

J

G

J'

K

0

K'

IN

CM.

M
Fig. 9 . Dart Points, Drills, and Gouge . A-E' , Group XI dart points. F-1, Unclassifiable
dart point fragments . J-L' , Drills, probably reworked dart points. M, M', Gouge-like tool
rechipped from a dart point . Dashes indicate extent of lateral smoothing ; arrows indicate
burin blows.

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

93

Dart Point Fragments (Fig. 9, F-I )
No. of specimens: 5
Description: Each of these specimens represents better than half of a
complete point, but none has retained the more diagnostic basal
portion. As a group, they are quite well made and very probably
are fragments from Paleo types . Two (Fig. 9, H, I ) have lateral
edges alternately beveled to the right, and three have (Fig. 9, G-I )
fine marginal serrations.
PROBABLE REwoRKED DART PoiNTs (Fig. 9, J-M' )

No. of specimens: 4
'Jescription: Included in this group are specimens which appear to
have originally been dart points but which have intentionally been
rechipped into other kinds of tools. Three (Fig. 9, J-L') have long,
narrow shafts and presumably served as drills . They are bifacially
worked across both the shaft and the stem. On two (Fig. 9, I , L )
the shaft is alternately beveled to the right, while on the third specimen (Fig. 9, K ) the shaft has a lenticular cross section. The base is
broadly concave in each case, and lateral edges of the stem are
smoothed. The drills vary from 4.7 to 5.5 em. in total length, 2.1 to
2.6 em. in maximum width (across the base of the stem ), and .7 to
.9 em. in maximum thickness; while the shafts are 2.7 and 3 em.
long.
The fourth specimen (Fig. 9, M , M' ) is quite unusual in that
the distal end of the blade has been steeply beveled to produce a
scraping or gouging tool, and the proximal end exhibits at least six
separate burin blows. Five of these are essentially of the lateral type,
with the fifth .and most recent burin facet, extending diagonally
across most of the specimen. This facet is 1.9 em. long. The small
facet that appears immediately to the left of this one probably
served to sharpen the burin edge.
Remarks: Although it is reasonably clear that these are reworked dart
points, none of the flake scars resulting from rechipping are noticeably fresher than the initial flaking.
ScRAPERS (Fig. 10, A-B)
Two fairly large and well made flake scrapers represent the only
unifacially-chipped stone artifacts recovered from the site. Both are
plano-convex in cross section and have steep marginal retouching

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

A'

B

0
0

B'

IN.
6

c
Fig . 10. Scrape rs and Grooved Ston e. A-8', Scra pers . C, Grooved Stone . X ind icates g raver
po int.

along all, or nearly all, marginals. The flaking does not, however, extend across the entire convex face. The plano surface is unaltered and
on one specimen (Fig. 10, B' ) a prepared striking platform is still
visible. The lack of a distinct bulb of percussion and the prominent
lipping just below the striking platform suggest that the flake used to
make this scraper was detached from the core by means of the billet
percussion technique. Diagnostic t1ake scars are not present on the
plano surface of the other scraper.
Only one (Fig. 10, A, A' ) of these specimens appears to have been
intentionally shaped, and has a distinct crescent-shaped outline. At one
end of the other scraper there is a rather prominent graver which has
been produced by chipping side-by-side two shallow concavities.

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

95

These scrapers are 5.4 and 7.3 em. long, 2.5 and 2.8 em. in maximum width, and .6 and . 7 em. in maximum thickness respectively.
The graver beak projects .2 em. One (Fig. 10, A ) is made of honeycolored flint, the other (Fig. 10, B) of bluish-gray flint. The latter has
a few traces of light-colored nodular cortex.
GROOVED STONE (Fig. 10, C)
A flattish , somewhat naturally ovoid-shaped piece of fine-grained
sandstone has a narrow groove pecked all around the long axis. Additional pecking scars are visible along one lateral edge and portions of
one end-these are, however, too sparse to have significantly modified
the natural shape of the stone. Both surfaces are lightly smoothed,
perhaps from use. The groove is generally about .5 em. wide and less
than 2 em. deep. The stone itself is 5.5 em. long, a maximum of 5 em.
wide, and a maximum of 2.4 em. thick. It weighs 88.4 grams.
GRINDING SLAB (not illustrated )
The only other specimen collected from the site is granite grinding
slab with a shallow depression on each flat surface. This piece has,
unfortunately, been lost and the only dimensions recorded are that it
was 25 em. long, 21 .5 em. wide, and 4 em. thick.
SUMMARY

Although all from the surface, the artifacts-especially the dart
points-from the Granite Beach Site comprise an unusual collection.
They exhibit considerable morphological variation and, yet, fall within
a significantly restricted range. In terms of outline form, workmanship, and the high incidence of lateral and basal smoothing, dart point
Groups VI through XI are stylistically related to the Paleo-Indian
tradition, particularly to types Angostura, Plainview, and Meserve.
On the other hand, Groups I through V show affinity with the Archaic
tradition in that they are generally less skillfully made, frequently
have well defined, occasionally barbed shoulders, and their stems are
not usually smoothed. Additionally, the occurrence of burins is much
less frequent than in Groups VI-XI, supporting an earlier observation
made by Epstein (1963: 191-194) .
The data are still incomplete but it appears that most, if not all, of
the Archaic dart points from the Granite Beach Site are-relatively
speaking-early forms. Shafer (1963: 79-81) has reported specimens
quite similar to Group I (his Gower type and Gower variants) as being

96

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

stratigraphically below types Wells, Morrill, Bulverde, Nolan, and
Pedernales. Another point somewhat similar to one of the Group I
specimens (see Fig. 3, A, A' ) was found at the Devil's Mouth Site,
in the same stratum that yielded Plainview golondrina and other PaleoIndian looking projectile points (Johnson, 1964: 46-58). Groups II-V
are more difficult to place, but they could also be early Archaic styles .
The Granite Beach Site appears to have been a campsite rather
than a killsite, as occupational features, especially hearths (see Table
I) were numerous and chipping debris was observed but not collected.
On the other hand, it must be admitted that the absence of certain kinds
of tools, such as knives and choppers, as well as the unusually high
incidence of dart points ( 73 of a total of 81 artifacts) is not the assemblage one might ordinarily expect to find at a campsite.
The diversity of dart points represented at the site suggests repeated
occupation, extending perhaps from late Paleo-Indian times to the
early Archaic period. Whether or not the hearths and stone piles also
gradually accumulated over a comparable span of time is not known.
None of these features were systematically investigated, nor were any
of the artifacts found in direct association with them. Perhaps this and
other problems which surround the site can be answered when Lake
Buchanan again recedes.
REFERENCES CITED
Baker, William E. , T. N. Campbell, and Glen L. Evans
1957. The Nail Site: Evidence of Early Man in the Oklahoma Panhandle. Bulletin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. V, pp. 1-20.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963. The Burin-Fa ceted Projectile Po:nt. American Antiquity, Vol. 29, No. 2. pp.
187- 201.
Jackson , A. T ., and Arthur M . Woolsey
1938. Annual Report of WPA and The University of Texas Archae:Jlogical Research, Lake Buchanan, 1936-193 7. The University of Texas Publications,
No. 3802.
Johns:Jn , LeRoy, Jr.
1964. The Devil's Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University o£
Texas, Archeology Series, No. 6.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1958. Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 48, Pt. 6.
Orchard, C. D., and T. N . Campbell
1954. Evidence of Early Man from the Vicinity of San Antonio, Texas. The
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. VI , No.4, pp. 454-465.

THE GRANITE BEACH SITE

97

Sellards, E . H.
1955. Fossil Bis:m and Associated Artifacts from Miln esand, New Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. 2.0, No. 4, Pt. 1, pp. 336-344.
Sellards, E. H., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade
1947. Fossil Bison and Associated Artifacts from Plainview, Texas . Bulletin of
the Geological S:Jciety of America, Vol. 58, pp. 92.7-954.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963. Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp.
57- 81.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 2.5.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962.. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Arche:Jlogical
Society, Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin
No.4.
Tunnell, Curtis D ., and William W. Newcomb
1962.. When the Waters Recede-A Mystery. The Mustang, Newsletter of the
Texas Memorial Museum, Vol. 4, No.6.
Wormington, H . M.
1957. Ancient Man in North America . D enver Museum of Natural History,
Popular Series No. 4.
Starr R:mte 18
Buchanan Dam, Texas

Notes on the Clark Site,
McLennan County, Texas
FRANK H. WATT
ABSTRACT
In the fall of 1955 members of the Central Texas Archeologica l Society made
limited excavations at the Clark Site, a small midden buried in alluvial deposits
of the Brazos River. Artifacts were not numerous, but those recovered suggest a
possible relationship between the Toyah Focus of central T exas and the Sanders
Focus of northeastern Texas. A radiocarbon date of A.D . 1277 ± 150 was obtained
from a partially disturbed hearth, the only occupational feature encountered by the
excavations.

INTRODUCTION

During the long annals of the Brazos River, from the late Pleistocene on down to the present, there have been many ch anges in the
route taken from the river's original source in northeastem New
Mexico to its joumey's end at the Gulf of Mexico. The river has rushed
along, carrying with it large amounts of sand and gravel picked up
in its upper reaches, then wandered lazily downstream, dropping these
materials far down its course. Along the more peaceful stretches of
the Brazos, Indians must have found it pleasant to live on the soft
deposits of sand, pursuing the daily routine of their lives and, when
departing- willingly or otherwise-leaving behind some of their possessions for us to ponder over.
The Clark Site, located approximately six miles upstream from the
northern city limits of Waco, provides evidence of such a stay along
the river. This former Indian camp is on a small point of land buried
in part of wh at appears to be a terrace remnant (Fig. 1) . It is bound
on th e west by a narrow flood plain and, beyond this, the Brazos;
while to the east is a normally-dry stream. Only a small, triangularshaped section of the terrace remains intact, its survival evidently a
result of protection afforded by a nearby (to the n orth) rock ledge or
bluff. The original extent of the terrace may have always been fairly
small, although there is no way of being certain of this. At present it
is rather narrow, being a maximum of approximately 250 yards wide
and roughly 25 feet above th e normal level of the river.
Geologically speaking, the Clark Site lies on the same fault as the

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CLARK SITE

30 0
...._______.

0

Fee t

Area

Excavated

Filled- in Gully

flS

•
'

0
1965

10
Sc o I e

Fire

Chicken Coop

20

in

Pit

Fee t

30
VMB

Fig . 1 . Sketch map of the Clark Site showing general location , plan of excavation, contours , and hearth .

101

CLARK SITE

Buried Midden Site (Mason, 1936 ), but it is a mile farther upstream
and on the opposite (east ) side of the river. This fault, the one which
has created the Balcones Escarpment, runs along the west bank of the
Brazos at the Buried Midden Site, continues upstream for a short distance, then angles across the river and leaves the east bank just below
the mouth of Aquilla Creek and about one-half a mile north of the
Clark Site.
The Clark Site has been recorded as 41-39B9-25 in the old quadrangle system, and, more recently, as 41 ML 39 in the new county
designation being employed by the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas. It is only one of several buried
sites reported for the general area. In addition to Buried Midden, these
are the Tehuacana Creek Site (Bryan, 1935 ), the Cow Bayou Site
(Bryan, 1935 ), and the three Asa Warner sites (Watt, 1956) .
DISCOVERY AND INVESTIGATION

Discovery of the Clark Site came in 1941 , when the author went to
the area to investigate rumors of an Indian burial. At the time, a house,
two barns (one of which has since been converted to a garage), and a
chicken house were situated on the terrace. Since the surface sloped
considerably toward the river, the erection of these buildings required
a good deal of leveling (Figs. 1 and 2) . Luckily, most of this had been
done on the upper part of the terrace, and the only structure directly
over the site was the chicken house. This building was lower than the
others and was located on the riverside portion of the leveled-off area
(Fig. 2) . It was on the face of the dump just behind the chicken house
that the first evidence of occupation-a few potsherds, a number of
flint chips, some charcoal, and burned rock fragments- was observed.
No concentrated midden deposit, however, was noted, nor were the
rumors of the burial verified.
Then, during the summer of 1955, a visit was made to the site by
Mr. Sam Langston and the writer. By this time the chicken house had
been torn down, and some haphazard digging at its former location
quickly exposed midden refuse at a depth of 12 to 24 inches below the
surface. Additional cultural debris was observed along the edges of a
road which had been graded across the terrace and extended down thR
point (i.e., the area between the confluence of the Brazos and the small
stream to the east ) . These concentrations of refuse indicated that the
site merited further investigation and, accordingly, another trip was
made to test more systematically with a posthole digger. The posthole
tests revealed an uppermost layer of sterile river sand, uniformly 16

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to 20 inches thick, and, below this, a layer, 12 to 18 inches thick, of
midden refuse. The midden zone was an ash-stained sand deposit with
charcoal, flint chips, bone, and shell fragments. Immediately beneath
the refuse layer was a grayish sand stratum, of undertermined thickness, which contained many fragmentary limestone rocks , but no cultural material. Tests were made to a maximum depth of five feet below
the surface, and no artifacts or any other type of occupational detritus
was found below a depth of 35 inches. The area of occupation was
shown to be small and roughly triangular-shaped, extending northward from the point for approximately 35 feet, to a filled-in gully. The
surface sloped slightly downward toward the river to the west and
south (Fig. 1).

Fig. 2. View of Clark Site, look ing northeast .

Encouraged by the results of the tests, the Central Texas Archeological Society decided to carry out limited excavations at the site.
Permission for this work was obtained from the landowner, the late
Mr. A. C. Clark of Waco, in October, 1955, and shortly thereafter,
written notices were sent to all members of the Society (only seven
were able to participate in the project). Ho'Wever, before excavation
could get underway, Mr. Clark removed almost all of the sterile overburden with a scraper in order to obtain material to fill in washes
which had developed in his road to the point. This saved the Society
much time and labor and, fortunately, did not discernably damage the
midden deposit. The only information lost was the exact thickness of
the overburden.
Some previous digging by persons unknown had been done around

103

CLARK SITE

a small oak tree standing at the tip of the point, and along the riverside
slope. At the edge of these disturbances, some six feet removed from
the oak tree, a trench five feet wide, 12 feet long, and three feet deep
was excavated across the point. Using the tree as a reference point,
a line was then extended to the filled-in gully and a second trench,
five feet wide and 25 feet long, was laid out along this lim (Fig. 1).
The midden deposit was generally well defined in the trench profiles, its point of contact with the little-remaining overburden being
especially distinct. Even the loose ash and charcoal in the midden had
not been disturbed or washed away. The base of the midden zone was
somewhat less easily distinguished, largely because the grayish color of
the layer below (perhaps imparted by seepage through the midden )
did not form a sharp contrast.
Most of the excavations were confined to the midden layer, as the
overburden had been largely removed, and the tests, as well as the first
trench, indicated that nothing of archeological interest was to be found
below this zone. No problem of stratification was present and the
midden was not hard packed so that no pick work was necessary. Some,
but not all, of the material was screened. Records were kept of the
vertical occurrence of the artifacts, with most coming from the upper
half of the midden. One day was required for the society to complete
both trenches and to make a few small test pits.
THE FINDINGS

Only one occupational feature, a rather crude fire pit, was located.
It had been partially uncovered by previous diggers and was re-exposed
in the first trench excavated by the Society (Fig. 1). Although most
of the upper portion was disturbed and the rocks scattered, it was
evident that the pit had been lined with irregularly-shaped limestone
rocks. The hearth could not be fully reconstructed, but enough remained to determine its approximate size and shape. It had been
roughly circular in outline-measuring three feet in diameter and
eight inches in depth-and had been dug into the gray soil, extending
slightly below the midden. The basal portion was undisturbed and, in
addition to what remained of the burned rock lining, there were ashes,
charcoal, and eight large pieces of unworked deer bone. No artifacts
were found in the pit, but most of the postsherds from the site were
recovered in the nearby excavations. In 195 7 the Magnolia Laboratories dated a charcoal sample (Sample FRL, No. RC-23) from the
hearthat680 ± 150yearsago (A.D. 1277 ± 150 ) .
A total of 100 artifacts was recovered from the site by members of

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Central Texas Archeological Society. Other specimens are known to
have been collected, but none of these could be traced down and, hence,
they are not included in this report. What follows is a listing and brief
description of the objects found by the society, both from the surface
and the excavations.

Arrow Points. The 20 arrow points from the Clark Site are all identifiable as the Perdiz type (Fig. 3, A-P ) . They conform in all particulars
of size, shape, and manufacture to the description given by Suhm and
Jelks ( 1962: 283, Pl. 142 ) . No attempt has been made to compare them
with the two varieties of Perdiz recently defined by Jelks ( 1962: 2426, Fig. 12) . In an earlier report (Watt, 1961) on the radiocarbon
date from the Clark Site these points were erroneously identified as
Alba. The Perdiz points are from 2.9 to 4 em. long, 1.5 to 2.2 em. wide
across the shoulders, and .25 to .4 em. in maximum thickness.
Dart Point. A single dart point (Fig. 3, Q) , possibly of the Yarbrough type, was recovered. It may, however, be intrusive, having
washed down from the nearby bluff where dart points are frequently
found. This point is 4.5 em. long, 2.8 em. wide across the shoulders,
and .7 em. (maximum ) thick.
Knives. The three knives from the site include one complete specimen and two basal fragments. All are well made and exhibit neat
marginal retouching. The complete example (Fig. 4, A) has a moderately broad, ovate outline. It measures 7.5 em. in length, 3.7 em. in
maximum width, and .6 em. in maximum thickness. Each of the two
fragmentary knives, one (Fig. 4, B) with a concave base and the other
(Fig. 4, C) with a convex base, is estimated to have been roughly
10 em. long.
Axe. This fist axe or chopper (Fig. 4, D) is made from a flat, waterworn nodule of greenish quartzite. Two lateral edges and the distal
(blade) end have been flaked on one face, but only one lateral edge
and the blade have been worked on the opposite side. The base is unworked and retains the nodular cortex. Workmanship is crude, with
flakes apparently having been removed by means of the percussion
technique. This axe is roughly triangular in outline, measuring 9 em.
long, 7.4 (maximum) wide, and 2.7 (maximum ) thick.
Scrapers. This category consists of nine flakes, each of which has
been lightly retouched along one or more marginal edges. The outlines
are quite irregular and there is no evidence of intentional shaping
Fig . 3 . Projectile Points. A-P, Perdiz arrow points . Q , Possible Yarbrough dart point.

A

8

c

F

G

H

J

N

p

0

~=---~~-N~-~~~20

E

M

L

K

D

CM.

6

Q

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 4, E-K). A typical specimen measures 5 em. long, 2.1 em. wide,
and 1.1 em. thick.

Rubbing Stone. This small, rounded quartzite pebble (Fig. 4, L)
has been well smoothed on one side and may have served as a rubbing

c

8
A

E

G
F

D

J

H

K

0

IN.

0

CM.

L

Fig. 4. Lithic Artifacts. A-C, Knives. D, Axe. E-K, Utilized flakes. l, Rubbing stone.

CLARK SITE

107

or polishing stone. In addition, one end shows possible pecking or
battering scars, perhaps from secondary use as a hammerstone. This
specimen is 7 em. long, 5.2 em. wide, and 3.1 em. (maximum) thick.
Bone Tools . Two deer bones show signs of having been purposefully
modified. One of these (Fig. 5, A, A' ) , an incomplete beamer fashioned
from a metapodial (or cannon bone), has a deep, V -shaped groove cut
into the posterior side of the shaft. This groove appears to have extended almost the entire length of the bone and is extensively worn along
the lateral edges. Approximately one-half (the proximal half) is missing, but when complete this tool must have been approximately 18 em.
long (Fig. 5, A' shows a reconstruction). Beaming tools are not common in central Texas, but have been found at the Horn Shelter in Bosque County (Frank Watt, unpublished manuscript) and at the Baylor
Site in McLennan County (Dee Ann Story, personal communication).
A very similar implement is illustrated for the Sanders Site (Krieger,
1946: Pl. 23, f ) .
The other bone implement (Fig. 5, B) has been manufactured from
a deer ulna. Much of the distal end of the bone has been removed and
the remaining tip has been smoothed into a convex shape. Virtually
complete, this piece is 9.1 em. long. Its use is unknown, although
identical specimens are often referred to as flaking tools . Worked deer
ulnae are widespread in central Texas and have been reported for both
the Toyah and Austin foci of the Central Texas Aspect (Jelks, 1962:
63 ).
Pottery. Exclusive of a number of very tiny pieces not counted, a
total of 63 sherds was collected at the Clark Site . Most of these came
from the east-west trench, in the area near the fire pit. Others came
from the surface of the slope near the chicken house. Thirteen of the
sherds are from vessel rims, the others from body areas. All have bone
and/ or grit (largely sand ) temper and a rather dark, gray-black paste.
Three of the sherds bear decorations, two having diagonally incised
lines (Fig. 5, C, E ) and one (Fig. 5, D ) having diagonally incised
lines combined with punctations. None of the other pieces is decorated
(Fig. 5, F-H) and at least one entirely plain vessel is indicated. Tentatively, the decorated sherds are identified as Canton Incised (similarities with Maydelle Incised, however, should be noted) and the undecorated ones, at least the rim sherds, as Sanders Plain. Earlier (Watt,
1961) one of the incised specimens was identified as Sanders Engraved.
Both the decorated and the plain sherds are from .8 to 1.2 em. in maximum thickness.
Besides the artifacts listed above, the site yielded numerous items of
miscellaneous refuse, including unworked animal bones, fire-black-

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

c'

A

A'

'
G'

G
0
0

Ill

CA

H .

H'

Fig . 5 . Bone Tools and Potte ry. A, A', Bone beamer. B, Worked dee r ulna. C, C', E, E',
Incised rim she rds . D, D', Punctated -i nci sed rim sherd . F-H ', Undeco rated ri m sherds . Ex teriors
to the right on all rim profi les .

ened rock fragments, flint flakes, and snail and mussel shells. Of these,
only the bones and the shells have been examined. Identifications of
the mammal bones were made by Bob H. Slaughter, Museum of Paleontology, Southern Methodist University; the mollusca were identified

109

CLARK SITE

by Dr. Joseph Bequaert, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard
College.
Among the faunal remains there are:
Deer (white-tailed, Odocoileus virginianus ) remains which consist of 36 split leg bones, 19 joint bones, 7 vertebrae, 2 antler
fragments, and 1 skull dome with a bud;
10 rodent mandible fragments;
1 land tortoise;
16 miscellaneous bones not identified.
Snail shells, including:
Two species-BuZ:mulus dealbatus, Say and Anguispira alternata Stronglades, Pfi both of limited occurrence at the site but
common in the area today.
Mussel shells, including:
10 specimens representing four species: Obvaria reflexa, Raf;
Elliptio tetralamus, Say; Proptera purpurata, Lam; and Credonta costata, Raf. All of these are also typical of present-day
fauna.
Since neither snail nor mussel shells were very abundant at the site,
it appears that deer constituted the major food item. However, to judge
from the proximity of the site to the Brazos River, it is possible that
numerous fish were also consumed.
SUMMARY

The Clark Site consists of a small midden accumulation buried in
alluvial deposits of the Brazos River. Limited excavations at the site
did not recover a great many artifacts, but those found are of special
interest. Among the more significant of the specimens is the bone
beamer, a tool common to the Plains and the Mississippi drainage,
but comparatively rare in central Texas. Only two other, recently
excavated, sites in the central Brazos Valley (Horn Shelter and Baylor
Site) have produced them. At the Horn Shelter, the beamer was recovered from Austin Focus context. No radiocarbon date has been
obtained for the level from which it was found, but it seems possible
that bone beamers could have been in use in the central Brazos Valley
as early as about A.D. 500.
Perhaps of even greater importance is the association of the Perdiz
arrow point type (a major trait of the Toyah Focus) and, tentatively,
Sanders Focus pottery. The one radiocarbon date from the site, that
of A.D. 1277 ± 150, agrees very well with those obtained for the Toyah

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Focus occupation at the Kyle Site in Hill County (Jelks, 1962: 97-98),
and should apply, in part, to the Sanders Focu s.
REFERENCES CITED
Bryan, Frank
1935. Resume of Prehistoric Human Cultural Remains so far Discovered in Cen·
tral T exas . Bulletin of the Central T exas Arch eological Socie ty, No. 1, pp.
8- 9.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962. The Ky le Site, A Stra tified Central Texas A spect Site in Hill County,
T exas. Archaeology Series, No.5, Department of Anthrop:Jlogy , The University of Texas.
Krieger, Al ex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Nor thern T exa s, with Extension of
Puebloan D atings to the Mississippi Valley. The University of T exas Publication, No. 4640.
Mason, James K .
1936. Buried Midden on the Brazos. Bulletin of the Central T exas Archeological
Society, No. 2, pp. 52-55.
Suhm, Dee Ann , and Edward B. Jelks
1962. H andbook of T exas Archeology: T ype D escriptions. T exas Arch eological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and T exas Memorial Muse um Bulletin
No.4.
Watt, Frank H.
m s.
The Horn Shelter, an Early American Site. Unpublished manuscript.
1956. Archeological Materials from the Asa Warner Sites. Central Texas Ar cheologist, No. 7, pp. 6- 29.
1961. Two Radiocarbon Dates from the Central Brazos Valley. Bulletin of the
T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 31 (fo r 1960) , pp. 327-328.
Box 1176
W aco, T exas

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave,
Bosque County, Texas
DORRIS L. OLDS
ABSTRACT
This report describes archeological specimens from Brawley's Cave ( 41 BQ 20 ), a
limestone rockshelter in Bosque County, Texas. The most important feature of the
assemblage is the fact that perishable specimens from this area have survived in
recognizable condition. D escription of other types of mater ials is includ ed. A l ate
Edwards Plateau Aspect component and both the Austin and Toyah foci of the
Central Texas Aspect are represented.

INTRODUCTION

Late in the fall of 1964, Dr. Edward B. Jelks, Director of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, through the courtesy of Jesse J . Howard,
brought a small collection of perishable materials to the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory for analysis and description. A note with
these materials read "Found by George Anderson in a very dry cave
between Clifton and Meridian, Texas. This is very rare stuff for Central Texas." It is indeed very unusual that such specimens have survived the damp central Texas climate, and it was thought that a report
on them would be of special interest because of the rarity of such a find .
Mr. Howard had obtained the collection from Gaines DeGraffenreid,
who had bought part of the large Anderson accumulation of central
Texas materials some years ago.
A search for more information about the perishables produced from
the County Archeological files at The University of Texas a manuscript written by Frank E. Simmons entitled "Report on Prehistoric
Relics and Skeletal Remains in the Bosque Basin," dated September,
1919. From this document it appeared that our specimens came from
Brawley's Cave, Bosque County ( 41 BQ 20). Simmons' manuscript
describes the location of the cave, which would be more accurately
called a rockshelter, and gives an interesting account of the burials,
artifacts, and other materials that he, with George Anderson and
Jacob Olsen, discovered during excavations in 1917 and 1918. The
original manuscript, slightly edited, follows this report as an addendum. A section dealing with another archeological site, Camp 5, has
been omitted.

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Anderson's collection from the cave was scattered after his death,
but the specimens still in DeGraffenreid's possession and those in Simmons' own collection will be described in this paper. I should like to
thank them both for their generous cooperation in allowing me to examine and photograph their artifacts. In addition to the perishables,
specimens of stone, bone, and shell are included, along with a single
potsherd. There are said to be additional materials from Brawley's Cave
in the Jacob Olsen collection at the Clifton Museum, in Clifton, but
I have not had an opportunity to see them.
I am deeply indebted to Mardith K. Schuetz, of the Witte Memorial
Museum, for assistance in analyzing the fragments of basketry and
cordage and for identification of some of the fibrous materials used in
their construction; to Dr. Gerald K. Raun, of the Texas Memorial
Museum, for identifying the faunal remains; and to Harry J. Shafer
and DavidS. Dibble for photographing the specimens and helping me
in the description and identification of a number of them. However,
any errors in description, identification, and interpretation are mine.
Unless otherwise noted, the specimens described below are from the
Jesse Howard collection.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIMENS

Perishable Specimens

Specimens of Wood (6 specimens; Fig. 1, A-G )
Four of the six specimens of wood can definitely be considered
artifacts. The material has not been identified.
1. Worked Stick (Fig. 1, A )
Length : about 15 em.
Diameter: tapers from 6 mm. at one end to about 3 mm. at the
other.
This is a slightly curved, cylindrical stick with a blunted point at one
end. Although no tool marks are evident, the stick may have been
rubbed to its slightly fuzzy smoothness.
Its function is not obvious, but it may be an arrow foreshaft which
has hardened into a slightly warped curve and has not been modified
for hafting. Another possible use could be as an awl or a basketry tool.
2. Worked Stick (Fig. 1, B)
Length: 6 em.
Diameter: tapers from 4 mm. to 1 mm.
A small, cylindrical stick has been sharpened to a rough point at
one end; it is slightly flattened and blunted at the other end, which is

11 3

B RAWLEY's CAVE

c

D

B

F

E
A

0

IN.

0

CM.

G

3

Fig . 1 . Specimens of Wood. A, 8 , Worked sticks . C, D, Arrow foreshaft w ith stem of
Perdiz po int and enlargement (DI of dista l end of foreshaft . E, Small , burred stick . F, G,

Small st icks .

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

somewhat ragged. Longitudinal whittling marks can be seen along the
entire surface. About 1.4 em. from the wider end the stick has been
thinned slightly to a spot where a tuft of short fibers curls. The small
fibrous attachment extends from 4 mm. to 1 em. from the blunt end.
Several possibilities for use are suggested: the specimen could be an
arrow foreshaft, with the tuft of curled fibers intended for securing the
arrow; it could be an unfinished foreshaft; it might be a complete
wooden arrow; and it might also have been used as a basketry tool.
Edward B. Jelks ( 1962: 70-71) has described a similar, but longer,
specimen in his report of the Kyle rockshelter.
3. Worked Stick (Fig. 1, C, D )
Length : 4.2 em.
Diameter: 5 mm. at one end, tapering to a point at the other.
This is another small, cylindrical, sharpened stick, apparently of the
same material as No. 2. This one, however, is certainly the distal end
of an arrow foreshaft. In the center of the straight, vertically cut end
a narrow cleft, 7 mm. long, still holds the tiny, slender stem (3 mm.
thick) of an arrow point. The size and shape of the contracting stem
fragment indicates that it is from a Perdiz whitney poin'i. This specimen is in DeGraffenreid's collection.
Simmons mentions (see Addendum ) finding a foreshaft holding
an arrow fragment but relates that a small piece of sinew was bound
around it when it was discovered. Jelks (ibid.: 69-70) describes and
illustrates a similar foreshaft-also holding a Perdiz point fragmentwhich gave evidence of having once been lashed with sinew.
4. Worked Stick (Fig. 1, E )
Length : about 4.5 em.
Diameter: 5 mm. to 6 mm.
A short, cylindrical, smooth stick has been shredded at each end so
that the fibers curl. No tool marks are visible. The tufted, shredded
ends suggest a possible use as a paint brush, but there is no evidence
of color particles. Schuetz ( 1961: 181) describes somewhat similar
burred wood objects from the Shumla Cave in Val Verde County with
"single ends split into thin strips that curl like paper ribbon. "

5. Small Stick (Fig. 1, F)
Length: 5 em.
Width: 5 mm. to 6 mm.
This very small, soft, slender stick is frayed at one end and notched
or broken off about 8 mm. from the other end, leaving a fragment
only 2 mm. wide. It is of such soft material that it yields to light finger

BRAWLEY's CAVE

115

pressure, and no tool marks are visible. Unless this is a badly decayed
paint brush, it is difficult to see how it could have been used at all, and
it is questionable whether it is an artifact.
6. Small, Broken Stick (Fig. 1, G )
Length: about 5.2. em.
Width: about 3 mm. when the two pieces are together.
The soft, fragile, slender stick has been broken in two lengthwise.
One end is split to a depth of about 1 em.; the other end is broken into
several fibrous lengths. There are no signs of its having been worked.

Specimens of Fiber and Grass ( 30 specimens )
The 30 specimens in this category are divided for descriptive purposes into cordage, basketry, and other artifacts of fiber and grass .
Botanical identifications, where certain, were made by Mardith K.
Schuetz.
CORDAGE ( 10 specimens; Fig. 2, A-H )
Terminology used in describing the cordage is based on an analysis
by Douglas and Carolyn Osborne (1954: 1095-1099 ). Fiber thus refers to the fundamental unit used in making yarns and fabrics. Yarn
is made by twisting sets of one or more fibers together to construct a
stronger unit; it is a generic term which includes single yarn, plied
yarn, cord, twine, sewing thread, and so forth. Ply is the term designating the yarn unit or units twisted together to make cordage, rope,
and the like. The Osbornes say: "Twine is a plied yarn made from
medium-twist single yarns with ply-twist in the opposite direction.
Properly, most yarns called 'cordage' are twine. For the larger and
more plied yarns, cords, and ropes, the changing of direction of twist
determines the type of rope and its uses" (ibid.: 1099 ) . However, as
the term cordage is commonly used in the archeological literature, I
employ it here for both twine and cordage. Twist refers to the direction
of slope that the fibers and yarns make around their vertical axis:
Z-twist means in a counterclockwise direction, S-twist in a clockwise
direction. According to the Osbornes, when the fiber and the ply are
twisted in opposite directions, the resulting construction is stronger
and more easily handled than it would be if the same twist direction
were used throughout. The number of twists to the inch and the angle
of helix (angle of slope made by the twists to the vertical axis, as
measured with a protractor ) are used in analyzing the construction of
the cordage.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

E

D

F

0
0

G

IN.

CM.

2

6

H

Fig . 2 . Cordage . A-D, Z-tw isted, 2 ply yarns , w ith 5-tw isted fibe rs. E-H, 5-tw isted , 2 ply
yarns , wi th Z-tw isted f ibers . All are made of sotol but G, wh ich is of s isal.

Of the 10 specimens of cordage, six are made of Z-twist, 2-ply yarns,
with S-twist fibers, and the remaining four are S-twist, 2-ply yarns,
with Z -twist fibers. One of the Z-twist fragments is tied around a
twisted piece made of fur strips which will be described under miscellaneous specimens later. Seven cordage specimens are constructed of
sotol and one of sisal. Two have not been definitely identified (Table 1,
No. 2 and Table 2, No.4) but appear to be of sotol. The sotol is Dasylirion texanum Scheele, the only sotol species found as far north as

117

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

Bosque County (Parks, 1937: 13). The sisal, commonly known as
Century Plant (Agave americana L .) is not native to Bosque County;
its distribution is given as extending south and west of this area (ibid.:
16 ) . Dimensions, material, an analysis of construction, and brief remarks concerning the individual specimens are given in Table 1 (Ztwist, 2-ply yarn, with S-twist fibers) and Table 2 (S-twist, 2-ply yarn,
with Z-twist fibers ). Many specimens are dry and brittle and contorted
by loops and twists. Because of possible damage through the handling
necessary to straighten them for measurement, approximate dimensions must be given in some instances.
BASKETRY

(8 specimens; Fig. 3, A-H)

Of the eight examples of basketry, five are in sufficiently good condition to reveal the weaving technique used. In most instances small
bundles of straight fibers were bound tightly, then the bound sections
were woven together with non-interlocking weft bands of a flat, wider
material. The three very loose and fragmentary specimens still suggest
TABLE 1
Six specimens of Z -twist, 2-ply yarn cordage, with S-twist fibers
(Dimensions are given in centimeters)
No. Length

Dia.

- 1- - 2 -- .3-

i'vlaterial:c...____,::-:-:-C
=:o nstruction-:-- -- .

- Sotol

3Yz twists/ inch

Angle of h elix not
measured

Remarks

Very small; e~eedingly fragile ,
badly deteriorated. (Not illustrated )

2

Not .3
measured

Possibly Ca. 8 twists/ inch
Angle of helix not
sotol
measured

3

Ca.
9

.2

Sotol

15 twist/ inch
Well made, evenly twisted and
Angle of helix ca. 45 ° in very good condition except
for frayed ends. (Fig. 2,A)

4

Ca. .3
23.5

Sotol

8 twists/ inch
Good condition. (F·ig. 2,B)
Angle of helix ca. 55o

5

28

.4

Sotol

7 twists/ inch
Angle of helix 45 o

6

Ca.
14.5

.5

Sotol

4 twists/inch
Fair condition. (Fig. 2,D)
Angle of helix ca. 55 o

Tied around fur fragment, ends
knotted twice. One end broken
off at an outer knot, the other
end frayed. (Fig. 6,A )

Well made. evenly twisted, in
excellent condition. Two overhand knots at one end, one behind the other, and a single knot
at the other. Yarn frayed beyond
the knots at both ends. (Fig. 2,C)

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 2
Four specimens of S-twist, 2-ply yarn cordage, with Z-twist fibers
(Dimensions are given in centimeters)
No. Length

Dia.

l\1aterial

Constructjon

Remarks

1

13

.2-.25 Sotol

Ca . 11 twists/ inch
Tightly twisted, well made in
Angle of helix ca. 45o good condition. ( Fig. 2,E)

2

Ca.

.2

Ca. 7 twists/ inch

Sotol

16

Angle of helix
ca. 55°-60°

3

2.5

.8

Sisal

4

6

.25

Probably Ca. 11 twists/ inch
sotol
Angle of helix not
mzasured

Not detennined

Loosely twisted and badly frayed at ends; in poor condition.
Accurate measurement difficult.
( Fig. 2,F)
Width taken at twist. Small,
consists of a single twist of the
2 plies. Ends spread out and
frayed. ( Fig. 2,G)
Broken in two pieces but appears
to be in fair condition. Evenly
and tightly twisted. From Simmons collection. ( Fig. 2,H)

a similar method of manufacture. In describing the fibrous materials
the width is termed "fine" if the fibers are 1 mm. or less in diameter,
"medium" up to 3 mm., and "coarse" over 3 mm. The materials have
not been identified.
1. Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, A )
Length: about 5 em.
Width: 4 em.
Lengths of fine-to-medium fibers are wrapped together into four
bundles (plus a fragment of a fifth ) about 5 mm. wide to make the
warp foundation of an oval fragment. The individual bundles are then
woven together with double strips of a flat fiber about 2 mm. wide in
a non-interlocking coil technique.
2. Coiled Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, B)
Length: 8.6 em.
Width: 1.8 em. to 2 em.
This is one of the best examples of basketry in the collection and
one of the best preserved as well. Flat strips of fiber have been used for
binding together three bundles of fine fibers in a non-interlocking coil
technique. Most of both surfaces are covered with the weft binding,
making a compact piece about 8 mm. thick. The split-leaf weft stitche'
have been worked on a diagonal slanting to the left. The wrapping
f~bers are not twisted but make flat bands in units about 4 to 5 mm.

119

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

c

A

F

0

E

t

Q

IN.

0

CM.

J

>

H

Fig. 3 . Basketry Fragments . A , 8 , Fragments showing the non-interlocking weave. C,
Cente r coi l with split-stitch, non-interlocking weave. E-H , Small basketry fragments .

wide. The bound surface of one bundle has been worn off one side
exposing an area of about 2 em. which shows the longitudinal fibers
underneath one end.
3. Coiled Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, C)
Diameter: 5 em.

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The center section of a piece of coiled basketry forms nearly a perfect circle. This specimen is in excellent condition and provides a good
example of the non-interlocking, split-stitch weaving technique. There
are six coils from the center to the perimeter. Stitches are very close
together at the center, but they are spaced increasingly farther apart
as the coils grow so that around the outer coil there are two stitches
to the centimeter. The fragment is from the DeGraffenreid collection.
4. Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, D )
Length: about 5 em.
Width: 7 mm. to 1.8 em.
This is a single bundle of untwisted fine fibers wrapped horizontally
along most of its length with bands of flat fiber about 4 mm. wide.
Enough weft elements protrude from the sides to show that the weave
is similar to that of the other basketry bundle fragments , although
this one is not tightly constructed.
5. Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, E )
Length: about 6 em.
Width: 2 em. to 3 em.
One bundle of fine-to-medium width fibers has been bound closely
by a band of flat fiber 2 mm. to 3 mm. wide. The horizontal binding
extends from 1.5 em. below one end to 1 em. from the other. The wider
end has been slightly scorched. A few fragments of a similar bundle
remain attached showing that the original construction was a noninterlocking weave.
6. Coiled Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, F )
Length: about 7 em.
Width: 1.2 em. at one end, spreading out to about 4 em. at the
other.
This fragment consists of three sections of untwisted fiber, of fine-tomedium width. Each section is bound separately, then the three bundles are woven together by horizontal bands of split-leaf fibers bunched
in strips about 5 mm. wide to make a non-interlocking weft construction. The narrow end is tightly secured, but the fibers and bundles
have loosened and spread out at the other end.
7. Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, G )
Length : 6 em.
Width: 1.5 em. to 2.5 em.
Mixed fine-to-medium width fibers have been wrapped horizontally
from the narrow end downward for about 2 em. by a band of flat material about 3 mm. wide.

121

BRAW L EY ' S CAVE

8. Basketry Fragm ent (Fig. 3, H )
Len gth : 3.2 em.
Width : about 8 mm.
This small fragment is made of fine fibers that are wrapped m ost
of their length with strips of flat material about 3 mm. wide.

A
B

IN.

c

I

CM:

Fig . 4 . Artifacts of Fiber and Grass . A, Poss ible basketry fragment . 8, Bundle of w rapped
fibers . C, Sandal made of grass bundles. D, Drawing by Mardith K. Schuetz showing details
of sandal construction .

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Other Artifacts of Fiber and Grass ( 12 specimens; Figs. 4, A-D; 5,
A-H)
1. Fiber Bundle (Fig. 4, A)
Length: 7 em.
Width: 2.2 em.
A bundle of matted fibers has been wrapped loosely about the middle
section by fibers of the same type. They appear to be a mixture of
very fine-to-medium width fibers. This is probably a deteriorated
basketry fragment, but identification is uncertain because of its condition.
2. Fragments of Fiber Bundles (Not illustrated)
There may be two or three bundles represented by these loose fragments. The similarity in length and the remnants of flat wrapping
fibers present suggest that they were once parts of wrapped bundles
used as warp foundations in the same manner as those previously
described.
3. Bundle of Wrapped Fiber (Fig. 4, B)
Length: about 9 em.
Width: about 2 em. at each end, widening in the center to about
3.6 em.
Thickness: about2.1 em.
This bundle of fibers has been doubled over but not twisted. It is
wrapped horizontally around the middle by similar fibers in a band
about 2.3 em. wide. On the reverse side the wrapping band disappears
in a diagonal into the loop . The bundle has been slightly scorched
on each end. This is probably a "storage bundle"-lengths of fiber
packaged for later use. Schuetz (1963: 157) mentions bundles of this
general type found among cave materials from Val Verde County.
4. Sandal (Fig 4, C, D)
Length: about 18.5 em.
Width: lower loops 2 em. and 1.5 em. at the narrow (heel?) end,
broadening to about 6.5 em. at the wide (toe?) end.
Material: coarse grass.
The specimen is loosely twined and shows no signs of wear. It is
probably an unfinished sandal of a type that looks like a variation of
Schuetz' "hi-parallel warp frame" construction (1956: 130-135).
Three lengths of S-twisted, single-ply coarse grass fiber bundles are
looped over and twisted clockwise at the toe, then relooped in a figure-8
just below the middle of the sandal ( 10 em. from the top) . At the heel
two lengths are looped in a figure-8, the upper ends passing through
the lower loops of the t(!p half. Crosswise bands of the same grass,

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

123

about 1.5 em. wide, reinforce the right edge about 4.5 em. from the
upper end and pass across the center loop about 3 em. from the top.
The sole does not appear to be especially designated for either foot.
Although it is made of material similar to that of the netting described below, there are no remnants of connecting elements that
would suggest that it belongs to the netting. The ends and sides seem
to be intact, and an identification as an unfinished sandal appears
logical.
5. Fragment of Game Net (Fig. 5, A )
Length: a bout 23 em.
Width: about 18 em.
Material: coarse grass mixed with some sotol.
The specimen is crudely made but in fair condition. The dimensions
would be considerably greater if the netting were stretched out fully.
S-twisted grass bundles are twisted again counterclockwise and looped
to catch the lower loops in a figure-S, then worked into the adjoining
upper loops, of which four are discernible. Reinforcing horizontal
bands can be seen near the upper edge. Three unbroken, generally
rectangular sections can be identified in the upper part and measure
about 5.5 em. on each side when they are pulled out. The lower sections are partly broken apart and the ends are loose. These ends have
been charred all along the lower edge. The most tightly wound bundles are about 6 mm. in diameter; others have loosened to about 2.5 em.
6. Twisted Loop of Grass (Fig. 5, B)
Length: about 8 em.
Diameter of yarn: 1 em.
Width at twisted end: 2 em.
A bundle of coarse grass has been S-twisted, then doubled over and
twisted counterclockwise into a loop. The ends spread out to about
4 em. These ends are scorched or charred in the same manner as the
lower ends of the game netting, and this specimen appears to be a
fragment broken from it.
Simmons' manuscript mentions "a few twists of grass folded and
turned similar to 'dry twist tobacco'," which would describe this and
the next two specimens very well.
7. Twisted Loop of Grass (Fig. 5, C)
Length: 4 em.
Width: 2.5 em.
Diameter of yarn: about 1 em.
The right end of this twisted loop crosses over the left to make an

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

,.

..•

0
0

c

...

J~·

8

CM.

E

0

8

0

F

CM.

6

G

H
Fig. 5 . Arlifacts of Fiber and Grass . A, Fragment of game netting . 8-D, Twisted loops of
grass, probably fragments of the netting . E, F, H, Co iled fiber. G, Knotted fiber.

oval, and the ends are scorched at the crossing .This is probably another
n etting fragment, for similar loops can be seen intact on the netting.

BRAWLEY 'S CAVE

125

8. Twisted Loop of Grass (Fig. 5, D )
Length : 3 em.
Width: 2 em.
Diameter of yam: about 5 mm.
This is just like the twisted loops described above except that it is
smaller.
9. Coiled Fiber (Fig. 5, E)
Eight roughly circular loops of a gray, knotty, pliable stem, about
1 mm. in diameter, have been loosely fastened together by three additional coils of a flat fiber wound loosely around them and secured with
an overhand knot. The construction makes a more or less oval coil
measuring about 4 em. by 6.5 em.
These coiled materials may have been kept for use as fastening or
lacing equipment. Epstein found similar specimens at Centipede and
Damp caves ( 1963: 104; 105, F, G) and Schuetz ( 1963: 154, C; 158 )
says that they are common in the Val Verde County cave assemblages.
10. Coiled Fiber (Fig. 5, F )
This is a coil of fiber that starts with a central circle, around which
three additional coils make an oval about 3.1 em. long and 2 em. wide.
There are no fastening elements present. The material looks like sotol,
but has not been definitely identified. The specimen is from the Simmons collection.
11 . Knotted Fiber (Fig. 5, G)
A small bundle of fiber, 3.2 em. long, has been tied with an overhand knot, making a neat finish at one end, with the other ends left
free. The specimen is 7 mm. wide at the knot. The material is not
identified, but looks like sotol. Jelks (1962: 74, F ) illustrates a very
similar bundle. This is from the Simmons collection.
12. Coiled Fiber (Fig. 5, H )
A length of fiber or wood shaving, with one straight end 4.3 em.
long, has been split into two parts at the other end, each terminating
in tight curls. The specimen resembles the curled cedar shavings described by Jelks (ibid.: 73 ) which he suggests are probably waste
materials resulting from wood scraping. The material of which this
item from the Simmons collection is made has not been identified.

Miscellaneous Perishables ( 4 specimens; Fig. 6, A, B)

1. Fragment of Fur with Scrap of Cordage Attached (Fig. 6, A )
Two separate, narrow strips of skin-backed fur have been twisted

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

together counterclockwise, then wrapped around once and tied with
a piece of 2-ply, Z-twisted cordage (described in more detail in Table 1)
about 3.9 em. from the narrow end. The whole construction is about
10.6 em. long and ranges in width from 1.2 em. to 3 em.
The dark gray to yellowish-tan fur has been identified as either rabbit or fox, with fox the more likely choice because of the color pattern.
This is no doubt the "piece of mink skin" that Simmons mentions in
his report.
2. Strands of Hair (Not illustrated)
Eighteen strands of extremely fine hair range in length from 2 to
11 em. The longer ones are not completely straight-they even have a
slight tendency to wave. The color is dark brown. Mardith Schuetz has
identified them as human hair.
3. Tuft of Hair (Fig. 6, B)
This is a small mass of reddish-brown, soft hair about 7 em. long
and 2 em. wide at its maximum. The ends spread out as individual
strands of different lengths less than 1 mm. in diameter. This is probably the " tuft of buffalo hair" that Simmons reports; Raun says this
identification could be correct, although it is not certain.
4. Feathers (Not illustrated )
A loose mass of matted feathers, white and gray-brown mixed, has
been identified as the great blue heron, confirming Simmons' "bunch
of feathers, apparently of the blue heron." Some of the feathers are
quill-like, and others are short or broken. They are interspersed with
a little down, bits of twigs, leaves, grass, and fiber fragments. No bones
are present.
SPECIMENS OF STONE

Of the 37 stone specimens, eight are ground or pecked, 23 are
chipped, and six are classified as miscellaneous stone objects. All
are from the Simmons or DeGraffenreid collection.

Ground or Pecked Stone (8 specimens; Figs. 6, C-J ; 7, A-D )
1. Boatstone (Fig. 6, C, D)
Length: 7.9 em.
Width: 4 em. at the center, 3.2 em. at the beginning of the terminal curves.
Depth: 1. 7 em. at the center.
Material: Probably limestone, reddish colored, possibly fired.

12 7

BRAW L EY ' S CAVE

B

A

E

F

c

D

G

0

0

CM.

6

J

H
Fig . 6. Miscellaneous Perishables, Boatstones, and Pipes . A, Twisted fur strips tied with
cordage . 8, Tuft of hair, possibly buffalo . C, D, Unnotched boatstone , showing basal side
with oval depression and convex side showing the transverse keel. E-G, Notched boatstone: side view, view of basal side with V-shaped groove, convex side with flat keel.
H, Ground stone pipe, bowl broken off. I, J, Elbow pipe of soapstone (or steatitel with
human effigy face: side view and frontal view .

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

This unnotched boatstone has been ground into an almost perfect
ellipsoid shape and is very well made. A small broken spot and a few
superficial scratches are the only marks on the base, or so-called upper,
surface; the convex, or bottom, side is somewhat worn and shows a
number of scratches. The end walls are smoothly sloped to meet at the
smoothed ridge of the transverse keel, but the side walls slant outward a distance of 6 mm., then slope downward to the bottom, giving
the side walls a convex appearance. From the side view the bottom
surface makes a smooth curve from end to end.
In the center of the excavated base is a shallow, oval depression 2.3
em. long, 1 em. wide, and 35 mm. deep . The end walls are only 6 mm.
thick.
This specimen seems to be the very common type which Patterson
( 193 7: 38-40) calls Variety XXXII. This boatstone is from the DeGraffenreid collection.
2. Boats tone (Fig. 6, E-G )
Length: 8 em.
Width : 2.3 em. at center, tapering to 1 em. at the ends.
Depths: 3 em. at the center.
Material: Probably limestone, light gray-brown, possibly fired.
This is another smooth, symmetrically ground boatstone showing
excellent workmanship, although the surface is somewhat nicked and
scratched. The V-shaped notches at either end are about 2 mm. wide
across the top and 2 mm. deep. A V -shaped groove, 5 mm. wide and
5 mm. deep, has been excavated from notch to notch along the base
side, and the walls are 6 mm. wide on either side of the groove. Seen
from the end in cross section, the walls are gently curved to meet the
keel. The flat keel extends along the convex bottom from one end to
the other; it is narrowest at the center ( 9 mm.) , then widens to 1.5 em.
at the notches.
This boatstone, also from the DeGraffenreid collection, seems to belong in Patterson's (ibid. : 29, 31 ) Variety XXIV as it is similar in appearance, type of keel, and the nature of the excavated base.
3. Elbow Pipe (Fig. 6, H )
Length : about 8.3 em.
Diameter: 2.9 em. at the widest part.
Material: probably limestone, possibly fired.
Although this ground stone pipe has a dull scratched surface now,
it looks as though it had once been polished. The lower part of the bowl
is broken off, leaving an oval aperture about 2 em. long and 1 em. wide,
with the opening slanting downward into the stem tube. The inner

BRAWLEY 'S CAVE

129

surface is blackened. The outermost edge of the bowl opening is about
9 mm. from the closed end of tJ:te stem, and the angle of the break suggests that the bowl was set at an angle of less than 90°. An incised
groove about 2.5 mm. wide makes a semi-circle around the opposite
side of the tube from the bowl aperture, about 1.5 em. from the closed
end.
The stem opening terminates in a rounded flange about 2 mm. wide
that is set off by a narrow groove encircling the tube. The mouth has
an outside diameter of 1.6 em., an inside diameter of 1.5 em., and is
beveled outward.
Fragments of similar pipes are found in the collection from the Harrell Site (Krieger, 1946: 36) in Young County.
4. Elbow Pipe with Human Effigy Face (Fig. 6, I, J)
This pipe is made of smooth, well polished gray soapstone (or steatite) and is cut all in one piece. The short, stubby bowl is set almost at
right angles to the stem; opposite this angle the face, carved in low
relief, looks outward. The pipe is in perfect condition except for a recent break in which some of the stone on the top and side of the stem
orifice has been broken off.
The bowl is nearly circular, measuring 2.5 em. by 3 em., with a
body thickness of 5 mm. The rim is smooth and flat. The inner side
of the pipe bowl is gently convex to the angle formed at the juncture
of the stem and bowl, but the outer side is convex only about 1.4 em.
down from the rim; at this point it becomes almost straight. At the
point where the side wall straightens a narrow incised groove encircles
the entire bowl. Bowl length, to the angle, is 2.5 em., and width at this
spot is 2.8 em.
The stem is slightly oval in cross section, measuring 2.4 em. by 1.6
em., and is 2.5 em. long from the orifice to the inside of the angle. Wall
thickness is 6 mm. at the long axis of the opening and 5 mm. at the
short axis.
The face is oval, measuring 2.2 em. by 3 em., and is set off from the
body of the pipe by a narrow incised groove. The eyes are small, round
holes set under clearly delineated curved eyebrows, and the nose is
small, straight, and well shaped. The features can be recognized
clearly on the profile (Fig. 6, I ) . The countenance looks very like
some of the Olmec faces.
Elbow-shaped, human effigy stone pipes are rare in central Texas
but are reported from the Spiro Mound in Oklahoma (Hamilton, 1952:
34-35) and from a number of sites in the southeastern states. Fundaburk and Foreman ( 1957 : Pls. 99-102) illustrate examples of these,

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

including a sandstone pipe from Lookout Mountain, Tennessee (ibid.:
Pl. 101 ) that shows an interesting similarity of facial treatment with
this pipe from the Simmons collection.

A

B

c

F
D

G

H

J

M

0

N
Q

I N.

0

CM.

K

p

Q

Fig . 7 . Sinkers, Manos, and Dart Points. A, Waco sinker. B, Sin''er. C, D, Quo:-~z;t") monos.
E, N, P, Q , Unclassified dart points. F, Ensor point . G-1, Ensor or Ellis points . J-L, Possible
Morrill poin ts. M, Godley point. 0, Marshall po in t.

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

131

5. Waco Sinker (Fig. 7, A)
Length: 4.2 em. to 4.4 em.
Width: 3.2 em. at center, 2 em. and 2.3 em. at the ends.
Thickness: 2 em. at center.
Material: dark gray quartz.
The sinker appears to be made of an unevenly elliptical river pebble
which has been notched at each end. It is roughly plano-convex and
corresponds in size and shape fairly well with Watts' Type 5 (1938:
28) . The notches are U-shaped and about 2 mm. deep, although one is
a little wider than the other. The sinker's uneven and bumpy surface
shows signs of battering. It is from the Simmons collection.
6. Sinker (Fig. 7, B)
Length: about 5 em. long on one side, 4.6 em. on the other.
Width : 2.7 em. to 3 em.
Thickness : varies from about .9 em. at the ends to 2 em. at the center.
Material: quartz, dark gray to reddish in color.
This bi-convex sinker is generally rectangular in shape, although
not symmetrical. The long sides are slightly concave. At each end are
wide, shallow notches, about 1.6 em. long and 3 mm. deep. The comers
are somewhat rounded off but not smoothed, and the sinker is crudely
made. It is a part of the Simmons collection.
7. Mano (Fig. 7, C)
Length: 8.8 em.
Width: 6.5 em. at the center.
Thickness : 4 em.
Material: probably quartzite.
The mano is one hand size, almost circular, nearly flat on one surface, and very slightly convex on the other. Both grinding facets are
smooth. Side :walls are straight and are pecked fairly smooth all the
way around, except where the surface is slightly broken off at one end.
No striations are visible. This specimen is from the Simmons collection.
8. Mano (Fig. 7, D )
Length: 8.8 em.
Width: 6.5 em. at the center .
Thickness: 4 em.
Material: probably quartzite.
This is also a one hand mano and has been shaped by pecking into

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

an oval. There are no scars or striations visible. It, too, is from the
Simmons collection.

Chipped Stone (23 specimens )
The chipped stone artifacts are described under the following categories : dart points, knives, scrapers, and miscellaneous chipped stone
tools. The first dart point listed is from the DeGraffenreid collection;
all other chipped stone artifacts are from the Simmons collection.
DART POINT

(13 specimens; Fig. 7, E-Q )

1. Unclassified Dart Point (Fig. 7, E )
This thin, beautifully chipped point of pinkish-tan flint is 9. 7 em.
long and 4.2 em. wide at the shoulders. It exhibits fine marginal chipping along all edges. The blade edges are recurved, being concave
about % of their length, then becoming convex, terminating m a
sharp point. Barbs are almost even with the thinned base.
2. Ensor Type (Fig. 7, F )
One dart point can be classified as Ensor. It is of a light beige flint
and was found outside the overhang of the rockshelter. It is 3.3 em.
long, 2.1 em. wide, and has convex lateral edges. The wide, expanding,
straight-based stem is 8 mm. long and 2.1 em. wide.

3-5. Ensor-Ellis Type (Fig. 7, G-I )
Three dart points, all of dark gray flint, fall into the general EnsorEllis classification but cannot be definitely ascribed to either. They
have triangular blades and range in length from 3.5 em. to 4.5 em.
Width at the shoulders is from 2 em. to 2.2 em. Two ( G, H ) have expanding stems and straight bases with the stems measuring 7 mm. and
8.5 mm. long, and 9 mm. and 1.6 em. wide. These two are very like
points described and illustrated by Shafer, Suhm, and Scurlock ( 1962:
14--16; Fig. 3, B, C, D) . The third one of this group (Fig. 7, I) has
serrated sides and a convex based stem which is 8 mm. long and 1.8
em. wide.
6- 8. Possible Morrill Type (Fig. 7, J-L )
Three points with fairly long, slightly expanding stems are similar
to Morrill points (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 223-224) but are not definitely identified as such. Sides are straight to very slightly convex. The
example in Fig. 8, K has a broken tip and a slight flare at the shoulders. These specimens vary in length from 4.8 em. to 5.4 em. and in

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

133

width at the shoulders from 2.1 em. to 2.5 em. Stem bases are straight
to slightly concave with lengths of 1.5 em. to 1.8 em. and widths of 1.5
em. to 1.6 em. All are of dark gray flint.
9. Godley klondike Type (Fig. 7, M)
This dart point of dark gray flint can be tentatively identified as
Godley klondike (Forrester, 1964: Plate 1, Fig. 20), although its dimensions exceed the maximum length and width given by Forrester
for this type. It is thin and finely chipped. The blade is triangular,
with slightly convex sides that flare out a little at the shoulders. The
expanding, convex-based stem is 6 mm. long and 1.4 em. wide. Overall length of the point is 6 em., and width at the shoulders is 2.5 em.
10. Unclassified Point (Fig. 7, N )
This unusual barbed point is broken in a slant across what appears
to be roughly the center of blade. It is of highly patinated, dark gray
flint. This may have been a Bulverde point that was notched on one
side for use as a knife. The notch is about 1 em. deep and lies just above
one of the wide, rounded barbs. Width across the barbs is 4.2 em. The
thin stem is broken on both sides, but looks as though it had been
rectangular in shape. The stem fragment is 1.9 em. wide, and 2.3 em.
long.
11. Marshall Type (Fig. 7, 0 )
This dart point is also broken, in this instance at the tip and at the
base of one of the barbs, but it is tentatively classified as a Marshall
point. The blade edges are convex, and the specimen is finely chipped
all the way around. It is 5.5 em. long and 3.2 em. wide at the barbs.
The parallel-sided, straight-based stem is 8 mm. thick, 1.2 em. long,
and 8 mm. wide. The material is dark gray in color.
12. Unclassified Point (Fig. 7, P)
One comer of the stem of this dark gray, barbed point is broken.
The specimen has fine marginal chipping and convex lateral edges.
The length is incomplete but now measures about 5 em., and the width
at the barbs is 3.2 em. The stem fragment is about 1.6 em. wide.
13. Unclassified Point (Fig. 7, Q)
This is another dart point of dark gray flint with a broken stem. It
is 6.5 em. long and 3.3 em. wide at the barbs. The lateral edges of the
blade taper in a convex curve to the tip. The stem fragment is 1. 7 em.
wide. The specimen is finely chipped all the way around to the break
in the stem.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

8
A

c

D

F

E

H

G

J
Fig . 8 . Knives , Scrapers, and Bifacial Tools . A-D, Knives, E-H, Unifacial scrapers . I,
Heavy bifacial tool. J, Gouge.
KNIVES ( 4

specimens; Fig. 8, A-D )

All four knives are bifacially worked.
1. This light gray flint knife (Fig. 8, A ) is lanceolate in outline. The

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

135

base is rounded, and the edges are worked all the way around. It is
11 .7 em. long and has a maximum width of 4.5 em. The sides are
gently convex for about % of the length, but from that point begin to
taper to the rounded tip.
2. The base of this asymmetrical, but essentially lanceolate-shaped,
knife (Fig. 8, B) of gray flint has been broken on one side. A small
notch is chipped on one lateral edge, 1 em. above the unbroken side
of the base. The knife is plano-convex and has been retouched along
all edges. The over-all length is 9.3 em. , maximum width is 3.6 em.,
and thickness is 9 mm.
3. This short-stemmed knife (Fig. 8, C) is made of light tan flint. It
measures 11 .5 em. long, 3.9 em. wide at the shoulders; the short, thick
stem is 1.2 em . thick, 2.5 em. wide, and 5 mm. long. The lateral edges
of the knife are recurved at the shoulders, concave for about half the
length, imd then become convex as they taper to the sharp tip. Retouching is confined to the margins of the blade.
4. The base of this knife (Fig. 8, D ) of pinkish flint is fairly straight;
otherwise, the specimen has a lanceolate shape with a rounded tip.
The basal edge is thinned and all the edges have been retouched.
When held lengthwise, the knife appears slightly twisted.
SCRAPERS ( 4

specimens ; Fig. 8, E-H )

These are made of unifacially chipped flint flakes . The three ovoid
ones are generally typical of the Toyah Focus of the Central Texas
Aspect (Jelks, 1962: 50-51 ) .

1. This dark gray flint scraper (Fig. 8, E ) is roughly oval, measuring
6.5 em. by 4.8 em., and is 2 mm. to 1.5 em. thick. It is chipped all the
way around except for the striking platform, and has steeply beveled
edges. The bulb of percussion can be seen on the unworked side.
2. Another ovoid scraper (Fig. 8, F ) has steep, marginal chipping
along most of its edges, leaving only the striking platform unworked.
The bulb of percussion is visible on the unworked (plano ) side. The
scraper is of dark gray flint; its dimensions are about 5 em. by 3 em.
3. The third example (Fig. 8, G ) is an elongated oval shape and is
made of light tan flint. It, too, is chipped and beveled all around except
for the striking platform, and, as in the others, the bulb of percussion
can be seen on the reverse of the worked side. It is 6.5 em. long and
3.2 em. wide.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

136

4. This small, nearly flat scraper (Fig. 8, H), another dark gray flint
one, is almost circular, measuring 3.2 em. by 2.8 em. It is chipped all
around the edges, but a negative bulb of percussion is visible on the
unworked side.
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE TOOLS (2 specimens; Fig. 8, I, J)
One of these is a plano-convex gouge (Fig. 8, J) of gray flint that
has been bifacially chipped along the marginal edges. Its maximum
length is 14 em. , and its width varies from 4 em. to 5.6 em., and its
thickness is from 2.2 em. to 2.6 em.
The other specimen (Fig. 8, I ) is a heavy, roughly chipped bifacial
tool which is also of gray flint. It is convex on both faces and chipped
around all the edges. One side looks slightly twisted. It is 13.5 em.
long and varies from 3.3 em. to 4.3 em. in width.

Other Stone Specimens (6 specimens; Fig. 9, A-F)
All of these are from the Simmons collection. They include:
A hammerstone (Fig. 9, A ) of very irregular outline which shows
flake scars and battering marks. It is made of reddish quartzite and
measures about 5.7 em. by 5.6 em. in maximum dimensions.
Three specimens of hematite (Fig. 9, B-D ): 1) a roughly ovalshaped piece about 3.6 em. long and 2.8 em. wide; 2) an almost perfect sphere, 2.2 em. in diameter; and 3 ) a generally rectangular, flat
stone that has been scored across both surfaces and measures 2 em.
by 2.5 em.
There are two unworked quartz stones (Fig. 9, E, F) , roughly rectangular in shape, measuring about 2 em. by 2.5 em. , and 2.5 em. by
2.6cm.
SPECIMENS OF BoNE (15 specimens; Figs. 9, G-0; 10, A-D )
The 15 bone specimens came from the Simmons and DeGraffenreid
collections. All but one are fashioned of deer bone, while the remaining artifact is of bird bone. Following Jelks ( 1962: 61 ) I have divided
them for descriptive purposes into three classes: pointed implements,
spatulate implements, and miscellaneous bone objects.

Pointed Bone Implements ( 10 specimens)
1.

(Fig. 9, G )
Length: 12.9 em.

137

BRAWLEY's CAVE

c

G

H

J
0
0

D

L

K

1111.

CM.

6

M

Fig . 9 . Misce llaneous Stones and Bone Implements. A, Hammerstone . 8-D , Hemat ite .
E, F, Quartz pebbles. G-L, Po inted tools , p robably aw ls or punches . M, Worked dee r
metapod ial , possibly reworked beame r. N, 0 , Po in :ed bone imp lements .

Width: 9 mm. at the proximal end, tapering to a sharp point at the
distal end.
The implement has been excellently smoothed and polished, and
the rounded proximal end is well finished. A shallow concavity runs
down most of the length on one side. The awl is creamy white in color
and bears no scratches or scars of use. It is from the DeGraffenreid
collection.

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

2.

(Fig. 9, H )
Length : 8.6 em.
Width: 1.3 em. at the proximal end, tapering to a sharp point.
This awl is smooth but not polished. A deep cleft runs down one
side, but the other side is rounded. It is in the DeGraffenreid collection.

3.

(Fig. 9, I )
Length: 14.3 em.
Width: 1 em. near the proximal end, sharply pointed at the distal
end.
This tool is made from a deer metapodial that has been smoothed
and polished. One long side has a shallowly-concave curvature. The
proximal end is well finished, and from it runs a small, natural groove
about 2 em. down the shaft. The implement comes from the DeGraffenreid collection.
4. (Fig. 9, J)
Length : 9 em.
Width: 8 mm. at the widest part, tapering to a sharp point.
This is another awl made from a deer metapodial bone. The proximal end shows little modification. It also is from the DeGraffenreid
collection.
5.

(Fig. 9, K)
Length: 8.3 em.
Width: 2.2 em. at the distal end, tapering to a blunt point.
Another awl has been cut from a deer metapodial and fairly well
smoothed but not polished. It is from the DeGraffenreid collection.
6.

(Fig. 9, L)
Length : 13 em.
Width: 1.6 em. at the proximal end, tapering to a fairly blunt point
of2mm.
The proximal end of this deer metapodial has been smoothed to
some extent; a shallow depression runs along most of the shaft on
both sides. The bone was once polished, but the surface is now eroded
and darkened. It is in DeGraffenreid's collection.
7.

(Fig. 9, M)
Length: 15 em., broken at the tip.
Width: 3 em. at the proximal end.
Deer metapodial fumishes the material from which this specimen,
possibly a reworked beamer, has been fashioned. The distal end has
been trimmed to a point (now broken off) with the narrowing begin-

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

139

ning about 1 em. from that end. The articulation has been left intact
at the proximal end, from which a deep groove has been hollowed out
the length of the shaft, leaving only thin, fairly well smoothed walls
of bone. This is from the Simmons collection. It is interesting to compare this tool with the beamers described by Frank H. Watt (see this
issue of the Bulletin) .
8.

(Fig. 9, N )
Length: 9 em.
Width: 1 em. , tapering to a sharp point, with the extreme tip
broken.
This is a flat tool made of split bone, 3 mm. thick. The proximal end
is somewhat rough and slanted, but except for a little pitting the surfaces are smooth and polished. Its function is not known. The specimen
is from the Simmons collection.
9.

(Fig. 9, 0)
Length: 6.2 em.
Width: 4.5 mm., tapering to a sharp point.
This is a smooth, slender implement that has a very slight curve. It
is in the Simmons collection.

10. (Not illustrated)
Length: 4.2 em., incomplete.
Diameter: 6.5 em., tapering to the broken point.
The proximal end of this cylindrical piece of bone has been broken
off and is rough, as is the point. The surfaces are smooth except for a
slight pitting. It is from the Simmons collection.
Spatulate Bone Implements ( 4 specimens; Fig. 10, A-C )
These implements are all made from deer ulnae and may have been
used as flaking tools. They are from the Simmons collection.

1.

(Not illustrated)
Length: 7.2 em.
Width : 3 em. at the widest part.
The proximal end and sides have been left unmodified except for a
little smoothing. The distal end has a rounded curve about 3 mm.
wide. One side is broken and shows signs of rodent chewing.
2.

(Fig. 10, A)
Length: 8 em.
Width: 3.2 em. at the widest part.

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The sides of this tool have been smoothed, and the distal end has
been worked into a rounded curve about 6 mm. wide.
3.

(Fig. 10, B)
Length: 7.5 em.
Width: 3.3 em. at the widest part.
The distal end is finished in a curve about 1.6 em. wide. The edges
have been smoothed all around the tool.

4.

(Fig. 10, C)
Length: 8.3 em. , incomplete.
Width: 1.5 em.
The curved proximal end is about 1.5 em. wide; the distal end has
been broken and is rough. About 3.2 em. from the proximal end a
section has been cut or broken out, it is about 3 mm. deep and extends
for about 2.3 em. along the side.

Miscellaneous Bone Objects ( 1 specimen; Fig. 10, D )
The only artifact that falls into this class is a cylindrical, hollow,
slightly curved bird bone that has been cut off fairly evenly at both
ends. These ends are not well smoothed. The tube is 5 em. long and
has a diameter of 8 mm. at each end. The curvature in the central
part narrows the diameter there to 5 mm. Because of the unsmoothed
ends, this is thought to be a bead rather than the mouth piece for a
pipe. It is from the DeGraffenreid collection.
SPECIMENS OF SHELL

(4 specimens; Fig. 10, E-H)

There are only four artifacts in this group, a pendant made from
a conch shell, and three mussel shell scrapers or knives .
The columella of a conch shell (Fig. 10, E) has been cut out and
polished to make a pendant 7.2 em. long and 1 em. to 1.4 em. in
diameter. In each of the smoothed and rounded ends a hole 4 mm. in
diameter has been drilled laterally, though the holes are not quite in
the same plane. Two incised, parallel lines, about 5 mm. apart, form
a band that crosses the pendant diagonally for a distance of 2.8 em. on
one side of each end. The band-perhaps a natural groove intentionally accentuated-commences above the right hand hole and
extends downward and to the left in an angle of about 45 degrees. It
appears on the reverse side below and to the left of the hole and extends upward the same distance to the right. The pendant is excellently finished and in good condition except for a small break at one
end.

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

141

Three large mussel shells (Fig. 10, F-H ) show use marks on the
end opposite the hinge. One shell (Fig. 10, H) has been cut or notched
on the side as well. Two shells (Fig. 10, F and H ) are chipped along
the edge, but the third one (Fig. 10, G) has been worked to a smooth,
knife-like edge for a distance of about 3 em.
SPECIMEN

OF

CLAY (1 specimen ; Fig. 10, I )

In Simmons' collection is one small potsherd with pinkish surfaces
and a brownish-gray core. The bone temper can readily be seen on
both surfaces as well as in the core, and there may be a little sand
mixed in the paste. The sherd measures about 2.5 em. by 3 em. , with
a thickness of 7 mm. One surface is slightly brushed and the other is
smoothed. It resembles locally made central Texas pottery from the
Leon River.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Brawley's Cave must once have been an extremely rich source of
archeological materials, of which only a small sample is now available
for study. We are indebted to Frank E. Simmons for the only records
that have been kept on the site: its location, the nature of the burials,
description of the skeletons, artifacts, and other materials that were
discovered when it was excavated in 1917 and 1918 (see Addendum ).
Simmons tells us (personal communication) that he did not see all of
the original Anderson collection. No attempt was made to distinguish
different natural strata and no vertical or horizontal controls were
used in the digging.
The cave remained unusually dry, and for that reason a considerable number of perishable specimens survived. These materials, along
with those of stone, bone, shell, and pottery, were divided among the
discoverers, although some had been removed by other visitors. Probably a great part of the specimens, especially the flint artifacts, have
now been scattered and lost, but those that remain available, supplemented by Simmons' manuscript (see Addendum), make it possible
to place the site into a broad cultural context.
Certain artifacts attributable to the Archaic Edwards Plateau Aspect
(Suhm, et al., 1954: 106-112; Suhm, 1958: 79-81 ) can be found in
the Brawley's Cave assemblage, and give evidence of what appears to
be the earliest occupation. These are : the stemmed knife, quartzite
hammerstone, sinkers, deer ulna tools, disc-like scraper, and Ensor,
Ellis, and Godley dart points. Moreover, Simmons' sketches (Figs. 11
and 12) show dart points that strongly resemble the Marshall type,

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D
A

F

c

B

G

E

0

IN.

o

CM:

H

Fig . 1 0 . Bone Implements , Shell Artifacts, and Potsherd . A-C, Spatulate implements of
deer ulnae, possibly flak ing tools. D, Bird bone bead. E, Conch shell pendant. F-H, Worked
mussel shells. I, Bone-tampered polshcrd .

drills, triangular knives, and curved, thin knives. These indirectly
augment the list of Edwards Plateau Aspect traits that may be found
among the Brawley's Cave materials. A number of Edwards Plateau
traits, however, carry over into the Central Texas Aspect: use of rockshelters as campsites, flexed burials with little or no grave goods, deer
ulna and antler tools, bone awls, triangular-shaped knives, hematite
pigment, and possibly the Godley point (Suhm, et al., 1954: 112-117;
Jelks, 1962: 86 ).
Jelks' report on the stratified Kyle Site (ibid.), in which he dis-

143

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

tinguishes two Central Texas Aspect foci (Austin and Toyah ) in
addition to the Edwards Plateau Aspect, offers the most useful source
for a comparison with the cultures represented at Brawley's Cave.
The specimens from this site parallel in many ways those from the
Kyle rockshelter in the general range and type of artifacts, including
the perishable items. To judge from Simmons' report, as well as from
certain of the specimens described in the preceding sections, both the
Austin Focus and the Toyah Focus are represented at Brawley's Cave.
Toyah Focus artifacts-including Perdiz and Cliffton points (Fig. 11 ),
steeply beveled snub-nosed scrapers, possible Cleburne knives, and the
pottery-may, however, be more common than those of the Austin
Focus. The perishables from the Kyle Site came from the Toyah Focus
zone, while those from Brawley's Cave probably belong with the
Central Texas Aspect but cannot be specifically attributed to either
focus . Such exotic specimens as the shell pendant and the effigy pipe
are very likely intrusive, but the broken elbow pipe has counterparts
in the pipe fragments from the not too distant Harrell Site in northcentral Texas (Krieger, 1946: 36).
Thus it appears that Brawley's Cave fits reasonably well into a time
range extending from a late Edwards Plateau Aspect through both
Austin and Toyah foci of the Central Texas Aspect, with no indication
of a continuance into the historic period.

REFERENCES CITED
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963. Centipede and Damp Caves : Excavations in Val Verde County, 1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962), pp. 1-129.
Forrester, Robert E.
1964. The Ham Creek Site. A Publication of the Tarrant County Archeological
Society.
Fundaburk, Emma Lila, and Mary Douglas Foreman (editors )
1957. Sun Circles and Human Hands. Published by Emma Lila Fundaburk.
Hamilton, Henry W.
1952. The Spiro Mound, The Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 14.
J elks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central T exas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series, No. 5.
Krieger, Alex D .
1946. Culture Complexes and Chr onology m Northern T exas. University of
Texas Publication No. 4640.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Osborne, Douglas and Carolyn
1954. Twines and Terminologies. American Anthropologist, Vol. 56, pp. 10931100.
Parks, H. G.
1937. Valuable Plants Native to Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station,
Bulletin No. 551.
Patterson, J. T .
1937. Boat Shaped Artifacts of the Gulf Southwest States. University of Texas
Bulletin No. 3732.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1956. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Materials: Part I. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 129-160.
1961. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material: Part II. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31 (for 1960), pp. 167-205.
1963. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material: Part III. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962) , pp. 121-165.
Shafer, Harry J ., Dee Ann Suhm, and J . Dan Scurlock
1962. An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton
Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962. Texas Arche:llogical
Salvage Project, Miscellaneous Papers, No. 1.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1958. A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological S:lciety, Vol. 29, pp. 63-107.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks (editors )
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Published jointly by
the Texas Archeological Society (Special Publication No. 1) , and thP
Texas Memorial Museum (Bulletin No. 4) .
Watt, Frank H .
1938. The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist, No.4, pp. 21-70.
Texas Memorial Museum
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

145

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

ADDENDUM
REPORT ON PREHISTORIC RELICS AND SKELETAL REMAINS IN THE
BOSQUE BASIN
Covering an area in the hill country ly ing west of the Bosque River and extending from Valley Mills to Hico, embracing an area of approximately 300 square
miles.
Frank E. Simmons
BRAWLEY's CAvE
One of the ancient habitations of primitive men found in this region is in a wild,
gloomy ca nyon which nature has cut into the low mountains lying west of the
Bosque River. It is some 4 miles south of the county seat, Meridian, and is known
as Brawley's Cave.
The wall of the mountain has an altitude of about ZOO feet above the river bed,
and back of this wall is an undulating tableland covered with a scrubby growth of
the species of oak common to the region and extensive brakes of scrubby cedar. Into
this tableland nature has cut many deep, rugged canyons of varying lengths up to
more than a mile. It is in the head of one of these deep, narrow canyons that
Brawley's Cave is found. At a point in the canyon even with the cave the gulch is
about 100 feet deep, some ZOO yards from its head. At the bottom the width varies
from 10 to 30 feet, while the crests of the opposing bluffs are 60 or 70 yards apart.
On the rocky bluffs where some soil has accumulated is a scrubby growth of bushes
of the common species.
In the face of the north cliff of this gloomy, lonesome hollow is Brawley's Cave,
cut by nature into the solid rock to a depth of 10 to 30 feet, with overhanging roof
15 to 20 feet high. The floor varies from 1Z to perhaps Z4 or Z5 feet above the bottom of the hollow. Thus nature provided a home where apparently many generations of primitive Americans lived and died. It is not probable that the floor of this
cave has ever been thoroughly wet since the appearance of man here. No chilling
north winds were felt by those who dwelt here. No destructive tornado ever disturbed their nightly slumbers, and no enemy armed with primitive weapons could
assail them.
Here with her rude utensils of stone, bone, mussel shells, pottery, basketry, and
so forth, the Indian wife performed her domestic duties. And here old men shaped
wonderful flint artifacts to be lost in ash beds and dust accumulations from three to
six or more feet deep and found again by the modem American, perhaps hundreds
of years later-a record of the arts, industries, and culture of the people who anciently made their home in this place. Buried in the ash beds have been found a fine
series of flint artifacts, broken pottery, broken mortars, stone hammers, bone and
shell implements, fragments of mats, fragments of wood work, arrow shafts, basket
stays, furs, feathers, paint, bark cordage, knotted grass, and a fine stone pipe. But
we will here state that no stone axes, nor grooved hammers, nor any polished stones
have been brought to light.
At intervals of leisure, during 1917-1918, we assisted in excavations that yielded
a fine collection of such items as are mentioned above along with six skeletons or
remains belonging to that number of human beings. At one point, the darkest and
best protected in the cave, four skeletons were found buried one below another:

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

three adults and one child, apparently 10 years old, and one female skull. These
were all folded , backs to the wall, heads to the east, and lying on the left side; the
lowest cranium was discovered not over four feet down. A great many of the bones
disintegrated on exposure. Three whole crania were saved, a pelvis, a number of
long limb bones, and some mandibles and teeth. Most of the vertebrae were decayed,
but many of the teeth were well preserved, though some were worn to the gums. In
the east end of the cave, at a depth of 18 inches, was found an adult male of large
size. He was buried extended, lying on his back, with his head to the east.
Not enough whole bones were found to reconstruct any individual; and not a
single ornament, tool, or weapon was directly in either of the graves, although a
good stone pipe was found in material that might have been thrown from the grave
in the east end of the cave. The excavating was done very unsystematically and so
we cannot be exact on all points. At all places in the ash and dust accumulations
were found the bones of most animals common to the country, some bison ribs and
large joints included. Acorns, walnuts, and pecans were also found promiscuously
scattered.
FLINT

The flint artifacts found here [Brawley's Cave] are of finer finish than any
others found in this region.
The drills vary from 1 to 2\6 inches long and are excellent. The triangular
scrapers, up to 3 inches long, are extremely good specimens. The knives are also
excellent and measure up to 4 inches in length. One fine spear is 5 inches long. The
arrow points are superior to all. Varying in length up to 2 inches, they have fine,
thin blades, long barbs chipped inside and out, and delicate, narrow stems. Many of
the points are serrated.
A good percentage of the flint was broken and seemed to have been injured by
fire. Yet these broken fragments, together with the whole specimens, furnish comparative material to show that the flint artifacts found here average superior in
workmanship to those found on the open camps of the same region. It is regrettable
that many specimens were carried away by curious people who cared little for them
and only later fell into the hands of those who were interested in the work.
PoTTERY AND MoRTARS

There is very little to be said of pottery and mortars. No whole specimens, so far
as we can learn, have been found here--only broken fragments of pottery; but they
are of an extra weight and thickness that is sufficient to guarantee the quality of
the work. They are fairly shiny and black. The curvature of some fragments indicates vessels of considerable capacity and strength, as some pieces are % of an inch
thick. This is much heavier and better than the fragments found on the open camps.
Many fragments of mortars, made of slabs of stone, were found . The hollow in
many seemed to be shallow as if worn by the process of grinding. Some were pecked
into shape. An examination of the fragments showed some to be severely burned as
if they had been used for cooking vessels.
HAMMERS AND PESTLES

So far as we know no pestles, other than natural granite boulders, have been
found in this ·c ave, but plenty of granite boulders and pebbles and lumps of flint

147

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

showing signs of wear were discovered. There were some oval-shaped sandstones
(so-ca lled " rubbing stones").
SHELLS

Other domestic utensils found here are the beautiful mussel shells, some of which
are highly polished from long u se. They were evidently household utensils used in
the capacity of spoons or scrapers. The end farthest from the hinge is gradually
worked to a point from both sides. Although most of them have been broken or
injured by fire, there are some good specimens. A number of them d1 n::>t appear t1
have been " worked" or u sed at all. The shells belong to the common species from the
river a mile away . There were no shell ornaments reported.
MISCELLANEOU S

Among a varied assortment of specimens were: a bunch of feathers, apparently of
the blue heron; a few twi sts of grass folded and turned, similar to "dry twist tobacco;" a fragment of a grass mat, which was the center coil, measuring about 3
inches across. This piece of mat was sufficient to show the development in mat
weaving. I t was necessary to handle it with the greatest care in order to preserve
the specimen. Other items included a small tuft of buffalo hair, a piece of mink
skin, and a small bit of skin dressed on the fl esh side, leaving the hair on the opposite side. Another remarkable find was a quantity of red paint. One lump of this,
w eighing about 3 ounces, had a cup-like ca vity in one side.
WooD
There were a few pieces of well preserved wood. A section of arrow shaft still had
the stem of a delicate flint projectile bound to it with a dry sinew. The "feather end"
of an arrow shaft still shows the marks of the things which held the feathers in
place. A basket stay 8 inches long is as good as when made. Another interesting
specimen is a piece of cedar wood 2Yz inches lon g, rounded on one side and flat on
the other. The flat side, % of an inch wide, has a groove running centrally end to
end. One end has been burned off and the entire flat side is charred. There was also a
pine shaft as large as one's little finger, 15 inches long, which had been slightly
burned from end to end.
BoNE AND HoRN

A number of bone and horn tools were found. The horn artifacts, few in number,
were all of antler and consisted of awls or punches 2 to 4 inches long.
The b::>ne tools, with on e exception, were of deer. The 20-odd awls or punches are
made of the stiple [sic] bone taken from the deer. They are 3 to 6 inches long, and
most of them have been injured by fire. There is one long needle-like bone 6 or more
inches long and several smaller ones. Other discoveries included a bone object 6
inches long and over Yz an inch wide, flat with raised edges, and polished; and an
excellent bone gouge, 6 inches long, with the point broken off. One minute round
object, 1,4 of an inch thick and as large as a ten cent piece, was bored through the
center. This well preserved specimen was the only ornament found.
A scraper 2 inches long, rounded and worn to a polish on one end, was made of
the wide section of a bison rib.

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
BARK CoRDAGE

We found a piece of bark which had been wound tightly around a small stem
but had slipped off; this had to be handled with much care to keep it whole. A piece
of cord, the size of an eight-penny nail, consisted of two strands of what appeared
to be 'Cedar bark pulped and nicely twisted together. This was found under three
feet of dust and ash accumulations. There were also some fragments of bark with
about 2 inches of one end pulped; the other end was left in its natural state as if
held in the fingers while working the pulped end to a fibrous stage. This was found
near a piece of grass that had been looped and drawn to a hard knot.
GouRDs

We found many fragments of the shell of the gourd commonly used for drinking
dippers.
PROJECTILE POINTS ( FIG.

11)

The projectile point being by far the most common form found, we give it first
consideration. There are a multitude of forms which may be brought under three
heads : A, B, and C.
Class A (Fig. 11, A-C ), the lozenge shape, neither shouldered nor barbed but similar to the outline shown, is represented by fairly numerous specimens.
Class B (Fig. 11 , D-F), stemmed and shouldered but not barbed, has many variations.
Class C (Fig. 11, G-1) , stemmed, shouldered, and barbed, presents the most beautiful specimens in the stone art.
There are many variations of forms which may be grouped with classes B and C
and vary in size from a tiny "bird point" up to a spear 5 inches long.
In the many collections known to us in the Bosque Basin we can account for
some 5000 points of all varieties. By far the greater number of these are rude, blunt,
or clumsy, but there is a high percentage of excellent specimens. These are not all
collected from old camps; but this being a country with an abundant supply of flint,
we believe that most places where points are found were merely workshops, as most
of the cruder forms come from them. The distinction in the mechanical execution of
the work flint found on the old camps is quite above the worked specimens found on
old workshops. There are many peculiar forms found in the Bosque Basin, all, however, being variations of the three great classes.
A listing and description of these peculiar forms (Fig. 11 , J-V) follows:
!: Fairly common form. Usually heavy, large, and clumsy.
K , L: Not numerous. May be straight, concave, or convex at base. Usually small
and well chipped.
M: Common. Varies in size from small to large. Has a bifurcated stem. There are
many blunt, heavy forms, but some are excellent and barbed.
N : Stemmed and barbed points ranging up to 4 inches long. Nearly always excellent.
0, P: Stemmed and barbed bird points. Always excellent.
Q: The serrated point is almost always an excellent one. Sometimes they are
stemmed and barbed, often only stemmed and shouldered.
R: Rarely found. Note base of stem is as wide as the base of the blade. Sometimes
beveled.

149

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

A

8

c

E

0

F

{j
G

L

Q

6

0
R

p

0

N

M

K

J

H

s

T

u

v

Fig . 11 . Outline Drawings of Projectile Points. A-C , Class A. D-F, Class B. G-1, Class C.
J-H, Projectile points with peculiar shapes . Drawings by Frank E. Simmons, not to scale.

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

S: Stemmed, barbed, and beveled.
T : Not very common. Usually broad and thin with only one barb. Some, though,
are blunt and heavy.
U: Only two specimens seen bke this. One is 3 inches long. Both are well finished.
Note pecubar notch in one edge.
V: Only two specimens seen like this. Both finely finished. Note extremely broad
base.
In addition to the unusual forms we have listed and described from our field notes,
there is still another "flake point," of which we have found a few. These are made
from a flint flake of such size and form that a few hammer strokes shaped it into
a rude small point-though a sharp, keen-edged one.
Mr. G. A. Anderson made a very interesting find at Camp 5. It was an obsidian
point, and would be a good specimen were the point not broken off. Personally, we
have found only one chert point in the Bosque Basin, a rude specimen 2 inches long.
Spear points here are not very numerous. Of a collection of some 500 points, we
have found half a dozen over 3 inches long that we felt safe to call spears, while
there are some shorter than 3 inches that would seem too heavy for arrows. A few
good specimens of spears up to 5 inches long have been found.

KNIVEs, ScRAPERS, AND HoEs (FIG. 12, A-H)
Of the flint implements used by primitive man none seems to have been of more
universal use than the three named at the heailing of this topic. And the forms of
the three blend so readily together that it is hard to draw a line of demarcation except with the more distinctive forms. For instance, we know that the long, oval
bladed, gracefully and symmetrically finished ones are knives. We know that the
fine, triangular blades are scrapers. And we know that the heavy, thick spades or
hoes could not have been other than digging tools, used in the field or at the flint
quarry. But variations leading from one of these types to the other are many. Thus
we find a great many of these diverse types whose proper classification we are not
sure of and yet feel that they belong to one of the three general types. individually
many could have been used in several ways. Of the well defined types, the Bosque
Basin has furnished some fine specimens of each-knife, scraper, and hoe . And we
can better illustrate by drawn outlines than by long worded descriptions.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, A is the prevailing type. This specimen is 5
inches long.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, B is another fine knife, 4Y2 inches long.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, Cis semi-lunar, 4Y2 inches long.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, D is beveled on both edges, giving a drill effect.
It is made of blue flint, 5 inches long, and comes from the Jacob Olsen collection.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, E is also beveled on both edges, giving a drill
effect, is 5 inches long, and made of blue flint. It is in the G. A. Anderson collection.
We find many large flint flakes that were struck off from the mass at one blow
of the hammer. Some of them have one thick edge, while the other edge is very thin
and s4arp. The thick edge was chipped, and the sharp edge was left as it was struck
off, thus making one of the best of flint knives.
The form of the scraper (Fig. 12, F -H ) is triangular, or nearly so. The base may
be somewhat rounded. The scrapers are seldom over 3 inches long and are very
often shorter. Sometimes they are thin and finely chipped, but often they are thick

15 1

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

B

A

F

c

D

G

H

E

K

L

M

J
Fig . 12 . Outline Drawings of Knives, Scrapers , large Serrated Flakes, and Drills . A-E,
Knives . F-H, Scrapers. I, J, large Serrated Flakes. K-M , Drills . Drawings by Frank E.
Simmons, not to scale .

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and clumsy. We sometimes find them nearly round, 2 inches across, and thick. The
most beautiful forms are those approaching the triangular.
The scraper in Fig. 12, F is of a distinct triangular form that is not numerous. It
is 3 inches long, thin, and finely finished.
The scraper in Fig. 12, G is a very common type, often nicely chipped. This one
is 2\IQ inches long.
The scraper in Fig. 12, H has a stem for attaching the handle. It is 3\IQ inches
long.
Coming in this same general class is the flint hoe. Sometimes it is a beautifully
finished blade 6 inches long and 3 or 4 inches wide, and sometimes it is a rude,
heavy hoe struck out at a few blows of the hammer. The heavy, rude hoes are often
found around old flint quarries and where land was cultivated. The finer ones are
found around old camps and fields . We have two fine examples 6 inches long and
3\IQ inches wide. We also have some quarry spades of the same dimensions, except
thicker transversally. Then there is the turtleback, which is quite common. This
type ranges in length up to 5 inches, and some of the specimens are nicely finished.
A few large flakes (Fig. 12, I, J ), 2 or more inches long, are usually thin and
knife-like, but serrated on one edge. They seem to be scarce. We found one in
Coryell County, 4 inches long by 2 inches broad, that was very finely serrated on
one edge. What were they used for? The outline of these serrated flakes is similar
to the outlines shown in the illustration.
Drills (Fig. 12, K-M) appear frequently. Some of them are excellent, but many
are poorly finished. They, like flint projectiles, run through several variations as to
form, and they range to more than 3 inches in length. The outlines will give a general idea of the variations in the more common forms. These are all well made and
thin and come from Brawley's Cave. The drill illustrated in Fig. 12, K is 1 \iQ inches
long, Lis 2% inches long, and that of Fig. 12, M is 2\IQ inches long.
There is another large implement made by chipping a slab of flint to a blunt edge.
The edge is often battered as if used for hammering, perhaps for breaking wood or
bones at camp. These are most often found at old flint quarries.
Many small flint hammers are found. They are usually about the size of an egg,
with all corners and edges very much battered as if used for hammering.
FLINT QuARRIES

There are numerous flint quarries, usually along the brow of the mountain where
a stratum of flint is often found just under the cap rock. At some points flint was
fairly extensively quarried. Comparisons of the flint found here and that found in
eastern counties where there is no "native flint" would seem to indicate that flint
was a commercial commodity between the tribes of this and the eastern counties.

Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site
(41 GV 5), Galveston County, Texas
L. E. ATEN

ABSTRACT
Anthropometric and morphologic data are presented on three complete and two
fragmentary skulls excavated from a site on Galveston Island which was occupied
late in time (approximately A.D. 1500 ). The burial complex and skeletal materials
at the site share traits with those of the Addicks Basin and Caplen sites, but the
assessment of any relationship is hazardous at present.

This project was conceived as an effort to salvage anthropometric
data on the five human crania from the Jamaica Beach Site which
were housed at the Houston Museum of Natural Science during the
period of the study, January through August, 1963. They were made
available by Dr. T . E . Pulley, Director of the museum. The remains
studied represent but a few of the total recovered ( 17 burials were unearthed), but they are, relative to those normally found in the Galveston Bay region, in an excellent state of preservation.
The Jamaica Beach Site, on Galveston Island, was excavated by
members of the H ouston Archeological Society for the Houston Museum of Natural Science, which lacked the facilities and personnel for
such an undertaking. All artifacts, skeletal material and general responsibility for the site remain with the museum and the Jamaica
Beach Corporation, the firm which first encountered the burials in the
course of preparing the area for a housing development.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

To summarize the cultural features of the burial area (from the
writer's notes unless indicated otherwise ), 17 flexed burials were excavated from an area approximately 20 feet square. Of these, 14 were
placed on their dorsal (back ) side and two were placed on their ventral
( chest) side, all with the long axis of the body in an alignment ranging from east northeast-west southwest to east southeast-west northwest, with heads in a westerly direction. One burial was placed in almost the opposite orientation: on the dorsal side, aligned on an east
southeast-west northwest axis with the head in an easterly direction.
This burial, although not one of those examined at the museum, was

154

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

measured for the two principal diameters of the skull vault, maximum
length and breadth, while still in the ground and will be mentioned in
the conclusion of this report. No preferential direction for placing the
face was observed; most of the heads, however, were forced into a vertical plane with respect to the body. According to Ring ( 1963: 4) , most
of the burials were covered with a fairly compact layer of oyster shells.
Burial accessories consisted solely of an arrangement of Dosinia sp.
and Dinocardium sp. shells over a femur of Burial K. Other specimens,
including some lithic pieces and bone artifacts, were recovered from
the cemetery area, but they appeared to be incidental inclusions fmm
nearby midden accumulations.
Radiocarbon analysis of Dosinia sp. shells associated with Burial K
(Sample run by Shell Development Co.; Catalog No. 349-A) produced a date of 490 ± 100 B. P. (Ring, 1963: 5 ). This date agrees
well with the other radiocarbon dates from the site, and may even be
within the range acceptable for the European items possibly associated
with the nearby Indian occupation. The cultural affiliations have not
yet been fully determined, although the dominant native ceramics are
apparently identifiable as Goose Creek wares. Readers desiring further
information on this site are referred to Ring ( 1963 ).
DESCRIPTION OF THE CRANIA

The procedures for taking measurements and reporting morphological observations followed here are, with slight modification, those
outlined by Hrdlicka ( 1952) but were undertaken without professional supervision. All age determinations were based on the extent of
suture closure of the vault (Cornwall, 1960; Montagu, 1960), and the
state of wear of the teeth (Hrdlicka, 1952: 52--53 ).
Measurements taken are presented in Table 1; indices computed
therefrom are presented in Table 2; measurements of the teeth are
presented in Table 3; and a tabulation of morphological observations
is presented in Table 4.
The descriptions to be presented below represent summaries of some
55 measurements and 33 morphological observations possible on each
skull.
Burial B: A partially restorable skull and lower jaw of a young adult
male, approximately 30 years old. The posterior portion of the frontal
bone and the anterior portion of the parietals are missing, thus making
it impossible to take most of the usual measurements on the vault. No
artificial deformation is evidenced.
The maxilla exhibits a healed fracture of the area anterior to a line

155

CRANIA FROM JAMAICA BEACH SITE

TABLE 1
Measurements
Burial
Fema le

Males

B

l\1easurements (in mm. )

Antero-posterior di;~eter, max.
Lateral diameter , max.
Basion-bregma height
Cranial capacity (cm 3 ) **
Thickness of left parietal
M enton-nasion height
Alveolar pt.-nasion height
Bizygomatic diameter
En do basion-nasion
Endobasion-subnasal pt.
Endobasion-prealveolar pt.
Facial angle (in degrees )
Alveolar angle (in degrees )
Minimum frontal diameter
Orbits, height (average )
Orbits, breadth (average )
Nose height
Nose breadth

136*

Lower jaw:
Bigonial diameter
H eight of symphysis
L ength of lower jaw
Minimum breadth of ramus
(average )
Thickness at second molar
(average )

114
39
92

Upper alveolar arch:
External length
External breadth

D

191
139
141
1520.3
7-9
135*
84
144
110
100*
110*
67.5*
62*
91*
40*
38*
57*
25*

106
42
96

L

I

Average
(Males)

74
139
111
95
104
75
53
96
37.3
41.8
58
26

170
12.7
136
1270.1
4-5*
117.5
70
120
99
87
98
70
46.5
90
34.5
37
52
24

188.5
138.2
141.7
1528.3
5.5- 8
135
79
141 .5
110.5
97.5
107
71.3
57.5
93.5
38.6
39.9
57.5
25 .5

112
37
93.5

92
39
89

111
39.3
93.8

186
142
144*
1536.3
4-7

37.5

39.5

34

33

37

20

22

16

20.3

19.3

59
67

64*
74

55
63

61.5
70.5

• Close estimate
· • Pearson's formula s:
Male cranial ca pacity=524 .6+ (2.66 X 10-' ) (length ) ( breadth) ( basi-breg. h eight) ]
Femal e cra nial capacity=812.0+ 1.56 X 10-'1 ) (length ) ( breadth ) ( basi-breg. height )]

r

r(

drawn between the canines, resulting in a slight flattening of the anterior portion of the maxilla and possibly some deformation of the
roots of the incisors and canines. Presumably a lesion in the palate
behind the right second incisor and excessive wear of the incisors and
canines relative to the premolars and molars is related to the fracture.
All teeth are erupted and present. Wear is generally third degree
(en amel entirely worn off masticating surface) . The teeth are of

156

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 2
Indices
Bw·ial

lVIales

Fe male
Average

D

B

Indices

Cranial index
M ean height index
Cranial module
Facial index, total
Facial index, upper
Orbital index
Nasal index
Upper alveolar arch index

11 3.7

L

72.8
76.4
85.4
87.8
157
157.3
93.8*
58.4* 53.3
89.2
43.9* 44.9
115.7

I

(Ma les)

74.8
91.6
144.3
97.9
58.3
93.3
46.2
114.5

74.6
86.6
157.1
93.8
55.8
89.0
44.4
114.7

• At least one of the measurements used in computing index is a cl ose es Lmale.

TABLE 3
T eeth Measurements
Male
Measurement (mm. ) •

Maxillary teeth:
Length PM 1 to M 3
Length M 1 to M 3
Width of molars ;
M1
M2
M3
Mandibular teeth:
Length PM1 to M 3
Length M 1 to M 3
Width of molars;
M1
M2
M3

Num ber

Average

Female
( one individual )

2
2

42.1
29.5

46.3
33.0

2
2
2

11.8
10.7
10.7

11.8
12.0
10.8

3
3

46.2
33.1

51.0
34.0

3
3
3

11.2
10.6
10.2

11.3
11.0
11 .8

• No corrections made for tooth w ear .

medium size, with heaviest tooth wear diagonally on the upper lingual
surface and on the lower buccal surface.
Burial D: A complete skull of a large, robust male in advanced
middle age, approximately 40 to 50 years old at the time of death. No
artificial deformation is evident, but natural lambdoid flattening+ does

t The criteria used to recognize natural flattening are somewhat subjective. Here
it refers to some degree (usually slight) of flattening in the area centered about
lambda. The cause of this condition is not well known, although the locus of the
flattening would seem to rule out cr adle practices.

CRANIA FROM JAMAICA BEACH SITE

157

occur. The teeth are all erupted and present; they are of medium size
and exhibit one possible cavity over the crown of the upper right
second incisor. The heaviest tooth wear occurs diagonally on the lower
buccal and upper lingual surfaces and is generally third degree
( enamel worn entirely off ).
Burial L: A reconstructed skull of a middle-aged male, approximately 35 to 40 years of age. No artificial flattening was indicated although
natural lambdoid flattening does occur.
The upper dentition is seriously diseased and deformed. The only
teeth remaining on the right side are the canine, second premolar, and
the three molars; on the left side are the canine, and first and second
molars. The two first incisors were apparently lost either shortly before death or after death. The right second premolar grew in a horizontal plane with the crown directed over the lingual surface of the
alveolar process . The left second premolar was lost before death and
the alveolus is partially absorbed.
The right and left first molars were contained by the surrounding
teeth in such a manner as to cause them to grow in an elongate manner
with the roots on the buccal side well outside the alveolar process. The
left second molar also shows some elongation. The second and third
molars on the right side appear normal. An abcess immediately behind
the left second molar has reduced the alveolar process to a thin shell
of bone about 2 mm. thick and exposed the root of the left second
molar.
The lower dentition does not appear diseased, but is heavily worn.
Wear, upper and lower, is fourth degree (crowns worn off markedly) .
Burial!: A well preserved skull of a young adult female , approximately 20 to 25 years of age. No artificial deformation was seen, although natural lambdoid flattening does occur. This burial was the
only one to show wormian bones: four in the lambdoid suture and one
in the left temporo-parietal suture. The teeth are all erupted and
present. They are of medium size, show no caries and exhibit second
degree wear (dentine visible ). The shovel-shaped concavities, common in the American Indian, are present on the upper incisors of this
individual.
The fifth skull (no burial designation given ) examined was one of
the first found upon discovery of the site and was subsequently turned
over to the Houston Museum of Natural Science by the Sheriff of
Galveston County. Although precise provenience data are lacking, the
approximate location of this burial is known. It consists only of the
posterior half of the vault of what was possibly a young (20- 30?

158

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 4
Morphological observations
Bur ials

Males
Observation ..

Vault:
Form
Ovoid
Pentagonal
Brow ridge form
Median
Divided
Supraorbital ridge
Slight
Pronounced
Excessive
Mastoids
Small
Submedium
Medium
Large
Forehead height
Medium
Forehead slope
Slight
Moderate
Frontal eminences
Indistinct
Double
Metopic ridge
Present
Absent
Sagittal region
Oval
Moderate elevation
Marked elevation
Parietal eminences
Indistinct
Medium
Prominent
Temporal bulge
Medium
Bulging
Occiput
Symmetrical
Asymmetrical
Lambdoid flattening

B

D

Femal es

U nex.··

L

X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

159

CRANIA FROM JAMAICA B EACH SITE

Present
Absent
External occipital protuberance
Moderate
Pronounced
Beaked process
Occipital form
Convex
Moderate protrusion
Occipital crests
Slight
Well developed
Pronounced
Face:
Orbital shape
Square
Orbital border
Dull
Sharp
Malars size
Submedium
Medium
Large
Malars protrusion
Slight
M edium
Suborbital fossae
Slight
Medium
Nasal spine
M edium
Pronounced
Nasal shelves
None
Borders of nasal aperture
Dull
Sharp
Subnasal fossae
Small
Palate form
Near circular
Elliptical
Ovoid
Palate height
Shallow
High
Intermaxillary suture
Present
Absent

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

160

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 4--Continued
Burials
Males

Observation'"

Lower iaw:
Mandible size
Medium
Large
Mandible strength
Medium
Massive
Chin form
Square
Rounded
Chin protrusion
None
M edium
Marked
Rami
Medium
Broad

B

Females

D

L

X

X

Unex. ··

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X
X

X

X

X

Lypes not included in table.
••• =
= Unrepresented
Unexcavated skull (see text, pp. 157 , 160) .

year old) female . Only one measurement and limited morphological
observations were possible.
The area between lambda and the right parietal eminence, an area
of approximately 4 by 6 em., has been thinned to about 4 mm. thickness. Normal bone thickness in the corresponding position on the left
parietal is nine millimeters. The central portion of the affected area
exhibits a rough bony growth. The exact nature of this lesion is not
known at this time.
CONCLUSION

The gross characteristics of the four crania upon which reasonably
complete information is available, may be summarized as follows.
1. The males and one female skull are relatively long and narrow,
giving rise to an average cranial index of 74.6, which is dolichocranic
or long-headed. The one burial measured for maximum length and
breadth while still in the ground, but not one of those studied at the

161

CRANIA FROM JAMAICA BEACH SITE

museum, had a cranial index of 81, which is brachycranic or roundheaded.
2. The cranial capacity (computed) of the males averages 1505 cc. ,
that of the female is 12 70 cc.
3. The skulls are high-vaulted with a slender face in both the upper
and over-all proportions. The noses are also very slender.
4. The orbital index shows the orbits of the males to be slightly
elongated and the orbits of the female to be more nearly equidimensional.
5. In two of the skulls, the molar and premolar teeth are worn
diagonally, with the maxillary teeth wom most heavily on the lingual
surface and the mandibular teeth wom most heavily on the buccal
surface.
6. Only in one skull are the incisors sufficiently unworn to show
clearly shovel-shaped concavities.
7. Generally, the facial protrusion is on the order of 70 degrees, and
the alveolar protrusion is as low as 53 degrees in the males and 46
degrees in the female.
8. With respect to the morphological observations, little pattem
emerges in this small a sample and these characteristics can best be
examined in tabular form (Table 4 ) .
9. Comparisons of the measurements of the Jamaica Beach burials
with those from the nearby sites of Oso and Caplen (Woodbury, 1937 )
and Addicks (Aten, 1964: 7; Newman, 1953: 259) reveals some apparent differences. However, we cannot expect the full range of
morphological variation in the population of a site to be present in an
unselected sample of five specimens; thus it is felt that any conclusions with respect to morphological similarity or dissimilarity at this
time would be premature and hazardous.
10. The burial complex at Jamaica Beach shares some cultural
traits with the Caplen Site on Bolivar Peninsula (Campbell, 1957:
468 ) and the Addicks Basin sites west of Houston (Wheat, 1953: 247 ).
A trait list is presented below:
TRAIT
Flexed and semiflexed burials
Burials placed on side and back

SITE
Addicks
X
X

Cap l en
X
X

Jamaica Beach
X
X; also rarely
on front

162

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Orientation-easterly or westerly

Fumiture
(X = present)

Both

?

Dominantly Dominantly
westerly, but westerly, but
also easterly one easterly
Very rare
X

Especially intriguing here is the preoccupation with an easterly or
westerly orientation of the remains. It is difficult, however, to assess
any direct relationship, especially without considering a trait list for
the midden portion of each site, which is lacking for Jamaica Beach.
REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1964. A Human Crania from the Addicks Dam Basin, Harris County, Texas.
Newsletter of the Houston Archeological Society, No. 11, June, pp. 6-7 .
Campbell, T. N.
1957. Archeological Investigations at the Caplen Site, Galveston County, Texas.
Texas Journ al of Science, Vol. 9, No.4, pp. 448-471.
Cornwall, I. W.
1960. Bones For the Archeologist. Phoenix House.
Hrdlicka, Ales
1952. Hrdlicka's Practical Anthropometry. Edited by T. D. Stewart. Fourth Edition. Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology.
Montagu, M. F .
1960. An Introduction to Physical Anthropology. Third Edition. Charles C.
Thomas.
Newman, Marshall T.
1953. Indian Skeletal Remains from the Doering and Kobs Sites, Addicks Reservoir, Texas. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 4, Pt. II, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 154.
Ring, E. Raymond
1963. Open ed by Accident. Newsletter of the Houston Archeological Society, No.
10, June, pp. 1-7.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953. An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
River Basin Surveys Paper, No. 4, Pt. I , Bureau of American Ethnology
Bulletin 154.
Woodbury, George
1937. Notes on Some Skeletal Remains of T exas. University of Texas Publications, No. 3734, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No.5.
6514 Calhoun, Apt. 17
Houston, Texas

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir,
Henderson and Kaufman Counties, Texas
DEE AN N STORY
ABS1RACT
During the spring of 1954 the Texas Archeological Salvage Project carried out
limited excavation s at three aboriginal sites in the proposed Cedar Creek Reservoir
area. Each of the sites investigated appears to have been repeatedly, but probably
intermittently, occupied by various small social groups whose material culture was
gradually modified over a period of time. The major artifact changes that can be
distinguished are tentatively assigned to five occupational periods which range in
broad affiliations from Paleo-Indian (Period 1) to Archaic ( Periods 2 and 3) to NeoAmerican (Periods 4 and 5). These periods are defined, and an attempt is made to
relate them to culture complexes and stylistic developments that have been recognized in adjacent parts of Texas.

IN 1RODU CTION

From April 7 through May 14, 1964, the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project (T.A.S .P. ) conducted limited excavations at three Indian sites in Cedar Creek Reservoir. This work was carried out in partial fulfillment of Memorandum of Agreement No. 14-10-0333-1121
between The University of Texas and the National Park Service, in
cooperation with the nationwide Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage
Program. The field work was supervised by Fredrick A. Peterson,
working under the general direction of the author.
Recently completed by the Tarrant County Water Control and Improvement District No. 1, Cedar Creek Dam lies in northwestem
Henderson County, about two miles north of Trinidad. It spans Cedar
Creek and, when full, will create a lake (to be known as Joe B. Hogsett) extending north-eastward into Kaufman County. Two of the sites
investigated (Wild Bull and Lacy ) are in H enderson County, while
the third (Gossett Bottoms ) is in Kaufman County (Fig. 1).
ENVIRONMENT

Cedar Creek heads in eastern Kaufman County and flows in a
general southerly direction, emptying into the Trinity River about six
miles below the dam. The area is fairly well-watered, with many
small tributaries-including Kings, Lacy Fork, Prairie, Twin, Lynn,

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CREEK RESERVOIR

•

Archeological

8

U.S

8

State

[§]2] Farm

Site

Highway
Highway
or

Ranch

Rood

Areo

0

2

I

I

3
I

Miles
Sou f ce

1964

~

19 61 Gene r al Hiqli woy
Mops No. 108,13 0

VMS

Fig . I. Map showing the location of Cedar Creek Reservoir and the sites excavated.

Clear, and Caney-entering the Cedar Creek drainage. Largely because of these many streams the reservoir shoreline of 300 miles will
be the most extensive within Texas.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

165

The topography consists of sand-capped rolling hills and ridges with
numerous gullies and broad valleys-features typical of the West Gulf
Coastal Plain (Fenneman, 1938: 100-120). Unconsolidated gravels,
sands, and clays are the most common deposits, with both Eocene and
Cenozoic formations having been recognized (Sellards, et al., 1954:
531-601 ) . Having an average annual rainfall of approximately 39
inches (Texas Almanac, 1965: 230-238 ) , the vegetation cover is
moderately dense and represents a mixture of many species from the
grasslands to the west and the forests to the east.
The area falls within the Texan Biotic Province (Blair, 1950: 100102), and one generally finds the sandy soils supporting oak-hickory
forests (rarely some pine ) and the clay soils containing tall grasses.
The fauna is rather diverse and also reflects interdigitation of eastern
and westem forms. Blair ( 1950: 101 ) , for example, notes that:
At least 49 species of mammals have occurred in the Texan province in recent
times. Forty-one of these occur also in the Austroriparian [to the east], and many'
of these are characteristic species of that province. Eight species range into the
Texan from the grasslands regions to the w est, southwest or north and fail to extend beyond this province into the Austroriparian.

Among the common, present-day mammals are raccoon, opossum, fox,
squirrel, Florida cottontail, swamp rabbit, black-tailed jack rabbit,
mole, pocket gopher, and numerous smaller rodents. Deer occur in the
area today, and the archeological record (see Table 2) suggests that
they were once a major source of food. Reptiles are still abundant and
include two species of terrapin, 16 species of lizards, and 39 species of
snakes. Amphibians are represented by five species of newts and
salamanders and by 18 species of frogs and toads (ibid.: 101-102).
The modern conditions and, even more importantly, the apparent
site density (Davis, 1961 ) suggest that the area was favorable for
aboriginal habitation. Hunting, gathering, and, probably only in later
times, small-scale agriculture were very likely the main sources of
livelihood.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Apart from a survey carried out in 1961 by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project (Davis, 1961), only two finds of consequence have
been reported for the immediate reservoir area. Perhaps the most
significant of the two was the discovery of three large, crudely-carved
stone heads near Malakoff. Each of these was unearthed during the
course of gravel operations, one in 1929, one in 1935, and the last in
1939 (Sellards, 1941; 19521: 95-105). Found in Pleistocene gravel

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DATUM 0
(100')

N

WILD BULL SITE

t

41 HE 61

MAGNETI C

I

D
D

Area

excavated

Test

pit
0

Ll Hearth

1964

40 Feet

I

I
CONTOUR

Burial

I

20

INT ER VAL

TWO

FEET

VMS

Fig. 2 . Map of Wild Bull Site showing contours , features, and plan of excavation .

deposits, it is quite possible that these heads are among the oldest
evidence of human habitation yet known for the Cedar Creek area.
The second find consists of a series of straight line and simple geo-

167

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

metric petroglyphs carved on the walls of a small rockshelter just east
of the reservoir (Jackson, 1938: 299- 302). Petroglyphs are exceedingly rare in the eastern part of the state, and neither this, nor the
Malakoff heads, can be satisfactorily related to archeological materials
recovered in the reservoir proper.
Much more work has been done in adjacent regions and it is from
these areas that many similarities with the Cedar Creek material can
be noted. Generally to the northeast are sites which have been classified as the Neo-American Wylie Focus (Stephenson, 1952) or as the
Archaic Trinity Aspect (Crook and Harris, 1952; 1954); while to the
east, northeast, southeast are Caddoan complexes (Krieger, 1946;
Newell and Krieger, 1949) as well as Archaic remains which have
been variously identified as East Texas Aspect (Suhm, et al., 1954:
148-151), Red River Aspect (Davis and Davis, 1960) , and La Harpe
Aspect (Johnson, 1962). The areas to the east and southwest have
been less systematically investigated, although the salvage project's
excavations at the Strawn Creek Site in Navarro Mills Reservoir, approximately 40 miles to the southwest, showed evidence of strong
influences from the Wylie Focus and the La Harpe Aspect (Duffield,
1963a ) .
The three sites-Wild Bull, Lacy, and Gossett Bottoms- excavated
at Cedar Creek yielded remains of both Archaic and Neo-American
occupations. In the sections which follow these three sites and the
specimens recovered from them are described, artifact distributions
are discussed, and an attempt is made at placing the material into a
broad chronological and cultural context.
THE SITES

None of the three sites excavated was recorded by the T.A.S.P.
survey of 1961 (Davis, 1961) , but rather two were found in the fall of
1963 during the course of further reconnaissance, while the third was
located by the excavation party. All three are situated on relatively
low, sand-capped clay rises in the Cedar Creek bottoms. The Wild Bull
Site ( 41 HE 61) is on the west or right-hand bank of the reservoir, a
short distance above the confluence of Persimmon Branch and Cedar
Creek (Fig. 1). The prominence on which it lies is bound on the east
by a small slough and on all other sides by the Cedar Creek flood plain
(Figs. 2 and 5, A ). Surface indications of occupation were found over
much of the rise, but most concentrated along the eastem edge,
Although larger vegetation had been cut and bulldozed off the site,
there were no indications that this resulted in serious disturbance to

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

.."'"'

~

C)

C>

<:
...,

0

,

0

0

-<
c

0

.,

"'"

C>

c:

0

0

~

~
...,

.

l>

<

"'

0

0

;
0.

"'~

~

r-

...,
~
C>

"'"'...,
"""

.t>

.'! D
0

~

.

__,

"'

.,

z

~

"'
.t>
CD

....I;

.

it:
C)

"'"'..,;:;

-"------1

"'

Fig . 3 . Map of lacy Site showing contours and plan of excavat ion .

the subsurface (i.e. , below approximately the first six inches ) cultural
bearing deposit.
Situated much like the Wild Bull Site, the Lacy Site ( 41 HE 70 ) is

169

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

on the left-hand side of the reservoir, roughly two miles upstream
from the mouth of Lynn Creek (Fig. 1). At the Lacy Site occupational
refuse was scattered over much of the surface of a crescent-shaped
rise, but concentrated only in the southwestern portion (Figs. 3 and 6).
Cedar Creek flows a short distance to the west and lateral erosion by
that stream has produced a steep, vertical face revealing the internal
structure of the rise (see below). To the northwest the rise descends
rather abruptly to a small slough, while to the east and southeast it
merges more gently with the Cedar Creek flood plain. The Lacy Site
has also been cleared of major vegetation and, although it is difficult to
measure precisely, there appears to have been relatively little serious
damage.
The third site excavated, Gossett Bottoms ( 41 KF 7), is located at
the upper end of the reservoir, approximately two miles west of Cedar
Creek. It consists of cultural refuse buried in the upper part of a low,
circular knoll (Figs. 4 and 5, B). A number of similar, though generally smaller, rises occur in the immediate vicinity, but the Gossett
Bottoms Site appeared to contain the richest midden. To the north and
east of the site are several sloughs and, beyond these, a drainage ditch.
Unlike Wild Bull and Lacy, the Gossett Bottoms Site had not been
cleared.
EXCAVATION

Since the sites shared many features, the same excavation procedure
could be followed at each. Before systematic investigations were begun,
small test pits (usually 3 by 5 feet ) were made primarily to determine
the horizontal and vertical extent of occupation. Once this had been
established reasonably well, a horizontal grid oriented in terms of the
cardinal directions was set up (Figs. 2-4). In each case, the grid was
laid out in such a manner as to confine the excavations to the northwest quadrant, thus simplifying the record-keeping. The actual units
of horizontal control varied in size, but were most often three by five
or three by ten foot trenches (Figs. ~4 ) .
Vertical control was maintained by establishing a datum and assigning it an arbitrary elevation, and by digging in six-inch levels. The
maximum depth to which the excavation units were dug varied considerably and is summarized (in terms of cubic feet removed) in Table
1. For the most part, only the upper portions (the top 2-.5 feet ) of the
sites were sampled well. The few deeper levels (below 2.5 feet ) dug
yield relatively little cultural refuse, and frequently encountered
sterile clay.

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

----39

40-----

41

44
N

t

MAGNE TIC

I

GOSSETT BOTTOMS SITE
41 KF 7
~ Area

excavated

0
196 4

CONTOUR

1

20

Burial

•

~ Test

pi t s

4 0 Fee t

INTERVAL

ONE

FOOT

VMB

Fig . 4 . Map of Gossett Bottoms Site showing contours , feat u res , and plan of excavation .

All material was passed throu gh either a qu arter-in ch mesh or, less
often, a half-inch mesh screen. Most of th e occupational debris was
retained an d placed in paper bags labeled according to site, excavation

171

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

unit (such as N100/ W90, 6-12 inch level), date, and excavators.
These were later sent to the T.A.S.P. laboratory in Austin where they
were washed and catalogued. A number of records were kept throughout the excavations, including a daily log, individual level reports,
profiles, photographic data sheets, and topographic maps with plans of
excavation. Both the records and the specimens will be permanently
housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas.
TABLE 1
Summary of extent of excavation by level (in cubic feet)
,.=:

Level
Site

~~

OJ9
j~

Wild Bull
(41HE61 )
208.5
Lacy
(41 HE 70)
314
GJssctt BJLom s
(41 KF 7)
158.5

.. 0

"'~

.

~

j~

Mu-:
~~

j~

..,.··O.

-" "'I
j~

~ ~~

&0cl

1.0~
~7

......:1

h

.;.;

l~

& ;:_':
Cl

~u:

a>> •~
,o
.~ ~

"":0'"

ooC:

.
~
u

j~

:-

4.5

995.5

a; )

.5
0

>

B

~

"

208.5

206.5

189

129

37.5

12

258.5

178.5

90

45

4.5

0

0

893.5

156.5

152.6

126

87

40.5

7.5

0

728.6

INTERNAL STRUCTURE

The matrix in which occupational refuse occurred at each of the
sites was basically similar-a fairly loose sand underlain by sterile
clay. By and large, this sand layer showed little variation and certainly
no distinct zoning. At the Wild Bull Site and, perhaps to a lesser extent,
at the Lacy Site, bulldozing had disturbed the uppermost, humusstained portion of the sand zone, and at all sites rodent burrows were
very much in evidence.
The sand zone at the Wild Bull Site varied from approximately one
foot in thickness at the northern end of the excavations to about three
feet in thickness in the central and southern portions. It was light to
medium brown in color and tended gradually to become clayey, with
the result that there was not a sharp break between the sand and the
underlying yellow clay. Since none of the excavations penetrated very
deeply into the clay, the thickness of this layer was undetermined.
Much the same stratigraphic picture prevailed at the Lacy Site,
although here vertical exposures on the western and southern (Figs.
3 and 6, A) edges of the site revealed more information concerning
the internal structure of the rise. As exposed in these erosional cuts

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

Fig. 5 . A, Wild Bull Site , view looking southwest. B, Gossett Bottoms Site, view looking
northeast.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

173

and, to a lesser extent, in the excavations, the natural sequence of the
major deposits at the Lacy Site is as follows :
The uppermost layer- the only artifact-producing zone- consisted of a sandy soil
which varied in thickness from slightl y less than one foot in the western portion of
the site to at least three feet ( the maximum depth of the excava tion ) in the eastern
part. The top of this layer, where undisturbed, was humus-stain ed and brownishgray in color, while the basal portion was generally a mottled tan and frequently
contained some clay.
Immediately below the sand zone was a steril e clay which in the vertical fac es
reached a thickness of about five feet. It was reddish in color in the upper portion,
turn ing yellowish toward the base.
Underlying the clay stratum was another sand layer, one w hich measured approxima tely four feet in thi ckness and which was a dark brown color. Like the clay,
it contained no cultural refuse.
The deepest zone exposed was fair ly coarse gravel of undetermined t hickness.
Perhaps this, .or a similar deposit, provided the prehistoric inhabitants of the site
with raw materials for the manufacture of chipped stone implements.

At the Gossett Bottom s Site the sand layer was somewhat darker in
color and a bit more compact than at either Lacy or Wild Bull. Also,
the clay substratum was more difficult to recognize, for the sand almost
imperceptibly became lighter in color and more clay ish in texture .
Very few of the excavations at the Gossett Bottoms Site encountered
the clay since the digging tended to cease when the artifacts became
scant. In general, however , the sand was as much as three feet in thickness, and humus-stained in the upper portion.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES

Surprisingly few occupational features were uncovered by the excavations at Cedar Creek and, moreover, those present were either in
poor condition or only partially exposed. The Gossett Bottoms Site
yielded an infant burial and a possible dog burial (Fig. 4), while the
Wild Bull Site contained a stone hearth and probable remains of a
much disturbed adult burial (Fig. 2 ) . No occupational features were
recognized at the Lacy Site, although the deeper levels were noted as
having a number of scattered burned rocks . Wattle-impressed daub
was obtained from all three sites, being particularly abundant at Gossett Bottoms, but no other definite remains of a structure (such as post
holes, floors, etc.) were observed.
Turning in more detail to the features at the Gossett Bottoms Site,
the infant burial was found at N128 .4jW82.3, at a depth of approximately two feet below the surface. The skeleton had been badly damaged by the excavations and this-coupled with its inherently fragile
nature-has obscured many of the particulars. The few surviving

B
Fig . 6 . Excavations in Progress at th e Lacy Site . A, View look ing northwe;t. B, View
looking west.

parts of the skeleton (bits of the skull and rib fragments) suggest that
the individual was about four y ears of age at the time of death
(Thomas W . McKern, personal communication ). No grave outline

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

175

was recognized, but the field notes state that the burial was flexed on
the right side, and that the skeleton was oriented east-west, with the
skull to the west and facing the south. No artifacts were found in direct
association, and the skeletal remains are too fragmentary to determ:.ne
the sex of the individual.
The presumed dog burial from the Gossett Bottoms Site (Fig. 7, A)
was also incomplete, but generally better preserved than the infant
skeleton. No grave pit was discerned and the case for deliberate interment rests mainly upon the tightly flexed position of the bones and
the occurrence of a similar domesticated dog burial (however, not
conclusively established as aboriginal) at the Miller Site about 70 miles
to the northeast (Johnson, 1962: 241, Fig. 28). The Gossett Bottoms
dog, identified as domesticated by Ernest L. Lundelius of the V ertebrate Paleontology Laboratory of The University of Texas, was recovered at approximately N130/ W95 , at a depth of between 1.6 and
1.8 feet below the surface. The skeleton was oriented east-west, with
the head to the east and facing north. Artifacts and miscellaneous
cultural refuse were recovered from the immediate vicinity, but none
of these items appeared to represent burial offerings. Remains of other
domesticated dogs were found at the Gossett Bottoms Site and at the
Lacy Site; however, only at the latter, where the bones were recovered
from a rodent burrow, may there have possibly been an interment.
The first occupational feature, a hearth, discovered at the Wild Bull
Site was found by Harry Shafer and James Corbin while carrying out
preliminary tests in the winter of 1963. Not completely excavated,
the exposed portions were located in the southeast corner of Test Pit 1
(Fig. 4), in the 1 to 1.5 foot level. The hearth consisted of a concentration of rounded, fire-cracked chert pebbles and burned clay, in a
roughly oval arrangement. That part uncovered (Fig. 7, B) measured
approximately 1 by 1.5 feet, and was apparently only one layer of
rocks thick (depth measurements were not taken). Midden refuse occurred in the general area, but no specimens appeared to be in direct
association with the hearth.
Possible remains of a much disturbed adult burial constitute the
only other feature recognized at the Wild Bull Site. Found at grid
location N98jW87.3, at a depth of between 1.95 and 2.2 feet below the
surface, the only bones present were an incomplete femur and bits of
another long bone, perhaps also a femur. The long axes of the bones
were oriented north-south, but no meaningful statements on possible
burial position can be inferred. No grave outline was recognized, nor
were any artifacts found in association, although the field notes record
(but do not describe) a small concentration of burned rocks lying just

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B
Fig . 7 . Occupational Features. A, Dog burial at Gossett Bol!oms Site; arrow pointing
to the north . B, Hearth at the Wild Bull Site , trowe l pointing north.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

177

south of the bones. In addition to the two limb bones, the Wild Bull
Site yielded a human molar tooth. This isolated find was made in the
northernmost excavation unit (N187/ W120), in the first six-inch
level, and is of little archeological significance.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIMENS
The Cedar Creek sites yielded a considerable quantity of occupational refuse, including both artifactual (intentionally modified specimens ) and non-artifactual (incidental debris such as flint flakes, or
animal bones) remains. Partly because of time limitations and partly
because they displayed the greatest variation, the analysis has focused
on the 2,714 artifacts. Only a portion of the miscellaneous residue, the
faunal remains and the wattle-impressed daub, has been examined.
Other non-artifactual debris, namely chipping refuse and mussel
shells, has been retained but awaits study.
To initiate the analysis, the artifacts were grouped into broad categories based upon the materials from which they were manufactured
--e.g., stone, clay, and bone. Next, these objects were sorted into inferred functional classes such as arrow points, dart points, knives,
pottery, and the like. Most of these use-classes were then further classified into morphologically similar clusters which, whenever appropriate, were identified with a previously existing typology (such as Bell,
1960 ; Suhm and Jelks, 1962; and Johnson, 1962 ). Those artifacts
which did not correspond with a known type were given descriptive
designations such as subtriangular knives or engraved pottery. However, one tentative new type, the Gossett gouge, is defined.
In the following, the artifacts from the three sites are treated as a
single collection, an approach justified by the many traits each site
shares with the other two. The emphasis is placed on description, with
a later section being devoted to a discussion of intrasite and intersite
distributions.
ARTIFACTS OF STONE

Arrow Points
Including the unclassifia ble fragments, a total of 192 arrow points
was recovered. Seventeen of these are from Wild Bull, 44 from Lacy,
and 131 from Gossett Bottoms. As a group, the arrow points are relatively small and thin, with pointed distal ends and, in most cases, well
defined stems. The material from which they are made can broadly be
termed chert which ranges from fine-grained to rather coarse-grained.

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Based primarily on variations in outline form, the complete or reasonably complete arrow points are grouped into ten types (Alba, Bonham,
Catahoula-like, Cliffton, Cuney, Friley, Granbury, Perdiz, Scallorn,
and Steiner ) and five descriptive groups.

Alba TYPE (Fig. 8, A-E; 6 specimens)
Distinguished by their concave-edged, triangular blades and slightly
bulbous stems, these points have either prominent right-angle shoulders (Fig. 8, B, D , E) , or faintly downward pointing barbs (Fig. 8, A ).
The lateral edges of the blades are often sinuous and, in one case,
serrated (Fig. 8, D ), in another recurved (Fig. 8, A ). Each is bifacially
chipped, but the workmanship on the whole is only fair. The four
complete specimens range from 1.7 to 3.5 em. in length, with the
smallest example (Fig. 8, C) having possibly been reworked. All have
maximum widths (across the shoulders) of between 1.6 and 2.1 em.;
while the stems are from .6 to .7 em. in length and from .6 to .8 em. in
maximum width. The thickness varies from .2 to .4 em.
Comments: These six specimens from Cedar Creek form a tight
morphological group which compares very favorably with the Alba
points from the George C. Davis Site (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 161162, Fig. 56, A-H), but which shows less variation than the Alba
points illustrated by Suhm and Jelks ( 1962: Pl. 132).

Bonham TYPE (Fig. 8, F, G; 2 specimens)
Two arrow points are somewhat hesitantly identified as the Bonham
type. Each has a small triangular blade with weak barbs and straight
or slightly convex lateral edges. The stems are short and essentially
rectangular in outline with gently convex bases. Both are rather poorly
made, being worked mainly on only one surface. Total length is 1.6
and 1.8 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders) is 1.5 and 1.4
em.; maximum thickness is .2 and .3 em.; stem length is .4 em. in each
case; and maximum stem width is .4 and .5 em.
Comments: It is the small size of these points that sets them apart
from the Bonham found at the Sanders Site (Krieger, 1946: 185, Pl.
22, C) and from those illustrated by Suhm and Jelks ( 1962: 267, Pl.
134 ) . In basic form, however, the Cedar Creek specimens seem related
to the Bonham type.

Catahoula-LIKE

POINTS

(Fig. 8, H-J ; 8 specimens)

Massive rectangular barbs, concave blade edges, and broad, slightly

F

c

B

A

E

D

J

H

G

'\

K

p

s

R

Q

0

N

M

L

T

u

o~~~~~~N~.;:~~~2--~
0

CM .

6

Fig. 8. Arrow points. A-E , Alba . F, G, Bonham. H-J , Catahoula-like. K-0, Cliffton.
P, Q . Cuney . R-U , Friley . A-C, F-1, K, N, and S-U from Gossett Bottoms Site; D, E, J, and P-R
from Lacy Site; 0 from Wild Bull Site.

expanding stems are the most salient features of this group. The stem
is generally short and either gently convex or straight at the base. All
but one are bifacially chipped and the workmanship is fairly good.

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Only one specimen (Fig. 8, H ) is complete, but the general impression
is that all were rather large for arrow points. Maximum width occurs
across the barbs and is between 2 and 2.3 em., while the maximum
thickness is between .3 and .5 em. The stems are generally about .5 em.
long and from .7 to 1.1 em. in maximum length. The single complete
point is 2.1 em. long.

Comments: The Catahoula type has been described by Bell (1960:
16, Pl. 8) who states that its most distinctive features are ( 1) relatively
broad shoulders with ma ssive, laterally -projecting barbs, (2 ) concave,
often recurved, blade edges, and ( 3) short, wide expanding stems with
convex bases. The eight specimens-from Cedar Creek depart from the
above in having less laterally-projecting barbs and only slightly expanding stems. They are perhaps a regional variation of the type, but
until more specimens are described and illustrated it seems advisable
to refer to them as Catahoula-like.
Clifjton

TYPE

(Fig. 8, K-0; 7 specimens)

The seven examples of this type have triangular blades with essentially straight lateral edges and, on five, fairly prominent serrations.
Barbs are sometimes present but are never pronounced. The stems
are contracting and have either pointed (Fig. 8, N ) or convex (Fig.
8, K-M, 0 ) bases, with more variation being observable in the treatment of the stem than the blade. Four of the Clifjton points are hifacially worked, while three are unifacially chipped. Total length is
between 2 and 2.5 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders) is
between 1.4 and 2 em.; stem length is from .3 to .7 em.; stem width
at the base is from .3 to .6 em.; and maximum thickness is from .3 to
.4 em.
Comments: Although they fall within the range of variation defined
for the Clifjton type ( Suhm and Jelks , 1962: 269, Pl. 135), the Cedar
Creek specimens are somewhat unusual in having (five instances )
serrated blades. In addition, one of the points (Fig. 8, N ) has downward pointing barbs and a small pointed stem-attributes suggestive
of the Bassett type (ibid.: 265, Pl. 133 ) .

Cuney

TYPE

(Fig. 8, P, Q; 2 specimens)

This type is characterized by a triangular blade and a rectangular
or slightly expanding stem with a concave base. The shoulders are
strong and may be barbed, while the blade edges vary from straight to
mildly convex. One of the two examples (Fig. 8, P) is very well made;

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

181

the other (Fig. 8, Q) is crudely flaked with most of the chipping being
confined to one face. Dimensions : total length 2 em. (both points);
maximum width (across the shoulders) 1.5 and 1.6 em.; maximum
thickness .2 and .3 em.; stem length .3 and .6 em.; and maximum
width of stem (across base) .6 and .5 em., respectively.
Comments: On the whole, these two points agree with the definition
of the Cuney type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 271 , Pl. 136).

Friley

TYPE

(Fig. 8, R-U; 7 specimens)

These are small arrow points having as their most diagnostic feature
laterally-projecting barbs which are upturned toward the distal end.
The edges of the blade vary from straight to concave and are often
serrated. Almost always expanding, the stem is relatively short and
broad, and has a base which ranges from straight or convex to concave.
Workmanship is good with all examples being bifacially chipped.
Length of the two complete points is 1.3 and 2 em. Maximum width
( across the shoulders) of all specimens is between 1.4 and 1.7 em.;
maximum thickness is from .2 to .4 em.; length of stem is from .4 to
.6 em.; and maximum width of the stem is from .7 to 1.1 em.
Comments: The Friley points from Cedar Creek compare favorably
with those described and illustrated by Bell ( 1960: 46, Pl. 23 ), the only
difference being that some of the former have serrated blades.

Granbury

TYPE

(Fig. 91 A-E; 17 specimens)

A fairly numerous group of rather crudely made arrow points with
subtriangular outlines are identified as Granbury. The lateral edges
of the blade and the base are either straight or convex, while the basal
corners are consistently rounded. All specimens are bifacially chipped.
Total length ranges from 2 to 3.1 em.; maximum width (across the
base ) from 1.2 to 2.2 em.; and maximum thickness from .2 to .6 em.
Comments: Although these points are well within the range of the
Granbury type, none can readily be linked with the three varieties
recognized by Jelks (1962: 35-36, Fig. 14, M-W ) .

Perdiz

TYPE

(Fig. 9, F-N ; 25 specimens)

Most common of the arrow point types, the Perdiz have contracting
stems and triangular blades with straight or, less often, slightly concave to mildly convex lateral edges. The shoulders are prominent and
usually barbed, while serrations occasionally appear on the blade
edges. A few of the stems are sharply pointed, but most are rounded

A

F

c

8

G

D

H

E

K

J

,.

' .

L

M

N

p

0

0

IN.

r=

0

Q

R

CM.

3

s

Fig . 9 . Arrow Points . A-E , Granbury. F-N , Perdiz. 0-S , Sea/lorn . A-E and L-S from
Gossell Bottoms Site; F-K from Lacy Site.

and have slightly convex lateral edges. The workmanship is variable,
with some specimens being crudely flaked and others being well made.
On several, the chipping is limited mainly to one face. Total length is

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

183

between 1.8 and 4 em.; maximum width (across the barbs) is between
1.1 and 2.2 em.; maximum thickness is between .2 and .6 em.; stem
length is between .6 and .9 em.; and maximum stem width is between
.3 and .7 em.
Comments: In spite of some variation in outline form, the Perdiz
points from Cedar Creek can be generally described as rather small
with moderately short, contracting stems which have rounded bases.
They are differentiated from the closely related Cliffton type on the
basis of their better workmanship and more pronounced stems.

Scallorn TYPE (Fig. 9, 0-S; 10 specimens)
Each of the 10 representatives of this type has a markedly expanding but fairly short stem and a triangular blade with either straight or
concave edges . Serrations occur on three points, while all have strong
barbs. The bases are straight or, less frequently, gently convex. Flaking is well done and occurs across the surface of both faces. Total
length ranges from 1.1 to 3 em., with the smallest specimen undoubtedly having been rechipped. Maximum width (across the barbs) is
from 1.4 to 2.1 em.; maximum thickness is from .2 to .4 em.; stem
length is uniformily .4 em.; and maximum width of the stem is from
.7 to 1 em.
Comments: Relative to the Scallorn points from central Texas
(where the type is quite common; see, for example, Jelks, 1962: 27-31 ,
Fig. 13) , the Cedar Creek specimens are smaller, have shorter stems
and more squat blades . It is probable that additional studies will reveal
them to be a regional variation of the type.

Steiner

TYPE

(Fig. 10, A-F; 12 specimens)

Originally named by J . Charles Kelley but described briefly by
Newell and Krieger (1949: 162-164, Fig. 56, 0-Q), the "Steiner
Serrated" type is here tentatively revived with the suggestion that its
name be shortened to Steiner. Both the specimens illustrated by Newell
and Krieger and those from Cedar Creek Reservoir have as their most
characteristic feature rather small triangular blades with deep serrations jutting out at right angles or, less often, at odd angles. The
shoulders are prominent and occasionally extend laterally in a manner somewhat similar to the Catahoula type. In several cases (Fig. 10,
B, C, D) one shoulder is more pronounced than the other. The stems
are usually short but otherwise variable, ranging from expanding to
slightly contracting; while the bases are straight to gently convex or
concave. Workmanship is fairly good although three of the Cedar

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

G

H

M

D

N

0

T

F

K

J

s

R

E

p

u

L

Q

v

w

Fig . I 0. Arrow Points. A-F, Steiner. G-1, Points with short, rectangular stems . J-M,
Points with expanding stems and straight or convex bases . N, 0, Points with expanding
stems and concave bases. P-R, Points with subtriangular outlines . S-W, Eccentric-shaped
points . A-D, G-L, N, 0, and S-V, from Gossett Bottoms Site ; D, F, and P-R from Lacy Site;
M and W from Wild Bull Site.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

185

Creek examples are unifacially chipped. Total length ranges from 1.4
to 2 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders) from 1.4 to 1.6 em.;
maximum thickness from .2 to .4 em.; stem length from .3 to .5 em.;
and maximum stem width from .5 to . 7 em.
Comments: Unlike most of the arrow point types, Steiner is based
primarily on blade characteristics rather than on stem features . Serrated blades, of course, are fairly common but the deep, sometimes
erratic, serrations on these points seem distinctive. The cultural affiliations and distribution remain uncertain (hence the provisional nature
of the type), although probable Steiner points have been found at
Forney Reservoir (Members of the Dallas Archeological Society, 1963:
Fig. 7, M), at the Limerick Site (Duffield, 1961: Fig. 8, R), at the
Strawn Creek Site (Duffield, 1963a, Fig. 11 , A), and at Wylie Focus
sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, G, third from the right).
MISCELLANEOUS ARROW POINTS

Points with short, rectangular stems (Fig. 10, G-I; 6 specimens).
This group of untyped specimens is represented by points having triangular blades and small, rectangular or very slightly expanding
stems. Lateral edges of the blade are frequently serrated and usually
concave. The shoulders are well developed and barbed, while the stem
is generally parallel-sided and has a straight base. Workmanship is
good and all examples are bifacially chipped. Total length is from 1.8
to an estimated 3 em.; maximum width (across the barbs ) is from 1.5
to 1.8 em.; maximum thickness is from .2 to .4 em.; stem length is
from .3 to .4 em.; and maximum stem width (across the base) is from
.5 to .6 em.
Comments: These six specimens appear to constitute a coherent
morphological group which may eventually be recognized as a new
type. Somewhat similar points have been reported from the Strawn
Creek Site (Duffield, 1963a: Fig. 10, K, L).
Points with expanding stems and straight or convex bases (Fig. 10,
J -M ; 11 specimens). These specimens typically have small, triangular
blades with prominent shoulders and short expanding stems . The
edges of the blade range from straight to convex or concave, and are
sometimes serrated. Considerable variation is apparent in the treatment of the stem, with the bases being straight or slightly convex to
almost bulbous. On the whole, however, the stem is broader than it is
long. The chipping on most specimens is merely fair and several represent only limited modification to flakes . Total length is between 1. 7
and 2.6 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders; largely estimated)

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

is 1.1 to 1.4 em.; maximum thickness is from .2 to .3 em.; stem length
is .4 to .5 em.; and maximum width of the stem is .7 to .9 em.
Comments: Possibly related to the Scallorn type, these points have
not been so classified because ( 1) their stems are somewhat smaller
and generally more convex or bulbous, and (2) they do not form a
good continuum with the points from Cedar Creek identified as Seallorn (see above ). At least some of these points also appear to be similar
to the tentative new Homan type (Wood, 1963: 1-2; Fig. 1, a-r), but
are perhaps of cruder workmanship and do not as frequently have
concave blade edges.
Points with expanding stems and concave bases (Fig. 10, N, 0; 3
specimens). Each of these points has a mildly expanding stem and a
concave base. On two (Fig. 10, N, 0) the blade is concave and one
shoulder has a rectangular, laterally-projecting barb. The opposite
shoulder is either weak (Fig. 10, N ) or absent (Fig. 10, 0 ). Both of
these points are worked mainly on one face, but neither appears to
have been rechipped. The third example differs considerably from the
other two in that it has a small triangular blade with straight edges
and prominent, downward pointing barbs. It, too, is unifacially
worked. This last specimen is quite small, being 1.4 em. long, an estimated 1.5 em. wide across the barbs, and .3 em. thick. Its stem is .4
em. long and . 7 em. wide at the base. The other two points (both,
incidentally, from the Gossett Bottoms Site) are 2 and 2.4 em. long,
1.1 and 1.6 em. wide at the shoulders, and .3 and .5 em. thick, respectively. Their stems are .4 and .5 em. long and .6 and .9 em. wide
at the base.
Comments: While this group is solely for descriptive convenience,
the two points with massive barbs are distinctive and in some respects
resemble the Catahoula type (Bell, 1960: 16, Pl. 8 ).
Points with subtriangular outlines (Fig. 10, P-R; 8 specimens).
This heterogeneous group of stemless points includes specimens which
have subtriangular to almost ovate outlines but which cannot be identified with either the Young or Granbury type. All are poorly made,
with most being unifacially worked, sometimes only along the marginal edges. Total length is from 2.1 to 4.6 em.; maximum width is
from 1.5 to 2.5 em.; and maximum thickness is from .1 to .6 em.
Comments: It is probable that some of these specimens-especially
the larger ones (such as illustrated in Fig. 10, R ) - served as knives,
while others (Fig. 10, P , Q) may have functioned as hastily-made
arrow points.
Points with eccentric outlines ( Fig. 10, S-W; 8 specimens ) . This
category, like the immediately preceding one, IS a catchall which

187

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

includes a variety of small, very crudely-made stemmed points. The
blades are usually asymmetrical and sometimes serrated, while the
stems range from contracting to expanding. Each has been simply
fashioned from a small flake and the outline form, at least in part,
appears to have been influenced by the original shape of the flake.
None is bifacially worked; indeed, the chipping is confined to marginal
retouching. The total length varies from 1.3 to 2.2 em.; the maximum
width (across the shoulders ) from .8 to 1.4 em., the maximum thickness from .2 to .3 em., the stem length from .3 to .5 em., and the
maximum stem width from .3 to . 7 em.
ARROW POINT FRAGMENTS ( 60

specimens)

Of the 192 arrow points from the Wild Bull, Lacy, and Gossett
Bottoms sites, 60 are too fragmentary for further classification. The
majority of these are blade pieces and none has an intact stem. In size,
however, all clearly contrast with the dart and knife fragments.

Dart Points
Characterized by bifacial chipping, pointed distal ends, and generally distinct stems, the dart points are distinguished from the arrow
points principally on the basis of their larger size and greater weight.
A total of 373 dart points was found, 130 at the Wild Bull Site, 206 at
the Gossett Bottoms Site, and 37 at the Lacy Site. Those complete
enough for typological study have either been grouped into one of 10
types (Bulverde, Edgewood, Ellis, Folsom, Gary, Kent, Marshall,
Morrill, Wesley, and Yarbrough ) , or left unclassified. In addition,
two types, Gary and Yarbrough , have been broken down into subgroups or varieties, primarily for descriptive convenience.
Most of the dart points have been fashioned from chert or a finegrained quartzitic stone. A few, however, are made of petrified wood.

Bulverde TYPE (Fig. 11, A, B; 2 specimens)
Both points identified as Bulverde are incomplete, but each appears
to have had a large triangular or subtriangular blade with either
moderate barbs or prominent shoulders. The stem is parallel-sided
and has an essentially straight base which on one specimen (Fig. 11 ,
B) consists of the nodular cortex. Rather crude flaking (perhaps a
result of the hammerstone percussion technique ) is exhibited by both
examples. Total length cannot be determined; maximum width
(across the shoulders) is 3.2 and an estimated 4 em.; maximum thick-

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

F

J

M

L

s
Q

R

E

H

G

K

D

0

N

p

T
0

I N.

o=

cM.

u

v

Fig . 11 . Dart Points . A, B, Bulverde . C, Edgewood. 0-G, Ellis. H. Folsom. 1-L, Gary a/sa .
M-P, Gary colfax . Q-V, Gary hobson . A from Lacy Site; B-H , K, L, and 0-T from Wild Bull
Site; I, J , M-P, U, V from Gossett Bottoms Site.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

189

ness is .9 and .8 em.; stem length is 1.2 and 1.4 em.; and stem width
at the base is 1.5 and 1.6 em., respectively.
Comments: The most distinctive features of these points are their
rectangular stems and prominent shoulders.

Edgewood TYPE (Fig. 11, C; 1 specimen )
The one example of this type is a side-notched point which has a
small triangular blade with convex edges and strong, but not barbed,
shoulders. Markedly expanding, the stem is short and almost as wide
as the blade. The base is concave and may have been somewhat
smoothed-fractures resulting from exposure to heat have damaged
the stem, however, and make it difficult to be certain of this feature.
Workmanship is generally good even though the flaking does not
extend entirely across the surface of one side. Total length is 3 em.;
maximum width (across the shoulders ) is 2.2 em.; maximum thickness is .5 em,; stem length is .6 em.; and stem width is an estimated
2cm.
Comments: In most respects, this point conforms to Johnson's ( 1962:
177, Fig. 7, F-H ) description of the dixon variety of Edgewood.

Ellis TYPE (Fig. 11, D-G; 5 specimens )
Small triangular blades and sharply expanding stems with straight
or very slightly convex bases are the most diagnostic attributes of these
five points. The edges of the blade are straight or gently convex and,
in one instance, beveled (to the left, distal end up ) . Shoulders are
uniformly prominent although not barbed. For the most part, the
chipping is well done with narrow, almost oblique flake scars occurring across the surfaces of the several specimens. Total length is from
2.2 (point probably rechipped) to 4.1 em.; maximum width (across
the shoulders ) is from 2 to 2.3 em.; maximum thickness is from .5 to
.6 em.; stem length is from .7 to 1 em.; and stem width at the base is
from 1.6 to 2 em.
Comments: Compared to the Ellis points from the George C. Davis
Site, where the type was first defined (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 166,
Fig. 58, A-H ) , and to those illustrated in Suhm and Jelks (1962: Pl.
94), the Cedar Creek specimens tend to have somewhat more concave
and sharply expanding stem edges. They are, however, clearly within
the range of variation defined for the type.

Folsom TYPE (Fig. 11 , H; 1 specimen )
Although consisting of only a small fragment, there can be no

190

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

serious doubt that this piece represents the medial section of a Folsom
point. A well defined flute is present on both surfaces, while the marginal edges are very skillfully retouched. The lateral edges contract
faintly at one end, but it is impossible to distinguish the distal edge
from the proximal edge. No lateral smoothing can be detected. This
piece now measures 2 em. wide, 2 em. long, and .2 em. thick (at the
center).
Comments: Both this specimen and an unidentifiable basal fragment
(conceivably from a Scottsbluff or Eden point) which has ground
edges and a lenticular cross section were recovered from the Wild Bull
Site. They are the only Paleo-Indian points found during the excavations and, unfortunately, neither was obtained from a context which
could be identified as early. Hence, whether they were picked up and
brought to the site by Archaic or Neo-American peoples, or were the
only residue recognized from an early occupation at the site remains undetermined. Interestingly, a very similar fragment of a fluted
point was found at the George C. Davis Site (Newell and Krieger, 1949:
168-170, Fig. 57, V ). It, too, appears to have been found out of its
original cultural context.

Gary TYPE (Figs. 11 and 12; 191 specimens)
Represented by over fifty percent of the identifiable dart points, the
Gary type is by far the most common recovered from the Cedar Creek
sites. As a group, the Gary points are linked by their contracting stems,
with other features-such as size, blade form, and treatment of the
base-showing a considerable range. Much the same degree of morphological variation was recorded at the Yarbrough and Miller sites
where Johnson (1962: 161- 166 and 244--247) recognized nine varieties of the Gary type: alsa, colfax, emory, hobson, kaufman, kemp,
kenedy, panna maria, and runge. Most of these varieties apply rather
well to the Cedar Creek material, although emory could not be satisfactorily separated from colfax. Johnson noted that kaufman and hobson were the "norms" for both the Miller and Yarbrough sites. At
Cedar Creek the norm is hobson, with alsa, colfax, and kemp being
secondary , and kaufman, kenedy, panna maria, and runge being
minor varieties.
Alsa Variety (Fig. 11, I-L ; 27 specimens). The most distinctive
attributes of this variety are moderate size, crude workmanship, broad
triangular blade, and relatively small stem. Lateral edges of the blade
vary from straight or slightly convex to concave, while the shoulders
are usually prominent and may even be outflaring (Fig. 11 , J, K ).

A

c

8

s

R

Q
0

0

N

M

L

K

IN.

CM.

J

H

G

F

E

0

0

p

u

v

T
2
6

Fig . 12 . Dart Po ints. A-D , Gary kaufma n. E-J , Gary kemp . K, L, Ga ry kenedy . M, N,
Gary panna maria . 0 , P, Gary runge . Q-V, Miscellaneous Gary. A-C and 1-K from Wild
Bull Site; D-H and L-T from Gossett Bottoms Site; U and V from Lacy Site.

The stem is typically short and contracting, terminating in either a
pointed or convex base. Most examples of this variety are poorly
chipped and h ave thick cross sections. Total length is 3.8 to 5.5 em.;

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

maximum width (across the shoulders) is 2.2 to 4.4 em.; maximum
thickness is .6 to 1.5 em.; stem length is .7 to 1.3 em.; and stem width
at the base is approximately .5 to 1.1 em.
Comments: These are quite heavy points which may, at least on
occasions, have served as knives . In outline form and workmanship
they resemble the Almagre type ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: Pl. 81 ) and
future studies should attempt to collect data to determine whether or
not these similarities are fortuitous or the result of a historical connection. Indeed, the whole problem of the relationship between the
contracting stem tradition (represented by the Gary and Wells types)
in the eastem part of the state and that (represented by the Almagre
and Langtry types) in the westem part of Texas merits careful investigation.
Colfax Variety (Fig. 11 , M-P; 25 specimens ) . All examples of this
group are small and have as their most characteristic features slightly
contracting stems and straight to faintly convex or concave bases. The
blades are triangular with concave or straight edges and fairly pronounced shoulders. Several have shallow serrations which apparently
resulted from marginal retouching (Fig. 11, N, 0 ). The workmanship
is good, although small (hammerstone percussion-produced?) flake
scars predominate. Total length is 2.7 to 4.2 em.; maximum width
(across the shoulders) is 1.7 to 2.7 ·e m.; maximum thickness is .4 to
.8 em.; stem length is .7 to 1.2 em.; and stem width at the base is .9
to 1.2 em.
Comments: Johnson's ( 1962 : 164-166 ) two varieties with flat bases,
emory and colfax, are differentiated from one another principally on
the basis of the degree of contraction of the stem. This distinction did
not, however, seem practical in the Cedar Creek collection and all of
the small, straight-based Gary points are grouped into the less-contracting stem colfax variety.
Hobson Variety (Fig. 11 , Q- V; 44 specimens) . The most definitive
characteristics of this variety are small to medium size, a triangular
blade, and, most importantly, a fairly broad stem with a rounded base.
The stem is relatively long, being from about one-third to one-half the
total length of the point. Lateral edges of the stem vary from convex
to nearly straight, while the blade edges are straight or slightly concave to mildly convex. Workmanship is good and many points have
been marginally retouched. T otal length is 2.4 to 4.1 em. ; maximum
width (across the shoulders ) is 1.5 to 2.5 em.; maximum thickness is
.5 to .9 em.; stem length is .9 to 1.3 em.; and stem width at the base
is approximately 1 to 1.2 em.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

193

Comments: It is the rounded base more than any other single feature
that distinguishes the hobson variety.
Kaufman Variety (Fig. 12, A-D; 9 specimens). A triangular blade
and an essentially pointed stem are the most diagnostic attributes of
the kaufman variety. The shoulders are pronounced and tend to flare
outward, with distinct barbs occasionally present. Stems are somewhat
triangular in outline and terminate in either a pointed (Fig. 12, C) or
very slightly rounded base (Fig. 12, A, B, D). The lateral edges of the
stem are smoothed on two specimens. On the whole, the chipping is
well done. Total length is 4 to 5.3 em.; maximum width (across the
shoulders) is 2.2 to an estimated 3.1 em.; maximum thickness is .5 to
.7 em.; stem length is 1.2 to 1.4 em.; and stem width at the base is
approximately .2 to .5 em.
Comments: A major variety at the Yarbrough and Miller sites
(Johnson, 1962) , kaufman is a minor form at Cedar Creek, having
been found only at Wild Bull and Gossett Bottoms.
Kemp Variety (Fig. 12, E-J; 25 specimens). These points have rather
long and narrow, contracting stems with pointed or very slightly
rounded bases. Like the stem, the blade tends to be slender, while the
lateral edges are usually concave. The shoulders are prominent, but
lack true barbs. Workmanship is generally excellent and most blades
have distinct lenticular cross sections which resulted from marginal
retouching. Several blades appear to be beveled, a trait rarely reported
for the Gary type. Total length is 2.3 to 5.4 em.; maximum width
(across the shoulders) is 1.6 to an estimated 2.2 em.; maximum thickness is .5 to .8 em.; stem lengths is 1 to 1.7 em.; and stem width at the
base is approximately .3 to .6 em.
Comments: The kemp variety points from Cedar Creek differ slightly
from those described by Johnson (1962: 164--165) in that they have
more markedly concave blade edges. In outline form, the kemp variety is similar to the runge variety, the major difference being that
the former is smaller than the latter.
Kenedy Variety (Fig. 12, K, L; 5 specimens). Each of the five examples of this variety has, as its chief distinguishing characteristic, a
diamond-shaped or lozenge-shaped outline. The blade is triangular
with straight or slightly concave edges and prominent shoulders, while
the base of the stem is pointed. Moderately good flaking with some
marginal retouching occurs on most of the specimens. Generally small
in size, these points have a total length of between 2.5 and 3.2 em.; a
maximum width (across the shoulders) of between 1.6 to 2.4 em.; a
maximum thickness of between .5 and . 7 em.; a stem length of between
.7 and 1.5 em.; and a stem width of between roughly .4 and .6 em.

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Panna Maria Variety (Fig. 12, M , N; 5 specimens ). Although only
one of the examples of this variety is complete, each appears to have
had a fairly long, triangular blade and poorly defined shoulders which
merge almost imperceptibly with the stem. The stem with its convex
edges and gently rounded base is less contracting than most of the other
varieties of Gary. Workmanship is rather poor and the majority seem
to have been percussion chipped by means of a hammerstone. Marginal
retouching is in evidence on just one specimen. Maximum width
(across the shoulders ) is 1.7 to 2.2 em.; maximum thickness is .6 and
.9 em.; stem length is 1 to 1.3 em.; and stem width at the base is
approximately .8 to 1 em. The one complete point is 4.4 em. long.
Comments: Unlike the panna maria variety points described by
Johnson (1962: 165 ), none from Cedar Creek has a pointed base. In
all other respects, however, they fall within the definition given by
Johnson.
Runge Variety (Fig. 12, 0, P; 13 specimens) . Medium to large size
and long, fairly narrow stem which ends in a pointed or slightly
rounded base are the most distinctive characteristics of the 13 runge
variety points. Most blades are broken, but all appear to have been
triangular in outline with straight to slightly convex to concave edges.
The shoulders are fairly prominent and sometimes (Fig. 12, P) flare
outward. Workmanship is quite variable, ranging from good to poor.
Total length is 4.1 to an estimated 7 em.; maximum width (across the
shoulders ) is 2.1 to 3.7 em.; maximum thickness is .7 to 1 em.; stem
length is 1.4 to 2.2 em.; and stem width at the base is approximately
.5 to 1 em.
Comments: The runge variety points from Cedar Creek are slightly
larger than those described by Johnson ( 1962: 164 and 246), but
otherwise conform to his definition.
Gary, miscellaneous and fragmentary (Fig. 12, Q-V; 38 specimens ) .
These are contracting stem points which fall within the general range
of tl:e Gary type, but which-either because of their fragmentary
condition or their combination of attributes-cannot be assigned to
any of the varieties yet defined for the type.
Kent

TYPE

(Fig. 13, A-C; 4 specimens)

This minor type at Cedar Creek Reservoir is represented by four
rather small specimens which have essentially rectangular stems. The
slender, triangular blade has straight or slightly convex edges which
are sometimes faintly serrated (Fig. 13, A, B). The shoulders are
distinct, but not barbed, and one side is sometimes-possibly because
it was rechipped-stronger than the other. Lateral edges of the stem

A

c

8

F

K

G

D

H

L

J

M

N

0

p

Q

0

IN.

R

Fig . I 3. Dart Points . A-C, Kent . D-F , Marshall . G, Morrill . H, Wesley . I, Yarbrough d ike .
J, Yarbrough lindale. K, Yarbrough mabank. L-R , Unclassified. A and F from Lacy Site; B, 0 ,
E, G-R from Wild Bull Site; C from Gossett Bottoms Site.

vary from straight to mildly convex, while the base ranges from
slightly to markedly convex. Despite the rather coarse-grained material from which they are made, these points exhibit good workman-

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ship. Total length is from 3.7 to 4.4 em.; maximum width (across the
shoulders ) is from 1.6 to 2 em.; maximum thickness is .5 to . 7 em.;
stem length is from 1 to 1.2 em.; and stem width at the base is from
1 to 1.3 em.
Comments: In size and general outline form these points are similar
to Johnson's (1962: 168, Fig. 5, D-G) phalba variety of Kent.

Marshall TYPE (Fig. 13, D-F; 4 specimens)
Long, massive barbs and short, generally rectangular stems are the
most diagnostic attributes of this group of points. The blades are broad
and triangular in outline with the lateral edges being straight or
slightly convex. Edges of the stem are roughly parallel and the base is
uniformly straight. In each case, the stem is broader than it is long.
Three of these specimens are fashioned from a fine-grained chert and
the chipping on all examples is unusually good. Maximum width
(across the barbs) is from 3 to an estimated 3.5 em.; maximum thickness is .7 to .9 em.; stem length is from .9 to 1 em.; and stem width
at the base is from 1.3 to 1.6 em. The one complete example is 5 em.
long.
Comments: The Marshall type occurs primarily in the central part
of the state (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 211), but does appear as a very
minor form (3 specimens) at the Yarbrough Site (Johnson, 1962:
171, Fig. 6, A-C).

Morrill TYPE (Fig. 13, G; 2 specimens)
Both examples of this type have a long, rectangular stem ·a nd
:straight base. The edges of the stem are heavily smoothed on one point
and lightly smoothed on the other. The one complete blade is long and
:slender and has a triangular outline with straight edge. Shoulders are
present, but rather weakly developed on both specimens. The chipping
is quite skillfully done, with marginal retouching being very much in
evidence. Maximum width (across the shoulders) is 1.9 and 2 em.;
maximum thickness is .9 and .6 em.; stem length is 2 and 1. 8 em.; and
stem width at the base is 1.4 em. in both instances. The complete point
measures 5.7 em. long.
Comments: While well within the range of variation indicated for
Morrill (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 223, Pl. 112), neither of these points
agrees very favorably with either the slocum or san pedro variety described by Johnson (1962: 169-170, Fig. 6, N-S).

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

197

Wesley TYPE (Fig. 13, H; 1 specimen)
Recently defined by Johnson (1962: 178, Fig. K-M), this type has a
long, triangular blade with straight edges and weak shoulders. The
stem is broad and mildly expanding, and has slightly concave lateral
edges which appear to have been faintly smoothed. The base of the
stem is slightly concave. Well made, this point has neat marginal
retouching which on the blade has produced shallow serrations. Total
length is an estimated 4.3 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders)
is 2.1 em.; maximum thickness is . 7 em.; stem length is 1.2 em.; and
stem width at the base is 1. 7 em.
Comments: The Wesley point from Cedar Creek, unlike those found
by Johnson at the Yarbrough Site (ibid.), has a beveled blade (to the
right, distal end up).

Yarbrough TYPE (Fig. 13, I-K; 3 specimens )
Although none of these points is complete, each seems to have had a
long, slender triangular or lanceolate blade with straight or slightly
convex lateral edges. The shoulders are clearly defined, but not barbed ..
Treatment of the stem, however, varies somewhat and primarily on
this basis three varieties-dike, lindale, and mabank-have been recognized (Johnson, 1962: 173-174, Fig. 6, J-R). All three are represented
in the collection from Cedar Creek.
Dike Variety (Fig. 13, I; 1 specimen). This quite fragmentary point
is distinguished by its markedly concave stem edges and straight base.
The workmanship is rather poor, resulting in an unusually thick cross
section. Total length and maximum width cannot be determined, but
the stem is 1. 7 em. long and 2.2 em. wide at the base.
Lindale Variety (Fig. 13, J; 1 specimen). The most diagnostic
feature of this variety is its slightly expanding stem with essentially
straight lateral edges and flat base. The Cedar Creek example is rather
well made, but lacks marginal retouching. Total length cannot be
determined; maximum width (across the shoulders) is 2.1 em.; maximum thickness is .8 em.; stem length is 1.2 em .; and stem width at
the base is 1.5 em.
Mabank Variety (Fig. 13, K; 1 specimen) . This variety is very much
like the dike variety of Yarbrough, except that it has a concave base.
The workmanship is good and the lateral edges of the stem are slightly
smoothed. Total length cannot be determined; maximum width (across
the shoulders) is 2.3 em.; maximum thickness is . 7 em.; stem length
is 1.5 em.; and stem width at the base is 2 em.

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

UNCLASSIFIED DART POINTS

(Fig. 13, L-R; 7 specimens )

Included in this category are seven reasonably complete pointsall from the Wild Bull Site-which cannot be identified with any
previously defined type. They exhibit a wide range of variation in
workmanship and outline form . All are illustrated in Figure 13, L-R.
DART POINT FRAGMENTS

(152 specimens)

Consisting primarily of blade pieces, these specimens are too incomplete for detailed typological study. They are rather arbitrarily separated from knife fragments on the basis of their smaller size and, to a
lesser extent, better workmanship.
Knives
Each of the 211 specimens classed as a knife is bifacially worked
along one or more edges or-more frequently-across both flat surfaces. Moreover, none has a clearly delineated stem and most have
pointed distal ends. They are generally larger than the dart points and,
on the whole, less well made than either the dart or arrow points.
Because of their crude workmanship and frequent incompleteness,
sorting the knives into discrete, yet coherent, morphological groups is
troublesome. The most obvious and presumably most meaningful
variation is in the outline form. However, on a few examples the locus
of the cutting edge seems to be of importance, while on others the
technique of manufacture or material from which they are made
appears to be of significance. Consequently, in classifying the knives
several criteria have been employed with varying emphasis. The
resultant categories are of a purely descriptive nature and include ovate
knives, subtriangular knives, lanceolate knives, hi-pointed knives,
single-edged knives, cortex-base knives, and knives made from petrified wood. In addition, there are 132 fragments which are too incomplete for further study but which, on the basis of their size, appear to
have come from knives.
OVATE KNIVES

(Fig. 14, A-C; 18 specimens)

These small to medium size specimens with ovate outlines have
rounded bases and evenly convex lateral edges. None is complete, but
all appear to have been relatively short and broad. Each is bifacially
flaked with several being rather skillfully made. Most were perhaps
between 4 and 6 em. in length; maximum width is from 2.2. to 3.5 em.;
and maximum thickness is from .4 to 1.3 em.

199

CEDAR CREEK RESER VOIR SITES

c

B

A

F

G

K

J

D

E

H

L

M

N

0
0

IN.

0

CM.

p
Q

R

Fig . 14 . Knives . A-C, Ovate. D-F, Subtriangular. G, H, Lanceolate. I, J, Bi-pointed. K, L,
Single-edged . M-0 , Cortex base. P-Q, Petrified wood. A-C , G, L, and N-R from Wild Bull
Site ; D, I, and K from Lacy Site ; E, F, H, J , and M from Gossett Bottoms Site.

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Comments: Very similar knives constitute Johnson's (1962: 184,
Fig. 9, G-H ) Group III.
SUBTRIANGULAR KNIVES

(Fig. 14, D-F; 9 specimens)

This knife form is distinguished by its triangular to subtriangular
outline and small to medium size. The lateral edges tend to be convex,
while the base varies from straight to gently rounded. The workmanship is quite poor and rough percussion flake scars predominate. The
proximal ends are thick on several examples and it is difficult to
imagine exactly how these particular specimens might have been
hafted. Total length is from 3 to 4.7 em.; maximum width (at the
base ) is from 2.2 to 3.3 em.; and maximum thickness is .5 to 1.4 em.
Comments: The smaller subtriangular knives resemble the Granbury arrow point type (see above ), except that they are thicker and
more crudely made.
LAN CEO LATE KNIVES

(Fig. 14, G, H ; 17 specimens)

Like the ovate knives, none of these specimens is complete. However,
each appears to have had an essentially lanceolate outline with a
slightly contracting proximal end. The base varies considerably, ranging from straight or gently concave to convex. The workmanship is
good on some examples, poor on others. Maximum width is 2.1 to 3.4
em.; maximum thickness is .5 to 1 em.; and the length of the nearly
complete lanceolate knife (Fig. 14, G ) is an estimated 6 em.
Comments: Similar knives have been found at the Yarbrough and
Miller sites (Johnson, 1962: 184 and 253, Groups I and IV ) and at the
Strawn Creek Site (Duffield, 1963a: Fig. 12, D ) .
BI-POINTED KNIVES

(Fig. 14, I, J ; 6 specimens)

Sharply contracting proximal and distal ends are the distinguishing
characteristics of this group of knives. Their lateral edges are convex,
but not always evenly so, and the outline is sometimes slightly asymmetrical (Fig. 14, J ) . Although flaked by means of the percussion
technique, most of the hi-pointed knives are fairly well made. Total
length is 4.3 to 6.2 em.; maximum width (approximately midway on
the edges ) is 2 to 3.1 em.; and maximum thickness is .7 to 1.4 em.
Comments: This form corresponds very favorably with Johnson's
(1962: 184-186 and 253) Group V found at the Yarbrough and Miller
sites.

201

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES
SINGLE-EDGED KNIVES

(Fig. 14, K, L; 15 specimens)

Bifacial chipping on these knives is confined to one lateral edge
but is much more pronounced than that occurring on the utilized
flakes (see below ). The single-edged knives have been fashioned from
flakes (Fig. 14, K) as well as small, rather flat pebbles (Fig. 14, L).
The workmanship is crude and the outline is irregular. Total length
is 4.2 to 6.8 em.; maximum width is 2.2 to 4.3 em. ; and maximum
thickness is 1 to 1.8 em.
CORTEX-BASE KNIVES

(Fig. 14, M-0; 9 specimens)

In outline form and size this group is very similar to the ovate
knives, but is differentiated from them on the basis of the nodular
cortex which appears at the base. Presumably these specimens were
fashioned from either cortex flakes (Epstein, 1963: 28) or small, flat
pebbles-it is difficult to be sure of which because of the bifacial flaking. The workmanship is generally good, although all are percussion
chipped. Total length is 4.2 to an estimated 6 em.; maximum width
is 2.4 to 3.5 em.; and maximum thickness is .6 to 1.1 em.
KNIVES MADE FROM PETRIFIED WOOD

(Fig. 14, P-Q; 5 specimens)

These five rather crude specimens have been fashioned from thin
flakes or slabs of petrified wood, rather than the chert and quartzite
stones used in the manufacture of the other knives . On most the chipping is limited to one or both marginal edges and the outlines can
generally be described as subtriangular. Total length ranges from 4.4
to 8.2 em.; maximum width from 3.2 to 3.6 em. ; and maximum thickness from .7 to 1.3 em.
Comments: In many respects these knives (particularly that illustrated in Fig. 14, R ) are similar to specimens found in the McGee
Bend Reservoir area and termed Bronson knives by Edward B. Jelks
( 1965: 165-166, Fig. 81 ) .

Bifaces
This category of artifacts forms a continuum with the knives in
that they are bifacially worked, frequently have pointed distal ends,and lack clearly defined stems. The 85 specimens classified as bifaces,
however, are generally larger and more crudely made than the knives .
On the basis of variations in the outline and, to a lesser extent, the
technique of manufacture the bifaces are sorted into three groups :

202

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bristol, pebble, and hi-pointed. In addition, there is a miscellaneous
group composed of unclassifiable and fragmentary specimens.
Bristol BIFACES (Fig. 15, A-E'; 32 specimens )
Recently defined by Duffield ( 1963a : 43-44, Fig. 13, C-H), this
highly distinctive group is most easily recognized by its subcircular
outline and moderately small size. The edges vary from sinuous (Fig.
15, C) to, more commonly, even (Fig. 15, A, B, E) , and about half are
slightly to well smoothed (Fig. 14, D ) -perhaps from use. Percussion
flake scars predominate, although many are well made and have neat
marginal retouching. Others are less skillfully manufactured and have
thickened, though lenticular, cross sections. Patches of nodular cortex
are occasionally present on one or both surfaces (Fig. 15, E-E' ) and
sometimes along the edges. Because of the bifacial chipping it is difficult to ascertain the details of manufacture, but there are suggestions
that both flakes (apparently produced by the hammerstone percussion
technique) and small, flat pebbles were utilized. The maximum diameter is 2.2 to 4.1 em. and the maximum thickness is 1.1 to 1. 8 em.
Comments: First recognized at the Strawn Creek Site in Navarro
Mills Reservoir (Duffield, 1963a: 43-44 ) , Bristol bifaces have also
been recovered from the Yarbrough, Miller (Johnson, 1962: Figs. 10,
F-H and 30, 0, P ) , Wolfshead (Duffield, 1963b: Fig. 14, D , E ), Limericlc (Duffield, 1961: Fig. 11, A, B), and Wood (Crook and Harris,
1952: Pl. 5, No. 6 ) sites, as well as from certain localities in the Forney
Reservoir area (Dallas Archeological Society, 1963: Fig. 9, N ). The
cultural context in which the Bristol biface occurs is not yet well
defined, although it appears to be late Archaic.
PEBBLE BIFACES

(Fig. 15, F , G; 6 specimens )

Fashioned from small, elongated chert or quartzitic pebbles, each
of these specimens has one (presumably the distal) end bifacially
worked to form a pointed or slightly rounded blade. Much of the
opposite end is unaltered and retains the nodular cortex. In outline and
technique of manufacture they resemble choppers, but they seem too
small to have effectively functioned as such. Moreover, none shows
the battering one would expect on a chopper. The workmanship is
crude and rough, with percussion-produced flake scars _very much in
evidence. Length is 4.3 to 7.1 em. ; the maximum width (generally
midway along the lateral edges ) is 3.3 to 5.5 em.; and maximum thickness is 1.9 to 4 em.
Comments: Similar specimens have been variously classified as

203

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

t
8'

8

E

c

E'
F

H

K

D

H'

G

J

L

Fig . 15 . Bifaces. A-E' , Bristol. F, G, Pebble. H, I, Bi-pointed. J-N, Miscellaneous . A-C, F,
K, and L from Gossett Bottoms Site; D, H, and 0 from Lacy Site; E-G , J, M, and N from
Wild Bull Site.

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

picks (Jelks, 1961 : Fig. 13, a-c ), choppers (Duffield, 1963b: 114),
blades (Tunnell, 1961 : 133, Fig. 6, G-I ), and Perkin pikes (Jelks,
1965 : 175-176, Fig. 85 ).
BI-POINTED BIFACES

(Fig. 15, H , I ; 5 specimens)

These six, bifacially worked artifacts have convex lateral edges
which terminate in more or less pointed distal and proximal ends. One
end (the proximal? ), however, tends to be slightly less pointed than
the other and is sometimes better thinned. The workmanship is quite
poor with most examples retaining traces of the nodular cortex. There
are indications that all were made from small, elongated chert or
quartzitic pebbles. The length ranges from 4 .2 to 7.4 em.; maximum
width is from 2.3 to 3.2 em.; and the maximum thickness is from 1.7
to 2.7 em.
Comments: In basic outline these specimens resemble the hi-pointed
knives (see above ) , but they are larger and more crudely made.
MISCELLANEOUS BIFACES

(Fig. 15, J-N; 42 specimens)

Included in this group are 32 complete or reasonably complete
bifaces which do not fit any of the above classifications, and 10 specimens which are too fragmentary for accurate identification. In outline,
the former exhibit considerable variation, ranging from approximate
ovate or subtriangular to asymmetrical. All have been roughly flaked
from chert or quartzitic pebbles by means of the hammerstone percussion technique, and many still have portion of the cortex across
either of the flat surfaces or at the edges. Length is from 3.6 to 7.2 em.;
maximum width is from 3 to 4.1 em.; and maximum thickness is 1.1
to 2.8 em.

Microliths (Fig. 16, A-E; 7 specimens )
This term is tentatively suggested for quite small, generally hifacially worked implements which ~how a variety of geometric forms.
Some are rectanguloid (Fig. 16, A, C), while others are subtriangular
to lanceolate (Fig. 16, B, D, E); none, however, is clearly pointedhence their exclusion from the arrow point category. The flaking is
generally good and appears to be mainly pressure-produced. Length
is from 1.4 to 2.9 em.; maximum width is from .9 to 2 em.; and maximum thickness is .4 to .5 em.
Comments: The most distinctive features of these microliths are
small size and bifacial chipping. Outline form is quite variable, but,
significantly, none terminates in a pointed distal end. Use as an arrow

205

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

c

B

A

H

G

F

E

0

J

j

l

l
M

N

l

L

K

l

1
R

p

Q

o~~~~N·~~
0

CM.

3

Fig . 16 . Microliths, Drills, Burin, Burin Spall, and Gravers. A-E, Microliths. F-H, Flake
drills . I, J, Large drills . K, Burin (arrow indicates burin blowl. L, Burin spall . M-R, Gravers
(arrows indicate graver points). A, B, F-H , M, N, and P from Gossett Bottoms Site; C and J
from Lacy Site; D, E, I, K, L, 0 , and R from Wild Bull Site.

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

point or even a small knife seem quite doubtful. More probably these
implements, like the Mesolithic microliths of Europe and north Africa,
were parts of composite tools- that is, set in slots or notches made in
wooden or bone shafts to form piercing and cutting edges.
Similar, though generally larger, artifacts have been reported from
the McGee Bend Reservoir (Jelks, 1965 : 178-179, Fig. 86, G-J ) .
Easily overlooked, it is possible that these implements are of much
wider distribution than present evidence suggests. They are not, however, comparable to the microflint industry that has been described
for the laketown (Ford, et al. , 1955 : 137-150) and Poverty Point
(Ford and Webb, 1956: 76-82 ) sites in Mississippi and Louisiana.

Drills (Fig. 16, F -I; 10 specimens )
Each of the drills recovered from the excavations has a relatively
long, narrow shaft suitable for boring. When examined closely, they
fall readily into two descriptive categories; drills made from flakes
(Fig. 16, F-H ) and drills apparently rechipped from dart points (Fig.
16, I, J ). The seven examples comprising the first group are small and
are chipped primarily across one face. The bases are expanded but
are not carefully shaped. Treatment of the shaft is variable, with some
having triangular to lenticular cross sections, while one is alternately
beveled. Total length is from 1.9 to an estimated 3 em.; length of the
shaft is 1.2 to an estimated 1.5 em. ; width across the base is 1.2 to 1.8
em.; maximum width of the shaft is .5 to 1 em.; and maximum thickness is .3 to .5 em.
The three drills of the second type are bifacially worked and are
noticeably larger than those described above. On two the base is identical to the stem found on the Gary dart point type (Fig. 16, I), while
the third (Fig. 16, J ) is reminiscent of the Pedernales type. Lateral
edges of the shaft are straight, and gradually taper to a sharp point on
the two complete specimens. The cross section of the shaft is either
triangular or lenticular. Each is well made and fine marginal retouching occurs along all edges. Total length is 3. 7 to 4 em.; length of the
shaft is 1.6 to 1.9 em.; width across the base is 1 to 1.3 em.; maximum
width of the shaft is 1 to 1.2 em. ; maximum thickness is 1.1 to 1.2 em.
Comments: None of the lateral edges of the drills shows signs of
wear (e.g., smoothing ) from use.

Burin (Fig. 16, K; 1 specimen )
A burin, or pointed engraving tool, was recovered from the Wild
Bull Site. It appears on the lateral edge of a probable dart point blade

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

207

and has been produced by the intersection of a burin facet with a
transverse hinge fracture. Only one spall has been removed and the
negative bulb of percussion is readily visible at the upper end (i.e.,
where the spall scar intersects the hinge fracture ) of the burin facet.
Microscopic examination of the burin point reveals some use wear.
The burin facet measures 1.9 em. long, and seems small enough to
have been removed by means of pressure (Epstein, 1960: 93 ).
Comments: Burins are rare in the eastem part of Texas and the occurrence of this specimen is of considerable interest. Of additional significance is the fact that 1) the material, a blue-gray flint, is foreign to
the area and probably came from central Texas, and 2 ) that the wellexecuted, parallel-flaking on the blade fragment is reminiscent of Paleo
points. It should be recalled that a medial fragment of a Folsom point
was found at the same site.

Burin Spall (Fig. 16, L; 1 specimen )
Besides the burin described above, the Wild Bull Site yielded an
unusual flake which is tentatively identified as a burin spall. Its size
and general shape are suggestive of a burin spall (Epstein, 1963: 3133 ), but it has a squarish- rather than triangular or rectangularcross section. Since there is no clear evidence of use, it may be that this
piece is merely the residue from the production of a burin. The material from which it is manufactured is a brown flint which is of a
better quality than that used for most other chipped stone artifacts
found at Cedar Creek Reservoir. Total length is 3 em., while the maximum width and maximum thickness are both approximately 1 em.

Gravers (Fig. 16, M-R; 37 specimens )
All artifacts having a small, beak-like projection which may have
served to incise or engrave objects of bone, clay, and the like are
termed gravers. Apart from this projection, however, the gravers exhibit considerable variation. Twenty-three are made from small, flattish flakes with the projections having been formed by either lightly
retouching two intersection edges (Fig. 16, M ), or by pressure flaking
two adjacent concavities in one edge ( Fig. 16, N , 0 ). Each specimen
has only one projection, although several also have a second edge prepared for scraping (Fig. 16, N , 0 ). The flakes are 2.8 to 4 em. long,
1.2 to 2.5 em. wide, and .3 to .9 em. thick; the projections are from .2
to .6 em. long.
The next most common variety of gravers is represented by 13 specimens made from small, stream-worn chert or petrified wood pebbles

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 15, P, Q). Their cross sections are typically thick and planoconvex, with most of the pebble apparently having been intentionally
broken approximately in half. Much of the weathered cortex surface
is retained, usually on the convex face. Each has a single graver
point formed by either of the two techniques mentioned above. In
addition, four have a beveled edge and presumably also functioned as
scrapers. The entire specimen is 2.1 to 5.1 em. long, 1 to 4 em. wide,
and .9 to 2.2 em. thick; the graver points vary from .2 to .6 em in
length.
The only other graver (Fig. 16, R), from the Wild Bull Site, is
quite unusual in that it has been chipped in the lateral edge of what
appears to have been a dart point stem. The beak has been formed by
two adjacent concavities unifacially chipped by means of the pressure
technique. Even the material, a black, speckled flint, is distinctive and
may have been obtained from the central part of the state. The over-all
dimensions are: 1.5 em. long, 1. 7 em. wide, and .4 em. thick; the
graver point is .3 em. long.
Gouges
The 64 implements identified as gouges have prominent, often carefully prepared, bits which suggest use as specialized scraping tools.
Most are made from small pebbles and seem distinctive enough to define as a tentative new type, Gossett gouges. The remaining four specimens compare favorably with either the Clear Fork gouge or the
"Guadalupe" adz.
Gossett GOUGES (Fig. 17, A-H; 60 specimens)
. Each of these artifacts has been made from a small, stream worn
pebble (of chert, quartzitic stone, or petrified wood) and has a steep
bit at one edge. The outline form was dictated principally by the natural shape of the pebble and ranges from almost circular (Fig. 17, F )
to, more often, subtriangular or rectanguloid (Fig. 17, A-E, G, H).
Flaking is confined to one surface and may or may not extend across
the entire specimen. The opposite surface is never altered and retains
the weathered cortex, perhaps to reduce the friction that might have
been created during use (Fig. 17, A', D' ) . This unaltered surface is
usually polished, but it is impossible to determine whether from use or
from stream abrasion. Cross sections are either plano-convex, or, less
often, biconvex. The bits vary from straight or slightly concave to convex, are generally wider than the base, and frequently show secondary

209

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

c

B

o'

D

F

G

o"

c'

E

I'

H

K

M
N
Fig . 17. Gouges and Scrapers. A-H, Gossett gouges . 1-K, Clear Fork gouges. L, Possible
" Guadalupe " adz . M-0, Mineola end scrapers . A-M, and 0 from Wild Bull Site; N from
Gossett Bottoms Site.

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

retouching. Length is from 2.5 to 6.1 em.; width across the bit is from
2.5 to 3. 7 em.; and maximum thickness is from .9 to 1.2 em.
Comments: Some of the Gossett gouges-especially those with subtriangular outlines-resemble Variety 2 of the Clear Fork gouges
(Ray, 1941: 153-15 7). However, Clear Fork gouges are usually larger,
are often bifacially worked, and do not appear to have been made from
small pebbles.
Since many published descriptions of superficially similar artifacts
do not clearly state whether or not the specimens in question have been
fashioned from small pebbles and have retained the nodular cortex on
the dorsal surface, is quite difficult to determine the distribution of the
Gossett gouge. However, possible Gossett gouges have been found at
the Harroun (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959; 49), and Pearson (Duffield
and Jelks, 1961: 28, Fig. 6, f, g ) sites in Texas and at the Boat Dock
Site in Oklahoma (Bell, 1958: 43, Pl. 12, C, D ). In addition, perhaps
some of the gouges reported from various Trinity Aspect sites (Crook
and Harris, 1952: 18-21 and 27-28, Fig. 2, Nos. 1-10) are also of this
type.

Clear Fork

GOUGES

(Fig. 17, I -K; 3 specimens)

Three of the gouges from Cedar Creek (all from the Wild Bull Site)
fall within the range of variation described by Ray ( 1941) for the
Clear Fork type. Each is bifacially worked and has an essentially biconvex cross section. Two (Fig. 17, J, K) are roughly triangular in
outline and compare closely with Ray's (ibid.: 153-154, Pl. 2, Nos. 1,
2, 6, 11-15) Variety 1. The third example (Fig. 17, I) is incomplete,
but appears to have had generally parallel lateral edges and a long,
rectangular outline-features similar to those mentioned by Ray
(ibid.: 157) for his Variety 3. On all examples the bit is steep and
somewhat scooped-out. Although the percussion flaking technique was
used, these gouges are fairly well made and usually show retouching
at the bit. Length of the two complete examples is 2.7 and 3.8 em.;
width across the bit of all specimens is 2.8 to 3.1 em.; and maximum
thickness is 1.2 to 1.6 em.
Comments: Unlike the Clear Fork gouges reported by Johnson
( 1962: 191-193 ) for the Yarbrough Site, those from Cedar Creek are
made from chert (rather than ferruginous sandstone ) and do not show
wear from use.
"GUADALUPE"? ADZ OR GOUGE

(Fig. 17, L; 1 specimen)

This unusual and crudely fashioned implement has a large, concave

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

211

bit across one end. The lateral edges are sinuous but essentially
straight, tapering gently toward the proximal end. Percussion flake
scars are present on both surfaces, although one side retains a sizable
portion of the nodular cortex. The cross section is quite thick and
roughly lenticular, while the longitudinal section is triangular and
shows distinct thinning at the proximal end. Length is 8.2 em.; width
across the bit is 4 em.; width across the base is 2 em.; and maximum
thickness is 3.1 em.
Comments: This specimen may be a crude example of the "Guadalupe" adz, a distinctive artifact which has not yet been studied in detail but which has been tentatively named by T. N . Campbell and
briefly mentioned by Tunnell (Johnson, et al., 1962: 108) .

Scrapers
Chipped stone artifacts having one generally flat, unworked surface
as well as one or more edges which could have been used for scraping
are classified as scrapers. They are made from chert flakes or pebbles,
less often from quartzitic stones and petrified wood. Exclusive of the
unclassifiable and fragmentary specimens, the scrapers are divided
into seven groups: Mineola, large end, thumbnail, core, initial cortex,
secondary flake, and concave-edged.

Mineola

END SCRAPERS

(Fig. 17, M-0; 12 specimens)

Recently recognized by Johnson ( 1962: 189, Fig. 10, R-T), this type
of scraper was manufactured from thin slabs of petrified wood. The
outline is either rectangular or squarish, and both surfaces are flat.
Marginal flaking is apparently of percussion type and is almost always
limited to one face, occurring on one end (the bit) and, infrequently,
along the sides. The bit is typically quite steep and is either straight or
convex. Length ranges from 2.4 to 4.6 em.; maximum width from 2.4
to 3.6 em.; maximum thickness from . 7 to 1.4 em.
Comments: As noted by Johnson (ibid.) for the Yarbrough specimens, the form of these scrapers appears to be mainly a function of the
fractioning characteristics of petrified wood. The Mineola end scrapers
from Cedar Creek, however, tend to be slightly smaller than those
from the Yarbrough Site.
LARGE END SCRAPERS

(Fig. 18, A-C; 10 specimens)

These large, crudely made specimens have subcircular to rectanguloid or ovate outlines and at least one steep scraping edge. Six have

212

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B
A

D

F

D'

G

E

H

Fig . 1 8 . Sc rapers . A-C , Large end. D-H , Core. A-D from Wild Bull Site; E and F from
Lacy Site ; G and H from Gossett Bottoms Site .

been fashioned from large chert pebbles, one from a slab of petrified
wood, and one from a piece of hard hematite. The principal bit edge
lies either at one edge or along a portion of the circumference. All are

213

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

rough percussion flaked and exhibit no marginal retouching. The more
circular examples (Fig. 18, C) have a maximum diameter of 4.2 to 5.5
em. and a maximum thickness of 2 to 2.8 em.; the others (Fig. 18, A,
B ) are 4.9 to 8.2 em. in length, 4 to 4.8 em. in maximum width, and
1. 7 to 2.5 em. in maximum thickness.
Comments: These specimens are linked primarily by their large
size and crude workmanship. Had the sample been larger it would
probably have been desirable to divide them into more discrete categones.
THUMBNAIL SCRAPERS

(Fig. 19, A-C; 3 specimens)

Diminutive size and delicate pressure retouching along one or more
marginals are the most diagnostic features of this group. A sharp fracture appears at one edge of each and it is possible that none is complete.
The present outlines are either ovate or rectanguloid, while the cross
sections are consistently plano-convex. The length is uniformily 1.6
em.; maximum width is 1.4 to 1.6 em.; and maximum thickness is .3
to .5 em.
CORE SCRAPERS

(Fig. 18, D-H; 24 specimens)

This group consists of specimens manufactured from moderately
large, stream worn chert pebbles . Much of the nodular cortex has been
retained, and on many it naturally fonns a planar surface (Fig. 18,
D , D' ) . All have rude percussion flake scars which appear along the
margins of one face. The cross section is plano-convex and a number of
examples are almost as thick as they are wide or long. The outline
form depends largely on the original shape of the pebble, there being
very little evidence of intentional shaping. Scraping edges are quite
steep and are usually limited to one edge or a portion of the circumference. Those 11 examples with subcircular outlines are 3.6 to 6.2 em.
in diameter and 1.5 to 5 em. in maximum thickness. The remaining
12 specimens are rectanguloid to ovate and are 4.3 to 6.4 em. long, 3.1
to 4.5 em. wide, and 1.2 to 4 em. thick.
Comments: Intended here as only a descriptive category, the core
scrapers seem distinctive and may eventually be shown to be a valid
cultural type.
INITIAL CORTEX FLAKE SCRAPERS

(Fig. 19, D-G; 37 specimens)

Scrapers made from small to medium size initial cortex flakes form
the most common group found at Cedar Creek Reservoir. These flakes

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

can be easily recognized by their plano-convex cross sections and the
weathered cortex on their convex surfaces (Epstein, 1963: 29). The
planar face usually has a prominent positive bulb of percussion indicating that the flakes had been detached by means of the hammerstone
percussion technique. None has a prepared striking platform. Moderately prominent flaking appears along one or more marginals of the
convex surface. Length is 2.5 to 5.2 em.; maximum width is 1.2 to 4.7
em.; and maximum thickness is . 7 to 1.6 em.
SECONDARY FLAKE SCRAPERS

(Fig. 19, H, I; 14 specimens )

Like those described above, these scrapers are made from small to
medium size flakes. However, none has retained traces of the pebble
surface and in most cases the bulb of percussion has been removed by
chipping. In general, the flaking is good, and some specimens (for example, Fig. 19, H) may be intentionally shaped. The scraping edge is
consistently steep and is usually along one or more lateral edges; only
a few (Fig. 19, I) are beveled at one end. Length is 2.8 to 5.2 em.;
maximum width is 1.5 to 3 em., and maximum thickness is .4 to 1.3
em.
CONCAVE-EDGED SCRAPERS

(Fig. 19, J -M; 11 specimens)

Included in this group are 11 unifacially flaked specimens and one
bifacially worked piece. The latter (Fig. 19, J-J') has been made from
a flat chert pebble and may be a very crude imitation of the Albany
spokeshave, subtype I (Webb, 1946: 10, Pl. 1, Nos. 1-3 ) . Although
bifacially chipped, this implement has a plano-convex cross section
with one edge being concave and suitable for scraping. It has a definite stem and one shoulder, but is not notched like the Albany type
(ibid.). The weathered surface of the pebble appears on parts of both
flat faces and across the base of the stem. This specimen is 4.4 em.
long, 2.5 em. wide at the shoulder, and 1 em. in maximum thickness.
Eight of the other concave-edged scrapers are made from small, thin
flakes (Fig. 19, K, L ) , while three are from large, rather thick flakes
(Fig. 19, M). Both types have a single, shallow concavity produced by
fine marginal retouching. No other scraping edge appears on these
specimens. The smaller examples average about 2 em. in length, 1
em. in maximum width, and .3 em. in maximum thickness; the larger
ones, on the other hand, average about 3.5 em. in length, 2 em. in
maximum width, and 1.4 em. in maximum thickness. The concavity
is fairly uniform in size, being from 1 to 2 em. in maximum width and
.2 to .4 em. in maximum depth.

215

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

c

8

F

D

G

E

H

K

L

M

J'

J

p

0

N

Q

R

T
0

0

IN.

CM.

2
6

u

U'

Fig . 19. Scrapers , Utilized Flakes, and Polished Stone Implements . A-C, Thumbnail
scrapers . D-G , Initial cortex scrapers . H, I, Secondary flake scrapers . J, J', Possible Albany
spokeshave. K-M , Concave-edged scrapers . N-R , Utilized flakes . S, T, Boatstone fragments .
U, U', Celt fragment . A, B, D-J , P, and Q from Wild Bull Site; C, K-M , and R-T from Gossett
Bottoms Site ; N, 0 , and U from lacy Site.

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

MISCELLANEOUS AND FRAGMENTARY SCRAPERS

(24 specimens)

Of the 24 artifacts comprising this category, 14 are too fragmentary
for further study and 10 do not have features which permit them to
be included in any of the above-mentioned groups. All, however, have
been unifacially worked and easily fall within the general definition of
a scraper.
UTILIZED FLAKES

(Fig. 19, N -R; 206 specimens)

A considerable number of the flakes recovered from the excavations
show, upon careful exainination, minute retouching along one or more
edges. Since this may have resulted from use--perhaps from pressure
applied in scraping-these specimens are termed utilized flakes. The
working edges are straight, concave, or convex, while the amount of
wear varies from slight to moderately pronounced. None of the flakes
has been shaped so that a wide variety of outline forms and flake types
are present. For example, there are billet flakes , hammerstone flakes,
and initial cortex flakes. Most are small, averaging about 2.4 em. in
length, 1. 7 em. in maximum width, and .5 em. in thickness. The
largest is 4.4 em. long, 3.6 em. wide, and 1 em. thick. One is made from
petrified wood, the remainder are of chert.

Boatstones (Fig. 19, S, T; 2 specimens)
Two small, well smoothed-almost polished-stone pieces appear
to be fragments of boatstones. Both have been hollowed out to form
a concavity on one surface; the other surface is markedly convex. The
over-all form cannot be reconstructed in detail, but one specimen
(Fig. 19, S) was evidently somewhat canoe-shaped with a deep,
V-shaped concavity. The other boatstone (Fig. 19, T) was apparently
circular in outline and may have had a somewhat shallower concavity.
The former has been manufactured from siltstone, and the latter from
a hematitic stone with fine sand inclusions. No meaningful dimensions
can be taken for either specimen.

Celt (Fig. 19, U , U' ; 1 specimen)
The distal portion of a rather crudely pecked and partially ground
celt of quartzite was recovered from the Lacy Site. The blade, or bit
end, is intact and shows some battering, perhaps from use. In longitudinal section this celt appears to have been lenticular, and in cross
section (Fig. 19, U') roughly plano-convex. The lateral edges are con-

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

217

vex and are not well smoothed. Present measurements are: 5.5 em.
long, 4 em. wide (maximum), and 1.7 em. thick.

Notched Pebbles (Fig. 20, A-E; 7 specimens)
The notched pebbles are readily divided into two groups, even
though all are made from quartzite. Represented by six specimens, the
most common form (Fig. 20, A-D) has been manufactured from
small, somewhat roundish stones and notched at each end. Percussion
flaking was used to produce the shallow, U -shaped notches and apparently to shape, at least in part, the pebble. Very little of the nodular
cortex is still visible. The notches and, to a lesser extent, the edges are
smoothed, perhaps both by wear and by intent. Length is from 4.3 to
5 em.; maximum width 3.2 to 4 em.; and maximum thickness 1.6 to
2.5 em.
The only other specimen (Fig. 20, E) is considerably different in
that it has been fashioned from a long, roughly rectangular pebble
with a flattened cross section. Moreover, the notches appear in the
lateral edges, with one being quite distinct, the other very slight. Both
are percussion flaked and no other alterations to the pebble can be detected. It seems likely that the artifact-maker consciously selected a
suitable-shaped stone-one which would require little modification.
The length is 8.1 em.; maximum width is 4 em.; and maximum thickness is 2 em.
Comments: Notched stones similar to those of the first group have
also been termed sinker stones (Johnson, 1962: 197) , bolas stones
(ibid. ), and "Waco" sinkers (Watt, 1938) . The Cedar Creek specimens are especially similar to Watt's sinker, Type 5 (ibid. : 28).

Pitted Stones (Fig. 20, J, K; 5 specimens)
These generally large pieces of ferruginous sandstone have one or
more shallow pits or depressions pecked into a flattish surface. One
somewhat oval-shaped stone (Fig. 20, K), has a grinding facet on the
same surface as the depression. This specimen and three with more
irregular outlines appear to have been roughly shaped by percussion.
By contrast, the fifth, and smallest, pitted stone is made from an elongated stream wom pebble (Fig. 20, J). It has one pit which has been
pecked into the center of a lateral edge; in addition, one surface shows
use as a grinding implement and one end had been battered, probably
from secondary use as a hammerstone. One of the stones, an irregularly
shaped specimen, has five depressions, all on one surface; each of the
remaining examples has a single pit. Because of the variation in out-

218

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A'

A

B

D

c

c'

E

F

J

H'

H

v --~

,.
.'-!:. .~
r:, ,";.
'

~

•

- -·'

o~~~~~~N~-~==~~2--~

0

CM .

6

Fig . 20. Notched Pebbles, Abraders , Scored Hematite, and Pitted Stones . A-D, End-notched
pebbles . E, Side-notched pebble . F, G , Abraders . H, I, Scored hematite . J , K, Pitted stones.
A-F, and H from Wild Bull Site ; G and I from Gossett Bottoms Site ; J and K from Lacy Site.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

219

line form, dimensions are difficult to take. The largest, however, is approximately 11.4 em. in diameter and 6.2 em. in maximum width.
The smallest is 7 em. long, 3.4 em. wide, and 3 em. thick. The depressions vary from 1.2 to 3 em. in diameter and from .2 to . 7 em in maximum depth.

Abraders (Fig. 20, F , G; 2 specimens)
Each of these small, thin pieces of coarse-grained sandstone has a
single V-shaped groove across one surface. Although one (Fig. 20, G )
is possibly incomplete, both have irregular outlines and show no evidence of having been intentionally shaped. The grooves are narrow
but tend to flare out slightly at one end. Abrasion, perhaps from sharpening implements such as bone awls, probably produced the grooves.
They now measure 2.3 and 3.8 em. long and approximately .1 and .3
em . in maximum depth respectively.

Scored Hematite (Fig. 20, H , I; 2 specimens )
In addition to the abraders, there are two rather small, unshaped
pieces of hematite which have numerous striations on one flat surface.
On one (Fig. 20, I) the scoring marks are fairly pronounced and run
p arallel with the long axis, while on the other (Fig. 20, H ) the striations are much fainter and more random in nature. This latter specimen also has two alternately beveled edges which indicate u se as a
scraper. At first blush it would seem that the marks may have been
produced in the course of scraping; however , they are present on only
one surface and not both as would have been the case if the implement
h ad been used as such. Over-all dimensions are 4.5 and 4 .4 em. long,
3.6 and 3.4 em. wide, and. 7 and .8 em. thick.
Comments: These pieces seem too hard to have served as sources of
pigment, and consequently they are described separately from the
ocher.

H ammerstones (Fig. 21 , A, B; 12 specimens)
This category is comprised of roundish to somewhat oblong streamworn cobbles which have one or more battered edges, presumably
from use as a hammerstone. All are of hard stones, usually quartzite
or ch ert, and none has been intentionally modified. There is little
range in size, with the average specimen being approximately 6.5 em.·
in diameter.

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Handstones (Fig. 21 , C, D; 10 specimens)
The handstones, or manos, consist of moderately small, stream worn
cobbles which have one or more facets worn from use in conjunction
with a grinding slab. With the possible exception of a fragmentary
specimen, none appears to have been significantly altered. At the most,
there are signs of limited pecking-or stream battering?-along the
margins of three handstones. The outlines are somewhat irregular, although there is a slight tendency toward circular. On five examples
there are worn surfaces on opposing faces , with the facets varying
from flat to slightly convex. Each of the remainder has only one grinding surface and it is usually flat. Both sandstone and quartzite cobbles
were used. Maximum diameter ranges from 6 to 8.8 em., and maximum thickness from 2.2 to 5.2 em.
Comments: All of the handstones appear to have been used with a
circular grinding motion.

Ocher (Fig. 21, E, F; 14 specimens)
Numerous, often sizable pieces of ocher were recovered from Cedar
Creek, particularly from the Wild Bull Site. The majority are of the
soft, yellowish-brown limonite, although three small pieces of red
hematite were found at Gossett Bottoms. Two of the latter have at
least one smoothed surface and were probably used as sources of pigment. Most of the remaining pieces are large nodules, none of which
shows evidence of having been modified (Fig. 21 , E, F ). Those from
the Wild Bull Site, however, were recovered from a limited area (see
Table II) and may have been a cache. The smoothed hematite specimens are essentially rectangular and are 1.6 and 2.7 em. long, 1.5 and
1. 7 em. wide, and 1.2 and 2 em. thick. Largest of the unworked limonite examples is 23 em. long, 7 em. wide and 6.5 em. thick.
ARTIFACTS OF CLAY

Represented by 1,146 specimens, artifacts of clay comprise the
largest single class recovered from the Cedar Creek excavations. Included are 1,143 vessel fragments, a worked sherd, a tubular bead, and
an ovoid lump of clay. In spite of the rather large number of sherds,
many are small and no vessel could be even partially restored. Both
of these factors make meaningful type identification difficult, and, in
the descriptions which follow, the pottery has been grouped according
to treatment of the exterior surface with the main categories being
plain and decorated. The latter is further divided into finer groups

221

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

B

c

Fig . 21. Hammerstones , Handstones , and Ocher. A, 8, Hammerstones . C, D, Handstones .
E, F, Ocher nodules . A and C from Lacy Site ; 8 and D-F from Wild Bull Site .

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

based upon the mode of decoration (e.g., engraved, puncta ted, brushed,
etc.), while the former is discussed in terms of the major temper
groups. The resultant classification is intended for convenience only,
although comparisons are made with known pottery types whenever
possible.

Plain Sherds (Fig. 22; 735 specimens)
Most of the potsherds from Cedar Creek are undecorated, the exterior surfaces merely having been smoothed, or very rarely, lightly
polished. The majority of these, moreover, are from body sherds, suggesting that many may be from vessels decorated only on the rim.
Twenty-seven are shell-tempered, 311 are bone-tempered, 366 are
clay-tempered, and 31 are sand-tempered.

-I

-I
A

c·

c

B'

8

.,,.."" " -1
.

,.

o·

D

-~
E
F

F'

G'

G

J
H
0=

o

IN.

CM.

2.

6

Fig. 22. Plain Pottery . A, Shell-tempered body sherd. B, B', Shell-tempered rim sherd .
C-E, Bone-tempered rim sherds. F, F', Bone-tempered basal sherd. G, G', Clay-tempered rim
sherd. H, H', Clay-tempered basal sherd. I, Clay-tempered strap handle. J, Sand-tempered
bcdy sherd. Exterior to the left on rim and base profiles. A, B, E-H, and J from Lacy Site;
C, D, and I from Gossett Bottoms Site.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

223

SHELL-TEMPERED

The easily recognized shell-tempered sherds include 26 body fragments and one small rim section (Fig. 22, A, B). Their surface color
varies from reddish-tan and brown to grayish; while the cores tend to
be slightly darker shades of the same color. Both the exterior and interior surfaces have been smoothed, but not polished. Leaching out of
temper particles has occurred on a number of examples (Fig. 23, B)
and has resulted in pitted, easily crumbled surfaces. The paste is laminated and frequently contorted, with crushed shell (apparently mussel) accounting for as much as one-fourth the total volume (Fig. 23,
A ) . Individual tempering particles range from 2 mm. to microscopic.
The surface hardness is from 2 to 3.5 on Moh's scale, and the wall
thickness is from 4 to 9 mm. The one rim fragment (Fig. 22, B, B' ) is
essentially vertical and has a faintly beveled, convex lip.
BONE-TEMPERED

Contrasting most obviously with the above in tempering agent used
(Fig. 23, C, D ) are the plain sherds with pulverized particles of bone.
Included are four basal fragments, 12 rim pieces, and 295 body sherds.
Most, however, are too small to reveal particulars concerning vessel
shape (Fig. 22, C-F). The base sherds (Fig. 22, F, F' ) suggest fairly
thick, disc-shaped bottoms which joined outcurved or nearly vertical
walls. On one specimen the juncture of the base and the body is somewhat reinforced, while on another the thickest part occurs near the
center of the base. The rim sherds suggest rather simple vessel forms,
both jars and bowls, with the rim being straight or very slightly
everted to inverted, and the lip flattened or gently convex. On some
the lip is somewhat thinned or slightly thickened.
One, much-eroded body sherd has traces of a red slip or film on the
exterior surface. Exterior surfaces in all other examples are merely
smoothed, some rather well, others quite poorly. On some (particularly
those from the Lacy Site ) the exterior has a slightly chalky texture
which is slightly reminiscent of the finish found on Baytown Plain
(Phillips, et al., 1951: 76-82 ). Interior surfaces are also smoothed, but
generally more carelessly finished than the exterior ones, so that tool
marks are commonly visible. Surface colors range from tan, sometimes
a bit reddish, to gray and gray-brown. Firing was not always even as
indicated by the occasional fire cloud and by some differentiation in
core color. The core, more often, is the same color as the surface, or
darker, sometimes almost black.
The paste is frequently rather granular (Fig. 23, C, D) and, in ad-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

clition to the bone, may contain an occasional lump of clay (perhaps
some ground sherds) as well as minute particles of sand. For the most
part, the bone stands out prominently, with many individual pieces
measuring 2 to 4 mm. On the less well smoothed sherds bits of bone are
clearly visible on both the exterior and interior surfaces. Sherd edges
are often jagged, mainly a reflection of the coarseness of the texture.
Breaks, however, tend to follow horizontal planes suggesting the coiled
manufacturing technique. Surface hardness is 2 to 3.5 on Moh's scale,
while the wall thickness is 4 to 11 mm.
CLAY -TEMPERED

Among the 366 clay-tempered sherds are 11 basal fragments, 14 rim
pieces, and one strap handle. In color and surface finish they resemble
the bone-tempered pottery, except that small, irregularly-shaped
lumps of clay are readily distinguished in the paste (Fig. 23, E) and
frequently on the surface. Besides these inclusions, the paste contains
an o'c casional ground sherd (or grog) and, in 220 instances, fine particles of sand. Specimens with both clay and sand tend to be firmer
than those tempered with just clay. The latter are typically rather
friable and have irregular edges. There is, however, sufficient intergradation between the two groups to justify treating them as a single
category. Indeed, it seems quite probable that the sand is an accidental
inclusion.
Very little information can be obtained on vessel shape, although
there are indications that the forms represented are about the same as
noted for the bone-tempered pottery (Fig. 22, G-H'). One rim sherd
(Fig. 22, G, G'), however, should be singled out for it is slightly thickened on the exterior, just below the lip. The thickened area is accentuated by underscoring (apparently almost scalloped) which resembles, but is not the same, as an overhang line. There is also a nearly
complete, undecorated strap handle (Fig. 22, I) similar to those found,
for example, on types Monkstown Impressed, Killough Pinched, or
Harleton Applique. Body sherds are 5 to 11 mm. thick, basal fragments 11 to 13 mm. thick. The hardness, on Moh's scale, is between 2
and 3.5.
SAND-TEMPERED

Sherds having a very sandy paste with little or no clay or bone inclusions make up a minor but distinct group. Most specimens are small
(the largest piece is 4.5 by 2.2 em.) and, moreover, 29 are from vessel
walls (Fig. 22, J), two from bases. Both the exterior and interior sur-

225

CEDAR C R EEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

c

'

'.,

G

H

Fig . 23 . Enlargements of Sherd Cross Sections. A, B, Shell-tempe red; part icles have
leached out of B. C, D, Bone-tempered; bone particles burned black in D. E, Clay-tempered.
F, H, Sand-tempered (quartz ). G, Sand-tempered (hematite).

faces have been well smoothed, but often have a gritty feeling because of the sandy paste. Surface colors range from reddish (one instance), to tan and brownish-gray to almost black, with the interior
being generally darker than the exterior. The core is black, or, less
often, light gray to tan.
Fine-grained, largely quartz sand particles (Fig. 23, F, H), believed
to have been intentionally added to the clay, are the major constituent
of the paste in all but one specimen. This exception, a small, reddish
body sherd (Fig. 23, G), has rounded hematite sand grains which vary

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in size from microscopic to as much as 3 mm. In addition to the sand,
several sherds have an occasional finely ground sherd. On the whole,
the paste of all sherds is reasonably firm and compact. The edges tend
to be less jagged than on any of the other sherds, but they do not
clearly follow horizontal fracture planes- admittedly, however, it is
difficult to orient most sherds. The largest of the basal fragments indicates a flat bottom which was thickened in the middle and was joined
to an outward sloping wall. Wall thickness is 3 to 9 mm.; hardness on
Moh's scale is rather uniform at 2.5.
Viewing the plain sherds as a group, most fall technologically (i .e.,
in paste and surface finish) within the Caddoan tradition. The only
possible exception is the sand-tempered ware which may be broadly
related to Goose Creek Plain of the Galveston Bay Focus (Suhm, et al. ,
1954: 128-130 and 378-380 ), Bear Creek Plain of the McGee Bend
area (Jelks, 1965 ), and the sand-tempered ware found at the George C.
Davis Site (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 130-133 ). Specific type identification is impossible, largely because the Cedar Creek sample is too
small and yields no significant data on vessel shape. Much the same
situation applies to the remainder of the plain sherds . The claytempered ones, as well as most of those bone particles, are, in some
respects, similar to Sanders Plain ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 139, Pl. 70 ) .
There are, nonetheless, significant differences with Sanders Plain: the
Cedar Creek sherds have a higher incidence of bone temper, the vessel
form-although data are limited- appear to be simpler, and there is
only one example of red-filming. Finally, it might be noted that on the
basis of the paste and the surface finish, the shell-tempered sherds are
close to type Nocona Plain (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 115, Pl. 58 ).

Decorated Sherds (Figs. 24 and 25 ; 408 specimens)
The techniques employed in decorating the pottery from Cedar
Creek include most methods common to Caddoan wares: incising,
brushing, punctating, engraving, and appliqueing. Indeed, these are
such widespread modes of surface alteration in the eastern part of the
state that, on the basis of the present sample, specific type affiliations
are difficult to assess.
ENGRAVED

(Fig. 24, A-C'; 17 specimens)

Sherds having engraved designs are not well represented and occur
at only the Lacy Site (Table 2 ) . They can be sorted into three, possibly four, vessels, none of which can be restored. The first vessel is
known from two base sherds and two rim pieces (Fig. 24, A, B). It ap-

227

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

8

_I

I

c

c'

D

_,

-=a
G'

G

F'

F

,.

H'

H

L

J

K

M'

M

IN.

N

N'

0

CM.

6

Fig. 24 . Decorated Pottery . A-B ', Rim and base sherd from clay-tempered eng raved
vessel. C, C' , Rim sherd from bone-tempered engraved ve ssel. D, E, Brushed body sherds .
F-J, Incised sherds . K, Trailed s herd . L, Brushed-incised rim sherd . M-P, Punctated sherds .
Exterior to the left on rim and base profiles . A-C, E, H, J , M, N from Lacy Site; D, F, G, I, K,
L, 0, P from Gossett Bottoms Site.

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pears to have been a small and quite shallow, flat-bottomed bowl which
had simple outward sloping walls and at least two rim peaks. The rim
is slightly everted, while the lip is tapered and varies from convex to
almost flat . Most of the body has been covered with bold, crudelyexecuted engraved lines which seem to be grouped into rather widelyspaced curvilinear and diagonal elements. About 7 mm. below the lip
there is an engraved line that evidently encircled the entire vessel. The
diagonal elements, made up of at least three roughly parallel lines,
extend from this line toward the base. The curvilinear design, on the
other hand, appears initially to converge with the encircling line and
only gradually to turn toward the base. Microscopic examination of
the paste reveals that numerous and often irregularly-shaped lumps
of clay (including perhaps an occasional ground sherd) are the major
tempering agents. The texture is compact and the clay seems to have
been well kneaded. Surface colors range from tan to light grayishbrown, with the interior being slightly darker than the exterior. The
core is dark gray, tending to become somewhat lighter toward the exterior. Both surfaces have been fairly well smoothed, but neither is
polished. Wall thickness is about 8 mm., while the base reaches a maximum of 12 mm. in thickness. The hardness on Moh's scale is 3.5.
The second engraved vessel is represented by ten, generally small
body sherds and one rim fragment (Fig. 24, C) . Most pieces have thin,'
roughly parallel horizontal lines which are spaced about 8 to 10 mm.
apart and which probably encircled the entire vessel. In addition,
two specimens have diagonal lines, but the design relationship between these and the horizontal ones is not clear. The horizontal lines
begin approximately 8 mm. below the lip and continue for an undetermined distance toward the base. The rim sherd is slightly inverted
and has a flat lip; the over-all vessel shape and size are not, however,
apparent. Wall thickness is 4 to 6 mm. and the temper consists of pulverized bone. Surface colors are gray to gray-brown, while the core is
de~rker, almost black. Hardness is 2.5.
Both of the remaining engraved sherds are small body fragments
decorated with hatched lines which, in one instance, flank a circle.
This latter sherd has traces of red pigment, presumably ocher, rubbed
into the engraved lines. The exterior surfaces are a deep tan to dark,
gray-brown, and are well smoothed. By contrast, the interiors are unsmoothed and suggest that these pieces are from bottle bodies. One is
6 mm. in thickness, the other is 4 mm. thick. The paste is compact and
contains small lumps of clay, as well as an occasional small particle
of sand.
None of the engraved pottery can be typed, although the first vessel

CEDAR CREE K RESERVOIR SITES

229

described has certain attributes (i.e., crudely-executed design and rim
peaks) suggestive Titus Focus ceramics, such as types Ripley Engraved
or Wilder Engraved. In general, all engraved sherds seem more closely
affiliated with the Fulton, rather than the Gibson, Aspect.
BRUSHED

(Fig. 24, D, E; 166 specimens)

Most common of the decorative techniques is brushing; that is, the
occurrence of numerous striations apparently made by dragging or
" brushing" clusters of stiff grass and/ or small twigs across the stillplastic exterior surface. The interior surface is always smoothed and,
on the less carefully finished pieces, sometimes shows tool marks. Since
all but three of the brushed sherds are body sections, it is probable that
many are from vessels having rim decorated by other means, such as
by incising or punctating. The thickness and lack of much curvature
on a number of sherds suggest that the most common form was a rather
large jar with slightly outflaring rim and flat or mildly convex lip.
While it is quite clear that brushing covered much of the exterior surface, no discernible orientation can be recognized, except on the three
rim sherds where the striations are either horizontal (two cases) or
diagonal.
Thirteen of the brushed sherds, all from the Gossett Bottoms Site,
are tempered with numerous, finely pulverized pieces of bone. The
remainder have clay temper, frequently combined with fine, quartz
sand or grit. The latter, however, is probably an accidental inclusion,
and the clay apparently naturally had a fairly sandy texture. Most
sherds are well fired, and, although typically coarse, the paste does
not crumble easily (hardness is 2.5 to 3). Exterior surface color is tan
to gray-brown, while the interior is usually a darker shade of the same
color, and the core is frequently darker than either the exterior or the
interior. Wall thickness is 6 to 15 mm.
INCISED

(Fig. 24, F-J; 70 specimens)

Included in the incised pottery are nine rim sherds and 60 body
fragments, many of which appear to be from the upper portions of
vessels. Although the rim pieces are generally too small to reveal many
details concerning vessel shape, it is possible that both cylindrical jars
and bowls (perhaps including carinated bowls) are represented. Lips
are either flat or .gently convex. Crushed particles of bone appear as
the major tempering agent in 49 sherds, while clay is dominant in the
paste of 21 sherds (all of the latter are from the Gossett Bottoms Site) .
The texture varies from coarse to fine, and is usually compact. Surface

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

colors are reddish to dark tan and dark gray; the cores are consistently
darker than either the exterior or the interior.
Designs are fairly simple and consist primarily of diagonal lines
arranged into parallel sets which 1) run in the same direction ( Fig.
24, F ), 2 ) cross one another in a diagonal direction (Fig. 24, I ), or 3 )
fill alter nate panels (Fig. 24, H , J). Two rim sherds, however, have
horizontal lines which begin just below the lip (Fig. 24, G ) . The one
incised sherd (Fig. 24, I , I' ) from the Wild Bull Site, a bone-tempered
specimen, has crossed diagonal lines and, below this (if I have oriented
the sherd properly ) , an overhanging line. Faintly incised marks, possibly light fingernail punctations, appear below this overhanging line
just below the rim decoration, but little of the over-all design is preserved.
The incised sherds vary from 5 to 10 mm. in thickness and are between 2 and 3.5 in hardness. In mode of decoration and, less certainly,
in vessel shape they show a general affinity with type Canton Incised.
The paste is similar to that described for this type ( Suhm and Jelks,
1962: 23 ), except that the incidence of bone temper is a bit high.
TRAILED

(Fig. 24, K; 1 specimen )

A small body sherd has broadly incised, or trailed, lines made by a
blunt-ended implement. It is dark gray to black (being darkest on the
interior and core ) in color and is tempered with tiny bits of clay. The
texture is fine and quite compact, indicating that the clay had been
well kneaded and well fired. Since the sherd cannot be properly
oriented with any measure of certainty, it can only be noted that the
trailed lines are roughly parallel and that they may have been placed
horizontally on the vessel body. Wall thickness is 5 mm. and the hardness is 3 on Moh's scale.
BRUSHED-INCISED

(Fig. 24, L; 5 specimens )

This small but distinctive group of sherds undoubtedly represents a
single vessel decorated with vertical brushing and horizontally incised
lines. On the one rim fragment (Fig. 24, L ) the brushing extends
almost to the lip and is interrupted at 1.5 em. below the lip by an
incised line. It is evident from this piece, and from the four body
sherds, that the incising was done after the brushing. While the horizontal lines probably encircled the entire vessel, it is not clear whether
they were confined to the upper portion of the pot, or occurred over
much of the body.
Little can be determined of vessel shape, other than the rim is

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

231

slightly everted and the lip is essentially flat. The paste is coarse, but
reasonably firm, and is tempered with small lumps of clay, as well as
minute particles of sand or grit. Both the exterior and interior surfaces
are a dark, grayish-brown, and the core is a slightly darker shade of
the same color. The interior has been smoothed, but not too well so
that the clay temper is readily visible on the surface. Wall thickness
is 10 to 12 mm. and hardness is 3.
PUNCTATED

(Fig. 24, M-P ; 111 specimens)

Indentations or punctations made by a fingernail or blunt implement occur on the exterior surface of 24 rim sherds and 87 body fragments. In some instances (Fig. 24, M ) they appear to be confined to
vessel rims, in others (Fig. 24, P ) they may have covered much of the
body area. The majority of the punctations have been produced by
either a squarish or rounded tool which was pressed vertically into
the plastic surface (Fig. 24, N, 0 ), or pushed at an angle so as to raise
or mound the surface opposing the direction of the tool (Fig. 24, M, P) .
Fingernail punctation, admittedly difficult to distinguish from indentations probably made with a split reed, appear to be present on at
least 12 sherds (Fig. 24, P). No clear design pattern can be recognized
on any of the sherds and most can be described as having random
punctations . On six specimens the exterior surfaces appear to have
been lightly smoothed over after the punctations were made. The
interior surfaces are always smoothed, generally rather well.
The paste is typically coarse and granular, but does not crumble
easily. Bone was used as the major tempering agent in 25 sherds,
lumps-of clay (perhaps some grog ) -often combined with grit or sand
-appear in 81 sherds, and bone, sand, and clay are present in the
paste of five sherds. Surface colors range from reddish and tan to
grayish-brown, with the interior usually being darker than the exterior. The cores are black and indicate an incomplete oxidizing atmosphere during firing.
Broken edges are often a bit jagged, although they tend to follow
horizontal fracture plane. Wall thickness is 5 to 10 mm. and the hardness is 3. The lips are flat to slightly convex and may be somewhat
thickened (Fig. 24, M ) . Rim sherds are generally small and provide
few clues as to over-all vessel shape.
Punctating as a means of surface modification is widespread in
Caddoan ceramics, occurring in both the Fulton and Gibson aspects.
In the latter, however, they tend to be zoned rather than random
punctations, suggesting that many of the Cedar Creek sherds can

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tentatively be assigned to the Fulton Aspect, even though a specific
type cannot be identified.
PUNCTATED-INCISED

(Fig. 25, A-D; 2 1 specimens )

Punctations combined with incised lines occur on the exterior of
four rim fragments and 17 body sherds, with all of the latter probably
coming from the upper portion of vessels. Most commonly the design
consists of sets of parallel diagonal lines running in opposite directions
and alternating with triangular spaces filled with stick punctations
(Fig. 25 , A-C). The lines may be closely (Fig. 25 , B, C) or widely
(Fig. 25 , A ) spaced, and the punctations made with squarish or, less
frequently, rounded and sometimes pointed implements. Typically,
the tools have been pressed in at an angle and caused the surface to
be mounded on one side of the identation. On one sherd from the
Gossett Bottoms Site (Fig. 25, D ) a single punctation fills the center
of each grid segment produced by crossed diagonal lines. On another,
quite small sherd-also from the Gossett Bottoms Site- there are
apparently diagonally crossed lines on the rim, below this an overhang
edge, and, on the vessel body, fingernail punctations .
Characteristics of paste and color are similar to those described for
the punctated sherds and need not be reviewed in detail. It should,
however, be mentioned that four have minute, rounded quartz sand
and small particles of clay as the temper; the remainder are tempered
with bone, sand, and clay, some of which is definitely crushed sherds.
The larger rim fragments (Fig. 25, A' -C' ) indicate jars with direct
or slightly everted rims, while the lips on all sherds are either flat or
gently convex. These few particulars of shape, along with the design
layout, indicate that most of the punctated-incised sherds are closely
affiliated with type Canton Incised.
PINCHED

(Fig. 25, E , F; 15 specimens )

The Gossett Bottoms Site yielded a group of sherds each of which
has one or more ridges produced by pinching the exterior surface with
fingernails. All specimens are small, but the ridges appear to have
been arranged primarily into straight-lined patterns. They occur on
both rims (Fig. 25, F ) and vessel bodies (Fig. 25, E ).
In surface color these sherds range from light tan and grayishbrown to dark gray-black. The cores consistently have a deeper hue
than either the exterior or the interior. Grit and clay are prominent
in the paste of all but one sherd; this exception having finely pulverized particles of bone. The texture is fairly fine and typically well

c

A'

A

G
F
D

',

H

E

I

L

J

I

0

' .

N

M

K

u

R

Q

S
0
0

lN.
CM.

T
2
6

v

Fig . 25. Decorated Pottery, Miscellaneous Artifacts of Clay, Modified Bone, and WattleImpressed Daub. A-D, Punctated-incised sherds . E, F, Pinched sherds . G, Brushed-appliqued
sherd . H, Applique ridge 1?1. I, Worked sherd. J , Ce ramic bead . K, Lump of clay. L-N,
Bone p ins. 0, Possible bone bead. P, P', Bone fleshing tool . Q , R, Bone awls. S, Possible awl.
T, Bone residue . U, V, Waltle-impressed daub. Exterior in profiles to the left. A, B, D-H, J ,
and L-V from Gossett Bottoms Site ; C, I, and K from Wild Bull Site.

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fused . Where not covered with pinching, the exteriors are poorly to
well smoothed, while all interior surfaces are moderately well finished.
One of the two rim fragments has a slightly convex lip, the other is
somewhat outturned and has a tapered, convex lip. Wall thickness is
8 to 10 mm., and the hardness is usually 3 on Moh's scale.
Pinching is not a widespread decorative technique, occurring primarily on Killough Pinched of the Frankston and Titus foci of the
Fulton Aspect ( Suhm and Jelks , 1962: 91). While identification with
this type is not warranted at the present time, it is probable that the
Gossett Bottoms sherds are closely related to Killough Pinched.
MISCELLANEOus SHERDS (Fig. 25, G, H; 2 specimens)
Included in this category are specimens which cannot be classified
into any of the above groups. One is a tiny clay-tempered body sherd
(Fig. 25, G ) with a brushed and appliqued decoration. The appliqued
node? (or possibly ridge ) seems to have been fingernail punctated.
The second specimen (Fig. 25, H ), also clay-tempered, is an unusual
piece which appears to have been an applique ridge. Presumably it
was not tightly welded to the vessel and has popped free. It is 4.3 em.
long, 1.8 em. wide, and 1 em. thick.

Worked Sherd (Fig. 25, I; 1 specimen)
Somewhat less than half of a small worked sherd was recovered
from the Wild Bull Site. It was evidently disc-shaped and shows careful grinding along the one intact edge. The sherd is plain and has a
fine, compact paste which contains small particles of crushed bone.
The diameter is estimated to have been approximately 2 em., and the
maximum thickness is .3 em. There are no indications of the specimen
having been perforated and its use remains undetermined.
Ceramic Bead (Fig. 25 , J; 1 specimen)
A rather small tubular bead having a very fine sandy paste was
found at the Gossett Bottoms Site. One end is slightly damaged, but
portions of the smoothed edge are still visible. The surface hardness
is 3.5, while the color is dark gray on both surfaces and the core. Total
length is 1. 7 em., outside diameter is .9 em., and the inside diameter
is .6 em. Since the central perforation is uniform in size, it seems quite
possible that the bead has been fashioned from a broken pipe stem.
Lump of Clay ( Fig. 25 , K; 1 specimen )
A rounded lump of untempered clay with a slightly flattened cross
section was obtained from the Wild Bull Site. It is very soft, is light
gray in color, and does not appear to have been fired. One surface is

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

235

covered with numerous fingernail scratches, some of which are recent,
but most are probably old. No other signs of wear can be detected and
it may be that this piece is nothing more than an unused lump of clay
collected by a potter. Its maximum diameter is 5 em., and its maximum thickness is 3.1 em.
ARTIFACTS OF BoNE AND ANTLER
Worked bone and antler are not common at the Cedar Creek sites,
occurring almost exclusively at Gossett Bottoms. This discrepancy in
distribution (Table 2), however, may be more a matter of preservation
than cultural differences. At least, the surviving specimens are typically fragmentary and, as a result, difficult to classify. Included are
three pins, a possible bead, a fleshing tool, six proximal ends of awls,
four possible flaking implements, and 13 pieces which either bear only
cut marks, or are too fragmentary to describe in detail.

Bone Pins (Fig. 25, L-N; 3 specimens)
While none of the bone pins is complete, each appears to have been
short and to have had a pointed distal end. They are carefully worked,
probably from mammal leg bones. All surfaces are either well
smoothed or polished and have numerous small striations which run
diagonally or horizontally across the long axis. On two, the cross
section is almost rectangular, on the third it is circular. The proximal
ends are well rounded, but otherwise unaltered. Maximum diameter
is .4 to .5 em., and the length of the one nearly complete bone pin is
estimated to have been 5 em.
Similar implements are often found at Wylie Focus sites and are
illustrated by Stephenson (1952: Fig. 94, Nos. 16 and 17) and by
Members of the Dallas Archeological Society (1963: Fig. 10, H-J).

Bone Bead? (Fig. 25, 0; 1 specimen)
A short section of a light, tubular bone, probably from a bird or
rodent, appears to have been cut at each end. The surfaces bear a
number of small striations, and have been slightly smoothed. The
lateral edges are somewhat tapered toward one end-undoubtedly a
reflection of the natural shape of the bone-and the cross section is
roughly plano-convex. Length is 1.7 em.; maximum outside diameter
is .7 em., and maximum inside diameter is .5 em.
Flesher (Fig. 25, P, P'; 1 specimen)
Manufactured from the long bone of a large mammal, perhaps a
deer, this artifact is tentatively identified as a fleshing tool. It shows
considerable smoothing or wear along the lateral edges and ends, but

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

relatively little on the flat surfaces. There was evidently limited effort
at shaping, the bone appears only to have been split and cut at the
ends. One end has a rounded bit, while the other is somewhat pointed,
having been produced by making a diagonal cut across the long axis.
Rodent teeth marks are common along both marginal edges . The
length is 8.6 em., maximum width is 2.1 em., and maximum thickness
is 1 em.

Bone Awls (Fig. 25, Q, R; 6 specimens)
Four proximal fragments and two medial sections are provisionally
recognized as bone awls. One of the proximal pieces (Fig. 25, Q) has
retained most of the articular joint, two have been extensively worked
and are spatula-shaped (Fig. 25, R), and the fourth is fragmentary
but may have also been spatula-shaped. Both of the medial pieces are
quite small and have roughly triangular cross sections. The cross sections of the proximal fragments on the other hand, vary from circular
to flattened. All were manufactured from the mammal limb bones,
perhaps from one about the size of a dog or coyote. No meaningful
dimensions can be taken.
Flaking Tools (4 specimens)
Each of these specimens is a small distal end of what may have
been a flaking implement. One is the tip end of an antler tine, two are
apparently fashioned from thick mammal bones, and the fourth is
perhaps part of a deer ulna. Three are tapered, with two of these
having somewhat beveled tips . The tip of the presumed ulna fragment
is flat in cross section and rounded in outline. All are polished and two
show probable use scars. Because of their incompleteness no measurements have been made.
Miscellaneous Modified Bone (Fig. 25, S, T; 13 specimens)
Included in this catchall category are 11 fragments of worked bone
and two pieces evidently residue from the production of bone implements. The worked specimens are both polished and shaped but are
too small to reveal much about the type of tool represented. Most, however, are possibly from awls, pins, or needles. Specifically, there are
three keenly pointed distal fragments, a large portion of a possible
unfinished awl (Fig. 25, S), and seven medial sections. The medial
pieces have plano-convex, or flattened cross sections.
The bone residue consists of two articular fragments one of which
has been completely severed 2.3 em. below the joint. The other (Fig.
25, T), apparently the lower limb bone of a deer, has been split in two
and a sliver removed from one edge.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

23 7

ARTIFACTS OF GLASS, METAL, AND LEATHER

Although varying considerably iri quantity (Table 2 ), all three sites
yielded relatively recent refuse consisting primarily of metal and glass.
From the Gossett Bottoms Site were obtained three thin fragments of
iron (probably from cans ) , a small white (porcelain? ) button, and
two small iron stars, apparently ornaments once riveted onto an item
of apparel. At the Wild Bull Site the following were collected: ten
fragments of earthenware (all apparently ironstone ), two pieces of
leather, a 12-gauge shotgun cartridge (labelled "U.M.C. Co. Nitro
Club"), two .22 shells (both marked with diamonds ) , 11 pieces of
bottle glass, a tapered wood screw, a heavy fragment of iron (possibly
from a stove) , a strip of lead perhaps from a jar lid, six square nails,
two round nails, an iron eye-like object, a small iron buckle, and an
embossed, brass disc .
Historic materials from the Lacy Site are similar to those recovered
from the Wild Bull Site and include: 45 pieces of bottle glass (one
unquestionably represents the base of a brown snuff bottle), one iron
tack, four staples, two bolts, four possible horseshoe nails, nine round
nails, two key type can openers, nine sherds of plain earthenware
(mainly ironstone), an iron buckle, base of a metal can, three fragments of an iron stove, a small iron cup (possibly from the base of a
chair leg), a brass overalls button ("Lone Star"), a small wad of lead,
a fragment of a glass button set, two pieces of narrow gauge iron wire,
eight thin pieces of iron probably from cans, three 12-gauge shotgun
cartridges (one "U.M.C. Co., New Club," one "Winchester Repeater",
and one "Western Super-X"), one 16-gauge shotgun cartridge
( "U.M.C. Co., New Club"), 15 .22-shells (one "P", three "U", one
"US," one "Peters HV," six have diamonds, and three have no visible
mark), a .32 shot cartridge, and a piece of pitch.
Without doubt this recent debris post-dates the Indian occupations,
although most of the historic items were in use by the tum of the 19th
century. The type and quantity from both the Wild Bull and Lacy
sites suggest the presence of a house in the vicinity, while more transient use seems indicated for the Gossett Bottoms Site.
NoN-ARTIFACTUAL REFUSE

A large number of specimens from the excavations are best described as miscellaneous, incidentally-accumulated refuse. Included
are food remains (animal bones and mussel shells), chipping debris,
and daub . Of these, only the daub and the animal bones have been
examined and appear in Table 2.

238

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Daub (Fig. 25, U, V; 1340 specimens)
Pieces of clay believed to have been used principally to plaster the
outside of thatch houses were found at each of the Cedar Creek sites.
All have been burned and many (an estimated 1Js to 1/2) bear impressions of perishable construction materials ranging from what appears
to have been grass (Fig. 25, V) to small poles (Fig. 25, U) perhaps as
much as 3.5 em. in diameter. None of the daub is tempered though
many pieces have a somewhat sandy texture. The colors are from grayblack to almost orange, and the maximum dimension is from less than
a centimeter to 6 em.
While all three sites yielded daub, it was common (1273 specimens)
just at Gossett Bottoms, where it occurred primarily in the eastern part
of the excavations (see Table 2 for the vertical distribution ). At both
the Wild Bull and Lacy sites the daub was more scattered, although
at the latter a slight concentration in the southern part of the excavations can be noted. In spite of a lack of collaborating evidence (such
as post holes), the presence of the daub-especially that wattle-impressed- suggests the former existence of a structure.

Animal Bones ( 1064 specimens)
The vertebrate fauna represented at the Cedar Creek sites is listed in
Table 2, the identifications having been made by Dr. Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr. of the Department of Geology, The University of Texas.
Bones are fairly numerous at the Gossett Bottoms and Lacy sites, but
are rare-probably because of poor conditions of preservation-at the
Wild Bull Site. To judge from their frequency, deer and, at the Gossett
Bottoms Site only, turtle were the most important sources of animal
food. Other forms, namely, bison (identification tentative because of
small sample), rabbit, raccoon, opossum, and fish, were also probably
eaten, but must have accounted for only minor additions to the diet.
Animals known from only a few bones-beaver, turkey, squirrel,
coyote, skunk, and gar-could have been utilized, or could just as well
have been introduced to the sites by some agency other than man
(e.g., predators ) . Certainly, however, the gopher, snake, and armadillo
(a recent addition to the fauna of the area) should be regarded as intrusive. As to the dog remains, most of those from Gossett Bottoms
represent a burial (see earlier section on Features); those from Lacy
have also been an intentional interment, but the field evidence is not
clear on this point, as the bones were recovered from an animal burrow.

TABLE 2

()

Provenience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir

;..
ill

ttl
0

()

WILD BULL
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Sm·· to to to to
fa ce 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0

(4 1 HE 61)
2.0 2 .5 3. 0 Unto to to cer2 .5 3.0 3.5 tain Total

Sur- to

to

to

to

to

to

ill

LACY (41 HE 70)
0. 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 U n -

GOSSETT BOTTOMS (4 1 KF 7)
0 .0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 Un to cer-

Sur- to

lace 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3.0 3.5 Lain T otal

to

to

to

to

to cer-

fa ce 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 tain To tal TOTAL

ttl
ttl
~
~

ttl

Artifa cts of Stone

Ul

Arrow Points
Alba
Bonham
Catahoula-like
Cliff ton
Cuney
Friley
... .
G ranbury
Perdiz
Sca Llorn
Steiner
1
:M isc. rec langular
stem
Misc. ex pand in g
sten1 , con vex ba se
Mi sc. e xpanding
stem , concave base .
.l\lli sc. subtriangular
Mi sc. eccentric
points
Arrow po in t
2
fra g m ents
Subtota ls
3

ttl

0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1

I

1

....
1

....

1

1

1

G
11

2
3

0

0

0

0

0

0

2
1
2
5

1

1

4
2
3
6
0

1
1

1

3
5
6
4
5

2
3
3

0

1

2

5
1
4
1

2

2

1

1

1

3

4

0
0

1
2

1

2

5

1

24
70

II

4

I

33

19

6

10
17

I

I

I

1

1
1

16
10
10
9

2

3

8

4

2

6

1

2
4

1

3

6

I

0

0

I

40
13 1

23

2
H

2
0

0

2
0
4
0
2
2
1
14
0
2

17
25
10
12

0

6

2

11

4

3
8

0

8

10

60
192

H

6

2

s

~

<

0H

~
Ul

...,
H

2

ttl

Ul

Dart Points
Bu/ vr~rde

1

Edgewood

Ellis
Folsom

1
1

I

3

....

1
1

1

5
1

0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0

2
1

5
1

to

(JJ

\0

~

TABLE Z-Continued
Provenience of th e specimens, Cedar
WILD BULL (41 HE 6 1)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 U nS ur- to

Gary a/sa
Gary colfa x
Gary hobson
Gary kaufman
Gary kemfJ
Gary kenedy
Gary panna nw ria
Gary nm ge
Gary, misc. and
lragmcnta 1·y
Kent
Marshall
i\1/orri/L
W esley
Yarbrough d ;ke
Yarbrough lindale
Yarbrough mabank
U ncl assir.cd
Fragment
Subtotal s
Kni ves
Ovate
Subtriangu lar
Lanceolatc
Bi -pointcd

~~~~!:·-~,~~~d
Petrified wood
Fragments
Subto ta ls

to

to

to

to

to

4

6
5

5

I

I

4
I

I

Sur- to

3

8
1

1

1

3

I

4
2
2

3

I

I

15
6

I

0
8

2

1
I

I

6
14

I
8
18

I

I

2

4
6

8
II

1
2

~

1

1
3
13
5
54 29

10
14

1
1
3

2

~

1

1

10
16

9
18

to

to

to

to

LACY (41 HE 70 )
0.0 0.5 1.0 1. 5 2.0 2.5 U n -

to ce r-

Sur- to

to

to

to

to

to cer-

5

3

8
I

I

2

1

20
1
0
0
0

1

2
1

3

2

1

8
I
1
0
0

38
4
4
2

1

1
1

0
0

0
0

1
1

1
1
9

I
1
2

1
7
36
130

0
0
100
206

0
0
16
37

1
7
152
373

2
I
3

1

3
2
0
I

18
9
17
G

... .

~

1

0

0
17
30

5
132
2 11

1
2
3

to

!nee 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3. 0 3.5 tain Total
lace 0. 5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2 .5 3. 0 tain Total TOTAL
2
1 2
2
3
10- -1
I- I
3
zi
6
I
7
I
15
3
I
4
25
3
G !J
J
5
2!>
1
2
3
44
J
1
1
3
0
9
5
I
4
4
3
I7
0
25
I
I
I
I
4
0
5
1
2
2
5
0
2
I
I
I
5
0
13

10
2
3
2
1

1

Reservoir

GOSSE1T BOTTOMS (41 KF 7 )
I: .J U.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 Uu-

to ce r-

fn ce 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0 2.5 3. 0 3.5 ta in Tot.1l
6 --5- 2
1
14
I
1
3
1
6
I

C re~k

0

1

0

7
2
11
0

0

35
58

I

3

I

I

1

!

;

4
51
85

I
25
36

I
J

0

1

2
3
1

2
t

2
8
17

1
2

2 1 18 14
39 52 24

8
10

II
27

1
5

I

0

2
1

1
2

8
5
6
5

1

2
t

2

~

12
20

1
64
96

10
15

3
7

4
5

2
2

0

I

5
6

I

I
4

3
12

4
II

2
2

0

1
I

2
1

1

I

I
1
3

1
2
3

3
4
9

1
4
7

1
5
6

1
2

0

~

~

~
;..
"'

~

(")

~

~

b
C)

n
~

0

0
~

><

TABLE 2---Continued

(l

Provenience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir

:>

WILD BULL (41 HE 6 1)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3. 0 Un Sur- to to to to to to to cerlace 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 tain Total

-1
0

I

0
2

2

3
3

5
12

2
1
1
6
10

1
1
3
5
1

0

0

0

.... ....

0

Rurin Spa ll ?
Gravers
Gouges

Clear Fork
Guadalupe?
Subtole:1l s

4

I

Pebble
Bi-pointed
Miscellaneous

Gossr-' 11

GOSSEIT BOTTOMS (41 KF 7)
1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3 .0 Un to to to to to to to cerlace 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3. 0 3.5 tain Total
U.O U.5

Sur -

LACY (41
0.0 0 .5 1.0 1.5
to to to
lace 0 .5 1.0 1.5 2.0

Sur- to

HE
2. 0
to
2.5

70)
2.5 Un to cer3.0 tain Total TOTAL

~
()
~

1:1
t'1

:;.::
~

t'1
t'1

Ul

Bifa ces
Bristol

Subtota ls
Microliths
Drill s
Flake
Rew01·ked (?)
dart points
Subtotals
Burins

t'1

0

0

0

0

8
4
2
18
32
3

3

1
1
1
1
5

1

4

3

3

6
1

3

G

18
1

11

7

3

G

7
1
1
9

19

11

1
1

1

3
1
1

5
2

1
2

2

1
1

5
9
7

6
8

3

5
12

4
7

4

I

2
0

5
8

3
7

I

0

0

6
1

1
3
1

I

1

'f

0
1

0

1

0

0

I

0

4

0

1

0

0

0

I

0

1
1

1

0

1

0

1(}

5

6

3

52
3
1
56

2

3

2

2

3

2

1
1
1
5
3
3
4

1

0

1

1

1

0

7
1
1
6
15
1

32
6
5
42
85
7

1

2
3
0
0
3

10
1
1
37

0

0
0
0
0

60
3
1
64

0
0
0
5
4
0
0
0

12
10
3
24
37
14
11
1

5
I

0

0

2
4

1
1
8

2
2

0

0

1
1

l

0

1

fi

I

2

0
0
18

0

8
0
0
8

1

0

2

~

<

0

>-<

~
Ul

::J
t'1

Ul

6

1
0

17
1
2
18
38
3

0

1
0

1

0

I

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Scrapers

Mineola
End , large
Thumbnail
Core
Initial col'lex flake

Secondary flake
Concave-edge

Albany spokesh ave (?) 1

l

1
1

6
1

1

10
7
2
13
27
9
0
1

1

1
1

2
2

1
1
1

1
4

2
3
1
6
6
5
11
0

1
2

3

1
1

1

....

to
..,.
.......

to
..,.

TABLE 2-Continued

to

Provenience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir
WILD BULL
0.0 0.5 1. 0 1.5
Sur- to to to to
face 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
---

(41 HE 6 1)
2.0 2.5 3.0 Unto to to cer·
2.5 3.0 3.5 tain Total

GOSSETT BOTTOMS (41 KF 7)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0 2 .5 3.0 Un to to to to to to to cerlaco 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 lain Total

S ur-

LACY (41
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
to to to
face 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0

Sur- to

HE
2 .0
to
2.5

70 )
2.5 U nto cer3.0 tain Total TOTAL

lVIisce ll anco us and
fra gmentary

Subtotals
Utilized flakes

I

6
1

2
6
6

3
7

0

1
1

I

3
15
10

3
31
12

1

3

II

I

18
G

0

I

0

I

Boats tones

Celt
Notched peb bles
End
Side
Subtotals

2
2

1-lamm erston es
I-Iand ston es

1

3
2

0

0

0

0

....
1

I

I

6
24
5
47 48
1
1

3
6
19

3
8
17

2
8

0
4

1
G

0

6

1
I

1

1

0

I

Pi Lted s ton es

A braders
Scored hemat ite

80
43
0
0

I

4·

1

1

1

1

7
2
1
1
10
4

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1
1

1
2

12
46
149
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
2

0
1

0

3
3

0

3
3

0
1

1
3
4

0

1
1

0

0
1

0
2

0
1

0

0

0

1

2

1

1

1
10
14
0

24
136
206
2

0
0
0
3
0
0
1
4

6

2
2
12
10

Ocher
U mnodified
Sub to tn l

0

0

0

5
5

5
5

1
1

2

0
11

Smoo th ed

0

0

0

It

1
0

0

0

2

0

I

0

0

0

2
1
3

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0
0
0

2
12
14

Artifac ts of Clay

Cla y -tempered
Sand- tempered
Subtotal s
Dec01·a ted Sherds
Engra ved

Brushed

tt1

>
>
~

Ul

(')

~

tt1
0

Plain She rds

Shel l-temper·ed
Bone- lempered

>-:l
:><:

1
9

10

I

I

1

I

<f

2

5

3

3

3

1

1

0

0

0

4
19
0
0
23

4
1
5
38 28 18
I 104 52 28
I 13
6
I
5 159 87 52
3

7
7

<f

I

2

I

15

6

0

I

0

10
99
194
22
325

2
2
68 59
69 38
I
2
I
2 1 141 100

4
16

3
30
20
I

54

5
23
13
3
44

1
G
9

I
2

2

5
I

16

3

8

13
193
172
9
387

2i
3 11
366
31
735

J7
<fl

17
166

t"'

0

Q

()

>

t"'

Ul

0

0
0

0
2

75

28

15

5

125

2

5
26

3
5

G
3

2
2

J

2

I

(')

>-<

tt1

>-:l

><

TABLE 2--Continued

()

Provenience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir

>
:;.l

t'1
Cl

()

WILD BULL
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Sur - to to to to
face 0.5 1.0 ·t .5 2.0

(4 1 HE 6 1)
2.0 2.5 3. 0 Unto to to cer2 .5 3.0 3.5 La in Total

1

In cised

Tra il ed
Brushed-i ncised
Puncta ted

....

....

Puncta ted- incised
Pinched

....

Misccl la ne:J tl s

0

S ubtotals

'''orked shcrcl

I

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

....

....

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

Pipe stem

0

Clay lump

0

Art ifa cts o f bone
Pin s

<~nd

GOSSETI BOTTOMS (41 KF 7)
(l.O 0.5 l. O 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 U nSlw- to to to to to to to cerface O.S 1.0 1. 5 2.0 2.5 3. 0 3.5 tain T ota l
j(j

4

2G

6

1
2
3
1 20 20
4
1
13
2
3 131

57

12

I

l

3

1
35

3

10

10

10

8

:;.l

70)

3

l

+

1

0

0

1

5
58
9
15
2
24 1
0
1
0

2

3.0 lain T otal TOTAL

I

7

12
2

14
6

16
2

3
2

2

55
1

38

37

17

5

t'1
t'1

2.5 Un to ce r-

I

I

1
10

LACY (4 1 HE
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Sur- to to to to to
face 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0 2.5

2

2

2

5

46
0
0
53
12
0
0
166
1
0

70
I

5
Ill
21
15
2
408

:;.::
:;.l

t'1

"'t'1
:;.l

<

0

~

::l"'
t'1

"'

nntler

1

0
0
0

Bead (?)
Fleshing tool
Poss ibl e aw l
fragme nts

.. ..

0

0

0
0
0

2

3
1
1

1
1

....

0
0
0

.. ..

6

1

2

3
1
5

1
1

l

1
3
7

II

'f

3

0

Possib le flak ing tool
fragment s
iVIi scellaneous
0
S ubt otals
A •·tifa cts of metal , glass
and lea th er
4

Misc. (>C.C ut>a tional refuse
Daub
Faunal rcmalns
Bison bison (?)
( bison)
Odoce ileus sp. ( deer)

0

0

34

2

1

6

0

0

0

1
11

21

0

0

41
1

1

41

0
1

1

0

3
3

1
0

0

6
3G8 327 280 2 19

2
1 82

1
68 102

0

4
13

0

l

2R

5

1

"11 5

162

l

26

1340

8

0
235

661

1

0

I

0

1

0

G

87

15

7

0

0

65

11

3

1273

4

15

5

1

....

59

16

5

5
425

6Z

79

61

17

5

z
92

I

3
13
27

0

3

to
....

w

to

TABLE 2-Continued

t

Proven ience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir
WILD BULL
0.0 0 .5 1.0 1.5
to to to to
face 0. 5 1.0 1.5 2.0

Sur-

Canis familiaris
(do g)
Canis latrans
(coyo te )
Procy on loLor

(4 1 HE 61 )
2.0 2.5 3. 0 Unto to to cer2.5 3.0 3 .5 tain Total

....

....

.... ....

....
....

1

0

1

2

1

1

....

1

2

....

1

I

....

2

....

0

....

2
0

2

2

It

70)
2.5 U nto cer3.0 tain Total TOTAL

27

2

....

12

3

1

3

....
1

I
II

0

2

30

0

2

4

16

0

3

2
14

0

3

..,

I

5

;;..:

I

23

"'>

I

It

~

I

27

0

1

1
2

HE
2 .0
to
2 .5

1
1

0
0

....

4

LACY (41
0.0 0 .5 1.0 1.5
Sur- to to to to
fa ce 0.5 I .0 1.5 2.0

3

1

0

....
.... ....

1

1'
1

0

1

2

1

·~

9

5

4

2

20

II

6

4

3

24

0

24

'I

I

0
0
0
0
I
0
2 73

I

1
1

....

tT1

>

1:0

··-·
....

....

....

Snake

Fish
Gar

Subtota ls

0

0

( r arC3011 )

Spilogale puturious
(spottoJ sku nk)
Castor caJwdensis
( beaver)
Sciurus sp.
(squirrel )
Geomys sp. ( gopher)
Lepus californicus
(jack rabbit )
Sylvilagus sp.
(cottontail )
Dide lphis virginiana
( oposs um )
D .tsyp :1s novemcinc lus
(annadillo )
i\1/eleagris gallopavo
( t urkey)
Un identifi ed bird ( ?)
T errapene ( tortoise )

GOSSEIT BOTTOMS (4 1 KF 7)
O.U U.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0 2.5 3.1! Un to to to to to to cerfa ce 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 tain Total

Sur- to

0

4

0

0

0

0

0

• Canis fam.iiiaris , Level 4/Dog burial-64 bones.
t Nearly comp le te skeleton of one indiv iduu L

0

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
4

32
I

82
1

1

2

77

55

3
I
1
I 142 168 201 168

11

3
2ol
2

6

li
I

2
76

26

5

0

7R7

I

0

68

8 1 9 1 17
5
3
8
GHA ND TOTAL 5 11 8

3
203
2
7
I

1064

()

~
tT1

0

I:"

0

c;)

>-<

()

>

I:"

"'0
>-<
..,tT1
()

><:

CEDAI\ CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

245

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SPECIMENS
The vertical proveniences of all specimens described in the preceding section are presented in Table 2. In addition, the relative frequency
by six-inch level (numbered from top to bottom ) of selected artifact
groups such as pottery, arrow points, and dart points, is plotted in
Figures 26 and 27. Horizontal occurrences within each site were also
carefully examined, but, with the exception of the daub at the Gossett
Bottoms Site and, less clearly, Lacy Site, no meaningful differences
could be detected.
Looking more closely at the vertical proveniences, all three of the
sites appear to be considerably mixed. Clearest indications of this are
perhaps to be seen in a comparison of the distribution of the arrow
points and historic materials at the Lacy Site (Fig. 27), where one
could argue with reason that the latter, dated at about 1860 at the
earliest, is older than the former. That many of the specimens from
the Wild Bull and Gossett Bottoms sites are equally as well mixed
seems very likely in view of: ( 1) the similarity of the artifact-bearing
deposit at all of the sites, (2 ) the diversity of types and classes recovered at each site, and (3) a comparison with the sequential data
obtained from culturally-related sites such as Yarbrough and Miller
(Johnson, 1962). Possible causes for this seemingly clear mixture of
refuse are less apparent, although there can be no doubt that burrowing gophers and armadillos are contributing factors. Other plausible
explanat:ons are more evasive but perhaps lie in the techniques of
excavations and/ or the nature and origin of the culture-bearing sandy
soil. Regarding the latter, it at least seems possible that part of all of
the sandy deposit at each of the sites was formed or accumulated before
any occupation took place and that the specimens have simply worked
their way down into this zone.
Regardless of the causes, it is quite evident that the intrasite distributions are of limited utility and that the ordering of the collections
must depend to a large measure upon less direct methods, particularly
intersite comparisons. This approach reveals both qualitative and
quantitative distributional differences, many of which probably represent gradual stylistic and/ or functional changes which occun·ed
throughout the general area. Still imperfectly defined and tentative
in nature, these developments are summarized below by major artifact groups.
Arrow Points. Each of the sites yielded arrow points although they
were numerous only at the Gossett Bottoms and Lacy sites. The vertical occurrences indicate that arrow points are generally later than dart

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

points and, less certainly, pottery. A rather wide range of styles is
represented in the collection and there do appear to be some differences
in the distribution of certain types. At Lacy the most common types
are Catahoula-like ( 4 specimens) and Perdiz ( 14 specimens), while
at Gossett Bottoms types Alba, Clitfton, Granbury, Friley, Perdiz,
Scallorn, and Steiner are each represented by four or more specimens.
While no arrow point type can be said to be numerous at the Wild
Bull Site, it is probably of importance that the only recognizable forms
(one of each) are Catahoula-like, Perdiz, Clitfton, and Steiner. The
stratigraphic evidence is not strong, but some gradual stylistic chances
can be discerned. Markedly expanding stem (namely the Scallorn
type) and subtriangular (Granbury) forms are apparently the earliest
styles. These seem to be followed by a rather poorly defined group of
less expanding and rectangular stem types (such as Alba, Steiner, and
Friley ) which, in turn, are replaced by better defined contracting stem
forms (C litfton and Perdiz ) , as well as the heavy -shouldered Catahoula-like points. A similar, but likewise weakly supported, sequence
has been recognized in the McGee Bend area by Duffield ( 1963b: 140).
To the west and south, in the central part of the state, there are excellent stratigraphic data to indicate that the expanding and subtriangular
traditions precede the contracting stem one. The apparently more
intermediate types at Cedar Creek and McGee Bend, however, are not
well represented in central Texas.
Dart Points. Dart points occurred at all three of the sites, generally
below the arrow points (Fig. 26). The contracting stem Gary is far
and away the dominant type and is, for all practical purposes, the only
form recovered at Gossett Bottoms and Lacy. The chronological position of Gary is not entirely clear, although evidence from other sites
in the eastern part of Texas and adjacent sections of Oklahoma (Tunnell, 1961; Johnson, 1962; Duffield, 1963b) suggests that it is probably
a late Archaic type which continued in use for a short period after the
arrival of pottery. Since pottery and Gary points are present at each
of the Cedar Creek sites, it may be that at least some of the ceramics
are associated with this dart point form. However, it should also be
noted that at the Wild Bull Site pottery was scarce, but Gary points
were numerous; while at the Lacy Site pottery was common, but Gary
points were relatively uncommon. Not by any means conclusive, these
data nonetheless suggest that Gary points are associated primarily
with preceramic occupation .
Except for the Folsom point, the non-Gary specimens (many of
which cannot be typed) at the Wild Bull Site seem to represent a
second, but light, Archaic occupation. While the stratigraphic position

(')

.,

tt1

.;;·

0

...

."'

Q

WILD

LEVE L

?'

BULL SITE

TOTA L

Sur face

GOSSETT

LEVEL

BOTTOMS

SITE

>

TOTAL

Uncer t a i n

16

Su r f ac e
Vnc er loin

I

!!1

I

418

2

26

2

216

.

<"

-

10

~
(')
~

tt1
tt1
:;<1
~

..~

3

51

3

!58

tt1
tt1

4

32

4

55

<
0

a-

5

/0

5

38

(f)

6

2

6

6

1

I

1

2

~

(f)

.J:l

c

-::"<
~

~·
~·
::r

0

;;-

10

20

.
F

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100'/o

~

.....
~

...,.....
tt1

(f)

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100 ' /,

<

~

LEVEL

!!

S urfac e

LACY

SITE

TO TA L
44

0
l<

Uncerta in

.,

I

225

!!.

2

!56

~

D.
D

=+

.,
0

~

3.

10 9

4

12

5

23

6

D

~
@)

Arr ow Poi n Is
Do r I

Poi nts

Po l ie r y

5
0

:I

•

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100 '/,

.,

D.

~

iD
~

196 5

VMB

to
..,.
'l

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of these points provides no meaningful data, information summarized
by Johnson (ibid.) argues in favor of their preceding the apparently
late Archaic Gary type. As for the Folsom fragment, it could be all
that remains (or can be recognized) of an even earlier-Paleo-Indian
-occupation at the Wild Bull Site.
Other Stone Artifacts. Differences can be observed in the distribution
of many of the other lithic specimens, although the interpretation of
these contrasts is made tenuous by small samples and/ or by poor
stratigraphic data. It seems probable, however, that notched pebbles,
Gossett, Clear Fork, and Guadalupe ( ?) gouges, Mineola end scrapers,
Albany spokeshave, and petrified wood knives are associated primarily
with the non-Gary points at the Wild Bull Site. Other possible Archaic
tools which appear to be either more widespread or longer-lived include subtriangular knives, re-worked dart point drills, most of the
bifaces (the Bristol type, however, may have continued in use during
later periods ) , core scrapers, and large end scrapers. The only lithic
types which seem to be linked mainly with the arrow points are the
fl ake drills and the microliths. The remainder of the stone artifacts
cannot even be tentatively assigned to chronologie periods; perhaps
many of them were in use for a considerable span of time.
Pottery. The occurrence of pottery at the Cedar Creek sites presents
a rather confused picture which is difficult to unravel. It is most common at the Lacy and Gossett Bottoms sites where arrow points were
relatively abundant, and is rare at the Wild Bull Site where arrow
points were relatively scarce. These distributions, coupled with the
seeming absence of any demonstrably early type--such as Williams
Plain found at the nearby Yarbrough and Miller sites (Johnson, 1962)
or at the Scott Site in Oklahoma (Bell, 1953)-suggests that the
pottery is linked mainly with the arrow point occupations and that it
is rather late. On the other hand, the vertical distribution of the
ceramics at the Lacy and Gossett Bottoms sites would seem to indicate
that it was earlier than the arrow points (Fig. 26 ) . Evidence to resolve
this apparent conflict is simply lacking, as are data which might show
a linkage between the decorative and technological subgroups and, say,
the arrow point styles.
Artifacts of Bone. Modified bone objects were recovered from only
the Gossett Bottoms Site, where they tended to be found moderately
deep (i.e. , below the arrow points ) in the deposit. The absence of bone
artifacts at Wild Bull may be a matter of preservation, particularly
since only four pieces of unmodified bone were found at this site. However, at the Lacy Site there were considerable quantities of bone refuse
(273 pieces), none of which had been worked. This hints that a cultur-

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

249

al factor was, at least in part, affecting the distribution, although at
this point its nature cannot be specifically defined.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Excavations carried out at Cedar Creek Reservoir in the spring of
1964 by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project resulted in the recovery of considerable quantities of occupational refuse from three,
largely aboriginal, sites. An analysis of the native artifacts obtained
indicates that all three were repeatedly, but intermittently, occupied
over a considerable span of time. The disturbed nature of the deposits
in which the specimens were buried, however, makes the ordering of
the collections extremely difficult. In spite of these perplexing problems, certain changes in the culture of the various occupants can be
distinguished, principally on the basis of contrasts in the intersite
distribution of some of the artifacts. These changes can be conveniently, if somewhat oversimply, grouped into five broad chronologie
periods (numbered from earliest to latest):
Period 1, believed to be the earliest represented, is tenuously factored out of the collection from the Wild Bull Site solely on the basis
typological pecularities of a Folsom point medial section, a basal fragment of a second, stylistically early-appearing point (possibly of the
Eden type), and even more uncertainly, a burin and burin spall. Each
of these occurs in a very mixed cultural context and could conceivably
have been introduced to the site by later inhabitants. I feel, nonetheless, that their occurrence at only the Wild Bull Site and the fact that
they are made from foreign materials make it more reasonable to
assume that these artifacts represent a very brief occupation during
Paleo-Indian times.
The second period of occupation is more definitive, but is significantly present only at the Wild Bull Site. Its temporal placement is
troublesome and must be largely inferred from findings made at other
nearby sites (Crook and Harris, 1952; Duffield, 1963b; Johnson,
1962). The diagnostic artifacts fall stylistically within the Archaic
tradition and include notched pebbles, a high percentage of scraping
and cutting tools (many of which tend to be large and crudely-made),
and a rather miscellaneous series of rectangular and expanding stem
dart points (many of which cannot be typed). Of the scraping tools,
the Gossett and Clear Fork gouges, and perhaps the Albany spokeshave, the Mineola end scraper, and the initial cortex flake scraper are
the most characteristic. Other lithic specimens, such as knives, heavy
bifaces, core scrapers, grinding implements, pitted stones, and gravers

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

appear to be typical of the period, but are less definitive and probably
carried over into at least Period 3.
Period 3, believed to mark the late Archaic and to be most easily
recognized by the contracting stem Gary dart point type, occurs at
each of the sites, but can be said to be well represented only at Gossett
Bottoms and Wild Bull. Other traits which might be associated with
this period are difficult to enumerate, although the Bristol biface,
many of the knife forms , grinding implements, scrapers, pitted stones,
and perhaps even a few polished stone implements (boatstones and
celts) are likely candidates. While the vertical proveniences (Table 2
and Fig. 27) suggest that pottery may have first appeared in at least
the latter part of Period 3, there are also indications of a preceramic
Gary component. Evidence in favor of this component consists of the
finding of large numbers of Gary points (68 specimens) and few
sherds (24) at the Wild Bull Site and, conversely, by the presence of
few Gary points ( 18) and large numbers of sherds (533) at the Lacy
Site. Less direct support for the largely preceramic nature of Period 3
comes from the apparent absence of any demonstrably early pottery,
such as Williams Plain , which in other areas has been associated with
Gary points (Bell, 1953; Johnson, 1962) .
Period 4 is heralded chiefly by the appearance of arrow points, with
types Scallorn and Granbury being the most distinctive. Other forms
possibly also associated, but perhaps arriving later or lasting longer,
include Alba, Friley, Steiner, and Bonham. Both plain and decorated
pottery were surely being made, but the linkage of specific technological or decorative types is impossible. For all practical purposes, Period
4 is present only at the Gossett Bottoms Site.
The last occupational period recognized occurs at each of the sites,
although in significant quantities just at Lacy and Gossett Bottoms.
Cliffton, Perdiz, and Catahoula-like are the major arrow point forms
of Period 5, having replaced the largely expanding stem and subtriangular forms of Period 4. There are hints that fewer lithic implements were in use, with the heavier bifaces, gouges, and scrapers
having been almost completely abandoned. Small flake drills, however,
do appear to be associated. Pottery continued to be made and, while no
specific complex can be defined, it may be that shell-tempering and
engraved decorations appear for the first time.
The relative sequence of artifact changes briefly outlined above are
interpreted as having occurred over a rather considerable period of
time and as having extended over a fairly wide geographical region.
On the Archaic level, the Cedar Creek materials of Periods 2 and 3
compare quite favorably with a group of sites (Yarbrough, Miller,

.;. .,

()
~

a~

~

.

·~ !::l

LEVEL

:;- :
;. Q

Surface
Uncertain

~ ~·

I

~ Cf)
'
~
~

g

"- g
~ -<
0 ::. "

;;. ~

a

GOSSETT BOTTOMS SITE

WILD BULL SITE

TOTAL

TOTAL

LEVEL

l3

10

Su rfa ce
Unce rt ain

383

I

19

?i

2

195

2

16

(/)~

3

139

3

33

4

41

4

21

5

21

5

6

~

~
~

6

5

6

7

2

1

~
<:

0

>-<

~

~

VI

:-. ;;c·
Q' !.

c
>
~

0

...,

t'rj

~~
!" :T

%

(/)

...<

.

_...
;

LE VEL

0

Sur face

~

LACY

SITE

TOTAL
43

Unc ertain
I

220

I

~·

2

15 4

2

g>

3

I 5

o

3

4

4

61

:::.

,

5

21

2.

6

Q

~

~

20

3o

4o

5o

60

10

8o

90

IOO'Io

1965

110

m?tm~ttt?@~jt~flt~ltkr

: =:::trrtt::::rrr:NHftttt:

29

13

5
10

20

17-7,1
[:2L:I

Go r y Oo rt Points
m
l2d Decorated She r ds

til

0

it

1o

TOTA L
2

0

m

o

"-

5
o

!!'

SITE

Uncerlo,·n

"8

~

LACY

LEVEL
Su r face

Histo r ic al

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100"/o

~
Qllill

Arrow

Points

D

Ploin

She r ds

It ems
VMB

~

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Martin, Limerick, and Boat Dock) found in northeastern Texas and
adjacent parts of Oklahoma and recently recognized as comprising a
distinctive areal cluster within the La Harpe Aspect (Johnson, 1962:
268-280) . The early part of the La Harpe Aspect, distinguished mainly by expanding stem dart points, appears to equate, at least in part,
with the light Period 2 occupation at the Wild Bull Site. If so, the data
from Cedar Creek suggests that notched pebbles, heavy bifaces, large
end and core scrapers, and Mineola end scrapers are traits which might
also belong to the early phase of the La Harpe Aspect. The late La
Harpe Aspect, marked mainly by the presence of Gary points, seems
to be particularly well represented at Cedar Creek, corresponding to
occupational Period 3. On the other hand, the terminal La Harpe
Aspect, characterized primarily by the arrival of plain, often crudelymade pottery, appears to be completely absent at the three Cedar Creek
sites. Also missing are such items as full-grooved axes and f1exed burials, but these last-named absences may ref1ect sampling errors more
than cultural differences.
While there is no doubt that the Archaic ties lie mainly with the
central cluster of La Harpe Aspect sites, there are a few in!fications of
limited relationships with other areas. Among these are suggestions of
slight contact with peoples in the southeastern part of the state, an
area that Johnson ( 1962: 269-278) sees as constituting yet another
distinct areal division within the La Harpe Aspect. Specific Archaic
traits at Cedar Creek which seem to point in this direction include the
petrified wood knives and, less clearly, the pebble bifaces and possibly
the Albany spokeshave. The few sand-tempered sherds found at Clear
Creek could also possibly relate to the south, where sand-tempered
pottery is quite common and was evidently first introduced in late
Archaic times (Tunnell, 1961) . However, the Cedar Creek specimens
cannot, on the basis of the present sample, be proven to be typologically
the same, nor can they be said to be clearly associated with the Archaic
occupations.
Somewhat closer, though perhaps more generalized, ties can be
found to the northwest, in the upper Trinity River drainage, with the
Carrollton and Elam foci of the Trinity Aspect (Crook and Harris,
1952; 1954). Most interesting of the traits shared with these foci are
gouges (apparently most of the Clear Fork type) and notched pebbles.
The remainder of the like artifacts are fairly numerous, but are also
common to virtually all of the central group of La Harpe Aspect sites.
Johnson ( 1962: 270) has already noted these similarities and has left
open the question of including the Trinity Aspect, especially the Elam

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

253

Focus, in the La Harpe tradition. The data from Cedar Creek contribute relatively little to clarification of this problem.
Evidence of any prolonged connections with Archaic manifestations
in the central part of the state, chiefly the Edwards Plateau Aspect, are
lacking, although a few of the dart point types (Bulverde and Marshall), the Clear Fork gouges, and the notched pebbles do frequently
occur in that region. On the whole, however, the materials from Cedar
Creek appear to represent a basically distinct culture whose history is
far more intimately bound with that of Archaic remains (largely the
La Harpe Aspect) found in the eastern part of the state.
The Neo-American Stage at Cedar Creek Reservoir is defined as
including all materials of Periods 4 and 5, with arrow points and
pottery being the most characteristic artifacts. As for the pottery, none
of the sherds can be identified with a specific type with any meaningful measure of certainty. Most, however, appear to be within the
Caddoan ceramic tradition, showing general typological similarities
with types found in the Gibson Aspect (perhaps mainly Sanders
Focus) and, to a lesser extent, the Fulton Aspect. This suggests the
hypothesis that the local ceramics may have been derived mainly from
contact with Gibson Aspect peoples and that the pottery styles of the
later Fulton Aspect did not as profoundly affect the Cedar Creek area .
Significantly, a somewhat comparable situation may have prevailed
at the Strawn Creek Site, roughly 40 miles to the southwest, where the
pottery appears to reflect strong influence from the Alto Focus of the
Gibson Aspect (Duffield, 1963a) .
The major arrow point types recognized at Cedar Creek are common, or at least well recorded, in central and north-central sections of
the state. Perdiz and Clifjton are the principal diagnostics of the protohistoric Toyah Focus, while Scallorn and Granbury are important
traits of the earlier Austin Focus (Jelks, 1962: 84-90 ). All four of
these types, in addition to Alba and Catahoula, are also frequently
found at sites identified as Wylie Focus-a complex which occurs
mainly in the upper Trinity area and which, as presently defined
(Stephenson, 1952) , may represent a considerable span of time. These
data suggest, but by no means prove, that the developments in arrow
point styles recognized at Cedar Creek are closely linked to those
which took place in north-central and/ or central Texas. Other traits
that might have bearing on possible relationships with the Wylie
Focus are the dog burial and bone artifacts found in uncertain context
(i.e., unassignable as to period ) at the Gossett Bottoms Site. Canine
interments (mainly wolf?) and numerous bone artifacts-pins, awls,
canine tooth pendants, deer ulna flaking tools, bone beads, and the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

like- have been listed as typical Wylie Focus features (Stephenson,
1952). On the other hand, many core traits of this complex are not
present and it is possible that the similarities which do exist may have
come to both the Cedar Creek area and the Wylie Focus from a common, but as yet unrecognized, source.
Obviously this and many other problems raised by the Cedar Creek
sites cannot be answered by the present findings. Significant gaps still
exist in the available data and the need for carefully-controlled field
work is evident. Also there is clearly a need for more broadly-based
typologies, ones which will eventually permit accurate and meaningful reconstruction of the cultural prehistory.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am indebted to a number of persons for their assistance in the
preparation of this report. Among the salvage project personnel, Miss
Marsha Jackson helped to prepare the figures and tables, Mrs. Barbara
Wood typed the manuscript, and Messrs. Harry J. Shafer, James Corbin, and Elton Prewitt checked the field records. Dr. Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr. of the Department of Geology, The University of Texas,
identified the faunal remains, while Mr. Cader A. Shelby of the Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas, examined and identified temper particles in a selected sample of sherds. Finally, Dr. Edward B. Jelks, Director of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
took time from his busy schedule to discuss problems of analysis and
interpretation.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1953. The Scott Site, L e Flore County, Oklahoma. American Antiquity, Vol.
XVIII, No.4, pp. 314-331 .
1958. Archeological Inv estigations at the Boat Dock Site, Ma-1, in the Lake
Texoma Area, Marshall County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. VI, pp. 37-47.
1960. Guid e to th e Id entifi cation of Certain American Indian Pro:ectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin No. 2.
Blair, W. Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of T exas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. II, No.
1, pp. 93-117.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr. , and R. K. Harris
1952. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
Bulletin of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 7-38.
1954. Traits of the Trinity Aspect Archaic: Carrollton and Elam Foci. The
Record, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. Z-16.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

255

Davis, W. A.
1961. Archeological Survey and Appraisal of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas. Mimeographed report submitted to the
National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas.
Davis, W. A., and E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir
Area, Northeastern Texas. Archaeology S2ries, No. 3, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1961. The Limer:ck Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959), pp. 51-116.
1953a. The Strawn Creek Site: A Mixed Archaic and Neo-American Site at
Navarro Mills Reservoir, Navarro County, Texas. Mimeographed report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
1963b. The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic-Neo-American Site in San Augustine
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp.
83-141.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1951. The PearsJn Site: A Historic Indian Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 4, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1960. Burins from Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 93-97.
1963. Centiped ~ and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33, pp. 1-129.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938. Physiography of Eastern United States, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.
Ford, James A. , Philip Phillips, and William G. Haag
1955. The Jaketown Site in West-Central Mississippi. Anthropological Papers of
the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 45, Pt. 1.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Pt. 1.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. The University of Texas Publications,
No. 3809.
Jelks, Edward B.
1961. Excavations at Texarkana Reservoir, Sulphur River, Texas. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 179 and River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 21.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archaeology Series No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
1965. The Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, The
University of Texas.

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959. The Harroun Site: A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, Archaeology Series, No. 2, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962. The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a Preliminary
Definition of the La Harpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 32 (for 1961 ), pp. 141-284.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr. , Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962. Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir:. The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 5.
Krieger, Alex D .
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University
of Texas Publications, No. 4640.
Members of the Dallas Archeological Society
1963. An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Forney Reservoir, Collin,
Dallas, Kaufman, and Rockwall Counties, Texas. Multilith rep::.rt submitted to the National Park Service by The University of Texas.
Newell, Perry H., and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, Vol. XIV, No.4, Pt. 2.
Phillips, Phillip, James A. Ford, and James B. Griffin
1951. Archeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Valley, 1940-1947. Papers
of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard
University, Vol. XXV.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1941. Various Types of Clear Fork Gouges. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 13, pp. 152-162.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1954. The Geology of Texas, Vol. I: Stratigraphy. The University of Texas
Bulletin, No. 3232. 3rd printing.
Sellards, E. H.
1941. Stone Images from Henderson County, Texas. Am erican Antiquity, Vol.
7, No. 1, pp. 29-38.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. The University of Texas
Press.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1952. The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity, Vol.
XVII, No. 4, pp. 299-312.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks (editors )
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin
No.4.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

257

Watt, Frank H.
1938. The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist, No. 4, pp. 21-70.
Webb, Clarence H .
1946. Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts from Northwest Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 17, pp. 9- 17.
Wood, Raymond W.
1963. Two New Projectile Points: Homan and Agee. The Arkansas Archeologist,
Vol. IV, No. 2, pp. 1~6.
Texas Almanac, 1964--1965
1965. Published by the Dallas Morning News.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1961. Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites in the M·cGee Bend
Reservoir, San· Angustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959) , pp. 123-158.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

The Bipolar Flaking Technique
In Texas and New Mexico
KENNETH H. HONEA
ABSTRACT
The bipolar flaking technique consists basically of holding a pebble core vertically
on an anvil and striking th e top of th e core with a hammerstone. Primary flaking
of this type is widespread in those parts of the world where the main source of
flaking material is pebbles. The author has found the bipolar technique to occur in
east-central Texas and north-central N ew Mexico.

The nature of core material available in a given area is a prime
factor determining not only the practice of certain stone flaking techniques but also the technological development of prehistoric cultures.
Research has shown that certain materials-depending on their fracturing qualities, size, and form-can be worked by certain techniques
but not by others, and that these materials can be used to produce
certain tool forms but not others (Clark, 1954: 160- 161; Honea, ms.a;
ms.b; 1965 ) .
Take as an example the McGee Bend Reservoir of east-central Texas
where the most abundant raw material is coarse-grained silicified
wood. Fracturing qualities are characteristically laminate or tabular.
Chunks of this material are easily fashioned into a variety of hand
tools by freehand hammerstone percussion. Due to its inherent fracture, however, it cannot be successfully worked by either the pressure
or cylinder-hammer (billet ) techniques. A prerequisite of materials
to be worked by either of these techniques is conchoidal to even fracturing qualities. Consequently, there is a notable absence of implements fashioned by these techniques in a~eas where native coarsegrained silicified wood or similarly textured stones are the only sources
of core material.
It is of course possible, and in some cases demonstrable, that a change
in the type of available material took place (either through human or
natural agencies ) permitting the development of flaking techniques
and tool forms not previously possible. Trade and quarrying are two
such possibilities; another is the exposure by either erosion or tectonic
action of new, more suitable materials.
On the other hand, the practice of certain flaking techniques may

260

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

be characteristically associated with given stages in the development
of a lithic complex. Later stages may show evolutionary changes tending towards refinement. Nonetheless, "crudity" of flaking does not
always indicate a lesser stage of development, nor refined flaking an
advanced stage. Here again, the above-mentioned nature of available
material may play an important role. Thus, a series of closely related
lithic cultures occurring in different areas may show some diversity of
materials and flaking techniques in their respective areas of occurrence, but yet belong to a related complex.
The relation of all these factors to the formal morphology of flaked
stone tools is obvious . Projectile point Type X may be characteristically
made of certain materials and by certain techniques in one area, but
the same type point may also be made from different materials and by
different techniques in another area.
In other instances, the choice of flaking materials may have been
determined through cultural conservatism, even when a variety of
suitable materials were available. So far as known, obsidian was rarely,
if ever, used in the making of projectile points during the Paleo-Indian
Horizon of north-central New Mexico. This material was certainly
available in quantity. By contrast, obsidian, pitchstone, and finegrained basalt, all black rocks, were extensively employed during the
succeeding Archaic Horizon of the same district, even though choice
chalcedonies and cherts were also at hand (examples in Museum of
New Mexico collections).
Finally, the choice of materials was influenced by the intended
function o£ tools. Thus, implements utilized in battering functions are
generally of tough, durable materials, such as the basalt used for
hammerstones found in north-central New Mexico Puebloan sites .
The occurrence of the bipolar technique in certain areas of the world
is a striking example of the influence of the size and form of locallyavailable core material on flaking techniques. Lantier, the French
archeologist, working on the basis of Old World findings, has shown
that the bipolar technique consistently occurs in those areas where
the main or choice source of core material is littoral or fluviatile pebbles too small to work by freehand hammerstone, cylinder-hammer,
or block-on-block percussion (Lantier, 1958: 33-34).
The bipolar technique consists of holding an oblong pebble core, the
size of an egg or smaller, vertically on a flattish, stationary anvil and
striking the core on the proximal or top end with a hammerstone
(Breuil et Lantier, 1959: 75-77; Clark, 1954: 155; Furon, 1958: 149;
Honea, ms.a). The anvil utilized is commonly of stone, but a large

261

BIPOLAR FLAIUNG TECHNIQUE

bone, block of hardwood, the ground, the padded thigh or even palm
of the stone-worker's hand may also be employed.
The flakes struck off in the above manner are called bipolar flakes.
They are usually about three-quarters the length of the pebble core
and are commonly longer than they are wide. Sometimes flakes are
detached simultaneously from both ends of the core. More frequently
than not, those coming off the distal or lower end of the core are both
smaller and shorter than those coming off the top (Fig. 1).
Occasionally, a bipolar flake, approximately equal in length to the
pebble core, will exhibit a major bulb of percussion on the proximal
end and a minor bulb of percussion on the distal end of the inside or

D

0

2

3

c

Fig. 1. Sketch Showing Detachment of a Flake by the Bipolar Technique. A, Pitted stone.
B, Single-ended bipolar core. C, Arrows showing the direction of hammerstone blow. D,
Hammerstone. E, Bipolar flake in process of detachment. F, Minor flake detached from
bottom of core along with E.

262

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

flat face. These are produced in the following manner on stone anvils.
As the term "bipolar" implies, mechanical force, inducing fracture of
a flake from a core, is applied at both ends of a core: at the proximal
end by the hammerstone and at the distal end, resting on the stone
anvil, by secondary mechanical force rebounding from the anvil upwards into the core. Opposed major and minor bulbs are formed when
the axes of percussion or poles of this combined primary and secondary
mechanical force coincide. Bipolar cores are occasionally worked on
their lateral edges, in which case flakes tend to be short and stubby
(Fig. 2, C, D). Several types of bipolar pebble cores can be distinguished. The criteria used in their classification are much the same as
those applied to cores worked by other techniques (see recent description by Suhm in Johnson, et al., 1962: 73). On the single-ended type,
flakes have only been struck from one end of the core (Fig. 2, A). On
the double-ended type, flakes have been struck alternately from both

CM
Fig . 2 . Sketch Show ing Type s of Cores, All of the Non-Prepa red Variety . !A rrows indicate
points of impact of hammerstone , and the dotted areas the stone cortex .) A, Single-ended.
B, Double-ended . C, D, Multi- platformed .

BIPOLAR FLAKING TECHNIQUE

263

ends of the core (Fig. 2, B) . On the multi-platformed type, however,
flakes have been struck from both ends and lateral edges of the core
(Fig. 2, C, D ) .
Platforms of bipolar pebble cores are commonly plain. That is, a
naturally convex, concave or plane, cortex-covered surface of one end
of a pebble core was used as a platform. Remnants of this kind of platform, as well as the others described below, are present on the proximal or bulbar ends of the detached bipolar flakes . Occasionally, utifaceted platforms are made on pebble cores. In this case, a single flake
is struck off one end of the core at an approximate right to slightly
oblique angle to the length of the core and direction of intended primary flaking. The resultant flake scar, somewhat concave, is used as a
platform. Faceted platforms are less frequently made on pebble cores.
They are made by striking off a series of roughly parallel flakelets from
the top of the core at approximate right angles to the intended direction of flaking. Both unfaceted and faceted cores are sometimes prepared in the Levallois fashion, i.e. , the cortex is trimmed off the core
surfaces by multi-directional unifacial or bifacial percussion flaking
before preparation of the platform and prior to commencement of
primary flaking .
In summary, it might be asked how we can specifically determine
presence of the bipolar flaking technique at an archeological site. One
body of suggestive evidence is the presence in quantity of bipolar pebble cores. A second, and better, indicator is the presence of s ~one-anvil
struck bipolar flakes exhibiting a major, positive bulb of percussion on
the upper end and a minor, positive bulb of percussion on the lower
end. On bipolar cores, these features on any given bipolar flake scar
are apparent as major negative and minor negative bulbs respectively.
They are only produced when direct primary mechanical force (from
the hammerstone ) and indirect secondary rebounding mechanical
force (from the stone anvil) are exerted simultaneously on both ends
of a core. The third indicator is association of bipolar pebble cores and
bipolar flakes with stone anvils, as outlined below.
In the course of research carried out between 1960 and 1964, the
author has found evidence suggesting the bipolar flaking technique in
both east-central Texas and north-central New Mexico. The studied
artifactual material from Texas sites stemmed from the McGee Bend
Reservoir area ( 41 SA 69, Sowell Site ; 41 SA 117, Wolfshead Site; 41
SA 118; 41 SA 120; and 41 NA 11 , Etoile S.!te ) . The New Mexico
material was from the Cochiti Reservoir sites LA 272; LA 6455, Nelson Site ; LA 6462, North Bank Site; and LA 70, Pueblo Encierro, all
to the west-northwest of Santa Fe. Study of lithic assemblages from

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

these two regions was complemented by experimental flaking carried
out in both the field and in the laboratory, using unworked pebble
cores, hammerstones, and stone anvils excavated or collected from the
above sites. In the way of specific materials, the Texas pebble cores
were of jasper and fine-grained silicified wood, while those from New
Mexico were of obsidian, chalcedony, and similar materials.
Experiments consisted of flaking, in the bipolar fashion, of 20 vertically-held pebble cores from each site, employing either stone or
wooden anvils, and the palm of the hand. Ten additional cores from
each site were separately worked by free-hand hammerstone percussion, during which the horizontally held cores were end-struck.
Results of these experiments showed that pebble cores were more
effectively worked in conjunction with stationary anvils of stone, using
the bipolar technique as above described. Free-hand hammerstone
percussion of horizontally hand-held cores was difficult to control.
There was a consistent tendency for detached flakes to be quite short
and thick, probably as a result of the absence of secondary rebounding
mechanical force.
While it was feasible to strike off flakes from the ends of cores held
vertically in the supported palm of the hand, it was determined the
method was neither as efficient nor as satisfactory as in the use of
stone or wooden anvils, especially the former. Disadvantages in the
repeated use of the palm were apparent in a bruised, aching palm.
Insertion of a leather cushion did relieve some of the discomfort, however. Otherwise, palm-worked cores compared favorably with those
worked on stone and wooden anvils. The superiority of the latter,
particularly those of stone, was marked with respect to facility and
rapidity of flaking, by which large numbers of longish bipolar flakes
could be detached.
Stone anvils employed in the working of Texas jasper pebble cores
were of sandstone; basalt, sandstone, and rhyolite stone anvils were
used with New Mexico materials. Use-marks produced on all, including those of wood, were in the form of localized areas of battering or
pitting. Texas sandstone anvils u sed in the experiments had a small,
circular depression on one face, in which the core was held while flaking. The apparent advantage of the depressions was prevention of
cores from slipping when struck on their upper end with the hammerstone.
" Pitted stones" were noted during our research to consistently occur
at sites in the McGee Bend Reservoir, together with bipolar cores and
flakes. These stones, which, as we shall observe, may have been used
as anvils, are flattish, frequently fist-sized or somewhat larger cobbles

BIPOLAR FLAKING TECHNIQUE

265

exhibiting one or more small, shallow, circular depressions on one or
more faces or sides. In some instances, pitted stones have been intentionally pecked and ground to rectangular, oval or discoidal shapes.
They are commonly of sandstone, less frequently of hematite.
Some authors, such as Fundaburk and Foreman (1957: Pl. 72 ) ,
have considered pitted stones to have been used as " nutting stones"
(i.e. , nuts presumably were placed in a depression and cracked with
another stone ) . Another possible use would be utilization as miniature
paint grinders. Although it is probable that pitted stones may have
been in part thus used, it does not seem this was in fact their only
function.
The characteristic depressions on pitted stones have been produced
either incidental to use, or by intentional pecking and perhaps grinding. It seems feasible , at least in theory, that their function could have
been to accommodate the convex bases of pebble cores during flaking
by the bipolar technique, perhaps to prevent the core from slipping
to the side at the moment of percussion. Pitted stones observed to have
more than one depression, often of different sizes (usually on the
opposite face, but occasionally, on larger stones, several on both faces
or sides ) , are thought to conceivably have been used in the working
of cores of variable size. This, however, is only a conjecture.
The association of pitted stones with the bipolar flaking technique
in the McGee Bend district seems to be supported by the occurrence
at all of the sites studied of 1) stone-anvil struck bipolar pebble cores,
as well as bipolar flakes, and 2) various tools which may have been
made of these small cores and flakes.
It is of interest, and at the same time quite in keeping with evidence
from sites in parts of the Old World, that the main sources of quality
core material in the McGee Bend area were pebbles of jasper and, to
a lesser extent, fine-grained silicified wood. Both of these take a conchoidal fracture. The quantitatively dominant material, however, was
coarse-grained silicified wood. It occurs abundantly in small to large
angular chunks. In contrast to pebble materials, this was worked uniformly by free hand hammerstone percussion. The tabular or laminate
fracturing qualities of this material seems, incidentally, to have precluded flaking by the cylinder-hammer (billet) , pressure, and bipolar
techniques.
An analysis of McGee Bend bipolar cores and flakes showed the
presence of single-ended, double-ended, and multi-platformed bipolar
pebble cores. The latter was least frequent. Studies of platforms indicate that bipolar cores were commonly flaked without special preparation of the platform surface. Characteristically, this surface was

266

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

comprised of the cortex of the original pebble core. Unfaceted platforms were quite rare, while faceting was absent. The faces of some
cores may have been prepared in the Levallois fashion prior to the
striking off of bipolar flakes .
Studies of lithic assemblages from sites in the Cochiti Reservoir
district of north-central New Mexico suggest practice of the bipolar
technique during all Pueblo culture stages represented in the district.
The technique is associated there with the working of obsidian pebbles,
which are found in abundance in deposits of volcanic ash in the nearby
Jemez Mountains. These pebbles also occur in local stream gravels,
primarily those of the Rio Grande. Pebbles of chalcedony, agate, chert,
and jasper were less often employed.
Bipolar core and flake types are in the main stone-anvil struck and
do not differ with respect to morphology appreciably from those of
east-central Texas. Cochiti district specimens usually have plain platforms, and cores are either single-ended, double-ended, or multi-platformed, in that order of frequency.
Pitted stones of the type found in the McGee Bend Reservoir area
of Texas are absent at the Cochiti sites. The perhaps closest parallels
are the occasional, secondarily pitted manos which have a circular
depression worked into either one or both faces. The original function
of these pieces is established by the presence on one or both faces of
previously-produced use-striations running at right angles to the mano
long-axis. Such striations are typically the result of grinding grain on
a metate. Depressions are sometimes also found on the surface of
grinding stones, grinding slabs, and lapstones. In the Cochiti district,
the latter are usually of fine-grained basalt. They were used primarily
as a base or support stone on which leather or vegetal materials were
rested while being cut with stone knives or sharp-edged flakes. Long,
shallow, multi-directional striations are suggestive of this function.
More frequently , localized areas of battering, rather than actual depressions, are observed on the surface of lapstones. These use-marks,
in our opinion, are strongly suggestive of use in an anvil function.
Since stone-anvil struck bipolar cores and flakes were excavated from
the same Cochiti sites where these implements were found , it seems
possible bipolar flaking could have been carried out on them. The rare
depressions observed on manos, grinding stones, grinding slabs, could,
it appears, have been similarly used. Nonetheless, we do not discount
the possibility that at least some depressions were employed in paint
grinding. This was not the general practice, however, since large num bers of pigment-stained paint grinding palettes were excavated from
the sites in question.

BIPOLAR FLAKING TECHNIQUE

267

As a final point, it should be noted that both pebble cores and pitted
ston es of various kinds occur in many parts of the Southwest. Whether
or not they were associated with practice of the bipolar flaking technique remains to be clarified. We also do not yet know the temporal
range of this technique, nor all the culture complexes with which it
occurs. Clearly, there is much research to be done before these question s can be an swered.
REFERENCES CITED
Breui l, H ., et R. Lantier
1959. L es H ommes de la Pierre Ancienn ". P ayo t.
Clark, J. D .
1954'. P reh is toric Cul tures of the Horn of Africa. Cambridge Un iversity Press.
Fundaburk, E. L., and M . D . F. Fo reman (editors )
195 7. Sun Circles and Human Hands. Publish ed by Emm a Lila Fundaburk.
Funn, R.
1958. Manuel de Prehistoire Generale. Payot.
Hon ea, K.
ms. a. The M cElroy Site. Unpublished m anu script on file at the T exas Archeological Salvage Project Office, The University of T exas.
ms. b. The Flaked Stone Industries of Pueblo Las M adres and Pueblo Largo,
Galisteo Basin, North-central New M exico. Unpublished manuscript on
fil e at the Division of Research, Museum of New M exico.
1965. A M orphobgy of Scrapers and their M ethods of Pro:lu ction. Southwes tern
L e~ re, Vol. 31 , N J. Z. The Colorado Arch aeological Society .
John son , LeRoy, Jr., D ee Ann Suhm, and Curti s D . Tunnell
1962. Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate Sites. Texas M emorial Mu seum, Bulle tin No. 5.
Lantier, R.
1958. La Vi e Prehiste>rique. Que Sais-ie?, No. 535. Le P oint des Connaissan ces
A ctuelles. Presses U niversitaires de France.
Museum of New M exico
Santa Fe, N ew Mexico

A Guide to the Drafting of
Archeological Maps
VAUGHN M. BRYANT, JR. AND ROBERT K. HOLZ
ABS1RACT
Scholarly writing in archeology is often accompanied by maps and other forms of
graphic illustrations. In th e past the quality of these illustrations has been rather
poor. Maps are an important form of visual communication, but a map can detract
from the scholarly nature of the accompanying written text if it is not drafted and
presented in a professional cartographic manner. Too often the archeologist seems to
be unaware of the whole, vast field of cartographic technique. The use of even the
rudimentary principles from this field would improve archeological mapping significant!:.::.. This article outlines some of the basic . errors and problems associated
with archeological maps and presents ideas, suggestions, and techniques for solving
these problems.

IN1RODUCTION

The science of archeology concerns itself with the study of past
cultures and the task of the archeologist is to record this information
in a factual and scholarly manner. Archeologists use maps to help
them present data, yet in many instances the quality of their maps is
rather poor. The caliber of archeological maps can be improved
through an understanding of some of the basic principles of cartography. This article will investigate some of these principles and will
show how each of them can be applied in the designing of archeological maps for reproduction and publication.
MAP REDUCTION

Every piece of paper has two marginal limits, a page size and an
effective page size. In this paper the page size refers to the entire sheet
of paper, or the whole page; while the effective page size is the page
size minus its border area, or that part of the paper which will be
used for printing. The page size of this journal is six inches by nine
inches, yet the maximum effective page size is only four and onequarter inches by six and one-half inches (Fig. 1). Any map or
illustration published in this bulletin can be of any size so long as it
does not exceed the dimensions of the effective page size. Ideally, a
map designed for use in this journal should be drawn with linear

270

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

dimensions twice those of the effective page size, or eight and one-half
inches by thirteen inches. Subjecting this enlarged illustration to one
full reduction will reduce its area to one-fourth the original size.
Linear distance, however, will be reduced by one-half their original
length (Fig. 2).
The question may be asked, " Why draft a map larger than the size
needed for publication ?". Cartographers u sually draft maps with
linear dimensions twice as large as their intended reproduced sizes
for a variety of reasons. For example, it is easier to work with larger
letter sizes, line widths, and symbols on the bigger workmap. It is
nearly impossible to draft a map with precision and accuracy if the
map is the same size as the one to be used in publication. Reduction
also minimizes minor letter and line variations and tends to sharpen
line distinction.
The cartographer's u se of the reduction technique introduces certain
problems in map design. One of these is the change in map scale
caused by reducing the original workmap. The problem of scale change
is basic to map drafting and will be discussed in detail in the following
section.
SCALE
PRINCIPLE OF ScALE

The scale on a map determines its degree of generalization and its
level of accuracy. Therefore, when selecting a scale for map use, a
cartographer must determine the map's eventual publication size, its
intended purpose, and its degree of detail. Each of these three factors
have a direct relationship to one another. For example, a reservoir
survey map will generally show the location of archeological sites with
small symbols because the map scale is too small to show these sites in
detail. On the other hand, a site map is drawn at a much larger scale
and can therefore show a greater degree of scale.
ExPRESSION OF ScALE

All maps depict the earth's surface at a greatly reduced size compared to the actual features they represent. This proportional relationship , or ratio, is defined as the map's scale.
There are three generally accepted methods of representing map
scale. These are : 1) by a statement, 2 ) in terms of a representative
fraction, abbreviated "RF", and 3) as a graphic representation or bar
scale. Statements such as "one inch represents approximately one

TE XAS

ARCHEOLOG~

-_

SOC IETY

-

--

--

----

-

--

--_

-

--

---_- -----=-- =-- - ---

-

-

-

--

Effect i ve

Page

__

--

s ; ze

' '• · ' .........................,......hi, ............ ·"·"··· ........

mae", aud "one ;ncb equal< ton feet" are example, of a 'tatemem
'Cale. Often th;, type of 'Ca]e w;n appear on road map, and on U.s.
Geoiog;c Survey map, lli conjunction w;th e;ther a grap!Uc or repre.

I
12

0

2

1/2

I

I
Scale in Feet

FIGURE

A

VM

FIGURE B
Fig. 2. Illustrations subjected to one full reduction have linear distances reduced by
one-half and areas reduced to one-fourth. Note the effect of reduction on both the graphic
and representative fraction scale.

273

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

sentative fraction scale. However, this type of scale is awkward to use
and therefore impractical for most map use. Furthermore, in reducing
a map for publication, a written statement remains constant while
linear distances, or scale, changes in proportion to the amount of
reduction.
The representative fraction scale makes use of a ratio between a
unit of measurement on a map and the corresponding unit on the
earth's surface. It can be expressed in either of two ways:

!oo

62 ,
or 1:62,500. The latter form is generally preferred since it is easier
to set up in type or print. Representative fractions are a valuable
method of indicating scale because any standard unit of measurement
(inches, centimeters, feet, meters) can be applied to a map as long as
the same unit of measurement is used on each side of the fraction or
ratio. Therefore, regardless of the standard units of measurement, any
literate person can understand and use the representative fraction.
For example, on a map with a scale of 1:250,000 one inch would be
equal to 250,000 inches or 3.95 miles; while one centimeter would
represent 250,000 on the earth's surface or 2.5 kilometers. Both measurements are correct even though each makes use of a different standard unit of measurement. In one way both the representative fraction
and the statement scale are similar. Both remain constant when a map
is reduced or enlarged.
Graphic, or bar scales are represented by a line which is generally
subdivided into units of some standard form of measurement, such as:
0

5

10

I

I

I

Scale in Feet
0

1

2

3

I

I

I

I

Scale in Miles
This type of scale is the most versatile of the three and is generally
used on maps which will be reduced for publication. When a map is
either reduced or enlarged, the line representing the graphic scale
changes in length in exact proportions to all other lines, or linear distances, on the map. Therefore it accurately represents the scale of the
map at its reduced size.

274

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

There are other methods of showing map scale but these unusual
types are rarely used and are beyond the scope of this article.
LETTERING THE MAP

A map is a graphic representation of a conceptual image of the
earth's surface through the use of conventionalized symbols. One of
the most useful and necessary types of map symbolization is lettering,
for it aids the reader in visualizing the location of places and it allows
differentiation of map phenomena. A road map, for example, would
be meaningless unless the names of the cities and the numbers of highways were lettered.
The placement of lettering on a map requires careful planning and
forethought in order to be effective. If a map is complex in detail,
then a greater degree of consideration must be given to the size, type,
and placement of lettering. However, even on a relatively simple map
at least five major factors concerning lettering must be considered.
These are: 1) the method of lettering-freehand, mechanical, commercially prepared "stick -on" lettering, Z) the form of letteringcapital, lower-case, 3 ) the style of lettering, 4 ) the size of lettering,
and 5) the position of the lettering.
METHOD OF LETTERING

A map can be lettered freehand, by the use of commercially prepared "stick-on" lettering, or mechanically. Freehand lettering is the
most versatile of the three methods and is the most rapid and artistic
for map use. Through the use of freehand lettering the cartographer
may orientate and scale letters precisely as desired. Freehand lettering also adds an individual or personal touch to a map. However,
learning to draw precise freehand letters requires many hours of
training and knowledge of the principles of letter formation and design. Most of us do not have the time to develop sophisticated and
uniform techniques of hand lettering, and, therefore, we usually turn
to other methods of lettering maps.
Preprinted, or "stick-on" lettering is a relatively new technique
which has become widely used in recent years. Many companies
such as Para-tone, Artype, Chart-Pak, and others offer an almost
limitless variety of letter styles and pattems. This type of lettering is
applied to the map surfac2 by first cutting out the appropriate letters
from the preprinted, adhesive-backed acetate sheets and then bumishing them down on the map surface. Stick-on lettering is useful for
map work but has several disadvantages over the other methods. First,

DRAFTING OF A RCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

275

letters that are printed in an upright position cannot be effectively
tilted in a slanting position . Secondly, preprinted letters often use
type-face styles which are not designed for reduction. Thus, it is often
necessary to u se extra large preprinted letters on the workmap. Furthermore, the careful positioning of these individual letters in an even
line of print is a long and painstaking task.
For most thematic, or statistical maps (which includes almost all
archeological maps ) m echanical lettering is the preferred method because it is simple, cheap, reasonably fa st, and assures letter uniformity.
There are many types of mechanical lettering devices available and
it is beyond the scope of this article to consider the merits of each
type. Therefore, in this article discussion will be confined to a single,
but perhaps the most commonly available method of mechanical lettering-the Leroy method.*
The basic elements of a Leroy Lettering Set are a scriber, a set of
templates with indented lettering guides, and various sizes of Leroy
pen points. Lettering of illustrations is achieved by tracing the indented letters of the template with the stylus of the scriber while the
arm, containing the pen, traces the outline of the letter in ink on the
surface of the illustration. Consecutive letters in a word are made by
moving the template along a straight edge. Ruled spaces are provided
on the bottom edge of templates to aid in letter spacing. However,
most cartographers attain sufficient skill through practice to space
these letters by sight.
Leroy templates come in a wide range of sizes (Fig. 3) and a variety
of letter styles. On each of these templates, letter size can be determined by converting the last set of numbers in the upper right-hand
corner to a measurement in inches. For example, on the Simple Sans
Serif, or Gothic style Leroy template, letter size is given in thousandths of an inch. Thus, a template showing the number 200 will
make letters 200/ 1000 or one-fifth of an inch tall. Each set of numbers
on a Leroy template is followed by either a capital "C" or by a "CL".
The letter "C" indicates that the template has numbers and capital
letters. On the other hand, the letters " CL" indicate that the template
can be used to make both capital and lower-case letters as well as
numbers. On other Leroy templates, which incorporate different styles
of lettering, the letter sizes are either written in thousandths of an inch
or in type-point sizes.
When selecting Leroy templates for lettering a map, the cartographer must remain constantly aware of the results reduction will
* L eroy is manufactured by the Keuffel and Esser Company and is the p aten ted
nam e giv: n to one of its mechanical lett ~ring systems.

276

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

have upon the lettering. Reduction tests have shown that capital letters
are illegible when they are smaller than one-twentieth of an inch tall
and that lower-case letters must be at least one-thirtieth of an inch
tall in order to be readable (Raisz, 1948 ) . Thus, the number 100/ 1000
or one-tenth of an inch Leroy template is the smallest size template
that can be effectively used on a map that is drafted one full size larger
than its publication size. If smaller letter sizes are used, the letters
will "close-out" and appear as a small black spot on the reduced copy;
or they will be too small to easily read with the unaided eye.
LETTERING FoRM-CAPITALS AND LowER-CAsE
Letters have two basic forms , capitals and lower-case. In printing,
or map lettering, words are written in capitals, in lower-case, or combinations of these forms. Map titles, and the names of important places
are usually written entirely in capitals because to the reader capitals
psychologically command more attention. Lower-case lettering is generally reserved for less important names and places. On the other hand,
lower-case lettering is easier to read because these letter characters
contain more visual recognition characteristics (Robin son, 1953) . A
well designed map will make limited use of words made entirely of
capital letters and will reserve their use for only selected, important
features.
LETTERING STYLES
The cartographer can choose from an almost infinite variety of
letter styles for map use, from simple Gothic, to the more complex
Old English. Each of these styles requires the use of special Leroy
templates, yet many different variations of style can be developed with
the most commonly used, or Gothic Leroy templates. By changing the
sizes of the inking pen in the Leroy scriber (Fig. 3 ), it is possible to
draw thin or very thick lined letters. Slant letters can also be made by
changing the angle of the stylus arm on the adjustable Leroy scriber.
Choice of lettering styles is one of the most important decisions a
cartographer must make. Short, stubby letters, for example, are more
difficult to read and are less pleasing visually than tall thin letters.
Furthermore, thin letters are more legible after reduction than thick
letters. When using a Leroy lettering set, thin lettering can best be
achieved by using one pen size smaller than what is normally recommended on the template.
Good cartographic technique calls for the use of upright letters to
represent man-made features such as cities, roads, or archeological

277

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

LEROY
TEMPLATE
Sl Z E
500

425

PEN
000 00

I

0

SIZE
2

3

4

5

ARCHEOLO
ARCHEOLO

350

ARCHEOLO

290

ARCHEOLO

240

A R

200

A R
A R

C H E 0 LO
c H E0 L 0
c

140

A

R

c

H E 0
H E 0

120

A

R

c

H

100

A

R

c

H

80

A

R

c

17 5

L

E

VMS
Fig. 3 . Variations in Leroy template and pen po int sizes. !Illustration adapted from
Keuffel and Esser Co ., Catalog No. 6l.

excavations while the lettering of natural features such as landscape
and water bodies should be done in slant lettering. There are no well
defined rules of when or where slant lettering must be used. Either
upright or slant lettering can be used in the names of almost any
feature on a map. The decision of when to use these types should

278

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

remain the cartograph er's. However, slant letters seem to suggest the
flowing quality of water and therefore are more often used to represent hydrographic features . If a cartographer used slanting letters to
represent various map features, then he sh ould take great pains to
insure that their use is consistent. For example, if he choses to use
slanting letters for water features, he should use them for all water
features on the map.
LETTERING SizE

The size of the lettering is one of the most widely and easily criticized parts of a map. This criticism is often the result of lack of careful planning and misunderstanding of the effects of letter reduction.
When a cartographer is selecting the size of letters to be used on a map,
he remains constantly aware of the effects of reduction. An improper
choice of letter size can often render the lettering illegible after reduction (Fig. 4 ) . Furthermore, letters which are less than one-tenth of
an inch in height will often become blurred or will " close-out" after
the map has been subjected to one full reduction.
LEROY
TEMPLATE
S I ZE

500

425

PEN

000 00

0

I

S I ZE

2

3

4

5

ARCHEOLO

AR CHEOLO

350

ARC HEOLO

290

A RC HEOLO

240

A

200

A

17 5

A

R C H E 0 LO
R c H E 0 L 0
R c H E 0 L

140

A

R

c

H

E

12 0

A

R

c

H

E

10 0

A

R

c

H

80

A

R

c

0

VM B

Fig . 4 . Le roy letting reduced in size by one fu ll reduc t ion . Note how the small , w ide
letters tend to " close-out" under reduction .

There are two other limiting factors affecting the size of letters used
on a map. These are the degree of importance of each item named,
and the size of the space available for lettering. Traditionally, the most

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

279

important features on a map, such as the title should be represented
by the largest letter sizes while the less important information should
be shown in smaller letters. As a corollary, the date and the authorship of a map should be written in the smallest legible letters because
they are of marginal importance on a map. In between these two extremes lie a series of letter sizes which should be graded in relation to
the significance of the data they represent. This takes a considerable
degree of planning and should be done before pen and ink are ever
applied to the map surface.
Often the scale of the map limits the size of the space available for
lettering and becomes the governing factor in determining selection
of letter size. In some cases, this problem can be solved by using smaller
lettering while in other cases it can be resolved only by adjusting the
position of the entire word.
PosiTIONING oF LETTERS

The lettering on a map should refer the reader unmistakenly to the
item it represents. If a feature has a long linear dimension, or "flow,"
the lettering should give the appearance of length of fluidity. For example, names of rivers should be placed along the stream in some
convenient location (a straight portion if possible ) and should follow
the course of the river. The letters in the name should be spread
slightly, but not so much that they become meaningless. Furthermore,
abbreviations should be avoided at all times. Occasionally, it might be
necessary to repeat river names if the stream course is very long or
after a major tributary joins the main channel (Fig. 5 ).
Names of features which do not have any "flowing" characteristics
should be written parallel to the bottom margin of the map. Whenever this is impossible, it is permissible to tilt the word at an angle.
However, when tilting a place name it is advisable to tilt it as little
as possible and only under extreme circumstances should a word be
tilted at more than a forty-five degree angle above or below the horizontal margins of a map. Furthermore, the angle of all tilted names
should be approximately the same and should all be aligned in the
same direction so that one simple turn of the map will allow all of
them to be read.
The names of large map features such as counties, states, or countries
always should be widely and evenly spaced so that the letters of the
name encompass as much of the total area of that feature as possible.
Care must be taken in these cases to insure that the place names do not
become a random scattering of incoherent letters.

280

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The names of archeological sites or other location points on a map
preferably should be placed to the right side and above the symbol.
This allows for the best possible identification between the letters and
symbol because this is the direction in which we normally read . Other
choices for letter placement are to the lower right, the upper left, and
lower left of the symbol. Experiments in cartographic lettering have
proven that letters placed in these positions have the best chance of
being associated with the features they represent. Centering the lettering above or below the symbol it represents should be avoided at all
costs.
An effort should be made to place the names of all features completely within the area they represent. For example, the name of an
island, peninsula, or county should be placed entirely within the lines
enclosing them. The names of bays, coves, and inlets should be placed
over the water features they represent. If the land, or water, features
are too small for the entire name, then the lettering should begin on
the feature it represents and extend into the adjacent water or land.
Coastal cities and other coastal land features should be labeled entirely
on the land. If this is impossible, then the names should be placed
entirely on the adjacent body of water. A place name should only
break a boundary when there is no other solution for its placement.
TITLE

The title "tells the story" or explains the purpose of the map, and,
therefore, it should be the most prominent lettering on the map. The
obvious location for a title is at the top of the page because habit has
taught us to read from top to bottom. The principle of "supraposition"
dictates the title's pre-eminent position whenever possible. If the location of various map features precludes using the top of the effective
page size for the title, then it should be given another prominent
position. Correct title placement, however, is not enough. In order to
make a title distinguishable, it should also be separated from surrounding data, correctly centered, and written in large or bold letters. The
size and style of lettering will vary from map to map but regardless
of a map's size, the title always should be written in a letter size larger
than any others used . Furthermore, map titles should be self-contained,
short, carefully worded, and should be a concise summary of the map's
contents.
LEGEND

A map legend serves two basic functions: 1 ) it explains all map

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

281

symbols which are not self-explanatory, and 2) it balances the map's
layout or design . A map legend normally will include the date the
map was drafted, and the initials or name of the cartographer. The
date indicates that the map includes only information known prior
to that time, while the authorship reveals who compiled the data and
drafted the map.
Legends can be placed almost anywhere on a map and are sometimes enclosed in an outline. In the past, legends were generally the
most decorative part of a map and were set-off by ornately designed
outlines. This is no longer a valid practice because cartographers are
concerned more with the explanation of symbolization on a map than
with its decorative attractiveness. Thus, the present trend in cartography is to either enclose the legend with a thin, simple line or omit
the outline altogether. The latter is the more accepted practice.
Cartographic technique calls for placing the legend in an inconspicuous but artistically well balanced position on the map. Under
normal conditions this will position it near or at the bottom margin of
the map. When the outlines of map phenomena make this impossible,
the legend should be placed in some other area where it will not obscure vital map data. However, under no conditions should a legend be
placed above the map's title or omitted from the map.
SYMBOLS

One of the main differences between maps and photographs is that
maps use symbols to represent real objects while photographs are
reduced copies of the entire real world. Maps are constructed using
the selective judgment of the cartographer in the choice of symbol
representation. Some symbols represent linear features such as highways and railroads, others show point location such as cities or archeological sites while still others, such as pattems and screens, can be used
to show spatial distribution. When combined on a map, these symbols
form a graphic code through which a visual image of a geographical
area can be represented.
A well selected symbol is one which gives the map reader a visual
impression of the phenomenon it represents. This can best be achieved
by using symbols which are either reminiscent of the feature they
represent or by using symbols which have gained wide acceptance
and recognition through repeated u sage. For example, an airplane
located near a city on a map graphically suggests an airfield. Furthermore, water features are often symbolized by a series of thin wavy
lines because the waves suggest rippled water surfaces.

282

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Point symbols are used to show the location of small areas on a map.
Symbols used to show the location of cities, archeological sites, burials,
post molds, and other such data are all examples of point location
symbols. As a general rule, these symbols should be just large enough
to be read easily and if possible should suggest the feature they represent. Small symbols also are more artistically pleasing to the eye than
large ones .
Area symbols are used to show the area covered by map features.
For example, the outline of a test pit on an archeological site map is
one form of area symbol because it shows the extent of the test excavation and differentiates it from the surrounding map features. One of
the most effective ways to show this differentiation is through the use
of contrast. Variations in the size, shape, interval, direction, and color
give change to the pattern, value, and intensity of the area symbolized
and are acceptable cartographic methods of showing contrast.
Some cartographers draft their own variations of contrast. However,
this method has two main drawbacks. First, it is time consuming and
requires a great deal of accuracy, artistic ability, and patience on the
part of the cartographer. Secondly, whenever an error is committed
in drafting, it has to be painstakingly erased. The use of pressuresensitive, adhesive, preprinted acetate sheets to show contrast eliminates these problems . Such companies as Para-tone, Artype, ChartPak, and others offer a wide variety of patterns, most of which are
suitable for showing variations of contrast. These preprinted, acetate
sheets are inexpensive to use (if one considers the amount of time they
save the cartographer), simple to apply, durable, and can be removed
easily from a map surface if it becomes necessary.
THE ExAGGERATED SYMBOL

Highways on the earth's surface are usually less than one-half a mile
in width, yet they appear to be much larger when their symbol width
is measured on the scale of most road maps. This is an example of
symbol exaggeration. If a normal width highway were drawn to scale
on a road map, it would appear as a barely visible line a few thousandths of an inch in width. Most map symbols need to be exaggerated
in order to be legible.
The degree of symbol exaggeration will vary from map to map depending upon the map's scale, its purpose, and the area represented
by the symbol. Furthermore, symbols should be graded in proportion
to their actual size on the earth's surface and their relative importance
on the map. For example, on a road map a narrow county road is

DRAFTI NG OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

283

generally represented by a thinner, lighter colored line while a multilane superhighway will appear as a broad band almost one-thirtysecond of an inch in width and will be printed in a prominent color.

STANDARDIZATION OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAP SYMBOLS

We are able to read and understand writing because the alphabet
has become standardized over the centuries. Combinations of these
basic letter symbols indicate words of the spoken language which have
special meaning to us. Map symbols, like words of a language, are used
to convey a message. However, unless some type of order and standardization occurs, the meaning of symbols can be confused or remain obscure to those who attempt to interpret them. Once a standardization
of symbol types has been developed for a specific group of maps such
as topographic, climatic, geologic, or archeological maps, then all the
maps in that series should use only those standardized symbol forms.
Think of the chaos that would develop if each of the regional U. S.
Geologic Survey offices used a different set of symbols on their maps.
The field of archeology needs to develop a "graphic dictionary" of
symbol usage. At the present time, archeological maps are going
through a stage of graphic diarrhea. On some maps, archeological sites
are currently being symbolized by small triangles, on others, sites are
represented by dots, squares, x's or a variety of other symbol forms.
Archeologists need to agree on standardization of symbol forms so that
anyone trained in this discipline will immediately recognize known
symbol forms on archeological maps.

CONCLUSION

Let this article serve as a plea for the more careful drafting of
archeological maps and the need for standardization of mapping techniques. There is a vast body of cartographic knowledge that seems to
be unknown to the archeologist-knowledge which cartographers have
painstakingly developed over centuries of work and which is applicable to the drafting of all maps. The use of these techniques in archeological mapping would improve the quality, the artistic appearance,
and the scholarly expression of graphic illustrations.
Maps, like writing, are a form of visual communication. The scholarly nature of an archeological paper would certainly be suspect if it
were poorly written. Therefore, is there any reason not to suspect an
article which is well written but poorly or inadequately illustrated?

to

.,

CXJ

TRAFFORD

t!f

!"

+

RESERVOIR

::0

..,

~
::r

-<

"D
0

;.
~

Trafford s ville

g·

N

~

j

~

<

!1.
ID

..,3::r

~
;:;·

:;-

"'

..,~.

;-

0.
n

~

0

"'..,il

~

~

~·

D
...

~

®

Proposed

Archeological
Proposed
U.S .

l:!l
X

>
>
i:lj

Reservoir

[J)

Site

(l

:r:

Dam Location

l:!l
0

Highway

0

State

m

Farm or Ranch

t"'

0

()

Highway

>-<

(l

>

Road

t"'

[J)

0

-;;·

~

...,

LEGEND

I
1965

I

I

I

I

ScaIe

5

10

I

I

in

Mil es

0

(l

>-<
VMB I

...,l:!l

><:

285

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Debeham, Frank
1951. Map Makin g. Blackie & Sons Ltd.
Dury, G. H.
1960. Map Interpretation. Sir Isacc Pitman & Sons Ltd.
Greenhood, David
1964. Mapping. University of Chicago Press.
Monkhouse, F. J., an d H. R. W ilkinson
1952. Map and Diagrams. Methuen & Co. Ltd.
Raisz, Erwin
1948. General Cartography. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.
1962. Principles of Cartography. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.
Robinson, A. H.
1952. The Look of Maps. University of Wisconsin Press.
1953. Elements of Cartography. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas
Department of Geography
The University of T exas

A Preliminary Archeological and
Documentary Study of the
Womack Site, Lamar
County, Texas
R. K. HARRIS, INUS MARIE HARRIS, JAY C. BLAINE, AND
JERRYLEE BLAINE

ABS1RACT
Intermittently over the past 35 or so years, amateur and professional archeologists
have been collecting artifacts and other scientifically valuable data from the Womack
Site, an important historic Indian village on the Red River, Lamar County, Texas.
This paper, the first to report in any detail on the site, is concerned exclusively with
an ana lysis of those artifacts and documents which are most useful in placing the
Womack Site in a meaningful historic context. The findings indicate that it can be
identified as a component of the Norteno Focus, very probably being the Quidehais
(Kichai ) village contacted by Du Rivage in 1719. If correct, this interpretation is
contrary to the widely held view that Wichita-speaking Indians did not come south
to the Red River until the middle 1740's.

IN1RODUCTION
The Womack Site lies in the northern part of Lamar County, Texas,
on a high bluff overlooking the Red River. It consists of midden debris,
burials, and probable house remains buried in a sandy layer which
appears to average about 18 inches thick. Below this zone is a red clay
stratum which is devoid of occupational refuse but does occasionally
preserve the outline of certain structural features. Covering an area
of about 30 acres, most of the site has been under cultivation for anumber of years, and some parts are considerably eroded. The uncultivated portions of the site support a fairly luxurious growth of cedar,
bois d'arc, persimmon, ash, willow, hackberry, dogwood, pecan, several species of oak, hickory, sycamore, and grass, and the wild Cherokee rose. A grove of tall, slim, straight cedars, which could well have
furnished poles for house construction, grows near the northern edge
of the site. More than ample water for the domestic needs of the villagers could have been obtained from the Red River, or from the numerous springs that outcrop at the base of the bluff.
Despite the archeological importance of the Womack Site, it has

288

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

never been intensively excavated. In the late summer of 1931, personnel from the Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, made limited tests which uncovered eight burials and sampled
some of the midden refuse (Krieger, 1946: 164; notes on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas).
The remainder of the investigations at the site have been carried out
primarily by interested amateurs who have made surface collections,
dug a number of small test pits, and salvaged burials disturbed by
plowing or fence building.
In the report whcih follows, the authors have not attempted a comprehensive analysis of all the specimens and features from the site.
Rather, this study is based almost exclusively on the notes and artifacts
recovered by amateurs, and only two artifacts, a bow fragment from a
trigger guard and a flintlock cock, from The University of Texas
collection are described. Even the descriptions of the specimens included are variable, with the greatest attention being given to those-mainly certain European-made goods-which are most useful in placing the Womack Site in a meaningful historic context. It is hoped that,
in the near future, extensive controlled excavations will be made at the
site, and that a detailed report will be published.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

For a number of years, persons interested in historic archeological
remains in the southern Plains, especially in north-central Texas, have
been at least vaguely aware of the existence of several culturally related sites. Formalization of these data came in 1961, when Lathel F.
Duffield and Edward B. Jelks published a report on the Pearson Site in
Rains County, Texas. In this paper they provisionally defined a complex of native traits which they termed Norteiio Focus and tentatively
attributed to protohistoric and historic southern Wichita Indian groups
(mainly the Taovayas, Tawakoni, and Yscani, but also the Waco and
Kichai ) . In addition to Pearson, components of the Norteiio Focus are
recognized at the Spanish Fort Site on the Red River in Montague
County, Texas and Jefferson County, Oklahoma; the Sanders and
Womack sites on the Red River in Lamar County, Texas; the Stansbury Site on the Brazos River in Lamar County, Texas; the Stone Site
on the Brazos River in McLennan County, Texas; the Vinson Site between the Brazos and Trinity rivers in Limestone County, Texas; and
the Gilbert Site on the Sabine drainage in Rains County, Texas (Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 70-71; Harris and Harris, 19621: 2-9; Jelks, ms.).
Of the known Norteiio Focus sites, Stansbury, Pearson, Gilbert,

289

WOMACK SITE

Womack, Sanders, and Vinson have been at least partially excavated;
however, only Pearson has been described in detail (Krieger's 1946 report on the Sanders Site deals most exclusively with the prehistoric
Sanders Focus) . Understandably many problems of interpretation yet
surround the Norteiio Focus. Despite the surge of research in historic
archeology, even the dating of these sites is difficult and rests mainly
on still poorly known European trade goods. Matching the Norteiio
Focus sites with historically documented Wichita villages is, of course,
most important. To date, only three-perhaps four-can, with a meaningful measure of confidence, be linked to the southern Wichita: Spanish Fort with a large 18th century Taovayas village, Stansbury with a
late 18th century Tawakoni village, Pearson-more tentatively-with
an 18th century Tawakoni-Y scani village (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:
69 and 76-79), and, as this paper attempts to demonstrate, Womack
with an early 18th century Kichai village. Some of the other problems
which remain are: 1) refining the definition of the Norteiio Focus, 2)
distinguishing, if possible, variations in this complex through time and
space, and 3 ) relating the Norteiio Focus to the Wichita remains (the
Big Bend Aspect) recognized in central and southern Kansas by Wedel
(1959: 571-589) .
OCCUPATIONAL FEATURES
Finds designated as occupational features are of two types: 1) circular concentrations of bone, shell, artifacts, burned daub, and stone, and
2) burials. None of the former has been fully investigated, but it is
believed that they represent the remains of houses.
Eight burials have been unearthed by The University of Texas (but
are not included in this study) , and four have been found by amateurs.
In each case, the latter burials were partially disturbed prior to excavation, and the skeletal remains were in a poor state of preservation,
apparently a result of the high acid content of the sandy soil (animal
bones recovered from the site were also in poor condition).
BURIAL

1

Excavated by R. K. Harris and his father, the late S. W. Harris, this
burial was found in August, 1938, just after the site had been plowed.
The plow damaged one edge of a vessel found in the grave, and destroyed the face of the skull. As the interment had been made in a
darkly stained midden deposit, it was impossible to trace the outlines
of a burial pit, although the bottom of the grave appeared to be roughly

290

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

eight to 10 inches below the surface. The skeleton was extended on its
back, with the head to the north. In too fragile a condition to be recovered, the bones seemed to represent an adult male, approximately 25 to
35 years of age at the time of death.
Two vessels were the only grave offerings. One of these, a bowl (Fig.
4, A) which has the shape and design of Womack Engraved (Duffield
and Jelks, 1961 : 36-39 ) but is incised, was recovered from the right
side of the skeleton, just below the pelvis. The other, a shell-tempered
bowl of type Natchitoches Engraved (Fig. 4, B), was found on the left
side of the burial, roughly midway between the shoulder and the elbow.
BURIAL

2

This burial was found in the spring of 1940, essentially under the
same circumstances as Burial 1. Excavated by R. K. Harris, it too had
been placed in what appeared to be an extensive midden accumulation.
The exact grave outline could not be distinguished because of the uniformily dark nature of the soil, but the base of the burial pit appeared
to lie about 10 inches beneath the surface. Too deteriorated to determine sex, the skeleton appeared to be that of an adult. It was extended
on its back, with the head to the northeast.
The only grave goods found with the burial were three vessels. Two
of these, a Simms Engraved bowl (Fig. 4, C ) and a bowl (Fig. 4, D )
which has the attributes of both Simms Engraved and Womack Engraved, were found near the right shoulder of the skeleton. The third
vessel (Fig. 4, E ), found near the opposite shoulder, is of type Emory
Punctated.
BURIAL

3

Burial 3 was discovered by Rex Housewright during the 1940's, but
it was so severely disturbed by plowing that very little information
could be salvaged by its excavation. However, remains of seven vessels,
all of which could be restored, were associated with the skeleton. Included are a water bottle (Fig. 5, A ) of type Hudson Engraved, a somewhat aberrant example (Fig. 5, B) of Simms Engraved, two Emory
Punctated vessels (Fig. 5, C), and three Womack Engraved bowls
( Fig. 5, D , E ).
BURIAL

4

In the summer of 1963, a fence was built near the south end of the
site and, in digging one of the post holes, the back of a skull was disturbed. The remainder of the burial was excavated by R. K. Harris and

291

WOMACK SITE

Jay C. Blaine, who found it to consist of an elderly female placed extended on her back, with the head to the northeast. The grave, like
those of the other three burials, had been dug into a midden accumulation, with the pit extending for approximately 15 inches below the
surface, into the upper part of the underlying red clay. A later fire pit
had been dug through the right side of the burial, between the hips and
knees. The skeletal material was in very bad shape and could not be
removed. No grave goods were associated with Burial 4.
THE ARTIFACfS

Numerous specimens of both European and native origin have been
recovered from the site. While the present analysis of these materials
is only preliminary and incomplete, it is reasonably clear that two
components are represented. In terms of the interests of this paper, as
well as the number of specimens which-on typological grounds-can
be assigned to it, the most important of these components is the historic
Nortefio Focus (Duffield and Jelks, 1961). The second occupational
component, apparently assignable to the Archaic Carrollton Focus, is
known from about 60 artifacts recovered from a limited portion of the
site. Since these specimens have no bearing on the historic period, they
are excluded from the discussions which follow.
NATIVE-MADE ARTIFACTS

Included in this category are items of stone, clay, shell, and metal
which, on the basis of their morphological and/ or technological characteristics, are believed to have been fashioned into useful forms by
the historic Indian occupants of the site. While the distinction between
native and European manufacture is not always easily made, it is a
convenient and, for the most part, meaningful dichotomy.
The majority of the specimens of stone herein linked with the Nortefio Focus agree favorably with those described for this complex by
Duffield and Jelks ( 1961 : 71-7 3 ) . These, and all other, types or descriptive groups that have already been well defined in print will not
be treated in detail, and the reader should assume that the specimens
from the Womack Site are within the range given in previous reports.
Materials from which the chipped stone artifacts are made include
Alibates flint from the Texas panhandle, Kay County Flint, a beautiful
banded stone found near Springtown, Oklahoma, Novaculite from Arkansas, and various local flints and jaspers which occur in the Red
River gravels. Most of the pecked, ground, and polished stone objects

292

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

are made from locally-occurring sandstone, basalt, quartzite, and limestone. The exceptions, a pipe fragment of catlinite and three turquoise
beads, indicate trade with the former probably coming from the central Plains and the latter from New Mexico.
SPEAR POINT

The one large projectile, perhaps spear, point (Fig. 1, A ) from the
site has a triangular outline, deep side notches, and a straight base. It
is much like the Harrell arrow point type in outline form but is far too
large, 12.0 em. in length and 4.0 em. in maximum width, to be so classified. The material from which this specimen is made is the banded
flint found near Springtown, Oklahoma.
ARROW POINTS

The 928 arrow points collected from the site vary from 1.0 to 4.2 em.
long. At least six types are included, with the well made, triangular
Fresno (Suhm, et al. , 1954: 498-499 ) being unquestionably the dominant form . Of the 863 examples of this type, 478 have straight bases
(Fig. 1, B, C) and 385 have concave bases (Fig. 1, D , E ) . Among the
remainder of the typed points there are 20 examples of Harrell (Fig. 1,
F, G; Suhm et al., 1954: 500-501), eight examples of Morris (Fig. 1,
H; Bell, 1958: 60-61 ), two examples of Bassett (Fig. 1, I; Suhm et al. ,
1954: 494-495 ) , two examples of Bonham (Fig. 1, I; ibid.: 496-497 ),
12 examples of Scallorn coryell (Fig. 1, K; Jelks, 1962: 28 ), and six
examples of Scallorn sattler (Fig. 1, L; ibid. : 30 ) . The other 15 arrow
· points from the site are of styles which cannot be identified with an
established type.
The Fresno and Harrell types have been linked with the Norteiio
Focus by Duffield and I elks ( 1961 : 71) . Whether or not the other
forms represented at the Womack Site should also be included is not
dear. It is possible, however, that the Bassettt points indicate trade
from the east, while the Scallorn and Morris points may be carry-overs
from an earlier period, or may have been collected from earlier sites.
The Bonham type, a major form at the nearby Sanders Site (Krieger,
1946 : 185 ), is perhaps also intrusive at the Womack Site.
KNIVES

Eighty-nine chipped stone knives have been recovered from the site.
They include 28 small triangular specimens (Fig. 1, M ) , 35 small leafshaped specimens (Fig. 1, N) , 15 large leaf-shaped specimens (Fig. 1,

293

WOMACK SITE

8

F

c

D

G

H

A

K

J

0

p
0

L

N

M

Q

5 CM .

R

Fig . 1. Points, Knives, and Axe. A, Possible spear point. B-E, Fresno points . F, G, Harrell
points . H, Morris point. I, Bassett po int . J , Bonham point. K, Sea/lorn eorye/1 point. L, Sea/lorn
sattler point. M, Small, triangular knife . N, Small , leaf-shaped knife. 0, Large, leaf-shaped
knife. P, Diamond-shaped, alternately beveled knife. Q , Jowell knife. R, Double-bitted axe-

294

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

0), six diamond-shaped, altemately beveled specimens (Fig. 1, P), and
five slender, bipointed specimens (Fig. 1, Q). Of these, the bipointed
knives are of the greatest interest as they are of a type which appears
to be characteristic of the Allen Focus, a historic Caddoan complex
found to the south, on the Angelina and Neches rivers. They have not
been well described but are sometimes referred to as lowell knives
(Suhm, et al., 1954: 220).
DOUBLE-BITTED AXE

A rather small, roughly chipped, double-bitted axe (Fig. 1, R) was
found at the site. It may not, however, belong to the Nortefw Focus
occupation, as it came from that part of the site which yielded mainly
Archaic artifacts. In addition to having a bit at each end, this specimen
has a broad, shallow notch on each lateral edge, probably for hafting.
SCRAPERS

Numerous scrapers (872 specimens) principally of the snub-nose
variety, occur at the site. They have been fashioned from a range of
siliceous materials, which, in addition to locally-occurring flints and
cherts, includes stones from central Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and
the Texas panhandle. In over-all length the scrapers fall between 1.2
and 9.5 em., and the majority conform quite well to the descriptive
groups recognized by Duffield and Jelks ( 1961: 24-30) for the Pearson
Site collection. These include 35 tapering base snub-nose scrapers (Fig.
2, A), 205 rounded base snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 2, B) , 65 subtriangular snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 2, C), 186 straight base snub-nose scrapers
(Fig. 2, D), 105 rectangular snub-nose scrapers (Fig. 2, E), 25 miscellaneous-largely fragmentary-snub-nose scrapers, 18 spokeshaves
(Fig. 2, F, G), 47 flakes scrapers (Fig. 2, H , I), and 20 semilunar
wedge-shaped scrapers (Fig. 2, J). Forms present at the Womack Site,
but not at the Pearson Site, are 142 side scrapers (Fig. 2, K, L), three
scrapers rechipped from small Gary dart points ( Fig. 2, M), and 21
snub-nose scrapers with graver beaks (Fig. 3, A-C). The lastmentioned group appears to represent an early Nortefio Focus trait,
perhaps one which predates the occupation at the Pearson Site. It has
also been found at the Gilbert Site in Rains County (Jelks, ms.), an
unmixed Nortefio site excavated in the summer of 1962 by members
of the Texas Archeological Society. The small graver on these specimens occurs sometimes on the comer of the steeply beveled distal end
(Fig. 3, A) , as well as along other portions of this beveled edge (Fig. 3,

B, C).

295

WOMACK SI TE

c

B

A

E

F

D

G

J

L

K

M

0

5 CM.

I

I

Fig. 2 . Scrapers. A, Tapering base snub-nose. B, Rounded base snub- nose . C, Subtriangular snub-nose. 0 , St raight base snub-nose. E, Rectangular snub-nose. F, G, Spokeshaves. H, I, Flake. J , Semilunar wedge-shaped . K, L, Side . M, RechipFed Gary point. Arrows
indicate spokeshave concavities .

296

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DRILLS

Each of the 68 drills possesses a long, narrow, pointed projection on
the shaft which has been carefully shaped by pressure flaking. They
can be readily divided into two groups : 43 with expanding, but unworked bases (Fig. 3, D ) , and 25 with expanding, carefully flaked
bases (Fig. 3, D ) . The high frequency of drills at the Womack Site is
interesting in that Duffield and Jelks ( 1961: 71-73) do not mention
this among their Norteiio Focus traits. The Womack Site appears to be
earlier than the Norteiio Focus components known on the Sabine
(Pearson and Gilbert sites) , Brazos (Stone, Stansbury, and Vinson
Sites), and Upper Red River (Spanish Fort) . In these apparently later
sites stone drills are rare, or even absent, although metal awls do occur
in some numbers. Significantly, only one metal awl (see below) was
found at theW omack Site.
GRAVERS

In addition to the graver beaks found on the snub-nose scrapers, 14
flakes have small graver projections (Fig. 3, F). The data from the
Womack Site indicates that gravers on otherwise unaltered flakes
should also be added to the Norteiio Focus trait list.
GUNFLINTS

Twenty-three of the 31 definite gunflints from the site appear to be
of native manufacture (Fig. 18). Most of native specimens have been
fashioned from locally-obtained flint, although one is made of Novaculite from Arkansas. In outline form these specimens vary from square
to rectangular (Fig. 17, A-G) , while in size they are from 0. 75 by 0.81
in. to 0.97 by 1.22 in. They are biconvex in cross section and, although
thinned on all edges, show no battering. Interestingly, many native
gunflints (approximately 60%) appear to be unused and were probably held in reserve for use when European flints could not be obtained.
POSSIBLE GUNFLINTS

Five faceted blade fragments from the site have what appear to be
intentionally produced rectangular or almost square (Fig. 17, H-J )
outlines. In cross section they arc plano-convex, much like the snubnose scrapers. On their convex surfaces two, .occasionally three facets,
are present. While a single break across a blade is not unusual, a second one which produces a square or rectangular outline, is noteworthy.

A

c

B

F

D

E

G
\

\

--.->J
K

H

0L

0

0

5

L

I

CM .

M

Fig. 3 . Scrapers, Drills, Gravers, Celts , Abrader, Pipes , and Beads. A-C , Snub-nose
scrapers with graver beaks . D, E, Drills. F, Graver. G, H, Celts . I, Arrow shaft abrader. J ,
Limestone pipe. K, Catlinite pipe. l, Crinoid bead . M, Turquoise bead . Arrows indicate graver
beaks .

298

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

There are, however, no indications that these pieces have been used as
gunflints and perhaps they, too, were kept in reserve. They vary in size
from 0.63 by 0.66 in. to 1.03 to 1.07 in.
CELTS

Very similar to specimens from the Pearson Site (Duffield and Jelks,
1961 : 32--34) each of the nine polished stone celts from the Womack
Site has a rectanguloid outline and a chisel-like bit at one end (Fig. 3,
G, H ). In cross section they are rectangular with somewhat rounded
edges. Both sandstone and basalt was used in their manufacture.
MANOS

The six manos from the site are of a compact sandstone. Most are
fragmentary, but all seem to have been of the type used in a back-andforth motion . Similar specimens have been reported for the Henrietta
Focus ( Suhm,etal. , 1954: 83-84).
ARROW SHAFT ABRADERS

Fourteen rectangular-shaped pieces of fine-grained sandstone have
one or more longitudinal grooves across one of their flat surfaces (Fig.
3, I). In cross section they vary from square to rectangular. Although
arrow shaft abraders occur in many prehistoric sites, they should probably be added to the Nortefio Focus trait list.
HAMMERSTONES

The 28 hammerstones from the site consist of river rolled cobbles
which have battering marks suggestive of use in hammering and pecking. Most are of quartzite, and all are between 4.0 and 9.0 em. in diameter.
PIPES

Three fragmentary stone pipes have been recovered from the
Womack Site. All appear to have been of the elbow type, with two being made from limestone (Fig. 3, J ) and one of catlinite (Fig. 3, K) .
BEADS

The seven stone beads include four fashioned from fossil crinoids
(Fig. 3, L) and three (Fig. 3, M) made from turquoise. Both types
were probably worn on necklaces. The turquoise beads indicate con-

WOMACK SITE

299

tact (either direct or indirect) with Puebloan peoples to the west, probably in New Mexico.
QUARTZ CRYSTAL

A small, unworked quartz crystal was recovered from the site and
perhaps represents a trade item from Arkansas , or a piece picked up
during an excursion to Arkansas for Novaculite. A small flake or two
has been detached from the crystal, but this is probably accidental.

Artifacts of Clay
Among the native-made ceramic objects from the site there are complete vessels, unrestorable vessel fragments, pipes, and a figurine fragment.
POTTERY VESSELS

Thirteen complete or restorable vessels have been recovered, 12
from Burials 1 through 3, and one from a midden deposit. One of those
(Fig. 4, A ) from Burial 1 is a large, grit-tempered bowl which has an
in curved rim and rounded shoulders, and an incised, but Womack
style, design. Of the four major designs, A, B, C (Duffield and Jelks,
1961 : Fig.10 ), andD (HarrisandHarris, 1962: 9), foundon Womack
Engraved (Fig. 6, A-D ) this vessel (Fig. 4, A ) has Design B-a motif
dominated by rather broad, meandering, negative scrolls and, through
the center of the scroll, a ticked line. The other vessel (Fig. 4, B) from
Burial 1 is a rather small, shell-tempered bowl of type Natchitoches
Engraved (Suhm, et al., 1954: 334-335 ) .
One (Fig. 4, C) of the three vessels from Burial 2 is a typical shelltempered Simms Engraved bowl (ibid.: 354-355 ). The second bowl
(Fig. 4, D ), however, has attributes of both Simms Engraved and
Womack Engraved. It is shallow like Simms, but the curve of the
shoulder is more like Womack; the design includes engraved horizontal lines and triangles which are reminiscent of, but not identical
to, those found on Womack. The third vessel associated with Burial 2 is
a shell-tempered jar (Fig. 4, E) which, at the juncture of the rim and
body, has a row of punctations and, just below the rim, two equally
spaced nodes. It falls within the range of a new type, Emory Punctated,
which has been recognized mainly on the basis of the findings at the
Gilbert Site (Jelks, ms.) .
The largest number of vessels, seven, were found with Burial 3, the
one so badly damaged by plowing. One of the vessels (Fig. 5, A ) is a

300

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

c

E

D
0
I

IOCM.

I

Fig . 4 . Vessels . A, Incised bowl from Burial 1, B, Natchitoches Engraved bowl from
Burial 1 . C, Simms Engra ved bowl from Burial 2 . D, Bowl from Buria l 2 . E, Emory Punctated
jar f rom Bu rial 2 .

small, shell-tempered water bottle of type H udson Engraved (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 304-305). It has the characteristic Hudson spool-shaped
spout and curvilinear, cross-hatched band design. Another shelltempered specimen (Fig. 5, B) from Burial 3 is not typical of any one
type, but rather it has the shape of the Simms Engraved bowl, and a
design (Type A ) like that found on Womack Engraved. The remaining four vessels from this burial include two shell-tempered Emory
Punctated jars (Fig. 5, C) and three grit-tempered Womack Engraved
bowls (Fig. 5, D, E ).
Two vessels have been found in the midden area, not associated with
any burial. One of them is of European origin and is discussed in more
detail in a later section. The other (Fig. 5, F), found by Henry Hanna,

301

WOMACK SITE

is a shell-tempered hemispherical vessel of type Nocona Plain (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 389).
POTTERY SHERDS

The 2,570 sherds from the surface of the site have been analyzed
with the following results:

Womack Engraved
grit-tempered, D esign A-------- ---------- --- -- -- ----- -----shell-tempered, Design A- ------ -------------··--------····
TOTAL DESIGN A

54
7
61

grit-tempered, Design B ------------------------------------ 559
shell-tempered, Design B ----------------------- -- -- ------ - 48
TOTAL DESIGN B
grit-tempered, Design C ------------------- ----- -- ------ -- -shell-tempered, Design C --------------- -- ---- ------- -----TOTAL DESIGN C

64
8

grit-tempered, Design D --- ----- -- -------------------------TOTAL DESIGN D

4

607

72

TOTAL WOMACK

4
744 sherds

Emory Punctated
grit-tempered ---------------------------------------------------- 78
shell-tempered -------- -- --- ----- --- -- ------------------------ -- - 485
TOTAL EMORY

563 sherds

Natchito-::hes Engraved, shell-tempered-------------- -------- -- -8
Simms Engraved, shell-tempered ·············----------------------5
5
Hudson Engraved, shell-tempered ---------------------------------Avery Engraved, shell-tempered ------------- ----------------------7
Nocona Plain, shell-tempered .... __________________________________ ____ 10
Untyped engraved, incised, and punctated ---- ---- ------------ 118
Plain, strap handles, shell-tempered
(probably from Emory vessels) ------ --- ·-- ·--------------------2
Plain, shell-tempered

f

p;~b~bi·y·f~~~-~-~d~~~;~-t~d·- ---

487

portions of Womack and
Emory vessels

Plain, grit-tempered

J ---------------------------------------------------GRAND TOTAL

621
2,570

302

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

8

A

c

0

E
0

5

10 CM.

F

Fig . 5 . Vessels. A, Hudson Engraved bottle from Burial 3 . B, Bowl from Burial 3 . C,
Emory Pu nctated jar from Buria l 3 . D, E, Womack Engra ved bow ls from Buria l 3 . F, Nocona
Plain bow l from mi dden .

From the above tabulation it is apparent that Womack Engraved and
Emory Punctated are the resident pottery types at the Womack Site.
The writers have noticed that Womack vessels show very little evidence of having been used in cooking and appear, instead, to have

WOMACK SITE

303

served as storage containers. By contrast, a large number of the Emory
vessels and sherds have smudged carbon on their outside surface, presumably a result of their having been used in cooking.
It is also evident from the above frequencies that Design B was the
most popular, occurring on 607 of the 744 sherds of Womack Engraved.
To judge from the writers' collections, the same design is the most
common in the Nortefio Focus component at the Sanders Site. Significantly, Sanders and Womack appear to be the earliest of the known
Nortefio sites on Red River. While much less frequent, Design C seems
to occur along with Design A at both of these sites. Design A , a very
minor motif at Womack, becomes more important at Nortefio sites
located on the Sabine, Brazos, and upper Red rivers, apparently at the
cost of Designs B and C. Design D , so far as presently known, occurs
only at the Gilbert and Womack s.ites, where in both cases it is a very
minor form (one and four examples, respectively).
Probable trade pottery is represented by Natchitoches Engraved,
Simms Engraved, Hudson Engraved, Avery Engraved, and Nocona
Plain . All but Nocona Plain, which is linked principally with the
Henrietta Focus to the west, are generally thought of as Caddoan
types . Conversely, Emory occurs, probably as trade ware, as far down
Red River as the Angola Farm (Ford, 1936), a historic Tunica site
near the mouth of that river.
FIGURINE FRAGMENT

A small piece of a baked figurine (Fig. 6, E), possibly representing
the leg of an animal, was recovered. It is too fragmentary for detailed
description, although it might be noted that portions of figurines have
been recovered from other Norteii.o Focus sites.
PIPES

Twenty-seven, largely fragmentary, ceramic pipes are included in
the collection. They are of the elbow type, with the lip of the bowl and
the stem being flat, and a projection, usually an angular spur, commonly appears at the outside juncture, or heel, of the stem and the
bowl. Fourteen of the pipes have small, engraved, crosshatched triangles and ticked circles (Fig. 6, F , H) , one has single engraved lines
(Fig. 6, G) , nine are undecorated (Fig. 6, I), and three are much like
those usually associated with the Allen Focus ( Suhm, et al., 1954:
220). The one complete example (Fig. 6, J) of the last-mentioned
group has punctations covering the body of the bowl and two small feet
at the base of the bowl.

304

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCI ETY

,

wvvvvw

I

AA& AAAA.

· ~
B

vxr ((022 JDII ((
c

E

F
G
H
0

;

I

5 CM .
I

I

I

I

I

WOMACK SITE

305

Artifacts of Shell
CONCH SHELL BEADS

Three rather large beads which were probably worn on necklaces
have been fashioned from conch shell columellae. Two are tube-shaped
and one is barrel-shaped.
CONCH SHELL GORGET

The two gorgets made from conch shell whorls are undecorated
discs. The larger of the two (Fig. 7, A ) has a hole drilled in the center
and two holes near the presumed upper edge. One large central perforation occurs on the other gorget ( Fig. 7, B).

Artifacts of Metal
Included in this category are brass beads and tinklers which appear
to be of native manufacture, although the raw material was obviously
obtained from Europeans. Numerous other metal objects were recovered from the site but these retain most or all of the European design.
A very different situation prevails at later Nortefio sites where both
scrap metal and worn out tools were frequently reworked.
BEADS

Fifteen beads have been made by rolling pieces of sheet kettle brass
into either short (Fig. 7, D) or long (Fig. 7, C) tubes. Twelve are made
of 25 gauge (0.018 inches) brass and three from 19 gauge (0 .036
inches) brass. The 25 gauge metal was apparently obtained from
small kettles, while the 19 gauge brass probably represents large kettles
(for a fuller description of brass kettles see descriptions in a later section ).
TINKLERS

The 77 cone-shaped tinklers from the site have also been made from
scrap pieces of kettle brass. Two different shaped blanks were used to
form most of them. One is trapezoidal in outline and, when rolled, it
produces a tinkler like those shown in Figure 7, E , F ; the other is recFig. 6. Designs on Womack Engraved Pottery, Possible Figurine Fragment, and Pipes .
A, Design A. B, Design B. C, Design C. D, Design D. E, Possible Figurine Fragment. F-J,
Ceramic pipes .

306

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIET Y

c

•
0

B
A

E

,

F

A
H

)~.

I'

l

G

...... ·v . _

...

\i

~

•
K
0

I

Fig . 7 .
tinklen.

5 CM .

I

Gorgets, Beads, and Tinkl e rs. A, B, Shell gorgets. C, D, Brass beads. E- L, Brass

tangular or square in outline and, when rolled, it produces a tinkler
like those shown in Figure 7, G-I.
The site yielded an extra large tinkler (Fig. 7, J) which upon cleaning, was found to contain two somewhat smaller tinklers (Fig. 7, K, L )
within the hollow cone. Brass salts had preserved buckskin thongs in-

307

WOMACK SITE

side all three, and it appears that these specimens constituted a bell,
possibly an item of horse paraphenalia. All three of these tinklers are
of 19 gauge brass. The other 74 specimens include 42 of 25 gauge
brass, 21 of 22 gauge brass, and 11 of 19 gauge brass.
In examining collections from other historic sites, the authors have
noticed that the tinklers from Womack and Angola Farm are loosely
rolled, while those from later historic sites are tightly rolled. Also there
are no iron tinklers known from the Womack Site, but they are common at the later Norteiio Focus site of Spanish Fort.
EuROPEAN-MADE ARTIFACTS

Objects of European origin and design make up an important segment of the collection from the Womack Site. Most apparently represent items the Europeans exchanged for native goods and favors, or
simply gave to the Indians to win their friendship . Included are glass
trade beads, gun parts, various specimens of iron, brass, lead, pewter,
and clay.

Glass Beads
The 2,123 beads from the site examined by the authors are believed
to be of considerable importance in determining the dates of the historic Indian occupation. Hence, in the sections which follow, they are
classified in detail, and several pertinent documentary materials are
reviewed. In analyzing the beads the authors have employed the same
terminology of structure and size as Duffield and Jelks (1961: 40-50) .
Included are simple beads which have a monolithic structure, compound beads which have two different structural components, and
complex beads which have three or more component parts. The sizes
range from large (greater than 6 mm. in diameter) and medium (4
mm. to 6 mm. in diameter), to small (less than 4 mm. in diameter).
Documentary evidence (Du Pratz-quoted in Swanton, 1911: 56)
suggests that the larger beads were used mainly on neckla'ces, while the
small and medium-sized ones were used principally on skins, garters,
and the like.
The various shapes recognized are also essentially the same as those
employed in the Pearson Site descriptions, except for some of the
larger (necklace) beads where the term olive-shaped is used. It is taken
from an early 18th century document (Thwaites, 1959 : 143) and was
apparently widely used by the French to describe certain of the trade
beads. A standard color chart (Bustanoby, 1947: 28-29) has been
used to indicate the hues of beads . It should be noted that the surfaces

308

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of the beads are frequently altered by age and weathering and it is
sometimes difficult to determine the original color. However, the color
can be restored by immersing the beads in a weak solution of muriatic
acid for about two hours and then washing them in water. It is surprising how many beads that would otherwise have been classified as
dirty white turn out to be red, green, yellow, etc. when cleaned. An
example of each of the 56 different kinds of beads recognized in the collection is shown in Figure 8. The number which appears opposite each
r efers to the type designation given below.

'"

30

2.

17

31

4-5

3

18

32.

4*'
-4-7

4-

I~

5
b

2_0

1

2..1

8

2.2.

<)

Z.3

10

Z.+

II

-+8

3+

+9

35

50

3~

51

37

l.5

52.

38

53

3~

2."

4-0

12.

13

2..1

4l

•+

z.s

42.

5+
55

.

0

2..~
Fig .

33

43

5""
I

CM

.

2.

8 . Glass Trade Bead s. Num be rs 1- 56 refe r to the types defi ned in the text.

WOMACK SITE

309

BEAD TYPES

No. 1: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 141 specimens.
No. 2: Large, white, opaque, elongated, olive-shaped necklace bead
of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 125 specimens.
No. 3: Large, white, opaque, round necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 105 specimens.
No. 4: Large, white, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of compound construction. The inner layer of glass has a porcelain-like texture, while the outer layer has a slightly frosted appearance. 70 specimens.
No. 5: Medium, white, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead, of compound construction. The two layers of glass in this bead are the same
as those described above for type No.4. 105 specimens.
No. 6: Medium, white, opaque, olive-shaped garter bead of simple
construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 75 specimens.
No. 7: Large, grayish-white, semitranslucent, olive-shaped necklace
bead of simple construction. The glass has a frosted-like appearance.
31 specimens.
No. 8: Large, light grayish-white, semitranslucent, donut-shaped
necklace bead of simple construction. The glass has a frosted-like appearance similar to No. 7. 17 specimens.
No.9: Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, elongated olive-shaped necklace
bead of simple construction. The glass has fine lines running lengthwise with the bead, giving it a texture reminiscent of stripped sugarcane. 15 specimens.
No.10: Large, Peacock Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped, necklace bead of
simple construction. The glass is the same as No. 9. 45 specimens.
No. 11: Medium, Peacock Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. The glass is the same as No. 9. 27 specimens.
No . 12: Large, Turquoise Blue, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead
of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 3 specimens.
No. 13: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is often cane-like in appearance. 9 specimens.
No. 14: Medium, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped,
garter bead of simple construction. 5 specimens.

310

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

No. 15: Medium, Gobelin Blue, opaque, barrel-shaped, garter bead
of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 62 specimens.
No. 16: Large, clear glass, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is clear but, due to age, sometimes appears frosted.
3 specimens.
No. 17: Large, black, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. The glass is somewhat cane-like in appearance. 2 specimens.
No. 18: Large, black, opaque, round necklace bead of simple construction. The glass is porcelain-like in appearance. 3 specimens.
No. 19: Large, Dandelion Yellow, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace
bead of simple construction . The glass is porcelain-like in texture. 1
speomen.
No. 20: Large, white, opaque, elongated olive-shaped necklace bead
of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with four dark
blue stripes which are evenly spaced and extend along the long axis.
The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 4 specimens.
No. 21 : Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with three blue stripes
which are evenly spaced and are parallel to the long axis. The white
glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 7 specimens.
No. 22: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with two red and two blue
alternating stripes. The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.
No. 23: Large, bluish-white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of
complex construction. The bead surface is covered with three longitudinal sets of three blue stripes spaced evenly around the bead. The
bluish-white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 21 specimens.
No . 24: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. Extending longitudinally across the surface of the bead
are three sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two red stripes
and, between these, a blue stripe. The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 4 specimens.
No. 25: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with three sets, each of which
is composed of two brown stripes and, between these, a blue stripe. The
white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.

WOMACK SITE

311

No. 26: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with three sets of three
blue stripes which are twisted in an S-shape fashion around the bead.
The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 8 specimens.
No. 27: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The surface of the bead is covered with six, more or less
evenly spaced, blue stripes which are twisted in an S-shape fashion
around the bead. The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 2 specimens.
No. 28: Large, white, opaque, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. The bead surface is covered with six, rather evenly distributed, red stripes which are twisted in an S-shape fashion around
the bead. The white glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 2
specimens.
No. 29: Large, Emerald Green, translucent, barrel-shaped necklace
bead of complex construction. The bead surface is covered with eight
white stripes, rather evenly spaced and parallel to the long axis. 3 specimens.
No. 30: Large, Brittany Blue, opaque, elongated olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered
with three evenly spaced sets of stripes, each of which is composed of
two white stripes and, between these, a red stripe. 3 specimens.
No. 31: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered
with five white stripes, twisted around the bead in an S-like fashion.
1 specimen.
No. 32: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. Parallel to the long axis of the bead
are more or less evenly spaced crescent-like white stripes. 1 specimen.
No. 33: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered
with three sets of stripes, each of which is composed of two white
stripes, and, between these, a red stripe. 2 specimens.
No. 34: Large, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, barrel-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered
with eight, evenly spaced white stripes. 1 specimen.
No. 35: Large, clear glass, donut-shaped necklace bead of complex
construction. Eight twisted white stripes appear embedded in the body
of the glass. In making this bead, a layer of clear glass was used for the
core, then the white stripes pressed into the surface of glass, and an-

312

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

other layer of clear glass was added to finish the bead. The white
stripes are twisted in an S-shaped fashion. 1 specimen.

No. 36: Large, black, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with twelve white
stripes running lengthwise with the bead. The surface of this bead
type, and that of No. 35, sometimes appears frosted, probably due to
age. 5 specimens.
No. 37: Large, black, opaque, barrel-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface is covered with eight white longitudinal
stripes, spaced more or less evenly. The black glass of the bead is
porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.
No. 38: Large, black, opaque, donut-shaped necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with eight white
stripes twisted around the bead in an S-shape pattern. The black glass
of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.
No. 39: Large, black, opaque, round necklace bead of complex construction. The surface of the bead is covered with six ivory-colored,
crescent-shaped stripes which run perpendicular to the core. The black
glass of the bead is porcelain-like in texture. 3 specimens.
No. 40: Large, Bluebird Blue, translucent, eight-faceted necklace
bead of simple construction. The surface of the glass sometimes appears
to be frosted, probably due to age. 2 specimens.
No. 41: Large, clear glass, eight-faceted necklace bead of simple construction. The surface of this bead sometimes appears frosted, probably
due to age. Both this bead and bead No. 40 are wire-wound and the
facets were pressed. 2 specimens.
No. 42: Large, clear glass, barrel-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. This bead is wire-wound with a surface which is pressed
into a pattern which resembles that of hobnail glass. This type is often
called the "mulberry bead." 1 specimen.
No. 43: Large, clear glass, barrel-shaped necklace bead of simple
construction. The bead is wire-wound and the surface pressed into six
spiral-shaped elements which give a corrugated effect. 1 specimen.
No. 44: Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead (sometimes
called "seed bead") of simple construction. The glass has a porcelainlike texture. This is the smallest type of bead found at the Womack
Site, and is similar in size to those commonly found at later historic
sites. 75 specimens.
No. 45: Small, white, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of com-

WOMACK SITE

313

pound construction. The two layers of glass in this bead, are the same
as those in bead Type 4. 685 specimens.

No. 46: Small, Peacock Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. The glass of this bead has the sugar cane-like texture of bead Types 9, 10, and 11. 201 specimens.
No. 47: Small, Gobelin Blue, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of
simple construction. The glass has a porcelain-like texture. 175 specimens.
No. 48: Small, dark Bluebird Blue, translucent, donut-shaped garter
bead of simple construction. The glass in this bead is the same as Nos.
13 and 14. 37 specimens.
No. 49: Small, clear glass, donut-shaped garter bead of simple construction. The glass of this bead is the same as that of Nos. 16, 35, 36,
41,42 and 43. 5 specimens.
No. 50: Small, black, opaque, donut-shaped garter bead of simple
The glass of this bead is porcelain-like in texture. 5 specimens.
co~struction.

No. 51: Small, red, opaque (outer layer) , donut-shaped garter bead
of compound construction. The outer layers of opaque glass is brick
red, and the inner layer is a translucent light green. This bead is generally referred to as "Comaline d'Aleppo" (Duffield and Jelks, 1961:
48) . 8 specimens.
No. 52: Large, amber, translucent, barrel-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The bead is wire-wound. 2 specimens.
No. 53: Extra large ( 19 mm. in diameter), milk-glass, translucent,
round necklace bead of simple construction. The bead is wire-wound.
3 specimens.
No. 54: Large, milk-glass, translucent, olive-shaped necklace bead of
simple construction. The bead is wire-wound. 2 specimens.
No. 55: Large, red, opaque (outer layer) , tube-shaped necklace bead
of compound construction. The outer layer of opaque glass is birck red
and the inner layer is a translucent light green. This bead is generally
referred to as "Comaline d'Aleppo," but in this case, the bead stock was
broken into tube-shaped beads, instead of the small, donut-shaped
beads described under No. 51. 2 specimens.
No. 56: Small, but long (bugle type, 9 mm. long and 4 mm. in diameter), Brittany Blue, opaque, tube-shaped, probably a necklace bead,
of simple construction. The glass of this bead is porcelain-like in texture. 1 specimen.

314

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Beads Nos. 55 and 56 usually occur on sites dated in the middle 18th
century (Jelks, ms.). Inasmuch as only three specimens of the tube
beads have come from the Womack Site, they could have been introduced into the site towards the latter part of the occupation.
DOCUMENTS AND COMPARATIVE DATA PERTINENT TO BEAD STUDY

The beads from the Womack Site, when viewed as a whole, contrast
significantly in shape, size, and variety of stripes with bead types found
at the later Norteiio Focus sites ( Spanish Fort, Pearson, Gilbert, Vinson, Stansbury, and Stone). To be sure, some of the beads recovered
from Womack also occur at these later components, but they are much
less frequent then at Womack. These comparative data suggest that,
shortly after the 1730's, an important change was taking place in the
bead industry. Indeed, according to Rogers and Beard ( 1937: 40) the
island of Murano, located in the lagoon of Venice and long famous
for the production of glass, in the 1730's began to decline. The fall of
Murano, of course, was intimately linked to the fall of the commercial
Republic of Venice. Thus by about 1735 what had once been a flourishing enterprise supporting 300 glass houses was quickly reduced to less
than 20 glass houses. Because of the secrecy that surrounded the manufacture of beads, it is difficult to unravel the historical details. However, it is quite possible that other glass houses in Europe took over
the market served by the Murano bead makers. With this shift in
locus of manufacture, there must have been some changes in the types
of beads traded to the Indians.
Three documents cited below give some insights into the sizes,
colors, and uses of some of the glass beads traded to the Indians by the
French in the lower Mississippi Valley between 1700 and 1740. In
one of these, an invoice dated March 5, 1702, and addressed to Father
Jean de Lamberville (Thwaites, 1959: 29), a Catholic priest ordered
certain trade goods for the missions up river, about Fort St. Louis of
Louisiana (present day St. Louis, Missouri ). Among the items requested are:
Ten livres [probably a pound of 12 ounces] of large glass Beads ... black, white and
striped.
Ten livres of small glass Beads ... white, green and transparent.

The second document is a letter written from Fort St. Louis of
Louisiana, dated February 23, 1708, and signed by Father Jacques
Gravier. In this letter he ordered, among other items," . . . 10 livres of
white Beads, olive-shaped and large-sized, 4 livres of small beads ...
blue, green, and white .. ." (Thwaites, 1959: 142).

WOMACK SITE

315

In the third document, LePage du Pratz's The History of Louisiana,
published in 1758, is to be found one of the few early descriptions of
trade beads among the Indians:
When they have beads (rassade ) they make necklaces composed of one or more
rows. They make them long enough for the head to pass through. The rassade is a
bead of the size of the end of a finger of a small infant. Its length is greater than its
diameter. Its substance is similar to porcelain. There is a smaller one, ordinarily
round and white. They value it more than the other. There is a blue one and one
of another style which is banded (bardelee) with blue and white. The medium
sized and the smallest are strung to ornament skins, garters, etc. (quoted in Swanton,
1911: 56).

The word rassade in Old French means "little bits of colored glass,"
and it was commonly used with reference to the beads traded to
Africans (glass beads were traded to Africans long before they were
traded to North American Indians ) . Bardelee, on the other hand,
comes from the Old French word, barde, which during the Middle
Ages, referred to a covering of horse armor, sometimes placed in strips
or stripes over the horse. Bardelee means "the act of covering with
strips or stripes."
It is possible that Father Gravier's large, olive-shaped beads are
represented by Types 1, 2, 6, 7, 12-14, 16, 17, 20-28, and 30-33 at
Womack; while LePage du Pratz's rassade bead with a porcelain-like
surface seems to describe Nos. 1-6, 15, 18-28, 37-39, 44, 45, 47, and
56. The bardelee bead is mentioned as being banded with blue and
white, although Du Pratz does not state whether it was white with blue
stripes, or blue with white stripes, At Womack, Types 20, 21, 23, 26,
and 27 are white with blue stripes, and Types 31 , 32, and 34 are blue
with white stripes.
Of the 56 bead types described for Womack, 47 have been found in
burials at the Angola Farm, a historic Tunica village in Louisiana,
near the mouth of the Red River (Ford, 1936). Thirty-one of the types
occur at the Fish Hatchery Site (personal observation; Gregory,
1962) , a former Natichitoches Indian village near Natchitoches, Louisiana, and 29 have been found at Fort St. Louis de Kadohadacho (the
Roseborough Lake Site near present day Texarkana and the probable
location of the N assoni te Post established in 1 719 by La Harpe;
Harris, et al., ms.). As will be brought out in later sections, Womack
and these three sites all appear to date from the same time period and,
more importantly, appear to have been visited by the La Harpe party
during the course of its journey up Red River.

316

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gun Parts
BACKGROUND

To many gun authorities and collectors, the Indian trade gun,
easily identified as a distinctive type after 1800, is characterized by a
combination of features: the brass serpent or dragon side plate, the
deep "ox bow" trigger guard, the ribbed rampipe, and flat butt plate.
In reality, such guns and their definitive characteristics represent the
culmination of certain developments in the English trade gun that
took place in the 1700's. During various periods in time, the common
name was the Hudson's Bay Company fuke or fusil, the Mackinaw
gun, and, the most famous of all, the Northwest gun (Hanson, 1955).
Supplied by the English, the Nor:thwest flintlock became so well
known to the Indians by the 19th century that often they would not
accept a weapon in trade that did not fit this type. While some imitations were made in Belgium and in the United States after 1800, the
Northwest gun was manufactured mainly in England from its inception in the late 1600's until after 1860. It is probably the single best
known item of English trade. Although the Northwest gun is well
identified as a type after 1800, it is quite another matter in the period
prior to that time. Some of the elements that eventually became characteristic of this type appear to be present earlier, but it is clear that
the stylistic evolution was not complete.
Then French were also producing trade guns. According to Russell
( 195 7: 22--24) , something like 200,000 French trade guns were manufactured in 100 years (ca. 1650-1750) . These, however, have virtually
disappeared and to our knowledge not one has been identified in a
museum or a private collection. This is of considerable importance to
the present study, as the Womack Site lies in an area which during
the 18th century was served primarily by French trade. At this, and
many other historic Texas Indian sites, there are many gun parts
which do not appear to be of English origin, even in view of the indefinite characteristics of the 18th century trade gun. Since the
Spanish policy of trade did not encourage traffic in weapons during
this period, it is improbable that the guns at the site were obtained
from this source.
If some of the parts labeled herein as coming from French flintlocks
are not of domestic French origin, it is very likely that they were at
least produced by manufacturers on the European Continent who
supplied common arms for the French market and who were certainly
influenced by French master gunsmith designs. Thus, in this report,
when we say French trade gun, we simply mean a specimen probably

~

0

s;

>
(')
~

Sode pla.te
fonoal

~pper

front

ta.nq

Q

lock

-heel

plate s cr e w

~

....U1...,

~C.l"e:W

loc k plate

M

-oosta.l

screwhole

toe

Thumb plc1te

Touch hole

/)Butt pl<1te

Muzzle

front

Barrel
I

sect ton

r

r.. rmonal

I

rdmpope

I

I
I

Dostal-

I

Butt

1 Interoor Surface
I

I

Ramrod

\
\
\

\

Upper

ro.mptpe

611=:=1

Intermedt<1~e

I

\

~.\

ro.mpope

bo~
j
Ftnta.l

I

front

Reo.r ftnt<>.l
f

X

to.n9

ten

or

surf O.Ce

Fig .

9.

lllustrotions showing component ports of fusil class weapon.
(.>.)

......
'1

318

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

designed for use in the French trade but not necessarily of French
manufacture.
When a recognizable, repetitive pattern occurs among the apparent
trade gun parts from Norte:iio Focus sites, it seems invariably to involve hardware suitable to the fusil (light weight) type flintlock.
Other, non-fusil type parts, are infrequent and fail to exhibit a clear or
consistent pattern. Since all the guns from the site have been disassembled and component parts (see Figs. 9 and 10 for a definition of
these parts ) are often broken, there is no way of being sure that any
two parts were associated with the same gun. This is an unfortunate
but common occurrence. As we have already mentioned, there is no
known example of the 18th century French trade gun. Almost nothing is known of the components of such a weapon beyond Hamilton's
( 1960a: 208 ) tentative linking of certain breech dimensions and bores
with the late 17th and early 18th century French trade gun. Other
probable French gun components have been recognized in the collection from the Gilbert Site (Jelks, ms. ) , but this material is not yet
published. However, library and field research carried out over the
past two years by the authors have strengthened the tentative assignments made in the Gilbert Site report. These assignments are made
after a careful study of the literature available concerning the characteristics of properly identified flintlock guns of the periods assumed
represented in the sites under study. Particular attention was focused
on those fusil specimens held to be typical products of a particular
country and period.
Among the major manufacturers, the English guns are among the
best detailed in the literature, and the French ones among the least
detailed . We know from history that trade items from these two
countries are the ones that archeologists are most likely to encounter
in 18th century Indian sites in Texas and adjacent areas. The Spanish
colonial policy was not to trade weapons to Indians, and when they
finally did grudgingly issue guns-usually, on a token basis-they
appear, at least during the late 1700's, often to have been supplied
through French sources.
The writers have no argument with the experienced gun authorities
who state that guns of these early times cannot be definitely identified
by any of their component parts. Indeed, it is difficult in most cases to
identify positively the age and source of a complete specimen. We do,
nonetheless, firmly believe that useful information can ultimately be
obtained by the recognition of repeatedly occurring patterns and by
adequate description of gun parts recovered from archeological sites.
In the section which follows reference will be made to certain

319

WOMACK SITE

A

cover

spnnq

l.lpp tr lock plate ,,,.,_ l'la.l•

8

JCB

Fig .

10.

Illustrations showing a flintlock mechanism.

decorations and design features which, to the authors, appear to have
been based on French pattern books (Hayward, 1963). These books
were used throughout Europe by fashionable gun decorators and gunsmiths. There are indications that even the common grade of gun may
reflect some of these patterns, albeit in simplified form and technique.
As aids to dating, they can at least indicate a possible starting date for

320

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a particular design. Fortunately, for our study, the 18th century
English gunsmiths, unlike those on the Continent, were generally
not so prone to adopt all the French designs. In dealing with common
grade guns, this tendency among the English seems to offer a useful
point of comparison. However, it will take a good deal more study to
determine the full value of this approach.
FLINTLOCK COCK

The one flintlock cock (Fig. 11 , A, A' ) collected from the site thus
far is in The University of Texas collections. It is complete with top
vise jaw and vise screw. The vise screw has a slotted head and the wide
comb has been vertically grooved (mortised ) for receipt of a tenon on
back of the top vise jaw. With an over-all sharp curvature, the cock is
of the gooseneck form and is not reinforced. The cock base is flat in
cross section, and has beveled edges and a square hole for the tumbler
shaft. No major cleaning has been attempted and the measurements
(see Fig. 11, B for locus of measurements) are: A, 1.45 in.; B, 2.87 in.
Remarks: Hamilton ( 1960b: 166 ) has illustrated cocks with combs
and central grooves, stating that they were most popular ca. 1750, and
that they could be from England, France, or the Low Countries. A
cock combining these features with a flat, beveled base is illustrated in
a French encyclopedia for the years 1751-65 (Held and Jenkins, 1957:
115) . The same combination of attributes can also be seen in two
French guns of the 1720's, a fowling piece and a pistol, which are
illustrated by Hayward ( 1963: Pls. 8c, 9b). Hayward notes (ibid.:
49, 200 ) that, as a French characteristic, the flat cock (usually combined with flat, rather than plano-convex, lock plate) continues from
its introduction in the late 17th century until the mid-18th century,
when the plano-convex cock and lock plate were again produced during the same period as the flat cock and lock plate. In England, the
plano-convex cock base persisted through this period and was not
superseded as a standard in fine guns until the 1770's (ibid. : 200).
In short, we seem to have a period, 1700-1750, in the production of
first quality guns when the presence of a flat cock and lock would seem
to eliminate an English source. S. James Gooding ( 1960: 85 ) makes a
case for the persistence of the round or plano-convex form in the
English trade gun from the end of the 17th century through the next
200 years. This is also substantiated in the English fusil and sporting
class guns by Joel Shiner's findings at Fort Frederica on Simons
Island, Georgia (Shiner, ms.) . At this site there were four flat musket
cocks identified with the early 1700 period. All thirteen of the round

WOMACK SITE

321

base cocks from Fort Frederica are of the smaller fusil and pistol class.
According to Manucy's ( 1959: 49, 51) description, the blacksmith
shop in which they were found should date between 1736 and 1743certainly not later than 1760. While there is always the possibility
that a French weapon or two might be represented in this group of
parts from Fort Frederica, there can be little question, in view of the
nature and history of the site, that most are of English origin.
If the data from the above sources have been correctly interpreted,
then, regardless of the quality or class of the weapon, the English
flintlock cock made between the late 17th century and ca. 1750
appears best characterized by the rounded face on the base of the
cock. This period can be extended to about 1770 for fine arms, and,
to the end of the flintlock era (ca. 1875 ) for the trade gun class.
As a possible indication of how useful this cock feature may be, at
the Gilbert Site, dated ca. 1750, the bases of all 13 cocks recovered had
flat cross sections. Present evidence indicates that the bulk of the
European trade at this site was with the French.
Conclusions : The flintlock cock from Womack is probably from a
French trade gun which dates between 1700 and approximately 1750.
It is of a size suitable for use on a fusil class weapon.
FRIZZ EN

The term frizzen, as used in this report, refers to the combination
of steel and fla sh pan cover in one part.
The one frizzen (Fig. 11, C, C') from the site is of iron or steeL
It has a rounded top and a slightly curved striking surface. The front
~ surface is beveled, with two major facets being present. No major
cleaning has been done and the measurements (see Fig. 11, D for
locus of measurements) are: A, 1.78 in.; B, 0.98 in.; C, 1.03 in. ;
D, 0.31 in.
Remarks: This frizzen is too large to have been used in the same
gunlock as the flashpan from the site (see below). It is also larger than
the average-sized specimen from the Gilbert Site (Jelks, ms.) .
Conclusions: Of a rather generalized type, such a specimen could
date anytime from about 1690 to the close of the flintlock trade period
in North America, ca. 1875.
FLASHPAN

This iron flashpan (Fig. 11, E-E') was made separate (removable )
from the lock plate. The flashpan is shallow with the underside
formed in three facets . Contact with the face of the lock plate was

322

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

A'

~

c

C'
D

I

E

E'

0

5 CM .

I

I

323

WOMACK SITE

made by a flange w hich projects from this bottom side. The rear of
the pan was fastened to the inside of the lock plate by a screw (still in
place ) which was passed through a tang, or tail, and into the inside
of the lock plate. A front section of the pan has an oblique surface to
key into the lock plate. The powder trough is essentially parallelsided, and there is a low flash shield at the r ear of the pan. There is no
waterproof feature, nor a bridle (supporting strap ) for the frizzen.
After major cleaning, this specimen measures, 0.97 in. wide (measurement taken same place as frizzen dimension "C") and 1.22 in. long
(front of oblique "key" surface to end of tail).
Remarks: Flash pans that are shallow and faceted on the undersidevery similar to this one-may occur shortly after 1705. They were extensively used by the French between about 1720 and 1750 (Hayward, 1963: 297, 347 ; Pls. 8c, 93, 95b) . The military used them from
1717 until1766, when they returned to rounded (rather than faceted)
forms (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1717, Modele 1766 ). The military
version had added the supporting strap (a metal projection from the
outer edge of the flash pan to the head of the frizzen pivot screw) for
the frizzen screw to flashpan in 1728 (ibid.: Modele 1728 ). However,
a book of gun decoration designs, first published shortly after 1705 and
republished in 1730 (Hayward, 1963 ) , has the strap still missing on
the pan of the civilian style lock. This absence continues in French
civilian guns until 1750 (ibid.: Pls. 11a, 12; H eld and Jenkins, 1957:
115 ) .
Conclusions: This flashpan is smaller and lighter than seems suitable for a military weapon . It is probably from a Fren ch trade gun
which was made between 1720 and 1750.
MAI N SPRING

The one mainspring from the site is of steel or iron and consists only
of the upper leaf section , having been broken in the bend. It is beveled
on the outside edge (side away from the lock plate). There is a screw
hole in the tang and on the inside of the spring there is a small boss
which fits into a hole in the lock plate. No major cleaning has been
attempted and this specimen has maximum width of 0.52 in.; and a
maximum thickness of 0.19 in.

Fig .

11 . Cock, Frizzen, and Flashpan . A, A' , Cock . B, Drawing of cock showing wher<>

measurements were ta ken. C,

c',

ments were taken . E, E', Flashpan.

Frizzen. D, Drawing of frizzen showing where measure-

324

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TRIGGER

Included in the collection is an iron trigger (Fig. 12, A) of long,
graceful form. The lower end terminates in a full circle or loop. This
specimen is quite similar to two of the triggers from Fort Michilimackinac (Maxwell and Binford, 1961: Pl. IV ). No major cleaning
has been attempted and this trigger is 1.84 in. long.
TRIGGER GUARDS

Briefly described below are 17 trigger guards, 15 of which have been
collected by the authors, one of which is from The University of Texas
Womack Site collection, and one of which is from the Fort St. Louis
Site in Texarkana. The last-mentioned specimen (Fig. 12, L') is included because it fits onto the broken end of one of the trigger guard
tangs (Fig. 12, L ) from the Womack Site.
Trigger Guard No . 1. This undecorated, cast brass trigger guard (Fig. 12, B, B')
has been broken across the front tang (forestock plate) and across a countersunk
screw hole in the rear (proximal) tang. The front tang has a tongue on the upper
surface with a pin hole in the tongue. This tongue was inserted into a slot in the
bottom of the gun stock and held into place by a pin passed through the stock. Both
tangs are plano-convex in cross section, w hil e the bow is biconvex in cross section.
Maximum width of bow, 0.89 in.; thickness of bow at point of maximum width,
0.13 in.
Trigger Guard No. 2. Consisting of only the bow section, this brass, cast trigger
guard (Fig. 12, C) had been broken across both ends. The lateral edges of the outside surface are bordered by two parallel grooves, while the center part is engraved
with a simple design which is reminiscent of the Chevrolet trade mark. At each end
of this design there are two small circles. The bow is biconvex in the cross section.
Maximum width of bow, 0.82 in. ; thickness of bow at point of maximum width,
0.17 in.
Trigger Guard No . 3. The bow piece (Fig. 12, D) is almost identical to No. 2,
differing from that trigger guard only in that it is broken near the midsection and
lacks the small circles at the ends of the engraved design.
M aximum width of bow, 0.81 in.; thickness of bow at point of maximum width,
0.17 in.
Trigger Guard No. 4. Broken across the front tang at the base of the finial and
across the bow, this piece was also cast in brass. Its front tang is trapezoidal in cross
section, with wide lateral bevels being present on the exterior face. A tongue with
a pin hole projects from interior surface of this tang. The margins of exterior surface
of the bow are engraved with a single line design which is lost beyond the break in
the bow.
Maximum width of front tang, 0.67 in. ; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11
Ill.

Trigger Guard No. 5. This specimen (Fig. 12, E, E') is similar to No. 4, except
that no decoration is present. A small, identical flaw appears in the metal of both
suggesting the possibility that Nos. 4 and 5 were cast in the same mold.

325

WOMACK SITE

F

,'

F

: '=

I

G

..

••
H

..

..

J
0

I

L

L.

5 CM.

I

M

Fig . 12 . Trigger and Trigger Guards . A, Trigger. 8, 8 ' , Trigger guard No . 1, C,
Trigger guard No. 2. C, Trigger guard No . 3 . E, E', Trigger guard No . 5. F, F' , Trigger
guard No . 6 . G, Trigger guard No . 7 . H, Trigger guard No. 8. I, Trigger guard No . 11. J,
Trigger guard No . 12 . K, Trigger guard No. 13 . L, L' , Trigger guards Nos. 15 and 16. M,
Trigger guard No. 17. Arrow points to mold flaw on E. The proximal or rear ends of the
trigger guards are to the right, except for C, D, and L, L' which are too fragmentary to orient.

Maximum width of front tang, 0.66 in.; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11
m.

Trigger Guard No. 6. This trigger guard (Fig. 12, F, F') is much like No. 4, except that it has been broken at the foot of the bow section and no details of the bow
can be determi ned.

326

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Maximum width of front tang, 0.64 in.; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11
ln.

Trigger Guard No. 7. Cast in brass, this specimen (Fig. 12, G) consists of a front
tang section. It is trapezoidal in cross section and has wide, lateral bevels on one
face. The finial is missing and the broken tang has been bifacially sharpened on the
distal end and along the two sides. The proximal end is broken. No measurements
were taken.
Trigger Guard No. 8. Broken across the rear tang and rear section of the bow,
this cast brass tang fragment (Fig. 12, H) has a trapezoidal cross section and wide
lateral bevels.
Maximum width of section present, 0.61 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.11 in.
Trigger Guard No. 9. Cast in brass, this specimen consists of a rear tang section
broken across both ends. It is trap e zoid~! in cross section and has wide bevels.
Maximum width across shoulders, 0.58 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.09 in.
Trigger Guard No . 10. This cast brass trigger guard is the same as No. 9, except
that it has the tongue with a pin hole.
Maximum width across shoulders, 0.58 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.09 in.
Trigger Guard No . 11. This incomplete, cast brass specimen (Fig. 12, I) consists
of a rear finial section broken across the rear tang. It is trapezoidal in cross section
and has wide lateral bevels on one face.
Maximum width across shoulders, 0.58 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.09 in.; maximum width across finial, 0.59 in.; maximum thickness at same point,
0.09 in.
Trigger Guard No. 12. Cast in brass, this specimen (Fig. 1'2, J) is a front finial
section which has been broken across the neck of the front tang. It is trapezoidal in
cross section and has wide bevels.
Maximum width across finial, 0.51 in.; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11
m.
Trigger Guard No. 13 . This tang section (Fig. 12, K)has been cast in brass. It is
broken across both ends and has a plano-convex cross section.
Maximum width of tang, 0.76 in.; maximum thickness at same point, 0.11 in.
Trigger Guard No. 14. Consisting of a cast brass tang section with a plano-convex
cross section, this piece has battered lateral edges. One break crossed the edge of a
screw hole that is countersunk into the exterior surface. No measurements were
taken.
Trigger. Guard No. 15. Also a cast brass tang section, this fragmentary specimen
(Fig. 16, L) has a plano-convex cross sect:on. The exterior surface of one end has
the remnants of a countersunk screw hole. No measurements were taken.
Trigger Guard No. 16. Although not from the Womack Site, this specimen (Fig.
16, L') .fits one broken end of No. 15. It is from the Fort St. Louis Site at Texarkana,
100 miles down river from Womack. Undoubtedly, they are part of the same trigger
guard. No measurements were taken.
Trigger Guard No. 17 . From The University of Texas collection, this cast brass
bow section (Fig. 16, M) is broken across both ends. Parallel to each lateral edge is

WOMACK SITE

327

a groove and, in the center, there is a simple engraved design much the same as that
on No. 2. It is, however, a slightly more stylized vers:on of that motif. This bow has
a maximum width of 0.81 in .

Remarks: Trigger Guard No. 1 resembles some of the French military specimens made between 1717 and 1746 (Boudriot, 1963 : Modele
1717-1746), and Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 16 may be tang fragments from
similar guards. Specimens No. 2, 3, and 17 are engraved with designs
like those found at the Angola Farm Site which ·dates between 1709
and 1729. This Chevrolet trademark-like element can be traced to
French pattern books of 1705 and 1730. It also occurs as a more complex, but still recognizable element, on Type I trigger guards from the
Gilbert Site (estimated to date at about 1750). However, the Womack
trigger bows (Nos. 2, 3, and 17), and those from the Angola Farm, are
somewhat thicker and wider than specimens from the Gilbert Site.
A comparison of the front and rear tangs found at Womack, Gilbert,
and Angola does not reveal any major differences . Trigger Guard No.
12, the only front finial section from the Womack Site, is longer, but is
of a simpler form, like those from the Gilbert Site. Finials from the
Anglo Farm end in an acanthus leaf. Only two of this type were found
at Gilbert, and, on these, the acanthus leaf has been depicted in a
slightly different manner.
The use of the pinned tongue for fastening the front of the guard
onto the stock of English fowling pieces dates from the early 18th
century (George, 1947: 104) . A tongue on the front tang and hook on
the rear tang are shown on a French trigger guard illustrated for the
period 1751-1765 (Held and Jenkins, 1957: 115).
Conclusions: Trigger guard bow sections 2, 3, and 17 probably represent French trade guns of about 1720. The same could be true of Nos.
4-12, although we believe that they were still in style in ca. 1750.
SIDE PLATES

The 15 side plates from the site are described individually below.
The thickness measurements in each case were taken at the ends of the
long axis. The use of the term upper for the upper lock or side screw
hole which occurs in the upper edge of the side plate, at the point of
maximum width, is to avoid the use of the term middle, and its possible
implication of a three screw plate.
Side Plate No. 1. This cast brass. apparently complete side plate consists of two
fragments that seem to fit together (they are shown together in Fig. 13, A) . The
break occurs across the rear section of the plate, along a transverse decorative groove.
The broken end of the larger piece has been bifacially resharpened, making perfect
matching of the two fragments impossible. The margins of the exterior, engraved

328

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

B

--.
0

E

F

H

G

K

J

L
M

N

0

Fig. 13. Side Plates. A, No . 1. B, No. 2. C, No . 3 . D, No. 4 . E, No. 5 . E, No . 6 . G, No.
7 . H, No . 8 . I, No . 9. J, No. 10. K, No . 11. L, No . 12 . M, No. 13 . N, No . 14. 0, No . 15 . P,
Side plate from pistol in Texas Memorial Museum collections . The proximal or rear ends of
plates are to the right.

surface of b::Jth sections are beveled, while the lateral edges of the plates are undercut toward the interior surface-evidently to facilitate inlaying.
The larger of the two pieces is extensively engraved, with the central design consisting of a trophy of arms and a boar's head. An arch-like design appears on each

WOMACK SITE

329

side of this central element. The one on the front side vaguely resembles the Chevrolet trade mark (similar motifs were found on three of the trigger guard bows ) , while the one on the rear side combines this design with small scroll elements. An elliptical-shaped element with a circle at each end and a leaf scroll, vaguely of acanthus
form, finish out the pattern. The upper and lower edges are bordered by a double
row of small, essentially triangular-shaped, marks. The piece has oxidized to a black
color.
The other section, evidently from the same plate, is a triangular-shaped rear (or
proximal ) piece. It also has a double row of triangular-like marks. Assuming that
the two do belong to the same specimen, it is a two-screw side plate, with the distance between the front and upper screw holes being ZU inches. The larger section
is 0.05 to 0.08 in. in thickness; the small section is 0.06 to 0.08 in. in thickness.

Side Plate No. 2. This incomplete side plate (Fig. 13, B ) is of cast brass, flat in
cross section, beveled on the sides of the exterior surface, and undercut at the lateral
edges. It is transversely broken across the distal, or front, section. Included in the
engraved design is a double row of triangular-like marks which, on the main body
of the plate, are parallel to the top edge and extend down the border of a transverse
groove which sets off the triangular-shaped proximal section. The proximal part of
the plate also has a double row of triangles, but these parallel both the upper and
lower edges. The central engraved design is a chase scene consisting of a stag and
two collared dogs, one with a curled tail. On the lower margin of the rear piece there
is a small hole which was probably for the trigger pin. The upper side plate screw
hole is present, and, although the part which would be expected to contain the front
screw hole is missing, there is no doubt that this was a two screw hole side plate .
The thickness is 0.04 to 0.05 in.
Side Plate No. 3. This cast brass side phte fragment (Fig. 13, C) is flat in cross
section, is slightly beveled along the sides of the exterior surface, has undercut
lateral edges, and is transversely broken at both ends. The engraved design in the
central portion consists of two opposing acanthus, or leaf-scroll, elements joined by
several parallel lines. The break along the front end cuts through a small circle.
Parallel to each lateral edge is a single engraved line and a row of triangles. The
upper screw hole is present and the thickness is from 0.04 to 0.05 in.
Side Plate No. 4. Consisting of a small part of the central section, this cast brass
side plate (Fig. 13, D) is flat, slightly beveled along the margins of the exterior
surface, and undercut along the lateral edges. It is broken across both ends, with
rear break passing through the upper screw hole. Rather badly battered, it appears
to be engraved with an acanthus scroll design. The thickness is 0.05 to 0.06 in.
Side Plate No. 5. Made of cast brass this central section fragment (Fig. 13, E) is
flat, beveled along the margins of the exterior surface, and undercut at the lateral
edges. It is broken across both ends, with the break at the rear edge passing through
the upper screw hole. The poorly executed engraved design consists of a drum
flanked by banners, and, along the borders of the plate, an engraved line. The plate
has oxidized to a black color and is 0.05 to 0.06 in. in thickness.
Side Plate No. 6. Of cast brass, this piece (Fig. 13, F ) is apparently from the front
section of a side plate. Its exterior surface is slightly convex and beveled. on the sides;
the lateral edges, however, are not undercut. An engraved line parallels each border,
with one of these (the lower line) terminating in a scroll. The intact distal end
contains a side screw hole, while the other end is broken across the edge of a
cartouche-like element. The thickness is from 0.06 to 0.08 in.

330

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Side Plate No. 7. This und ecorated cartouche fragment (Fig. 13, G) is of cast
brass, flat in cross section, beveled along the margins of th e exterior surface, and
undercut at the lateral edges. It is 0.08 in. in thickness.
Slide Plate No.8. Broken at each end, this cast brass side plate fragment (Fig. 13,
H ) has und ercut lateral edges, and is essentially flat in cross section , although the

oval-shaped escutcheon has a slightly convex exterior surface. This plate is a simple
version of the pierced or fretted type, and the outlined leaf-scroll elements are
emp hasized by engraved lines. It is 0.06 to 0.07 in. in thickness.

Side Plate No. 9. This specimen (Fig. 13, I ) is the proxim al section of a s:de plate
decorated in the same manner as No. 8. It is of cast brass, is fl at in cross section, and
h as been broken across the upper end. Only one edge appears to be under cut. The
thickness is from 0.07 to 0.08 in.
Slide Plate No. 10. This specimen (Fig. 13, J) is almost identical to No. 9. It is a
pro xim al section of a cast brass side plate which was flat in cross section but not
und ercut. Although broke~ across both ends, only a small portion of the proximal
part of the decorative scroll is missing. Because of the ext ent of oxidation, it is difficult to be sure, but one edge of the upp er screw hole may be present along portions
of the distal break. The thickn ess is from 0.05 to 0.06 in.
Side Plate No . 11. This piece (Fig. 13, K) is of cast brass, is flat in cross section,
and lacks undercut lateral edges. Evidently representing the front part of a pierced
type side plate. it is outlined and engraved to depict the h ead of a serpent (or
dragon) . The distal screw hole is present in front of the serpent's m outh. The plate
h as been broken across an excised area in the serpent's neck. The thickness is from
0.07 to 0.08 in.
Side Plates Nos. 12 and 13. Both of these quite fragmentary and badly oxidized
pieces (Fig. 13, L, M ) are of iron. As a r esult, their identifica tion is tentative and
no significant measurements can be m ade. H : > wever , they were probably fretted.
Side Plate No . 14. Thi s specimen (Fig. 13, N ) is of cast brass and has a flat ext erior surface which is beveled along the edges. The lateral edges, h owever, are not
undercut. Broken across both ends, the distal break appears just beyond the upper
screw hole, while the proximal brea k occurs just above a small, right-angled corner
on the bottom of the plate. There are two round punch m arks on the interior surface.
They are 0.07 in. in diameter and 0.11 in. apart. The thickness is from 0.11 to 0.3 in.
Side Plate No. 15. Probably of sheet brass, th' s undecorated proxim al fragm ent
(Fig. 13, 0 ) is transversely broken on the distal side. At the edge of the other end
is what appears to be the proximal hole of a two-holed side plate. The thickness is
uniform at 0.025 in.

Remarks: The flat, unfretted side plate of simple outline form, and
decorated chiefly by means of engraving, began to be used on fashionable weapons by the French about 1715-1720 (Hayward, 1963: 297,
Pl. 92) . The English, by contrast, did not adopt this style until about
1750 ; they abandoned it between 1798 and 1800 (George, 1947: 111,
112) .
. Note the curvature of the bottom edges of side plates Nos. 1 and 2.
According to Peterson ( 1956: 36, Pl. 38) lock plates with such a curve

WOMACK SITE

331

would generally date prior to 1770. Whether or not a lock plate used
with this type of side plate would normally have a matching curve
along its lower edge has not been determined. It does, at least, seem
possible. A pistol illustrated by Hayward ( 1963: Pls. 9b, 10b) with a
side plate comparable to No. 1 from Womack does have a matching
curve along the lower edge of the lock plate. The apparent absence of
this style side plate at the Angola Site makes it seem unlikely that they
were common on guns traded prior to 1730. This general style of side
plate is present at the Gilbert Site which is dated at ca. 1750 (Jelks,
ms. ) .
The design on the side plate of a French pistol dated at about 1720
(Hayward, 1963: Pl. 10b) is so similar to that found on specimen No.
1 from the Womack Site, that both could have been copied from the
same basic pattern. Designs based on military trophies and the chase
were used by European gunmakers and are rather difficult to pin down
as to source and age. On the other hand, the Chevrolet trademark-like
element (i.e. , a design made of essentially parallel, but offset lines) ,
represented in a stylized form on side plate No. 1, and trigger guards
Nos. 2 and 3, and the opposing leaf scroll elements, found on side plate
No. 3, are motifs that repeatedly occur at other Texas sites where
French trade is indicated (Jelks, ms.) .
Side plate No. 14 (Fig. 13, N) , while quite fragmentary, gives the
impression of having had a markedly curved lower edge. This possibly
suggests an early 18th century date, while the thickness and lack of
decoration suggest a military weapon. The outline form of side plate
No. 15 (Fig. 13, 0) resembles the 1767 model fusil made for French
infantry lieutenants (Boudriot, 1963: Modele 1767 ), although it does
appear to be smaller and perhaps too thin for use on a military weapon.
Side plate No. 6 (Fig. 13, F) may be transitional between the fretted
(pierced) and the non-fretted styles. It has the symmetrical cartouche
and elaborated outline of the fretted style, but it is not pierced. Side
plate No. 7 appears to be similar to No.6. Side plates Nos. 8, 9, 10, and
11 (Fig. 13, H-K) are fragments of fretted or pierced side plates and
are of a type that was in use at the Angola Farm which is dated at 1709
to 1729 (Ford, 1936; Swanton, 1911). According to Hayward (1963:
45), the pierced side plate on expensive (fine class ) French guns was
going out of fashion by about 1710.
Side plate fragments 8, 9, and 10 (or 8, 9, and 11) could be from the
same specimen. If true, then only the head of the serpent would be
rendered in reptilian form; the remainder, the "body," would consist
of a pierced leaf scroll design. A possibly similar side plate from a pistol
in the Texas Memorial Museum Collections (catalogue No. 1721-270)

332

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

is illustrated in Figure 13, P. This weapon is badly rusted and no identification marks can be seen, but the style is French, and the authors
believe that it probably dates from the period 1700-1725.
A generally similar pierced type side plate was found on a gun associated with Burial 7 at Angola Farm. The butt plate tang on this
Angola specimen was shortened and the finial was of the acanthus leaf
style-both of these appear by 1710 as general features of the leading
French fashion (Hayward, 1963: 45). The trigger guard bow from
this gun is engraved with a design (much like the Chevrolet trademark) similar to those found on some of the specimens from the Womack Site. Portions of this decorative element can also be found in the
French Pattern books of De Lacollombe which date from 1705-1730
(ibid.: 297). The pierced side plate had evidently disappeared by the
time the Gilbert Site was occupied, probably about 1750 (Jelks, ms.).
It would seem from the foregoing data that gunsmiths producing
weapons used in the French trade followed the leading French fashions
when these designs were suitable for reproduction in a relatively inexpensive manner. Since fashion change is represented, it seems possible that these weapons were being made for the ordinary French
market and not solely for the Indian trade.
Conclusions: The pierced type side plate, Nos. 8 through 11, probably represents the French trade gun of ca. 1720. The solid type side
plate of simple outline, Nos. 1 through 5, represents the French trade
gun of ca. 1750, and quite possibly earlier.
GUN BARRELS

Including a specimen containing the breech section, nine iron barrels :were recovered from the site. Five of the barrel pieces were originally round but are broken across both ends and flattened. The other
four have retained more diagnostic features and are more fully described below.
Gun Barrels Nos. 6 and 7. Barrel section No.6 (Fig. 14, A) is 12 inches long, bent,
and broken on both ends. One end, however, is still round and approximately og .55
caliber after major cleaning. A flat, longitudinal facet, averaging 0.19 inches in
width, extends the full length of this piece. In the absence of a sight or pin (barrel
mounting) lug, there is no sure way of properly orienting this piece.
Barrel section No. 7 (Fig. 14, B) is 5.25 inches long, round in cross section, and
bro~en at both ends. After major cleaning the caliber measures approximately .58.
There is a flat, slightly raised sighting rib, averaging 0.16 inches wide and extending the entire length of the upper side. On the underside a short flat for a mounting
lug has been filed in the barrel. One end of this flat is undercut and interrupted by
a break. A pin lug was probably set into the bottom of the barrel at this point. It is
possible, but we believe unlikely, that a sight was dove-tailed into the barrel at this

333

WOMACK SITE

..
A

B

c

-1

:

0

,'

E

I

G

E'
0
I

5 CM.

I

Fig. 14. Gun Barrels and Rampipes . A, Section of gun barrel No. 6 . B, Gun barrel No . 7 .
C, Section of gun barrel No. 8. D, Gun barrel No. 9 , with breech section . E, E' , Rampipe No.
1. F, Rampipe No. 2 . G, Rampipe No. 3.

point. If we have correctly assumed the pin lug location, then the rib would be on
the top of the barrel.

Remarks: Among the features of the first standard French mu sket, model of 1707,
Peterson (1956: 172) lists a flat face, which extends to within five inches of the
muzzle, on top of a round barrel. The caliber of this model, .69, is considerably
larger than any of those from the Womack Site. The use of a slightly raised rib by
the French dates from about 1685 to 1720 (Hayward, 1963 : 44, 49, and 78 ). This
characteristic does not generally appear on English guns ( ibid.: 78 ).

334

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Gun Barrel No.8 . This fragmentary barrel (Fig. 14, C) is 6.13 inches long, round
in cross section, and has a pin lug brazed into the underside. A round pin passed
through the forestock and this lug, keeping the barrel in place. No major cleaning
has been done, but the caliber appears to be .55.
Gun Barrel No. 9. This octagonal barrel fragment (Fig. 14, D) includes the
largely intact breech section. Exclusive of the breech plug it is 6.38 inches long and
is .58 caliber after major cleaning. Across the flats this piece is a maximum of 1.125
inches in diameter. The breech plug is intact, although the tail of the tang is broken
off. The back of the breech plug is notched for the upper lock plate screw. A touch
hole is present on the side of the breech.
Remarks: The breech section of this piece measures 1.13 inches in diameter across
the flats. According to Hamilton (1960a: 208; 1960b: 126) a breech diameter in
excess of one inch should eliminate the 19th century Northwest gun and may be
assumed to in:licate an 18th century trade gun, an 18th or 19th century_mili.ta.ry
musket, or Colonial smoothbore. Since the bore size of the Womack specimen does
n::>t match those common to the French, English, or Colonial muskets of the 'p eriod,
it appears probable that this is from an 18th century trade gun. We cannot determine
the origin, but the caliber is larger than those believed by Hamilton (ibid.) to be
typical of the late 17th and early 18th centuries. We believe bores of caliber .58 and
.60 represent the French trade gun of a slightly later period, ca. 1750.
At the Gilbert Site (Jelks, ms.) , where the guns represant principally items of
French trade, all, but two, of the measurable bores were approximately caliber
.58-.60. The exceptions were smaller, approximately .55. At least one earlier
association of a breech measuring over one inch in diameter with balls of .58 caliber
can be n::>ted: At the Angola Farm such a barrel and 11 balls of approximately
caliber .58 were found with Burial No. 4 (personal observation). It is a highly
conjectural process to determine the probable bores in which any particular size ball
was used, except, that it is usually safe to assume that the ball was intended for a
bore larger than itself. Depending on the thickness of the patch (a piece of greased
cloth or leather used as wrapping for a rifle ball), a ball may often be intended for
use in a bore considerably larger. Hamilton (1960b: 132) believes a useful estimate
of caliber for smoothbores can be obtained by adding 0.02 in. to the actual ball size
-we tend to agree.
Conclusions: This breech section probably represents an 18th century trade gun
and could date from ca. 1720 to ca. 1750.
RAMROD GUIDES

The site yielded three ramrod guides or rampipes-essentially
tubular-shaped pieces of brass afixed to the forestock and used to hold
the ramrod in place.
Ramrod Guide No. 1. This complete specimen (Fig. 14, E, E') of cast brass is a
lower or terminal guide; so-called because it was afixed to the proximal portion of
the forest6ck. The proximal end consists of a long pointed tail or tang which has
recurved lateral edges and which was probably inlaid into the lower surface of the
forestock. The distal section of the guide is tubular-shaped, although the edges are
not joined. The upper edges of this portion are flanged and pierced for a pin which
secured the guide to the forestock. Five longitudinal facets have been filed on the

WOMACK SITE

335

exterior suri ace of the tubular part, an:l a ring encircles each end of the tube. These
two presumed decorative rings appear t :> have been formed in the casting process
and r etouch 2d by filing. The lower external surface at the proximal end is damaged,
possibly from wzar pnduced in balancing the gun across a saddle. This guide has
an external d:ameter of 0.34 in. and a length of 2.75 in.

Ramrod Guide No . 2. This quite fragmentary piece (Fig. 14, F ) is from the
tubular portion of a cast sheet termin al ramrod guide. It is too incomplete for
further description and meaningful measurement.
Ramrod Gu:de No. 3. Representing an intermediate or upper guide, this tubularshaped piece (Fig. 14, G ) of sheet brass is complete. Annular ribs are present on
the exterior surface, with only the center rib having a matching groove on the interior surface. The upper edges are brought together, flanged, and pierced. This
specimen is 0.42 in. in diameter and 1.03 in. in length.

Remarks: The recurved tail of specimen No. 1 closely resembles a
ramrod guide obtained from Burial No. 7 at the Angola Farm Site
(personal observation ). Of the examples of ramrod guides from the
Gilbert Site, it is similar to only one, a large specimen of iron. Ramrod
guide No. 3, on the other hand, does not resemble in detail the typical
intermediate guide from either Angola or Gilbert. It is more like those
from the 19th century English trade gun, although it lacks the distinctive CC marking found on guides from that weapon. Ribbed rampipes
of this general form were fairly common in the early 18th century,
appearing on both English and French arms.
Conclusions: Ramrod guides Nos. 1 and 2 are probably from French
trade guns, with the former most probably dating about 1720 and the
latter between 1720 and 1750. The third specimen is of a more generalized type which was present throughout the 18th century and lasted
on into the 19th century, where it occurs on the Northwest gun.
THUMB PLATE ESCUTCHEONS

Four thumb plate escutcheons were recovered from the site. A
thumb plate escutcheon is set into the upper surface of the stock between the proximal end of the breech plug tang and distal end of the
comb of the stock, if used on a shoulder weapon. This position is the
same if used on a pistol, except of course, there would be no comb.
Thumb Plate Escutcheon N o. 1. Complete, this cast brass specimen (Fig. 15, A,
A') has a concave inner surface and convex external surface. The exterior side is cast
or filled in low relief, beveled on the edges, and bears an engraved design. An acanthus leaf element appears at the top of the design, and a series of curvilinear lines
and triangles from the remainder of the motif. A solid cylindrical peg is molded into
the inner surface.
Thumb Plate Escutcheon No . 2. Quite similar to the above, this cast brass escut-

336

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

c

G'

0
I

Fig.

15.

8

8"

D

D. .
5 CM.
I

Thumb Plate Escutcheons. A, A', No. 1. B, B', No.2. C, C', No.3. D, D', No.4.

cheon (Fig. 15, B, B') is also concave-convex in cross section. On the external surface there is an engraved design which is basically similar to that on specimen
No. 1. A s~lid cylindrical peg is molded into the inner surface.
Thumb Plate Escutcheon No. 3. Broken across the lower edge, this cast brass escutcheon (Fig. 15, C, C') has a concave internal surface and convex exterior surface.
A solid cylindrical peg is molded onto the internal surface, while the exterior surfaces is molded in low relief and retouched with engraving. The design at the top
vaguely resembles an inverted plume, although we believe that it is an adaption of
the acanthus pattern. Double ridges border each side.
Thumb Plate Escutcheon No. 4. This cast brass specimen (Fig. 15, D,D') is concave on the interior surface and convex on the exterior surface. There is a hollow
cylindrical peg molded onto the inner surface while the exterior surface is molded

WOMACK SITE

337

in low relief and retouched by means of engraving. This resulting design is dominated by a lion-like mask. The edges and lower portion of the escutcheon are
adorned with a curving ridge which ends in scrolls just below this mask.

Remarks: The occurrence of the four thumb plate escutcheons at
the Womack Site is unusual, as they have not been observed by the
writers in any of the collections from other historic sites in Texas.
Moreover, they do not conform to any of the illustrations of English
escutcheons which J. N. George (1947: Fig. XVII) indicates as being
standard for the period between 1720 and 1750.
Escutcheon No. 3 is topped with a stylized floral element which
strongly resembles a distal end lock plate design taken from patterns
by De Lacollombe and published in Paris about 1705 and again in
1730 (Hayward, 1963: 297, Pl. 93). This is rendered in a crude form
suggestive of "mass" production-perhaps supplied by a large brass
founding center such as that at Liege (Hayward, 1963: 165). (Indeed,
it is quite possible that most of the brass mounts on the French trade
guns are from these foundries.) The decorative escutcheon No. 4 is
quite similar to a trigger f9re tang pattern in the same pattern book.
Conclusions: The design motifs on the escutcheons, especially No.4,
were possibly based on French patterns available as early as 1705. It
must be noted, however, that these pattern books were widely used on
the European continent.
BUTT PLATES

During the period apparently represented by the Womack flintlock
parts, a butt plate was a sheet of metal fastened across the end and
portion of the top or comb of the butt stock. It was secured by various
combinations of screws and pins, and, in some English guns, with small
spikes. Thirteen butt plates are recognized in the collection from the
Womack Site.
Butt Plate No. 1. Incomplete, this cast brass butt plate (Fig. 16, A) is broken
across the finial (decorative projection at the upper end) and lower part of the heel
(the curved area of the plate). A tongue, for attaching the plate to the wooden stock,
is molded onto the interior surface of the finial and has been broken across the pin
hole. The finial area is flat on the interior surface and convex on the exterior surface. The tang and heel areas are also convex on the outside surface but concave on
the interior. The lateral edges of the heel are beveled. Decoration on the exterior
consists of four longitudinal grooves which tend to converge toward the finial. The
toe area (missing here) of such a plate was usually secured by one screw.
Butt Plate No. 2. Broken across the neck (constricted p:)rtion) of the finial and
across the heel, this specimen (Fig. 16, B) is also of cast brass. The tang area (the
upper, tapered projection between the heel and the finial) is plano-convex in cross
section, while the heel is concavo-convex in cross section. The decoration on the

338

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

8

c

A

E

···-·]

~

~--~
G

H

G'

K

0

5 CM .

L

Fig . 16. Butt Plates. A, No. 1 . 8, No. 2 . C, No. 3. D, No. 4 . E, No. 5 . F, No . 6. G, No . 7 .
H, No . 8 . I, No . 9 . J, No . 10. K, No. 11. L, No . 12 .

339
convex exterior surface is basically similar to the above, differing from that specimen only in having two additional lines inside of, and parallel to, the two inner
grooves. The grooves terminate just above the break across the heel.

Butt Plate No . 3. This specimen (Fig. 16, C) is of cast brass, is broken across the
heel, across the upper edge of the finial, and though restored, across the juncture of
the finial and the tang. A tongue is present on the interior surface of the finial , but
it has been broken across the pin hole. The exterior surface of the tang is convex and
formed into three longitudinal facets. Five parallel grooves cross the tang just below
the finial, angling down from each side and extending straight across the center
facet. The exterior surface of the heel is beveled at the sides, while the interior
surface is concave.
Butt Plate No. 4. This cast brass plate (Fig. 16, D ) has been broken just below
the finial and across the beginning of the heel area. It is concavo-convex in cross
section. There is a groove across the tang (just below the missing finial) and three
longitudinal facets below this.
Butt Plate No . 5. Consisting only of a tang section, this piece (Fig. 16, E ) has
been pounded flat. However, marks typical of a contouring tool are present on the
interior surface, and there is no doubt that this tang was once concavo-convex in
cross section. A single engraved line, superimposed by small triangular-shaped
marks, appears along each side and terminates in a scroll at the top of the design. A
small oval is engraved just below the scroll and, below this, is the main design: an
unstrung bow, quiver, and two clubs.
Butt Plate No . 6. Of iron, this tang section (Fig. 16, F ) is broken just below the
finial and across the top of the heel. The lateral edges of the heel that are intact are
beveled and there is a countersunk screw hole in the center edge of the lower break.
The cross section is concavo-convex, and three longitudinal facets are formed on
the tang.
Butt Plate No . 7. Consisting of a finial section which ends in an acanthus leaf
pattern, this specimen of cast brass (Fig. 16, G, G' ) is broken at the p:>int of juncture
with the tang. There is a tongue with a pin hole on the under surface. In cross
section it is slightly concavo-convex.
Butt Plate No. 8. This finial section (Fig. 16, H) is of cast brass and has been
broken across the lower part of the finial. It is topped with an acanthus leaf pattern
and is slightly concavo-convex in cross section.
Butt Plate No . 9. Of cast brass, this piece (Fig. 16, I ) represents the lower section
of a butt plate. The outer edges are beveled, while the exterior surface is convex
and the interior one is concave. A screw hole is countersunk into the exterior surface, and on the interior surface a ring-shaped area about this hole has been deliberately cast thicker than the remainder of the plate. A mark, apparently a crown
over an R, is stamped on the exterior, just above the bottom edge.
Butt Plate No. 10. This lower part of a butt plate (Fig. 16, J) is essentially the
same as No. 9, although it lacks the interior reinforcement around the screw hole,
as well as the mark at the lower edge.
Butt Plate No. 11. Also from the lower section of a butt plate, this piece (Fig. 16,
K) is broken across a screw hole countersunk into the exterior surface. The plate has
been pounded flat and the exterior lateral marginal edges are beveled.
Butt Plate No. 12. Apart from battermg on the lower edge of the toe and a
concavo-convex cross section, this p1ece (F1g. 16, L) lS much like No. 11.

340

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Butt Plate No. 13. This iron tang sectwn-it IS broken just below the finial and
across the heel area-has been hammered almost flat but was probably once concavoconvex in 1cross section. The edge across what was the heel area has been bifacially
sharpened, probably for use as a scraper.

Remarks: For purposes of analysis, butt plate sections 1 and 2 can
be combined with finial pieces 7 and 8. Their decorative patterns match
and, combined, they are in close agreement with the complete brass
butt plates from the Angola Farm. A similar tang decoration-i.e.,
longitudinal grooves-occurs on a butt plate from the Fish Hatchery
Site near Natchitoches, Louisiana (Gregory, 1962: 60-61). The short
tang (as opposed to the long tang variety found on late 17th century
guns) with the finial ending in an acanthus leaf was in general vogue
in France by 1710 (Hayward, 1963: 45) . Its occurrence at Angola indicates that it had been used as a design motif on French trade guns
before 1730.
Butt plates 3 and 4, of brass, and No. 6, of iron, each have three
longitudinal facets-a feature which does not appear on corresponding
gun parts from the Gilbert Site. While No. 3 differs from Nos. 1, 2, 7,
and 8 in decorative detail, we believe that it is essentially of the same
type.
The engraved bow, quiver, and arrow design on specimen No. 5 is
generally similar to decorations found on five butt plates and two
side plates at the Gilbert Site. As noted in the report on that site
(Jelks, ms.), the English were using similar motifs on fine weapons in
the period between 1702 and 1720. The bow and quiver can be traced
back at least as early as 1685 in French gun design (Hayward, 1963:
91). A French pattern book first issued in about 1705 and republished
in 1730, shows a design combining an unstrung bow, an arrow, and a
club (ibid.: Pl. 93) . Its use on fine French weapons of about 1720 is
illustrated by a fowling piece made by Germain (ibid. : Pl. 8c) . Hamilton (1960b: Pl. 52) shows a basically similar design for an historic
Osage site dated between 1730 and 1775. Like patterns can also be
seen on specimens from Fort Michilimacknac which dates from the
latter half of the 18th century (Maxwell and Binford, 1961: 101102). Two such designs also occur on an early 19th century trade gun
made by P . Bond (Russell, 1957: 113-114) . As a decorative motif,
then, the bow, arrow, quiver, and club were in use for more than 100
years. In regard to French use, these design elements were originally
employed on sporting weapons of fine grade. Their presence on five
of the Gilbert Site butt plates, as well as two of the side plates, suggest
that they were also at least one of the major designs used on the
French trade gun of 1750.

WOMACK SITE

341

Butt plate No. 9, with a possible maker's mark, matches the butt
plate from the Fish Hatchery Site, as well as those from Angola Farm
(personal observation) . All are approximately 0.25 in. wider than the
specimens from the Gilbert Site. By contrast, butt plates Nos. 10, 11,
and 12 are narrower and more nearly resemble the Gilbert pieces.
Butt plate No. 13 is similar to No. 6, although it lacks the screw hole
and any facets that might have been present would have been obliterated by hammering.
Conclusions: Specimens Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, and 9 probably represent
French trade guns which date about 1720. Butt plates, Nos. 3, 4, and 6,
with their faceted tangs, suggest a variant form which appears to predate specimens from the Gilbert Site. On the other hand, Nos. 5, 10, 11,
and 12 do not differ in any important detail from those found at Gilbert
and could, therefore, represent French trade guns of ca. 1750; they
could also be earlier. In view of the length of its tang, butt plate No.
13 is possibly of a form earlier than those from Gilbert.
GUNFLINTS

In addition to the 23 native-made gunflints, there are eight gunflints
believed to be of European manufacture. These can be sorted into two
categories,-spall gunflints and conventional gunflints. Both types were
mounted in a cock vise and, when the cock was released by the trigger,
were struck against the striking surface of the frizzen, thus producing
a spark to ignite the priming powder in the flash pan.
Spall Gunflint . Three spall type gunflints (Hamilton's gunspalls) can be recognized in collection largely on the basis of their wedge-shaped or plano-convex longitudinal sections (Fig. 18 ) . One of these (Fig. 17, M ) is made of pinkish-tan chert
and is extensively reworked. The other two (Fig. 17, K, L ), of light gray chert, have
retained their original form. They are 1.03 and 1.ZZ in. wide, and 0.88 and 1.0 in.
long.
Remarks: According to Hamilton (1960c: 76- 77; 1964: 5Z-53) , gunspalls were
produced by detaching wedged-shaped spalls from a small, rounded cobble of chert
( Subtype A ) or flint of unknown source (Subtype B), as well as from core remnants
of flint from known quarries (Subtype C). Our examination of a large number of
spall gunflints from Texas sites suggest that at least some of them (including specimens from Womack, Gilbert, Spanish Fort, and Fort St. Louis at Texarkana ) were
produced by techniques which involved rudimentary preparatiOn of a core. Many
of these specimens have little or no secondary flaking along the lateral edges, nor
a bulb of percussion visible on the plano surface. However, thi s plano surface usually
has at least one transverse flake scar, apparently produced in dressing the original
core. Also in the heel area of these gunspalls a prepared fa cet or striking platform
often is still apparent. In these ways, the cited Texas specimens appear to bridge the
technological (and poss1bly chronological) gap ·b etween the Subtype A spall gun-

342

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

D

F

E

G

J

H

N

M

L

K

0
0
l

p

Q

5 CM.

I

Fig . 17. Gunflints . A-G, Native-made gunflints. H-J, Possible native-made gunfl ints.
K-M, Spall gunflints . N-P, Convent ional French gunflints . Q, Conventional English gunflint.

WOMACK SITE

343

flints produced from and unprepared pebble core acc::>rding to the method described
by Hamilton, and the conventional gunflint produced from blades removed from a
carefully prepared core.

Conclusions: The three, probably French, gunspalls from Womack could date
anytime from the early 17th century to about 1750.
Conventional Gunflints. Five gunflints are included, four of which appear to be
of French origin and one (Fig. 17, Q) of English origin. Three (Fig. 17, N-P) of
the probable French ones are of the characteristic blond color, while the fourth is
grayish-white. Two of these have D-shaped outlines, with rounded backs (Fig. 17,
N, P) and one (Fig. 17, 0 ) is square with two edges. The latter has the distinctivel.y
French "gnawed" retouching (secondary flaking) on the sides (Fig. 18). One blond
flint (Fig. 17, P) is reworked in the Indian fashion.
The fifth gunflint (Fig. 17, Q) is rectangular in outline and dark gray in color.
Its recognition as English rests mainly on technique of manufacture which is identified by single blow undercut fracture (Woodard, 1960: 30-31; Hamilton, 1964: 53 ) .
The French gunflints are from 0.94 to 1.0Z in. wide, and from 0.75 to 0.88 in .
long. The probable English one is 0.69 in. wide and 0.94 in long. •
Remarks: As Hamilton (1960c: 75) makes clear, the occurrence of French gunspalls and gunflints at the sites is not, by itself, a reliable indication of direct trade
with the French.
According to Witthoft (cited in Hamilton, J960c : 74-79; 1964: 5Z), the conventional gunflint began to displace the spall gunflint about 1750, and, by 1775, almost
all were of the conventional type. However, the conventional gunflint was apparently first introduced into the Western Hemisphere about 1680 (Hamilton, 1964:
55 ). We note (personal observation) in the collection of offerings from a burial at
the Angola Farm Site that there were eight spalls and one honey colored gunflint.
This burial probably dates about 17ZO, and it is to our knowledge, the earliest date
example of a honey colored French gunflint from the sites discussed in this reportConclusions: The French gunflints could easily have been present at the Womack
Sie by 17ZO, and possibly earlier. We have no estimate concerning the English specimen, but we seriously doubt a pre-1700 origin.
SPHERICAL BULLETS

Six spherical bullets, molded lead balls (Fig. 19, A, B), were recovered from the Womack Site. All are oxidized, and all, but one,
deformed. This exception shows mold marks and flat sprue cut. Following the system devised by Hamilton (1960b: 128-129), calibers and
gaugest can be worked out for five of the spherical bullets.
• No attempt has been made to indicate what size guns these gunflints (and the
gunspalls ) were intended to be used with; it remains a difficult problem (Woodard,
1960: 36 ) .
t The gauge is the interior diameter (bore ) of a barrel expressed by the number
of spherical lead bullets fitting it required to make a pound.

344

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Grains
149.6
215.4
218.0
232.2
267.7

Approximate Caliber
.49-.50
.53-.55
.53-.55
.55
.55-.58

Gauge
56-36
32-28
32-28
28
28-24

LEAD SHOT

The site yielded two oxidized and deformed specimens of lead small
shot. These shots were weighed and assigned sizes (see below) which
correspond with the weight classes listed in an early table (George,
1947: 211). Early size designations often do not match modern ones.
Since the early sorting was based on the use of graded screens, shot of
different weights may receive the same label.
Grains
Size
5.1
#1 shot
13.0
Duck shot
QUESTIONABLE GUNPART

Included in this category is a slender, bent piece of iron which may
represent a gun pin. Its fragmentary condition, however, makes positive identification impossible.

Possible Sword Guard
Of cast brass, this broken specimen (Fig. 19, C) appears to be from
a hemispherical- or spherical-shaped object, possibly a sword guard.
The external surface is convex and the interior one is concave. A light,
probably engraved, design appears on the exterior surface. Although
incomplete, it seems to have consisted of a centrally placed circle
-formed by two concentric lines and, radiating out from this element, a
series of panels separated from one another by sets of parallel lines.

Remarks: This specimen could be from the cup of Caribbean cuphilted type sword. If so, it probably dates back to the 17th century
(Peterson, 1956: 74) .
Trade Axes and Wedges
Three complete and three fragmentary axe heads and a wedge have
been found at the site. All are of iron and some have been cleaned of
rust in an effort to locate maker's marks or names. Unfortunately none
was found, although several did show use scars.

~
~

Spall G.unfl1nt

(onventtonal Enqltsh G.unfltnt
"'.' ~ r4,J

fl.ect.dton

1

8 lb 5

'

"

:';(,!,~

!V', I •
I

fd~e

LJ"l

-~·cl

-Bevel

t'

Undercut

lndtan

·r

fclce-

t'<l

Edqe , - - -

I

Heel

!;;J':« w

·,,

-~-6c1ck
.

-Stde

>-<

j;<ij'/7/'\R u . e t t o n bulb of p01Ycuss1on

Convent1ono.l french Ciunfl1nt

SIde -

1

. •'

11 11

~

..,

(f>

04ck

B .. lb of

>

(')

Ed'le-

fro.d:ures

G.unfltnt

~_
..,,lbl
~,

~I
f

c~k)

fdC~t

w

-t>-

fi$1.

18. Idealized $ketche$ llf the malor type$ Qf eunfllnts found In Norteiio f11cus sites.

U\

346

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

One of the complete axes (Fig. 19, D), which has not been cleaned
because of extreme rusting, does not have a hafting eye for a handle.
It is single-bitted and has a swept back blade. Similar specimens have
been found in Pennsylvania at historic sites which yielded French
trade items dated between 1650 and 1718 (Cadzow, 1936: 218, Pl. 90 ) .
A second complete single-bitted axe head (Fig. 19, E) is of the camp
or belt (i.e., light) type. It has a broad, swept back blade and a rounded
hafting eye. It was cleaned of rust, but no marks were found. One of
the fragmentary specimens (Fig. 19, F) , lacking only the cutting edge,
is of the same type. After breakage the remaining portion of this specimen was straightened out, inadvertently revealing the method of manufacture: the iron was forged, shaped, and then bent to form an eye for
the handle, and, finally, the two ends were forged together to form
the cutting edge (All belt axe heads examined by the authors have been
fashioned in this manner, while the blades of regular axes and wedges
are of simpler construction.). When cleaned this fragmentary camp
axe was found to contain small cut marks on one face, possibly a result
of use as an anvil. Similar scars have been observed on axes and
wedges from the Gilbert and Spanish Fort sites.
The specimen shown in Figure 19, G is a single-bitted camp axe
that was probably forged by a blacksmith at one of the trading post
sites. Apparently made from a flat, rectangular-shaped piece of iron,
the blade was first shaped then the lateral edges above the blade were
bent to receive a handle. Since this hole, unlike those of the other axes,
parallels the long axis, it would require a handle bent at an angle of
about 70 to 75 degrees, or, a limb with a branch extending out at about
the same angle. A small perforation in one side was evidently made to
receive a pin and, thus, to secure the handle.
The two remaining axes are single-bitted blade fragments which, in
each case, appear to be of the camp type. At least, they have the same
blade form and were constructed by forging together the ends of a long
piece of iron.
The blade of the one rim wedge (Fig. 19, H ) from the Womack Site
differs from those of the axe heads in that both lateral edges are flared.
The top of this wedge has signs of extensive battering, perhaps from
being hammered or from use as an hammer. When cleaned this piece
showed the same type of cut marks as noted for one of the fragmentary
camp axes . Similar wedges from the Gilbert and Spanish Fort sites
have also been observed to have like scars. In many instances, it seems
as if one wedge was used as an anvil and another as a cutting implement, possibly for working brass for tinklers and other artifacts.

347

WOMACK SITE

A

8

c
0

5 CM .

F

H

Fig . 19. Spherical Bullets , Poss ible Sword Guard , Axe Heads, and We dge. A, B, Spherical bullets . C, Possible sword gua rd . 0-G , Axe head . H, Wedge .

348

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Knives
BACKGROUND

After several years of studying collections mainly from Nortefio
Focus sites it has been possible to recognize six different types of iron
knives (Fig. 20) which, in tum, can be subdivided into clasp (folding)
and case knives. Only two of the six forms are known for the Womack
Site, but all six are present at the Spanish Fort Site and several of the
types are found at Fort St. Louis at Texarkana and at the Gilbert Site.
The three types shown in Figure 20, A-C are French clasp knives.
Types 1 and 2 differ only in outline form, as both have a small basal
flange or boss which extends over the upper edge of the blade and
which served as a stop to make the knife rigid when open. Type 3 has
a different form of stop, a small perforated tang at the back of the blade,
which is similar to that found on present day knives. All three types
are identified as French on the basis of names found on them after
cleaning.* In some cases, crowns or emblems have been noted following the names.
The other three types (Fig. 20, D-F) are case knives. All three are
ridged and designed either for a handle to be held in place by pins or a
tang tightly inserted into a solid handle. The tang on Type 2 is square
in cross section. Types 1 and 3 of the case knife may have two, sometimes three, pins for the handle, while Types 2 and 3 have raised bosses
for the handle to fit against. Type 3 has a "fish-scaler" on top of the
knife blade. Type 1 can be identified as French or English on the basis
of the names found after cleaning. Examples of the other two forms
have been cleaned, but no names have been located thus far.
KNIVES FROM THE WOMACK SITE

One complete, one reworked, and five fragmentary knife blades have
been recovered from the site. To judge from their shape or from the
names found on them, six are definitely of French manufacture.
The complete specimen (Fig. 21, A) is a French clasp knife of Type
1. When it was cleaned, two sets of letters, one above the other, could
be distinguished. The top row consists of . . NNET .. and is too incomplete to reveal the full name. On the bottom row the letters
• A word of caution should be given on the cleaning of knives and other specimens of iron for the purposes of securing names and designs. One should not attempt
to clean such an artifact by the electrochemical method unless he has had experience, as this method will often destroy weak letters and designs. Use only a slow acid
acid method and do not leave the specimen in the acid longer than 20 or 30 seconds.
The proper cleaning of th e iron is a very slow process and may take two m· three
days per specimen.

WOMACK SITE

349

.. LA VD .. can be made out. Since CLA VDE, a good French name,
has been found on several knives from Gilbert and Spanish Fort, there
can be no doubt that it is the name imperfectly preserved on this knife
from Womack. (Incidentally, in reading these names the V can represent either a V or aU. )
Three specimens (Fig. 21, B-D ) lacking the ends of the blades are
fragments of French clasp knives . Although their incompleteness
makes precise identification impossible, they are either of Type 1 or 2.
The letter E was raised one one (Fig. 21, D ).
A fourth fragmentary blade (Fig. 21, E ) is from a rather large Type
3 clasp knife. The blade on this piece was resharpened after breakage.
No letter could be located on this specimen, but similar specimens from
the Gilbert and Spanish Fort sites have yielded French names.
Another fragmentary specimen (Fig. 21, F) cannot be identified as
to type, as it is from the center part of the blade. When cleaned, however, it produced two rows of letters and an emblem. Both names are
French and are complete as follows: On the top row, MATHIEVR,
and on the bottom row, CALLE LAVNE. A heart-shaped emblem
appears after these names. It is turned at a 90 degree angle to the names
and the bottom of the "heart" is missing. Similarly shaped emblems
have been found on knives from the Gilbert Site.
The only other knife blade (Fig. 21, G) from the site is a medial
fragment. It is too incomplete for further classification, and no letters
were detected in cleaning.
·
Remarks: The names on iron knives probably represent the names
of the Guilds that manufactured them. When a number of examples
have been found and identified with the iron guilds in Europe, they
will undoubtedly be excellent means of dating historic sites. The writers now have matching names on knives from Gilbert and Fort St.
Louis at Texarkana, and on knives from Fort St. Louis and Spanish
Fort. These data suggest that Fort St. Louis (the possible site of the
Nassonite Post) was a trading center for the upper Red and Sabine
rivers (Harris and Harris, 1961: 4; Harris, Miroir, McVey, and Blaine,
ms.) .

Awl
A fairly long, but incomplete, iron punch or awl (Fig. 21 , H ) is
pointed at one end. When cleaned, it was found to contain the letters
RENA . ., being broken just beyond the A. It might be noted that a
French knife from the Gilbert Site bears the name RENARD. Perhaps
it is the same name that is only partially discernible on this punch.

350

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

---~ ~

:7

~---~----------------------:;
NAME

TYPE 1

c
B

TYPE~

~·------------N-A_M_E----~~
TYPE3

~

NAME

_0

0
0
r--__ _

TYPE
--------------~'

_____]J-->

L~
E

iYPE 2.

TYPE 3
Fig.

20.

Sketch Showing Knife Blade Types . A-C , Clasp knives . D-F, Case knives.

Bridle Bit Fragments
Two specimens (Fig. 21, I , J) appear to be fragments of the distinctive Spanish ring bits (Tunnell, ms.). This type is, in a sense, an elaboration of the curb bit, as it has a prominent port (curve in the horizontal bar placed into the horse's mouth). However, unlike the curb
bit it has: 1) a large ring which attaches to the proximal end of the
port and encircles the lower jaw of the horse, 2) two chains which
extend from this ring to the lower portion of the bit legs (or shanks),

WOMACK SITE

351

3) two small, flat bars which are placed across the port, and 4), on
these bars, three to four small rings which cause the horse to salivate.
One of the pieces from Womack (Fig. 21 , J) can definitely be identified as coming from the central part of such a bit. It has the port and
cannons (horizontal extensions on either side of the port) intact, as
well as the flange through which the large ring was attached. The
other, more fragmentary specimen (Fig. 21, I) may possibly represent
a portion of one of these large rings . It is perhaps from the same bit, or
from yet another bit.
Tunnell ( ms.) has noted that the Spanish ring bit occurs at almost
all historic sites in Te'!'~as . This is in agreement with observations made
by explorer La Harpe who, on September 3, 1719, met a high chief of
the Touacaras (Tawakoni) near the Arkansas River. He stated that
this chief rode a horse that was saddled and bridled according to the
Spanish mode (Smith, 1959: 525) . Then, on September 8, 1719, La
Harpe gathered with the chiefs of the Touacara nation and they told
him of the route to the Spanish dwellings in the west. The presence of
the Spanish bridle bit fragments at Womack provides material evidence of the trade between the Spanish in New Mexico and Witchitaspeaking peoples.

Miscellaneous Horse Trappings
Eight fragments of sheet brass from the site appear to be from
harness or horse trappings of some sort. Four are of 25 gauge brass and
four of 22 gauge brass. Each consists of two pieces of sheet brass joined
by native-made, brass rivets (Fig. 21, K) with leather or rawhide strips
between the sheets of brass. The leather has been preserved by the
brass salts. The writers have seen similar specimens in all of the
collections from Nortefio Focus sites.

Strike-A-Light
A roughly C-shaped fragment of iron is believed to be from a strikea-light. It is shown in Figure 22, A.

Probable Fragment of Armor
An elongated, slightly curved piece of iron (Fig. 22, B) has a hole
drilled in each end. It cannot be positively identified but may be a
piece of armor.

352

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

A

8

c
D

F

K
5CM .
H

Fif. 21 . Knife Blades, Awl, and Horse Trapp ings . A, Type I clasp knife blade. B-D,
Fragments of clasp knife blades . E, Type 3 clasp knife blade . F, G , Medial blade fragments .
H, Iron awl. I, J , Brid le b it fragments . K, Possible piece of harness trapping .

Miscellaneous Iron Scrap
Nine pieces of iron scrap have been recovered from the site. In view
of its low frequ en cy of occu rrence, it is u n likely that the Indians were
working much iron. This is in marked contrast with later Norteiio sites,
such as Gilbert, Spanish Fort, and Stone, wh ere large amounts of iron
scrap occur. It is pertinent to note that after having collected from the

WOMACK SITE

353

Womack Site for about 35 years, the authors have never found an iron
or brass arrow point. However, metal projectile points are numerous
in their collections from later Nortefio Focus components.

Brass Kettle Fragments
No complete kettle has been found at Womack, although numerous
fragments of sheet brass appear to be from worn out kettles (Fig. 22,
C, D). In studying these pieces, it was noticed that they are of three
different thicknesses which, by using an American Standard Wire
Gauge, can be converted as follows :
Measurement
Gauge
.018 in .
25
.025 in.
22
.036 in.
19
Apart from the probable kettle fragments reworked into tinklers and
described earlier (scrap kettle brass was often used by the Indians to
manufacture a variety of artifacts), included in the collection are:
Number of
Specimens
Gauge
Type
2
25
Rim fragments
22
3
Rim fragments
4
19
Rim fragments
67
Side or bottom fragments
25
40
Side or bottom fragments
22
22
19
Side or bottom fragments
1
22
Kettle lug
19
1
Kettle lug
140total
Inasmuch as kettle brass from historic sites appears to be of several
sizes, it seems quite plausible that the differences in thickness, or
gauge, reflect differences in size. If correct, then small, medium, and
large kettles appear to be represented at Womack.
There is very little direct indication of shape of the kettles, although
one of the rims (Fig. 22, C) is rolled (similar rims occur at Gilbert and
Spanish Fort ) . At the contemporaneous Angola Farm Site, however,
there were complete kettles. These have flat bottoms and essentially
straight sides (Ford, 1936: 136-137).
The writers have noticed that a kettle rim in their collection from
the Spanish site of Los Adais in Louisiana is of red brass, while kettle
brass from all known Nortefio sites is yellow. It may be that this differ-

354

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ence in color will, if reinforced by more extensive research, prove to be
useful for distinguishing between French and Spanish kettles.

Hawk Bells
There are two fragments of hawk bells in the collection (Fig. 22, E).
Both are of the soldered type and are made from 25 gauge brass.

Brass and Lead Discs
Two discs (Fig. 22, F, G), one of lead and one of brass, were found
together at the site. They are of an identical size and each contains four
matching holes. Their function is unknown, although very similar
specimens have been illustrated (Cadzow, 1936: Pl. 39) for a site in
Pennsylvania which had French contact between 1675 and 1718.

Pendant
A small, disc-shaped pendant of pewter (Fig. 22, H) has a perforation near one, the presumed upper, edge. Pendants of this type, but of
brass, have also been found at the above-mentioned historic site in
Pennsylvania (Cadzow, 1936: Pl. 88). They have not, however, been
reported from other Norteiio Focus components.

Medal
A disc-shaped medal cast in pewter (Fig. 22, I) has an attachment
hole in a flange at the top and a small perforation along each side. Presumably, a ribbon to suspend the medal from the neck was passed
through the flange, while small ribbons or streamers may have dangled
from the lateral perforations. The exterior surface is covered with a
design which has as a central element the head of an Indian with long
hair and streamers. About this is a typical French godroon border and,
along the edge of the medal, a French laurel leaf wreath-both of
which are usually found on 18th century French blanket or baling
seals. It is possible that this medal was presented to a chief at the
Womack Site, perhaps to induce him to send two guides to help La
Harpe find the best route to the Arkansas River.

Buttons
Six of the ten buttons from the site can be identified with types
recently defined by Olsen (1963: 551-554). These include: one example (Fig. 22, J) of his Type A which is dated at 1700-1765, two

355

WOMACK SITE

E

'·

F

5
I

-

J
N

K

G

H

L

M
10

0

I

I
CM.

Fig . 22 . Artifacts of Iron, Brass, and Pewter. A, Fragment of a strike-a-light. B, Possible
fragment of armor. C, Fragment of kettle rim . D, Fagment of kettle lug. E, Hawk bell fragment. F, G, Brass and lead discs . H, Pewter pendant. I, Pewter metal. J-M, Buttons. N, Unidentified fragment of brass. J-M reduced twice as much as A-1 ond N .

356

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

examples (Fig. 22, K, L) of his TypeD which is dated at 1760-1785,
and three examples (Fig. 22, M) of his Type G which is dated at 17851800. Three of these buttons are English and have the words Gilt or
Trebble (letters mainly in Old English script) on their back sides. The
four unclassified specimens include:
1) A compound brass button which resembles half of a hawk bell.
The front is concave and decorated with a design composed of four
lines and a floral pattern. The attachment loop is the same as that found
on many hawk bells.
2) A compound brass button which has four holes and a cut out
pattern on the front. This pattern consists of multi-pointed star-like
element with a (leur-de-lis on those points oriented toward the cardinal
directions.
3) A compound brass button which is decorated on the exterior
surface but too badly damaged to discern the pattern.
4) A badly damaged brass button which is too fragmentary for
further description.

Miscellaneous Brass Fragment
A small unidentifiable fragment of cast brass (Fig. 22, N) has
been sawed across one end and broken diagonally across the other end.
Its exterior surface is engraved and stamped, possibly to represent the
scales on an animal figure which may have been the central design
element. A small beveled area along portions of the broken end may
represent a screw hole countersunk from the exterior (decorated)
surface.

Glass Fragments
Two small fragments of crown glass from the site are probably from
mirrors traded to the Indians.

Vessel
Found eroding out of the midden depost, this wheel-made vessel
(Fig. 23, A) represents the only European ceramic container found
to date at the site. Although the neck is broken, and the edge of the
break subsequently smoothed, it appears to have been a water bottle.
The body is globular and the base is convex. Somewhat porcelain-like
in texture, the paste is very white and compact. The interior is glazed
while the exterior has four painted lines which encircle the body. In

357

WOMACK SITE

B'

5 CM.

A

Fig.

23.

I

European Ceramics . A, Wheel-made vessel. B, B', Pipe.

addition, reddish-black lines and splotches of red and black paint appear on the outside surface.
Pipes
Five fragments of European-made, ceramic pipes have been recovered from the site. All appear to be of the elbow type and the most
complete example is shown in Figure 23, B, B' .
THE JOURNEY OF BERNARD DE LA HARPE

The historic Nortefio Focus component at the Womack Site can
tentatively be identified with the early 18th century Quidehais
(Kichai) village visited in 1719 by Du Rivage, a member of the La
Harpe expedition. Of the four criteria Duffield and Jelks ( 1961: 96)
recommend be met before a field location can accurately be related to
a documented historic site, at least three-1) location agree with documentary sources, 2) physical evidence of occupation be present, and
3) cultural remains be of appropriate age and character-can be satis-

358

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fied. The second and third are abundantly present and are the subject
of the preceeding section. Of concern in this section is the first criterion,
and it is the documentary evidence, the journal left by the French
explorer and trader Benard de la Harpe, that will be briefly reviewed.
This journal records La Harpe's 1718-1719 sojourn up the Red River,
made for the purpose of establishing a trading post, known as the Post
of the Nassonites because of its location near a Nassoni (or Nasoni)
village in Kadohadacho territory .
The English translation of La Harpe 's journal u sed in this paper
was made by Dr. Ralph A. Smith and published in the Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. LXII, Nos . 1-4. It was first printed in
French in Pierre Margry's Decouvertes et establissements des Francais
dans l'Ouest et dans le Sud del' Amerique septentroinale ( 1614-1754 ).
Whenever deemed desirable, the writers have checked Margry's
French version of La Harpe's journey against Smith's translation.
As was typical of the period, La Harpe stated distance in terms
of leagues. He sometimes used leagues by river, and at other times, by
land. According to an Encyclopaedia Britannica published in 1888
(Vol. 24: 485 ) the value of a league as used in 1719 is equivalent to
1.59 miles.
To improve the French position in their rivalry with the Spanish
over control of the Indians, Benard de la Harpe was charged by MM.
de Bienville and Hubert with the exploration of the Kadohadacho
territory and the establishment of a post in that region. With these
goals in mind, the La Harpe expedition left New Orleans on December
18, 1718, and reached the mouth of the Red River on January 10, 1719.
At this point La Harpe left his boats and took a pirogue to visit the
Tunica Indians, arriving at the village of the Tunicas on January 12,
1719 (Smith, 1958: 78-80 ) . This Tunica village has been identified as
the Angola Farm Site excavated by James A . Ford in 1934. It was
occupied by the Indians from a bout 1709 until 1729 (Swanton, 1911:
311-313).
After this brief excursion La Harpe returned to his boats, and, on
January 15, 1719, entered the mouth of the Red River. On February
21, he reached the French post at Natchitoches, noting that from the
mouth of Red River to Natchitoches they had traveled 83 leagues to
the northwest (Smith, 1958: 80-85). Using the conversion value of
1.59 miles to a league, La Harpe journeyed 131.97 river miles from
the mouth of Red River to Natchitoches. This distance today measures
126.5 river miles and the minor discrepancy between the two figures
(only 5.47 ) is of no significance, especially in view of the changes in
the Red River channel that have occurred in the intervening 245 years.

WOMACK SITE

359

Significantly, the Natchitoches village near this post has been identified as the Fish Hatchery Site (Gregory, 1962).
On March 6, 1719, La Harpe left Natchitoches, taking with him a
detachment of six soldiers and senior sergeant assigned to him by M.
Blondel, the commandant at Natchitoches. He entered the mouth of
the Bear River (now known as the Sulphur River), journeyed onto
the Nassonite village, giving these Indians 2,000 livres of merchandise
in a big festival. On April 21 and 22, he established nearby Nassonite
Post. La Harpe has left a good description of this area about the post
(Smith, 1958: 245). If one will check this, visit the Rosen borough Lake
Site near Texarkana, then consult the astronomical observations made
on July 26, 1806, at the Nassonite Post by the Freeman-Custis expedition (Swanton, 1952: 80), he will note that the Roseborough Lake Site
(also known as the Rochelle Place) closely matches La Harpe's description, and is only 12 seconds off the reading given by the Freemaneustis party. It seems, therefore, that the Roseborough Lake Site near
present Texarkana, is the Nassonite Post of 1719, and Fort St. Louis de
Kadohadacho (San Luis de Cadodacho) are one and the same (Harris,
Miroir, MeV ey, and Blaine, ms.) .
While La Harpe was erecting the Nassonite Post, he did not lose
sight of his desire to open trade with New Mexico. The Indians told
him about the wild tribes to the west, and the Toucaras (Tawakoni)
to the north, on the banks of a great river. La Harpe resolved to send
M. du Rivage, along with 1500 livres of merchandise, up Red River to
contact the nomadic tribes and to make an alliance with them (Smith,
1959: 372).
On July 29, 1719, Du Rivage returned from his sojourn with two
savages of the Quidehais (Kichai) nation. He reported to La Harpe
that at 70 leagues by land (de chemin) to the westward and from the
west a quarter northwest, he encountered members of several nomadic
tribes-including the Quidehais, Naouydiches (Nabedachi?), Joyvan
(Yojuane), Huanchane (Waco), Ruane (Waco), Tancaoye (Tonkawa)-by whom he had been well received (ibid.: 375-376).
Du Rivage states that he traveled 70 leagues by land which, using
the 1.59 mile conversion, is 111 .3 miles. Today, if one will start at the
Roseborough Lake Site, come out of the Red River bottoms (it is doubtful that Du Rivage went through the dense thickets of the river bottomland), and follow present Hwy. 82 to Paris, Texas, then turn northwest to the Womack Site, one would have gone about 108 miles- only
3.3 miles less than the distance covered by Du Rivage. The age and
nature of the Womack Site, coupled with its distance and direction
from the Roseborough Site, argue for its identification as the village

360

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

where Du Rivage obtained the two Kichais who guided La Harpe north
to the Toucaras on the great river (Arkansas River) in September
1719.
It has been stated that the Indians told La Harpe of the nomadic
tribes to the west of the Nassonite Post. It is possible that La Harpe
had some advance knowledge where to locate these people, as two
Frenchmen, MM. de Bienville and St. Denis, had preceded him up
the Red River in 1700 (French, 1875: 73). Significantly, it was Bienville who gave La Harpe the order to journey up the Red River.
SUMMARY

The journal left by Benard de la Harpe has made possible the tentative identification of the Womack Site with a Kichai village and, thus,
places Wichita-speaking Indians on the Red River as early as 1719.
Expeditions by Bienville and St. Denis to the upper Red River suggest
that at least some Wichita may have been there as early as 1700.
Additionally, it has been stated that the Kichai were south of Red River
by 1701 (Swanton, 1952: 321).
With a reasonably firm cut off date of 1729, the Angola Farm Site
is of considerable importance in the interpretation of historic sites
extant on the upper Red River between 1700 and 1729. To judge from
the trade bead types and some of the gun parts, there appears to be a
definite connection between Angola Farm, Fish Hatchery Site, the
Nassonite Post, and Womack Site. It is possible that some of the items
common to these sites represent goods distributed by the La Harpe
party.
The complete absence of metal projectile points and the relatively
high incidence of chipped stone drills and gravers suggest that the
Womack Site was occupied earlier than Norteii.o Focus components on
the Sabine, Brazos, and upper Red rivers. Most of the trade goods found
at the site place it between 1700 and 1730. There are, however, several
European objects which appear to date between 1675 and 1718; at least
they have been found in this temporal context in Pennsylvania.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Although most of the specimens studied are in the authors' collections, a number of cooperative individuals and institutions have made
available their artifacts. These include: Mr. and Mrs. R. B. Hicks, Mr.
and Mrs. J . R. Parsons, Loyd Harper, Rex Housewright, Lester Wilson, Henry Hanna, J. B. Sollberger, E. J. Ruhland, Clifford Ray Allen,

361

WOMACK SITE

Mark Huff, and the Texas Memorial Museum and the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas. Thanks are
also due Louisiana State University and William G. Haag, and Northwestern Louisiana State College of Natchitoches and H. F. Gregory
for permitting the writers to examine collections from sites in Louisiana. T. M. Hamilton of Missouri and Joel Shiner of Southern Methodist University have also helped by graciously allowing the writers to
use unpublished research material.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, R. E.
1958. Guide to the identification of certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Special Bulletin No. 1.
Boudriot, J.
1963. Armes A Feu Francaises-Modeles Reglementaires. L. Petitot.
Bustanoby, J. H.
1947. Principles of Color and Color Mixing. McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Cadzow, Donald A.
1936. Archaeological Studies of the Susquehannock Indians, Vol. III. Pennsylvania Historical Commission.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1951. The Pearson Site: A Historic Indian Site in Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology,
Archaeology Series No. 4.
Encyclopa edia Britannica
1888. Vol. 24.
Ford, James A.
1936. Analysis of Indian Village Site. Collections from Louisiana and Mississippi.
Department of Conservation, Louisiana Geological Survey.
French, B. F.
1875. Historical Collections of Louisiana and Florida.
George, J. N.
1947. English Guns and Rifles. The Stackpole Co.
Gooding, James S.
1960. A Preliminary Study of the Trade Guns Sold by the Hudson's Bay Company. In Indian Trade Guns (compiled and arranged by T. M. Hamilton ) .
Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp. 81-95 .
Gregory, H. L.
1962. Louisiana Studies, Vol. 1, No.2. Northwestern State College.
Hamilton, T. M.
1960a. Concluding Comments and Observations. In Indian Trade Guns (compiled
and arranged by T. M. Hamilton ). Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp.
207-209.

362

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1960b. Some Gun Parts from 18th Century Osage Sites. Ibid. , pp. 120-171.
1960c. Additional Comments on Gunflints. Ibid., pp. 73-79.
1964. Recent Developments in the Use of Gunflints for Dating and Identification.
In Diving Into The Past (edited by June Drenning Holmquist and Ardis
Hillman Wheeler), pp. 5Z-57. Published by the Minnesata Historical
Society and the Council of Underwater Archaeology.
Hanson, Charles E., Jr.
1955. The Northwest Gun. Nebraska State Historical Society, Publications m
Anthropology No. 2.
Harris, R. K., and Inus Marie Harris
1961. Spanish Fort, A Historic Trade Site. The Record, Vol. 16, No. 1. Published
by the Dallas Archaeological Society.
1962. Another Marker on the Trail of the Nortefio : A Preliminary Report on
the Gilbert Site. Ibid. , Vol. 17, No.1.
Harris, R. K., M.P. Miroir, J. L. McVey, and Jay C. Blaine
ms. Fort St. Louis de Kadohadacho. Unpublished manuscript.
Hayward, J. F.
1963. The Art of the Gunmaker, Vol. II. St. Martins Press.
Held, Robert, and Nancy Jenkins
1957. The Age of Firearms- A Pictorial History. Harper and Brothers.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series No. 5.
Jelks, Edward B. (editor)
ms. The Gilbert Site. Unpublished manuscript.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas, with Extension of
Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi Valley. The University of Texas,
Bulletin 4640.
Manucy, Albert
1959. The Fort at Frederica . Publication of the National Park Service, The U. S.
Department of Interior.
Maxwell, Moreau S., and Lewis H. Binford
1961. Excavations at Fort Michilimakinac. Publications of the Museum, Michigan State University, Vol. 1, No. 1.
Olsen, Stanley J.
1963. Dating Early Plain Buttons by Their Form. American Ant:quity, Vol. 28,
No. 4, pp. 551-554.
Peterson, Harold L.
1956. Arms and Armor in Colonial America. Bramhall House.
Rodgers, Frances, and Alice Beard
1937. 5000 Years of Glass. Frederick A. Stokes Co.
Russell, Carl P.
1957. Guns on the Early Frontiers. University of Califomia Press.

363

WOMACK SITE

Shiner, Joel L.
ms. The Excavation of Fort Frederica. Unpublished manuscript.
Smith, Ralph A .
1958-59. Account of the Journey of Benard de la Harpe: Discovery Made by Him
of Several Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. LXII, Nos. 1-4. Texas State Historical Association.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of T exas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Swanton, John R.
1911. Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the
Gulf of Mexico. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin No. 43.
1952. Indian Tribes of North America. Ibid. , Bulletin No. 145.
Thwaites, Reuben Gold
1959. The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. LXVI. Pageant Book Co.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
ms. A Description of Spanish Ring Bit Fragments from Some Historic Archeological Sites in Texas. Unpublished manuscript.
Wedel, Waldo R.
1959. An Introduction to Kansas Archeology. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 174.
Woodard, Arthur
1960. Some Notes on Gun Flints. In Indian Trade Guns (compiled and arranged
by T . M. Hamilton). Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp. 29-39.

9024 San Fernando Way
Dallas, Texas
827 Ravenwood
Dallas, Texas

Book Reviews
The Cosgrove Report, by Mr. and Mrs. C. B. Cosgrove, 1925. El Paso
Archeological Society, Special Report No. 3, 1965 . 23 pp., 15
figs. $1.25.
This report is presented just as it was prepared 40 years ago. It
describes briefly the excavation of a multi-roomed pueblo structure
near Three Rivers, New Mexico, and a survey of sites in the El Paso
area of western Texas. Mention is made of some pictograph and petroglyph sites in the El Paso area. The work was carried out in April of
1925 by members of the El Paso Archeological Society, and the unpublished manuscript has been referred to in archeological literature
for many years . This year the local Society decided to publish the old
manuscript without correction or revision.
This little report describes the daily field trips made by members of
the El Paso Society. It gives few details about site locations or the
nature of the cultural remains. There is, however, a brief room-byroom description of the excavated pueblo structure, listing contents and
giving some information about room size and associated cultural features-burials, hearths, doorways, etc. Photographs of some of the
excavated rooms show some details and indicate a sophisticated excavation technique for that early time period. There are brief ceramic
descriptions which utilize type names probably long outdated.
This report is valuable primarily as a documentation of the activities
of one of the earliest amateur archeological groups in Texas. Its content
is not particularly valuable because of inadequate descriptions and outdated terminology. It will be of interest primarily to people working in
the Southwest and immediately adjacent areas.
Curtis Tunnell
Texas Memorial Museum

366

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Tlacuilolli: Die mexikanischen Bilderhandschriften Stil und lnhalt
mit einem Katalog der Cordex-Borgia-Gruppe, by Karl A.
Nowotny. 287 pages, 10 figs . 67 double-page plates and tables
(some being fold-outs). Monumenta Americana, III, IberoAmerikanische Bibliothek, Berlin, 1951. DM 100.
This is the third volume in the excellent Monumenta Americana
series of Berlin's Ibero-Amerikanische Bibliothek, the previous titles
being Kutscher's Nordperuanische Keramik ( 1954) and Burland's
Selden Roll (1955). The series' large format (23 x 31 em.) is particularly suited to codex reproductions and studies such as the Selden Roll
and the present study by Nowotny.
In the precolumbian New World, ancient Mesoamerica was unique
in developing native systems of writing. Evidence of early writing first
appears in the form of stone inscriptions dated close to the beginning
of the Christian epoch. From the evidence now available, admittedly
most incomplete and fragmentary, it is a good hypothesis that the
origins of Mesoamerican writing lie in calendrical notation, particularly in the context of devination and prognostication, perhaps including the forecasting of weather. Such matters represent a great leitmotiv
of Mesoamerican writing.
Mesoamerican writing achieved its greatest development among the
Maya who perhaps developed the only "true" hieroglyphic script of
the ancient New World. Maya writing was employed for calendrical
notation and astronomic or, better, astrologic emmendation, but also in
formal historical texts glorifying exploits of the dynasts. We have no
evidence of Maya writing in more profane contexts, such as temple
accounts or commercial transactions, although our view could well be
biased by the limitations of archeological survival-in this instance,
primarily monumental texts.
Elsewhere in Mesoamerica, native scripts never developed as fully
and have left us a far smaller corpus to testify to their former role and
importance. Again, however, ritual and mantic contexts figure importantly although we do have significant examples of historical texts
as well as the inventory of tribute. These sources are preserved mainly
in the form of late preconquest or early postconquest native manuscripts.
The present study is devoted to the early mantic-ritual manuscripts
of Mexico. It therefore excludes the three Maya ritual documents although cross references to them are sometimes provided. In addition to
covering the purely religious manuscripts, mantic-ritual passages
from historical manuscripts, such as some of the Mixtec codices, are
included in the present work.

BOOK REVIEWS

367

The study opens with a brief introduction in which matters of art
style, provenience, and relationship of the manuscripts are considered .
Nowotny emphasizes the importance of the manuscripts for the study
of art style, drawing upon the analogy of medieval book illuminations
in European art history.
There follows 67 plates which provide an illustrated inventory, together with a schematic dissection, of representative passages from the
manuscripts studied. About half of the passages are selected from the
Codex Borgia. Each passage receives an analytical commentary; this
section might well serve as a manual and guide to mantic-ritual interpretation. The passages reproduced are selected to illustrate each of
the themes of mantic-ritual subject matter catalogued in the concluding portion of the volume. Although the plates do not follow the catalogue organization, they are keyed to it by heading references.
The remainder of the study consists of an analytical outline or index
of themes of mantic-ritual subject matter in the studied manuscripts.
Each theme receives a brief commentary and its incidence in the manuscript corpus is listed. This outline catalogue lists all themes so far
recognized while the commentary indicates the extent of present understanding of the topic. Needless to say, such a catalogue is an invaluable research tool which will greatly facilitate future codex studies.
Tlacuilolli is of great usefulness both to the student beginning in the
study of native Mesoamerican documents as well as to the advanced
researcher. Nowotny is to be warmly congratulated for such an effective and well executed contribution.
University of California, Berkeley
John A. Graham

