DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VoLUME

36

Editor: Dee Ann Story
Assistant Editors :
Harry J. Shafer
Marsha F . Jackson

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1965

Table of Contents
Articles
Anderson's Mill ( 41 TV 130 ): A Historic Site in Travis
County, Texas
By E. Paul Durrenberger

1

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas
By Daymond D . Crawford .

71

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas
By Frank H. Watt .

99

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave, Bosque
County, Texas
By Dorris L. Olds

111

Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site ( 41 GV 5 ),
Galveston County, Texas
By L. E. Aten .

153

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas
By Dee Ann Story .

163

The Bipolar Flaking Technique in Texas and New Mexico
By Kenneth H. Honea .

259

A Guide to the Drafting of Archeological Maps
By Vaughn M . Bryant, Jr. and Robert K. Holz

269

A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas
By R. K. Harris, In us Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine,
and Jerrylee Blaine

287

Book Reviews
Cosgrove, Mr. and Mrs., The Cosgrove Report.
By Curtis Tunnell .

365

Nowothny, Karl A. , Tlacuilolli: Die mexikanischen Bilderhandschriften Stil und I nhalt mit einem Katalog der
Codex-Borgie-Gruppe
By John A. Graham

366

Notes on the Clark Site,
McLennan County, Texas
FRANK H. WATT
ABSTRACT
In the fall of 1955 members of the Central Texas Archeologica l Society made
limited excavations at the Clark Site, a small midden buried in alluvial deposits
of the Brazos River. Artifacts were not numerous, but those recovered suggest a
possible relationship between the Toyah Focus of central T exas and the Sanders
Focus of northeastern Texas. A radiocarbon date of A.D . 1277 ± 150 was obtained
from a partially disturbed hearth, the only occupational feature encountered by the
excavations.

INTRODUCTION

During the long annals of the Brazos River, from the late Pleistocene on down to the present, there have been many ch anges in the
route taken from the river's original source in northeastem New
Mexico to its joumey's end at the Gulf of Mexico. The river has rushed
along, carrying with it large amounts of sand and gravel picked up
in its upper reaches, then wandered lazily downstream, dropping these
materials far down its course. Along the more peaceful stretches of
the Brazos, Indians must have found it pleasant to live on the soft
deposits of sand, pursuing the daily routine of their lives and, when
departing- willingly or otherwise-leaving behind some of their possessions for us to ponder over.
The Clark Site, located approximately six miles upstream from the
northern city limits of Waco, provides evidence of such a stay along
the river. This former Indian camp is on a small point of land buried
in part of wh at appears to be a terrace remnant (Fig. 1) . It is bound
on th e west by a narrow flood plain and, beyond this, the Brazos;
while to the east is a normally-dry stream. Only a small, triangularshaped section of the terrace remains intact, its survival evidently a
result of protection afforded by a nearby (to the n orth) rock ledge or
bluff. The original extent of the terrace may have always been fairly
small, although there is no way of being certain of this. At present it
is rather narrow, being a maximum of approximately 250 yards wide
and roughly 25 feet above th e normal level of the river.
Geologically speaking, the Clark Site lies on the same fault as the

100

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CLARK SITE

30 0
...._______.

0

Fee t

Area

Excavated

Filled- in Gully

flS

•
'

0
1965

10
Sc o I e

Fire

Chicken Coop

20

in

Pit

Fee t

30
VMB

Fig . 1 . Sketch map of the Clark Site showing general location , plan of excavation, contours , and hearth .

101

CLARK SITE

Buried Midden Site (Mason, 1936 ), but it is a mile farther upstream
and on the opposite (east ) side of the river. This fault, the one which
has created the Balcones Escarpment, runs along the west bank of the
Brazos at the Buried Midden Site, continues upstream for a short distance, then angles across the river and leaves the east bank just below
the mouth of Aquilla Creek and about one-half a mile north of the
Clark Site.
The Clark Site has been recorded as 41-39B9-25 in the old quadrangle system, and, more recently, as 41 ML 39 in the new county
designation being employed by the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas. It is only one of several buried
sites reported for the general area. In addition to Buried Midden, these
are the Tehuacana Creek Site (Bryan, 1935 ), the Cow Bayou Site
(Bryan, 1935 ), and the three Asa Warner sites (Watt, 1956) .
DISCOVERY AND INVESTIGATION

Discovery of the Clark Site came in 1941 , when the author went to
the area to investigate rumors of an Indian burial. At the time, a house,
two barns (one of which has since been converted to a garage), and a
chicken house were situated on the terrace. Since the surface sloped
considerably toward the river, the erection of these buildings required
a good deal of leveling (Figs. 1 and 2) . Luckily, most of this had been
done on the upper part of the terrace, and the only structure directly
over the site was the chicken house. This building was lower than the
others and was located on the riverside portion of the leveled-off area
(Fig. 2) . It was on the face of the dump just behind the chicken house
that the first evidence of occupation-a few potsherds, a number of
flint chips, some charcoal, and burned rock fragments- was observed.
No concentrated midden deposit, however, was noted, nor were the
rumors of the burial verified.
Then, during the summer of 1955, a visit was made to the site by
Mr. Sam Langston and the writer. By this time the chicken house had
been torn down, and some haphazard digging at its former location
quickly exposed midden refuse at a depth of 12 to 24 inches below the
surface. Additional cultural debris was observed along the edges of a
road which had been graded across the terrace and extended down thR
point (i.e., the area between the confluence of the Brazos and the small
stream to the east ) . These concentrations of refuse indicated that the
site merited further investigation and, accordingly, another trip was
made to test more systematically with a posthole digger. The posthole
tests revealed an uppermost layer of sterile river sand, uniformly 16

102

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

to 20 inches thick, and, below this, a layer, 12 to 18 inches thick, of
midden refuse. The midden zone was an ash-stained sand deposit with
charcoal, flint chips, bone, and shell fragments. Immediately beneath
the refuse layer was a grayish sand stratum, of undertermined thickness, which contained many fragmentary limestone rocks , but no cultural material. Tests were made to a maximum depth of five feet below
the surface, and no artifacts or any other type of occupational detritus
was found below a depth of 35 inches. The area of occupation was
shown to be small and roughly triangular-shaped, extending northward from the point for approximately 35 feet, to a filled-in gully. The
surface sloped slightly downward toward the river to the west and
south (Fig. 1).

Fig. 2. View of Clark Site, look ing northeast .

Encouraged by the results of the tests, the Central Texas Archeological Society decided to carry out limited excavations at the site.
Permission for this work was obtained from the landowner, the late
Mr. A. C. Clark of Waco, in October, 1955, and shortly thereafter,
written notices were sent to all members of the Society (only seven
were able to participate in the project). Ho'Wever, before excavation
could get underway, Mr. Clark removed almost all of the sterile overburden with a scraper in order to obtain material to fill in washes
which had developed in his road to the point. This saved the Society
much time and labor and, fortunately, did not discernably damage the
midden deposit. The only information lost was the exact thickness of
the overburden.
Some previous digging by persons unknown had been done around

103

CLARK SITE

a small oak tree standing at the tip of the point, and along the riverside
slope. At the edge of these disturbances, some six feet removed from
the oak tree, a trench five feet wide, 12 feet long, and three feet deep
was excavated across the point. Using the tree as a reference point,
a line was then extended to the filled-in gully and a second trench,
five feet wide and 25 feet long, was laid out along this lim (Fig. 1).
The midden deposit was generally well defined in the trench profiles, its point of contact with the little-remaining overburden being
especially distinct. Even the loose ash and charcoal in the midden had
not been disturbed or washed away. The base of the midden zone was
somewhat less easily distinguished, largely because the grayish color of
the layer below (perhaps imparted by seepage through the midden )
did not form a sharp contrast.
Most of the excavations were confined to the midden layer, as the
overburden had been largely removed, and the tests, as well as the first
trench, indicated that nothing of archeological interest was to be found
below this zone. No problem of stratification was present and the
midden was not hard packed so that no pick work was necessary. Some,
but not all, of the material was screened. Records were kept of the
vertical occurrence of the artifacts, with most coming from the upper
half of the midden. One day was required for the society to complete
both trenches and to make a few small test pits.
THE FINDINGS

Only one occupational feature, a rather crude fire pit, was located.
It had been partially uncovered by previous diggers and was re-exposed
in the first trench excavated by the Society (Fig. 1). Although most
of the upper portion was disturbed and the rocks scattered, it was
evident that the pit had been lined with irregularly-shaped limestone
rocks. The hearth could not be fully reconstructed, but enough remained to determine its approximate size and shape. It had been
roughly circular in outline-measuring three feet in diameter and
eight inches in depth-and had been dug into the gray soil, extending
slightly below the midden. The basal portion was undisturbed and, in
addition to what remained of the burned rock lining, there were ashes,
charcoal, and eight large pieces of unworked deer bone. No artifacts
were found in the pit, but most of the postsherds from the site were
recovered in the nearby excavations. In 195 7 the Magnolia Laboratories dated a charcoal sample (Sample FRL, No. RC-23) from the
hearthat680 ± 150yearsago (A.D. 1277 ± 150 ) .
A total of 100 artifacts was recovered from the site by members of

104

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the Central Texas Archeological Society. Other specimens are known to
have been collected, but none of these could be traced down and, hence,
they are not included in this report. What follows is a listing and brief
description of the objects found by the society, both from the surface
and the excavations.

Arrow Points. The 20 arrow points from the Clark Site are all identifiable as the Perdiz type (Fig. 3, A-P ) . They conform in all particulars
of size, shape, and manufacture to the description given by Suhm and
Jelks ( 1962: 283, Pl. 142 ) . No attempt has been made to compare them
with the two varieties of Perdiz recently defined by Jelks ( 1962: 2426, Fig. 12) . In an earlier report (Watt, 1961) on the radiocarbon
date from the Clark Site these points were erroneously identified as
Alba. The Perdiz points are from 2.9 to 4 em. long, 1.5 to 2.2 em. wide
across the shoulders, and .25 to .4 em. in maximum thickness.
Dart Point. A single dart point (Fig. 3, Q) , possibly of the Yarbrough type, was recovered. It may, however, be intrusive, having
washed down from the nearby bluff where dart points are frequently
found. This point is 4.5 em. long, 2.8 em. wide across the shoulders,
and .7 em. (maximum ) thick.
Knives. The three knives from the site include one complete specimen and two basal fragments. All are well made and exhibit neat
marginal retouching. The complete example (Fig. 4, A) has a moderately broad, ovate outline. It measures 7.5 em. in length, 3.7 em. in
maximum width, and .6 em. in maximum thickness. Each of the two
fragmentary knives, one (Fig. 4, B) with a concave base and the other
(Fig. 4, C) with a convex base, is estimated to have been roughly
10 em. long.
Axe. This fist axe or chopper (Fig. 4, D) is made from a flat, waterworn nodule of greenish quartzite. Two lateral edges and the distal
(blade) end have been flaked on one face, but only one lateral edge
and the blade have been worked on the opposite side. The base is unworked and retains the nodular cortex. Workmanship is crude, with
flakes apparently having been removed by means of the percussion
technique. This axe is roughly triangular in outline, measuring 9 em.
long, 7.4 (maximum) wide, and 2.7 (maximum ) thick.
Scrapers. This category consists of nine flakes, each of which has
been lightly retouched along one or more marginal edges. The outlines
are quite irregular and there is no evidence of intentional shaping
Fig . 3 . Projectile Points. A-P, Perdiz arrow points . Q , Possible Yarbrough dart point.

A

8

c

F

G

H

J

N

p

0

~=---~~-N~-~~~20

E

M

L

K

D

CM.

6

Q

106

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 4, E-K). A typical specimen measures 5 em. long, 2.1 em. wide,
and 1.1 em. thick.

Rubbing Stone. This small, rounded quartzite pebble (Fig. 4, L)
has been well smoothed on one side and may have served as a rubbing

c

8
A

E

G
F

D

J

H

K

0

IN.

0

CM.

L

Fig. 4. Lithic Artifacts. A-C, Knives. D, Axe. E-K, Utilized flakes. l, Rubbing stone.

CLARK SITE

107

or polishing stone. In addition, one end shows possible pecking or
battering scars, perhaps from secondary use as a hammerstone. This
specimen is 7 em. long, 5.2 em. wide, and 3.1 em. (maximum) thick.
Bone Tools . Two deer bones show signs of having been purposefully
modified. One of these (Fig. 5, A, A' ) , an incomplete beamer fashioned
from a metapodial (or cannon bone), has a deep, V -shaped groove cut
into the posterior side of the shaft. This groove appears to have extended almost the entire length of the bone and is extensively worn along
the lateral edges. Approximately one-half (the proximal half) is missing, but when complete this tool must have been approximately 18 em.
long (Fig. 5, A' shows a reconstruction). Beaming tools are not common in central Texas, but have been found at the Horn Shelter in Bosque County (Frank Watt, unpublished manuscript) and at the Baylor
Site in McLennan County (Dee Ann Story, personal communication).
A very similar implement is illustrated for the Sanders Site (Krieger,
1946: Pl. 23, f ) .
The other bone implement (Fig. 5, B) has been manufactured from
a deer ulna. Much of the distal end of the bone has been removed and
the remaining tip has been smoothed into a convex shape. Virtually
complete, this piece is 9.1 em. long. Its use is unknown, although
identical specimens are often referred to as flaking tools . Worked deer
ulnae are widespread in central Texas and have been reported for both
the Toyah and Austin foci of the Central Texas Aspect (Jelks, 1962:
63 ).
Pottery. Exclusive of a number of very tiny pieces not counted, a
total of 63 sherds was collected at the Clark Site . Most of these came
from the east-west trench, in the area near the fire pit. Others came
from the surface of the slope near the chicken house. Thirteen of the
sherds are from vessel rims, the others from body areas. All have bone
and/ or grit (largely sand ) temper and a rather dark, gray-black paste.
Three of the sherds bear decorations, two having diagonally incised
lines (Fig. 5, C, E ) and one (Fig. 5, D ) having diagonally incised
lines combined with punctations. None of the other pieces is decorated
(Fig. 5, F-H) and at least one entirely plain vessel is indicated. Tentatively, the decorated sherds are identified as Canton Incised (similarities with Maydelle Incised, however, should be noted) and the undecorated ones, at least the rim sherds, as Sanders Plain. Earlier (Watt,
1961) one of the incised specimens was identified as Sanders Engraved.
Both the decorated and the plain sherds are from .8 to 1.2 em. in maximum thickness.
Besides the artifacts listed above, the site yielded numerous items of
miscellaneous refuse, including unworked animal bones, fire-black-

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

c'

A

A'

'
G'

G
0
0

Ill

CA

H .

H'

Fig . 5 . Bone Tools and Potte ry. A, A', Bone beamer. B, Worked dee r ulna. C, C', E, E',
Incised rim she rds . D, D', Punctated -i nci sed rim sherd . F-H ', Undeco rated ri m sherds . Ex teriors
to the right on all rim profi les .

ened rock fragments, flint flakes, and snail and mussel shells. Of these,
only the bones and the shells have been examined. Identifications of
the mammal bones were made by Bob H. Slaughter, Museum of Paleontology, Southern Methodist University; the mollusca were identified

109

CLARK SITE

by Dr. Joseph Bequaert, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard
College.
Among the faunal remains there are:
Deer (white-tailed, Odocoileus virginianus ) remains which consist of 36 split leg bones, 19 joint bones, 7 vertebrae, 2 antler
fragments, and 1 skull dome with a bud;
10 rodent mandible fragments;
1 land tortoise;
16 miscellaneous bones not identified.
Snail shells, including:
Two species-BuZ:mulus dealbatus, Say and Anguispira alternata Stronglades, Pfi both of limited occurrence at the site but
common in the area today.
Mussel shells, including:
10 specimens representing four species: Obvaria reflexa, Raf;
Elliptio tetralamus, Say; Proptera purpurata, Lam; and Credonta costata, Raf. All of these are also typical of present-day
fauna.
Since neither snail nor mussel shells were very abundant at the site,
it appears that deer constituted the major food item. However, to judge
from the proximity of the site to the Brazos River, it is possible that
numerous fish were also consumed.
SUMMARY

The Clark Site consists of a small midden accumulation buried in
alluvial deposits of the Brazos River. Limited excavations at the site
did not recover a great many artifacts, but those found are of special
interest. Among the more significant of the specimens is the bone
beamer, a tool common to the Plains and the Mississippi drainage,
but comparatively rare in central Texas. Only two other, recently
excavated, sites in the central Brazos Valley (Horn Shelter and Baylor
Site) have produced them. At the Horn Shelter, the beamer was recovered from Austin Focus context. No radiocarbon date has been
obtained for the level from which it was found, but it seems possible
that bone beamers could have been in use in the central Brazos Valley
as early as about A.D. 500.
Perhaps of even greater importance is the association of the Perdiz
arrow point type (a major trait of the Toyah Focus) and, tentatively,
Sanders Focus pottery. The one radiocarbon date from the site, that
of A.D. 1277 ± 150, agrees very well with those obtained for the Toyah

110

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Focus occupation at the Kyle Site in Hill County (Jelks, 1962: 97-98),
and should apply, in part, to the Sanders Focu s.
REFERENCES CITED
Bryan, Frank
1935. Resume of Prehistoric Human Cultural Remains so far Discovered in Cen·
tral T exas . Bulletin of the Central T exas Arch eological Socie ty, No. 1, pp.
8- 9.
Jelks, Edward B.
1962. The Ky le Site, A Stra tified Central Texas A spect Site in Hill County,
T exas. Archaeology Series, No.5, Department of Anthrop:Jlogy , The University of Texas.
Krieger, Al ex D.
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Nor thern T exa s, with Extension of
Puebloan D atings to the Mississippi Valley. The University of T exas Publication, No. 4640.
Mason, James K .
1936. Buried Midden on the Brazos. Bulletin of the Central T exas Archeological
Society, No. 2, pp. 52-55.
Suhm, Dee Ann , and Edward B. Jelks
1962. H andbook of T exas Archeology: T ype D escriptions. T exas Arch eological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and T exas Memorial Muse um Bulletin
No.4.
Watt, Frank H.
m s.
The Horn Shelter, an Early American Site. Unpublished manuscript.
1956. Archeological Materials from the Asa Warner Sites. Central Texas Ar cheologist, No. 7, pp. 6- 29.
1961. Two Radiocarbon Dates from the Central Brazos Valley. Bulletin of the
T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 31 (fo r 1960) , pp. 327-328.
Box 1176
W aco, T exas

