DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VoLUME

36

Editor: Dee Ann Story
Assistant Editors :
Harry J. Shafer
Marsha F . Jackson

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1965

Table of Contents
Articles
Anderson's Mill ( 41 TV 130 ): A Historic Site in Travis
County, Texas
By E. Paul Durrenberger

1

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas
By Daymond D . Crawford .

71

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas
By Frank H. Watt .

99

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave, Bosque
County, Texas
By Dorris L. Olds

111

Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site ( 41 GV 5 ),
Galveston County, Texas
By L. E. Aten .

153

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas
By Dee Ann Story .

163

The Bipolar Flaking Technique in Texas and New Mexico
By Kenneth H. Honea .

259

A Guide to the Drafting of Archeological Maps
By Vaughn M . Bryant, Jr. and Robert K. Holz

269

A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas
By R. K. Harris, In us Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine,
and Jerrylee Blaine

287

Book Reviews
Cosgrove, Mr. and Mrs., The Cosgrove Report.
By Curtis Tunnell .

365

Nowothny, Karl A. , Tlacuilolli: Die mexikanischen Bilderhandschriften Stil und I nhalt mit einem Katalog der
Codex-Borgie-Gruppe
By John A. Graham

366

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir,
Henderson and Kaufman Counties, Texas
DEE AN N STORY
ABS1RACT
During the spring of 1954 the Texas Archeological Salvage Project carried out
limited excavation s at three aboriginal sites in the proposed Cedar Creek Reservoir
area. Each of the sites investigated appears to have been repeatedly, but probably
intermittently, occupied by various small social groups whose material culture was
gradually modified over a period of time. The major artifact changes that can be
distinguished are tentatively assigned to five occupational periods which range in
broad affiliations from Paleo-Indian (Period 1) to Archaic ( Periods 2 and 3) to NeoAmerican (Periods 4 and 5). These periods are defined, and an attempt is made to
relate them to culture complexes and stylistic developments that have been recognized in adjacent parts of Texas.

IN 1RODU CTION

From April 7 through May 14, 1964, the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project (T.A.S .P. ) conducted limited excavations at three Indian sites in Cedar Creek Reservoir. This work was carried out in partial fulfillment of Memorandum of Agreement No. 14-10-0333-1121
between The University of Texas and the National Park Service, in
cooperation with the nationwide Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage
Program. The field work was supervised by Fredrick A. Peterson,
working under the general direction of the author.
Recently completed by the Tarrant County Water Control and Improvement District No. 1, Cedar Creek Dam lies in northwestem
Henderson County, about two miles north of Trinidad. It spans Cedar
Creek and, when full, will create a lake (to be known as Joe B. Hogsett) extending north-eastward into Kaufman County. Two of the sites
investigated (Wild Bull and Lacy ) are in H enderson County, while
the third (Gossett Bottoms ) is in Kaufman County (Fig. 1).
ENVIRONMENT

Cedar Creek heads in eastern Kaufman County and flows in a
general southerly direction, emptying into the Trinity River about six
miles below the dam. The area is fairly well-watered, with many
small tributaries-including Kings, Lacy Fork, Prairie, Twin, Lynn,

164

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

CREEK RESERVOIR

•

Archeological

8

U.S

8

State

[§]2] Farm

Site

Highway
Highway
or

Ranch

Rood

Areo

0

2

I

I

3
I

Miles
Sou f ce

1964

~

19 61 Gene r al Hiqli woy
Mops No. 108,13 0

VMS

Fig . I. Map showing the location of Cedar Creek Reservoir and the sites excavated.

Clear, and Caney-entering the Cedar Creek drainage. Largely because of these many streams the reservoir shoreline of 300 miles will
be the most extensive within Texas.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

165

The topography consists of sand-capped rolling hills and ridges with
numerous gullies and broad valleys-features typical of the West Gulf
Coastal Plain (Fenneman, 1938: 100-120). Unconsolidated gravels,
sands, and clays are the most common deposits, with both Eocene and
Cenozoic formations having been recognized (Sellards, et al., 1954:
531-601 ) . Having an average annual rainfall of approximately 39
inches (Texas Almanac, 1965: 230-238 ) , the vegetation cover is
moderately dense and represents a mixture of many species from the
grasslands to the west and the forests to the east.
The area falls within the Texan Biotic Province (Blair, 1950: 100102), and one generally finds the sandy soils supporting oak-hickory
forests (rarely some pine ) and the clay soils containing tall grasses.
The fauna is rather diverse and also reflects interdigitation of eastern
and westem forms. Blair ( 1950: 101 ) , for example, notes that:
At least 49 species of mammals have occurred in the Texan province in recent
times. Forty-one of these occur also in the Austroriparian [to the east], and many'
of these are characteristic species of that province. Eight species range into the
Texan from the grasslands regions to the w est, southwest or north and fail to extend beyond this province into the Austroriparian.

Among the common, present-day mammals are raccoon, opossum, fox,
squirrel, Florida cottontail, swamp rabbit, black-tailed jack rabbit,
mole, pocket gopher, and numerous smaller rodents. Deer occur in the
area today, and the archeological record (see Table 2) suggests that
they were once a major source of food. Reptiles are still abundant and
include two species of terrapin, 16 species of lizards, and 39 species of
snakes. Amphibians are represented by five species of newts and
salamanders and by 18 species of frogs and toads (ibid.: 101-102).
The modern conditions and, even more importantly, the apparent
site density (Davis, 1961 ) suggest that the area was favorable for
aboriginal habitation. Hunting, gathering, and, probably only in later
times, small-scale agriculture were very likely the main sources of
livelihood.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Apart from a survey carried out in 1961 by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project (Davis, 1961), only two finds of consequence have
been reported for the immediate reservoir area. Perhaps the most
significant of the two was the discovery of three large, crudely-carved
stone heads near Malakoff. Each of these was unearthed during the
course of gravel operations, one in 1929, one in 1935, and the last in
1939 (Sellards, 1941; 19521: 95-105). Found in Pleistocene gravel

166

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

DATUM 0
(100')

N

WILD BULL SITE

t

41 HE 61

MAGNETI C

I

D
D

Area

excavated

Test

pit
0

Ll Hearth

1964

40 Feet

I

I
CONTOUR

Burial

I

20

INT ER VAL

TWO

FEET

VMS

Fig. 2 . Map of Wild Bull Site showing contours , features, and plan of excavation .

deposits, it is quite possible that these heads are among the oldest
evidence of human habitation yet known for the Cedar Creek area.
The second find consists of a series of straight line and simple geo-

167

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

metric petroglyphs carved on the walls of a small rockshelter just east
of the reservoir (Jackson, 1938: 299- 302). Petroglyphs are exceedingly rare in the eastern part of the state, and neither this, nor the
Malakoff heads, can be satisfactorily related to archeological materials
recovered in the reservoir proper.
Much more work has been done in adjacent regions and it is from
these areas that many similarities with the Cedar Creek material can
be noted. Generally to the northeast are sites which have been classified as the Neo-American Wylie Focus (Stephenson, 1952) or as the
Archaic Trinity Aspect (Crook and Harris, 1952; 1954); while to the
east, northeast, southeast are Caddoan complexes (Krieger, 1946;
Newell and Krieger, 1949) as well as Archaic remains which have
been variously identified as East Texas Aspect (Suhm, et al., 1954:
148-151), Red River Aspect (Davis and Davis, 1960) , and La Harpe
Aspect (Johnson, 1962). The areas to the east and southwest have
been less systematically investigated, although the salvage project's
excavations at the Strawn Creek Site in Navarro Mills Reservoir, approximately 40 miles to the southwest, showed evidence of strong
influences from the Wylie Focus and the La Harpe Aspect (Duffield,
1963a ) .
The three sites-Wild Bull, Lacy, and Gossett Bottoms- excavated
at Cedar Creek yielded remains of both Archaic and Neo-American
occupations. In the sections which follow these three sites and the
specimens recovered from them are described, artifact distributions
are discussed, and an attempt is made at placing the material into a
broad chronological and cultural context.
THE SITES

None of the three sites excavated was recorded by the T.A.S.P.
survey of 1961 (Davis, 1961) , but rather two were found in the fall of
1963 during the course of further reconnaissance, while the third was
located by the excavation party. All three are situated on relatively
low, sand-capped clay rises in the Cedar Creek bottoms. The Wild Bull
Site ( 41 HE 61) is on the west or right-hand bank of the reservoir, a
short distance above the confluence of Persimmon Branch and Cedar
Creek (Fig. 1). The prominence on which it lies is bound on the east
by a small slough and on all other sides by the Cedar Creek flood plain
(Figs. 2 and 5, A ). Surface indications of occupation were found over
much of the rise, but most concentrated along the eastem edge,
Although larger vegetation had been cut and bulldozed off the site,
there were no indications that this resulted in serious disturbance to

168

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

.."'"'

~

C)

C>

<:
...,

0

,

0

0

-<
c

0

.,

"'"

C>

c:

0

0

~

~
...,

.

l>

<

"'

0

0

;
0.

"'~

~

r-

...,
~
C>

"'"'...,
"""

.t>

.'! D
0

~

.

__,

"'

.,

z

~

"'
.t>
CD

....I;

.

it:
C)

"'"'..,;:;

-"------1

"'

Fig . 3 . Map of lacy Site showing contours and plan of excavat ion .

the subsurface (i.e. , below approximately the first six inches ) cultural
bearing deposit.
Situated much like the Wild Bull Site, the Lacy Site ( 41 HE 70 ) is

169

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

on the left-hand side of the reservoir, roughly two miles upstream
from the mouth of Lynn Creek (Fig. 1). At the Lacy Site occupational
refuse was scattered over much of the surface of a crescent-shaped
rise, but concentrated only in the southwestern portion (Figs. 3 and 6).
Cedar Creek flows a short distance to the west and lateral erosion by
that stream has produced a steep, vertical face revealing the internal
structure of the rise (see below). To the northwest the rise descends
rather abruptly to a small slough, while to the east and southeast it
merges more gently with the Cedar Creek flood plain. The Lacy Site
has also been cleared of major vegetation and, although it is difficult to
measure precisely, there appears to have been relatively little serious
damage.
The third site excavated, Gossett Bottoms ( 41 KF 7), is located at
the upper end of the reservoir, approximately two miles west of Cedar
Creek. It consists of cultural refuse buried in the upper part of a low,
circular knoll (Figs. 4 and 5, B). A number of similar, though generally smaller, rises occur in the immediate vicinity, but the Gossett
Bottoms Site appeared to contain the richest midden. To the north and
east of the site are several sloughs and, beyond these, a drainage ditch.
Unlike Wild Bull and Lacy, the Gossett Bottoms Site had not been
cleared.
EXCAVATION

Since the sites shared many features, the same excavation procedure
could be followed at each. Before systematic investigations were begun,
small test pits (usually 3 by 5 feet ) were made primarily to determine
the horizontal and vertical extent of occupation. Once this had been
established reasonably well, a horizontal grid oriented in terms of the
cardinal directions was set up (Figs. 2-4). In each case, the grid was
laid out in such a manner as to confine the excavations to the northwest quadrant, thus simplifying the record-keeping. The actual units
of horizontal control varied in size, but were most often three by five
or three by ten foot trenches (Figs. ~4 ) .
Vertical control was maintained by establishing a datum and assigning it an arbitrary elevation, and by digging in six-inch levels. The
maximum depth to which the excavation units were dug varied considerably and is summarized (in terms of cubic feet removed) in Table
1. For the most part, only the upper portions (the top 2-.5 feet ) of the
sites were sampled well. The few deeper levels (below 2.5 feet ) dug
yield relatively little cultural refuse, and frequently encountered
sterile clay.

170

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

----39

40-----

41

44
N

t

MAGNE TIC

I

GOSSETT BOTTOMS SITE
41 KF 7
~ Area

excavated

0
196 4

CONTOUR

1

20

Burial

•

~ Test

pi t s

4 0 Fee t

INTERVAL

ONE

FOOT

VMB

Fig . 4 . Map of Gossett Bottoms Site showing contours , feat u res , and plan of excavation .

All material was passed throu gh either a qu arter-in ch mesh or, less
often, a half-inch mesh screen. Most of th e occupational debris was
retained an d placed in paper bags labeled according to site, excavation

171

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

unit (such as N100/ W90, 6-12 inch level), date, and excavators.
These were later sent to the T.A.S.P. laboratory in Austin where they
were washed and catalogued. A number of records were kept throughout the excavations, including a daily log, individual level reports,
profiles, photographic data sheets, and topographic maps with plans of
excavation. Both the records and the specimens will be permanently
housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas.
TABLE 1
Summary of extent of excavation by level (in cubic feet)
,.=:

Level
Site

~~

OJ9
j~

Wild Bull
(41HE61 )
208.5
Lacy
(41 HE 70)
314
GJssctt BJLom s
(41 KF 7)
158.5

.. 0

"'~

.

~

j~

Mu-:
~~

j~

..,.··O.

-" "'I
j~

~ ~~

&0cl

1.0~
~7

......:1

h

.;.;

l~

& ;:_':
Cl

~u:

a>> •~
,o
.~ ~

"":0'"

ooC:

.
~
u

j~

:-

4.5

995.5

a; )

.5
0

>

B

~

"

208.5

206.5

189

129

37.5

12

258.5

178.5

90

45

4.5

0

0

893.5

156.5

152.6

126

87

40.5

7.5

0

728.6

INTERNAL STRUCTURE

The matrix in which occupational refuse occurred at each of the
sites was basically similar-a fairly loose sand underlain by sterile
clay. By and large, this sand layer showed little variation and certainly
no distinct zoning. At the Wild Bull Site and, perhaps to a lesser extent,
at the Lacy Site, bulldozing had disturbed the uppermost, humusstained portion of the sand zone, and at all sites rodent burrows were
very much in evidence.
The sand zone at the Wild Bull Site varied from approximately one
foot in thickness at the northern end of the excavations to about three
feet in thickness in the central and southern portions. It was light to
medium brown in color and tended gradually to become clayey, with
the result that there was not a sharp break between the sand and the
underlying yellow clay. Since none of the excavations penetrated very
deeply into the clay, the thickness of this layer was undetermined.
Much the same stratigraphic picture prevailed at the Lacy Site,
although here vertical exposures on the western and southern (Figs.
3 and 6, A) edges of the site revealed more information concerning
the internal structure of the rise. As exposed in these erosional cuts

172

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

Fig. 5 . A, Wild Bull Site , view looking southwest. B, Gossett Bottoms Site, view looking
northeast.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

173

and, to a lesser extent, in the excavations, the natural sequence of the
major deposits at the Lacy Site is as follows :
The uppermost layer- the only artifact-producing zone- consisted of a sandy soil
which varied in thickness from slightl y less than one foot in the western portion of
the site to at least three feet ( the maximum depth of the excava tion ) in the eastern
part. The top of this layer, where undisturbed, was humus-stain ed and brownishgray in color, while the basal portion was generally a mottled tan and frequently
contained some clay.
Immediately below the sand zone was a steril e clay which in the vertical fac es
reached a thickness of about five feet. It was reddish in color in the upper portion,
turn ing yellowish toward the base.
Underlying the clay stratum was another sand layer, one w hich measured approxima tely four feet in thi ckness and which was a dark brown color. Like the clay,
it contained no cultural refuse.
The deepest zone exposed was fair ly coarse gravel of undetermined t hickness.
Perhaps this, .or a similar deposit, provided the prehistoric inhabitants of the site
with raw materials for the manufacture of chipped stone implements.

At the Gossett Bottom s Site the sand layer was somewhat darker in
color and a bit more compact than at either Lacy or Wild Bull. Also,
the clay substratum was more difficult to recognize, for the sand almost
imperceptibly became lighter in color and more clay ish in texture .
Very few of the excavations at the Gossett Bottoms Site encountered
the clay since the digging tended to cease when the artifacts became
scant. In general, however , the sand was as much as three feet in thickness, and humus-stained in the upper portion.
OccuPATIONAL FEATURES

Surprisingly few occupational features were uncovered by the excavations at Cedar Creek and, moreover, those present were either in
poor condition or only partially exposed. The Gossett Bottoms Site
yielded an infant burial and a possible dog burial (Fig. 4), while the
Wild Bull Site contained a stone hearth and probable remains of a
much disturbed adult burial (Fig. 2 ) . No occupational features were
recognized at the Lacy Site, although the deeper levels were noted as
having a number of scattered burned rocks . Wattle-impressed daub
was obtained from all three sites, being particularly abundant at Gossett Bottoms, but no other definite remains of a structure (such as post
holes, floors, etc.) were observed.
Turning in more detail to the features at the Gossett Bottoms Site,
the infant burial was found at N128 .4jW82.3, at a depth of approximately two feet below the surface. The skeleton had been badly damaged by the excavations and this-coupled with its inherently fragile
nature-has obscured many of the particulars. The few surviving

B
Fig . 6 . Excavations in Progress at th e Lacy Site . A, View look ing northwe;t. B, View
looking west.

parts of the skeleton (bits of the skull and rib fragments) suggest that
the individual was about four y ears of age at the time of death
(Thomas W . McKern, personal communication ). No grave outline

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

175

was recognized, but the field notes state that the burial was flexed on
the right side, and that the skeleton was oriented east-west, with the
skull to the west and facing the south. No artifacts were found in direct
association, and the skeletal remains are too fragmentary to determ:.ne
the sex of the individual.
The presumed dog burial from the Gossett Bottoms Site (Fig. 7, A)
was also incomplete, but generally better preserved than the infant
skeleton. No grave pit was discerned and the case for deliberate interment rests mainly upon the tightly flexed position of the bones and
the occurrence of a similar domesticated dog burial (however, not
conclusively established as aboriginal) at the Miller Site about 70 miles
to the northeast (Johnson, 1962: 241, Fig. 28). The Gossett Bottoms
dog, identified as domesticated by Ernest L. Lundelius of the V ertebrate Paleontology Laboratory of The University of Texas, was recovered at approximately N130/ W95 , at a depth of between 1.6 and
1.8 feet below the surface. The skeleton was oriented east-west, with
the head to the east and facing north. Artifacts and miscellaneous
cultural refuse were recovered from the immediate vicinity, but none
of these items appeared to represent burial offerings. Remains of other
domesticated dogs were found at the Gossett Bottoms Site and at the
Lacy Site; however, only at the latter, where the bones were recovered
from a rodent burrow, may there have possibly been an interment.
The first occupational feature, a hearth, discovered at the Wild Bull
Site was found by Harry Shafer and James Corbin while carrying out
preliminary tests in the winter of 1963. Not completely excavated,
the exposed portions were located in the southeast corner of Test Pit 1
(Fig. 4), in the 1 to 1.5 foot level. The hearth consisted of a concentration of rounded, fire-cracked chert pebbles and burned clay, in a
roughly oval arrangement. That part uncovered (Fig. 7, B) measured
approximately 1 by 1.5 feet, and was apparently only one layer of
rocks thick (depth measurements were not taken). Midden refuse occurred in the general area, but no specimens appeared to be in direct
association with the hearth.
Possible remains of a much disturbed adult burial constitute the
only other feature recognized at the Wild Bull Site. Found at grid
location N98jW87.3, at a depth of between 1.95 and 2.2 feet below the
surface, the only bones present were an incomplete femur and bits of
another long bone, perhaps also a femur. The long axes of the bones
were oriented north-south, but no meaningful statements on possible
burial position can be inferred. No grave outline was recognized, nor
were any artifacts found in association, although the field notes record
(but do not describe) a small concentration of burned rocks lying just

176

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B
Fig . 7 . Occupational Features. A, Dog burial at Gossett Bol!oms Site; arrow pointing
to the north . B, Hearth at the Wild Bull Site , trowe l pointing north.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

177

south of the bones. In addition to the two limb bones, the Wild Bull
Site yielded a human molar tooth. This isolated find was made in the
northernmost excavation unit (N187/ W120), in the first six-inch
level, and is of little archeological significance.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIMENS
The Cedar Creek sites yielded a considerable quantity of occupational refuse, including both artifactual (intentionally modified specimens ) and non-artifactual (incidental debris such as flint flakes, or
animal bones) remains. Partly because of time limitations and partly
because they displayed the greatest variation, the analysis has focused
on the 2,714 artifacts. Only a portion of the miscellaneous residue, the
faunal remains and the wattle-impressed daub, has been examined.
Other non-artifactual debris, namely chipping refuse and mussel
shells, has been retained but awaits study.
To initiate the analysis, the artifacts were grouped into broad categories based upon the materials from which they were manufactured
--e.g., stone, clay, and bone. Next, these objects were sorted into inferred functional classes such as arrow points, dart points, knives,
pottery, and the like. Most of these use-classes were then further classified into morphologically similar clusters which, whenever appropriate, were identified with a previously existing typology (such as Bell,
1960 ; Suhm and Jelks, 1962; and Johnson, 1962 ). Those artifacts
which did not correspond with a known type were given descriptive
designations such as subtriangular knives or engraved pottery. However, one tentative new type, the Gossett gouge, is defined.
In the following, the artifacts from the three sites are treated as a
single collection, an approach justified by the many traits each site
shares with the other two. The emphasis is placed on description, with
a later section being devoted to a discussion of intrasite and intersite
distributions.
ARTIFACTS OF STONE

Arrow Points
Including the unclassifia ble fragments, a total of 192 arrow points
was recovered. Seventeen of these are from Wild Bull, 44 from Lacy,
and 131 from Gossett Bottoms. As a group, the arrow points are relatively small and thin, with pointed distal ends and, in most cases, well
defined stems. The material from which they are made can broadly be
termed chert which ranges from fine-grained to rather coarse-grained.

178

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Based primarily on variations in outline form, the complete or reasonably complete arrow points are grouped into ten types (Alba, Bonham,
Catahoula-like, Cliffton, Cuney, Friley, Granbury, Perdiz, Scallorn,
and Steiner ) and five descriptive groups.

Alba TYPE (Fig. 8, A-E; 6 specimens)
Distinguished by their concave-edged, triangular blades and slightly
bulbous stems, these points have either prominent right-angle shoulders (Fig. 8, B, D , E) , or faintly downward pointing barbs (Fig. 8, A ).
The lateral edges of the blades are often sinuous and, in one case,
serrated (Fig. 8, D ), in another recurved (Fig. 8, A ). Each is bifacially
chipped, but the workmanship on the whole is only fair. The four
complete specimens range from 1.7 to 3.5 em. in length, with the
smallest example (Fig. 8, C) having possibly been reworked. All have
maximum widths (across the shoulders) of between 1.6 and 2.1 em.;
while the stems are from .6 to .7 em. in length and from .6 to .8 em. in
maximum width. The thickness varies from .2 to .4 em.
Comments: These six specimens from Cedar Creek form a tight
morphological group which compares very favorably with the Alba
points from the George C. Davis Site (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 161162, Fig. 56, A-H), but which shows less variation than the Alba
points illustrated by Suhm and Jelks ( 1962: Pl. 132).

Bonham TYPE (Fig. 8, F, G; 2 specimens)
Two arrow points are somewhat hesitantly identified as the Bonham
type. Each has a small triangular blade with weak barbs and straight
or slightly convex lateral edges. The stems are short and essentially
rectangular in outline with gently convex bases. Both are rather poorly
made, being worked mainly on only one surface. Total length is 1.6
and 1.8 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders) is 1.5 and 1.4
em.; maximum thickness is .2 and .3 em.; stem length is .4 em. in each
case; and maximum stem width is .4 and .5 em.
Comments: It is the small size of these points that sets them apart
from the Bonham found at the Sanders Site (Krieger, 1946: 185, Pl.
22, C) and from those illustrated by Suhm and Jelks ( 1962: 267, Pl.
134 ) . In basic form, however, the Cedar Creek specimens seem related
to the Bonham type.

Catahoula-LIKE

POINTS

(Fig. 8, H-J ; 8 specimens)

Massive rectangular barbs, concave blade edges, and broad, slightly

F

c

B

A

E

D

J

H

G

'\

K

p

s

R

Q

0

N

M

L

T

u

o~~~~~~N~.;:~~~2--~
0

CM .

6

Fig. 8. Arrow points. A-E , Alba . F, G, Bonham. H-J , Catahoula-like. K-0, Cliffton.
P, Q . Cuney . R-U , Friley . A-C, F-1, K, N, and S-U from Gossett Bottoms Site; D, E, J, and P-R
from Lacy Site; 0 from Wild Bull Site.

expanding stems are the most salient features of this group. The stem
is generally short and either gently convex or straight at the base. All
but one are bifacially chipped and the workmanship is fairly good.

180

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Only one specimen (Fig. 8, H ) is complete, but the general impression
is that all were rather large for arrow points. Maximum width occurs
across the barbs and is between 2 and 2.3 em., while the maximum
thickness is between .3 and .5 em. The stems are generally about .5 em.
long and from .7 to 1.1 em. in maximum length. The single complete
point is 2.1 em. long.

Comments: The Catahoula type has been described by Bell (1960:
16, Pl. 8) who states that its most distinctive features are ( 1) relatively
broad shoulders with ma ssive, laterally -projecting barbs, (2 ) concave,
often recurved, blade edges, and ( 3) short, wide expanding stems with
convex bases. The eight specimens-from Cedar Creek depart from the
above in having less laterally-projecting barbs and only slightly expanding stems. They are perhaps a regional variation of the type, but
until more specimens are described and illustrated it seems advisable
to refer to them as Catahoula-like.
Clifjton

TYPE

(Fig. 8, K-0; 7 specimens)

The seven examples of this type have triangular blades with essentially straight lateral edges and, on five, fairly prominent serrations.
Barbs are sometimes present but are never pronounced. The stems
are contracting and have either pointed (Fig. 8, N ) or convex (Fig.
8, K-M, 0 ) bases, with more variation being observable in the treatment of the stem than the blade. Four of the Clifjton points are hifacially worked, while three are unifacially chipped. Total length is
between 2 and 2.5 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders) is
between 1.4 and 2 em.; stem length is from .3 to .7 em.; stem width
at the base is from .3 to .6 em.; and maximum thickness is from .3 to
.4 em.
Comments: Although they fall within the range of variation defined
for the Clifjton type ( Suhm and Jelks , 1962: 269, Pl. 135), the Cedar
Creek specimens are somewhat unusual in having (five instances )
serrated blades. In addition, one of the points (Fig. 8, N ) has downward pointing barbs and a small pointed stem-attributes suggestive
of the Bassett type (ibid.: 265, Pl. 133 ) .

Cuney

TYPE

(Fig. 8, P, Q; 2 specimens)

This type is characterized by a triangular blade and a rectangular
or slightly expanding stem with a concave base. The shoulders are
strong and may be barbed, while the blade edges vary from straight to
mildly convex. One of the two examples (Fig. 8, P) is very well made;

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

181

the other (Fig. 8, Q) is crudely flaked with most of the chipping being
confined to one face. Dimensions : total length 2 em. (both points);
maximum width (across the shoulders) 1.5 and 1.6 em.; maximum
thickness .2 and .3 em.; stem length .3 and .6 em.; and maximum
width of stem (across base) .6 and .5 em., respectively.
Comments: On the whole, these two points agree with the definition
of the Cuney type (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 271 , Pl. 136).

Friley

TYPE

(Fig. 8, R-U; 7 specimens)

These are small arrow points having as their most diagnostic feature
laterally-projecting barbs which are upturned toward the distal end.
The edges of the blade vary from straight to concave and are often
serrated. Almost always expanding, the stem is relatively short and
broad, and has a base which ranges from straight or convex to concave.
Workmanship is good with all examples being bifacially chipped.
Length of the two complete points is 1.3 and 2 em. Maximum width
( across the shoulders) of all specimens is between 1.4 and 1.7 em.;
maximum thickness is from .2 to .4 em.; length of stem is from .4 to
.6 em.; and maximum width of the stem is from .7 to 1.1 em.
Comments: The Friley points from Cedar Creek compare favorably
with those described and illustrated by Bell ( 1960: 46, Pl. 23 ), the only
difference being that some of the former have serrated blades.

Granbury

TYPE

(Fig. 91 A-E; 17 specimens)

A fairly numerous group of rather crudely made arrow points with
subtriangular outlines are identified as Granbury. The lateral edges
of the blade and the base are either straight or convex, while the basal
corners are consistently rounded. All specimens are bifacially chipped.
Total length ranges from 2 to 3.1 em.; maximum width (across the
base ) from 1.2 to 2.2 em.; and maximum thickness from .2 to .6 em.
Comments: Although these points are well within the range of the
Granbury type, none can readily be linked with the three varieties
recognized by Jelks (1962: 35-36, Fig. 14, M-W ) .

Perdiz

TYPE

(Fig. 9, F-N ; 25 specimens)

Most common of the arrow point types, the Perdiz have contracting
stems and triangular blades with straight or, less often, slightly concave to mildly convex lateral edges. The shoulders are prominent and
usually barbed, while serrations occasionally appear on the blade
edges. A few of the stems are sharply pointed, but most are rounded

A

F

c

8

G

D

H

E

K

J

,.

' .

L

M

N

p

0

0

IN.

r=

0

Q

R

CM.

3

s

Fig . 9 . Arrow Points . A-E , Granbury. F-N , Perdiz. 0-S , Sea/lorn . A-E and L-S from
Gossell Bottoms Site; F-K from Lacy Site.

and have slightly convex lateral edges. The workmanship is variable,
with some specimens being crudely flaked and others being well made.
On several, the chipping is limited mainly to one face. Total length is

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

183

between 1.8 and 4 em.; maximum width (across the barbs) is between
1.1 and 2.2 em.; maximum thickness is between .2 and .6 em.; stem
length is between .6 and .9 em.; and maximum stem width is between
.3 and .7 em.
Comments: In spite of some variation in outline form, the Perdiz
points from Cedar Creek can be generally described as rather small
with moderately short, contracting stems which have rounded bases.
They are differentiated from the closely related Cliffton type on the
basis of their better workmanship and more pronounced stems.

Scallorn TYPE (Fig. 9, 0-S; 10 specimens)
Each of the 10 representatives of this type has a markedly expanding but fairly short stem and a triangular blade with either straight or
concave edges . Serrations occur on three points, while all have strong
barbs. The bases are straight or, less frequently, gently convex. Flaking is well done and occurs across the surface of both faces. Total
length ranges from 1.1 to 3 em., with the smallest specimen undoubtedly having been rechipped. Maximum width (across the barbs) is
from 1.4 to 2.1 em.; maximum thickness is from .2 to .4 em.; stem
length is uniformily .4 em.; and maximum width of the stem is from
.7 to 1 em.
Comments: Relative to the Scallorn points from central Texas
(where the type is quite common; see, for example, Jelks, 1962: 27-31 ,
Fig. 13) , the Cedar Creek specimens are smaller, have shorter stems
and more squat blades . It is probable that additional studies will reveal
them to be a regional variation of the type.

Steiner

TYPE

(Fig. 10, A-F; 12 specimens)

Originally named by J . Charles Kelley but described briefly by
Newell and Krieger (1949: 162-164, Fig. 56, 0-Q), the "Steiner
Serrated" type is here tentatively revived with the suggestion that its
name be shortened to Steiner. Both the specimens illustrated by Newell
and Krieger and those from Cedar Creek Reservoir have as their most
characteristic feature rather small triangular blades with deep serrations jutting out at right angles or, less often, at odd angles. The
shoulders are prominent and occasionally extend laterally in a manner somewhat similar to the Catahoula type. In several cases (Fig. 10,
B, C, D) one shoulder is more pronounced than the other. The stems
are usually short but otherwise variable, ranging from expanding to
slightly contracting; while the bases are straight to gently convex or
concave. Workmanship is fairly good although three of the Cedar

184

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

G

H

M

D

N

0

T

F

K

J

s

R

E

p

u

L

Q

v

w

Fig . I 0. Arrow Points. A-F, Steiner. G-1, Points with short, rectangular stems . J-M,
Points with expanding stems and straight or convex bases . N, 0, Points with expanding
stems and concave bases. P-R, Points with subtriangular outlines . S-W, Eccentric-shaped
points . A-D, G-L, N, 0, and S-V, from Gossett Bottoms Site ; D, F, and P-R from Lacy Site;
M and W from Wild Bull Site.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

185

Creek examples are unifacially chipped. Total length ranges from 1.4
to 2 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders) from 1.4 to 1.6 em.;
maximum thickness from .2 to .4 em.; stem length from .3 to .5 em.;
and maximum stem width from .5 to . 7 em.
Comments: Unlike most of the arrow point types, Steiner is based
primarily on blade characteristics rather than on stem features . Serrated blades, of course, are fairly common but the deep, sometimes
erratic, serrations on these points seem distinctive. The cultural affiliations and distribution remain uncertain (hence the provisional nature
of the type), although probable Steiner points have been found at
Forney Reservoir (Members of the Dallas Archeological Society, 1963:
Fig. 7, M), at the Limerick Site (Duffield, 1961: Fig. 8, R), at the
Strawn Creek Site (Duffield, 1963a, Fig. 11 , A), and at Wylie Focus
sites (Stephenson, 1952: Fig. 95, G, third from the right).
MISCELLANEOUS ARROW POINTS

Points with short, rectangular stems (Fig. 10, G-I; 6 specimens).
This group of untyped specimens is represented by points having triangular blades and small, rectangular or very slightly expanding
stems. Lateral edges of the blade are frequently serrated and usually
concave. The shoulders are well developed and barbed, while the stem
is generally parallel-sided and has a straight base. Workmanship is
good and all examples are bifacially chipped. Total length is from 1.8
to an estimated 3 em.; maximum width (across the barbs ) is from 1.5
to 1.8 em.; maximum thickness is from .2 to .4 em.; stem length is
from .3 to .4 em.; and maximum stem width (across the base) is from
.5 to .6 em.
Comments: These six specimens appear to constitute a coherent
morphological group which may eventually be recognized as a new
type. Somewhat similar points have been reported from the Strawn
Creek Site (Duffield, 1963a: Fig. 10, K, L).
Points with expanding stems and straight or convex bases (Fig. 10,
J -M ; 11 specimens). These specimens typically have small, triangular
blades with prominent shoulders and short expanding stems . The
edges of the blade range from straight to convex or concave, and are
sometimes serrated. Considerable variation is apparent in the treatment of the stem, with the bases being straight or slightly convex to
almost bulbous. On the whole, however, the stem is broader than it is
long. The chipping on most specimens is merely fair and several represent only limited modification to flakes . Total length is between 1. 7
and 2.6 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders; largely estimated)

186

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

is 1.1 to 1.4 em.; maximum thickness is from .2 to .3 em.; stem length
is .4 to .5 em.; and maximum width of the stem is .7 to .9 em.
Comments: Possibly related to the Scallorn type, these points have
not been so classified because ( 1) their stems are somewhat smaller
and generally more convex or bulbous, and (2) they do not form a
good continuum with the points from Cedar Creek identified as Seallorn (see above ). At least some of these points also appear to be similar
to the tentative new Homan type (Wood, 1963: 1-2; Fig. 1, a-r), but
are perhaps of cruder workmanship and do not as frequently have
concave blade edges.
Points with expanding stems and concave bases (Fig. 10, N, 0; 3
specimens). Each of these points has a mildly expanding stem and a
concave base. On two (Fig. 10, N, 0) the blade is concave and one
shoulder has a rectangular, laterally-projecting barb. The opposite
shoulder is either weak (Fig. 10, N ) or absent (Fig. 10, 0 ). Both of
these points are worked mainly on one face, but neither appears to
have been rechipped. The third example differs considerably from the
other two in that it has a small triangular blade with straight edges
and prominent, downward pointing barbs. It, too, is unifacially
worked. This last specimen is quite small, being 1.4 em. long, an estimated 1.5 em. wide across the barbs, and .3 em. thick. Its stem is .4
em. long and . 7 em. wide at the base. The other two points (both,
incidentally, from the Gossett Bottoms Site) are 2 and 2.4 em. long,
1.1 and 1.6 em. wide at the shoulders, and .3 and .5 em. thick, respectively. Their stems are .4 and .5 em. long and .6 and .9 em. wide
at the base.
Comments: While this group is solely for descriptive convenience,
the two points with massive barbs are distinctive and in some respects
resemble the Catahoula type (Bell, 1960: 16, Pl. 8 ).
Points with subtriangular outlines (Fig. 10, P-R; 8 specimens).
This heterogeneous group of stemless points includes specimens which
have subtriangular to almost ovate outlines but which cannot be identified with either the Young or Granbury type. All are poorly made,
with most being unifacially worked, sometimes only along the marginal edges. Total length is from 2.1 to 4.6 em.; maximum width is
from 1.5 to 2.5 em.; and maximum thickness is from .1 to .6 em.
Comments: It is probable that some of these specimens-especially
the larger ones (such as illustrated in Fig. 10, R ) - served as knives,
while others (Fig. 10, P , Q) may have functioned as hastily-made
arrow points.
Points with eccentric outlines ( Fig. 10, S-W; 8 specimens ) . This
category, like the immediately preceding one, IS a catchall which

187

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

includes a variety of small, very crudely-made stemmed points. The
blades are usually asymmetrical and sometimes serrated, while the
stems range from contracting to expanding. Each has been simply
fashioned from a small flake and the outline form, at least in part,
appears to have been influenced by the original shape of the flake.
None is bifacially worked; indeed, the chipping is confined to marginal
retouching. The total length varies from 1.3 to 2.2 em.; the maximum
width (across the shoulders ) from .8 to 1.4 em., the maximum thickness from .2 to .3 em., the stem length from .3 to .5 em., and the
maximum stem width from .3 to . 7 em.
ARROW POINT FRAGMENTS ( 60

specimens)

Of the 192 arrow points from the Wild Bull, Lacy, and Gossett
Bottoms sites, 60 are too fragmentary for further classification. The
majority of these are blade pieces and none has an intact stem. In size,
however, all clearly contrast with the dart and knife fragments.

Dart Points
Characterized by bifacial chipping, pointed distal ends, and generally distinct stems, the dart points are distinguished from the arrow
points principally on the basis of their larger size and greater weight.
A total of 373 dart points was found, 130 at the Wild Bull Site, 206 at
the Gossett Bottoms Site, and 37 at the Lacy Site. Those complete
enough for typological study have either been grouped into one of 10
types (Bulverde, Edgewood, Ellis, Folsom, Gary, Kent, Marshall,
Morrill, Wesley, and Yarbrough ) , or left unclassified. In addition,
two types, Gary and Yarbrough , have been broken down into subgroups or varieties, primarily for descriptive convenience.
Most of the dart points have been fashioned from chert or a finegrained quartzitic stone. A few, however, are made of petrified wood.

Bulverde TYPE (Fig. 11, A, B; 2 specimens)
Both points identified as Bulverde are incomplete, but each appears
to have had a large triangular or subtriangular blade with either
moderate barbs or prominent shoulders. The stem is parallel-sided
and has an essentially straight base which on one specimen (Fig. 11 ,
B) consists of the nodular cortex. Rather crude flaking (perhaps a
result of the hammerstone percussion technique ) is exhibited by both
examples. Total length cannot be determined; maximum width
(across the shoulders) is 3.2 and an estimated 4 em.; maximum thick-

188

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

F

J

M

L

s
Q

R

E

H

G

K

D

0

N

p

T
0

I N.

o=

cM.

u

v

Fig . 11 . Dart Points . A, B, Bulverde . C, Edgewood. 0-G, Ellis. H. Folsom. 1-L, Gary a/sa .
M-P, Gary colfax . Q-V, Gary hobson . A from Lacy Site; B-H , K, L, and 0-T from Wild Bull
Site; I, J , M-P, U, V from Gossett Bottoms Site.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

189

ness is .9 and .8 em.; stem length is 1.2 and 1.4 em.; and stem width
at the base is 1.5 and 1.6 em., respectively.
Comments: The most distinctive features of these points are their
rectangular stems and prominent shoulders.

Edgewood TYPE (Fig. 11, C; 1 specimen )
The one example of this type is a side-notched point which has a
small triangular blade with convex edges and strong, but not barbed,
shoulders. Markedly expanding, the stem is short and almost as wide
as the blade. The base is concave and may have been somewhat
smoothed-fractures resulting from exposure to heat have damaged
the stem, however, and make it difficult to be certain of this feature.
Workmanship is generally good even though the flaking does not
extend entirely across the surface of one side. Total length is 3 em.;
maximum width (across the shoulders ) is 2.2 em.; maximum thickness is .5 em,; stem length is .6 em.; and stem width is an estimated
2cm.
Comments: In most respects, this point conforms to Johnson's ( 1962:
177, Fig. 7, F-H ) description of the dixon variety of Edgewood.

Ellis TYPE (Fig. 11, D-G; 5 specimens )
Small triangular blades and sharply expanding stems with straight
or very slightly convex bases are the most diagnostic attributes of these
five points. The edges of the blade are straight or gently convex and,
in one instance, beveled (to the left, distal end up ) . Shoulders are
uniformly prominent although not barbed. For the most part, the
chipping is well done with narrow, almost oblique flake scars occurring across the surfaces of the several specimens. Total length is from
2.2 (point probably rechipped) to 4.1 em.; maximum width (across
the shoulders ) is from 2 to 2.3 em.; maximum thickness is from .5 to
.6 em.; stem length is from .7 to 1 em.; and stem width at the base is
from 1.6 to 2 em.
Comments: Compared to the Ellis points from the George C. Davis
Site, where the type was first defined (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 166,
Fig. 58, A-H ) , and to those illustrated in Suhm and Jelks (1962: Pl.
94), the Cedar Creek specimens tend to have somewhat more concave
and sharply expanding stem edges. They are, however, clearly within
the range of variation defined for the type.

Folsom TYPE (Fig. 11 , H; 1 specimen )
Although consisting of only a small fragment, there can be no

190

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

serious doubt that this piece represents the medial section of a Folsom
point. A well defined flute is present on both surfaces, while the marginal edges are very skillfully retouched. The lateral edges contract
faintly at one end, but it is impossible to distinguish the distal edge
from the proximal edge. No lateral smoothing can be detected. This
piece now measures 2 em. wide, 2 em. long, and .2 em. thick (at the
center).
Comments: Both this specimen and an unidentifiable basal fragment
(conceivably from a Scottsbluff or Eden point) which has ground
edges and a lenticular cross section were recovered from the Wild Bull
Site. They are the only Paleo-Indian points found during the excavations and, unfortunately, neither was obtained from a context which
could be identified as early. Hence, whether they were picked up and
brought to the site by Archaic or Neo-American peoples, or were the
only residue recognized from an early occupation at the site remains undetermined. Interestingly, a very similar fragment of a fluted
point was found at the George C. Davis Site (Newell and Krieger, 1949:
168-170, Fig. 57, V ). It, too, appears to have been found out of its
original cultural context.

Gary TYPE (Figs. 11 and 12; 191 specimens)
Represented by over fifty percent of the identifiable dart points, the
Gary type is by far the most common recovered from the Cedar Creek
sites. As a group, the Gary points are linked by their contracting stems,
with other features-such as size, blade form, and treatment of the
base-showing a considerable range. Much the same degree of morphological variation was recorded at the Yarbrough and Miller sites
where Johnson (1962: 161- 166 and 244--247) recognized nine varieties of the Gary type: alsa, colfax, emory, hobson, kaufman, kemp,
kenedy, panna maria, and runge. Most of these varieties apply rather
well to the Cedar Creek material, although emory could not be satisfactorily separated from colfax. Johnson noted that kaufman and hobson were the "norms" for both the Miller and Yarbrough sites. At
Cedar Creek the norm is hobson, with alsa, colfax, and kemp being
secondary , and kaufman, kenedy, panna maria, and runge being
minor varieties.
Alsa Variety (Fig. 11, I-L ; 27 specimens). The most distinctive
attributes of this variety are moderate size, crude workmanship, broad
triangular blade, and relatively small stem. Lateral edges of the blade
vary from straight or slightly convex to concave, while the shoulders
are usually prominent and may even be outflaring (Fig. 11 , J, K ).

A

c

8

s

R

Q
0

0

N

M

L

K

IN.

CM.

J

H

G

F

E

0

0

p

u

v

T
2
6

Fig . 12 . Dart Po ints. A-D , Gary kaufma n. E-J , Gary kemp . K, L, Ga ry kenedy . M, N,
Gary panna maria . 0 , P, Gary runge . Q-V, Miscellaneous Gary. A-C and 1-K from Wild
Bull Site; D-H and L-T from Gossett Bottoms Site; U and V from Lacy Site.

The stem is typically short and contracting, terminating in either a
pointed or convex base. Most examples of this variety are poorly
chipped and h ave thick cross sections. Total length is 3.8 to 5.5 em.;

192

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

maximum width (across the shoulders) is 2.2 to 4.4 em.; maximum
thickness is .6 to 1.5 em.; stem length is .7 to 1.3 em.; and stem width
at the base is approximately .5 to 1.1 em.
Comments: These are quite heavy points which may, at least on
occasions, have served as knives . In outline form and workmanship
they resemble the Almagre type ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: Pl. 81 ) and
future studies should attempt to collect data to determine whether or
not these similarities are fortuitous or the result of a historical connection. Indeed, the whole problem of the relationship between the
contracting stem tradition (represented by the Gary and Wells types)
in the eastem part of the state and that (represented by the Almagre
and Langtry types) in the westem part of Texas merits careful investigation.
Colfax Variety (Fig. 11 , M-P; 25 specimens ) . All examples of this
group are small and have as their most characteristic features slightly
contracting stems and straight to faintly convex or concave bases. The
blades are triangular with concave or straight edges and fairly pronounced shoulders. Several have shallow serrations which apparently
resulted from marginal retouching (Fig. 11, N, 0 ). The workmanship
is good, although small (hammerstone percussion-produced?) flake
scars predominate. Total length is 2.7 to 4.2 em.; maximum width
(across the shoulders) is 1.7 to 2.7 ·e m.; maximum thickness is .4 to
.8 em.; stem length is .7 to 1.2 em.; and stem width at the base is .9
to 1.2 em.
Comments: Johnson's ( 1962 : 164-166 ) two varieties with flat bases,
emory and colfax, are differentiated from one another principally on
the basis of the degree of contraction of the stem. This distinction did
not, however, seem practical in the Cedar Creek collection and all of
the small, straight-based Gary points are grouped into the less-contracting stem colfax variety.
Hobson Variety (Fig. 11 , Q- V; 44 specimens) . The most definitive
characteristics of this variety are small to medium size, a triangular
blade, and, most importantly, a fairly broad stem with a rounded base.
The stem is relatively long, being from about one-third to one-half the
total length of the point. Lateral edges of the stem vary from convex
to nearly straight, while the blade edges are straight or slightly concave to mildly convex. Workmanship is good and many points have
been marginally retouched. T otal length is 2.4 to 4.1 em. ; maximum
width (across the shoulders ) is 1.5 to 2.5 em.; maximum thickness is
.5 to .9 em.; stem length is .9 to 1.3 em.; and stem width at the base
is approximately 1 to 1.2 em.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

193

Comments: It is the rounded base more than any other single feature
that distinguishes the hobson variety.
Kaufman Variety (Fig. 12, A-D; 9 specimens). A triangular blade
and an essentially pointed stem are the most diagnostic attributes of
the kaufman variety. The shoulders are pronounced and tend to flare
outward, with distinct barbs occasionally present. Stems are somewhat
triangular in outline and terminate in either a pointed (Fig. 12, C) or
very slightly rounded base (Fig. 12, A, B, D). The lateral edges of the
stem are smoothed on two specimens. On the whole, the chipping is
well done. Total length is 4 to 5.3 em.; maximum width (across the
shoulders) is 2.2 to an estimated 3.1 em.; maximum thickness is .5 to
.7 em.; stem length is 1.2 to 1.4 em.; and stem width at the base is
approximately .2 to .5 em.
Comments: A major variety at the Yarbrough and Miller sites
(Johnson, 1962) , kaufman is a minor form at Cedar Creek, having
been found only at Wild Bull and Gossett Bottoms.
Kemp Variety (Fig. 12, E-J; 25 specimens). These points have rather
long and narrow, contracting stems with pointed or very slightly
rounded bases. Like the stem, the blade tends to be slender, while the
lateral edges are usually concave. The shoulders are prominent, but
lack true barbs. Workmanship is generally excellent and most blades
have distinct lenticular cross sections which resulted from marginal
retouching. Several blades appear to be beveled, a trait rarely reported
for the Gary type. Total length is 2.3 to 5.4 em.; maximum width
(across the shoulders) is 1.6 to an estimated 2.2 em.; maximum thickness is .5 to .8 em.; stem lengths is 1 to 1.7 em.; and stem width at the
base is approximately .3 to .6 em.
Comments: The kemp variety points from Cedar Creek differ slightly
from those described by Johnson (1962: 164--165) in that they have
more markedly concave blade edges. In outline form, the kemp variety is similar to the runge variety, the major difference being that
the former is smaller than the latter.
Kenedy Variety (Fig. 12, K, L; 5 specimens). Each of the five examples of this variety has, as its chief distinguishing characteristic, a
diamond-shaped or lozenge-shaped outline. The blade is triangular
with straight or slightly concave edges and prominent shoulders, while
the base of the stem is pointed. Moderately good flaking with some
marginal retouching occurs on most of the specimens. Generally small
in size, these points have a total length of between 2.5 and 3.2 em.; a
maximum width (across the shoulders) of between 1.6 to 2.4 em.; a
maximum thickness of between .5 and . 7 em.; a stem length of between
.7 and 1.5 em.; and a stem width of between roughly .4 and .6 em.

194

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Panna Maria Variety (Fig. 12, M , N; 5 specimens ). Although only
one of the examples of this variety is complete, each appears to have
had a fairly long, triangular blade and poorly defined shoulders which
merge almost imperceptibly with the stem. The stem with its convex
edges and gently rounded base is less contracting than most of the other
varieties of Gary. Workmanship is rather poor and the majority seem
to have been percussion chipped by means of a hammerstone. Marginal
retouching is in evidence on just one specimen. Maximum width
(across the shoulders ) is 1.7 to 2.2 em.; maximum thickness is .6 and
.9 em.; stem length is 1 to 1.3 em.; and stem width at the base is
approximately .8 to 1 em. The one complete point is 4.4 em. long.
Comments: Unlike the panna maria variety points described by
Johnson (1962: 165 ), none from Cedar Creek has a pointed base. In
all other respects, however, they fall within the definition given by
Johnson.
Runge Variety (Fig. 12, 0, P; 13 specimens) . Medium to large size
and long, fairly narrow stem which ends in a pointed or slightly
rounded base are the most distinctive characteristics of the 13 runge
variety points. Most blades are broken, but all appear to have been
triangular in outline with straight to slightly convex to concave edges.
The shoulders are fairly prominent and sometimes (Fig. 12, P) flare
outward. Workmanship is quite variable, ranging from good to poor.
Total length is 4.1 to an estimated 7 em.; maximum width (across the
shoulders ) is 2.1 to 3.7 em.; maximum thickness is .7 to 1 em.; stem
length is 1.4 to 2.2 em.; and stem width at the base is approximately
.5 to 1 em.
Comments: The runge variety points from Cedar Creek are slightly
larger than those described by Johnson ( 1962: 164 and 246), but
otherwise conform to his definition.
Gary, miscellaneous and fragmentary (Fig. 12, Q-V; 38 specimens ) .
These are contracting stem points which fall within the general range
of tl:e Gary type, but which-either because of their fragmentary
condition or their combination of attributes-cannot be assigned to
any of the varieties yet defined for the type.
Kent

TYPE

(Fig. 13, A-C; 4 specimens)

This minor type at Cedar Creek Reservoir is represented by four
rather small specimens which have essentially rectangular stems. The
slender, triangular blade has straight or slightly convex edges which
are sometimes faintly serrated (Fig. 13, A, B). The shoulders are
distinct, but not barbed, and one side is sometimes-possibly because
it was rechipped-stronger than the other. Lateral edges of the stem

A

c

8

F

K

G

D

H

L

J

M

N

0

p

Q

0

IN.

R

Fig . I 3. Dart Points . A-C, Kent . D-F , Marshall . G, Morrill . H, Wesley . I, Yarbrough d ike .
J, Yarbrough lindale. K, Yarbrough mabank. L-R , Unclassified. A and F from Lacy Site; B, 0 ,
E, G-R from Wild Bull Site; C from Gossett Bottoms Site.

vary from straight to mildly convex, while the base ranges from
slightly to markedly convex. Despite the rather coarse-grained material from which they are made, these points exhibit good workman-

196

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ship. Total length is from 3.7 to 4.4 em.; maximum width (across the
shoulders ) is from 1.6 to 2 em.; maximum thickness is .5 to . 7 em.;
stem length is from 1 to 1.2 em.; and stem width at the base is from
1 to 1.3 em.
Comments: In size and general outline form these points are similar
to Johnson's (1962: 168, Fig. 5, D-G) phalba variety of Kent.

Marshall TYPE (Fig. 13, D-F; 4 specimens)
Long, massive barbs and short, generally rectangular stems are the
most diagnostic attributes of this group of points. The blades are broad
and triangular in outline with the lateral edges being straight or
slightly convex. Edges of the stem are roughly parallel and the base is
uniformly straight. In each case, the stem is broader than it is long.
Three of these specimens are fashioned from a fine-grained chert and
the chipping on all examples is unusually good. Maximum width
(across the barbs) is from 3 to an estimated 3.5 em.; maximum thickness is .7 to .9 em.; stem length is from .9 to 1 em.; and stem width
at the base is from 1.3 to 1.6 em. The one complete example is 5 em.
long.
Comments: The Marshall type occurs primarily in the central part
of the state (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 211), but does appear as a very
minor form (3 specimens) at the Yarbrough Site (Johnson, 1962:
171, Fig. 6, A-C).

Morrill TYPE (Fig. 13, G; 2 specimens)
Both examples of this type have a long, rectangular stem ·a nd
:straight base. The edges of the stem are heavily smoothed on one point
and lightly smoothed on the other. The one complete blade is long and
:slender and has a triangular outline with straight edge. Shoulders are
present, but rather weakly developed on both specimens. The chipping
is quite skillfully done, with marginal retouching being very much in
evidence. Maximum width (across the shoulders) is 1.9 and 2 em.;
maximum thickness is .9 and .6 em.; stem length is 2 and 1. 8 em.; and
stem width at the base is 1.4 em. in both instances. The complete point
measures 5.7 em. long.
Comments: While well within the range of variation indicated for
Morrill (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 223, Pl. 112), neither of these points
agrees very favorably with either the slocum or san pedro variety described by Johnson (1962: 169-170, Fig. 6, N-S).

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

197

Wesley TYPE (Fig. 13, H; 1 specimen)
Recently defined by Johnson (1962: 178, Fig. K-M), this type has a
long, triangular blade with straight edges and weak shoulders. The
stem is broad and mildly expanding, and has slightly concave lateral
edges which appear to have been faintly smoothed. The base of the
stem is slightly concave. Well made, this point has neat marginal
retouching which on the blade has produced shallow serrations. Total
length is an estimated 4.3 em.; maximum width (across the shoulders)
is 2.1 em.; maximum thickness is . 7 em.; stem length is 1.2 em.; and
stem width at the base is 1. 7 em.
Comments: The Wesley point from Cedar Creek, unlike those found
by Johnson at the Yarbrough Site (ibid.), has a beveled blade (to the
right, distal end up).

Yarbrough TYPE (Fig. 13, I-K; 3 specimens )
Although none of these points is complete, each seems to have had a
long, slender triangular or lanceolate blade with straight or slightly
convex lateral edges. The shoulders are clearly defined, but not barbed ..
Treatment of the stem, however, varies somewhat and primarily on
this basis three varieties-dike, lindale, and mabank-have been recognized (Johnson, 1962: 173-174, Fig. 6, J-R). All three are represented
in the collection from Cedar Creek.
Dike Variety (Fig. 13, I; 1 specimen). This quite fragmentary point
is distinguished by its markedly concave stem edges and straight base.
The workmanship is rather poor, resulting in an unusually thick cross
section. Total length and maximum width cannot be determined, but
the stem is 1. 7 em. long and 2.2 em. wide at the base.
Lindale Variety (Fig. 13, J; 1 specimen). The most diagnostic
feature of this variety is its slightly expanding stem with essentially
straight lateral edges and flat base. The Cedar Creek example is rather
well made, but lacks marginal retouching. Total length cannot be
determined; maximum width (across the shoulders) is 2.1 em.; maximum thickness is .8 em.; stem length is 1.2 em .; and stem width at
the base is 1.5 em.
Mabank Variety (Fig. 13, K; 1 specimen) . This variety is very much
like the dike variety of Yarbrough, except that it has a concave base.
The workmanship is good and the lateral edges of the stem are slightly
smoothed. Total length cannot be determined; maximum width (across
the shoulders) is 2.3 em.; maximum thickness is . 7 em.; stem length
is 1.5 em.; and stem width at the base is 2 em.

198

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

UNCLASSIFIED DART POINTS

(Fig. 13, L-R; 7 specimens )

Included in this category are seven reasonably complete pointsall from the Wild Bull Site-which cannot be identified with any
previously defined type. They exhibit a wide range of variation in
workmanship and outline form . All are illustrated in Figure 13, L-R.
DART POINT FRAGMENTS

(152 specimens)

Consisting primarily of blade pieces, these specimens are too incomplete for detailed typological study. They are rather arbitrarily separated from knife fragments on the basis of their smaller size and, to a
lesser extent, better workmanship.
Knives
Each of the 211 specimens classed as a knife is bifacially worked
along one or more edges or-more frequently-across both flat surfaces. Moreover, none has a clearly delineated stem and most have
pointed distal ends. They are generally larger than the dart points and,
on the whole, less well made than either the dart or arrow points.
Because of their crude workmanship and frequent incompleteness,
sorting the knives into discrete, yet coherent, morphological groups is
troublesome. The most obvious and presumably most meaningful
variation is in the outline form. However, on a few examples the locus
of the cutting edge seems to be of importance, while on others the
technique of manufacture or material from which they are made
appears to be of significance. Consequently, in classifying the knives
several criteria have been employed with varying emphasis. The
resultant categories are of a purely descriptive nature and include ovate
knives, subtriangular knives, lanceolate knives, hi-pointed knives,
single-edged knives, cortex-base knives, and knives made from petrified wood. In addition, there are 132 fragments which are too incomplete for further study but which, on the basis of their size, appear to
have come from knives.
OVATE KNIVES

(Fig. 14, A-C; 18 specimens)

These small to medium size specimens with ovate outlines have
rounded bases and evenly convex lateral edges. None is complete, but
all appear to have been relatively short and broad. Each is bifacially
flaked with several being rather skillfully made. Most were perhaps
between 4 and 6 em. in length; maximum width is from 2.2. to 3.5 em.;
and maximum thickness is from .4 to 1.3 em.

199

CEDAR CREEK RESER VOIR SITES

c

B

A

F

G

K

J

D

E

H

L

M

N

0
0

IN.

0

CM.

p
Q

R

Fig . 14 . Knives . A-C, Ovate. D-F, Subtriangular. G, H, Lanceolate. I, J, Bi-pointed. K, L,
Single-edged . M-0 , Cortex base. P-Q, Petrified wood. A-C , G, L, and N-R from Wild Bull
Site ; D, I, and K from Lacy Site ; E, F, H, J , and M from Gossett Bottoms Site.

200

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Comments: Very similar knives constitute Johnson's (1962: 184,
Fig. 9, G-H ) Group III.
SUBTRIANGULAR KNIVES

(Fig. 14, D-F; 9 specimens)

This knife form is distinguished by its triangular to subtriangular
outline and small to medium size. The lateral edges tend to be convex,
while the base varies from straight to gently rounded. The workmanship is quite poor and rough percussion flake scars predominate. The
proximal ends are thick on several examples and it is difficult to
imagine exactly how these particular specimens might have been
hafted. Total length is from 3 to 4.7 em.; maximum width (at the
base ) is from 2.2 to 3.3 em.; and maximum thickness is .5 to 1.4 em.
Comments: The smaller subtriangular knives resemble the Granbury arrow point type (see above ), except that they are thicker and
more crudely made.
LAN CEO LATE KNIVES

(Fig. 14, G, H ; 17 specimens)

Like the ovate knives, none of these specimens is complete. However,
each appears to have had an essentially lanceolate outline with a
slightly contracting proximal end. The base varies considerably, ranging from straight or gently concave to convex. The workmanship is
good on some examples, poor on others. Maximum width is 2.1 to 3.4
em.; maximum thickness is .5 to 1 em.; and the length of the nearly
complete lanceolate knife (Fig. 14, G ) is an estimated 6 em.
Comments: Similar knives have been found at the Yarbrough and
Miller sites (Johnson, 1962: 184 and 253, Groups I and IV ) and at the
Strawn Creek Site (Duffield, 1963a: Fig. 12, D ) .
BI-POINTED KNIVES

(Fig. 14, I, J ; 6 specimens)

Sharply contracting proximal and distal ends are the distinguishing
characteristics of this group of knives. Their lateral edges are convex,
but not always evenly so, and the outline is sometimes slightly asymmetrical (Fig. 14, J ) . Although flaked by means of the percussion
technique, most of the hi-pointed knives are fairly well made. Total
length is 4.3 to 6.2 em.; maximum width (approximately midway on
the edges ) is 2 to 3.1 em.; and maximum thickness is .7 to 1.4 em.
Comments: This form corresponds very favorably with Johnson's
(1962: 184-186 and 253) Group V found at the Yarbrough and Miller
sites.

201

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES
SINGLE-EDGED KNIVES

(Fig. 14, K, L; 15 specimens)

Bifacial chipping on these knives is confined to one lateral edge
but is much more pronounced than that occurring on the utilized
flakes (see below ). The single-edged knives have been fashioned from
flakes (Fig. 14, K) as well as small, rather flat pebbles (Fig. 14, L).
The workmanship is crude and the outline is irregular. Total length
is 4.2 to 6.8 em.; maximum width is 2.2 to 4.3 em. ; and maximum
thickness is 1 to 1.8 em.
CORTEX-BASE KNIVES

(Fig. 14, M-0; 9 specimens)

In outline form and size this group is very similar to the ovate
knives, but is differentiated from them on the basis of the nodular
cortex which appears at the base. Presumably these specimens were
fashioned from either cortex flakes (Epstein, 1963: 28) or small, flat
pebbles-it is difficult to be sure of which because of the bifacial flaking. The workmanship is generally good, although all are percussion
chipped. Total length is 4.2 to an estimated 6 em.; maximum width
is 2.4 to 3.5 em.; and maximum thickness is .6 to 1.1 em.
KNIVES MADE FROM PETRIFIED WOOD

(Fig. 14, P-Q; 5 specimens)

These five rather crude specimens have been fashioned from thin
flakes or slabs of petrified wood, rather than the chert and quartzite
stones used in the manufacture of the other knives . On most the chipping is limited to one or both marginal edges and the outlines can
generally be described as subtriangular. Total length ranges from 4.4
to 8.2 em.; maximum width from 3.2 to 3.6 em. ; and maximum thickness from .7 to 1.3 em.
Comments: In many respects these knives (particularly that illustrated in Fig. 14, R ) are similar to specimens found in the McGee
Bend Reservoir area and termed Bronson knives by Edward B. Jelks
( 1965: 165-166, Fig. 81 ) .

Bifaces
This category of artifacts forms a continuum with the knives in
that they are bifacially worked, frequently have pointed distal ends,and lack clearly defined stems. The 85 specimens classified as bifaces,
however, are generally larger and more crudely made than the knives .
On the basis of variations in the outline and, to a lesser extent, the
technique of manufacture the bifaces are sorted into three groups :

202

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bristol, pebble, and hi-pointed. In addition, there is a miscellaneous
group composed of unclassifiable and fragmentary specimens.
Bristol BIFACES (Fig. 15, A-E'; 32 specimens )
Recently defined by Duffield ( 1963a : 43-44, Fig. 13, C-H), this
highly distinctive group is most easily recognized by its subcircular
outline and moderately small size. The edges vary from sinuous (Fig.
15, C) to, more commonly, even (Fig. 15, A, B, E) , and about half are
slightly to well smoothed (Fig. 14, D ) -perhaps from use. Percussion
flake scars predominate, although many are well made and have neat
marginal retouching. Others are less skillfully manufactured and have
thickened, though lenticular, cross sections. Patches of nodular cortex
are occasionally present on one or both surfaces (Fig. 15, E-E' ) and
sometimes along the edges. Because of the bifacial chipping it is difficult to ascertain the details of manufacture, but there are suggestions
that both flakes (apparently produced by the hammerstone percussion
technique) and small, flat pebbles were utilized. The maximum diameter is 2.2 to 4.1 em. and the maximum thickness is 1.1 to 1. 8 em.
Comments: First recognized at the Strawn Creek Site in Navarro
Mills Reservoir (Duffield, 1963a: 43-44 ) , Bristol bifaces have also
been recovered from the Yarbrough, Miller (Johnson, 1962: Figs. 10,
F-H and 30, 0, P ) , Wolfshead (Duffield, 1963b: Fig. 14, D , E ), Limericlc (Duffield, 1961: Fig. 11, A, B), and Wood (Crook and Harris,
1952: Pl. 5, No. 6 ) sites, as well as from certain localities in the Forney
Reservoir area (Dallas Archeological Society, 1963: Fig. 9, N ). The
cultural context in which the Bristol biface occurs is not yet well
defined, although it appears to be late Archaic.
PEBBLE BIFACES

(Fig. 15, F , G; 6 specimens )

Fashioned from small, elongated chert or quartzitic pebbles, each
of these specimens has one (presumably the distal) end bifacially
worked to form a pointed or slightly rounded blade. Much of the
opposite end is unaltered and retains the nodular cortex. In outline and
technique of manufacture they resemble choppers, but they seem too
small to have effectively functioned as such. Moreover, none shows
the battering one would expect on a chopper. The workmanship is
crude and rough, with percussion-produced flake scars _very much in
evidence. Length is 4.3 to 7.1 em. ; the maximum width (generally
midway along the lateral edges ) is 3.3 to 5.5 em.; and maximum thickness is 1.9 to 4 em.
Comments: Similar specimens have been variously classified as

203

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

t
8'

8

E

c

E'
F

H

K

D

H'

G

J

L

Fig . 15 . Bifaces. A-E' , Bristol. F, G, Pebble. H, I, Bi-pointed. J-N, Miscellaneous . A-C, F,
K, and L from Gossett Bottoms Site; D, H, and 0 from Lacy Site; E-G , J, M, and N from
Wild Bull Site.

204

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

picks (Jelks, 1961 : Fig. 13, a-c ), choppers (Duffield, 1963b: 114),
blades (Tunnell, 1961 : 133, Fig. 6, G-I ), and Perkin pikes (Jelks,
1965 : 175-176, Fig. 85 ).
BI-POINTED BIFACES

(Fig. 15, H , I ; 5 specimens)

These six, bifacially worked artifacts have convex lateral edges
which terminate in more or less pointed distal and proximal ends. One
end (the proximal? ), however, tends to be slightly less pointed than
the other and is sometimes better thinned. The workmanship is quite
poor with most examples retaining traces of the nodular cortex. There
are indications that all were made from small, elongated chert or
quartzitic pebbles. The length ranges from 4 .2 to 7.4 em.; maximum
width is from 2.3 to 3.2 em.; and the maximum thickness is from 1.7
to 2.7 em.
Comments: In basic outline these specimens resemble the hi-pointed
knives (see above ) , but they are larger and more crudely made.
MISCELLANEOUS BIFACES

(Fig. 15, J-N; 42 specimens)

Included in this group are 32 complete or reasonably complete
bifaces which do not fit any of the above classifications, and 10 specimens which are too fragmentary for accurate identification. In outline,
the former exhibit considerable variation, ranging from approximate
ovate or subtriangular to asymmetrical. All have been roughly flaked
from chert or quartzitic pebbles by means of the hammerstone percussion technique, and many still have portion of the cortex across
either of the flat surfaces or at the edges. Length is from 3.6 to 7.2 em.;
maximum width is from 3 to 4.1 em.; and maximum thickness is 1.1
to 2.8 em.

Microliths (Fig. 16, A-E; 7 specimens )
This term is tentatively suggested for quite small, generally hifacially worked implements which ~how a variety of geometric forms.
Some are rectanguloid (Fig. 16, A, C), while others are subtriangular
to lanceolate (Fig. 16, B, D, E); none, however, is clearly pointedhence their exclusion from the arrow point category. The flaking is
generally good and appears to be mainly pressure-produced. Length
is from 1.4 to 2.9 em.; maximum width is from .9 to 2 em.; and maximum thickness is .4 to .5 em.
Comments: The most distinctive features of these microliths are
small size and bifacial chipping. Outline form is quite variable, but,
significantly, none terminates in a pointed distal end. Use as an arrow

205

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

c

B

A

H

G

F

E

0

J

j

l

l
M

N

l

L

K

l

1
R

p

Q

o~~~~N·~~
0

CM.

3

Fig . 16 . Microliths, Drills, Burin, Burin Spall, and Gravers. A-E, Microliths. F-H, Flake
drills . I, J, Large drills . K, Burin (arrow indicates burin blowl. L, Burin spall . M-R, Gravers
(arrows indicate graver points). A, B, F-H , M, N, and P from Gossett Bottoms Site; C and J
from Lacy Site; D, E, I, K, L, 0 , and R from Wild Bull Site.

206

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

point or even a small knife seem quite doubtful. More probably these
implements, like the Mesolithic microliths of Europe and north Africa,
were parts of composite tools- that is, set in slots or notches made in
wooden or bone shafts to form piercing and cutting edges.
Similar, though generally larger, artifacts have been reported from
the McGee Bend Reservoir (Jelks, 1965 : 178-179, Fig. 86, G-J ) .
Easily overlooked, it is possible that these implements are of much
wider distribution than present evidence suggests. They are not, however, comparable to the microflint industry that has been described
for the laketown (Ford, et al. , 1955 : 137-150) and Poverty Point
(Ford and Webb, 1956: 76-82 ) sites in Mississippi and Louisiana.

Drills (Fig. 16, F -I; 10 specimens )
Each of the drills recovered from the excavations has a relatively
long, narrow shaft suitable for boring. When examined closely, they
fall readily into two descriptive categories; drills made from flakes
(Fig. 16, F-H ) and drills apparently rechipped from dart points (Fig.
16, I, J ). The seven examples comprising the first group are small and
are chipped primarily across one face. The bases are expanded but
are not carefully shaped. Treatment of the shaft is variable, with some
having triangular to lenticular cross sections, while one is alternately
beveled. Total length is from 1.9 to an estimated 3 em.; length of the
shaft is 1.2 to an estimated 1.5 em. ; width across the base is 1.2 to 1.8
em.; maximum width of the shaft is .5 to 1 em.; and maximum thickness is .3 to .5 em.
The three drills of the second type are bifacially worked and are
noticeably larger than those described above. On two the base is identical to the stem found on the Gary dart point type (Fig. 16, I), while
the third (Fig. 16, J ) is reminiscent of the Pedernales type. Lateral
edges of the shaft are straight, and gradually taper to a sharp point on
the two complete specimens. The cross section of the shaft is either
triangular or lenticular. Each is well made and fine marginal retouching occurs along all edges. Total length is 3. 7 to 4 em.; length of the
shaft is 1.6 to 1.9 em.; width across the base is 1 to 1.3 em.; maximum
width of the shaft is 1 to 1.2 em. ; maximum thickness is 1.1 to 1.2 em.
Comments: None of the lateral edges of the drills shows signs of
wear (e.g., smoothing ) from use.

Burin (Fig. 16, K; 1 specimen )
A burin, or pointed engraving tool, was recovered from the Wild
Bull Site. It appears on the lateral edge of a probable dart point blade

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

207

and has been produced by the intersection of a burin facet with a
transverse hinge fracture. Only one spall has been removed and the
negative bulb of percussion is readily visible at the upper end (i.e.,
where the spall scar intersects the hinge fracture ) of the burin facet.
Microscopic examination of the burin point reveals some use wear.
The burin facet measures 1.9 em. long, and seems small enough to
have been removed by means of pressure (Epstein, 1960: 93 ).
Comments: Burins are rare in the eastem part of Texas and the occurrence of this specimen is of considerable interest. Of additional significance is the fact that 1) the material, a blue-gray flint, is foreign to
the area and probably came from central Texas, and 2 ) that the wellexecuted, parallel-flaking on the blade fragment is reminiscent of Paleo
points. It should be recalled that a medial fragment of a Folsom point
was found at the same site.

Burin Spall (Fig. 16, L; 1 specimen )
Besides the burin described above, the Wild Bull Site yielded an
unusual flake which is tentatively identified as a burin spall. Its size
and general shape are suggestive of a burin spall (Epstein, 1963: 3133 ), but it has a squarish- rather than triangular or rectangularcross section. Since there is no clear evidence of use, it may be that this
piece is merely the residue from the production of a burin. The material from which it is manufactured is a brown flint which is of a
better quality than that used for most other chipped stone artifacts
found at Cedar Creek Reservoir. Total length is 3 em., while the maximum width and maximum thickness are both approximately 1 em.

Gravers (Fig. 16, M-R; 37 specimens )
All artifacts having a small, beak-like projection which may have
served to incise or engrave objects of bone, clay, and the like are
termed gravers. Apart from this projection, however, the gravers exhibit considerable variation. Twenty-three are made from small, flattish flakes with the projections having been formed by either lightly
retouching two intersection edges (Fig. 16, M ), or by pressure flaking
two adjacent concavities in one edge ( Fig. 16, N , 0 ). Each specimen
has only one projection, although several also have a second edge prepared for scraping (Fig. 16, N , 0 ). The flakes are 2.8 to 4 em. long,
1.2 to 2.5 em. wide, and .3 to .9 em. thick; the projections are from .2
to .6 em. long.
The next most common variety of gravers is represented by 13 specimens made from small, stream-worn chert or petrified wood pebbles

208

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 15, P, Q). Their cross sections are typically thick and planoconvex, with most of the pebble apparently having been intentionally
broken approximately in half. Much of the weathered cortex surface
is retained, usually on the convex face. Each has a single graver
point formed by either of the two techniques mentioned above. In
addition, four have a beveled edge and presumably also functioned as
scrapers. The entire specimen is 2.1 to 5.1 em. long, 1 to 4 em. wide,
and .9 to 2.2 em. thick; the graver points vary from .2 to .6 em in
length.
The only other graver (Fig. 16, R), from the Wild Bull Site, is
quite unusual in that it has been chipped in the lateral edge of what
appears to have been a dart point stem. The beak has been formed by
two adjacent concavities unifacially chipped by means of the pressure
technique. Even the material, a black, speckled flint, is distinctive and
may have been obtained from the central part of the state. The over-all
dimensions are: 1.5 em. long, 1. 7 em. wide, and .4 em. thick; the
graver point is .3 em. long.
Gouges
The 64 implements identified as gouges have prominent, often carefully prepared, bits which suggest use as specialized scraping tools.
Most are made from small pebbles and seem distinctive enough to define as a tentative new type, Gossett gouges. The remaining four specimens compare favorably with either the Clear Fork gouge or the
"Guadalupe" adz.
Gossett GOUGES (Fig. 17, A-H; 60 specimens)
. Each of these artifacts has been made from a small, stream worn
pebble (of chert, quartzitic stone, or petrified wood) and has a steep
bit at one edge. The outline form was dictated principally by the natural shape of the pebble and ranges from almost circular (Fig. 17, F )
to, more often, subtriangular or rectanguloid (Fig. 17, A-E, G, H).
Flaking is confined to one surface and may or may not extend across
the entire specimen. The opposite surface is never altered and retains
the weathered cortex, perhaps to reduce the friction that might have
been created during use (Fig. 17, A', D' ) . This unaltered surface is
usually polished, but it is impossible to determine whether from use or
from stream abrasion. Cross sections are either plano-convex, or, less
often, biconvex. The bits vary from straight or slightly concave to convex, are generally wider than the base, and frequently show secondary

209

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

c

B

o'

D

F

G

o"

c'

E

I'

H

K

M
N
Fig . 17. Gouges and Scrapers. A-H, Gossett gouges . 1-K, Clear Fork gouges. L, Possible
" Guadalupe " adz . M-0, Mineola end scrapers . A-M, and 0 from Wild Bull Site; N from
Gossett Bottoms Site.

210

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

retouching. Length is from 2.5 to 6.1 em.; width across the bit is from
2.5 to 3. 7 em.; and maximum thickness is from .9 to 1.2 em.
Comments: Some of the Gossett gouges-especially those with subtriangular outlines-resemble Variety 2 of the Clear Fork gouges
(Ray, 1941: 153-15 7). However, Clear Fork gouges are usually larger,
are often bifacially worked, and do not appear to have been made from
small pebbles.
Since many published descriptions of superficially similar artifacts
do not clearly state whether or not the specimens in question have been
fashioned from small pebbles and have retained the nodular cortex on
the dorsal surface, is quite difficult to determine the distribution of the
Gossett gouge. However, possible Gossett gouges have been found at
the Harroun (Jelks and Tunnell, 1959; 49), and Pearson (Duffield
and Jelks, 1961: 28, Fig. 6, f, g ) sites in Texas and at the Boat Dock
Site in Oklahoma (Bell, 1958: 43, Pl. 12, C, D ). In addition, perhaps
some of the gouges reported from various Trinity Aspect sites (Crook
and Harris, 1952: 18-21 and 27-28, Fig. 2, Nos. 1-10) are also of this
type.

Clear Fork

GOUGES

(Fig. 17, I -K; 3 specimens)

Three of the gouges from Cedar Creek (all from the Wild Bull Site)
fall within the range of variation described by Ray ( 1941) for the
Clear Fork type. Each is bifacially worked and has an essentially biconvex cross section. Two (Fig. 17, J, K) are roughly triangular in
outline and compare closely with Ray's (ibid.: 153-154, Pl. 2, Nos. 1,
2, 6, 11-15) Variety 1. The third example (Fig. 17, I) is incomplete,
but appears to have had generally parallel lateral edges and a long,
rectangular outline-features similar to those mentioned by Ray
(ibid.: 157) for his Variety 3. On all examples the bit is steep and
somewhat scooped-out. Although the percussion flaking technique was
used, these gouges are fairly well made and usually show retouching
at the bit. Length of the two complete examples is 2.7 and 3.8 em.;
width across the bit of all specimens is 2.8 to 3.1 em.; and maximum
thickness is 1.2 to 1.6 em.
Comments: Unlike the Clear Fork gouges reported by Johnson
( 1962: 191-193 ) for the Yarbrough Site, those from Cedar Creek are
made from chert (rather than ferruginous sandstone ) and do not show
wear from use.
"GUADALUPE"? ADZ OR GOUGE

(Fig. 17, L; 1 specimen)

This unusual and crudely fashioned implement has a large, concave

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

211

bit across one end. The lateral edges are sinuous but essentially
straight, tapering gently toward the proximal end. Percussion flake
scars are present on both surfaces, although one side retains a sizable
portion of the nodular cortex. The cross section is quite thick and
roughly lenticular, while the longitudinal section is triangular and
shows distinct thinning at the proximal end. Length is 8.2 em.; width
across the bit is 4 em.; width across the base is 2 em.; and maximum
thickness is 3.1 em.
Comments: This specimen may be a crude example of the "Guadalupe" adz, a distinctive artifact which has not yet been studied in detail but which has been tentatively named by T. N . Campbell and
briefly mentioned by Tunnell (Johnson, et al., 1962: 108) .

Scrapers
Chipped stone artifacts having one generally flat, unworked surface
as well as one or more edges which could have been used for scraping
are classified as scrapers. They are made from chert flakes or pebbles,
less often from quartzitic stones and petrified wood. Exclusive of the
unclassifiable and fragmentary specimens, the scrapers are divided
into seven groups: Mineola, large end, thumbnail, core, initial cortex,
secondary flake, and concave-edged.

Mineola

END SCRAPERS

(Fig. 17, M-0; 12 specimens)

Recently recognized by Johnson ( 1962: 189, Fig. 10, R-T), this type
of scraper was manufactured from thin slabs of petrified wood. The
outline is either rectangular or squarish, and both surfaces are flat.
Marginal flaking is apparently of percussion type and is almost always
limited to one face, occurring on one end (the bit) and, infrequently,
along the sides. The bit is typically quite steep and is either straight or
convex. Length ranges from 2.4 to 4.6 em.; maximum width from 2.4
to 3.6 em.; maximum thickness from . 7 to 1.4 em.
Comments: As noted by Johnson (ibid.) for the Yarbrough specimens, the form of these scrapers appears to be mainly a function of the
fractioning characteristics of petrified wood. The Mineola end scrapers
from Cedar Creek, however, tend to be slightly smaller than those
from the Yarbrough Site.
LARGE END SCRAPERS

(Fig. 18, A-C; 10 specimens)

These large, crudely made specimens have subcircular to rectanguloid or ovate outlines and at least one steep scraping edge. Six have

212

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B
A

D

F

D'

G

E

H

Fig . 1 8 . Sc rapers . A-C , Large end. D-H , Core. A-D from Wild Bull Site; E and F from
Lacy Site ; G and H from Gossett Bottoms Site .

been fashioned from large chert pebbles, one from a slab of petrified
wood, and one from a piece of hard hematite. The principal bit edge
lies either at one edge or along a portion of the circumference. All are

213

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

rough percussion flaked and exhibit no marginal retouching. The more
circular examples (Fig. 18, C) have a maximum diameter of 4.2 to 5.5
em. and a maximum thickness of 2 to 2.8 em.; the others (Fig. 18, A,
B ) are 4.9 to 8.2 em. in length, 4 to 4.8 em. in maximum width, and
1. 7 to 2.5 em. in maximum thickness.
Comments: These specimens are linked primarily by their large
size and crude workmanship. Had the sample been larger it would
probably have been desirable to divide them into more discrete categones.
THUMBNAIL SCRAPERS

(Fig. 19, A-C; 3 specimens)

Diminutive size and delicate pressure retouching along one or more
marginals are the most diagnostic features of this group. A sharp fracture appears at one edge of each and it is possible that none is complete.
The present outlines are either ovate or rectanguloid, while the cross
sections are consistently plano-convex. The length is uniformily 1.6
em.; maximum width is 1.4 to 1.6 em.; and maximum thickness is .3
to .5 em.
CORE SCRAPERS

(Fig. 18, D-H; 24 specimens)

This group consists of specimens manufactured from moderately
large, stream worn chert pebbles . Much of the nodular cortex has been
retained, and on many it naturally fonns a planar surface (Fig. 18,
D , D' ) . All have rude percussion flake scars which appear along the
margins of one face. The cross section is plano-convex and a number of
examples are almost as thick as they are wide or long. The outline
form depends largely on the original shape of the pebble, there being
very little evidence of intentional shaping. Scraping edges are quite
steep and are usually limited to one edge or a portion of the circumference. Those 11 examples with subcircular outlines are 3.6 to 6.2 em.
in diameter and 1.5 to 5 em. in maximum thickness. The remaining
12 specimens are rectanguloid to ovate and are 4.3 to 6.4 em. long, 3.1
to 4.5 em. wide, and 1.2 to 4 em. thick.
Comments: Intended here as only a descriptive category, the core
scrapers seem distinctive and may eventually be shown to be a valid
cultural type.
INITIAL CORTEX FLAKE SCRAPERS

(Fig. 19, D-G; 37 specimens)

Scrapers made from small to medium size initial cortex flakes form
the most common group found at Cedar Creek Reservoir. These flakes

214

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

can be easily recognized by their plano-convex cross sections and the
weathered cortex on their convex surfaces (Epstein, 1963: 29). The
planar face usually has a prominent positive bulb of percussion indicating that the flakes had been detached by means of the hammerstone
percussion technique. None has a prepared striking platform. Moderately prominent flaking appears along one or more marginals of the
convex surface. Length is 2.5 to 5.2 em.; maximum width is 1.2 to 4.7
em.; and maximum thickness is . 7 to 1.6 em.
SECONDARY FLAKE SCRAPERS

(Fig. 19, H, I; 14 specimens )

Like those described above, these scrapers are made from small to
medium size flakes. However, none has retained traces of the pebble
surface and in most cases the bulb of percussion has been removed by
chipping. In general, the flaking is good, and some specimens (for example, Fig. 19, H) may be intentionally shaped. The scraping edge is
consistently steep and is usually along one or more lateral edges; only
a few (Fig. 19, I) are beveled at one end. Length is 2.8 to 5.2 em.;
maximum width is 1.5 to 3 em., and maximum thickness is .4 to 1.3
em.
CONCAVE-EDGED SCRAPERS

(Fig. 19, J -M; 11 specimens)

Included in this group are 11 unifacially flaked specimens and one
bifacially worked piece. The latter (Fig. 19, J-J') has been made from
a flat chert pebble and may be a very crude imitation of the Albany
spokeshave, subtype I (Webb, 1946: 10, Pl. 1, Nos. 1-3 ) . Although
bifacially chipped, this implement has a plano-convex cross section
with one edge being concave and suitable for scraping. It has a definite stem and one shoulder, but is not notched like the Albany type
(ibid.). The weathered surface of the pebble appears on parts of both
flat faces and across the base of the stem. This specimen is 4.4 em.
long, 2.5 em. wide at the shoulder, and 1 em. in maximum thickness.
Eight of the other concave-edged scrapers are made from small, thin
flakes (Fig. 19, K, L ) , while three are from large, rather thick flakes
(Fig. 19, M). Both types have a single, shallow concavity produced by
fine marginal retouching. No other scraping edge appears on these
specimens. The smaller examples average about 2 em. in length, 1
em. in maximum width, and .3 em. in maximum thickness; the larger
ones, on the other hand, average about 3.5 em. in length, 2 em. in
maximum width, and 1.4 em. in maximum thickness. The concavity
is fairly uniform in size, being from 1 to 2 em. in maximum width and
.2 to .4 em. in maximum depth.

215

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

c

8

F

D

G

E

H

K

L

M

J'

J

p

0

N

Q

R

T
0

0

IN.

CM.

2
6

u

U'

Fig . 19. Scrapers , Utilized Flakes, and Polished Stone Implements . A-C, Thumbnail
scrapers . D-G , Initial cortex scrapers . H, I, Secondary flake scrapers . J, J', Possible Albany
spokeshave. K-M , Concave-edged scrapers . N-R , Utilized flakes . S, T, Boatstone fragments .
U, U', Celt fragment . A, B, D-J , P, and Q from Wild Bull Site; C, K-M , and R-T from Gossett
Bottoms Site ; N, 0 , and U from lacy Site.

216

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

MISCELLANEOUS AND FRAGMENTARY SCRAPERS

(24 specimens)

Of the 24 artifacts comprising this category, 14 are too fragmentary
for further study and 10 do not have features which permit them to
be included in any of the above-mentioned groups. All, however, have
been unifacially worked and easily fall within the general definition of
a scraper.
UTILIZED FLAKES

(Fig. 19, N -R; 206 specimens)

A considerable number of the flakes recovered from the excavations
show, upon careful exainination, minute retouching along one or more
edges. Since this may have resulted from use--perhaps from pressure
applied in scraping-these specimens are termed utilized flakes. The
working edges are straight, concave, or convex, while the amount of
wear varies from slight to moderately pronounced. None of the flakes
has been shaped so that a wide variety of outline forms and flake types
are present. For example, there are billet flakes , hammerstone flakes,
and initial cortex flakes. Most are small, averaging about 2.4 em. in
length, 1. 7 em. in maximum width, and .5 em. in thickness. The
largest is 4.4 em. long, 3.6 em. wide, and 1 em. thick. One is made from
petrified wood, the remainder are of chert.

Boatstones (Fig. 19, S, T; 2 specimens)
Two small, well smoothed-almost polished-stone pieces appear
to be fragments of boatstones. Both have been hollowed out to form
a concavity on one surface; the other surface is markedly convex. The
over-all form cannot be reconstructed in detail, but one specimen
(Fig. 19, S) was evidently somewhat canoe-shaped with a deep,
V-shaped concavity. The other boatstone (Fig. 19, T) was apparently
circular in outline and may have had a somewhat shallower concavity.
The former has been manufactured from siltstone, and the latter from
a hematitic stone with fine sand inclusions. No meaningful dimensions
can be taken for either specimen.

Celt (Fig. 19, U , U' ; 1 specimen)
The distal portion of a rather crudely pecked and partially ground
celt of quartzite was recovered from the Lacy Site. The blade, or bit
end, is intact and shows some battering, perhaps from use. In longitudinal section this celt appears to have been lenticular, and in cross
section (Fig. 19, U') roughly plano-convex. The lateral edges are con-

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

217

vex and are not well smoothed. Present measurements are: 5.5 em.
long, 4 em. wide (maximum), and 1.7 em. thick.

Notched Pebbles (Fig. 20, A-E; 7 specimens)
The notched pebbles are readily divided into two groups, even
though all are made from quartzite. Represented by six specimens, the
most common form (Fig. 20, A-D) has been manufactured from
small, somewhat roundish stones and notched at each end. Percussion
flaking was used to produce the shallow, U -shaped notches and apparently to shape, at least in part, the pebble. Very little of the nodular
cortex is still visible. The notches and, to a lesser extent, the edges are
smoothed, perhaps both by wear and by intent. Length is from 4.3 to
5 em.; maximum width 3.2 to 4 em.; and maximum thickness 1.6 to
2.5 em.
The only other specimen (Fig. 20, E) is considerably different in
that it has been fashioned from a long, roughly rectangular pebble
with a flattened cross section. Moreover, the notches appear in the
lateral edges, with one being quite distinct, the other very slight. Both
are percussion flaked and no other alterations to the pebble can be detected. It seems likely that the artifact-maker consciously selected a
suitable-shaped stone-one which would require little modification.
The length is 8.1 em.; maximum width is 4 em.; and maximum thickness is 2 em.
Comments: Notched stones similar to those of the first group have
also been termed sinker stones (Johnson, 1962: 197) , bolas stones
(ibid. ), and "Waco" sinkers (Watt, 1938) . The Cedar Creek specimens are especially similar to Watt's sinker, Type 5 (ibid. : 28).

Pitted Stones (Fig. 20, J, K; 5 specimens)
These generally large pieces of ferruginous sandstone have one or
more shallow pits or depressions pecked into a flattish surface. One
somewhat oval-shaped stone (Fig. 20, K), has a grinding facet on the
same surface as the depression. This specimen and three with more
irregular outlines appear to have been roughly shaped by percussion.
By contrast, the fifth, and smallest, pitted stone is made from an elongated stream wom pebble (Fig. 20, J). It has one pit which has been
pecked into the center of a lateral edge; in addition, one surface shows
use as a grinding implement and one end had been battered, probably
from secondary use as a hammerstone. One of the stones, an irregularly
shaped specimen, has five depressions, all on one surface; each of the
remaining examples has a single pit. Because of the variation in out-

218

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A'

A

B

D

c

c'

E

F

J

H'

H

v --~

,.
.'-!:. .~
r:, ,";.
'

~

•

- -·'

o~~~~~~N~-~==~~2--~

0

CM .

6

Fig . 20. Notched Pebbles, Abraders , Scored Hematite, and Pitted Stones . A-D, End-notched
pebbles . E, Side-notched pebble . F, G , Abraders . H, I, Scored hematite . J , K, Pitted stones.
A-F, and H from Wild Bull Site ; G and I from Gossett Bottoms Site ; J and K from Lacy Site.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

219

line form, dimensions are difficult to take. The largest, however, is approximately 11.4 em. in diameter and 6.2 em. in maximum width.
The smallest is 7 em. long, 3.4 em. wide, and 3 em. thick. The depressions vary from 1.2 to 3 em. in diameter and from .2 to . 7 em in maximum depth.

Abraders (Fig. 20, F , G; 2 specimens)
Each of these small, thin pieces of coarse-grained sandstone has a
single V-shaped groove across one surface. Although one (Fig. 20, G )
is possibly incomplete, both have irregular outlines and show no evidence of having been intentionally shaped. The grooves are narrow
but tend to flare out slightly at one end. Abrasion, perhaps from sharpening implements such as bone awls, probably produced the grooves.
They now measure 2.3 and 3.8 em. long and approximately .1 and .3
em . in maximum depth respectively.

Scored Hematite (Fig. 20, H , I; 2 specimens )
In addition to the abraders, there are two rather small, unshaped
pieces of hematite which have numerous striations on one flat surface.
On one (Fig. 20, I) the scoring marks are fairly pronounced and run
p arallel with the long axis, while on the other (Fig. 20, H ) the striations are much fainter and more random in nature. This latter specimen also has two alternately beveled edges which indicate u se as a
scraper. At first blush it would seem that the marks may have been
produced in the course of scraping; however , they are present on only
one surface and not both as would have been the case if the implement
h ad been used as such. Over-all dimensions are 4.5 and 4 .4 em. long,
3.6 and 3.4 em. wide, and. 7 and .8 em. thick.
Comments: These pieces seem too hard to have served as sources of
pigment, and consequently they are described separately from the
ocher.

H ammerstones (Fig. 21 , A, B; 12 specimens)
This category is comprised of roundish to somewhat oblong streamworn cobbles which have one or more battered edges, presumably
from use as a hammerstone. All are of hard stones, usually quartzite
or ch ert, and none has been intentionally modified. There is little
range in size, with the average specimen being approximately 6.5 em.·
in diameter.

220

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Handstones (Fig. 21 , C, D; 10 specimens)
The handstones, or manos, consist of moderately small, stream worn
cobbles which have one or more facets worn from use in conjunction
with a grinding slab. With the possible exception of a fragmentary
specimen, none appears to have been significantly altered. At the most,
there are signs of limited pecking-or stream battering?-along the
margins of three handstones. The outlines are somewhat irregular, although there is a slight tendency toward circular. On five examples
there are worn surfaces on opposing faces , with the facets varying
from flat to slightly convex. Each of the remainder has only one grinding surface and it is usually flat. Both sandstone and quartzite cobbles
were used. Maximum diameter ranges from 6 to 8.8 em., and maximum thickness from 2.2 to 5.2 em.
Comments: All of the handstones appear to have been used with a
circular grinding motion.

Ocher (Fig. 21, E, F; 14 specimens)
Numerous, often sizable pieces of ocher were recovered from Cedar
Creek, particularly from the Wild Bull Site. The majority are of the
soft, yellowish-brown limonite, although three small pieces of red
hematite were found at Gossett Bottoms. Two of the latter have at
least one smoothed surface and were probably used as sources of pigment. Most of the remaining pieces are large nodules, none of which
shows evidence of having been modified (Fig. 21 , E, F ). Those from
the Wild Bull Site, however, were recovered from a limited area (see
Table II) and may have been a cache. The smoothed hematite specimens are essentially rectangular and are 1.6 and 2.7 em. long, 1.5 and
1. 7 em. wide, and 1.2 and 2 em. thick. Largest of the unworked limonite examples is 23 em. long, 7 em. wide and 6.5 em. thick.
ARTIFACTS OF CLAY

Represented by 1,146 specimens, artifacts of clay comprise the
largest single class recovered from the Cedar Creek excavations. Included are 1,143 vessel fragments, a worked sherd, a tubular bead, and
an ovoid lump of clay. In spite of the rather large number of sherds,
many are small and no vessel could be even partially restored. Both
of these factors make meaningful type identification difficult, and, in
the descriptions which follow, the pottery has been grouped according
to treatment of the exterior surface with the main categories being
plain and decorated. The latter is further divided into finer groups

221

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

B

c

Fig . 21. Hammerstones , Handstones , and Ocher. A, 8, Hammerstones . C, D, Handstones .
E, F, Ocher nodules . A and C from Lacy Site ; 8 and D-F from Wild Bull Site .

222

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

based upon the mode of decoration (e.g., engraved, puncta ted, brushed,
etc.), while the former is discussed in terms of the major temper
groups. The resultant classification is intended for convenience only,
although comparisons are made with known pottery types whenever
possible.

Plain Sherds (Fig. 22; 735 specimens)
Most of the potsherds from Cedar Creek are undecorated, the exterior surfaces merely having been smoothed, or very rarely, lightly
polished. The majority of these, moreover, are from body sherds, suggesting that many may be from vessels decorated only on the rim.
Twenty-seven are shell-tempered, 311 are bone-tempered, 366 are
clay-tempered, and 31 are sand-tempered.

-I

-I
A

c·

c

B'

8

.,,.."" " -1
.

,.

o·

D

-~
E
F

F'

G'

G

J
H
0=

o

IN.

CM.

2.

6

Fig. 22. Plain Pottery . A, Shell-tempered body sherd. B, B', Shell-tempered rim sherd .
C-E, Bone-tempered rim sherds. F, F', Bone-tempered basal sherd. G, G', Clay-tempered rim
sherd. H, H', Clay-tempered basal sherd. I, Clay-tempered strap handle. J, Sand-tempered
bcdy sherd. Exterior to the left on rim and base profiles. A, B, E-H, and J from Lacy Site;
C, D, and I from Gossett Bottoms Site.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

223

SHELL-TEMPERED

The easily recognized shell-tempered sherds include 26 body fragments and one small rim section (Fig. 22, A, B). Their surface color
varies from reddish-tan and brown to grayish; while the cores tend to
be slightly darker shades of the same color. Both the exterior and interior surfaces have been smoothed, but not polished. Leaching out of
temper particles has occurred on a number of examples (Fig. 23, B)
and has resulted in pitted, easily crumbled surfaces. The paste is laminated and frequently contorted, with crushed shell (apparently mussel) accounting for as much as one-fourth the total volume (Fig. 23,
A ) . Individual tempering particles range from 2 mm. to microscopic.
The surface hardness is from 2 to 3.5 on Moh's scale, and the wall
thickness is from 4 to 9 mm. The one rim fragment (Fig. 22, B, B' ) is
essentially vertical and has a faintly beveled, convex lip.
BONE-TEMPERED

Contrasting most obviously with the above in tempering agent used
(Fig. 23, C, D ) are the plain sherds with pulverized particles of bone.
Included are four basal fragments, 12 rim pieces, and 295 body sherds.
Most, however, are too small to reveal particulars concerning vessel
shape (Fig. 22, C-F). The base sherds (Fig. 22, F, F' ) suggest fairly
thick, disc-shaped bottoms which joined outcurved or nearly vertical
walls. On one specimen the juncture of the base and the body is somewhat reinforced, while on another the thickest part occurs near the
center of the base. The rim sherds suggest rather simple vessel forms,
both jars and bowls, with the rim being straight or very slightly
everted to inverted, and the lip flattened or gently convex. On some
the lip is somewhat thinned or slightly thickened.
One, much-eroded body sherd has traces of a red slip or film on the
exterior surface. Exterior surfaces in all other examples are merely
smoothed, some rather well, others quite poorly. On some (particularly
those from the Lacy Site ) the exterior has a slightly chalky texture
which is slightly reminiscent of the finish found on Baytown Plain
(Phillips, et al., 1951: 76-82 ). Interior surfaces are also smoothed, but
generally more carelessly finished than the exterior ones, so that tool
marks are commonly visible. Surface colors range from tan, sometimes
a bit reddish, to gray and gray-brown. Firing was not always even as
indicated by the occasional fire cloud and by some differentiation in
core color. The core, more often, is the same color as the surface, or
darker, sometimes almost black.
The paste is frequently rather granular (Fig. 23, C, D) and, in ad-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

clition to the bone, may contain an occasional lump of clay (perhaps
some ground sherds) as well as minute particles of sand. For the most
part, the bone stands out prominently, with many individual pieces
measuring 2 to 4 mm. On the less well smoothed sherds bits of bone are
clearly visible on both the exterior and interior surfaces. Sherd edges
are often jagged, mainly a reflection of the coarseness of the texture.
Breaks, however, tend to follow horizontal planes suggesting the coiled
manufacturing technique. Surface hardness is 2 to 3.5 on Moh's scale,
while the wall thickness is 4 to 11 mm.
CLAY -TEMPERED

Among the 366 clay-tempered sherds are 11 basal fragments, 14 rim
pieces, and one strap handle. In color and surface finish they resemble
the bone-tempered pottery, except that small, irregularly-shaped
lumps of clay are readily distinguished in the paste (Fig. 23, E) and
frequently on the surface. Besides these inclusions, the paste contains
an o'c casional ground sherd (or grog) and, in 220 instances, fine particles of sand. Specimens with both clay and sand tend to be firmer
than those tempered with just clay. The latter are typically rather
friable and have irregular edges. There is, however, sufficient intergradation between the two groups to justify treating them as a single
category. Indeed, it seems quite probable that the sand is an accidental
inclusion.
Very little information can be obtained on vessel shape, although
there are indications that the forms represented are about the same as
noted for the bone-tempered pottery (Fig. 22, G-H'). One rim sherd
(Fig. 22, G, G'), however, should be singled out for it is slightly thickened on the exterior, just below the lip. The thickened area is accentuated by underscoring (apparently almost scalloped) which resembles, but is not the same, as an overhang line. There is also a nearly
complete, undecorated strap handle (Fig. 22, I) similar to those found,
for example, on types Monkstown Impressed, Killough Pinched, or
Harleton Applique. Body sherds are 5 to 11 mm. thick, basal fragments 11 to 13 mm. thick. The hardness, on Moh's scale, is between 2
and 3.5.
SAND-TEMPERED

Sherds having a very sandy paste with little or no clay or bone inclusions make up a minor but distinct group. Most specimens are small
(the largest piece is 4.5 by 2.2 em.) and, moreover, 29 are from vessel
walls (Fig. 22, J), two from bases. Both the exterior and interior sur-

225

CEDAR C R EEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

c

'

'.,

G

H

Fig . 23 . Enlargements of Sherd Cross Sections. A, B, Shell-tempe red; part icles have
leached out of B. C, D, Bone-tempered; bone particles burned black in D. E, Clay-tempered.
F, H, Sand-tempered (quartz ). G, Sand-tempered (hematite).

faces have been well smoothed, but often have a gritty feeling because of the sandy paste. Surface colors range from reddish (one instance), to tan and brownish-gray to almost black, with the interior
being generally darker than the exterior. The core is black, or, less
often, light gray to tan.
Fine-grained, largely quartz sand particles (Fig. 23, F, H), believed
to have been intentionally added to the clay, are the major constituent
of the paste in all but one specimen. This exception, a small, reddish
body sherd (Fig. 23, G), has rounded hematite sand grains which vary

226

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in size from microscopic to as much as 3 mm. In addition to the sand,
several sherds have an occasional finely ground sherd. On the whole,
the paste of all sherds is reasonably firm and compact. The edges tend
to be less jagged than on any of the other sherds, but they do not
clearly follow horizontal fracture planes- admittedly, however, it is
difficult to orient most sherds. The largest of the basal fragments indicates a flat bottom which was thickened in the middle and was joined
to an outward sloping wall. Wall thickness is 3 to 9 mm.; hardness on
Moh's scale is rather uniform at 2.5.
Viewing the plain sherds as a group, most fall technologically (i .e.,
in paste and surface finish) within the Caddoan tradition. The only
possible exception is the sand-tempered ware which may be broadly
related to Goose Creek Plain of the Galveston Bay Focus (Suhm, et al. ,
1954: 128-130 and 378-380 ), Bear Creek Plain of the McGee Bend
area (Jelks, 1965 ), and the sand-tempered ware found at the George C.
Davis Site (Newell and Krieger, 1949: 130-133 ). Specific type identification is impossible, largely because the Cedar Creek sample is too
small and yields no significant data on vessel shape. Much the same
situation applies to the remainder of the plain sherds . The claytempered ones, as well as most of those bone particles, are, in some
respects, similar to Sanders Plain ( Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 139, Pl. 70 ) .
There are, nonetheless, significant differences with Sanders Plain: the
Cedar Creek sherds have a higher incidence of bone temper, the vessel
form-although data are limited- appear to be simpler, and there is
only one example of red-filming. Finally, it might be noted that on the
basis of the paste and the surface finish, the shell-tempered sherds are
close to type Nocona Plain (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 115, Pl. 58 ).

Decorated Sherds (Figs. 24 and 25 ; 408 specimens)
The techniques employed in decorating the pottery from Cedar
Creek include most methods common to Caddoan wares: incising,
brushing, punctating, engraving, and appliqueing. Indeed, these are
such widespread modes of surface alteration in the eastern part of the
state that, on the basis of the present sample, specific type affiliations
are difficult to assess.
ENGRAVED

(Fig. 24, A-C'; 17 specimens)

Sherds having engraved designs are not well represented and occur
at only the Lacy Site (Table 2 ) . They can be sorted into three, possibly four, vessels, none of which can be restored. The first vessel is
known from two base sherds and two rim pieces (Fig. 24, A, B). It ap-

227

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

A

8

_I

I

c

c'

D

_,

-=a
G'

G

F'

F

,.

H'

H

L

J

K

M'

M

IN.

N

N'

0

CM.

6

Fig. 24 . Decorated Pottery . A-B ', Rim and base sherd from clay-tempered eng raved
vessel. C, C' , Rim sherd from bone-tempered engraved ve ssel. D, E, Brushed body sherds .
F-J, Incised sherds . K, Trailed s herd . L, Brushed-incised rim sherd . M-P, Punctated sherds .
Exterior to the left on rim and base profiles . A-C, E, H, J , M, N from Lacy Site; D, F, G, I, K,
L, 0, P from Gossett Bottoms Site.

228

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

pears to have been a small and quite shallow, flat-bottomed bowl which
had simple outward sloping walls and at least two rim peaks. The rim
is slightly everted, while the lip is tapered and varies from convex to
almost flat . Most of the body has been covered with bold, crudelyexecuted engraved lines which seem to be grouped into rather widelyspaced curvilinear and diagonal elements. About 7 mm. below the lip
there is an engraved line that evidently encircled the entire vessel. The
diagonal elements, made up of at least three roughly parallel lines,
extend from this line toward the base. The curvilinear design, on the
other hand, appears initially to converge with the encircling line and
only gradually to turn toward the base. Microscopic examination of
the paste reveals that numerous and often irregularly-shaped lumps
of clay (including perhaps an occasional ground sherd) are the major
tempering agents. The texture is compact and the clay seems to have
been well kneaded. Surface colors range from tan to light grayishbrown, with the interior being slightly darker than the exterior. The
core is dark gray, tending to become somewhat lighter toward the exterior. Both surfaces have been fairly well smoothed, but neither is
polished. Wall thickness is about 8 mm., while the base reaches a maximum of 12 mm. in thickness. The hardness on Moh's scale is 3.5.
The second engraved vessel is represented by ten, generally small
body sherds and one rim fragment (Fig. 24, C) . Most pieces have thin,'
roughly parallel horizontal lines which are spaced about 8 to 10 mm.
apart and which probably encircled the entire vessel. In addition,
two specimens have diagonal lines, but the design relationship between these and the horizontal ones is not clear. The horizontal lines
begin approximately 8 mm. below the lip and continue for an undetermined distance toward the base. The rim sherd is slightly inverted
and has a flat lip; the over-all vessel shape and size are not, however,
apparent. Wall thickness is 4 to 6 mm. and the temper consists of pulverized bone. Surface colors are gray to gray-brown, while the core is
de~rker, almost black. Hardness is 2.5.
Both of the remaining engraved sherds are small body fragments
decorated with hatched lines which, in one instance, flank a circle.
This latter sherd has traces of red pigment, presumably ocher, rubbed
into the engraved lines. The exterior surfaces are a deep tan to dark,
gray-brown, and are well smoothed. By contrast, the interiors are unsmoothed and suggest that these pieces are from bottle bodies. One is
6 mm. in thickness, the other is 4 mm. thick. The paste is compact and
contains small lumps of clay, as well as an occasional small particle
of sand.
None of the engraved pottery can be typed, although the first vessel

CEDAR CREE K RESERVOIR SITES

229

described has certain attributes (i.e., crudely-executed design and rim
peaks) suggestive Titus Focus ceramics, such as types Ripley Engraved
or Wilder Engraved. In general, all engraved sherds seem more closely
affiliated with the Fulton, rather than the Gibson, Aspect.
BRUSHED

(Fig. 24, D, E; 166 specimens)

Most common of the decorative techniques is brushing; that is, the
occurrence of numerous striations apparently made by dragging or
" brushing" clusters of stiff grass and/ or small twigs across the stillplastic exterior surface. The interior surface is always smoothed and,
on the less carefully finished pieces, sometimes shows tool marks. Since
all but three of the brushed sherds are body sections, it is probable that
many are from vessels having rim decorated by other means, such as
by incising or punctating. The thickness and lack of much curvature
on a number of sherds suggest that the most common form was a rather
large jar with slightly outflaring rim and flat or mildly convex lip.
While it is quite clear that brushing covered much of the exterior surface, no discernible orientation can be recognized, except on the three
rim sherds where the striations are either horizontal (two cases) or
diagonal.
Thirteen of the brushed sherds, all from the Gossett Bottoms Site,
are tempered with numerous, finely pulverized pieces of bone. The
remainder have clay temper, frequently combined with fine, quartz
sand or grit. The latter, however, is probably an accidental inclusion,
and the clay apparently naturally had a fairly sandy texture. Most
sherds are well fired, and, although typically coarse, the paste does
not crumble easily (hardness is 2.5 to 3). Exterior surface color is tan
to gray-brown, while the interior is usually a darker shade of the same
color, and the core is frequently darker than either the exterior or the
interior. Wall thickness is 6 to 15 mm.
INCISED

(Fig. 24, F-J; 70 specimens)

Included in the incised pottery are nine rim sherds and 60 body
fragments, many of which appear to be from the upper portions of
vessels. Although the rim pieces are generally too small to reveal many
details concerning vessel shape, it is possible that both cylindrical jars
and bowls (perhaps including carinated bowls) are represented. Lips
are either flat or .gently convex. Crushed particles of bone appear as
the major tempering agent in 49 sherds, while clay is dominant in the
paste of 21 sherds (all of the latter are from the Gossett Bottoms Site) .
The texture varies from coarse to fine, and is usually compact. Surface

230

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

colors are reddish to dark tan and dark gray; the cores are consistently
darker than either the exterior or the interior.
Designs are fairly simple and consist primarily of diagonal lines
arranged into parallel sets which 1) run in the same direction ( Fig.
24, F ), 2 ) cross one another in a diagonal direction (Fig. 24, I ), or 3 )
fill alter nate panels (Fig. 24, H , J). Two rim sherds, however, have
horizontal lines which begin just below the lip (Fig. 24, G ) . The one
incised sherd (Fig. 24, I , I' ) from the Wild Bull Site, a bone-tempered
specimen, has crossed diagonal lines and, below this (if I have oriented
the sherd properly ) , an overhanging line. Faintly incised marks, possibly light fingernail punctations, appear below this overhanging line
just below the rim decoration, but little of the over-all design is preserved.
The incised sherds vary from 5 to 10 mm. in thickness and are between 2 and 3.5 in hardness. In mode of decoration and, less certainly,
in vessel shape they show a general affinity with type Canton Incised.
The paste is similar to that described for this type ( Suhm and Jelks,
1962: 23 ), except that the incidence of bone temper is a bit high.
TRAILED

(Fig. 24, K; 1 specimen )

A small body sherd has broadly incised, or trailed, lines made by a
blunt-ended implement. It is dark gray to black (being darkest on the
interior and core ) in color and is tempered with tiny bits of clay. The
texture is fine and quite compact, indicating that the clay had been
well kneaded and well fired. Since the sherd cannot be properly
oriented with any measure of certainty, it can only be noted that the
trailed lines are roughly parallel and that they may have been placed
horizontally on the vessel body. Wall thickness is 5 mm. and the hardness is 3 on Moh's scale.
BRUSHED-INCISED

(Fig. 24, L; 5 specimens )

This small but distinctive group of sherds undoubtedly represents a
single vessel decorated with vertical brushing and horizontally incised
lines. On the one rim fragment (Fig. 24, L ) the brushing extends
almost to the lip and is interrupted at 1.5 em. below the lip by an
incised line. It is evident from this piece, and from the four body
sherds, that the incising was done after the brushing. While the horizontal lines probably encircled the entire vessel, it is not clear whether
they were confined to the upper portion of the pot, or occurred over
much of the body.
Little can be determined of vessel shape, other than the rim is

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

231

slightly everted and the lip is essentially flat. The paste is coarse, but
reasonably firm, and is tempered with small lumps of clay, as well as
minute particles of sand or grit. Both the exterior and interior surfaces
are a dark, grayish-brown, and the core is a slightly darker shade of
the same color. The interior has been smoothed, but not too well so
that the clay temper is readily visible on the surface. Wall thickness
is 10 to 12 mm. and hardness is 3.
PUNCTATED

(Fig. 24, M-P ; 111 specimens)

Indentations or punctations made by a fingernail or blunt implement occur on the exterior surface of 24 rim sherds and 87 body fragments. In some instances (Fig. 24, M ) they appear to be confined to
vessel rims, in others (Fig. 24, P ) they may have covered much of the
body area. The majority of the punctations have been produced by
either a squarish or rounded tool which was pressed vertically into
the plastic surface (Fig. 24, N, 0 ), or pushed at an angle so as to raise
or mound the surface opposing the direction of the tool (Fig. 24, M, P) .
Fingernail punctation, admittedly difficult to distinguish from indentations probably made with a split reed, appear to be present on at
least 12 sherds (Fig. 24, P). No clear design pattern can be recognized
on any of the sherds and most can be described as having random
punctations . On six specimens the exterior surfaces appear to have
been lightly smoothed over after the punctations were made. The
interior surfaces are always smoothed, generally rather well.
The paste is typically coarse and granular, but does not crumble
easily. Bone was used as the major tempering agent in 25 sherds,
lumps-of clay (perhaps some grog ) -often combined with grit or sand
-appear in 81 sherds, and bone, sand, and clay are present in the
paste of five sherds. Surface colors range from reddish and tan to
grayish-brown, with the interior usually being darker than the exterior. The cores are black and indicate an incomplete oxidizing atmosphere during firing.
Broken edges are often a bit jagged, although they tend to follow
horizontal fracture plane. Wall thickness is 5 to 10 mm. and the hardness is 3. The lips are flat to slightly convex and may be somewhat
thickened (Fig. 24, M ) . Rim sherds are generally small and provide
few clues as to over-all vessel shape.
Punctating as a means of surface modification is widespread in
Caddoan ceramics, occurring in both the Fulton and Gibson aspects.
In the latter, however, they tend to be zoned rather than random
punctations, suggesting that many of the Cedar Creek sherds can

232

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tentatively be assigned to the Fulton Aspect, even though a specific
type cannot be identified.
PUNCTATED-INCISED

(Fig. 25, A-D; 2 1 specimens )

Punctations combined with incised lines occur on the exterior of
four rim fragments and 17 body sherds, with all of the latter probably
coming from the upper portion of vessels. Most commonly the design
consists of sets of parallel diagonal lines running in opposite directions
and alternating with triangular spaces filled with stick punctations
(Fig. 25 , A-C). The lines may be closely (Fig. 25 , B, C) or widely
(Fig. 25 , A ) spaced, and the punctations made with squarish or, less
frequently, rounded and sometimes pointed implements. Typically,
the tools have been pressed in at an angle and caused the surface to
be mounded on one side of the identation. On one sherd from the
Gossett Bottoms Site (Fig. 25, D ) a single punctation fills the center
of each grid segment produced by crossed diagonal lines. On another,
quite small sherd-also from the Gossett Bottoms Site- there are
apparently diagonally crossed lines on the rim, below this an overhang
edge, and, on the vessel body, fingernail punctations .
Characteristics of paste and color are similar to those described for
the punctated sherds and need not be reviewed in detail. It should,
however, be mentioned that four have minute, rounded quartz sand
and small particles of clay as the temper; the remainder are tempered
with bone, sand, and clay, some of which is definitely crushed sherds.
The larger rim fragments (Fig. 25, A' -C' ) indicate jars with direct
or slightly everted rims, while the lips on all sherds are either flat or
gently convex. These few particulars of shape, along with the design
layout, indicate that most of the punctated-incised sherds are closely
affiliated with type Canton Incised.
PINCHED

(Fig. 25, E , F; 15 specimens )

The Gossett Bottoms Site yielded a group of sherds each of which
has one or more ridges produced by pinching the exterior surface with
fingernails. All specimens are small, but the ridges appear to have
been arranged primarily into straight-lined patterns. They occur on
both rims (Fig. 25, F ) and vessel bodies (Fig. 25, E ).
In surface color these sherds range from light tan and grayishbrown to dark gray-black. The cores consistently have a deeper hue
than either the exterior or the interior. Grit and clay are prominent
in the paste of all but one sherd; this exception having finely pulverized particles of bone. The texture is fairly fine and typically well

c

A'

A

G
F
D

',

H

E

I

L

J

I

0

' .

N

M

K

u

R

Q

S
0
0

lN.
CM.

T
2
6

v

Fig . 25. Decorated Pottery, Miscellaneous Artifacts of Clay, Modified Bone, and WattleImpressed Daub. A-D, Punctated-incised sherds . E, F, Pinched sherds . G, Brushed-appliqued
sherd . H, Applique ridge 1?1. I, Worked sherd. J , Ce ramic bead . K, Lump of clay. L-N,
Bone p ins. 0, Possible bone bead. P, P', Bone fleshing tool . Q , R, Bone awls. S, Possible awl.
T, Bone residue . U, V, Waltle-impressed daub. Exterior in profiles to the left. A, B, D-H, J ,
and L-V from Gossett Bottoms Site ; C, I, and K from Wild Bull Site.

234

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

fused . Where not covered with pinching, the exteriors are poorly to
well smoothed, while all interior surfaces are moderately well finished.
One of the two rim fragments has a slightly convex lip, the other is
somewhat outturned and has a tapered, convex lip. Wall thickness is
8 to 10 mm., and the hardness is usually 3 on Moh's scale.
Pinching is not a widespread decorative technique, occurring primarily on Killough Pinched of the Frankston and Titus foci of the
Fulton Aspect ( Suhm and Jelks , 1962: 91). While identification with
this type is not warranted at the present time, it is probable that the
Gossett Bottoms sherds are closely related to Killough Pinched.
MISCELLANEOus SHERDS (Fig. 25, G, H; 2 specimens)
Included in this category are specimens which cannot be classified
into any of the above groups. One is a tiny clay-tempered body sherd
(Fig. 25, G ) with a brushed and appliqued decoration. The appliqued
node? (or possibly ridge ) seems to have been fingernail punctated.
The second specimen (Fig. 25, H ), also clay-tempered, is an unusual
piece which appears to have been an applique ridge. Presumably it
was not tightly welded to the vessel and has popped free. It is 4.3 em.
long, 1.8 em. wide, and 1 em. thick.

Worked Sherd (Fig. 25, I; 1 specimen)
Somewhat less than half of a small worked sherd was recovered
from the Wild Bull Site. It was evidently disc-shaped and shows careful grinding along the one intact edge. The sherd is plain and has a
fine, compact paste which contains small particles of crushed bone.
The diameter is estimated to have been approximately 2 em., and the
maximum thickness is .3 em. There are no indications of the specimen
having been perforated and its use remains undetermined.
Ceramic Bead (Fig. 25 , J; 1 specimen)
A rather small tubular bead having a very fine sandy paste was
found at the Gossett Bottoms Site. One end is slightly damaged, but
portions of the smoothed edge are still visible. The surface hardness
is 3.5, while the color is dark gray on both surfaces and the core. Total
length is 1. 7 em., outside diameter is .9 em., and the inside diameter
is .6 em. Since the central perforation is uniform in size, it seems quite
possible that the bead has been fashioned from a broken pipe stem.
Lump of Clay ( Fig. 25 , K; 1 specimen )
A rounded lump of untempered clay with a slightly flattened cross
section was obtained from the Wild Bull Site. It is very soft, is light
gray in color, and does not appear to have been fired. One surface is

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

235

covered with numerous fingernail scratches, some of which are recent,
but most are probably old. No other signs of wear can be detected and
it may be that this piece is nothing more than an unused lump of clay
collected by a potter. Its maximum diameter is 5 em., and its maximum thickness is 3.1 em.
ARTIFACTS OF BoNE AND ANTLER
Worked bone and antler are not common at the Cedar Creek sites,
occurring almost exclusively at Gossett Bottoms. This discrepancy in
distribution (Table 2), however, may be more a matter of preservation
than cultural differences. At least, the surviving specimens are typically fragmentary and, as a result, difficult to classify. Included are
three pins, a possible bead, a fleshing tool, six proximal ends of awls,
four possible flaking implements, and 13 pieces which either bear only
cut marks, or are too fragmentary to describe in detail.

Bone Pins (Fig. 25, L-N; 3 specimens)
While none of the bone pins is complete, each appears to have been
short and to have had a pointed distal end. They are carefully worked,
probably from mammal leg bones. All surfaces are either well
smoothed or polished and have numerous small striations which run
diagonally or horizontally across the long axis. On two, the cross
section is almost rectangular, on the third it is circular. The proximal
ends are well rounded, but otherwise unaltered. Maximum diameter
is .4 to .5 em., and the length of the one nearly complete bone pin is
estimated to have been 5 em.
Similar implements are often found at Wylie Focus sites and are
illustrated by Stephenson (1952: Fig. 94, Nos. 16 and 17) and by
Members of the Dallas Archeological Society (1963: Fig. 10, H-J).

Bone Bead? (Fig. 25, 0; 1 specimen)
A short section of a light, tubular bone, probably from a bird or
rodent, appears to have been cut at each end. The surfaces bear a
number of small striations, and have been slightly smoothed. The
lateral edges are somewhat tapered toward one end-undoubtedly a
reflection of the natural shape of the bone-and the cross section is
roughly plano-convex. Length is 1.7 em.; maximum outside diameter
is .7 em., and maximum inside diameter is .5 em.
Flesher (Fig. 25, P, P'; 1 specimen)
Manufactured from the long bone of a large mammal, perhaps a
deer, this artifact is tentatively identified as a fleshing tool. It shows
considerable smoothing or wear along the lateral edges and ends, but

236

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

relatively little on the flat surfaces. There was evidently limited effort
at shaping, the bone appears only to have been split and cut at the
ends. One end has a rounded bit, while the other is somewhat pointed,
having been produced by making a diagonal cut across the long axis.
Rodent teeth marks are common along both marginal edges . The
length is 8.6 em., maximum width is 2.1 em., and maximum thickness
is 1 em.

Bone Awls (Fig. 25, Q, R; 6 specimens)
Four proximal fragments and two medial sections are provisionally
recognized as bone awls. One of the proximal pieces (Fig. 25, Q) has
retained most of the articular joint, two have been extensively worked
and are spatula-shaped (Fig. 25, R), and the fourth is fragmentary
but may have also been spatula-shaped. Both of the medial pieces are
quite small and have roughly triangular cross sections. The cross sections of the proximal fragments on the other hand, vary from circular
to flattened. All were manufactured from the mammal limb bones,
perhaps from one about the size of a dog or coyote. No meaningful
dimensions can be taken.
Flaking Tools (4 specimens)
Each of these specimens is a small distal end of what may have
been a flaking implement. One is the tip end of an antler tine, two are
apparently fashioned from thick mammal bones, and the fourth is
perhaps part of a deer ulna. Three are tapered, with two of these
having somewhat beveled tips . The tip of the presumed ulna fragment
is flat in cross section and rounded in outline. All are polished and two
show probable use scars. Because of their incompleteness no measurements have been made.
Miscellaneous Modified Bone (Fig. 25, S, T; 13 specimens)
Included in this catchall category are 11 fragments of worked bone
and two pieces evidently residue from the production of bone implements. The worked specimens are both polished and shaped but are
too small to reveal much about the type of tool represented. Most, however, are possibly from awls, pins, or needles. Specifically, there are
three keenly pointed distal fragments, a large portion of a possible
unfinished awl (Fig. 25, S), and seven medial sections. The medial
pieces have plano-convex, or flattened cross sections.
The bone residue consists of two articular fragments one of which
has been completely severed 2.3 em. below the joint. The other (Fig.
25, T), apparently the lower limb bone of a deer, has been split in two
and a sliver removed from one edge.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

23 7

ARTIFACTS OF GLASS, METAL, AND LEATHER

Although varying considerably iri quantity (Table 2 ), all three sites
yielded relatively recent refuse consisting primarily of metal and glass.
From the Gossett Bottoms Site were obtained three thin fragments of
iron (probably from cans ) , a small white (porcelain? ) button, and
two small iron stars, apparently ornaments once riveted onto an item
of apparel. At the Wild Bull Site the following were collected: ten
fragments of earthenware (all apparently ironstone ), two pieces of
leather, a 12-gauge shotgun cartridge (labelled "U.M.C. Co. Nitro
Club"), two .22 shells (both marked with diamonds ) , 11 pieces of
bottle glass, a tapered wood screw, a heavy fragment of iron (possibly
from a stove) , a strip of lead perhaps from a jar lid, six square nails,
two round nails, an iron eye-like object, a small iron buckle, and an
embossed, brass disc .
Historic materials from the Lacy Site are similar to those recovered
from the Wild Bull Site and include: 45 pieces of bottle glass (one
unquestionably represents the base of a brown snuff bottle), one iron
tack, four staples, two bolts, four possible horseshoe nails, nine round
nails, two key type can openers, nine sherds of plain earthenware
(mainly ironstone), an iron buckle, base of a metal can, three fragments of an iron stove, a small iron cup (possibly from the base of a
chair leg), a brass overalls button ("Lone Star"), a small wad of lead,
a fragment of a glass button set, two pieces of narrow gauge iron wire,
eight thin pieces of iron probably from cans, three 12-gauge shotgun
cartridges (one "U.M.C. Co., New Club," one "Winchester Repeater",
and one "Western Super-X"), one 16-gauge shotgun cartridge
( "U.M.C. Co., New Club"), 15 .22-shells (one "P", three "U", one
"US," one "Peters HV," six have diamonds, and three have no visible
mark), a .32 shot cartridge, and a piece of pitch.
Without doubt this recent debris post-dates the Indian occupations,
although most of the historic items were in use by the tum of the 19th
century. The type and quantity from both the Wild Bull and Lacy
sites suggest the presence of a house in the vicinity, while more transient use seems indicated for the Gossett Bottoms Site.
NoN-ARTIFACTUAL REFUSE

A large number of specimens from the excavations are best described as miscellaneous, incidentally-accumulated refuse. Included
are food remains (animal bones and mussel shells), chipping debris,
and daub . Of these, only the daub and the animal bones have been
examined and appear in Table 2.

238

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Daub (Fig. 25, U, V; 1340 specimens)
Pieces of clay believed to have been used principally to plaster the
outside of thatch houses were found at each of the Cedar Creek sites.
All have been burned and many (an estimated 1Js to 1/2) bear impressions of perishable construction materials ranging from what appears
to have been grass (Fig. 25, V) to small poles (Fig. 25, U) perhaps as
much as 3.5 em. in diameter. None of the daub is tempered though
many pieces have a somewhat sandy texture. The colors are from grayblack to almost orange, and the maximum dimension is from less than
a centimeter to 6 em.
While all three sites yielded daub, it was common (1273 specimens)
just at Gossett Bottoms, where it occurred primarily in the eastern part
of the excavations (see Table 2 for the vertical distribution ). At both
the Wild Bull and Lacy sites the daub was more scattered, although
at the latter a slight concentration in the southern part of the excavations can be noted. In spite of a lack of collaborating evidence (such
as post holes), the presence of the daub-especially that wattle-impressed- suggests the former existence of a structure.

Animal Bones ( 1064 specimens)
The vertebrate fauna represented at the Cedar Creek sites is listed in
Table 2, the identifications having been made by Dr. Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr. of the Department of Geology, The University of Texas.
Bones are fairly numerous at the Gossett Bottoms and Lacy sites, but
are rare-probably because of poor conditions of preservation-at the
Wild Bull Site. To judge from their frequency, deer and, at the Gossett
Bottoms Site only, turtle were the most important sources of animal
food. Other forms, namely, bison (identification tentative because of
small sample), rabbit, raccoon, opossum, and fish, were also probably
eaten, but must have accounted for only minor additions to the diet.
Animals known from only a few bones-beaver, turkey, squirrel,
coyote, skunk, and gar-could have been utilized, or could just as well
have been introduced to the sites by some agency other than man
(e.g., predators ) . Certainly, however, the gopher, snake, and armadillo
(a recent addition to the fauna of the area) should be regarded as intrusive. As to the dog remains, most of those from Gossett Bottoms
represent a burial (see earlier section on Features); those from Lacy
have also been an intentional interment, but the field evidence is not
clear on this point, as the bones were recovered from an animal burrow.

TABLE 2

()

Provenience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir

;..
ill

ttl
0

()

WILD BULL
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Sm·· to to to to
fa ce 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0

(4 1 HE 61)
2.0 2 .5 3. 0 Unto to to cer2 .5 3.0 3.5 tain Total

Sur- to

to

to

to

to

to

ill

LACY (41 HE 70)
0. 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 U n -

GOSSETT BOTTOMS (4 1 KF 7)
0 .0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 Un to cer-

Sur- to

lace 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3.0 3.5 Lain T otal

to

to

to

to

to cer-

fa ce 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 tain To tal TOTAL

ttl
ttl
~
~

ttl

Artifa cts of Stone

Ul

Arrow Points
Alba
Bonham
Catahoula-like
Cliff ton
Cuney
Friley
... .
G ranbury
Perdiz
Sca Llorn
Steiner
1
:M isc. rec langular
stem
Misc. ex pand in g
sten1 , con vex ba se
Mi sc. e xpanding
stem , concave base .
.l\lli sc. subtriangular
Mi sc. eccentric
points
Arrow po in t
2
fra g m ents
Subtota ls
3

ttl

0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1

I

1

....
1

....

1

1

1

G
11

2
3

0

0

0

0

0

0

2
1
2
5

1

1

4
2
3
6
0

1
1

1

3
5
6
4
5

2
3
3

0

1

2

5
1
4
1

2

2

1

1

1

3

4

0
0

1
2

1

2

5

1

24
70

II

4

I

33

19

6

10
17

I

I

I

1

1
1

16
10
10
9

2

3

8

4

2

6

1

2
4

1

3

6

I

0

0

I

40
13 1

23

2
H

2
0

0

2
0
4
0
2
2
1
14
0
2

17
25
10
12

0

6

2

11

4

3
8

0

8

10

60
192

H

6

2

s

~

<

0H

~
Ul

...,
H

2

ttl

Ul

Dart Points
Bu/ vr~rde

1

Edgewood

Ellis
Folsom

1
1

I

3

....

1
1

1

5
1

0
0
0
0

1
0
0
0

2
1

5
1

to

(JJ

\0

~

TABLE Z-Continued
Provenience of th e specimens, Cedar
WILD BULL (41 HE 6 1)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 U nS ur- to

Gary a/sa
Gary colfa x
Gary hobson
Gary kaufman
Gary kemfJ
Gary kenedy
Gary panna nw ria
Gary nm ge
Gary, misc. and
lragmcnta 1·y
Kent
Marshall
i\1/orri/L
W esley
Yarbrough d ;ke
Yarbrough lindale
Yarbrough mabank
U ncl assir.cd
Fragment
Subtotal s
Kni ves
Ovate
Subtriangu lar
Lanceolatc
Bi -pointcd

~~~~!:·-~,~~~d
Petrified wood
Fragments
Subto ta ls

to

to

to

to

to

4

6
5

5

I

I

4
I

I

Sur- to

3

8
1

1

1

3

I

4
2
2

3

I

I

15
6

I

0
8

2

1
I

I

6
14

I
8
18

I

I

2

4
6

8
II

1
2

~

1

1
3
13
5
54 29

10
14

1
1
3

2

~

1

1

10
16

9
18

to

to

to

to

LACY (41 HE 70 )
0.0 0.5 1.0 1. 5 2.0 2.5 U n -

to ce r-

Sur- to

to

to

to

to

to cer-

5

3

8
I

I

2

1

20
1
0
0
0

1

2
1

3

2

1

8
I
1
0
0

38
4
4
2

1

1
1

0
0

0
0

1
1

1
1
9

I
1
2

1
7
36
130

0
0
100
206

0
0
16
37

1
7
152
373

2
I
3

1

3
2
0
I

18
9
17
G

... .

~

1

0

0
17
30

5
132
2 11

1
2
3

to

!nee 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3. 0 3.5 tain Total
lace 0. 5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2 .5 3. 0 tain Total TOTAL
2
1 2
2
3
10- -1
I- I
3
zi
6
I
7
I
15
3
I
4
25
3
G !J
J
5
2!>
1
2
3
44
J
1
1
3
0
9
5
I
4
4
3
I7
0
25
I
I
I
I
4
0
5
1
2
2
5
0
2
I
I
I
5
0
13

10
2
3
2
1

1

Reservoir

GOSSE1T BOTTOMS (41 KF 7 )
I: .J U.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 Uu-

to ce r-

fn ce 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0 2.5 3. 0 3.5 ta in Tot.1l
6 --5- 2
1
14
I
1
3
1
6
I

C re~k

0

1

0

7
2
11
0

0

35
58

I

3

I

I

1

!

;

4
51
85

I
25
36

I
J

0

1

2
3
1

2
t

2
8
17

1
2

2 1 18 14
39 52 24

8
10

II
27

1
5

I

0

2
1

1
2

8
5
6
5

1

2
t

2

~

12
20

1
64
96

10
15

3
7

4
5

2
2

0

I

5
6

I

I
4

3
12

4
II

2
2

0

1
I

2
1

1

I

I
1
3

1
2
3

3
4
9

1
4
7

1
5
6

1
2

0

~

~

~
;..
"'

~

(")

~

~

b
C)

n
~

0

0
~

><

TABLE 2---Continued

(l

Provenience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir

:>

WILD BULL (41 HE 6 1)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3. 0 Un Sur- to to to to to to to cerlace 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 tain Total

-1
0

I

0
2

2

3
3

5
12

2
1
1
6
10

1
1
3
5
1

0

0

0

.... ....

0

Rurin Spa ll ?
Gravers
Gouges

Clear Fork
Guadalupe?
Subtole:1l s

4

I

Pebble
Bi-pointed
Miscellaneous

Gossr-' 11

GOSSEIT BOTTOMS (41 KF 7)
1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3 .0 Un to to to to to to to cerlace 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0 2.5 3. 0 3.5 tain Total
U.O U.5

Sur -

LACY (41
0.0 0 .5 1.0 1.5
to to to
lace 0 .5 1.0 1.5 2.0

Sur- to

HE
2. 0
to
2.5

70)
2.5 Un to cer3.0 tain Total TOTAL

~
()
~

1:1
t'1

:;.::
~

t'1
t'1

Ul

Bifa ces
Bristol

Subtota ls
Microliths
Drill s
Flake
Rew01·ked (?)
dart points
Subtotals
Burins

t'1

0

0

0

0

8
4
2
18
32
3

3

1
1
1
1
5

1

4

3

3

6
1

3

G

18
1

11

7

3

G

7
1
1
9

19

11

1
1

1

3
1
1

5
2

1
2

2

1
1

5
9
7

6
8

3

5
12

4
7

4

I

2
0

5
8

3
7

I

0

0

6
1

1
3
1

I

1

'f

0
1

0

1

0

0

I

0

4

0

1

0

0

0

I

0

1
1

1

0

1

0

1(}

5

6

3

52
3
1
56

2

3

2

2

3

2

1
1
1
5
3
3
4

1

0

1

1

1

0

7
1
1
6
15
1

32
6
5
42
85
7

1

2
3
0
0
3

10
1
1
37

0

0
0
0
0

60
3
1
64

0
0
0
5
4
0
0
0

12
10
3
24
37
14
11
1

5
I

0

0

2
4

1
1
8

2
2

0

0

1
1

l

0

1

fi

I

2

0
0
18

0

8
0
0
8

1

0

2

~

<

0

>-<

~
Ul

::J
t'1

Ul

6

1
0

17
1
2
18
38
3

0

1
0

1

0

I

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Scrapers

Mineola
End , large
Thumbnail
Core
Initial col'lex flake

Secondary flake
Concave-edge

Albany spokesh ave (?) 1

l

1
1

6
1

1

10
7
2
13
27
9
0
1

1

1
1

2
2

1
1
1

1
4

2
3
1
6
6
5
11
0

1
2

3

1
1

1

....

to
..,.
.......

to
..,.

TABLE 2-Continued

to

Provenience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir
WILD BULL
0.0 0.5 1. 0 1.5
Sur- to to to to
face 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
---

(41 HE 6 1)
2.0 2.5 3.0 Unto to to cer·
2.5 3.0 3.5 tain Total

GOSSETT BOTTOMS (41 KF 7)
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0 2 .5 3.0 Un to to to to to to to cerlaco 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 lain Total

S ur-

LACY (41
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
to to to
face 0.5 1.0 1.5 2. 0

Sur- to

HE
2 .0
to
2.5

70 )
2.5 U nto cer3.0 tain Total TOTAL

lVIisce ll anco us and
fra gmentary

Subtotals
Utilized flakes

I

6
1

2
6
6

3
7

0

1
1

I

3
15
10

3
31
12

1

3

II

I

18
G

0

I

0

I

Boats tones

Celt
Notched peb bles
End
Side
Subtotals

2
2

1-lamm erston es
I-Iand ston es

1

3
2

0

0

0

0

....
1

I

I

6
24
5
47 48
1
1

3
6
19

3
8
17

2
8

0
4

1
G

0

6

1
I

1

1

0

I

Pi Lted s ton es

A braders
Scored hemat ite

80
43
0
0

I

4·

1

1

1

1

7
2
1
1
10
4

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1
1

1
2

12
46
149
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
2

0
1

0

3
3

0

3
3

0
1

1
3
4

0

1
1

0

0
1

0
2

0
1

0

0

0

1

2

1

1

1
10
14
0

24
136
206
2

0
0
0
3
0
0
1
4

6

2
2
12
10

Ocher
U mnodified
Sub to tn l

0

0

0

5
5

5
5

1
1

2

0
11

Smoo th ed

0

0

0

It

1
0

0

0

2

0

I

0

0

0

2
1
3

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0
0
0

2
12
14

Artifac ts of Clay

Cla y -tempered
Sand- tempered
Subtotal s
Dec01·a ted Sherds
Engra ved

Brushed

tt1

>
>
~

Ul

(')

~

tt1
0

Plain She rds

Shel l-temper·ed
Bone- lempered

>-:l
:><:

1
9

10

I

I

1

I

<f

2

5

3

3

3

1

1

0

0

0

4
19
0
0
23

4
1
5
38 28 18
I 104 52 28
I 13
6
I
5 159 87 52
3

7
7

<f

I

2

I

15

6

0

I

0

10
99
194
22
325

2
2
68 59
69 38
I
2
I
2 1 141 100

4
16

3
30
20
I

54

5
23
13
3
44

1
G
9

I
2

2

5
I

16

3

8

13
193
172
9
387

2i
3 11
366
31
735

J7
<fl

17
166

t"'

0

Q

()

>

t"'

Ul

0

0
0

0
2

75

28

15

5

125

2

5
26

3
5

G
3

2
2

J

2

I

(')

>-<

tt1

>-:l

><

TABLE 2--Continued

()

Provenience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir

>
:;.l

t'1
Cl

()

WILD BULL
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
Sur - to to to to
face 0.5 1.0 ·t .5 2.0

(4 1 HE 6 1)
2.0 2.5 3. 0 Unto to to cer2 .5 3.0 3.5 La in Total

1

In cised

Tra il ed
Brushed-i ncised
Puncta ted

....

....

Puncta ted- incised
Pinched

....

Misccl la ne:J tl s

0

S ubtotals

'''orked shcrcl

I

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

....

....

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

Pipe stem

0

Clay lump

0

Art ifa cts o f bone
Pin s

<~nd

GOSSETI BOTTOMS (41 KF 7)
(l.O 0.5 l. O 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 U nSlw- to to to to to to to cerface O.S 1.0 1. 5 2.0 2.5 3. 0 3.5 tain T ota l
j(j

4

2G

6

1
2
3
1 20 20
4
1
13
2
3 131

57

12

I

l

3

1
35

3

10

10

10

8

:;.l

70)

3

l

+

1

0

0

1

5
58
9
15
2
24 1
0
1
0

2

3.0 lain T otal TOTAL

I

7

12
2

14
6

16
2

3
2

2

55
1

38

37

17

5

t'1
t'1

2.5 Un to ce r-

I

I

1
10

LACY (4 1 HE
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
Sur- to to to to to
face 0.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0 2.5

2

2

2

5

46
0
0
53
12
0
0
166
1
0

70
I

5
Ill
21
15
2
408

:;.::
:;.l

t'1

"'t'1
:;.l

<

0

~

::l"'
t'1

"'

nntler

1

0
0
0

Bead (?)
Fleshing tool
Poss ibl e aw l
fragme nts

.. ..

0

0

0
0
0

2

3
1
1

1
1

....

0
0
0

.. ..

6

1

2

3
1
5

1
1

l

1
3
7

II

'f

3

0

Possib le flak ing tool
fragment s
iVIi scellaneous
0
S ubt otals
A •·tifa cts of metal , glass
and lea th er
4

Misc. (>C.C ut>a tional refuse
Daub
Faunal rcmalns
Bison bison (?)
( bison)
Odoce ileus sp. ( deer)

0

0

34

2

1

6

0

0

0

1
11

21

0

0

41
1

1

41

0
1

1

0

3
3

1
0

0

6
3G8 327 280 2 19

2
1 82

1
68 102

0

4
13

0

l

2R

5

1

"11 5

162

l

26

1340

8

0
235

661

1

0

I

0

1

0

G

87

15

7

0

0

65

11

3

1273

4

15

5

1

....

59

16

5

5
425

6Z

79

61

17

5

z
92

I

3
13
27

0

3

to
....

w

to

TABLE 2-Continued

t

Proven ience of the specimens, Cedar Creek Reservoir
WILD BULL
0.0 0 .5 1.0 1.5
to to to to
face 0. 5 1.0 1.5 2.0

Sur-

Canis familiaris
(do g)
Canis latrans
(coyo te )
Procy on loLor

(4 1 HE 61 )
2.0 2.5 3. 0 Unto to to cer2.5 3.0 3 .5 tain Total

....

....

.... ....

....
....

1

0

1

2

1

1

....

1

2

....

1

I

....

2

....

0

....

2
0

2

2

It

70)
2.5 U nto cer3.0 tain Total TOTAL

27

2

....

12

3

1

3

....
1

I
II

0

2

30

0

2

4

16

0

3

2
14

0

3

..,

I

5

;;..:

I

23

"'>

I

It

~

I

27

0

1

1
2

HE
2 .0
to
2 .5

1
1

0
0

....

4

LACY (41
0.0 0 .5 1.0 1.5
Sur- to to to to
fa ce 0.5 I .0 1.5 2.0

3

1

0

....
.... ....

1

1'
1

0

1

2

1

·~

9

5

4

2

20

II

6

4

3

24

0

24

'I

I

0
0
0
0
I
0
2 73

I

1
1

....

tT1

>

1:0

··-·
....

....

....

Snake

Fish
Gar

Subtota ls

0

0

( r arC3011 )

Spilogale puturious
(spottoJ sku nk)
Castor caJwdensis
( beaver)
Sciurus sp.
(squirrel )
Geomys sp. ( gopher)
Lepus californicus
(jack rabbit )
Sylvilagus sp.
(cottontail )
Dide lphis virginiana
( oposs um )
D .tsyp :1s novemcinc lus
(annadillo )
i\1/eleagris gallopavo
( t urkey)
Un identifi ed bird ( ?)
T errapene ( tortoise )

GOSSEIT BOTTOMS (4 1 KF 7)
O.U U.5 1.0 1.5 2 .0 2.5 3.1! Un to to to to to to cerfa ce 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 tain Total

Sur- to

0

4

0

0

0

0

0

• Canis fam.iiiaris , Level 4/Dog burial-64 bones.
t Nearly comp le te skeleton of one indiv iduu L

0

0

0
0
0
0
0
0
4

32
I

82
1

1

2

77

55

3
I
1
I 142 168 201 168

11

3
2ol
2

6

li
I

2
76

26

5

0

7R7

I

0

68

8 1 9 1 17
5
3
8
GHA ND TOTAL 5 11 8

3
203
2
7
I

1064

()

~
tT1

0

I:"

0

c;)

>-<

()

>

I:"

"'0
>-<
..,tT1
()

><:

CEDAI\ CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

245

DISTRIBUTION OF THE SPECIMENS
The vertical proveniences of all specimens described in the preceding section are presented in Table 2. In addition, the relative frequency
by six-inch level (numbered from top to bottom ) of selected artifact
groups such as pottery, arrow points, and dart points, is plotted in
Figures 26 and 27. Horizontal occurrences within each site were also
carefully examined, but, with the exception of the daub at the Gossett
Bottoms Site and, less clearly, Lacy Site, no meaningful differences
could be detected.
Looking more closely at the vertical proveniences, all three of the
sites appear to be considerably mixed. Clearest indications of this are
perhaps to be seen in a comparison of the distribution of the arrow
points and historic materials at the Lacy Site (Fig. 27), where one
could argue with reason that the latter, dated at about 1860 at the
earliest, is older than the former. That many of the specimens from
the Wild Bull and Gossett Bottoms sites are equally as well mixed
seems very likely in view of: ( 1) the similarity of the artifact-bearing
deposit at all of the sites, (2 ) the diversity of types and classes recovered at each site, and (3) a comparison with the sequential data
obtained from culturally-related sites such as Yarbrough and Miller
(Johnson, 1962). Possible causes for this seemingly clear mixture of
refuse are less apparent, although there can be no doubt that burrowing gophers and armadillos are contributing factors. Other plausible
explanat:ons are more evasive but perhaps lie in the techniques of
excavations and/ or the nature and origin of the culture-bearing sandy
soil. Regarding the latter, it at least seems possible that part of all of
the sandy deposit at each of the sites was formed or accumulated before
any occupation took place and that the specimens have simply worked
their way down into this zone.
Regardless of the causes, it is quite evident that the intrasite distributions are of limited utility and that the ordering of the collections
must depend to a large measure upon less direct methods, particularly
intersite comparisons. This approach reveals both qualitative and
quantitative distributional differences, many of which probably represent gradual stylistic and/ or functional changes which occun·ed
throughout the general area. Still imperfectly defined and tentative
in nature, these developments are summarized below by major artifact groups.
Arrow Points. Each of the sites yielded arrow points although they
were numerous only at the Gossett Bottoms and Lacy sites. The vertical occurrences indicate that arrow points are generally later than dart

246

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

points and, less certainly, pottery. A rather wide range of styles is
represented in the collection and there do appear to be some differences
in the distribution of certain types. At Lacy the most common types
are Catahoula-like ( 4 specimens) and Perdiz ( 14 specimens), while
at Gossett Bottoms types Alba, Clitfton, Granbury, Friley, Perdiz,
Scallorn, and Steiner are each represented by four or more specimens.
While no arrow point type can be said to be numerous at the Wild
Bull Site, it is probably of importance that the only recognizable forms
(one of each) are Catahoula-like, Perdiz, Clitfton, and Steiner. The
stratigraphic evidence is not strong, but some gradual stylistic chances
can be discerned. Markedly expanding stem (namely the Scallorn
type) and subtriangular (Granbury) forms are apparently the earliest
styles. These seem to be followed by a rather poorly defined group of
less expanding and rectangular stem types (such as Alba, Steiner, and
Friley ) which, in turn, are replaced by better defined contracting stem
forms (C litfton and Perdiz ) , as well as the heavy -shouldered Catahoula-like points. A similar, but likewise weakly supported, sequence
has been recognized in the McGee Bend area by Duffield ( 1963b: 140).
To the west and south, in the central part of the state, there are excellent stratigraphic data to indicate that the expanding and subtriangular
traditions precede the contracting stem one. The apparently more
intermediate types at Cedar Creek and McGee Bend, however, are not
well represented in central Texas.
Dart Points. Dart points occurred at all three of the sites, generally
below the arrow points (Fig. 26). The contracting stem Gary is far
and away the dominant type and is, for all practical purposes, the only
form recovered at Gossett Bottoms and Lacy. The chronological position of Gary is not entirely clear, although evidence from other sites
in the eastern part of Texas and adjacent sections of Oklahoma (Tunnell, 1961; Johnson, 1962; Duffield, 1963b) suggests that it is probably
a late Archaic type which continued in use for a short period after the
arrival of pottery. Since pottery and Gary points are present at each
of the Cedar Creek sites, it may be that at least some of the ceramics
are associated with this dart point form. However, it should also be
noted that at the Wild Bull Site pottery was scarce, but Gary points
were numerous; while at the Lacy Site pottery was common, but Gary
points were relatively uncommon. Not by any means conclusive, these
data nonetheless suggest that Gary points are associated primarily
with preceramic occupation .
Except for the Folsom point, the non-Gary specimens (many of
which cannot be typed) at the Wild Bull Site seem to represent a
second, but light, Archaic occupation. While the stratigraphic position

(')

.,

tt1

.;;·

0

...

."'

Q

WILD

LEVE L

?'

BULL SITE

TOTA L

Sur face

GOSSETT

LEVEL

BOTTOMS

SITE

>

TOTAL

Uncer t a i n

16

Su r f ac e
Vnc er loin

I

!!1

I

418

2

26

2

216

.

<"

-

10

~
(')
~

tt1
tt1
:;<1
~

..~

3

51

3

!58

tt1
tt1

4

32

4

55

<
0

a-

5

/0

5

38

(f)

6

2

6

6

1

I

1

2

~

(f)

.J:l

c

-::"<
~

~·
~·
::r

0

;;-

10

20

.
F

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100'/o

~

.....
~

...,.....
tt1

(f)

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100 ' /,

<

~

LEVEL

!!

S urfac e

LACY

SITE

TO TA L
44

0
l<

Uncerta in

.,

I

225

!!.

2

!56

~

D.
D

=+

.,
0

~

3.

10 9

4

12

5

23

6

D

~
@)

Arr ow Poi n Is
Do r I

Poi nts

Po l ie r y

5
0

:I

•

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100 '/,

.,

D.

~

iD
~

196 5

VMB

to
..,.
'l

248

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

of these points provides no meaningful data, information summarized
by Johnson (ibid.) argues in favor of their preceding the apparently
late Archaic Gary type. As for the Folsom fragment, it could be all
that remains (or can be recognized) of an even earlier-Paleo-Indian
-occupation at the Wild Bull Site.
Other Stone Artifacts. Differences can be observed in the distribution
of many of the other lithic specimens, although the interpretation of
these contrasts is made tenuous by small samples and/ or by poor
stratigraphic data. It seems probable, however, that notched pebbles,
Gossett, Clear Fork, and Guadalupe ( ?) gouges, Mineola end scrapers,
Albany spokeshave, and petrified wood knives are associated primarily
with the non-Gary points at the Wild Bull Site. Other possible Archaic
tools which appear to be either more widespread or longer-lived include subtriangular knives, re-worked dart point drills, most of the
bifaces (the Bristol type, however, may have continued in use during
later periods ) , core scrapers, and large end scrapers. The only lithic
types which seem to be linked mainly with the arrow points are the
fl ake drills and the microliths. The remainder of the stone artifacts
cannot even be tentatively assigned to chronologie periods; perhaps
many of them were in use for a considerable span of time.
Pottery. The occurrence of pottery at the Cedar Creek sites presents
a rather confused picture which is difficult to unravel. It is most common at the Lacy and Gossett Bottoms sites where arrow points were
relatively abundant, and is rare at the Wild Bull Site where arrow
points were relatively scarce. These distributions, coupled with the
seeming absence of any demonstrably early type--such as Williams
Plain found at the nearby Yarbrough and Miller sites (Johnson, 1962)
or at the Scott Site in Oklahoma (Bell, 1953)-suggests that the
pottery is linked mainly with the arrow point occupations and that it
is rather late. On the other hand, the vertical distribution of the
ceramics at the Lacy and Gossett Bottoms sites would seem to indicate
that it was earlier than the arrow points (Fig. 26 ) . Evidence to resolve
this apparent conflict is simply lacking, as are data which might show
a linkage between the decorative and technological subgroups and, say,
the arrow point styles.
Artifacts of Bone. Modified bone objects were recovered from only
the Gossett Bottoms Site, where they tended to be found moderately
deep (i.e. , below the arrow points ) in the deposit. The absence of bone
artifacts at Wild Bull may be a matter of preservation, particularly
since only four pieces of unmodified bone were found at this site. However, at the Lacy Site there were considerable quantities of bone refuse
(273 pieces), none of which had been worked. This hints that a cultur-

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

249

al factor was, at least in part, affecting the distribution, although at
this point its nature cannot be specifically defined.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Excavations carried out at Cedar Creek Reservoir in the spring of
1964 by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project resulted in the recovery of considerable quantities of occupational refuse from three,
largely aboriginal, sites. An analysis of the native artifacts obtained
indicates that all three were repeatedly, but intermittently, occupied
over a considerable span of time. The disturbed nature of the deposits
in which the specimens were buried, however, makes the ordering of
the collections extremely difficult. In spite of these perplexing problems, certain changes in the culture of the various occupants can be
distinguished, principally on the basis of contrasts in the intersite
distribution of some of the artifacts. These changes can be conveniently, if somewhat oversimply, grouped into five broad chronologie
periods (numbered from earliest to latest):
Period 1, believed to be the earliest represented, is tenuously factored out of the collection from the Wild Bull Site solely on the basis
typological pecularities of a Folsom point medial section, a basal fragment of a second, stylistically early-appearing point (possibly of the
Eden type), and even more uncertainly, a burin and burin spall. Each
of these occurs in a very mixed cultural context and could conceivably
have been introduced to the site by later inhabitants. I feel, nonetheless, that their occurrence at only the Wild Bull Site and the fact that
they are made from foreign materials make it more reasonable to
assume that these artifacts represent a very brief occupation during
Paleo-Indian times.
The second period of occupation is more definitive, but is significantly present only at the Wild Bull Site. Its temporal placement is
troublesome and must be largely inferred from findings made at other
nearby sites (Crook and Harris, 1952; Duffield, 1963b; Johnson,
1962). The diagnostic artifacts fall stylistically within the Archaic
tradition and include notched pebbles, a high percentage of scraping
and cutting tools (many of which tend to be large and crudely-made),
and a rather miscellaneous series of rectangular and expanding stem
dart points (many of which cannot be typed). Of the scraping tools,
the Gossett and Clear Fork gouges, and perhaps the Albany spokeshave, the Mineola end scraper, and the initial cortex flake scraper are
the most characteristic. Other lithic specimens, such as knives, heavy
bifaces, core scrapers, grinding implements, pitted stones, and gravers

250

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

appear to be typical of the period, but are less definitive and probably
carried over into at least Period 3.
Period 3, believed to mark the late Archaic and to be most easily
recognized by the contracting stem Gary dart point type, occurs at
each of the sites, but can be said to be well represented only at Gossett
Bottoms and Wild Bull. Other traits which might be associated with
this period are difficult to enumerate, although the Bristol biface,
many of the knife forms , grinding implements, scrapers, pitted stones,
and perhaps even a few polished stone implements (boatstones and
celts) are likely candidates. While the vertical proveniences (Table 2
and Fig. 27) suggest that pottery may have first appeared in at least
the latter part of Period 3, there are also indications of a preceramic
Gary component. Evidence in favor of this component consists of the
finding of large numbers of Gary points (68 specimens) and few
sherds (24) at the Wild Bull Site and, conversely, by the presence of
few Gary points ( 18) and large numbers of sherds (533) at the Lacy
Site. Less direct support for the largely preceramic nature of Period 3
comes from the apparent absence of any demonstrably early pottery,
such as Williams Plain , which in other areas has been associated with
Gary points (Bell, 1953; Johnson, 1962) .
Period 4 is heralded chiefly by the appearance of arrow points, with
types Scallorn and Granbury being the most distinctive. Other forms
possibly also associated, but perhaps arriving later or lasting longer,
include Alba, Friley, Steiner, and Bonham. Both plain and decorated
pottery were surely being made, but the linkage of specific technological or decorative types is impossible. For all practical purposes, Period
4 is present only at the Gossett Bottoms Site.
The last occupational period recognized occurs at each of the sites,
although in significant quantities just at Lacy and Gossett Bottoms.
Cliffton, Perdiz, and Catahoula-like are the major arrow point forms
of Period 5, having replaced the largely expanding stem and subtriangular forms of Period 4. There are hints that fewer lithic implements were in use, with the heavier bifaces, gouges, and scrapers
having been almost completely abandoned. Small flake drills, however,
do appear to be associated. Pottery continued to be made and, while no
specific complex can be defined, it may be that shell-tempering and
engraved decorations appear for the first time.
The relative sequence of artifact changes briefly outlined above are
interpreted as having occurred over a rather considerable period of
time and as having extended over a fairly wide geographical region.
On the Archaic level, the Cedar Creek materials of Periods 2 and 3
compare quite favorably with a group of sites (Yarbrough, Miller,

.;. .,

()
~

a~

~

.

·~ !::l

LEVEL

:;- :
;. Q

Surface
Uncertain

~ ~·

I

~ Cf)
'
~
~

g

"- g
~ -<
0 ::. "

;;. ~

a

GOSSETT BOTTOMS SITE

WILD BULL SITE

TOTAL

TOTAL

LEVEL

l3

10

Su rfa ce
Unce rt ain

383

I

19

?i

2

195

2

16

(/)~

3

139

3

33

4

41

4

21

5

21

5

6

~

~
~

6

5

6

7

2

1

~
<:

0

>-<

~

~

VI

:-. ;;c·
Q' !.

c
>
~

0

...,

t'rj

~~
!" :T

%

(/)

...<

.

_...
;

LE VEL

0

Sur face

~

LACY

SITE

TOTAL
43

Unc ertain
I

220

I

~·

2

15 4

2

g>

3

I 5

o

3

4

4

61

:::.

,

5

21

2.

6

Q

~

~

20

3o

4o

5o

60

10

8o

90

IOO'Io

1965

110

m?tm~ttt?@~jt~flt~ltkr

: =:::trrtt::::rrr:NHftttt:

29

13

5
10

20

17-7,1
[:2L:I

Go r y Oo rt Points
m
l2d Decorated She r ds

til

0

it

1o

TOTA L
2

0

m

o

"-

5
o

!!'

SITE

Uncerlo,·n

"8

~

LACY

LEVEL
Su r face

Histo r ic al

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100"/o

~
Qllill

Arrow

Points

D

Ploin

She r ds

It ems
VMB

~

252

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Martin, Limerick, and Boat Dock) found in northeastern Texas and
adjacent parts of Oklahoma and recently recognized as comprising a
distinctive areal cluster within the La Harpe Aspect (Johnson, 1962:
268-280) . The early part of the La Harpe Aspect, distinguished mainly by expanding stem dart points, appears to equate, at least in part,
with the light Period 2 occupation at the Wild Bull Site. If so, the data
from Cedar Creek suggests that notched pebbles, heavy bifaces, large
end and core scrapers, and Mineola end scrapers are traits which might
also belong to the early phase of the La Harpe Aspect. The late La
Harpe Aspect, marked mainly by the presence of Gary points, seems
to be particularly well represented at Cedar Creek, corresponding to
occupational Period 3. On the other hand, the terminal La Harpe
Aspect, characterized primarily by the arrival of plain, often crudelymade pottery, appears to be completely absent at the three Cedar Creek
sites. Also missing are such items as full-grooved axes and f1exed burials, but these last-named absences may ref1ect sampling errors more
than cultural differences.
While there is no doubt that the Archaic ties lie mainly with the
central cluster of La Harpe Aspect sites, there are a few in!fications of
limited relationships with other areas. Among these are suggestions of
slight contact with peoples in the southeastern part of the state, an
area that Johnson ( 1962: 269-278) sees as constituting yet another
distinct areal division within the La Harpe Aspect. Specific Archaic
traits at Cedar Creek which seem to point in this direction include the
petrified wood knives and, less clearly, the pebble bifaces and possibly
the Albany spokeshave. The few sand-tempered sherds found at Clear
Creek could also possibly relate to the south, where sand-tempered
pottery is quite common and was evidently first introduced in late
Archaic times (Tunnell, 1961) . However, the Cedar Creek specimens
cannot, on the basis of the present sample, be proven to be typologically
the same, nor can they be said to be clearly associated with the Archaic
occupations.
Somewhat closer, though perhaps more generalized, ties can be
found to the northwest, in the upper Trinity River drainage, with the
Carrollton and Elam foci of the Trinity Aspect (Crook and Harris,
1952; 1954). Most interesting of the traits shared with these foci are
gouges (apparently most of the Clear Fork type) and notched pebbles.
The remainder of the like artifacts are fairly numerous, but are also
common to virtually all of the central group of La Harpe Aspect sites.
Johnson ( 1962: 270) has already noted these similarities and has left
open the question of including the Trinity Aspect, especially the Elam

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

253

Focus, in the La Harpe tradition. The data from Cedar Creek contribute relatively little to clarification of this problem.
Evidence of any prolonged connections with Archaic manifestations
in the central part of the state, chiefly the Edwards Plateau Aspect, are
lacking, although a few of the dart point types (Bulverde and Marshall), the Clear Fork gouges, and the notched pebbles do frequently
occur in that region. On the whole, however, the materials from Cedar
Creek appear to represent a basically distinct culture whose history is
far more intimately bound with that of Archaic remains (largely the
La Harpe Aspect) found in the eastern part of the state.
The Neo-American Stage at Cedar Creek Reservoir is defined as
including all materials of Periods 4 and 5, with arrow points and
pottery being the most characteristic artifacts. As for the pottery, none
of the sherds can be identified with a specific type with any meaningful measure of certainty. Most, however, appear to be within the
Caddoan ceramic tradition, showing general typological similarities
with types found in the Gibson Aspect (perhaps mainly Sanders
Focus) and, to a lesser extent, the Fulton Aspect. This suggests the
hypothesis that the local ceramics may have been derived mainly from
contact with Gibson Aspect peoples and that the pottery styles of the
later Fulton Aspect did not as profoundly affect the Cedar Creek area .
Significantly, a somewhat comparable situation may have prevailed
at the Strawn Creek Site, roughly 40 miles to the southwest, where the
pottery appears to reflect strong influence from the Alto Focus of the
Gibson Aspect (Duffield, 1963a) .
The major arrow point types recognized at Cedar Creek are common, or at least well recorded, in central and north-central sections of
the state. Perdiz and Clifjton are the principal diagnostics of the protohistoric Toyah Focus, while Scallorn and Granbury are important
traits of the earlier Austin Focus (Jelks, 1962: 84-90 ). All four of
these types, in addition to Alba and Catahoula, are also frequently
found at sites identified as Wylie Focus-a complex which occurs
mainly in the upper Trinity area and which, as presently defined
(Stephenson, 1952) , may represent a considerable span of time. These
data suggest, but by no means prove, that the developments in arrow
point styles recognized at Cedar Creek are closely linked to those
which took place in north-central and/ or central Texas. Other traits
that might have bearing on possible relationships with the Wylie
Focus are the dog burial and bone artifacts found in uncertain context
(i.e., unassignable as to period ) at the Gossett Bottoms Site. Canine
interments (mainly wolf?) and numerous bone artifacts-pins, awls,
canine tooth pendants, deer ulna flaking tools, bone beads, and the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

like- have been listed as typical Wylie Focus features (Stephenson,
1952). On the other hand, many core traits of this complex are not
present and it is possible that the similarities which do exist may have
come to both the Cedar Creek area and the Wylie Focus from a common, but as yet unrecognized, source.
Obviously this and many other problems raised by the Cedar Creek
sites cannot be answered by the present findings. Significant gaps still
exist in the available data and the need for carefully-controlled field
work is evident. Also there is clearly a need for more broadly-based
typologies, ones which will eventually permit accurate and meaningful reconstruction of the cultural prehistory.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am indebted to a number of persons for their assistance in the
preparation of this report. Among the salvage project personnel, Miss
Marsha Jackson helped to prepare the figures and tables, Mrs. Barbara
Wood typed the manuscript, and Messrs. Harry J. Shafer, James Corbin, and Elton Prewitt checked the field records. Dr. Ernest L. Lundelius, Jr. of the Department of Geology, The University of Texas,
identified the faunal remains, while Mr. Cader A. Shelby of the Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas, examined and identified temper particles in a selected sample of sherds. Finally, Dr. Edward B. Jelks, Director of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
took time from his busy schedule to discuss problems of analysis and
interpretation.
REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1953. The Scott Site, L e Flore County, Oklahoma. American Antiquity, Vol.
XVIII, No.4, pp. 314-331 .
1958. Archeological Inv estigations at the Boat Dock Site, Ma-1, in the Lake
Texoma Area, Marshall County, Oklahoma. Bulletin of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society, Vol. VI, pp. 37-47.
1960. Guid e to th e Id entifi cation of Certain American Indian Pro:ectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Special Bulletin No. 2.
Blair, W. Frank
1950. The Biotic Provinces of T exas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. II, No.
1, pp. 93-117.
Crook, Wilson W., Jr. , and R. K. Harris
1952. Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carrollton and Elam Foci.
Bulletin of the T exas Archeological Society, Vol. 23, pp. 7-38.
1954. Traits of the Trinity Aspect Archaic: Carrollton and Elam Foci. The
Record, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. Z-16.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

255

Davis, W. A.
1961. Archeological Survey and Appraisal of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas. Mimeographed report submitted to the
National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas.
Davis, W. A., and E. Mott Davis
1960. The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir
Area, Northeastern Texas. Archaeology S2ries, No. 3, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1961. The Limer:ck Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959), pp. 51-116.
1953a. The Strawn Creek Site: A Mixed Archaic and Neo-American Site at
Navarro Mills Reservoir, Navarro County, Texas. Mimeographed report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas.
1963b. The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic-Neo-American Site in San Augustine
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, pp.
83-141.
Duffield, Lathel F., and Edward B. Jelks
1951. The PearsJn Site: A Historic Indian Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains
County, Texas. Archaeology Series, No. 4, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas.
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1960. Burins from Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 93-97.
1963. Centiped ~ and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County, Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33, pp. 1-129.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938. Physiography of Eastern United States, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.
Ford, James A. , Philip Phillips, and William G. Haag
1955. The Jaketown Site in West-Central Mississippi. Anthropological Papers of
the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 45, Pt. 1.
Ford, James A., and Clarence H. Webb
1956. Poverty Point, A Late Archaic Site in Louisiana. Anthropological Papers
of the American Museum of Natural History, Vol. 46, Pt. 1.
Jackson, A. T.
1938. Picture-Writing of Texas Indians. The University of Texas Publications,
No. 3809.
Jelks, Edward B.
1961. Excavations at Texarkana Reservoir, Sulphur River, Texas. Bureau of
American Ethnology Bulletin 179 and River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 21.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. Archaeology Series No. 5, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas.
1965. The Archeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, The
University of Texas.

256

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959. The Harroun Site: A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, Archaeology Series, No. 2, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962. The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a Preliminary
Definition of the La Harpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 32 (for 1961 ), pp. 141-284.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr. , Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962. Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir:. The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 5.
Krieger, Alex D .
1946. Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University
of Texas Publications, No. 4640.
Members of the Dallas Archeological Society
1963. An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Forney Reservoir, Collin,
Dallas, Kaufman, and Rockwall Counties, Texas. Multilith rep::.rt submitted to the National Park Service by The University of Texas.
Newell, Perry H., and Alex D. Krieger
1949. The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Memoirs of the Society for American Archaeology, Vol. XIV, No.4, Pt. 2.
Phillips, Phillip, James A. Ford, and James B. Griffin
1951. Archeological Survey in the Lower Mississippi Valley, 1940-1947. Papers
of the Peabody Museum of American Archaeology and Ethnology, Harvard
University, Vol. XXV.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1941. Various Types of Clear Fork Gouges. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 13, pp. 152-162.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1954. The Geology of Texas, Vol. I: Stratigraphy. The University of Texas
Bulletin, No. 3232. 3rd printing.
Sellards, E. H.
1941. Stone Images from Henderson County, Texas. Am erican Antiquity, Vol.
7, No. 1, pp. 29-38.
1952. Early Man in America: A Study in Prehistory. The University of Texas
Press.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1952. The Hogge Bridge Site and the Wylie Focus. American Antiquity, Vol.
XVII, No. 4, pp. 299-312.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks (editors )
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin
No.4.

CEDAR CREEK RESERVOIR SITES

257

Watt, Frank H.
1938. The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist, No. 4, pp. 21-70.
Webb, Clarence H .
1946. Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts from Northwest Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 17, pp. 9- 17.
Wood, Raymond W.
1963. Two New Projectile Points: Homan and Agee. The Arkansas Archeologist,
Vol. IV, No. 2, pp. 1~6.
Texas Almanac, 1964--1965
1965. Published by the Dallas Morning News.
Tunnell, Curtis D.
1961. Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three Sites in the M·cGee Bend
Reservoir, San· Angustine County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30 (for 1959) , pp. 123-158.
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

