DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VoLUME

36

Editor: Dee Ann Story
Assistant Editors :
Harry J. Shafer
Marsha F . Jackson

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1965

Table of Contents
Articles
Anderson's Mill ( 41 TV 130 ): A Historic Site in Travis
County, Texas
By E. Paul Durrenberger

1

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas
By Daymond D . Crawford .

71

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas
By Frank H. Watt .

99

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave, Bosque
County, Texas
By Dorris L. Olds

111

Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site ( 41 GV 5 ),
Galveston County, Texas
By L. E. Aten .

153

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas
By Dee Ann Story .

163

The Bipolar Flaking Technique in Texas and New Mexico
By Kenneth H. Honea .

259

A Guide to the Drafting of Archeological Maps
By Vaughn M . Bryant, Jr. and Robert K. Holz

269

A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas
By R. K. Harris, In us Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine,
and Jerrylee Blaine

287

Book Reviews
Cosgrove, Mr. and Mrs., The Cosgrove Report.
By Curtis Tunnell .

365

Nowothny, Karl A. , Tlacuilolli: Die mexikanischen Bilderhandschriften Stil und I nhalt mit einem Katalog der
Codex-Borgie-Gruppe
By John A. Graham

366

Anderson's Mill (41 TV 130):
A Historic Site in Travis County, Texas
E. PAUL DURRENBERGER
ABSTRACT
Working intermittently on week ends fr om the fall of 1963 to the fall of 1964,
members of The University of Texas Archeological Society carried out small scale
excavations at Anderson's Mill, a historic mill and house site apparently built in
the early 1860's. The history of the mill and the structural remains are briefly
noted; the main part of the paper is devoted to a description of the artifacts recovered from the surface and the excavations.

INTRODUCTION

Anderson's Mill is the site of a mill and house dating from the early
1860's to possibly as late as the 1920's. In this paper a description of
the structural features and artifacts recovered from the site are presented. The main emphasis, however, is placed on the artifacts, as
little remained of the structures. Moreover, the artifact analysis provides a general picture of what might be found at other historic sites
of the same period. Whiie structures may vary widely in function
(for instance, forts, houses, trading posts, missions, mills ) many of the
same kinds of specimens (for example, dishes, nails, bottles, etc.) can
be recovered from them.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

Having traveled through Virginia from Pennsylvania, Thomas
Anderson arrived in Texas in 1859 (Upton, 1941: 3 ) , bringing with
him some furnishings such as china, silver, and linens (Anderson,
1959: 2). Shortly after reaching Texas, Anderson built a log dwelling
to house his family while he and others constructed a mill. When the
miU was finished-apparently in 1862 or 1863-he built a more comfortable house which had a basement where many jams, jellies, pickles,
and preserves were stored. The house had a wide central hall with
a fireplace on either side. Around the house area Anderson built a
rock wall with front, back, and side gates. Somewhat later he added
an irrigation system which consisted in part of a stone tank on high

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ground and which furnished water for a garden behind the house
(Anderson, 1959 ).
The purpose for which the mill proper was erected is not entirely
clear, as some (Anderson, 1959 ; M·c Donald, 1959 ) state that it served
initially as a grist mill, while others (Upton, 1941 ; Brown, n.d. )
indicate that it was built expressedly to manufacture gun powder for
the Confederacy. Regardless, it seems certain that by 1863, under the
direction of the Texas State Military Board, the mill was producing
gun powder for the Confederate cause in Texas and not until after
the Civil War was the mill used extensively to grind corn. Still later,
apparently in the 1870's, Mr. Anderson began ginning cotton. According to Upton ( 1941: 3 ) :
In the early seventies the hill people began raising cotton, and Mr. Anderson
built a gin. This. building was m ade of n ative stone and its w alls still stand. The
grist mill ran on certain days of the w eek and the g in on the others. A large belt
connected the mill-wheel with each mill.

The subsequent history is poorly documented, but after Mr. Anderson's death his family moved to Austin and the mill and house fell
into decay. In about 1942 much of what remained of the mill was
razed by the Lower Colorado River Authority in preparation for the
rising waters of Lake Travis. Then, in 1964, a road was constructed
in the area, destroying most of the structural remnan ~s of Anderson's
house.
THE SITE
Anderson's mill and house were built on Cypress Creek-a small
northern tributary of the Colorado River-which flows approximately
south in a valley surrounded by gently rolling hills (Fig. 1) . The
valley is about two miles north of Mansfield Dam and about 17 miles
northwest of Austin. The valley floor, now occasionally flooded by the
waters of Lake Travis, is covered with short grass and weeds, while
the surrounding hills support scrub brush and small trees.
Three low (ca. one foot high ) stone walls which form an open
rectangle are situated on the west bank of Cypress Creek (Fig. 1).
They are oriented the same way as two early photographs of the mill
show the then-standing mill walls (Fig. 2 ) . Since there are no other
evidences of a structure near the creek for a distance of about one half
a mile in either direction, these must be the remains of the mill.
Historic references indicate that a house was situated somewhere on
the east side of the creek and, indeed, about 720 feet north and east of
the mill three rock walls were located (Figs. 1, 3, B). These walls lie

3

AN DE RSON'S M I L L

110

100

50

I
Scale

in

100

150

I

I

Feet

MILL
41 TV 130
Rood

VMB

E2l

Tonk

b>!;;J

Mill
Roc k wal l

• Tes t pits
tSSJ Ash

de posit

Fig . 1 . Map of Anderson 's Mill (41 TV 130) showing features , areas excavated, and
contours .

4

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

at the foot of a hill that slopes upward to the east of the valley floor.
Within their confines were found a cement-lined stone tank (Fig. 3, A )
and a concentration of limestone boulders. The former is likely part
of Mr. Anderson's irrigation system, and the latter residue from the
fireplaces alluded to in the historic accounts. Both serve to fix the
locus of the main house.
THE ExcAVATIONs

The site fell readily into three (at first it was thought four) rather
distinct areas (Fig. 1) . That lying to the west of the creek and marked
by the structural remnants of the mill complex was designated as
Area 1. To the east of creek, where the documents record both the log
cabin and the main home, were found house remains. What was
initially thought to have been the older of these (the limestone boulder
concentration) was labeled Area 2, while what appears to be the later
house, to the east of Area 2, was designed as Area 3. The limestone
boulders, it was assumed, were the remains of the chimney of the log
cabin. It was later discovered that Areas 2 and 3 were both associated
with the later house; the initial designations, however , w ere retained
(Fig. 1) . In addition to these areas, surface material was collected
from a large region, designated as Area 4, to the south of 2 and 3.
Work at the site was begun by making extensive surface collections
at the above-mentioned areas. This was followed by two excavations
made in Area 1. One of these explored an extension which appeared
along portions of the nori;hern wall of the mill and which had been
observed on the surface. This still unidentified structural remnant was
labeled Feature 1. The second excava tion consisted of a 2-foot wide by
approximately 15.5-foot long tr0nch dup; along the outside of the
southern wall. Called Feature 2, this trench was dug to bedrock, which
was encountered from 6 to 18 inches below the surface.
A grid system oriented on an approximate magnetic north line was
superimposed over Area 2. The north-south base line was marked
off at five-foot intervals which were numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., from
south to north. The approximate east-west line was also divided into
five-foot segments lettered A, B, C, D, etc., from east to west. The
designation of the southeast corner of a square (such as A-1 , B-2, etc. )
named that square. No vertical controls were maintained for most of
the excavations, since the first three units dug made it quite obvious
that there was only one component at the site.
While the archeological investigations were in progress, the concentration of limestone boulders situated roughly in the center of Area 2

5

ANDERSON'S MILL

was bulldozed in preparation for a road. This bulldozing exposed two
ash deposits and thereby confirmed the hypothesis that the boulders
were the remains of fireplaces. The artifacts exposed by the road construction were treated as a surface collection.
Squares C-2, G-5, B-11 , and C-14, in Area 2 (Fig. 1) were excavated
to bedrock, which varied from 8 to 25 inches below the surface. As it
was removed from a square, the dirt was screened through a quarterinch mesh hardware cloth.
The digging, mapping, and other field work was done by members
of The University of Texas Archeological Society on week ends, under
the direction of the author. All investigations took place during the
period October 20, 1963 to October 10, 1964, exclusive of the summer
months. I should like to thank John Clark, Elton Prewitt, Emory
Whipple, and Charles R. Nance for their assistance in the field work;
and Dorothy Burr for her help in both the field and the laboratory.
My thanks also to Dr. E. Mott Davis who offered many valuable
suggestions.
STRUCTURAL FEATURES

The Mill
The mortared stone walls of the mill were standing to a height of
from 4 to 14 inches when work at the site was initiated. A trench
(Feature 2 ) dug along the outside of the southern wall of the mill
revealed that this wall now stands a maximum of from 7 to 16.5 inches
high (top to bedrock) . This and the other two remaining walls are
from 15 to 17 inches thick and were constructed of roughly shaped,
generally rectangular, limestone blocks.
The mill as it exists at the present (Fig. 2) measures 18 feet wide
from north to south and 20 feet long from east to west. Surrounding
the outside of the north, south, and west walls are mounds of rubble
formed when the walls of the mill collapsed. The eastem end of the
structure fades out into a talus slope and no wall was located there. The
present floor of the r:1ill consists of limestone bedrock which descends
toward the creek in three steep, step-like ledges (Fig. 2). The bottom
ledge grades into the rock talus that extends to the creek edge. This
bedrock foundation was probably originally floored with wood to give
a level surface.
Extending to the north of the eastern end of the northem wall were
a number of irregularly-shaped limestone blocks set in a matrix of
gray mortar (Feature 1) . The smooth bedrock floor enclosed on three
sides by this wall (?) measures 37 by 50 inches, while the wall itself

6

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

<

Fig . 2. Anderson's Mill. Above, Mill as it appeared shortly after construction (sketch
adapted from photograph in Travis County Collection , Austin Public Library( . Below, Mill
site as it appeared in 1964.

is from 6 to 8 inches high . The eastern end of Feature 2 is unwalled
and extends downward to a mass of talus debr is.
Associated with th e mill were pieces of wood and glass, as well as a
few fragmen ts of light gray, powdery mortar.

7

ANDERSON's MILL

The House Complex
The house complex (Areas 2 and 3 ) includes the rock wall or fence,
tank, and house proper situated to the east of the mill, well above the
creek. The wall is about 2 feet thick, a maximum of 3.5 feet high, and
is composed of unquarried limestone boulders piled without mortar
(Fig. 3, B) . The partially enclosed area is now roughly trapezoidal in
shape. The eastern wall is about 145 feet long, the northern wall approximately 205 feet long, and the southern wall roughly 140 feet long;
no western wall was found. There is a poorly delineated opening about
midway in each wall.
Approximately 36 feet to the west of the eastern rock wall is a
cement-linked tank made of quarried limestone blocks which are mortared together (Fig. 3, A ). The tank is 9.2 feet east-west, 15 feet northsouth, and 2.8 feet high; its walls are 1.8 feet thick. This tank is almost
certainly part of Anderson's irrigation works.
About 200 feet to the west of the eastern rock wall were located
two deposits of ash, one about 20 feet south of the other (Fig. 1) . The
southernmost ash deposit is about 15 feet across and the northern one
is about 10 feet across. Several large quarried limestone blocks were
found in this area, but their relationships to the ash deposits did not
seem to be meaningful. It is thought, nonetheless, that the ash deposits
represent fireplaces and that the limestone boulders thickly strewn
over this area very probably are remains from the chimneys and
hearths. Most of the cultural material from the site was found in this
area.
THE ARTIFACTS

Each of the four areas from which surface collections were made,
as well as each feature and square excavated, was assigned a lot number, and all artifacts from each of these proveniences were labeled
accordingly. When the specimens were examined in the laboratory,
however, it was obvious that there were few significant differences in
their distributions and, hence, there is no need to present these data
here. The one exception is the nails: round nails were found about
the house but not the mill.
Most of the objects recovered from the site can be conveniently
sorted into four broad categories: ceramics, glass, metal, and miscellaneous (rubber, shell, etc. ). The only exception to this scheme is the
metal jar lids which are discussed with the glass jar parts to preserve
functional continuity. Each of the major categories has been further
divided into a number of subgroups, some of which serve purely de-

Fig. 3. A, Section of cement-lined tank. 8, Portions of one of the walls that surround
the house complex .

9

ANDERSON'S MILL

scriptive ends, while others (especially the ceramics, pressed glass, and
nails) are of both descriptive and chronologie value.

CERAMICS

Two major criteria have been used to classify the ceramics: 1) certain physical properties of the paste, and 2) the techniques by which
the surfaces were decorated. On the basis of the paste the following
groups are recognized:
1. Earthenware. These ceramics are distinguished most readily by the porosity of
their paste (it sticks to the tongue when licked ) and, as a result, permeability. They
absorb a relatively high volume of liquid, generally 4 to 10 per cent (Norton, 1956:
208-~418) . The earthenware from Anderson's Mill shows a considerable range and
can be further sorted into two subgroups: soft-paste and hard-paste ( the latter is also
sometimes referred to as semi-p3rcelain ) .

2. Stoneware. The paste of this group is harder and more compact than the above.
It absorbs relatively little moisture (generally between 1 and 6 p 3r cent) and will
mt stick to the tongue (ibid.).

3. Porcelain. Like the stoneware, the paste of porcelain is impermeable to liquids,
absorption being less than 3 per cent. In addition , the paste is typically smooth, quite
compact, white, and, especially in the case of the thinner pieces, translucent. Porcelain is often referred to as china or chinaware.

These categories may be seen primarily as progressions in the firing
temperature, with the absorption decreasing as the temperature increases. They are, of course, not always sharply defined (as indicated
by the overlap in percentage of absorption), and the classification of
some specimens is perhaps arbitrary. Most, however, can be placed
into the appropriate group with a minimum of difficulty.
The techniques of decoration are: transfer printing, decalcomania,
gilding, respousse, and painting. Transfer printing is a process for
transferring a design to a vessel. The design is etched onto a copper
plate which in turn is inked with a pigment in a suspension of oil.
The inked plate is pressed on a thin piece of linen paper, which is
placed on the surface of the biscuit or once-fired vessel to be decorated.
The back of the paper is rubbed with a piece of flannel cloth to make
the pigment adhere to the surface of the biscuit, then the paper is removed, leaving the design on the vessel. The vessel is heated to drive
off the oil base of the pigment, glazed, and refired. Because of the
rubbing process and the removal of the paper, the transfer printed
designs do not often retain their sharpness. Another inherent limita-

10

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

tion is in the number of colors that can be used due to the problem of
aligning the different sheets that bear the designs (Binns, 1930: 222224).
With the invention of lithography several colors could be printed
on one surface. The technique of making decalcomanias (decals ) was
developed in the mid-19th century (Encyclopedia Americana, 1963:
553). It was but a short step from the development of multi-colored
decalcomanias to the application of these to pottery. A design is printed
on a layer of thin tissue paper which is backed with heavier paper.
The tissue paper is then coated with an adhesive. The unit can be
dampened and the decal slid off onto the surface to be adorned-in
this case the glazed vessel. With the decalcomania technique many
colors can be used and there is no chance of smearing the lines. Another distinguishing feature between the decalcomania and the transfer printed vessels is that the former is applied over the glaze, so when
a sherd is held up to the light, the surrounding areas appear more
glossy than the decorated area (Encyclopedia Americana, 1963: 553).
By contrast, the glaze is applied over the transfer printed designs and
the surface is uniformily glossy (Nichols, 1878: 72 ).
Gilding is the process of applying gold in some medium of suspension, then heating it to a relatively low temperature to drive off
the suspending medium, but not so as to vaporize the metallic gold
(Binns, 1930: 263). This technique was often used in conjunction
with one or more of the others, but in the present collection it occurs
only with repousse and decalcomania.
Repousse decoration is a method of making a relief design by use of
a mold (Nichols, 1878: 75), while painting here refers to the application of paints by some means other than transfer printing.
In addition to the obviously decorative techniques mentioned above,
all of the ceramics are covered with a glaze. It is consistently present
on the exterior surfaces and common on the interiors. In the case of
the permeable earthen wares, this coating ungoubtedly made the vessels
more serviceable as containers for liquids. Secondarily, it may have
enhanced their appearance, since the glaze on some of the soft-paste
the hard-paste earthenwares, the stonewares, and the porcelain-the
glaze gives the surfaces an attractive, clean-looking shine. Jelks ( 1958)
in his discussion of the ceramics found at James town has summarized
the various techniques of glazing. Since his statements seem germane
to the Anderson's Mill material they are repeated here:
Glazes are applied to ceramic objects by three basic methods: (1) by coating the
object with ground glass before firing, (2) by coating the object with the unfused ingredients of glass prior to firing (for example, red oxide of lead, ground to a powder

ANDERSON's

MILL

11

and mixed in water with sand or other silicious material, was frequently employed
in England for this kind of glaze), or (3) by coating the object with a flux whrch
combines with silica from the body of the clay object itself to form the glaze under
the heat of firing. The most common fluxes used in the latter process (with special
reference to the ceramics found at Jamestown) were sulfide of lead (PbS)-usually
in the form of powdered galena-and sodium chloride (NaCl), or common table
salt. The powdered lead sulfide was dusted on the clay body before it was put into
the kiln, sometimes with the addition of copper salts which imparted a greenish cast
to the otherwise amber lead glaze, or occasionally with manganese salts which
rendered it black or brown-black and sometimes almost completely opaque.
The customary way of applying sodium chloride glaze is to bring the molded
clay objects to a white · heat, then to cast a quantity of salt through the kiln door
directly onto the fire. The heat vaporizes the salt and the vapor sticks to the hot
clay in a thin film which acts as a flux and combines with silica from the clay to
form the transparent glaze. Salt glazes are clear and thin, but have an uneven pitted
surface resembling the surface of an orange peel (Jelks, 1958: 202).

Earthenware
SOFT-PASTE (79 Sherds)
All of the specimens comprising this group have a relatively soft
and quite porous paste which varies in color from almost white to
shades of tan and gray. Temper particles are sometimes visible, but
none of these has been identified. Virtually all of the soft-paste sherds
are thicker (between 6 and 13 mm.) than the other ceramics from the
site. Throwing rings (Fig. 4, C) and other wheel marks are frequently
found on the interior surfaces. Most appear to represent rather heavy
utility vessels, especially large cylindrical jars or crocks with flat bottoms (Fig. 4, A) and thickened rims (Fig. 4, B). All have been glazed
on at least the exterior surfaces, and many are glazed on the interiors.
The identification of the type of glazing, however, is often difficult
and is only tentatively indicated in the section which follows. The
soft-paste earthenware sherds show some variation, particularly in the
color and placement of the glaze. They include:
Brown Exterior and Interior. Twenty-two of the soft-paste fragments have a heavy, very dark brown glaze on both the exterior and
interior surfaces (Fig. 4, A, B). The glaze appears to have been produced by dusting lead sulfide onto the vessel, while the color was possibly achieved by the addition of manganese salts. Wheel marks and
faint throwing rings are frequently present on the interiors. Two, possibly three, large cylindrical vessels are represented.
Gray Exterior/ Brown Interior. Twenty-eight sherds from one or
possibly two large crocks are distinguished by a gray exterior and a
chocolate brown interior. The base of the vessel (or vessels), how-

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D
0,

IN.

eM.

--s

Fig . 4 . Soft-Paste Earthenware . A, Base sherd . B, Rim sherd . C, Interior of body she rd
show ing th row ing rings . D, Pai nted body she rd .

ever, was unglazed. The exterior surfaces have a rather pitty texture
and are covered with what appears to be a naturally gray salt glaze.
The insides of the sherds, by contrast, are quite smooth (throwing
rings nonetheless are prominent ) and have been coated with the dark
brown lead glaze noted above.

ANDERSON'S MILL

13

Cream Exteriorj Browninterior. One fairly small sherd has a creamcolored lead glaze on the exterior surface and a rich, chocolate-colored
lead glaze on the interior surface. An appliqued strip, possibly part of
a handle, appears over much of the outside surface.
White Exterior and Interior. An easily distinguished group of 14
specimens has a white to slightly gray glaze applied on both surfaces of
the vessel walls but not on the base (Fig. 4, C). Although it is difficult
to be certain, the exterior appears to have been salt glazed and the
interior lead glazed. Throwing rings are present on three sherds, and
one sherd is a fragment of a large loop handle. Two large cylindrical
vessels, or crocks, are represented.
Olive Green Exterior and Interior. A small group of four sherdsall from the same vessel-are coated on both wall surfaces (but not the
base ) with a greenish-brown salt glaze. A thin, almost purple line
appears in the paste of each sherd, near the surfaces, and probably
represents improper or incomplete firing.
Glazed Exterior/ Unglazed Interior. Nine sherds are glazed on only
the outside surface, six with a brown lead glaze and three with a
grayish-white salt glaze. Most of these may be from narrow-mouthed
vessels, although one is clearly a fragment of large cro ~k lid.
Painted Exterior/ Brown Interior. The most unusual soft-paste earthenware sherd is a small body fragment (Fig. 4, D) which has a dark
brown, lead-glazed interior and a painted and salt-glazed exterior. The
design motif cannot be reconstructed, but it is a duochrome, with the
natural gray of the salt glaze contrasting with the rich blue (cobalt
blue) on the painted decoration.
HARD-PASTE

(363 Sherds)

The specimens comprising this, the single most numerous group of
sherds, have a somewhat porous paste which sticks to the tongue when
licked. They are slightly harder and less porous than the soft-paste
earthenware. In addition, most, if not all, appear to be covered on the
exterior and interior with either a white slip and a clear glaze, or a
white glaze. Surfaces are typically quite smooth, lacking throwing
rings and wheel marks, but they are frequently crazed. Sherds are
generally thinner than the soft-paste earthenware fragments, ranging
frcm 3 to 9 mm. in thickness. In view of their relative abundance at
Anderson's Mill it seems likely that the hard-paste earthenware represents the everyday dishes-the plates, cups, saucers, and serving bowls.
On the basis of variations in the treatment of the surface, these ceram-

14

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

ics can be sorted into a number of subgroups, each of which is briefly
described below.
Decalcomania. Twenty-three of the sherds have been decorated by
means of the decalcomania technique. Six of these, probably from
one plate or a set of plates, are distinguished by a green and white decal
applied to the interior or upper surface (Fig. 5, A, B). The design
appears to have covered much of the plate, the central part consisting
of a stylized floral pattern and the rim or border area containing a geometric motif composed of a dashed line inside of which are a wavy
line and numerous small dots.
Five other sherds represent a deep bowl which is decorated with a
single recurring flower pattern in dark green, light green, red, yellow,
pink, and black (Fig. 5, C, D ) . The rim of the vessel and one panel
of the decal design are decorated with a repousse basket-like pattern.
An additional two fragments from a single plate or saucer have a vine
pattern which divides the vessel into a series of panels (Fig. 5, E, F ) .
Clusters of small flowers in blue, green, yellow, red, and pink appear
in and around these panels. Polychrome floral motifs occur on the
remaining 10 sherds, all of which are too small to reveal details about
design layout (Fig. 5, G ), although one (Fig. 5, H , H') has traces of a
maker's mark.
Transfer Printed. The five specimens decorated with transfer designs seem to represent a minimum of two vessels, possibly a plate and
a cup or small bowl. The two plate fragments (Fig. 5, I, J) have a
rather poorly preserved green floral pattern, a gently scalloped lip, and
a faint repousse vine design; while the cup ( ?) fragments have a blue
dentile pattern (Fig. 5, K ) on the rim exterior. One of the latter sherds
also contains portions of a green and blue leaf ( ?) design just below
the dentile decoration.
Painted. The painted sherds include one specimen with a dark blue
exterior and a white (undecorated) interior, as well as six specimens
from a bowl which had a narrow aquamarine-colored band encircling
the interior of the rim. The dark blue painted sherd also has a repousse
pattern of indeterminate nature.
Gilded. Five sherds have traces of gilded decorations. Included is one
fragment of a plate rim which contains two encircling vine-like lines
and, between these, the partially complete letters OV (Fig. 5, L) .
Among the remaining sherds is a small rim piece with a gilt band on
the interior near the lip (Fig. 5, M ), two rim fragments with what
appear to be stylized floral designs (one has the design on the exterior
surface, the other-Fig. 5, N-on the interior surface), and, lastly, a
tiny rim sherd with only traces of gilt on the interior surface.

15

A N DERSON 'S MILL

F

H

J

K

M
L

N
oc-=-o

- ~N.

CM.

Fig . 5 . Decorated Hard-Paste Ea rthenwa re Sherds . A- H, Deca l. H', Maker's ma rk. 1-K,
Transfe r printed. L-N , Gilded .

Repousse. Twenty-two sherds of hard-paste earthenware have only
repousse decoration. Included are 13 rim pieces, six body fragments,
two basal pieces, and a cup handle fragment . The repousse designs

16

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

(Fig. 6, A-C ) occur on the exterior of some sherds and interior of
others, and include floral and geometric (fluted and radial largely )
motifs. One of the basal sherds contains an incomplete and indecipherable maker's mark on the exterior (Fig. 6, D ) .
Plain. Sherds from either plain white vessels or from undecorated
vessel areas are by far the most common type ( 300 specimens ) of
hard-paste earthenware. Shapes are not particularly distinctive with
cups, bowls, plates, and saucers being well represented. Four basal
fragments (Fig. 6, E-H ) do, however, contain maker's marks on their
exterior surfaces. Only one of these (Fig. 6, G ) can be identified. It is
the mark of Johannes Lehman who in about 1830 operated a pottery
factory at Tyler's Port, Pennsylvania (Thorn, 1947: 134).
Stoneware ( 6 Sherds )
This small group of sherds is characterized by a hard, compact
paste which appears to be impermeable (i.e., it does not stick to the
tongue when licked) . The color of the paste varies from grayish-white
to dark gray and the wall thickness is uniform, from 4 to 5 mm. All
exterior surfaces were evidently painted and then glazed, although
it is possible that the glaze was mixed with pigment. In addition to
the all-over painted decoration, the outside surface of three specimens
have repousse fluted or radial designs (Fig. 6, I). The interiors of all
but one, a possible ginger beer bottle fragment, are glazed. Three,
however, are lighter on the interior and none has a repousse design on
the inside. Jars and vases appear to be the most common vessel form.
Porcelain (57 Sherds )
The second type of impermeable ceramics, the porcelain or chinaware, is distinguished by a very hard and compact white paste which
can frequently be penetrated by light. Most specimens are relatively
thin, about 5mm. in thickness on the average. On the basis of variations
in the treatment of the surface the porcelain can be broken into a
number of subgroups, each of which is briefly described below.
Decalcomania. Eight of the procelain sherds are adorned with a decal
floral pattern. One of these (Fig. 7, A), a partially restored saucer
estimated to have been roughly 15 em. in diameter, has, in addition to
the decals, two gilt bands. One of the bands appears on the lip, the
other around the center depression. The colors of the decal are blue,
pink, coral, maroon, yellow, and black.
Six of the remaining sherds-three basal pieces and three body
fragments-have prominent polychrome flowers in green, yellow,
pink, and red (Fig. 7, B-D). On four of these (three bases and one body
fragment ) the decoration is on the interior; on the other two it appears
on the exterior.

17

ANDERSON ' S MILL

H

0
0

IN.

CM.

6

Fig . 6. Hard- Paste Earthenware and Stoneware Sherds. A-C, Repousse, hard-paste
earthenware. 0-H , Maker's marks, hard-paste eathenware. I, Stoneware.

A final sherd (Fig. 7, E ) in this group, possibly from a small mug
or pitcher, contains both a decal and a repousse decoration on the
exterior surface. The repousse design, a highly stylized vine and dot
pattern, appears just below the lip; while the polychrome decal is im-

18

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mediately beneath this-indeed, it partially overlaps the repousse
pattern.
Transfer Printed. Each of the five transfer printed porcelain sherds
is monochrome. Two of these bear delicate Chinese or Japanese na cu ralistic (landscape and figure) designs in brown (Fig. 7, F, G ) , and a
third (Fig. 7, H) is decorated with a scalloped blue band around the
inside of the rim. This band is not unlike that often combined with
the more delicate naturalistic patterns. The remaining two sherds (Fig.
7, I , J ) are rather small and are decorated on the interior w.ith a green
floral design. It is likely that they are from the same plate.
Painted. Five sherds are painted on one surface only, three on the
exterior and one on the interior. Two are lavender colored and appear
to be from the same set of dishes. One of these, a probable saucer fragment, has a wide band around the inside of the rim; the other, possibly from a cup, appears to have been painted over much (or perhaps
all) of the exterior surface. The two remaining sherds are unusual in
form and are very likely from the face of a doll. Both are pink and one
(Fig. 8, A) has traces of small brown lines, evidently eyelashes.
Gilded. Included in this group are four fragments decorated with
one or more straight to slightly wavy lines (Fig. 8, B-E) , and one
sherd with a stylized floral or vine design (Fig. 8, F) . Two are from
plate rims, two from thick cups or mugs, and one from the base of a
possible shaving mug. One of the rim fragments has portions (Fig.
8, D) of a handle and could be.from the same vessel as the base sherd.
In addition to the gilded decoration, one of the plate rims (Fig. 8, F)
has a geometric repousse design and one of the cup fragments (Fig.
8, E) has portions of green floral decal (?).
Repousse. Eight specimens-three rim and five body sherds-have
only repousse decorations, most of which are geometric patterns. Included are fluted and radial lines, as well as curvilinear (possibly
stylized floral) designs. Most sherds are small and difficult to orient
properly, but the decoration appears to be on the outside surface of
two pieces and on the inside surface of the other six.
Plain. The 26 specimens comprising the undecorated porcelain include four rim fragments, eight basal sherds, and 16 body pieces. Cups
and small bowls appear to be most common forms represented. One
of the basal sherds (Fig. 8, G) has an unidentified maker's mark which
reads rmany.
Miscellaneous Ceramic Objects (6 Specimens )
Included in this group are one complete (Fig. 8, H) and two fragmentary door knobs, a wire insulator (Fig. 8, I) a baked but unglazed
marble (Fig. 8, J), and a thick, unidentifiable piece of glazed porce-

19

ANDERSON's MILL

E

H
0

I N.

0

CM.

'=1

J
Fig . 7 . Decorated Porcelain Sherds . A-D, Decal. E, Decal and repousse. F-J, Transfer
printed.

lain. The door knobs are of glazed, opaque porcelain, with the complete specimen measuring 5.6 em. in diameter and 2.6 em. in thickness.
The insulator, also of glazed porcelain, is constricted in the middle and
has a central perforation. It is 4.2 em. high and has a maximum diam-

20

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

D

c

8

F

E

•

G

J

0

IN.

0

CM.

3

Fig . 8 . Porcelain and Miscellaneous Ceramic Objects . A, Painted sherd from doll face ;
arrow points to traces of eye lashes . ll-F, Gilda d . G, Basal sherd w ith por iions of maker' s
mark . H, Door knob . I, Wire insulator. J, Marble .

eter of 4 em. and a minimum diameter of 2.6 em. The central perforation is 8 mm. in diameter. The marble appears to have been home
made and measures 1.3 em. in diameter.
Interpretations
In doing correlative studies which would help to place the Anderson's Mill ceramics into a broader picture I have been faced with the
perplexing problem of differing terminologies. Terms such as china,
ironstone, semiporcelain, whiteware, and the like are often used but

21

ANDERSON's MILL

generally not adequately defined. Fortunately, however, the most important features for this study are not the characteristics of the paste,
but rather the techniques of decoration. Both the styles and methods
of decoration are somewhat better defined and their histories a bit
better known.
Up to 1865 American potters had produced only an insignificant
amount of ceramics, and what few were being manufactured were
largely copies of European (mostly English) wares (Ramsay, 1947:
95-96 ). Since few of the domestic pieces were of good quality, most
ceramics were imported from Europe, chiefly from England. The
source of the Anderson's Mill ceramics is, of course, not known (the
one identifiable maker's mark was from a Pennsylvania factory), but
it is possible that they were, at least in part, imported.
During the first half of the 19th century English potters were producing large quantities of transfer printed (especially in blue ) vessels
with pseudo-romantic oriental scenes copied from Chinese and Japanese wares (such as shown in Fig. 7, F , G) being quite popular
(Ramsay, 1947: 106-115 ; Camehl, 1916: xi-xii ). About 1850, however, a number of new varieties of whitewares, known variously as
semiporcelain, White Granite, Ironstone, etc., began to be introduced.
Referred to herein as hard-paste earthenware and stoneware, these
ceramics were often undecorated (Ramsay, 1947: 106-115 ), although
designs of wheat or grapes were occasionally applied in low relief
(ibid.). About the same time (1850) , the process of decalcomania was
developed by Minton's pottery in England.
In light of the developments briefly outlined above, the frequency
of decalcomania, transfer printed, repousse, gilded, and plain hardpaste earthenware is presented below. The figures on the left of the
slash are the sherd counts, while those on the right indicate the minimum number of vessels represented.
Transfer
Decalcomania printed Painted Repousse

Hard-paste
earthenware
Porcelain

Gilded

Plain

23/ 12

5/ 2

7/ 2

22/ 14

5/ 4

300/?

8/ 8

5/ 5

4/ 2

8/ 6

6/ 6

26/ ?

The preponderance of the decalcomania vessels over the transfer
printed ones and the number of repousse decorated pieces indicate that
most of the porcelain and the hard-paste earthenware from Anderson's
Mill date after 1850. Allowing even for the possibility that many of

22

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the plain sherds are from undecorated vessel areas, their frequency
of occurrence also suggests a post-1850 date. The transfer printed
sherds-especially those with oriental-inspired designs-could date
from an earlier period, but it is possible that these motifs and transfer
printing were retained for some time after the introduction of decalcomania. It is also possible that they were vessels long in the possession
of the Anderson family .
GLASS

The glass artifacts have been divided into three large groupsbottles, jars, and pressed glass--on the basis of their morphological
characteristics.

Bottles
For descriptive purposes the bottles have been classified into panel
bottles, snuff bottles, and miscellaneous bottles. The last-named category is further sorted into bottle necks and bottle bottoms.
PANEL BOTTLES ( 48

Specimens)

Included in this group are bottles that have rectangular panels recessed into their fronts , backs, and/ or sides (Fig. 9). Each is rectangular in cross section on a plane parallel to the base. The longer
sides in this sectional view are referred to as the faces, the shorter
as the sides. The panels usually bear low relief letters that indicate
the maker and/ or the product.
At least five Rawleigh's medicine bottles are represented in the collection. These are of two types. One type (Fig. 9, A, A') has the word
Rawleigh's in script on one face and below this the words trade mark
in upper case Roman letters, no inscription on the other face, the words
Freeport, Ill. in upper case Roman letters on one side, and the words
W. T . Rawleigh Co. in upper case Roman letters on the opposite side.
The second type (Fig. 9, B) has the word Rawleigh's in script on one
face with the words trade mark in upper case Roman letters within the
space formed by two lines of the tail of the R which underscores the
rest of the word Rawleigh's. On the basal part of the same face below
the panel are the words Made in U.S.A. in upper case Roman letters.
There are no panels or words on the sides or the other face. There is
one complete bottle and one fragment of the first type, and one complete bottle and one fragment of the second type, as well as one untyped neck fragment and one unlettered panel. There are two different
Fig . 9 . Panel Bottles. A, A', Type 1 Rawleigh l:ottle . B, Ty~·e 2 Rawleigh bottle. C, C',
Fletcher's Castoria bottle . D, D', Three-In-One Oil bottle. E, Hand finished neck . F, Machine
finished neck.

c·

c

0

eM.

E

24

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

sizes represented. The two complete specimens and one of the fragments are 15.9 em. tall, 2.8 em. thick, and 5.7 em. wide. Their necks
are 2.1 em. in diameter and 4.5 cin. tall. The panel fragments are
from bottles that were somewhat larger, but they are too incomplete
to obtain the exact dimensions. The three necks are machine finished.
One bottle (Fig. 9, C, C') is 14.2 em. tall, 2.4 em. thick, 4.45 em.
wide and has a neck 4.6 em. tall, 2.2 em. in diameter at the shoulders
tapering to 1.6 em. at the point below the thickened portion. It has
two unlettered face panels and two side panels one of which has Castoria in upper case Roman letters, the other Cha. H. Fletcher's in script.
The neck is machine finished.
Another complete bottle (Fig. 9, D, D') has no panels on its faces,
but one on either side lettered THREE IN ONE and 3-in-ONE OIL
COMPANY.
One of the bottle fragments has a panel on both its face and side. The
one on the face is lettered:
. .. Y & HOREHOUND

URES
COLDS, CROUP.
Another sixteen inscribed panel bottle fragments were recovered.
They are inscribed as follows :

co.

ELIXR
ER

AL.

DR
FS

PRE
DICIN

AR

YRUP

OIS.

co

EW

DR
UST

ALD
ER

EDI
LO

s

HAM
WIZAR

:~;

CHATTAN

All of the above are printed in Roman letters except CHATTAN
which is in upper case italics. Eighteen unlettered body fragments of
panel are also in the collection, but are too incomplete for further
description.
Of the seven necks recovered two are hand finished (Fig. 9, E) , two
machine finished (Fig. 9, F ) , and three too incomplete to determine
the method used. Both of the hand finished necks are 2 em. in diameter; one is 4 em. tall; the other 4.5 em. tall. The machine finished
necks are 2.45 and 2.35 em. in diameter, but of indeterminable height.

ANDERSON's MILL

25

SNUFF BOTTLES (25 specimens)
The snuff bottles are square in cross section on a plane parallel with
that of the base and, more importantly, lack necks (Fig. 10, A-C ) .
The mouths project about . 7 em. above the shoulders. The complete

0
B

c

A

E
Q

INC

0

&i.

3

Fig . 10. Snuff Bottle ond Bottle Necks . A, Complete snuff bottle. B, Snuff bottle neck.
C, Snuff bottle base. D, E, Group I bottle necks . F, Group II bottle necks.

26

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

example (and probably most or all those represented by fragments) is
11 em. high and 6.15 em. wide; the outside diameter of the mouth is
3.45 em. The six bottom sherds and the one complete specimen indicate
that at least 7 bottles are included in the collection.
MISCELLANEOUS BOTTLE NECKS

(22 Specimens )

Three criteria have been used in grouping these specimens: 1) presence or absence of wire rim, 2) size of the mouth orifice and neck
diameter relative to the probable height of the bottle, and 3) general
configuration of the thickened upper area of the neck just below the
mouth. The wire rim is the ledge or rim that protrudes from the neck
just under the thickened portion of the neck. The characteristic of being hand finished or machine finished is not considered as a criterion
for descriptive classification; however, it has been taken into account
as it is important for dating the bottles.
Group I (Fig. 10, D, E)
Number of specimens : 5
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Present
Inside diameters of mouths: 1.45 to 2.2 em.
Diameter of necks measured below wire rim : 2.1 to 3.1 em.
General configuration of thickened area: The wire rim is rounded and protrudes
only slightly (not more than .5 em.). Above the wire rim the neck expands
slightly to form a thickened area that does not extend laterally (on a plane parallel to the base) beyond the rim. This thickened portion tapers toward the center
of the mouth. The outer sides of the tapered portion are straight.
Height of the thickened area from the bottom (nearest the base of the bottle) of the
wire rim to the rim of the mouth: 2.3 to 3.2 em.
Over-all height of neck: 3.7 to 10.2 em. (intermediary ones are 8.1 and 5.7 em.; the
other is indeterminable) .

Group II (Fig. 10, F)
Number of specimens: 3
Color: Clear (2) and amber ( 1)
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameters of mouths: 1.4, 1.5, and 1.7 em.
Diameters of necks below thi·c kened portion: 2.1, 2.2., and 2.5 em.
General configuration of thickened area : Similar to Group I except that they lack
wire rims. One specimen has slightly curved sides.
Over-all height of necks: 4.1, 3.1, and 9.25 em.
General configuration of bottles: All three specimens have pronounced seam marks.
One appears to have had a cylindrical body; another a rectangular body. All of
the n ecks were hand finished.

ANDERSON'S MILL

27

Group III (Fig. 11, A)
Number of specimens :
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Present
Inside diameter of mouth: 1.6 em.
Diameter of neck below thickened portion: 2.4 em.
General configuration of thickened area: Wire rim is edged or diamond-shaped in
cross section. Above the wire rim the thickened area is rounded or roughly semicircular in cross section. The neck was hand finished.
Over-all height of neck : 4.25 em.

Group IV (Fig. 11, B)
Number of specimens:
Color: Amber
Wire rim : Present
Inside diameter of mouth: 2 em.
Diameter of neck below wire rim : 2.85 em.
General configuration of thickened area: Rounded wire tim as in Group I. Area
above the wire is trapezoidal in cross section. The trapezoidal area is 1.15 em . t all.
Over-all height of neck: More than 4.1 em.
General configuration of neck: Striations run at a slight angle to an axis perpendicular to the base of the bottle. Neck is probably hand finished .

Group V (Fig. 11, C)
Number of specimens:
Color: Amber
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameter of mouth: Indeterminable
Diameter of neck: Indeterminable
General configuration of thickened area : Roughly semi-circular m cross sect ion
General configuration of neck: Hand finished

Group VI (Fig. 11, D, E)
Number of specimens: 5
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameters of mouths: ca. 4.25 em., greater than 3.1 em., and indetermina b le
Diameters of necks below thickened portions: 5 em., and indeterminable
General configuration of thickened area: One fragment has a stippled band 1.45 c :rn.
wide around the neck below the thickened area. The neck juts straight out fo r a
distance of about .4 em. and slants toward the mouth at an angle of about 4 5 ° .
One fragment has a thickened area 1.45 em. in height that is roughly semi-circular in cross section. The third piece has a thickened portion that is rectangular in
cross section and is .7 em. across the long side (height of the thickened area ) .
Above the thickened portion is a rim that goes straight up to the mouth for .35

28

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

em. The mouth orifices are large relative to the size of the bottle. Two necks are
hand finished, one is machine finished.
Over-all height of necks: 3.45 and 2.2 em., and indeterminable.
General configuration of the bottles: Probably wide mouth jars not adapted to take
screw on lids.

B

F

E

~

~y r
..

-I

.-.,·
···~!.

· ~~~·..

...

H
0

g=

!N
CM.

Fig. II . Bottle Necks. A, Group Ill. 8, Group IV. C, Group V. D, E, Group VI. F, H, Group
VII. G, Group VIII. I, Group IX.

29

ANDERSON's MILL

Group VII (Fig. 11, F, H)
Number of specimens: 3
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameters of mouths: 1.7 em. and indeterminable
Diameter of neck below thickened portion: 2.45 em. and indetenninable
General configuration of thickened areas: Like the thickened areas of modern soda
water bottles.
Over-all height of necks: Indeterminable
General configuration of necks: They were made to take crown cap closures. One is
hand finished, one incomplete, and one machine finished.

Group VIII (Fig. 11, G)
Number of specimens: 2
Color: Clear and amber
Wire rim: Absent
Inside diameters of mouths: .35 and 2.4 em.
Diameter of necks below thickened portions: 1.7 and 2.95 em.
General ·configurations of thickened areas: These two fragments have only one
characteristic in common that separates them from the other bottle necks: they
are made to take screw caps. The one with the smaller mouth appears to be from
a flavor extract bottle. Both are machine finished.

Group IX (Fig. 11, I)
Number of specimens:
Color: Clear
Wire rim: Present
Diameter of neck below thickened portion: 2.75 em.
General configuration: Neck for a screw on cap

MISCELLANEOUS BOTTLE BOTTOMS ( 48

Specimens)

The bottle bottoms are sorted into two large classes according to their
shapes. The first group, those with round bottoms, are further divided
into specimens: 1) with no markings, 2) with simple markings, and
3) with complex markings. The second large class, those lacking round
bottoms, were divided into finer groups according to the shape of the
base. All of these categories are purely descriptive.

30

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The following bottles have round bottoms:
Group I (Fig. 12, A, B)
Number of specimens: 8
T y pe of marking: None
D escription : One bottom (Fig. 12, A) has a very slightly conically-indented base
which forms a kick-up of about 1.2 em. This bottom appears to be one made with
a snap case (a device for grasping the bottom of the bottle during th e finishing
process). The lower portion of the body (not the bottom ) ha s words CONTENTS
1/:; QUART in low relief, suggesting this piece is probably a fragm ent of a spirits
or wine bottle. It is 7.8 em. in diameter.
Another bottle bottom ha s a slightly indented base which is not conical but
rather is slightly curved. A h eavy seam encircles the basal part of the body about
.95 em . above th e bottom. The bottom is 8 em. in diameter. A third fragment ha s
a slightly incurved bottom and a h eavy seam which encircles the basal part of the
body about .4 em. above the bottom. The bottom is 7 em. in diameter. There is a
ring around the base of th e fourth bottom sherd. The center is downcurved or
convex, and the bottom is 6.5 em. in diameter.
The last four sherds in thi s group are of the sam e type. The bottoms are slightly
upcurved or con cave to form a kick-up of about 1 em. The surfa ces are irregular,
and at about the center is a circle in low relief which appears to be a result of the
manufacturing method rather than an intentional mark. Th e one complete example is 10.2 em. in diameter.

Group II (Fig. 12, C, D )
Number of specimens: 12
Type of marking: Numera ls in low relief
D escription: Seven of these sherds are of the sam e type. The ki ck-up varies from .3
to .6 em., and all except two have circles which contain numbers approximately
at their centers. The circles are 2.2 em. in diameter; and the numbers are 1.2 em.
high in all cases except one which is 1.6 em. All of th e surfaces are slightly irr egular. The one complete bottom (Fig. 12, D ) has a diamet er of 11.5 em. The
two sherds with portions of th e body have seams around the basal part of the body.
The remaining five specimens in this group have slightly concave bottoms.
Th eir dimensions are as follows:

Diameter

H eight of number

Possible basal body seam

4.15 em.

.40cm.

yes

7.8 em.

.45 em.

yes

.3 em .

no

.3 em.

no

.3 em.

no

4.5 em.

31

AN D ERSON's M I LL

B

A

D

c

G
E

F

0

eM.

Fig . 12. Round Bottle Bottom s. A, B, Group I. C, D, Group II . E-G, Group Ill.

32

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Group III (Fig. 12, E-G)
Number of specimens: 14
Type of marking: Complex
Description:

Diameter
14.4cm.
14.3

9.1

8.0

ca. 6.5
8.2
6.25

ca . 6.2
5.85
6.2

Symbol
14 circle-diamond 3
1 circle-diamond 3
4
Diamond containing letter I
D23
65-S circle-diamond
3 Rivers
32
6
A
MGCo
8
Se~ Fig. 12, G
Dr. S.B .H.
PR. 0 ....
AB
16
9-B -383
68-7
15 circle 8
9Duraglas (Fig. 12, F )
F
0-1217
4
12 circle-diamond 9
10
(Fig. 12, E )

Possible
basal body
seam

Color

no
no

amber
amber

yes

amber
clear

yes

clear

no

amber
frosted

no

clear

yes
no

amber
clear

no
yes

amber
amber

no

clear

yes

clear

The following groups of bottle bottoms are rectangular, oblong, square,
or hexagonal:
Group IV (Fig. 13, A )
Number of specimens: 1
Description: Several sherds have been reconstructed to form the b etter part of a
bottle which has an oblong base and parallel panels on each side which are 2.25
em. wide and run the length of the bottle. The neck has threads to take a screw
cap. The bottle is blue in color and was probably a milk of magnesia container.
The short axis of the base is 6.05 em. long; the long axis, 8.45 em. The neck is 3.1
em. in diameter and 3.5 em. high .
The total height of the bottle is indeterminable.

33

ANDERSON'S MILL

Group V (Fig. 13, B-E)
Number of specimens: 11 (includes one complete bottle)
Description: In this group are specimens which have rectangular or near rectangular bases but which cannot be classed as panel bottles (Fig. 13, B). Three of the
10 base sherds are straight on one side and have curved ends and one curved side
(Fig. 13, C). One of these is marked on the bottom with a diamond and, inside
this, an I; the other two are unmarked. The marked fragment als:J has the letters

ESS
. .. ED BY
. . . C.
in low relief on the flat face. This piece is 3.5 em. wide; the others, 2.8 em. and
indetenninable.
Four bottle bottoms are quite fragmentary, but appear to have had straight
sides and curved ends. None is marked and the only one complete enough to measure is 4.15 em. by 2.15 em.
An eighth bottom sherd is rectangular in shape, but the sides are slightly
curved. On the bottom there is an equilateral triangle enclosing the letters W and
Tin low relief. Below the apex of the triangle are letters U. S. A. To the right of
th= triangle is the letter I. This base was more than 9 em. long and greater than
6.5 em. wide.
Another bottle bottom (Fig. 13, D) is hexagonal in shape. The bottom is marked
with a Heinz 57-like shield within which is the letter J. To the right of this
symbol are the numbers 4 and 50. One other sherd of the same general shape has
the letters J. B. W. Co. and the numbers 118 2 on its base in low relief.
In addition to the above fragments , one complete bottle (Fig. 13, E ) is included
with this group because it has a rectangular base and is marked with a diamond
and, inside this, an /. The neck, however, looks like the necks of the panel bottles.
The bottle is 14.7 em. high, 3.1 em. wide, and 5.4 em. long; the neck is 4.4 em.
high and 1.9 em. in diameter. The base of the neck on one face has 3 iv in low

r~lief.

Group VI (Fig. 13, F )
Number of specimens : 2
Description: Both of these are square bottoms. One (Fig. 13, F ) looks rather like
the base of a snuff bottle, but it is clear, not amber, and is too incomplete to determine the size of the bottle. The other fragment is also clear and has the letter
H near its center in low relief. The bottle it is from was over 8 em. wide.

Jars

The jar parts are here considered under four headings: nms, lid
liners, tops, and miscellaneous.
JAR RIMS

(27 Specimens)

The characteristics used to separate the jar rim sherds into a number
of descriptive groups include: the shape of the shoulder, the presence

34

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

B

c

A

D

E
0

F

0

IN.

CM.

6

Fig . 13. Miscellaneous Bottle Bottoms. A, Group IV. B-E, Group V. F, Group VI .

ANDERSON's MILL

35

or absence of a wire rim, the shape of the wire rim when it is present,
and the shape of the lip.
Group I (Fig. 14, A )
Number of specimens: 5
Wire rim: Absent
Shape of shoulders : Square
Dimensions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth: 1.7 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: 6.2 em. Thickness of glass at rim: from .4 to .5 em.
Rim shape: Rounded, but ridges remain on the outside-the rounded part is centered
on the rim's surface leaving a ledge on either side.

Group II (Fig. 14, B)
Number of specimens: 1
Wire rim: Absent
Shape of shoulders: Squared
Dimen sions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth: 1.5 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: indeterminable. Thickness of glass at r im: .35 em.
Rim shape: Squared

Group III (Fig. 14, C)
Number of specimens : 1
Wire rim: Present; protrudes . 7 em.
Shape of shoulders: Squared
Dimensions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth: 2.55 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: indeterminable. Thickness of glass at rim : .35 em .
Rim shape: Squared

Group IV (Fig. 14, D , E )
Number of specimens: 5
\iVire rim : Present; protrudes .55 em.
Shape of shoulders: Rounded
Dimensions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth: 2.55 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: about 6.4 em. Thickness of glass at rim: .3 em.
Rim shape: Slightly rounded and beveled

Group V
Number of specimens: 2
Wire rim: Present; protrudes about .3 em.
Shape of shoulders: Rounded
Dimensions: Height of constricted area from shoulder to mouth : 2 .3 em. Outside
diameter of mouth: indeterminable. Thickness of glass at rim: .35 em.
Rim shape: Rounded

36

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

c

F
Fig. 14 . Jar Rims . A , Group I. B, Group II. C, Group Ill. D, E, Group IV. F, Miscellaneous .

Two sherds may belong to either Group II or III. Their rims are
squared, but they are not large enough to ascertain the presence or
absence of a wire ri:tn. Ten other sherds have the necks or restricted

ANDERSON's MILL

37

areas of the jars made for screw lids, but are too incomplete to classify.
One additional rim fragment (Fig. 14, F) is from a jar with no shoulders. The threads for the cap on this piece are on the rim of the straight
sides.
JAR LID LINERS ( 47 Specimens )
Jar lid liners (Fig. 15 ) are discs of white glass that fit into the tops
of screw tops for wide mouth jars. They have been divided into five
groups on the basis of what is written on their surfaces, or, in one case,
an absence of any wording.
Group I
Number of specimens: 8
Diameter: 6.65 em.
Thickness at center: .35 em.
General features: A set of two concentric circles in relief is placed in the center.
The words GENU !NE BOYD app ear in low r elief around the outside of the liner,
on the rim. One specimen has 56 BOYD'S in that position.

Group II
Number of specimens : 4
Diameter : ca. 6.4 em.
Thickness: .35 to .45 em.
General features: The words Celain lined occur on the outside edges of one;
. . . VINE PORC . .. on another.

Group III
Number of specimens: 2
Diameter: 6.4 and 6.5 em.
General features: Two concentric circles in the center which contain no wording.
Both l:ners were found inside screw on tin caps.

Group IV
Number of specimens: 3
Diamet ~ r: Indeterminable
General features: Words FOR M . . . on one; FOR MA .. . on the second; and
MASON JAR CAP on the third. The words are around the outer edges of the
discs.

Group V
Number of specimens:
Diameter: Indeterminable
Thickness at center: ca. 5.0 em.

38

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

General features: Words ... AR CAP NN . . . around the edge, inside rim. Number
2 toward the center of the disc in low relief.

An additional twenty-nine lid lines sherds are too incomplete to
classify.
JAR TOPS

( 15 Specimens )

Although the jar tops are of metal, they are discussed here in order
to maintain the continuity of the jar parts. Fourteen of the lids and lid
fragments are of tin and one is of iron. The iron specimen, a discshaped piece, represents the top part of a compound lid. The missing
part, a threaded rim section, fits over this piece and is screwed onto the
mouth of a jar. The disc is about 8 em. in diameter and is inscribed
with KERR WIDE MOUTH MASON PAT. *-31-.. .
The remaining 14 lids are one piece tin lids which were used with
the jar lid liners (Fig. 15 ). One is inscribed GENUINE BOYD CAP
MASON JAR around the top of its rim. All of the six complete lids are
about 6.5 em. in diameter. At least ten lids are represented by the fragmentary and whole specimens.

Miscellaneous Jar Parts (6 Specimens)
In addition to the above, there are two glass jar bases and four glass
jar body sherds. Each of the bases is 9.2, em. in diameter and contains
the words KERR GLASS MFG COM SAND SPRINGS, OKLA around
the outside, and PAT AUG 3,1915 in the center.
Three of the body fragments , all probably from Ball jars, are inscribed in upper case script: one has . . . ALL, and two have BAL ...
The one remaining piece is decorated with intersecting lines (a gridlike pattern ) done in low relief and placed .6 em. apart from one another. This sherd is probably from a pickle jar.

Pressed Glass
The criterion for the classification of the pressed glass (i.e., glass
pressed into a mold while still plastic) has been the design. The terminology has been taken primarily from Lee ( 1933).
IDENTIFIED PATTERNS

(50 Specimens )

Crystal (Fig. 16, A)
Number of specimens: 2
Color: Clear
Design: Included in this group are a large rim sherd (Fig. 16, A ) and a small body

39

ANDERSON's MILL

Fig. 1 5. Jar Lids a nd Liners .

fragment, both of which h ave on the exterior surface a series of rather broadlyspaced (m aximum of '2.7 em. ), raised vertical lines. On the rim piece the lines
begin at indentations formed by a scalloped lip and continue toward the base of
the vessel, becoming more closely-spaced (i.e., somewhat converging) .
Vessel form : Probably a small bow l

Daisy and Button (Fig. 16, B, C)
Number of specimen s: 5
Color: Clear
Design : The design on each of these specimens consists of a geometric figure, usually
an octagon or a hexagon, composed of a number of wedge-shaped segments done

40

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in high relief. One of the sherds has the octagon divided into 12 wedge-shaped
segments, and 2 others have patterns in which hexagons are divided into 6 segments. In the classic daisy and button pattern the stylized "daisies" (the wedged
geometric figures) are interspersed with smaller geometric elements which may
or may not be subdivided by wedges. The sherd that is decorated with the octagonal stylized daisies has one "button" that is an octagon in high relief and is
surrounded by four daisies. On the two sherds having hexagonal daisies, there are
equilateral triangles whose bases are sides of the hexagons between the daisies.
The over-all effect of this pattern is that of a set of interlocking, six-pointed stars.
Thes ~ two sherds have been considered in this group because they seem to represent a set. The wedges of another· sherd are ranged in a circle about a central
daisy that has a round button in the middle of it. The two remaining pieces
exhibit the daisy pattern, but are too incomplete to determine the exact style of
decoration.
Vessel form: One sherd is a rim from what appears to have been a steep-sided
vessel, while another fragment is probably from the top or lid of a vessel. The
similarity of the patterns on these two sherds suggests that they belong to a set.
The other pieces are too incomplete to yield particulars about form , but they
appear to represent 3 different vessels.

Pressed Block (Fig. 16, D)
Number of specimens: 1
Color: Clear
Design: The pressed block design consists of a number of truncated pyramid-shaped
elements placed side by side, row upon row.
Vessel form: Unknown

Ribbed (Fig. 16, E)
Number of specimens: 1
Color: Amethystine
Design: Ribs in high relief radiate from a raised central circle (ca. 3 em. in
diameter and :6 em. high ) which app ears to be a knob for lifting.
Vessel form: Probably a bowl lid

Fine Cut (Fig. 16, F)
Number of specimens: 1
Color: Pale, clear yellow-green
Design: Four-sided pyramid-shaped projections cover the face (exterior) of the
vessel. The apex of each pyramid is truncated and has an indented cross, the arms
of which are perpendicular to the basal sides of the pyramid. The bases of the
pyramids are about .5 em. square.
Vessel form: Probably a rim of a glass, cup, or goblet

Grape (Fig. 16, G)
Number of specimens:
Color: Clear
Design: A bunch of grapes and two leaves are represented in high relief on the

41

ANDERSON'S MILL

B

E

G

J

0

IN.

o

tM.

K

Fig . 16. Pressed Glass. A, Crystal. B, C, Daisy and button . D, Pressed block. E, Ribbed .
F, Fine cut. G, Grape . H, I, Bellflower ribbed. J , K, Hobnail.

exterior. A vertica l line in low relief appears just below the grapes, and may be
one of a set that divided the vessel into panels. If this were the case, the sherd
wou1d be of the paneled grap e type.
Ve3s : l brm: Unknown

42

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Bellflower Ribbed (Fig. 16, H, I )
Number of specimens: 5
Color: Clear ( 1) and amethystine ( 4)
Design: Characterized by raised ribs which radiate from a central point or circle.
These ribs differ from those of the above-m entioned ribbed type in that they are
pointed on the ends, are in lower relief, and are more triangular in cross section
(th e ribs of the ribbed type are nearly square in cross section).
Vessel form : Unknown, but at least 4 vessels are represented.

Pointed Hobnail (Fig. 16, J, K)
Number of specimens: 5
Color: Clear ( 4) and ameth ystine ( 1)
Design: All of these sherds are from rims, each of which has been thickened and
indentations made to achieve the effect of a scalloped edge. On three of the pieces
the indentations are on a plan2 that is probably parallel to the base, but on one
the indentations are on a plane that appears to be perpendicular to the base.
Vessel form: Unknown, but at least 4 vessels are represented.

Bull's Eye (Fig. 17, A-C )
Number of specimens : 6
Color: Clear
Design. One sherd exhibits a pattern composed of partially contiguous rings (ca.
1.5 em. in diameter) in high relief. In the center of each ring is a raised hemisphere. The area between the inside of the ring and the outside of the hemisphere
-as well as the space between each ring-is stippled. Four other sherds exhibit
the classic hull's eye pattern of a rounded circle in high relief inside an indented
circle (Fig. 17, A, B). The one remaining specimen (Fig. 17, C) is decorated
with a pattern that may be a variation of the hull's eye style. On this piece a
slightly elliptical-shaped area in high reHef is outlined by two crescents, one
above and one below the ellipse. The surface of the ellipse is decorated in diamond
point, while the surfaces of the crescents are scored.
Vessel form: Unknown; at least 3 vessels are present in the collection.

Icicle (Fig. 17, D, E)
Number of specimens:
Color: Clear
Design: Two of these
pointed (Fig. 17, D ,
point.
Vessel form: Probably

3
pieces have long, parallel indentations or lines which are
E); the third has the lines (also indented) radiating from a
drinking glasses.

White Glass (Fig. 17, F-I)
Number of specimens: 20
Color: White ("milk" glass)
Design: Primarily floral, with both naturalistic (Fig. 17, F, G; 3 sherds ) and styl-

ANDERSON's MILL

43

Fig . 17. Pre ssed Glass . A-C , Bull ' s eye. D, E, Icicle . F-1 , Wh ite glass .

ized (Fig. 17, H , I; 4 sherds ) patterns recognizable. Eight specimens, including
a handle fragment, are undecorated; and one-a plate fragment- is painted on
its interior surface.
V essel form: Those with floral designs represent 2 plates, those with a stylized floral
pattern a plate and a cup. The painted sherd is from a plate.

44
UNIDENTIFIED PATTERNS (3 1

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Specimens )

Stylized Floral (Fig. 18, A, B)
Number of specimens : 4
Color : Clear, light green
Design: A stylized floral pattern appears on the exterior surfaces.
Vessel form: Two vessels are represented. One is a small, footed bowl. 4.85 em. high
and a minimum of 5.25 em. in diameter. The other vessel has a similar design,
but appears to be from a vase or decanter which was more than 6.15 em. high
and had a minimum diameter of 4.2 em .

Floral
Number of specimens:
Color: Amethystine
Design : Sherd is too small to determine any details.
Vessel form: Unknown

Panel (Fig. 18, C)
Number of specimens: 4
Color: Clear
Design: A number of contiguous, rectanguloid panels
Vessel form : Three of the sherds appear to be from bottle shoulders; a minimum of
3 vessels are represented.

Circular (Fig. 18, D)
Number of specimens: 2
Color: Amethystine
Design: Each sherd contains portions of large raised circle.
Vessel form: Unknown, but both pieces may be from the same vessel.

Octagonal (Fig. 18, E, E')
Number of specimens : 1
Color: Amethystine
Design: Appears on the interior surface and consists of a central octagon which
contains an 8 pointed star composed of wedge-shaped triangles. Numerous small
triangles surround this central motif.
Vessel form: Possibly a lid or decanter top, as a long stem having a hexag:mal cross
section projects from the exterior surface.

Striated (Fig. 18, F)
Number. of specimens: 2
Cqlor: Clear
Design: Short, closely-spaced vertical striations (or ticked lines) appear just below
the rim. On the larger piece the upper portions of two panels are visible.
Vessel form: Unknown

45

ANDERSO N 'S MILL

B

c

A

E

F

E'

D

G

H
0

0

IN.
6

Fig. 18 . Pressed Glass . A, B, Stylized floral. C, Panel. D, Circular. E, E', Octagonal. F,
Striated. G, Rad iating lines . H, Concentric circles. I, Multi- pointed star.

Radiatin g Lines (Fig. 18, G)
Number of specimens: 1
Color: Amethystine
Design: Done in high relief on both the exterior and interior, and con sists of lines

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

which r adiate from a centr al point. The lines from each surface converge at the
edge and produce a sawtooth-like rim.
Vessel for m : This specimen is solid and was elliptical in cross section. It was an
estima ted 2.2 em . in diameter an d is 1.1 5 em . in m aximum thickness. It is probably part of a lid knob.

Con centric Circles (Fig. 18, H )
N umber of sp ecim ens: 1
Color: Amethystin e
D esign : A series of horizontal, con centric circles
Vessel form : This piece is a complete knob, 2.2 em . high and 2.4 em. in maximum
di am eter.

Multi-Pointed Star (Fig. 18, I )
Number of specimens: 1
Color : Amethystine
Design: Incomplete, but appear s to h ave a multi-pointed star.
Vessel form : Appar ently a shallow, w ide-mouth vessel of thick ( .75 em .) glass.

In addition to the above, there are 16 pieces of pressed glass which
ar e so small that their design elements cannot be accurately ascertained.

Miscellaneous Glass Objects
Included in this category are:
1) One hundred and twelve fragments of window glass (Fig. 19,
A, B). These range from .15 to .3 em. in thickness, and are coated with
fl ecks of gold and blue, as a result of corrosion.
2 ) A flat fragment of glass with a smooth, wavy edge (Fig. 19, C) .
It is possible that this piece is from a glass table top cover .
3) Nine pieces of ver y thin (.05 to .1 em.) glass, probably from
lamp chimneys (Fig. 19, D, E ) .
4 ) Three fragments of white, opaque glass possibly from a cosmetic
(cold cream? ) container (Fig.19, F ).
5 ) Two beads, one of which is a molded red bead with a geometric
design. The other is a plain, spheroid-shaped blue bead. The red one
is 1.5 em . long and. 7 em. in diameter ; the blue one is .55 em. in
diameter.
6) A basal fragment (Fig. 19, G ) of a small salt bowl. The diameter
of the base is 2.65 em. and the maximum thickness is .45 em.
7) Three buttons, each with four holes. One (Fig. 19, I ) is 2.3 em.
in diameter and two (Fig. 19, H ) are 1.1 em. in diameter.
8 ) Fragments of what appear to be a faceted bottle (Fig. 19, J ),
possibly a perfume container.

47

ANDERSON's MILL

.c

6

Fig. 19. Miscellaneous Glass . A, B, Window glass fragments . C, Table top cover 1?1 fragment. D, E, Fragments of lamp chimneys. F, Fragment of cosmetic container. G, Basal fragment of possible salt bowl. H, I, Buttons. J, Fragments of faceted perfume I?J bottles.

Interpretations
BOTTLES

Hand blowing of bottles-the earliest technique of bottle making
known-consisted of 1) gathering a glob of molten glass on the end
of a metal blowing tube or blowpipe, 2 ) roughly shaping the viscous

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

glass by rolling it on a hard, flat surface (marvelling), 3 ) blowing the
bottle to its desired size, 4) attaching a punty rod to the incipient bottle
at the end opposite that where the blowpipe was attached, 5) detaching
the blowpipe by cutting the glass with shears, and shaping the neck
and body with hand tools while another workman rotated the bottle
with the punty rod, and 6) breaking off the punty rod and annealing
the bottle. The characteristics of a bottle produced by this method are
as follows: there are no seams or mold marks, the surface is irregular,
and there is a pontil mark (sharp scar of broken glass) on the bottom
where the punty rod was broken off (Knittle, 192.9: 22-24).
By the beginning of the 19th century, molds which aided in the
shaping of bottles had come into use. After the glass had been gathered
on the end of the blowpipe and marvelled, the bottle was shaped with
the assistance of a wooden or clay mold. The mold formed only the
base and body of the bottle, so the neck had to be drawn out and
finished by hand. Diagnostic characteristics of bottles produced in this
type of mold are seams on the sides of the body, but not on the neck,
and the pontil mark on the base (Scoville, 1948: 18).
Shortly after 1800 the two-piece hinged mold came into common
use. This mold formed all but the mouth of the bottle. The bottle, after
it had been extracted from the mold was attached to a punty rod so
that it could be manipulated while the mouth was formed. Bottles
produced in this fashion have seams along both the sides and the neck,
but not on the upper portions of the neck and the mouth, which were
hand finished as the bottle was rotated by the punty rod. The point of
attachment is marked by a pontil mark (Scoville, 1948: 16-17).
As early as 1820, three and four piece molds were in use. The
earliest ones were made of hardwoods, but these were replaced later
with brass, copper, and, particularly, cast iron molds. The upper portions of the necks still had to be hand finished. These bottles have as
many seams as there were pieces in the mold, pontil marks on their
bases, and smooth ( unseamed ) upper necks and mouths (ibid.: 17 ) .
Between 1850 and 1860 the snap case was introduced. The snap case
fitted around the basal portion of the bottle and enabled the workman
to manipulate the bottle without using a punty rod. Bottles made with
snap cases have no pontil marks, but rather they have smooth, hollow
bases (Van Rensselaer, 1926: 10).
Chilled iron molds began to be employed immediately after the
Civil War. They gave the bottles more regular surfaces than the older
types of molds; this characteristic, however, is difficult to recognize
(Van Rensselaer, 1926: 12) .
In 1881 a process was invented that mechanically finished the

ANDERSON'S MILL

49

mouths of bottles. Viscous glass was dropped into a "blank mold" that
gave the glob of glass a shape somewhat like that of the bottle to be
produced. After the glass was placed in the blank mold, a plunger was
pressed down to press the glass up around the portions of the mold that
would form the mouth. The second, or " blowing" mold was put in
place of the blank mold and compressed air was forced through the
formed mouth. This method was first used successfully in 1892 when
Dos Taylor began to make wide mouth ware at his plant in Huntington, West Virginia. In 1892 C. L. Flaccus started production of wide
mouth Vaseline jars at the Enterprise Glass Co. at Beaver Falls,
Pennsylvania. These first jars that were completely machine formed
have seams that run the entire height of the vessel. They also have
rough, sharp edges along their mouths (Scoville, 1948: 329 ) . Before
1900, however, refinements had been made in the basic idea of
machine jars and their quality improved (ibid.: 325 ).
By 1903 this general principle had been adapted to bottle making
at the Owens Bottle Co. Improved machines were designed and sold
by Mr. Owens in 1909, 1911 , 1912, and 1917. About the time of the
First World War the machines were widespread. Bottles produced on
these machines have seams that extend the whole length of the bottle
and neck, and no pontil marks (Scoville, 1948: 324-329).
None of the bottles from Anderson's Mill has a pontil mark on it;
therefore, they all must date after 1860. One of the bottle bottoms was
finished in a snap case, so it dates from between 1860 and 1914. The
other bottle bottoms may have been finished with snap cases, but I
am not sure that they were.
The 13 bottle necks that were hand finished date from the period
between the invention of the two piece mold ( early 1800's ) and the
first use of machinery to finish bottle necks in 1914. One of the hand
finished necks (Group VII ) was made to accommodate a crown cap
closure. This type of closure (same as used on modem beer and soda
water bottles ) was introduced in 1907 (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962:
73); therefore, this neck dates from between 1907 and 1914.
All but two of the panel bottles are machine finished; therefore, most
of them date from after 1914. The two exceptions date from before
1914. Rawleigh's products were first introduced into Texas in 1904
(Milton Babcock, personal communication) so the five Rawleigh's
bottles date from 1904 at least, and the two complete ones (with machine finished necks ) date from after 1914, The first lettered panel
bottles began to be produced about 1867 (Moore, 1924: 255- 256 ) so
the other lettered panel bottle fragments date from around 1867 at the
earliest. None of the Rawleigh's bottle necks from the site were made

50

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

for screw caps. Presently-used Rawleigh's bottles do have screw caps,
but it is not known when they were first introduced.
JARS

The Mason wide mouth jar with the screw cap was patented in 1858
(Glass Containers, 1963). No other meaningful dates could be obtained for the jars.
PRESSED GLASS

The first experiments with pressed glass were carried out in New
England in the 1820's (Lee, 1933: 4; Watkins, 1950: 84-87 ) . As the
processes and machinery were perfected, more and more plants for
pressing glass were founded, until by 1840 there were factories in
several states (Lee, 1933: 5 ) . Before 1850 the vessel forms and designs
used seem to have been rather limited, but after this date changing
styles and greater demand for different sorts of vessels led to a number of innovations (ibid.: 6) . The production of pressed white or milk
white glass was probably begun between 1830 and 1850, but it was
not produced commercially for a large market until 1870 (ibid.: 614615) .
The pressed glass from Anderson's Mill has been compared with
illustrations and descriptions in several texts. Most of the nomenclature and chronology, however, have been taken from Lee (1933).
It is realized that dates based on design alone are not as accurate as
could be desired, largely because they sometimes refer to the first date
of manufacture, and other times to the period during which the pattem
was in vogue. In the latter case, a particular vessel could have been
purchased either before, after, or during the period indicated. In the
former case, the vessel could have been purchased at any time after the
first date of manufacture. Some of these patterns can still be purchased
today. The dates presented, then, give only a general idea of the age
of a particular vessel or design, although in some instances fairly good
dates have been obtained. The arrangement presented below is on the
basis of the age that has been indicated (Lee, 1933) for the particular
design, going from the earliest to latest:
The bellflower ribbed pattern was popular from the 1830's to the 1850's;
The pressed block designed vessels probably do not date much before 1853;
Vessels of the crystal patterns are listed in the 1859 and 1868 catalogues of the
M'Kee Bros. Co. of Pittsburg;
The fine cut pattern probably dates from the 1870's;
The pointed hobnail pattern was popular in the late 1870's and the 1880's;

51

ANDERSON ' S MILL

In the early 1880's the daisy and button pattern came into vogue. Several examples of this style are illustrated in the 1888 catalogue of Otto Young & Co.;
Production of the paneled grape design was begun in the 1890's;
The hull's eye pattern and its variants were produced from the 1850's to the
1880's;
The icicle pattern dates from the 1870's.

The above suggest that the pressed glass from Anderson's Mill date
from the 1830's to the 1890's.
METAL

A wide range of metal artifacts was found at the site. Only a relatively few of these (expanded cartridges, nails, tin cans, and lids),
however, are similar enough to each other to warrant classification.
The other, more diverse, specimens are lumped and briefly discussed
individually under the heading of miscellaneous metal artifacts.

Expended cartridges
Twelve metallic cartridges and three metal shotgun shell cases (or
paper cartridges ) were recovered. Two (Fig. 20, A,B) are Winchester
Repeating Arms Co. .30-.30 cartridges. The primer of one of these
(Fig. 20, B) has been removed, and the mouth of the case is compressed
and wrinkled in such a manner as to suggest that a fairly uniform
pressure had been exerted against it-possibly the result of an accident
in reloading the expended case.
Two Union Metallic Cartridge Co. cases are in the collection: one
(Fig. 20, D ) for a Colt .45 and one (a metal base and primer) for a
12 gauge shotgun. The shotgun shell has the words NEW CLUB
inscribed on it. Another shotgun base is from a Remington-Union
Metallic Cartridge Co. 16 gauge shotgun shell ; while a second 12 gauge
shotgun shell base (Fig. 20, C) is inscribed WESTERN FIELD.
Six of the cartridge cases are .22 long (Fig. 20, E), four of which
have the word SUPER inscribed on their bases; one has U, and another
has H . The U indicates that the shell was produced either by the Union
Metallic Cartridge Co., or by the Remington-Union Metallic Cartridge
Co. Another expended cartridge is a .22 short (Fig. 20, F ) with the
letter N inscribed on its base.
A rim fire brass cartridge (Fig. 20, G ) is badly bent and there is no
inscription on the base. It is probably a 59, 60, or 61 caliber cartridge.
It is 2.3 em. high.
One center fire metallic cartridge is a .30 caliber shell that represents military ammunition of a late date. Its base is inscribed with
FA 34, indicating that it was produced in 1934.

52

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

c

B

A

0

E.

F

G

H

ll
0

0

IN.

CM.

6

J

Fig . 20 . Cartridges and Nails . A, 8 , Winchester .30-.30. C, Western Field 12 gauge
shotgun shell base. D, Colt .45. E, .22 long. F, .22 short. G, Unidentified cartridge. H, Wire
nails. I, Thin headed cut nails . J, Thick headed cut nails .

53

ANDERSON ' S MILL

Nails
All of the nails from Anderson's Mill are either cut nails or wire
nails (Fig. 20, H ); no hand wrought nails were found. There are two
types of cut nails : 1) those with thin, irregular heads (Fig. 20, I ), and
2) those with more regular, thick square heads (Fig. 20, J). Horseshoe
nails (Fig. 21 , A-E) and wire staples (Fig. 21 , F-H ) were also recovered. The distribution of the nails and staples is presented in the
chart below.
Staples

Cut thin
heads

Cut thick
heads

Wire

Horseshoe

Associated with house

7

6

164

81

7

Associated with mill

0

34

54

1

0

It is significant to note that there are few thin headed cut nails from
the house, but there are many from the mill; conversely, there are a
negligible number of wire nails from the mill, but there are many
from the house.

Tin Cans
The 15 tin cans and can fragments can be divided into three groups :
soldered, crimped, and flat tobacco.
Soldered (Fig. 21, I-K )
Number of specimens: 5
Description: Side seams are crimped and lightly soldered, while the tops and bottoms
have rims whi ch are fitted over the ends of the body of the can and soldered but
not crimped. Small holes in the tops of the cans have been sealed with a drop of
solder.
Dimensions: Three specimens, two complete cans and a top , are approximately th e
size of modern, medium-sized condensed milk cans, measuring 6.3 em. in diameter
and 6.95 em. tall (Fig. 21, I ). The one other measurable specimen (Fig. 2 1, K )
is 7.3 em. in diameter, and was greater than 9.5 em. tall.
Remarks: One of the complete small cans and the small lid piece have been opened
by punching two small holes in the top, while the other small can (Fig. 21, J )
was opened by making two diagonal cuts across the top and lifting up one of the
wedge-shaped segments thus formed.

Crimped (Fig. 22, A)
Number of specimens : 8
Description: Four of the five fragments that have part of the top attached had their
lids crimped on with no use of solder. The fifth fragment is quite incomplete,

54

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

F

A

c

B

D

G

H

E

K

0

CM.

J
Fig . 21 . Nails, Staples, and Tin Cans . A-E, Horseshoe nails. F-H , Staples . 1-K , Soldered
cans .

but perhaps had the top crimped on over a thin band of solder that was later
heated. Five body fragments indicate that side seams were crimped without the
use of solder.
Dimensions : Indeterminable
Remarks: At least five cans appear to be represented.

ANDERSON'S MILL

55

Flat Tobacco (Fig. 22, B)
Number of specimens: Z
D escription : These are tobacco ·cans with hinged lids, crimped seam s, and rectangular cross sections. One (Fig. ZZ, B) h as a partially preserved yellow and black
label which reads PRINCE A LBERT CRIMP CUT. Between the words PRINCE
A LBERT and CRIMP CUT is a faintly visible standing figure. The bottoms of
both cans are lettered in low relief with PRINCE ALBERT.
Dimensions : H eight, 10.9 em. ; thickness, Z.Z5; width, 7.65 em .

Lids
The thirteen metal lids (exclusive of the jar lids described earlier)
recovered from the site represent four different types of closures:
friction or slip-on, snap, crown, and screw. Each of the eight friction
type lids is made from thin sheet metal and is designed to slip on over
the top of a container. Seven have circular outlines, and one has a
rectangular outline. Four of the former are baking can lids (Fig. 22, C)
which are inscribed as follows :

CLABBER GIRL DOUBLE ACTING BAKING POWDER
( 2 specimens)
. . . KC BAKING POWDER . . .
KC BAKING POWDER SAME PR . .. TODAY 45 YEARS AGO
None of the other friction lids bears any mar ks. The circular specimens are between 3 and 12.75 em. in diameter; the rectangular one is
3 em. by 7 em.
One of the two snap lids is circular, m easuring 5.2 em. in diameter;
the other is rectangular and measures 4.5 em. by 3.5 em. The crown
cap (Fig. 22, E ) is identical to those used on modern soda water and
beer bottles. The two screw caps are, of course, circular, one (Fig. 22,
D ) 5.2 em . in diameter, the other 4.3 em. in diameter.

Miscellaneous M etal
Itemized below are a number of metal objects which do not lend
themselves to detailed classification. They are briefly described individually below and include :
1) A spring holder for a wagon (Fig. 23, A, A' ) . This piece is flat
on one side and has two unthreaded lugs protruding from that side;
on the opposite face there is a slot that extends across the short axis
(Fig. 23, A' ) . A perforation appears in the center of the holder.
2) A lock washer with wings that are bent downward .
3) A probable coffee grinder handle (Fig. 23, B) .

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGI CAL SOCIETY

A

B

E
D

c
Fig . 22 . Cans and Lids . A, Crimped can . B, Tobacco ca n. C, Clabb e r Girl ba:<i ng ca n lid .
D, Screw lid . E, Crown cap lid .

4 ) A right angle iron brace with four screw attachment holes.
5) A nearly complete Ford Model T taillight (Fig. 23, C).
6) A fine, round screen filter for a gas tank or a gas funnel.
7) Apossiblethumbknobplate (Bald:winCo. , 1891 : 555 ) -asheet
metal object engraved with a scroll-like pattern (Fig. 23 , D ) .
8) A common carriage bolt. The head is round, 2.6 em. in diameter,
and the total length is estimated to have been approximately 13.25 em.
(Fig. 23, E).
9) A bolt with a hexagonal head and a lock nut. The lock nut has
slots around its base which permit use of a cotter key.
10) Two machine bolts. The head is broken off of one, but it has a
square nut which is 2.65 em. on a side and 1.85 em. thick. This bolt

57

ANDERSON ' S MILL

is 1.55 em. in diameter. The other specimen has an octagonal head
which is 2.3 em. in diameter and 1.0 em. thick. This bolt is 1.25 em.
in diameter and 7.55 em. long (it may, however, be broken ) .
11 ) Three other bolts are fragmentary. Included is one with a
hexagonal head, one with an octagonal head, and one (Fig. 23, F ) with
a thin, flat, rectangular head.
12) A U -shaped iron bolt ( ?) that resembles a beam clip illustrated

A

A'

D

0=

F

!N,

CM.

E

c
Fig. 23 , Metal Artifacts . A, A', Spring holder for a wagon . B, Poss ible coffee grinder
handle . C, Model T tail light . D, Possible thumb plate. E, F, Bolts.

58

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

in the 1893-94 Mansur & Tebbets Implement Co. catalogue. It measures 4.25 em. long and 4.25 em. wide (Fig. 24, A).
13 ) A Twitchel pneumatic tire pressure gauge (Fig. 24, B ) .
14) An iron object (Fig. 24, C) which is rectangular with rounded
ends. Tapered holes are present at either end, and a rectangular opening appears in the center. This was perhaps used to support a set of
box springs or a platform to support box springs. It resembles a specimen which the 1891 Baldwin & Co. catalogue (page 463) illustrates
as a "bedstead fastener."
15 ) A brace lacking the wooden handle and knob. At the distal end
is an orifice to receive a bit and a sleeve to secure the bit.
16) Four metal handles, including aU-shaped one still riveted onto
part of an iron vessel. Two of the other handles are of wire; the third
appears to be a drawer pull.
17) A cast iron poker handle (Fig. 24, D) which may have belonged to a fireplace set.
18 ) Twenty-nine iron stove parts, including 3 round grill fragments and a grill lifter handle.
19 ) A clothespin spring.
20 ) A fragment of rake prong.
21 ) A horseshoe fragment.
22 ) A tin stove pipe fragment.
23 ) A pipe fitting.
24 ) A tire valve anchor (Fig. 24, E ) .
25) A copper object (Fig. 24, F) which may have been a top to
a pill or snuff box. It is decorated with a stylized floral pattern inside
a narrow band that encircles the rim. This piece is 4 em. in diameter.
26) A spring hinge.
27 ) Three pieces of barbed wire.
28) A fragment of sheet tin.
29 ) A segment of iron pipe, 2.75 em. in diameter.
30 ) Portions of a bolt type door latch (Fig. 24, G).
31 ) Two spoon handles, one (Fig. 24, I) of pewter, one (Fig. 24, H )
silver plated.
32) A fragment (Fig. 24, J) of what appears to be a cast iron
wheel from a toy.
33) A spiral bedspring.
34) Two round washers.
35) A clock gear, probably for a minute hand.
36 ) Two parts of a foot-operated sewing machine frame.
37) Four vest or suspender buckles (Fig. 24, L ) , according to
Fontana and Greenleaf ( 1962: 87).

59

ANDERSON ' S MILL

A

c

8

D

E
F
G

J

K

H

L

Fig . 24. Metal Artifact> . A, Possible beam clip . B, Pressure gauge . C, Possible bed spring
fastener. D, Poker handle. E, Valve anchor. F, Possible snuff or pill box lid. G, Part of a bolt
type door latch. H, I, Spoon handles . J, Wheel for a toy . K, Upper jaw of monkey wrench .
L, Vest or suspender buckle.

60

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

38 ) Upper jaw of monkey wrench (Fig. 24, K) .
39 ) Three iron chain links.
40 ) A cuff link (Fig. 25, A ) .
41 ) A snap.
42) A rivet type button for work clothes.
43) Eleven shoe eyes.
44) Two metal buttons.
45 ) Two (Fig. 25 , B) spur strap buckles (Baldwin Co., 1891 : 619 ) .
46 ) A square sheet copper object (Fig. 25, C) 4.6 em. on a side. It
is stamped with an image of a bird.
47 ) A screw.
48 ) An iron ring, outside diameter 2.5 em.
49 ) A fragment of flexible tubing, possibly part of an electrical
conduit; approximately .4 em . in diameter.
50 ) A fragment of a large iron magnet.
51 ) Part of a chain-type bed spring (Fig. 25 , E).
52) A ball bearing cage (Fig. 25, D).
53) Approximately 50 unidentifiable metal objects, many of which
are fragmentary.
Interpretations
EXPENDED CARTRIDGES

The two .30-.30's made by the Winchester Repeating Arms Co.
were produced for use in the Winchester Lever Action Model 1894
rifle, the first sporting rifle adapted for use of smokeless powder ammunition. The Winchester Repeating Arms Co. began production of
the ammunition for this rifle in 1895 (Williamson, 1952: 450 ) . The
rifle is still being produced and is Winchester's most popular model
(ibid.: 161-162) . These data simply indicate that the two Winchester
Center Fire .30-.30 cartridge cases that were found at the site date
after 1895. It is one of these cases that has had the primer removed
and the mouth compressed, suggesting that an attempt had been made
to reload the expended cartridge. There are reloading equipment sets
listed in Baldwin's 1891 catalogue that may have, if carelessly handled,
caused a cartridge case to be so deformed.
The Union Metallic Cartridge Company began production in 1867
and merged with Remington in 1910 to form the Remington-UMC
Co. Any cartridge marked UMC would, then, date from the period
between 1867 and 1910 (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 80) . One of
the UMC products recovered is a .45 cartridge for a Colt weapon. The
earliest such weapon was the Colt Frontier, introduced in 1873. A

ANDERSON'S MILL

61

double action Colt .45 was introduced in 1877, but it was not very
popular. The cartridge was probably used in the 1873 model Frontier;
if so, this case would date from the period between 1873 and 1910.
The other UMC product from the site is a 12 gauge shotgun shell
base which is marked NEW CLUB. UMC Club shotgun shells are
listed in Baldwin & Co.'s 1891 catalogue, but no New Club shells are
listed. It is possible that the New Club was a development of the Club
shell that came later, or that the Baldwin Co. did not carry the New
Club shells. At any rate, the shotgun shell base surely dates from
between 1867 and 1910, and perhaps from after 1891 to 1910.
The 16 gauge Remington-UMC shotgun shell base dates from after
1910, and the large caliber rimfire cartridge probably dates from the
Civil War period. It is interesting to note that a cartridge case identical
to the Winchester Repeating Arms Co.'s .30-.30 case recovered from
Anderson's Mill was reported from the Johnny Ward Ranch (Fontana
and Greenleaf, 1962: 80 ) . The Johnny Ward Ranch Site dates from
1859 to 1903. It would be expected that cartridge cases from the popular Winchester Model '94 would be widespread. A cartridge from a
Colt Frontier ( .45 ) was also reported from the Johnny Ward Ranch
(ibid. : 81 ) . Again, from the popularity of the model Colt revolver one
would expect cartridges from it to be widely distributed.
NAILS

Before 1825 machine cut nails were headed by hand. They were
placed in a vise and struck with a hammer to flatten the end of the
nail and thus produce the head. This manufacturing process resulted in
nails with thin, irregularly-shaped heads. About 1825 water-powered
machinery came into use that would cut and head the nails. Until1830
or 1840, however, the nail heads continued to be thin and somewhat
irregular. By 1840 processes had been perfected that resulted in thicker
and more uniform heads on nails. In 1855 the technique of manufacturing wire or round nails was invented, but the wire nails did not
outnumber the square cut ones until about 1890 (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 46-55).
Three time periods are represented by the nails from Anderson's
Mill: before 1840, between 1840 and 1890, and after 1890. I think,
however, that these dates-especially the 1840 one-should not be
taken too seriously. It is quite possible that the suppliers kept stocks
of earlier types of nails on hand until they could be sold, or that some
naileries continued to make the earlier type for a while after the thick

62

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

B

c

D
E

""
~

F

(]

G
0
0

H

IN.
CM.

2
6

Fig . 25 . Metal Artifacts. A, Cuff link. B, Spur buckle. C, Unidentified copper object. D,
Ball bearing cage. E, Possible bed . spring fragment. F-H, Shell buttons. I, Carbon rod.

headed ones had become widespread. It is useful, nonetheless, to have
an estimation of their dates of manufacture.
The sequence of construction of the structures at Anderson's Mill
was as follows: 1 ) a log cabin (unlocated) , 2) the mill, and 3) the
main house. Anderson probably obtained the thin headed nails that
were used in constructing the mill from a supplier that had them on
hand either because they were still being made, or because he had

63

ANDERSON'S MILL

them in stock. Thick headed nails were also used in the mill, but only
one wire nail was recovered from the mill area.
At the house site few (six) thin headed nail were found, but many
thick headed cut and wire nails were recovered. This would be expected considering the later date of the main house. The presence of
the wire nails probably indicates that the occupation and construction
(or repair) lasted into the 1890's.
The relatively small number of thick headed cut nails and the
absence of wire nails at the mill confirm its earlier date of construction.
TIN CANS

The three small, soldered cans were probably condensed milk containers. Sine:! this type has been made in the same fashion from Civil
War times (they were not, however, widely marketed until about
1898 ) until the present (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 74 ), not much
can be said about their age except that they probably postdate 1898.
The process of crimping all of the seams came into use about the time
of World War I, while the process by which the carr's side seams could
be lightly mechanically soldered was introduced in the 1880's. A
diagnostic trait of these cans is the slotting of the four sides where they
came together to form which would be the side seam (Fontana and
Greenleaf, 1962: 71 ). The larger soldered can from the site does not
have these notches, so it was not made in that manner. As early as
1859, however, a machine was in use to lap solder cans (Fontana and
Greenleaf, 1962: 71 ). At any rate, the large soldered can probably
predates the World War I; at least if it is like the one Hunt ( 1959: 9 )
illustrates.
If the one fragmentary crimped lid does have solder within the
crimped top seam, it probably dates from between 1860 and 1890
(Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 72 ) . All of the other fragments of this
type have crimped seams and therefore date from about 1914 (ibid.:
73; Hunt, 1959 : 9).
Fragments of at least two hinged lid tobacco cans similar to the ones
from Anderson's Mill were found at the Johnny Ward Ranch (Fontana and Greenleaf, 1962: 77 ). However, the same sort of can is in use
today.
OTHER ARTIFACTS

Leather
Objects of leather include four shoe sole fragments, two fragments

64

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

from the upper portions of shoes, one boot top, two heel fragments, a
possible visor from a cap, and eight small, unidentifiable pieces of
leather.

Rubber
Two small, unidentifiable fragments of rubber were recovered from
the site.

Shell
The only artifacts of shell are three buttons (Fig. 25 , F-H) which
are: 1) 2.2 em. in diameter with two holes, 2 ) 1.2 em. in diameter
with four holes, and 3) 1 em. in diameter with four holes. A button
quite similar to No. 2 above was found at the Johnny Ward Ranch.

Miscellaneous
Included in this group are a cloth fragment and two carbon rods,
possibly from old batteries. One of these rods (Fig. 25 , I) is 2.3 em. in
diameter and has ridges running its length; the other is 2.2 em. in
diameter and has a smooth exterior. Neither specimen is complete.
CHRONOLOGY

Sherds from an estimated 20 vessels are decorated by the decalcomania method, and at least another 20 vessels are adorned by means
of repousse. Both of these decorative techniques became popular after
1850. Sherds representing an estimated 10 vessels are gilded, while
seven are transfer printed. These techniques were in use before 1850,
and persisted after this period only in diminishing quantities. One
sherd bears a maker's mark that probably dates from the 1830's. No
meaningful dates could be obtained for the stoneware or the soft-paste
earthenware. The ceramics indicate that the site could have been
occupied as early as 1830. On the other hand, most of the material
suggests a later date and it is perhaps reasonable to assume that the
earlier pottery was obtained before the site was occupied.
The pressed glass from Anderson's Mill falls between the 1830's
and the 1890's, 'w ith most the dates clustering between the 1850's and
the 1880's. It has, however, been dated on the basis of the time periods
when certain patterns were popular, a method not as precise as might
be desired.
The 48 panel bottle specimens probably date from after 1867. Five
of them, the Rawleigh's bottles, date from 1904 at the earliest, and

65

ANDERSON ' S MILL

more probably from after 1914. Two of the panel bottle necks are hand
finished, so they date from before 1914. None of the bottle bottoms has
a pontil mark, so all of them fall after the invention of the snap case
( 1850-1860 ) . Thirteen of the miscellaneous bottle necks are hand
finished and 13 are machine finished. Therefore, it appears that half
of the bottle necks predate 1914 and half postdate 1914. Since all of
the bottle bottoms date from after 1850, it is probably a good guess to
say that the hand finished necks date from between 1850 and 1914.
The most significant point is that the bottle necks indicate that the
occupation extended until sometime after 1914.
The absence of round nails from the mill structure reveals that it
was constructed before 1890, just as the presence of round nails at the
house indicates that it was occupied after 1890. The square nails used
on the house and the mill are mostly of a type introduced after 1840.
The nails, then, provide evidence suggesting that the occupation took
place after 1840 and lasted until1890.
The earliest cartridge case is one that can be assigned to the Civil
War period; while the latest associated with the occupation dates after
1910. There are several cartridges that date from period in between
these two.
The archeological materials as a whole present a picture of an
occupation that lasted from the 1850's to after 1914.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Anderson's Mill is a historic site consisting of two major structural
components, the mill and the house. Limited excavations were carried
out at each of the areas. On the basis of the archeological materials
recovered from the site (principally ceramics, bottles, pressed glass,
nails, and expended cartridges ) , it is concluded that the occupation
extended from the mid-1800's to sometime after 1914. These dates
confirm the historical accounts that state Anderson established himself
at the site in the mid-1800's.
The archeological materials confirm other statements about the
Anderson household. The fact that many jar parts were found indicates that the occupants were indeed doing home canning. The fact
that two ash deposits were located evidence that there were two fireplaces. The statement that there was an irrigation system was verified
by the location of a tank on high ground (so that there would be
sufficient water pressure).
In addition to revealing certain details about the lifeways of the
occupants, the analysis of the cultural refuse indicates that the arti-

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

facts clearly reflect the vogues of that time. Several articles that are
listed in late 19th century trade catalogues ( 1888 catalogue of the Otto
Young & Co.; 1891 catalogue of the Baldwin Co. ) were found at the
site. Pressed glass fragments of pattems that Lee ( 1933 ) states date
from the mid-19th century to the early 20th century were found, as
were types of pottery that are said to have been popular ( decalcomania, repousse ) from the mid-19th century (Eberlein and Ramsdell,
192J5; Ramsay, 1947; Spargo, 1926 ). Kinds of bottles that Knittle
(1929) and Van Rensselaer ( 1926 ) state were being made after the
mid-19th century (hand finished necks, no pontil marks ) were also
recovered. The archeological findings, in general, reveal a picture
quite in keeping with the times.
Finally, it might be noted that the materials from Anderson's Mill
also correlate well with the specimens reported from other historic
sites of the same general time period-such sites as the Johnny ward
Ranch, Fort Lookout (Miller, 1960 ), Ft. Pierre -II (Smith, 1960a),
and Ft. Stevenson (Smith, 1960b).
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, W. D.
1959. Kingdom in the Hills. Pamphlet published by the Anderson's Mill Garden
Club.
Babcock, Milton
1964. Letters dated October 6 and October 29 from the advertising department
of the W . T. Rawleigh Company, 223 E. Main St., Freeport, Illinois.
Baldwin Company
1891. Trade catalogue by firm of this name.
Barkley, Mary Starr
1963. History of Travis County and Austin, 1839-1899. The T exian Press.
Beard, F. R.
1937. 5000 Years of Glass. Frederick Stokes Co.
Binns, Charles F.
1930. The Story of the Potter. Hodder & Stroughton.
Brown, Frank
n .d.
Annals of Travis County and of the City of Austin. Manuscript in Travis
County Collection, Austin Public Library.
Camehl, A. W.
1916. The Blue China Book. Crown Publishers.
Cochran, Thomas C.
1948. The Pabst Brewing Company. New York University Press.
Combes, J . D.
1964. Excavations at Spokane House-Fort Spokane Historic Site. Laboratory of
Anthropology, Washington State University.

ANDERSON ' S MILL

67

Cox, Warren E.
1953. The Book of Pottery and Porcelain, Vols. I and II. Crown Publishers.
Dyer, Walter A .
1928. Stoneware for the Collector. Arts and Decoration. July issue, pp. 58-59,
88, 101.
Eberlein, H. D., and R. W. Ramsdell
1925. The Practical Book of Chinaware. J. B. Lippincott Co.
Encyclopedia Americana
1963. Decalcomania. Encyclopedia Americana, Vol. 8, p. 553 .
Fisher, S. W.
1945. The Decoration of English Porcelain. D. Verschoy le.
Fontana, Bernard L., and J. Cameron Greenleaf
1952. Johnny Ward's Ranch : A Study in Historic Archaeology. The Kiva , Vol.
·28, Nos. 1-2. Arizona Archaeological and Historical Society.
Gaines, Edith
1961. Dictionary of American Glass. Woman's Day, August issue, pp. 19-34.
1962. Dictionary of Pottery and Porcelain. Woman's Day, August issue, pp.
19-34.
Glass Containers, 1963
n.d.
Pamphlet published ·by the Glass C::mtainer Manufacturers, Inc.
Hunt, C. B.
1959. Dating of Mining Camps With Tin Cans and Bottles. Geo Times, Vol. 3,
No. 8. American Geological Institute.
Jelks, Edward B.
1958. Appendix A: Ceramics from Jamestown. In Archeological Excavations at
Jamestown, Virginia, by John L. Cotter. Archeological Research Series No.
4, National Park Service, U. S. Department of Interior.
Knittle, Rhea Mansfield
1929. Early American Glass. The Centu ry Company.
Lee, R. W.
1933. Early American Pressed Glass. Framingham Centre, Mass.
Mansur and Tebbets Implement Co.
1893-94. Trade Catalogue by firm of this name.
McDonald, Mrs. Robert E.
1959. Kingdom in the Hills. Pamphlet prepared by the Anderson Mill Gardeners
for the Austin Area Garden Center Flower Show, April 18-19·, 1959.
McKearin, George S., and Helen McKearin
1941. American Glass. Crown Publishers.
M 'Kee Bros. of Pittsburg
1859 and 1868. Trade catalogue by firm of this name.
Miller, C. F.
1960. The Excavation and Investigation of Fort Lookout Trading Post II
(39LM57 ) in the Fort Randall Reservoir, South Dakota. River Basin
Surveys Papers, No. 17. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 176.
Moore, N. Hudson
1924. Old Glass, European and American. Hodder and Stoughton, Ltd.

68

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Nichols, George W .
1878. Pottery, How it is Made. Putnam's Sons.
Northend, Mary H.
1926. American Glass . Dodd, Mead & Company.
Norton, F. H .
1956. Ceramics for the Artist Potter. Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Inc.
Otto Young & Co.
1888. Trade ·c atalogue by firm of this name.
Phillips, Charles J .
1941. Glass: The Miracle Maker. Pitman Publishing Corp.
1950. Get Acquainted with Glass. Pitman Publishing Corp.
Powell, B. Bruce
1962. Classification of Ceramics from Historic American Sites. Newsletter of the
Southeastern Archaeological Conference, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 34--45.
Prescott, Samuel C., and Bernard E. Proctor
1937. Food Technology. McGraw Hill.
Ramsay, John
1947. American Potters and Pottery. Tudor Publishing Company.
Scoville, Warren C.
1948. Revolution in Glassmaking. H arvard University Press.
Smith, G. Hubert
1960a. Fort Pierre II (39ST217) , A Historic Trading Post in the Oahe Dam Area,
South Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 18. Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin No. 176.
1960b. Archeological Investigations at the Site of Fort Stevenson (32ML1), Garrison Reservoir, North Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 19. Bureau
of American Ethnology, Bulletin, No. 176.
Spargo, John
1926. Early American Pottery and China. The Century Company.
Thorn, C. Jordan
1947. Handbook of Old Pottery and Porcelain Marks. Tudor Publishing Company.
Upton, Elsie
1941. Article in Austin Daily Tribune, August 17, p. 3.
Van Rensselaer, Stephen
1926. Early American Bottles and Flasks. Transcript Printing Co.
Von Loesecke, Harry W .
1942. Outlines of Food Technology. Reinhold Publishing Co.
Vulte, Hermann T., and Sadie B. Vanderbilt
1916. Food Industries. The Chemical Publishing Company.
Watkins, Laura
1950. American Glass and Glassmaking. Chanticleer Press.
Williamson, Harold F.
1952. Winchester: The Gun That Won the West. A Sportsman's Press Book.
Combat Forces Press.

ANDERSON'S MILL

69

Woolworth, Alan R. , and W. Raymond Wood
1960. The Archeology of a Small Trading Post (Kipps Post, 3ZMN1) in the
Garrison Reservoir, North Dakota. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. ZO.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 176.
Washington State University
Pullman, Washington

