DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VoLUME

36

Editor: Dee Ann Story
Assistant Editors :
Harry J. Shafer
Marsha F . Jackson

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1965

Table of Contents
Articles
Anderson's Mill ( 41 TV 130 ): A Historic Site in Travis
County, Texas
By E. Paul Durrenberger

1

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas
By Daymond D . Crawford .

71

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas
By Frank H. Watt .

99

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave, Bosque
County, Texas
By Dorris L. Olds

111

Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site ( 41 GV 5 ),
Galveston County, Texas
By L. E. Aten .

153

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas
By Dee Ann Story .

163

The Bipolar Flaking Technique in Texas and New Mexico
By Kenneth H. Honea .

259

A Guide to the Drafting of Archeological Maps
By Vaughn M . Bryant, Jr. and Robert K. Holz

269

A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas
By R. K. Harris, In us Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine,
and Jerrylee Blaine

287

Book Reviews
Cosgrove, Mr. and Mrs., The Cosgrove Report.
By Curtis Tunnell .

365

Nowothny, Karl A. , Tlacuilolli: Die mexikanischen Bilderhandschriften Stil und I nhalt mit einem Katalog der
Codex-Borgie-Gruppe
By John A. Graham

366

A Guide to the Drafting of
Archeological Maps
VAUGHN M. BRYANT, JR. AND ROBERT K. HOLZ
ABS1RACT
Scholarly writing in archeology is often accompanied by maps and other forms of
graphic illustrations. In th e past the quality of these illustrations has been rather
poor. Maps are an important form of visual communication, but a map can detract
from the scholarly nature of the accompanying written text if it is not drafted and
presented in a professional cartographic manner. Too often the archeologist seems to
be unaware of the whole, vast field of cartographic technique. The use of even the
rudimentary principles from this field would improve archeological mapping significant!:.::.. This article outlines some of the basic . errors and problems associated
with archeological maps and presents ideas, suggestions, and techniques for solving
these problems.

IN1RODUCTION

The science of archeology concerns itself with the study of past
cultures and the task of the archeologist is to record this information
in a factual and scholarly manner. Archeologists use maps to help
them present data, yet in many instances the quality of their maps is
rather poor. The caliber of archeological maps can be improved
through an understanding of some of the basic principles of cartography. This article will investigate some of these principles and will
show how each of them can be applied in the designing of archeological maps for reproduction and publication.
MAP REDUCTION

Every piece of paper has two marginal limits, a page size and an
effective page size. In this paper the page size refers to the entire sheet
of paper, or the whole page; while the effective page size is the page
size minus its border area, or that part of the paper which will be
used for printing. The page size of this journal is six inches by nine
inches, yet the maximum effective page size is only four and onequarter inches by six and one-half inches (Fig. 1). Any map or
illustration published in this bulletin can be of any size so long as it
does not exceed the dimensions of the effective page size. Ideally, a
map designed for use in this journal should be drawn with linear

270

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

dimensions twice those of the effective page size, or eight and one-half
inches by thirteen inches. Subjecting this enlarged illustration to one
full reduction will reduce its area to one-fourth the original size.
Linear distance, however, will be reduced by one-half their original
length (Fig. 2).
The question may be asked, " Why draft a map larger than the size
needed for publication ?". Cartographers u sually draft maps with
linear dimensions twice as large as their intended reproduced sizes
for a variety of reasons. For example, it is easier to work with larger
letter sizes, line widths, and symbols on the bigger workmap. It is
nearly impossible to draft a map with precision and accuracy if the
map is the same size as the one to be used in publication. Reduction
also minimizes minor letter and line variations and tends to sharpen
line distinction.
The cartographer's u se of the reduction technique introduces certain
problems in map design. One of these is the change in map scale
caused by reducing the original workmap. The problem of scale change
is basic to map drafting and will be discussed in detail in the following
section.
SCALE
PRINCIPLE OF ScALE

The scale on a map determines its degree of generalization and its
level of accuracy. Therefore, when selecting a scale for map use, a
cartographer must determine the map's eventual publication size, its
intended purpose, and its degree of detail. Each of these three factors
have a direct relationship to one another. For example, a reservoir
survey map will generally show the location of archeological sites with
small symbols because the map scale is too small to show these sites in
detail. On the other hand, a site map is drawn at a much larger scale
and can therefore show a greater degree of scale.
ExPRESSION OF ScALE

All maps depict the earth's surface at a greatly reduced size compared to the actual features they represent. This proportional relationship , or ratio, is defined as the map's scale.
There are three generally accepted methods of representing map
scale. These are : 1) by a statement, 2 ) in terms of a representative
fraction, abbreviated "RF", and 3) as a graphic representation or bar
scale. Statements such as "one inch represents approximately one

TE XAS

ARCHEOLOG~

-_

SOC IETY

-

--

--

----

-

--

--_

-

--

---_- -----=-- =-- - ---

-

-

-

--

Effect i ve

Page

__

--

s ; ze

' '• · ' .........................,......hi, ............ ·"·"··· ........

mae", aud "one ;ncb equal< ton feet" are example, of a 'tatemem
'Cale. Often th;, type of 'Ca]e w;n appear on road map, and on U.s.
Geoiog;c Survey map, lli conjunction w;th e;ther a grap!Uc or repre.

I
12

0

2

1/2

I

I
Scale in Feet

FIGURE

A

VM

FIGURE B
Fig. 2. Illustrations subjected to one full reduction have linear distances reduced by
one-half and areas reduced to one-fourth. Note the effect of reduction on both the graphic
and representative fraction scale.

273

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

sentative fraction scale. However, this type of scale is awkward to use
and therefore impractical for most map use. Furthermore, in reducing
a map for publication, a written statement remains constant while
linear distances, or scale, changes in proportion to the amount of
reduction.
The representative fraction scale makes use of a ratio between a
unit of measurement on a map and the corresponding unit on the
earth's surface. It can be expressed in either of two ways:

!oo

62 ,
or 1:62,500. The latter form is generally preferred since it is easier
to set up in type or print. Representative fractions are a valuable
method of indicating scale because any standard unit of measurement
(inches, centimeters, feet, meters) can be applied to a map as long as
the same unit of measurement is used on each side of the fraction or
ratio. Therefore, regardless of the standard units of measurement, any
literate person can understand and use the representative fraction.
For example, on a map with a scale of 1:250,000 one inch would be
equal to 250,000 inches or 3.95 miles; while one centimeter would
represent 250,000 on the earth's surface or 2.5 kilometers. Both measurements are correct even though each makes use of a different standard unit of measurement. In one way both the representative fraction
and the statement scale are similar. Both remain constant when a map
is reduced or enlarged.
Graphic, or bar scales are represented by a line which is generally
subdivided into units of some standard form of measurement, such as:
0

5

10

I

I

I

Scale in Feet
0

1

2

3

I

I

I

I

Scale in Miles
This type of scale is the most versatile of the three and is generally
used on maps which will be reduced for publication. When a map is
either reduced or enlarged, the line representing the graphic scale
changes in length in exact proportions to all other lines, or linear distances, on the map. Therefore it accurately represents the scale of the
map at its reduced size.

274

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

There are other methods of showing map scale but these unusual
types are rarely used and are beyond the scope of this article.
LETTERING THE MAP

A map is a graphic representation of a conceptual image of the
earth's surface through the use of conventionalized symbols. One of
the most useful and necessary types of map symbolization is lettering,
for it aids the reader in visualizing the location of places and it allows
differentiation of map phenomena. A road map, for example, would
be meaningless unless the names of the cities and the numbers of highways were lettered.
The placement of lettering on a map requires careful planning and
forethought in order to be effective. If a map is complex in detail,
then a greater degree of consideration must be given to the size, type,
and placement of lettering. However, even on a relatively simple map
at least five major factors concerning lettering must be considered.
These are: 1) the method of lettering-freehand, mechanical, commercially prepared "stick -on" lettering, Z) the form of letteringcapital, lower-case, 3 ) the style of lettering, 4 ) the size of lettering,
and 5) the position of the lettering.
METHOD OF LETTERING

A map can be lettered freehand, by the use of commercially prepared "stick-on" lettering, or mechanically. Freehand lettering is the
most versatile of the three methods and is the most rapid and artistic
for map use. Through the use of freehand lettering the cartographer
may orientate and scale letters precisely as desired. Freehand lettering also adds an individual or personal touch to a map. However,
learning to draw precise freehand letters requires many hours of
training and knowledge of the principles of letter formation and design. Most of us do not have the time to develop sophisticated and
uniform techniques of hand lettering, and, therefore, we usually turn
to other methods of lettering maps.
Preprinted, or "stick-on" lettering is a relatively new technique
which has become widely used in recent years. Many companies
such as Para-tone, Artype, Chart-Pak, and others offer an almost
limitless variety of letter styles and pattems. This type of lettering is
applied to the map surfac2 by first cutting out the appropriate letters
from the preprinted, adhesive-backed acetate sheets and then bumishing them down on the map surface. Stick-on lettering is useful for
map work but has several disadvantages over the other methods. First,

DRAFTING OF A RCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

275

letters that are printed in an upright position cannot be effectively
tilted in a slanting position . Secondly, preprinted letters often use
type-face styles which are not designed for reduction. Thus, it is often
necessary to u se extra large preprinted letters on the workmap. Furthermore, the careful positioning of these individual letters in an even
line of print is a long and painstaking task.
For most thematic, or statistical maps (which includes almost all
archeological maps ) m echanical lettering is the preferred method because it is simple, cheap, reasonably fa st, and assures letter uniformity.
There are many types of mechanical lettering devices available and
it is beyond the scope of this article to consider the merits of each
type. Therefore, in this article discussion will be confined to a single,
but perhaps the most commonly available method of mechanical lettering-the Leroy method.*
The basic elements of a Leroy Lettering Set are a scriber, a set of
templates with indented lettering guides, and various sizes of Leroy
pen points. Lettering of illustrations is achieved by tracing the indented letters of the template with the stylus of the scriber while the
arm, containing the pen, traces the outline of the letter in ink on the
surface of the illustration. Consecutive letters in a word are made by
moving the template along a straight edge. Ruled spaces are provided
on the bottom edge of templates to aid in letter spacing. However,
most cartographers attain sufficient skill through practice to space
these letters by sight.
Leroy templates come in a wide range of sizes (Fig. 3) and a variety
of letter styles. On each of these templates, letter size can be determined by converting the last set of numbers in the upper right-hand
corner to a measurement in inches. For example, on the Simple Sans
Serif, or Gothic style Leroy template, letter size is given in thousandths of an inch. Thus, a template showing the number 200 will
make letters 200/ 1000 or one-fifth of an inch tall. Each set of numbers
on a Leroy template is followed by either a capital "C" or by a "CL".
The letter "C" indicates that the template has numbers and capital
letters. On the other hand, the letters " CL" indicate that the template
can be used to make both capital and lower-case letters as well as
numbers. On other Leroy templates, which incorporate different styles
of lettering, the letter sizes are either written in thousandths of an inch
or in type-point sizes.
When selecting Leroy templates for lettering a map, the cartographer must remain constantly aware of the results reduction will
* L eroy is manufactured by the Keuffel and Esser Company and is the p aten ted
nam e giv: n to one of its mechanical lett ~ring systems.

276

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

have upon the lettering. Reduction tests have shown that capital letters
are illegible when they are smaller than one-twentieth of an inch tall
and that lower-case letters must be at least one-thirtieth of an inch
tall in order to be readable (Raisz, 1948 ) . Thus, the number 100/ 1000
or one-tenth of an inch Leroy template is the smallest size template
that can be effectively used on a map that is drafted one full size larger
than its publication size. If smaller letter sizes are used, the letters
will "close-out" and appear as a small black spot on the reduced copy;
or they will be too small to easily read with the unaided eye.
LETTERING FoRM-CAPITALS AND LowER-CAsE
Letters have two basic forms , capitals and lower-case. In printing,
or map lettering, words are written in capitals, in lower-case, or combinations of these forms. Map titles, and the names of important places
are usually written entirely in capitals because to the reader capitals
psychologically command more attention. Lower-case lettering is generally reserved for less important names and places. On the other hand,
lower-case lettering is easier to read because these letter characters
contain more visual recognition characteristics (Robin son, 1953) . A
well designed map will make limited use of words made entirely of
capital letters and will reserve their use for only selected, important
features.
LETTERING STYLES
The cartographer can choose from an almost infinite variety of
letter styles for map use, from simple Gothic, to the more complex
Old English. Each of these styles requires the use of special Leroy
templates, yet many different variations of style can be developed with
the most commonly used, or Gothic Leroy templates. By changing the
sizes of the inking pen in the Leroy scriber (Fig. 3 ), it is possible to
draw thin or very thick lined letters. Slant letters can also be made by
changing the angle of the stylus arm on the adjustable Leroy scriber.
Choice of lettering styles is one of the most important decisions a
cartographer must make. Short, stubby letters, for example, are more
difficult to read and are less pleasing visually than tall thin letters.
Furthermore, thin letters are more legible after reduction than thick
letters. When using a Leroy lettering set, thin lettering can best be
achieved by using one pen size smaller than what is normally recommended on the template.
Good cartographic technique calls for the use of upright letters to
represent man-made features such as cities, roads, or archeological

277

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

LEROY
TEMPLATE
Sl Z E
500

425

PEN
000 00

I

0

SIZE
2

3

4

5

ARCHEOLO
ARCHEOLO

350

ARCHEOLO

290

ARCHEOLO

240

A R

200

A R
A R

C H E 0 LO
c H E0 L 0
c

140

A

R

c

H E 0
H E 0

120

A

R

c

H

100

A

R

c

H

80

A

R

c

17 5

L

E

VMS
Fig. 3 . Variations in Leroy template and pen po int sizes. !Illustration adapted from
Keuffel and Esser Co ., Catalog No. 6l.

excavations while the lettering of natural features such as landscape
and water bodies should be done in slant lettering. There are no well
defined rules of when or where slant lettering must be used. Either
upright or slant lettering can be used in the names of almost any
feature on a map. The decision of when to use these types should

278

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

remain the cartograph er's. However, slant letters seem to suggest the
flowing quality of water and therefore are more often used to represent hydrographic features . If a cartographer used slanting letters to
represent various map features, then he sh ould take great pains to
insure that their use is consistent. For example, if he choses to use
slanting letters for water features, he should use them for all water
features on the map.
LETTERING SizE

The size of the lettering is one of the most widely and easily criticized parts of a map. This criticism is often the result of lack of careful planning and misunderstanding of the effects of letter reduction.
When a cartographer is selecting the size of letters to be used on a map,
he remains constantly aware of the effects of reduction. An improper
choice of letter size can often render the lettering illegible after reduction (Fig. 4 ) . Furthermore, letters which are less than one-tenth of
an inch in height will often become blurred or will " close-out" after
the map has been subjected to one full reduction.
LEROY
TEMPLATE
S I ZE

500

425

PEN

000 00

0

I

S I ZE

2

3

4

5

ARCHEOLO

AR CHEOLO

350

ARC HEOLO

290

A RC HEOLO

240

A

200

A

17 5

A

R C H E 0 LO
R c H E 0 L 0
R c H E 0 L

140

A

R

c

H

E

12 0

A

R

c

H

E

10 0

A

R

c

H

80

A

R

c

0

VM B

Fig . 4 . Le roy letting reduced in size by one fu ll reduc t ion . Note how the small , w ide
letters tend to " close-out" under reduction .

There are two other limiting factors affecting the size of letters used
on a map. These are the degree of importance of each item named,
and the size of the space available for lettering. Traditionally, the most

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

279

important features on a map, such as the title should be represented
by the largest letter sizes while the less important information should
be shown in smaller letters. As a corollary, the date and the authorship of a map should be written in the smallest legible letters because
they are of marginal importance on a map. In between these two extremes lie a series of letter sizes which should be graded in relation to
the significance of the data they represent. This takes a considerable
degree of planning and should be done before pen and ink are ever
applied to the map surface.
Often the scale of the map limits the size of the space available for
lettering and becomes the governing factor in determining selection
of letter size. In some cases, this problem can be solved by using smaller
lettering while in other cases it can be resolved only by adjusting the
position of the entire word.
PosiTIONING oF LETTERS

The lettering on a map should refer the reader unmistakenly to the
item it represents. If a feature has a long linear dimension, or "flow,"
the lettering should give the appearance of length of fluidity. For example, names of rivers should be placed along the stream in some
convenient location (a straight portion if possible ) and should follow
the course of the river. The letters in the name should be spread
slightly, but not so much that they become meaningless. Furthermore,
abbreviations should be avoided at all times. Occasionally, it might be
necessary to repeat river names if the stream course is very long or
after a major tributary joins the main channel (Fig. 5 ).
Names of features which do not have any "flowing" characteristics
should be written parallel to the bottom margin of the map. Whenever this is impossible, it is permissible to tilt the word at an angle.
However, when tilting a place name it is advisable to tilt it as little
as possible and only under extreme circumstances should a word be
tilted at more than a forty-five degree angle above or below the horizontal margins of a map. Furthermore, the angle of all tilted names
should be approximately the same and should all be aligned in the
same direction so that one simple turn of the map will allow all of
them to be read.
The names of large map features such as counties, states, or countries
always should be widely and evenly spaced so that the letters of the
name encompass as much of the total area of that feature as possible.
Care must be taken in these cases to insure that the place names do not
become a random scattering of incoherent letters.

280

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The names of archeological sites or other location points on a map
preferably should be placed to the right side and above the symbol.
This allows for the best possible identification between the letters and
symbol because this is the direction in which we normally read . Other
choices for letter placement are to the lower right, the upper left, and
lower left of the symbol. Experiments in cartographic lettering have
proven that letters placed in these positions have the best chance of
being associated with the features they represent. Centering the lettering above or below the symbol it represents should be avoided at all
costs.
An effort should be made to place the names of all features completely within the area they represent. For example, the name of an
island, peninsula, or county should be placed entirely within the lines
enclosing them. The names of bays, coves, and inlets should be placed
over the water features they represent. If the land, or water, features
are too small for the entire name, then the lettering should begin on
the feature it represents and extend into the adjacent water or land.
Coastal cities and other coastal land features should be labeled entirely
on the land. If this is impossible, then the names should be placed
entirely on the adjacent body of water. A place name should only
break a boundary when there is no other solution for its placement.
TITLE

The title "tells the story" or explains the purpose of the map, and,
therefore, it should be the most prominent lettering on the map. The
obvious location for a title is at the top of the page because habit has
taught us to read from top to bottom. The principle of "supraposition"
dictates the title's pre-eminent position whenever possible. If the location of various map features precludes using the top of the effective
page size for the title, then it should be given another prominent
position. Correct title placement, however, is not enough. In order to
make a title distinguishable, it should also be separated from surrounding data, correctly centered, and written in large or bold letters. The
size and style of lettering will vary from map to map but regardless
of a map's size, the title always should be written in a letter size larger
than any others used . Furthermore, map titles should be self-contained,
short, carefully worded, and should be a concise summary of the map's
contents.
LEGEND

A map legend serves two basic functions: 1 ) it explains all map

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

281

symbols which are not self-explanatory, and 2) it balances the map's
layout or design . A map legend normally will include the date the
map was drafted, and the initials or name of the cartographer. The
date indicates that the map includes only information known prior
to that time, while the authorship reveals who compiled the data and
drafted the map.
Legends can be placed almost anywhere on a map and are sometimes enclosed in an outline. In the past, legends were generally the
most decorative part of a map and were set-off by ornately designed
outlines. This is no longer a valid practice because cartographers are
concerned more with the explanation of symbolization on a map than
with its decorative attractiveness. Thus, the present trend in cartography is to either enclose the legend with a thin, simple line or omit
the outline altogether. The latter is the more accepted practice.
Cartographic technique calls for placing the legend in an inconspicuous but artistically well balanced position on the map. Under
normal conditions this will position it near or at the bottom margin of
the map. When the outlines of map phenomena make this impossible,
the legend should be placed in some other area where it will not obscure vital map data. However, under no conditions should a legend be
placed above the map's title or omitted from the map.
SYMBOLS

One of the main differences between maps and photographs is that
maps use symbols to represent real objects while photographs are
reduced copies of the entire real world. Maps are constructed using
the selective judgment of the cartographer in the choice of symbol
representation. Some symbols represent linear features such as highways and railroads, others show point location such as cities or archeological sites while still others, such as pattems and screens, can be used
to show spatial distribution. When combined on a map, these symbols
form a graphic code through which a visual image of a geographical
area can be represented.
A well selected symbol is one which gives the map reader a visual
impression of the phenomenon it represents. This can best be achieved
by using symbols which are either reminiscent of the feature they
represent or by using symbols which have gained wide acceptance
and recognition through repeated u sage. For example, an airplane
located near a city on a map graphically suggests an airfield. Furthermore, water features are often symbolized by a series of thin wavy
lines because the waves suggest rippled water surfaces.

282

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Point symbols are used to show the location of small areas on a map.
Symbols used to show the location of cities, archeological sites, burials,
post molds, and other such data are all examples of point location
symbols. As a general rule, these symbols should be just large enough
to be read easily and if possible should suggest the feature they represent. Small symbols also are more artistically pleasing to the eye than
large ones .
Area symbols are used to show the area covered by map features.
For example, the outline of a test pit on an archeological site map is
one form of area symbol because it shows the extent of the test excavation and differentiates it from the surrounding map features. One of
the most effective ways to show this differentiation is through the use
of contrast. Variations in the size, shape, interval, direction, and color
give change to the pattern, value, and intensity of the area symbolized
and are acceptable cartographic methods of showing contrast.
Some cartographers draft their own variations of contrast. However,
this method has two main drawbacks. First, it is time consuming and
requires a great deal of accuracy, artistic ability, and patience on the
part of the cartographer. Secondly, whenever an error is committed
in drafting, it has to be painstakingly erased. The use of pressuresensitive, adhesive, preprinted acetate sheets to show contrast eliminates these problems . Such companies as Para-tone, Artype, ChartPak, and others offer a wide variety of patterns, most of which are
suitable for showing variations of contrast. These preprinted, acetate
sheets are inexpensive to use (if one considers the amount of time they
save the cartographer), simple to apply, durable, and can be removed
easily from a map surface if it becomes necessary.
THE ExAGGERATED SYMBOL

Highways on the earth's surface are usually less than one-half a mile
in width, yet they appear to be much larger when their symbol width
is measured on the scale of most road maps. This is an example of
symbol exaggeration. If a normal width highway were drawn to scale
on a road map, it would appear as a barely visible line a few thousandths of an inch in width. Most map symbols need to be exaggerated
in order to be legible.
The degree of symbol exaggeration will vary from map to map depending upon the map's scale, its purpose, and the area represented
by the symbol. Furthermore, symbols should be graded in proportion
to their actual size on the earth's surface and their relative importance
on the map. For example, on a road map a narrow county road is

DRAFTI NG OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

283

generally represented by a thinner, lighter colored line while a multilane superhighway will appear as a broad band almost one-thirtysecond of an inch in width and will be printed in a prominent color.

STANDARDIZATION OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAP SYMBOLS

We are able to read and understand writing because the alphabet
has become standardized over the centuries. Combinations of these
basic letter symbols indicate words of the spoken language which have
special meaning to us. Map symbols, like words of a language, are used
to convey a message. However, unless some type of order and standardization occurs, the meaning of symbols can be confused or remain obscure to those who attempt to interpret them. Once a standardization
of symbol types has been developed for a specific group of maps such
as topographic, climatic, geologic, or archeological maps, then all the
maps in that series should use only those standardized symbol forms.
Think of the chaos that would develop if each of the regional U. S.
Geologic Survey offices used a different set of symbols on their maps.
The field of archeology needs to develop a "graphic dictionary" of
symbol usage. At the present time, archeological maps are going
through a stage of graphic diarrhea. On some maps, archeological sites
are currently being symbolized by small triangles, on others, sites are
represented by dots, squares, x's or a variety of other symbol forms.
Archeologists need to agree on standardization of symbol forms so that
anyone trained in this discipline will immediately recognize known
symbol forms on archeological maps.

CONCLUSION

Let this article serve as a plea for the more careful drafting of
archeological maps and the need for standardization of mapping techniques. There is a vast body of cartographic knowledge that seems to
be unknown to the archeologist-knowledge which cartographers have
painstakingly developed over centuries of work and which is applicable to the drafting of all maps. The use of these techniques in archeological mapping would improve the quality, the artistic appearance,
and the scholarly expression of graphic illustrations.
Maps, like writing, are a form of visual communication. The scholarly nature of an archeological paper would certainly be suspect if it
were poorly written. Therefore, is there any reason not to suspect an
article which is well written but poorly or inadequately illustrated?

to

.,

CXJ

TRAFFORD

t!f

!"

+

RESERVOIR

::0

..,

~
::r

-<

"D
0

;.
~

Trafford s ville

g·

N

~

j

~

<

!1.
ID

..,3::r

~
;:;·

:;-

"'

..,~.

;-

0.
n

~

0

"'..,il

~

~

~·

D
...

~

®

Proposed

Archeological
Proposed
U.S .

l:!l
X

>
>
i:lj

Reservoir

[J)

Site

(l

:r:

Dam Location

l:!l
0

Highway

0

State

m

Farm or Ranch

t"'

0

()

Highway

>-<

(l

>

Road

t"'

[J)

0

-;;·

~

...,

LEGEND

I
1965

I

I

I

I

ScaIe

5

10

I

I

in

Mil es

0

(l

>-<
VMB I

...,l:!l

><:

285

DRAFTING OF ARCHEOLOGICAL MAPS

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND RECOMMENDED READINGS
Debeham, Frank
1951. Map Makin g. Blackie & Sons Ltd.
Dury, G. H.
1960. Map Interpretation. Sir Isacc Pitman & Sons Ltd.
Greenhood, David
1964. Mapping. University of Chicago Press.
Monkhouse, F. J., an d H. R. W ilkinson
1952. Map and Diagrams. Methuen & Co. Ltd.
Raisz, Erwin
1948. General Cartography. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.
1962. Principles of Cartography. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.
Robinson, A. H.
1952. The Look of Maps. University of Wisconsin Press.
1953. Elements of Cartography. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Department of Anthropology
The University of Texas
Department of Geography
The University of T exas

