DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VoLUME

36

Editor: Dee Ann Story
Assistant Editors :
Harry J. Shafer
Marsha F . Jackson

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1965

Table of Contents
Articles
Anderson's Mill ( 41 TV 130 ): A Historic Site in Travis
County, Texas
By E. Paul Durrenberger

1

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas
By Daymond D . Crawford .

71

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas
By Frank H. Watt .

99

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave, Bosque
County, Texas
By Dorris L. Olds

111

Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site ( 41 GV 5 ),
Galveston County, Texas
By L. E. Aten .

153

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas
By Dee Ann Story .

163

The Bipolar Flaking Technique in Texas and New Mexico
By Kenneth H. Honea .

259

A Guide to the Drafting of Archeological Maps
By Vaughn M . Bryant, Jr. and Robert K. Holz

269

A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas
By R. K. Harris, In us Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine,
and Jerrylee Blaine

287

Book Reviews
Cosgrove, Mr. and Mrs., The Cosgrove Report.
By Curtis Tunnell .

365

Nowothny, Karl A. , Tlacuilolli: Die mexikanischen Bilderhandschriften Stil und I nhalt mit einem Katalog der
Codex-Borgie-Gruppe
By John A. Graham

366

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave,
Bosque County, Texas
DORRIS L. OLDS
ABSTRACT
This report describes archeological specimens from Brawley's Cave ( 41 BQ 20 ), a
limestone rockshelter in Bosque County, Texas. The most important feature of the
assemblage is the fact that perishable specimens from this area have survived in
recognizable condition. D escription of other types of mater ials is includ ed. A l ate
Edwards Plateau Aspect component and both the Austin and Toyah foci of the
Central Texas Aspect are represented.

INTRODUCTION

Late in the fall of 1964, Dr. Edward B. Jelks, Director of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, through the courtesy of Jesse J . Howard,
brought a small collection of perishable materials to the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory for analysis and description. A note with
these materials read "Found by George Anderson in a very dry cave
between Clifton and Meridian, Texas. This is very rare stuff for Central Texas." It is indeed very unusual that such specimens have survived the damp central Texas climate, and it was thought that a report
on them would be of special interest because of the rarity of such a find .
Mr. Howard had obtained the collection from Gaines DeGraffenreid,
who had bought part of the large Anderson accumulation of central
Texas materials some years ago.
A search for more information about the perishables produced from
the County Archeological files at The University of Texas a manuscript written by Frank E. Simmons entitled "Report on Prehistoric
Relics and Skeletal Remains in the Bosque Basin," dated September,
1919. From this document it appeared that our specimens came from
Brawley's Cave, Bosque County ( 41 BQ 20). Simmons' manuscript
describes the location of the cave, which would be more accurately
called a rockshelter, and gives an interesting account of the burials,
artifacts, and other materials that he, with George Anderson and
Jacob Olsen, discovered during excavations in 1917 and 1918. The
original manuscript, slightly edited, follows this report as an addendum. A section dealing with another archeological site, Camp 5, has
been omitted.

112

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Anderson's collection from the cave was scattered after his death,
but the specimens still in DeGraffenreid's possession and those in Simmons' own collection will be described in this paper. I should like to
thank them both for their generous cooperation in allowing me to examine and photograph their artifacts. In addition to the perishables,
specimens of stone, bone, and shell are included, along with a single
potsherd. There are said to be additional materials from Brawley's Cave
in the Jacob Olsen collection at the Clifton Museum, in Clifton, but
I have not had an opportunity to see them.
I am deeply indebted to Mardith K. Schuetz, of the Witte Memorial
Museum, for assistance in analyzing the fragments of basketry and
cordage and for identification of some of the fibrous materials used in
their construction; to Dr. Gerald K. Raun, of the Texas Memorial
Museum, for identifying the faunal remains; and to Harry J. Shafer
and DavidS. Dibble for photographing the specimens and helping me
in the description and identification of a number of them. However,
any errors in description, identification, and interpretation are mine.
Unless otherwise noted, the specimens described below are from the
Jesse Howard collection.
DESCRIPTION OF THE SPECIMENS

Perishable Specimens

Specimens of Wood (6 specimens; Fig. 1, A-G )
Four of the six specimens of wood can definitely be considered
artifacts. The material has not been identified.
1. Worked Stick (Fig. 1, A )
Length : about 15 em.
Diameter: tapers from 6 mm. at one end to about 3 mm. at the
other.
This is a slightly curved, cylindrical stick with a blunted point at one
end. Although no tool marks are evident, the stick may have been
rubbed to its slightly fuzzy smoothness.
Its function is not obvious, but it may be an arrow foreshaft which
has hardened into a slightly warped curve and has not been modified
for hafting. Another possible use could be as an awl or a basketry tool.
2. Worked Stick (Fig. 1, B)
Length: 6 em.
Diameter: tapers from 4 mm. to 1 mm.
A small, cylindrical stick has been sharpened to a rough point at
one end; it is slightly flattened and blunted at the other end, which is

11 3

B RAWLEY's CAVE

c

D

B

F

E
A

0

IN.

0

CM.

G

3

Fig . 1 . Specimens of Wood. A, 8 , Worked sticks . C, D, Arrow foreshaft w ith stem of
Perdiz po int and enlargement (DI of dista l end of foreshaft . E, Small , burred stick . F, G,

Small st icks .

114

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

somewhat ragged. Longitudinal whittling marks can be seen along the
entire surface. About 1.4 em. from the wider end the stick has been
thinned slightly to a spot where a tuft of short fibers curls. The small
fibrous attachment extends from 4 mm. to 1 em. from the blunt end.
Several possibilities for use are suggested: the specimen could be an
arrow foreshaft, with the tuft of curled fibers intended for securing the
arrow; it could be an unfinished foreshaft; it might be a complete
wooden arrow; and it might also have been used as a basketry tool.
Edward B. Jelks ( 1962: 70-71) has described a similar, but longer,
specimen in his report of the Kyle rockshelter.
3. Worked Stick (Fig. 1, C, D )
Length : 4.2 em.
Diameter: 5 mm. at one end, tapering to a point at the other.
This is another small, cylindrical, sharpened stick, apparently of the
same material as No. 2. This one, however, is certainly the distal end
of an arrow foreshaft. In the center of the straight, vertically cut end
a narrow cleft, 7 mm. long, still holds the tiny, slender stem (3 mm.
thick) of an arrow point. The size and shape of the contracting stem
fragment indicates that it is from a Perdiz whitney poin'i. This specimen is in DeGraffenreid's collection.
Simmons mentions (see Addendum ) finding a foreshaft holding
an arrow fragment but relates that a small piece of sinew was bound
around it when it was discovered. Jelks (ibid.: 69-70) describes and
illustrates a similar foreshaft-also holding a Perdiz point fragmentwhich gave evidence of having once been lashed with sinew.
4. Worked Stick (Fig. 1, E )
Length : about 4.5 em.
Diameter: 5 mm. to 6 mm.
A short, cylindrical, smooth stick has been shredded at each end so
that the fibers curl. No tool marks are visible. The tufted, shredded
ends suggest a possible use as a paint brush, but there is no evidence
of color particles. Schuetz ( 1961: 181) describes somewhat similar
burred wood objects from the Shumla Cave in Val Verde County with
"single ends split into thin strips that curl like paper ribbon. "

5. Small Stick (Fig. 1, F)
Length: 5 em.
Width: 5 mm. to 6 mm.
This very small, soft, slender stick is frayed at one end and notched
or broken off about 8 mm. from the other end, leaving a fragment
only 2 mm. wide. It is of such soft material that it yields to light finger

BRAWLEY's CAVE

115

pressure, and no tool marks are visible. Unless this is a badly decayed
paint brush, it is difficult to see how it could have been used at all, and
it is questionable whether it is an artifact.
6. Small, Broken Stick (Fig. 1, G )
Length: about 5.2. em.
Width: about 3 mm. when the two pieces are together.
The soft, fragile, slender stick has been broken in two lengthwise.
One end is split to a depth of about 1 em.; the other end is broken into
several fibrous lengths. There are no signs of its having been worked.

Specimens of Fiber and Grass ( 30 specimens )
The 30 specimens in this category are divided for descriptive purposes into cordage, basketry, and other artifacts of fiber and grass .
Botanical identifications, where certain, were made by Mardith K.
Schuetz.
CORDAGE ( 10 specimens; Fig. 2, A-H )
Terminology used in describing the cordage is based on an analysis
by Douglas and Carolyn Osborne (1954: 1095-1099 ). Fiber thus refers to the fundamental unit used in making yarns and fabrics. Yarn
is made by twisting sets of one or more fibers together to construct a
stronger unit; it is a generic term which includes single yarn, plied
yarn, cord, twine, sewing thread, and so forth. Ply is the term designating the yarn unit or units twisted together to make cordage, rope,
and the like. The Osbornes say: "Twine is a plied yarn made from
medium-twist single yarns with ply-twist in the opposite direction.
Properly, most yarns called 'cordage' are twine. For the larger and
more plied yarns, cords, and ropes, the changing of direction of twist
determines the type of rope and its uses" (ibid.: 1099 ) . However, as
the term cordage is commonly used in the archeological literature, I
employ it here for both twine and cordage. Twist refers to the direction
of slope that the fibers and yarns make around their vertical axis:
Z-twist means in a counterclockwise direction, S-twist in a clockwise
direction. According to the Osbornes, when the fiber and the ply are
twisted in opposite directions, the resulting construction is stronger
and more easily handled than it would be if the same twist direction
were used throughout. The number of twists to the inch and the angle
of helix (angle of slope made by the twists to the vertical axis, as
measured with a protractor ) are used in analyzing the construction of
the cordage.

116

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

A

8

E

D

F

0
0

G

IN.

CM.

2

6

H

Fig . 2 . Cordage . A-D, Z-tw isted, 2 ply yarns , w ith 5-tw isted fibe rs. E-H, 5-tw isted , 2 ply
yarns , wi th Z-tw isted f ibers . All are made of sotol but G, wh ich is of s isal.

Of the 10 specimens of cordage, six are made of Z-twist, 2-ply yarns,
with S-twist fibers, and the remaining four are S-twist, 2-ply yarns,
with Z -twist fibers. One of the Z-twist fragments is tied around a
twisted piece made of fur strips which will be described under miscellaneous specimens later. Seven cordage specimens are constructed of
sotol and one of sisal. Two have not been definitely identified (Table 1,
No. 2 and Table 2, No.4) but appear to be of sotol. The sotol is Dasylirion texanum Scheele, the only sotol species found as far north as

117

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

Bosque County (Parks, 1937: 13). The sisal, commonly known as
Century Plant (Agave americana L .) is not native to Bosque County;
its distribution is given as extending south and west of this area (ibid.:
16 ) . Dimensions, material, an analysis of construction, and brief remarks concerning the individual specimens are given in Table 1 (Ztwist, 2-ply yarn, with S-twist fibers) and Table 2 (S-twist, 2-ply yarn,
with Z-twist fibers ). Many specimens are dry and brittle and contorted
by loops and twists. Because of possible damage through the handling
necessary to straighten them for measurement, approximate dimensions must be given in some instances.
BASKETRY

(8 specimens; Fig. 3, A-H)

Of the eight examples of basketry, five are in sufficiently good condition to reveal the weaving technique used. In most instances small
bundles of straight fibers were bound tightly, then the bound sections
were woven together with non-interlocking weft bands of a flat, wider
material. The three very loose and fragmentary specimens still suggest
TABLE 1
Six specimens of Z -twist, 2-ply yarn cordage, with S-twist fibers
(Dimensions are given in centimeters)
No. Length

Dia.

- 1- - 2 -- .3-

i'vlaterial:c...____,::-:-:-C
=:o nstruction-:-- -- .

- Sotol

3Yz twists/ inch

Angle of h elix not
measured

Remarks

Very small; e~eedingly fragile ,
badly deteriorated. (Not illustrated )

2

Not .3
measured

Possibly Ca. 8 twists/ inch
Angle of helix not
sotol
measured

3

Ca.
9

.2

Sotol

15 twist/ inch
Well made, evenly twisted and
Angle of helix ca. 45 ° in very good condition except
for frayed ends. (Fig. 2,A)

4

Ca. .3
23.5

Sotol

8 twists/ inch
Good condition. (F·ig. 2,B)
Angle of helix ca. 55o

5

28

.4

Sotol

7 twists/ inch
Angle of helix 45 o

6

Ca.
14.5

.5

Sotol

4 twists/inch
Fair condition. (Fig. 2,D)
Angle of helix ca. 55 o

Tied around fur fragment, ends
knotted twice. One end broken
off at an outer knot, the other
end frayed. (Fig. 6,A )

Well made. evenly twisted, in
excellent condition. Two overhand knots at one end, one behind the other, and a single knot
at the other. Yarn frayed beyond
the knots at both ends. (Fig. 2,C)

118

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

TABLE 2
Four specimens of S-twist, 2-ply yarn cordage, with Z-twist fibers
(Dimensions are given in centimeters)
No. Length

Dia.

l\1aterial

Constructjon

Remarks

1

13

.2-.25 Sotol

Ca . 11 twists/ inch
Tightly twisted, well made in
Angle of helix ca. 45o good condition. ( Fig. 2,E)

2

Ca.

.2

Ca. 7 twists/ inch

Sotol

16

Angle of helix
ca. 55°-60°

3

2.5

.8

Sisal

4

6

.25

Probably Ca. 11 twists/ inch
sotol
Angle of helix not
mzasured

Not detennined

Loosely twisted and badly frayed at ends; in poor condition.
Accurate measurement difficult.
( Fig. 2,F)
Width taken at twist. Small,
consists of a single twist of the
2 plies. Ends spread out and
frayed. ( Fig. 2,G)
Broken in two pieces but appears
to be in fair condition. Evenly
and tightly twisted. From Simmons collection. ( Fig. 2,H)

a similar method of manufacture. In describing the fibrous materials
the width is termed "fine" if the fibers are 1 mm. or less in diameter,
"medium" up to 3 mm., and "coarse" over 3 mm. The materials have
not been identified.
1. Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, A )
Length: about 5 em.
Width: 4 em.
Lengths of fine-to-medium fibers are wrapped together into four
bundles (plus a fragment of a fifth ) about 5 mm. wide to make the
warp foundation of an oval fragment. The individual bundles are then
woven together with double strips of a flat fiber about 2 mm. wide in
a non-interlocking coil technique.
2. Coiled Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, B)
Length: 8.6 em.
Width: 1.8 em. to 2 em.
This is one of the best examples of basketry in the collection and
one of the best preserved as well. Flat strips of fiber have been used for
binding together three bundles of fine fibers in a non-interlocking coil
technique. Most of both surfaces are covered with the weft binding,
making a compact piece about 8 mm. thick. The split-leaf weft stitche'
have been worked on a diagonal slanting to the left. The wrapping
f~bers are not twisted but make flat bands in units about 4 to 5 mm.

119

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

c

A

F

0

E

t

Q

IN.

0

CM.

J

>

H

Fig. 3 . Basketry Fragments . A , 8 , Fragments showing the non-interlocking weave. C,
Cente r coi l with split-stitch, non-interlocking weave. E-H , Small basketry fragments .

wide. The bound surface of one bundle has been worn off one side
exposing an area of about 2 em. which shows the longitudinal fibers
underneath one end.
3. Coiled Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, C)
Diameter: 5 em.

120

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The center section of a piece of coiled basketry forms nearly a perfect circle. This specimen is in excellent condition and provides a good
example of the non-interlocking, split-stitch weaving technique. There
are six coils from the center to the perimeter. Stitches are very close
together at the center, but they are spaced increasingly farther apart
as the coils grow so that around the outer coil there are two stitches
to the centimeter. The fragment is from the DeGraffenreid collection.
4. Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, D )
Length: about 5 em.
Width: 7 mm. to 1.8 em.
This is a single bundle of untwisted fine fibers wrapped horizontally
along most of its length with bands of flat fiber about 4 mm. wide.
Enough weft elements protrude from the sides to show that the weave
is similar to that of the other basketry bundle fragments , although
this one is not tightly constructed.
5. Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, E )
Length: about 6 em.
Width: 2 em. to 3 em.
One bundle of fine-to-medium width fibers has been bound closely
by a band of flat fiber 2 mm. to 3 mm. wide. The horizontal binding
extends from 1.5 em. below one end to 1 em. from the other. The wider
end has been slightly scorched. A few fragments of a similar bundle
remain attached showing that the original construction was a noninterlocking weave.
6. Coiled Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, F )
Length: about 7 em.
Width: 1.2 em. at one end, spreading out to about 4 em. at the
other.
This fragment consists of three sections of untwisted fiber, of fine-tomedium width. Each section is bound separately, then the three bundles are woven together by horizontal bands of split-leaf fibers bunched
in strips about 5 mm. wide to make a non-interlocking weft construction. The narrow end is tightly secured, but the fibers and bundles
have loosened and spread out at the other end.
7. Basketry Fragment (Fig. 3, G )
Length : 6 em.
Width: 1.5 em. to 2.5 em.
Mixed fine-to-medium width fibers have been wrapped horizontally
from the narrow end downward for about 2 em. by a band of flat material about 3 mm. wide.

121

BRAW L EY ' S CAVE

8. Basketry Fragm ent (Fig. 3, H )
Len gth : 3.2 em.
Width : about 8 mm.
This small fragment is made of fine fibers that are wrapped m ost
of their length with strips of flat material about 3 mm. wide.

A
B

IN.

c

I

CM:

Fig . 4 . Artifacts of Fiber and Grass . A, Poss ible basketry fragment . 8, Bundle of w rapped
fibers . C, Sandal made of grass bundles. D, Drawing by Mardith K. Schuetz showing details
of sandal construction .

122

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Other Artifacts of Fiber and Grass ( 12 specimens; Figs. 4, A-D; 5,
A-H)
1. Fiber Bundle (Fig. 4, A)
Length: 7 em.
Width: 2.2 em.
A bundle of matted fibers has been wrapped loosely about the middle
section by fibers of the same type. They appear to be a mixture of
very fine-to-medium width fibers. This is probably a deteriorated
basketry fragment, but identification is uncertain because of its condition.
2. Fragments of Fiber Bundles (Not illustrated)
There may be two or three bundles represented by these loose fragments. The similarity in length and the remnants of flat wrapping
fibers present suggest that they were once parts of wrapped bundles
used as warp foundations in the same manner as those previously
described.
3. Bundle of Wrapped Fiber (Fig. 4, B)
Length: about 9 em.
Width: about 2 em. at each end, widening in the center to about
3.6 em.
Thickness: about2.1 em.
This bundle of fibers has been doubled over but not twisted. It is
wrapped horizontally around the middle by similar fibers in a band
about 2.3 em. wide. On the reverse side the wrapping band disappears
in a diagonal into the loop . The bundle has been slightly scorched
on each end. This is probably a "storage bundle"-lengths of fiber
packaged for later use. Schuetz (1963: 157) mentions bundles of this
general type found among cave materials from Val Verde County.
4. Sandal (Fig 4, C, D)
Length: about 18.5 em.
Width: lower loops 2 em. and 1.5 em. at the narrow (heel?) end,
broadening to about 6.5 em. at the wide (toe?) end.
Material: coarse grass.
The specimen is loosely twined and shows no signs of wear. It is
probably an unfinished sandal of a type that looks like a variation of
Schuetz' "hi-parallel warp frame" construction (1956: 130-135).
Three lengths of S-twisted, single-ply coarse grass fiber bundles are
looped over and twisted clockwise at the toe, then relooped in a figure-8
just below the middle of the sandal ( 10 em. from the top) . At the heel
two lengths are looped in a figure-8, the upper ends passing through
the lower loops of the t(!p half. Crosswise bands of the same grass,

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

123

about 1.5 em. wide, reinforce the right edge about 4.5 em. from the
upper end and pass across the center loop about 3 em. from the top.
The sole does not appear to be especially designated for either foot.
Although it is made of material similar to that of the netting described below, there are no remnants of connecting elements that
would suggest that it belongs to the netting. The ends and sides seem
to be intact, and an identification as an unfinished sandal appears
logical.
5. Fragment of Game Net (Fig. 5, A )
Length: a bout 23 em.
Width: about 18 em.
Material: coarse grass mixed with some sotol.
The specimen is crudely made but in fair condition. The dimensions
would be considerably greater if the netting were stretched out fully.
S-twisted grass bundles are twisted again counterclockwise and looped
to catch the lower loops in a figure-S, then worked into the adjoining
upper loops, of which four are discernible. Reinforcing horizontal
bands can be seen near the upper edge. Three unbroken, generally
rectangular sections can be identified in the upper part and measure
about 5.5 em. on each side when they are pulled out. The lower sections are partly broken apart and the ends are loose. These ends have
been charred all along the lower edge. The most tightly wound bundles are about 6 mm. in diameter; others have loosened to about 2.5 em.
6. Twisted Loop of Grass (Fig. 5, B)
Length: about 8 em.
Diameter of yarn: 1 em.
Width at twisted end: 2 em.
A bundle of coarse grass has been S-twisted, then doubled over and
twisted counterclockwise into a loop. The ends spread out to about
4 em. These ends are scorched or charred in the same manner as the
lower ends of the game netting, and this specimen appears to be a
fragment broken from it.
Simmons' manuscript mentions "a few twists of grass folded and
turned similar to 'dry twist tobacco'," which would describe this and
the next two specimens very well.
7. Twisted Loop of Grass (Fig. 5, C)
Length: 4 em.
Width: 2.5 em.
Diameter of yarn: about 1 em.
The right end of this twisted loop crosses over the left to make an

124

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCI ETY

,.

..•

0
0

c

...

J~·

8

CM.

E

0

8

0

F

CM.

6

G

H
Fig. 5 . Arlifacts of Fiber and Grass . A, Fragment of game netting . 8-D, Twisted loops of
grass, probably fragments of the netting . E, F, H, Co iled fiber. G, Knotted fiber.

oval, and the ends are scorched at the crossing .This is probably another
n etting fragment, for similar loops can be seen intact on the netting.

BRAWLEY 'S CAVE

125

8. Twisted Loop of Grass (Fig. 5, D )
Length : 3 em.
Width: 2 em.
Diameter of yam: about 5 mm.
This is just like the twisted loops described above except that it is
smaller.
9. Coiled Fiber (Fig. 5, E)
Eight roughly circular loops of a gray, knotty, pliable stem, about
1 mm. in diameter, have been loosely fastened together by three additional coils of a flat fiber wound loosely around them and secured with
an overhand knot. The construction makes a more or less oval coil
measuring about 4 em. by 6.5 em.
These coiled materials may have been kept for use as fastening or
lacing equipment. Epstein found similar specimens at Centipede and
Damp caves ( 1963: 104; 105, F, G) and Schuetz ( 1963: 154, C; 158 )
says that they are common in the Val Verde County cave assemblages.
10. Coiled Fiber (Fig. 5, F )
This is a coil of fiber that starts with a central circle, around which
three additional coils make an oval about 3.1 em. long and 2 em. wide.
There are no fastening elements present. The material looks like sotol,
but has not been definitely identified. The specimen is from the Simmons collection.
11 . Knotted Fiber (Fig. 5, G)
A small bundle of fiber, 3.2 em. long, has been tied with an overhand knot, making a neat finish at one end, with the other ends left
free. The specimen is 7 mm. wide at the knot. The material is not
identified, but looks like sotol. Jelks (1962: 74, F ) illustrates a very
similar bundle. This is from the Simmons collection.
12. Coiled Fiber (Fig. 5, H )
A length of fiber or wood shaving, with one straight end 4.3 em.
long, has been split into two parts at the other end, each terminating
in tight curls. The specimen resembles the curled cedar shavings described by Jelks (ibid.: 73 ) which he suggests are probably waste
materials resulting from wood scraping. The material of which this
item from the Simmons collection is made has not been identified.

Miscellaneous Perishables ( 4 specimens; Fig. 6, A, B)

1. Fragment of Fur with Scrap of Cordage Attached (Fig. 6, A )
Two separate, narrow strips of skin-backed fur have been twisted

126

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

together counterclockwise, then wrapped around once and tied with
a piece of 2-ply, Z-twisted cordage (described in more detail in Table 1)
about 3.9 em. from the narrow end. The whole construction is about
10.6 em. long and ranges in width from 1.2 em. to 3 em.
The dark gray to yellowish-tan fur has been identified as either rabbit or fox, with fox the more likely choice because of the color pattern.
This is no doubt the "piece of mink skin" that Simmons mentions in
his report.
2. Strands of Hair (Not illustrated)
Eighteen strands of extremely fine hair range in length from 2 to
11 em. The longer ones are not completely straight-they even have a
slight tendency to wave. The color is dark brown. Mardith Schuetz has
identified them as human hair.
3. Tuft of Hair (Fig. 6, B)
This is a small mass of reddish-brown, soft hair about 7 em. long
and 2 em. wide at its maximum. The ends spread out as individual
strands of different lengths less than 1 mm. in diameter. This is probably the " tuft of buffalo hair" that Simmons reports; Raun says this
identification could be correct, although it is not certain.
4. Feathers (Not illustrated )
A loose mass of matted feathers, white and gray-brown mixed, has
been identified as the great blue heron, confirming Simmons' "bunch
of feathers, apparently of the blue heron." Some of the feathers are
quill-like, and others are short or broken. They are interspersed with
a little down, bits of twigs, leaves, grass, and fiber fragments. No bones
are present.
SPECIMENS OF STONE

Of the 37 stone specimens, eight are ground or pecked, 23 are
chipped, and six are classified as miscellaneous stone objects. All
are from the Simmons or DeGraffenreid collection.

Ground or Pecked Stone (8 specimens; Figs. 6, C-J ; 7, A-D )
1. Boatstone (Fig. 6, C, D)
Length: 7.9 em.
Width: 4 em. at the center, 3.2 em. at the beginning of the terminal curves.
Depth: 1. 7 em. at the center.
Material: Probably limestone, reddish colored, possibly fired.

12 7

BRAW L EY ' S CAVE

B

A

E

F

c

D

G

0

0

CM.

6

J

H
Fig . 6. Miscellaneous Perishables, Boatstones, and Pipes . A, Twisted fur strips tied with
cordage . 8, Tuft of hair, possibly buffalo . C, D, Unnotched boatstone , showing basal side
with oval depression and convex side showing the transverse keel. E-G, Notched boatstone: side view, view of basal side with V-shaped groove, convex side with flat keel.
H, Ground stone pipe, bowl broken off. I, J, Elbow pipe of soapstone (or steatitel with
human effigy face: side view and frontal view .

128

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

This unnotched boatstone has been ground into an almost perfect
ellipsoid shape and is very well made. A small broken spot and a few
superficial scratches are the only marks on the base, or so-called upper,
surface; the convex, or bottom, side is somewhat worn and shows a
number of scratches. The end walls are smoothly sloped to meet at the
smoothed ridge of the transverse keel, but the side walls slant outward a distance of 6 mm., then slope downward to the bottom, giving
the side walls a convex appearance. From the side view the bottom
surface makes a smooth curve from end to end.
In the center of the excavated base is a shallow, oval depression 2.3
em. long, 1 em. wide, and 35 mm. deep . The end walls are only 6 mm.
thick.
This specimen seems to be the very common type which Patterson
( 193 7: 38-40) calls Variety XXXII. This boatstone is from the DeGraffenreid collection.
2. Boats tone (Fig. 6, E-G )
Length: 8 em.
Width : 2.3 em. at center, tapering to 1 em. at the ends.
Depths: 3 em. at the center.
Material: Probably limestone, light gray-brown, possibly fired.
This is another smooth, symmetrically ground boatstone showing
excellent workmanship, although the surface is somewhat nicked and
scratched. The V-shaped notches at either end are about 2 mm. wide
across the top and 2 mm. deep. A V -shaped groove, 5 mm. wide and
5 mm. deep, has been excavated from notch to notch along the base
side, and the walls are 6 mm. wide on either side of the groove. Seen
from the end in cross section, the walls are gently curved to meet the
keel. The flat keel extends along the convex bottom from one end to
the other; it is narrowest at the center ( 9 mm.) , then widens to 1.5 em.
at the notches.
This boatstone, also from the DeGraffenreid collection, seems to belong in Patterson's (ibid. : 29, 31 ) Variety XXIV as it is similar in appearance, type of keel, and the nature of the excavated base.
3. Elbow Pipe (Fig. 6, H )
Length : about 8.3 em.
Diameter: 2.9 em. at the widest part.
Material: probably limestone, possibly fired.
Although this ground stone pipe has a dull scratched surface now,
it looks as though it had once been polished. The lower part of the bowl
is broken off, leaving an oval aperture about 2 em. long and 1 em. wide,
with the opening slanting downward into the stem tube. The inner

BRAWLEY 'S CAVE

129

surface is blackened. The outermost edge of the bowl opening is about
9 mm. from the closed end of tJ:te stem, and the angle of the break suggests that the bowl was set at an angle of less than 90°. An incised
groove about 2.5 mm. wide makes a semi-circle around the opposite
side of the tube from the bowl aperture, about 1.5 em. from the closed
end.
The stem opening terminates in a rounded flange about 2 mm. wide
that is set off by a narrow groove encircling the tube. The mouth has
an outside diameter of 1.6 em., an inside diameter of 1.5 em., and is
beveled outward.
Fragments of similar pipes are found in the collection from the Harrell Site (Krieger, 1946: 36) in Young County.
4. Elbow Pipe with Human Effigy Face (Fig. 6, I, J)
This pipe is made of smooth, well polished gray soapstone (or steatite) and is cut all in one piece. The short, stubby bowl is set almost at
right angles to the stem; opposite this angle the face, carved in low
relief, looks outward. The pipe is in perfect condition except for a recent break in which some of the stone on the top and side of the stem
orifice has been broken off.
The bowl is nearly circular, measuring 2.5 em. by 3 em., with a
body thickness of 5 mm. The rim is smooth and flat. The inner side
of the pipe bowl is gently convex to the angle formed at the juncture
of the stem and bowl, but the outer side is convex only about 1.4 em.
down from the rim; at this point it becomes almost straight. At the
point where the side wall straightens a narrow incised groove encircles
the entire bowl. Bowl length, to the angle, is 2.5 em., and width at this
spot is 2.8 em.
The stem is slightly oval in cross section, measuring 2.4 em. by 1.6
em., and is 2.5 em. long from the orifice to the inside of the angle. Wall
thickness is 6 mm. at the long axis of the opening and 5 mm. at the
short axis.
The face is oval, measuring 2.2 em. by 3 em., and is set off from the
body of the pipe by a narrow incised groove. The eyes are small, round
holes set under clearly delineated curved eyebrows, and the nose is
small, straight, and well shaped. The features can be recognized
clearly on the profile (Fig. 6, I ) . The countenance looks very like
some of the Olmec faces.
Elbow-shaped, human effigy stone pipes are rare in central Texas
but are reported from the Spiro Mound in Oklahoma (Hamilton, 1952:
34-35) and from a number of sites in the southeastern states. Fundaburk and Foreman ( 1957 : Pls. 99-102) illustrate examples of these,

130

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

including a sandstone pipe from Lookout Mountain, Tennessee (ibid.:
Pl. 101 ) that shows an interesting similarity of facial treatment with
this pipe from the Simmons collection.

A

B

c

F
D

G

H

J

M

0

N
Q

I N.

0

CM.

K

p

Q

Fig . 7 . Sinkers, Manos, and Dart Points. A, Waco sinker. B, Sin''er. C, D, Quo:-~z;t") monos.
E, N, P, Q , Unclassified dart points. F, Ensor point . G-1, Ensor or Ellis points . J-L, Possible
Morrill poin ts. M, Godley point. 0, Marshall po in t.

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

131

5. Waco Sinker (Fig. 7, A)
Length: 4.2 em. to 4.4 em.
Width: 3.2 em. at center, 2 em. and 2.3 em. at the ends.
Thickness: 2 em. at center.
Material: dark gray quartz.
The sinker appears to be made of an unevenly elliptical river pebble
which has been notched at each end. It is roughly plano-convex and
corresponds in size and shape fairly well with Watts' Type 5 (1938:
28) . The notches are U-shaped and about 2 mm. deep, although one is
a little wider than the other. The sinker's uneven and bumpy surface
shows signs of battering. It is from the Simmons collection.
6. Sinker (Fig. 7, B)
Length: about 5 em. long on one side, 4.6 em. on the other.
Width : 2.7 em. to 3 em.
Thickness : varies from about .9 em. at the ends to 2 em. at the center.
Material: quartz, dark gray to reddish in color.
This bi-convex sinker is generally rectangular in shape, although
not symmetrical. The long sides are slightly concave. At each end are
wide, shallow notches, about 1.6 em. long and 3 mm. deep. The comers
are somewhat rounded off but not smoothed, and the sinker is crudely
made. It is a part of the Simmons collection.
7. Mano (Fig. 7, C)
Length: 8.8 em.
Width: 6.5 em. at the center.
Thickness : 4 em.
Material: probably quartzite.
The mano is one hand size, almost circular, nearly flat on one surface, and very slightly convex on the other. Both grinding facets are
smooth. Side :walls are straight and are pecked fairly smooth all the
way around, except where the surface is slightly broken off at one end.
No striations are visible. This specimen is from the Simmons collection.
8. Mano (Fig. 7, D )
Length: 8.8 em.
Width: 6.5 em. at the center .
Thickness: 4 em.
Material: probably quartzite.
This is also a one hand mano and has been shaped by pecking into

132

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

an oval. There are no scars or striations visible. It, too, is from the
Simmons collection.

Chipped Stone (23 specimens )
The chipped stone artifacts are described under the following categories : dart points, knives, scrapers, and miscellaneous chipped stone
tools. The first dart point listed is from the DeGraffenreid collection;
all other chipped stone artifacts are from the Simmons collection.
DART POINT

(13 specimens; Fig. 7, E-Q )

1. Unclassified Dart Point (Fig. 7, E )
This thin, beautifully chipped point of pinkish-tan flint is 9. 7 em.
long and 4.2 em. wide at the shoulders. It exhibits fine marginal chipping along all edges. The blade edges are recurved, being concave
about % of their length, then becoming convex, terminating m a
sharp point. Barbs are almost even with the thinned base.
2. Ensor Type (Fig. 7, F )
One dart point can be classified as Ensor. It is of a light beige flint
and was found outside the overhang of the rockshelter. It is 3.3 em.
long, 2.1 em. wide, and has convex lateral edges. The wide, expanding,
straight-based stem is 8 mm. long and 2.1 em. wide.

3-5. Ensor-Ellis Type (Fig. 7, G-I )
Three dart points, all of dark gray flint, fall into the general EnsorEllis classification but cannot be definitely ascribed to either. They
have triangular blades and range in length from 3.5 em. to 4.5 em.
Width at the shoulders is from 2 em. to 2.2 em. Two ( G, H ) have expanding stems and straight bases with the stems measuring 7 mm. and
8.5 mm. long, and 9 mm. and 1.6 em. wide. These two are very like
points described and illustrated by Shafer, Suhm, and Scurlock ( 1962:
14--16; Fig. 3, B, C, D) . The third one of this group (Fig. 7, I) has
serrated sides and a convex based stem which is 8 mm. long and 1.8
em. wide.
6- 8. Possible Morrill Type (Fig. 7, J-L )
Three points with fairly long, slightly expanding stems are similar
to Morrill points (Suhm and Jelks, 1962: 223-224) but are not definitely identified as such. Sides are straight to very slightly convex. The
example in Fig. 8, K has a broken tip and a slight flare at the shoulders. These specimens vary in length from 4.8 em. to 5.4 em. and in

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

133

width at the shoulders from 2.1 em. to 2.5 em. Stem bases are straight
to slightly concave with lengths of 1.5 em. to 1.8 em. and widths of 1.5
em. to 1.6 em. All are of dark gray flint.
9. Godley klondike Type (Fig. 7, M)
This dart point of dark gray flint can be tentatively identified as
Godley klondike (Forrester, 1964: Plate 1, Fig. 20), although its dimensions exceed the maximum length and width given by Forrester
for this type. It is thin and finely chipped. The blade is triangular,
with slightly convex sides that flare out a little at the shoulders. The
expanding, convex-based stem is 6 mm. long and 1.4 em. wide. Overall length of the point is 6 em., and width at the shoulders is 2.5 em.
10. Unclassified Point (Fig. 7, N )
This unusual barbed point is broken in a slant across what appears
to be roughly the center of blade. It is of highly patinated, dark gray
flint. This may have been a Bulverde point that was notched on one
side for use as a knife. The notch is about 1 em. deep and lies just above
one of the wide, rounded barbs. Width across the barbs is 4.2 em. The
thin stem is broken on both sides, but looks as though it had been
rectangular in shape. The stem fragment is 1.9 em. wide, and 2.3 em.
long.
11. Marshall Type (Fig. 7, 0 )
This dart point is also broken, in this instance at the tip and at the
base of one of the barbs, but it is tentatively classified as a Marshall
point. The blade edges are convex, and the specimen is finely chipped
all the way around. It is 5.5 em. long and 3.2 em. wide at the barbs.
The parallel-sided, straight-based stem is 8 mm. thick, 1.2 em. long,
and 8 mm. wide. The material is dark gray in color.
12. Unclassified Point (Fig. 7, P)
One comer of the stem of this dark gray, barbed point is broken.
The specimen has fine marginal chipping and convex lateral edges.
The length is incomplete but now measures about 5 em., and the width
at the barbs is 3.2 em. The stem fragment is about 1.6 em. wide.
13. Unclassified Point (Fig. 7, Q)
This is another dart point of dark gray flint with a broken stem. It
is 6.5 em. long and 3.3 em. wide at the barbs. The lateral edges of the
blade taper in a convex curve to the tip. The stem fragment is 1. 7 em.
wide. The specimen is finely chipped all the way around to the break
in the stem.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

8
A

c

D

F

E

H

G

J
Fig . 8 . Knives , Scrapers, and Bifacial Tools . A-D, Knives, E-H, Unifacial scrapers . I,
Heavy bifacial tool. J, Gouge.
KNIVES ( 4

specimens; Fig. 8, A-D )

All four knives are bifacially worked.
1. This light gray flint knife (Fig. 8, A ) is lanceolate in outline. The

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

135

base is rounded, and the edges are worked all the way around. It is
11 .7 em. long and has a maximum width of 4.5 em. The sides are
gently convex for about % of the length, but from that point begin to
taper to the rounded tip.
2. The base of this asymmetrical, but essentially lanceolate-shaped,
knife (Fig. 8, B) of gray flint has been broken on one side. A small
notch is chipped on one lateral edge, 1 em. above the unbroken side
of the base. The knife is plano-convex and has been retouched along
all edges. The over-all length is 9.3 em. , maximum width is 3.6 em.,
and thickness is 9 mm.
3. This short-stemmed knife (Fig. 8, C) is made of light tan flint. It
measures 11 .5 em. long, 3.9 em. wide at the shoulders; the short, thick
stem is 1.2 em . thick, 2.5 em. wide, and 5 mm. long. The lateral edges
of the knife are recurved at the shoulders, concave for about half the
length, imd then become convex as they taper to the sharp tip. Retouching is confined to the margins of the blade.
4. The base of this knife (Fig. 8, D ) of pinkish flint is fairly straight;
otherwise, the specimen has a lanceolate shape with a rounded tip.
The basal edge is thinned and all the edges have been retouched.
When held lengthwise, the knife appears slightly twisted.
SCRAPERS ( 4

specimens ; Fig. 8, E-H )

These are made of unifacially chipped flint flakes . The three ovoid
ones are generally typical of the Toyah Focus of the Central Texas
Aspect (Jelks, 1962: 50-51 ) .

1. This dark gray flint scraper (Fig. 8, E ) is roughly oval, measuring
6.5 em. by 4.8 em., and is 2 mm. to 1.5 em. thick. It is chipped all the
way around except for the striking platform, and has steeply beveled
edges. The bulb of percussion can be seen on the unworked side.
2. Another ovoid scraper (Fig. 8, F ) has steep, marginal chipping
along most of its edges, leaving only the striking platform unworked.
The bulb of percussion is visible on the unworked (plano ) side. The
scraper is of dark gray flint; its dimensions are about 5 em. by 3 em.
3. The third example (Fig. 8, G ) is an elongated oval shape and is
made of light tan flint. It, too, is chipped and beveled all around except
for the striking platform, and, as in the others, the bulb of percussion
can be seen on the reverse of the worked side. It is 6.5 em. long and
3.2 em. wide.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

136

4. This small, nearly flat scraper (Fig. 8, H), another dark gray flint
one, is almost circular, measuring 3.2 em. by 2.8 em. It is chipped all
around the edges, but a negative bulb of percussion is visible on the
unworked side.
MISCELLANEOUS CHIPPED STONE TOOLS (2 specimens; Fig. 8, I, J)
One of these is a plano-convex gouge (Fig. 8, J) of gray flint that
has been bifacially chipped along the marginal edges. Its maximum
length is 14 em. , and its width varies from 4 em. to 5.6 em., and its
thickness is from 2.2 em. to 2.6 em.
The other specimen (Fig. 8, I ) is a heavy, roughly chipped bifacial
tool which is also of gray flint. It is convex on both faces and chipped
around all the edges. One side looks slightly twisted. It is 13.5 em.
long and varies from 3.3 em. to 4.3 em. in width.

Other Stone Specimens (6 specimens; Fig. 9, A-F)
All of these are from the Simmons collection. They include:
A hammerstone (Fig. 9, A ) of very irregular outline which shows
flake scars and battering marks. It is made of reddish quartzite and
measures about 5.7 em. by 5.6 em. in maximum dimensions.
Three specimens of hematite (Fig. 9, B-D ): 1) a roughly ovalshaped piece about 3.6 em. long and 2.8 em. wide; 2) an almost perfect sphere, 2.2 em. in diameter; and 3 ) a generally rectangular, flat
stone that has been scored across both surfaces and measures 2 em.
by 2.5 em.
There are two unworked quartz stones (Fig. 9, E, F) , roughly rectangular in shape, measuring about 2 em. by 2.5 em. , and 2.5 em. by
2.6cm.
SPECIMENS OF BoNE (15 specimens; Figs. 9, G-0; 10, A-D )
The 15 bone specimens came from the Simmons and DeGraffenreid
collections. All but one are fashioned of deer bone, while the remaining artifact is of bird bone. Following Jelks ( 1962: 61 ) I have divided
them for descriptive purposes into three classes: pointed implements,
spatulate implements, and miscellaneous bone objects.

Pointed Bone Implements ( 10 specimens)
1.

(Fig. 9, G )
Length: 12.9 em.

137

BRAWLEY's CAVE

c

G

H

J
0
0

D

L

K

1111.

CM.

6

M

Fig . 9 . Misce llaneous Stones and Bone Implements. A, Hammerstone . 8-D , Hemat ite .
E, F, Quartz pebbles. G-L, Po inted tools , p robably aw ls or punches . M, Worked dee r
metapod ial , possibly reworked beame r. N, 0 , Po in :ed bone imp lements .

Width: 9 mm. at the proximal end, tapering to a sharp point at the
distal end.
The implement has been excellently smoothed and polished, and
the rounded proximal end is well finished. A shallow concavity runs
down most of the length on one side. The awl is creamy white in color
and bears no scratches or scars of use. It is from the DeGraffenreid
collection.

138

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

2.

(Fig. 9, H )
Length : 8.6 em.
Width: 1.3 em. at the proximal end, tapering to a sharp point.
This awl is smooth but not polished. A deep cleft runs down one
side, but the other side is rounded. It is in the DeGraffenreid collection.

3.

(Fig. 9, I )
Length: 14.3 em.
Width: 1 em. near the proximal end, sharply pointed at the distal
end.
This tool is made from a deer metapodial that has been smoothed
and polished. One long side has a shallowly-concave curvature. The
proximal end is well finished, and from it runs a small, natural groove
about 2 em. down the shaft. The implement comes from the DeGraffenreid collection.
4. (Fig. 9, J)
Length : 9 em.
Width: 8 mm. at the widest part, tapering to a sharp point.
This is another awl made from a deer metapodial bone. The proximal end shows little modification. It also is from the DeGraffenreid
collection.
5.

(Fig. 9, K)
Length: 8.3 em.
Width: 2.2 em. at the distal end, tapering to a blunt point.
Another awl has been cut from a deer metapodial and fairly well
smoothed but not polished. It is from the DeGraffenreid collection.
6.

(Fig. 9, L)
Length : 13 em.
Width: 1.6 em. at the proximal end, tapering to a fairly blunt point
of2mm.
The proximal end of this deer metapodial has been smoothed to
some extent; a shallow depression runs along most of the shaft on
both sides. The bone was once polished, but the surface is now eroded
and darkened. It is in DeGraffenreid's collection.
7.

(Fig. 9, M)
Length: 15 em., broken at the tip.
Width: 3 em. at the proximal end.
Deer metapodial fumishes the material from which this specimen,
possibly a reworked beamer, has been fashioned. The distal end has
been trimmed to a point (now broken off) with the narrowing begin-

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

139

ning about 1 em. from that end. The articulation has been left intact
at the proximal end, from which a deep groove has been hollowed out
the length of the shaft, leaving only thin, fairly well smoothed walls
of bone. This is from the Simmons collection. It is interesting to compare this tool with the beamers described by Frank H. Watt (see this
issue of the Bulletin) .
8.

(Fig. 9, N )
Length: 9 em.
Width: 1 em. , tapering to a sharp point, with the extreme tip
broken.
This is a flat tool made of split bone, 3 mm. thick. The proximal end
is somewhat rough and slanted, but except for a little pitting the surfaces are smooth and polished. Its function is not known. The specimen
is from the Simmons collection.
9.

(Fig. 9, 0)
Length: 6.2 em.
Width: 4.5 mm., tapering to a sharp point.
This is a smooth, slender implement that has a very slight curve. It
is in the Simmons collection.

10. (Not illustrated)
Length: 4.2 em., incomplete.
Diameter: 6.5 em., tapering to the broken point.
The proximal end of this cylindrical piece of bone has been broken
off and is rough, as is the point. The surfaces are smooth except for a
slight pitting. It is from the Simmons collection.
Spatulate Bone Implements ( 4 specimens; Fig. 10, A-C )
These implements are all made from deer ulnae and may have been
used as flaking tools. They are from the Simmons collection.

1.

(Not illustrated)
Length: 7.2 em.
Width : 3 em. at the widest part.
The proximal end and sides have been left unmodified except for a
little smoothing. The distal end has a rounded curve about 3 mm.
wide. One side is broken and shows signs of rodent chewing.
2.

(Fig. 10, A)
Length: 8 em.
Width: 3.2 em. at the widest part.

140

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The sides of this tool have been smoothed, and the distal end has
been worked into a rounded curve about 6 mm. wide.
3.

(Fig. 10, B)
Length: 7.5 em.
Width: 3.3 em. at the widest part.
The distal end is finished in a curve about 1.6 em. wide. The edges
have been smoothed all around the tool.

4.

(Fig. 10, C)
Length: 8.3 em. , incomplete.
Width: 1.5 em.
The curved proximal end is about 1.5 em. wide; the distal end has
been broken and is rough. About 3.2 em. from the proximal end a
section has been cut or broken out, it is about 3 mm. deep and extends
for about 2.3 em. along the side.

Miscellaneous Bone Objects ( 1 specimen; Fig. 10, D )
The only artifact that falls into this class is a cylindrical, hollow,
slightly curved bird bone that has been cut off fairly evenly at both
ends. These ends are not well smoothed. The tube is 5 em. long and
has a diameter of 8 mm. at each end. The curvature in the central
part narrows the diameter there to 5 mm. Because of the unsmoothed
ends, this is thought to be a bead rather than the mouth piece for a
pipe. It is from the DeGraffenreid collection.
SPECIMENS OF SHELL

(4 specimens; Fig. 10, E-H)

There are only four artifacts in this group, a pendant made from
a conch shell, and three mussel shell scrapers or knives .
The columella of a conch shell (Fig. 10, E) has been cut out and
polished to make a pendant 7.2 em. long and 1 em. to 1.4 em. in
diameter. In each of the smoothed and rounded ends a hole 4 mm. in
diameter has been drilled laterally, though the holes are not quite in
the same plane. Two incised, parallel lines, about 5 mm. apart, form
a band that crosses the pendant diagonally for a distance of 2.8 em. on
one side of each end. The band-perhaps a natural groove intentionally accentuated-commences above the right hand hole and
extends downward and to the left in an angle of about 45 degrees. It
appears on the reverse side below and to the left of the hole and extends upward the same distance to the right. The pendant is excellently finished and in good condition except for a small break at one
end.

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

141

Three large mussel shells (Fig. 10, F-H ) show use marks on the
end opposite the hinge. One shell (Fig. 10, H) has been cut or notched
on the side as well. Two shells (Fig. 10, F and H ) are chipped along
the edge, but the third one (Fig. 10, G) has been worked to a smooth,
knife-like edge for a distance of about 3 em.
SPECIMEN

OF

CLAY (1 specimen ; Fig. 10, I )

In Simmons' collection is one small potsherd with pinkish surfaces
and a brownish-gray core. The bone temper can readily be seen on
both surfaces as well as in the core, and there may be a little sand
mixed in the paste. The sherd measures about 2.5 em. by 3 em. , with
a thickness of 7 mm. One surface is slightly brushed and the other is
smoothed. It resembles locally made central Texas pottery from the
Leon River.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

Brawley's Cave must once have been an extremely rich source of
archeological materials, of which only a small sample is now available
for study. We are indebted to Frank E. Simmons for the only records
that have been kept on the site: its location, the nature of the burials,
description of the skeletons, artifacts, and other materials that were
discovered when it was excavated in 1917 and 1918 (see Addendum ).
Simmons tells us (personal communication) that he did not see all of
the original Anderson collection. No attempt was made to distinguish
different natural strata and no vertical or horizontal controls were
used in the digging.
The cave remained unusually dry, and for that reason a considerable number of perishable specimens survived. These materials, along
with those of stone, bone, shell, and pottery, were divided among the
discoverers, although some had been removed by other visitors. Probably a great part of the specimens, especially the flint artifacts, have
now been scattered and lost, but those that remain available, supplemented by Simmons' manuscript (see Addendum), make it possible
to place the site into a broad cultural context.
Certain artifacts attributable to the Archaic Edwards Plateau Aspect
(Suhm, et al., 1954: 106-112; Suhm, 1958: 79-81 ) can be found in
the Brawley's Cave assemblage, and give evidence of what appears to
be the earliest occupation. These are : the stemmed knife, quartzite
hammerstone, sinkers, deer ulna tools, disc-like scraper, and Ensor,
Ellis, and Godley dart points. Moreover, Simmons' sketches (Figs. 11
and 12) show dart points that strongly resemble the Marshall type,

142

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

D
A

F

c

B

G

E

0

IN.

o

CM:

H

Fig . 1 0 . Bone Implements , Shell Artifacts, and Potsherd . A-C, Spatulate implements of
deer ulnae, possibly flak ing tools. D, Bird bone bead. E, Conch shell pendant. F-H, Worked
mussel shells. I, Bone-tampered polshcrd .

drills, triangular knives, and curved, thin knives. These indirectly
augment the list of Edwards Plateau Aspect traits that may be found
among the Brawley's Cave materials. A number of Edwards Plateau
traits, however, carry over into the Central Texas Aspect: use of rockshelters as campsites, flexed burials with little or no grave goods, deer
ulna and antler tools, bone awls, triangular-shaped knives, hematite
pigment, and possibly the Godley point (Suhm, et al., 1954: 112-117;
Jelks, 1962: 86 ).
Jelks' report on the stratified Kyle Site (ibid.), in which he dis-

143

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

tinguishes two Central Texas Aspect foci (Austin and Toyah ) in
addition to the Edwards Plateau Aspect, offers the most useful source
for a comparison with the cultures represented at Brawley's Cave.
The specimens from this site parallel in many ways those from the
Kyle rockshelter in the general range and type of artifacts, including
the perishable items. To judge from Simmons' report, as well as from
certain of the specimens described in the preceding sections, both the
Austin Focus and the Toyah Focus are represented at Brawley's Cave.
Toyah Focus artifacts-including Perdiz and Cliffton points (Fig. 11 ),
steeply beveled snub-nosed scrapers, possible Cleburne knives, and the
pottery-may, however, be more common than those of the Austin
Focus. The perishables from the Kyle Site came from the Toyah Focus
zone, while those from Brawley's Cave probably belong with the
Central Texas Aspect but cannot be specifically attributed to either
focus . Such exotic specimens as the shell pendant and the effigy pipe
are very likely intrusive, but the broken elbow pipe has counterparts
in the pipe fragments from the not too distant Harrell Site in northcentral Texas (Krieger, 1946: 36).
Thus it appears that Brawley's Cave fits reasonably well into a time
range extending from a late Edwards Plateau Aspect through both
Austin and Toyah foci of the Central Texas Aspect, with no indication
of a continuance into the historic period.

REFERENCES CITED
Epstein, Jeremiah F.
1963. Centipede and Damp Caves : Excavations in Val Verde County, 1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962), pp. 1-129.
Forrester, Robert E.
1964. The Ham Creek Site. A Publication of the Tarrant County Archeological
Society.
Fundaburk, Emma Lila, and Mary Douglas Foreman (editors )
1957. Sun Circles and Human Hands. Published by Emma Lila Fundaburk.
Hamilton, Henry W.
1952. The Spiro Mound, The Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 14.
J elks, Edward B.
1962. The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central T exas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology, Archaeology Series, No. 5.
Krieger, Alex D .
1946. Culture Complexes and Chr onology m Northern T exas. University of
Texas Publication No. 4640.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Osborne, Douglas and Carolyn
1954. Twines and Terminologies. American Anthropologist, Vol. 56, pp. 10931100.
Parks, H. G.
1937. Valuable Plants Native to Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station,
Bulletin No. 551.
Patterson, J. T .
1937. Boat Shaped Artifacts of the Gulf Southwest States. University of Texas
Bulletin No. 3732.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1956. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Materials: Part I. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 27, pp. 129-160.
1961. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material: Part II. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31 (for 1960), pp. 167-205.
1963. An Analysis of Val Verde County Cave Material: Part III. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33 (for 1962) , pp. 121-165.
Shafer, Harry J ., Dee Ann Suhm, and J . Dan Scurlock
1962. An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton
Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962. Texas Arche:llogical
Salvage Project, Miscellaneous Papers, No. 1.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1958. A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological S:lciety, Vol. 29, pp. 63-107.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D . Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954. An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks (editors )
1962. Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Published jointly by
the Texas Archeological Society (Special Publication No. 1) , and thP
Texas Memorial Museum (Bulletin No. 4) .
Watt, Frank H .
1938. The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist, No.4, pp. 21-70.
Texas Memorial Museum
The University of Texas
Austin, Texas

145

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

ADDENDUM
REPORT ON PREHISTORIC RELICS AND SKELETAL REMAINS IN THE
BOSQUE BASIN
Covering an area in the hill country ly ing west of the Bosque River and extending from Valley Mills to Hico, embracing an area of approximately 300 square
miles.
Frank E. Simmons
BRAWLEY's CAvE
One of the ancient habitations of primitive men found in this region is in a wild,
gloomy ca nyon which nature has cut into the low mountains lying west of the
Bosque River. It is some 4 miles south of the county seat, Meridian, and is known
as Brawley's Cave.
The wall of the mountain has an altitude of about ZOO feet above the river bed,
and back of this wall is an undulating tableland covered with a scrubby growth of
the species of oak common to the region and extensive brakes of scrubby cedar. Into
this tableland nature has cut many deep, rugged canyons of varying lengths up to
more than a mile. It is in the head of one of these deep, narrow canyons that
Brawley's Cave is found. At a point in the canyon even with the cave the gulch is
about 100 feet deep, some ZOO yards from its head. At the bottom the width varies
from 10 to 30 feet, while the crests of the opposing bluffs are 60 or 70 yards apart.
On the rocky bluffs where some soil has accumulated is a scrubby growth of bushes
of the common species.
In the face of the north cliff of this gloomy, lonesome hollow is Brawley's Cave,
cut by nature into the solid rock to a depth of 10 to 30 feet, with overhanging roof
15 to 20 feet high. The floor varies from 1Z to perhaps Z4 or Z5 feet above the bottom of the hollow. Thus nature provided a home where apparently many generations of primitive Americans lived and died. It is not probable that the floor of this
cave has ever been thoroughly wet since the appearance of man here. No chilling
north winds were felt by those who dwelt here. No destructive tornado ever disturbed their nightly slumbers, and no enemy armed with primitive weapons could
assail them.
Here with her rude utensils of stone, bone, mussel shells, pottery, basketry, and
so forth, the Indian wife performed her domestic duties. And here old men shaped
wonderful flint artifacts to be lost in ash beds and dust accumulations from three to
six or more feet deep and found again by the modem American, perhaps hundreds
of years later-a record of the arts, industries, and culture of the people who anciently made their home in this place. Buried in the ash beds have been found a fine
series of flint artifacts, broken pottery, broken mortars, stone hammers, bone and
shell implements, fragments of mats, fragments of wood work, arrow shafts, basket
stays, furs, feathers, paint, bark cordage, knotted grass, and a fine stone pipe. But
we will here state that no stone axes, nor grooved hammers, nor any polished stones
have been brought to light.
At intervals of leisure, during 1917-1918, we assisted in excavations that yielded
a fine collection of such items as are mentioned above along with six skeletons or
remains belonging to that number of human beings. At one point, the darkest and
best protected in the cave, four skeletons were found buried one below another:

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

three adults and one child, apparently 10 years old, and one female skull. These
were all folded , backs to the wall, heads to the east, and lying on the left side; the
lowest cranium was discovered not over four feet down. A great many of the bones
disintegrated on exposure. Three whole crania were saved, a pelvis, a number of
long limb bones, and some mandibles and teeth. Most of the vertebrae were decayed,
but many of the teeth were well preserved, though some were worn to the gums. In
the east end of the cave, at a depth of 18 inches, was found an adult male of large
size. He was buried extended, lying on his back, with his head to the east.
Not enough whole bones were found to reconstruct any individual; and not a
single ornament, tool, or weapon was directly in either of the graves, although a
good stone pipe was found in material that might have been thrown from the grave
in the east end of the cave. The excavating was done very unsystematically and so
we cannot be exact on all points. At all places in the ash and dust accumulations
were found the bones of most animals common to the country, some bison ribs and
large joints included. Acorns, walnuts, and pecans were also found promiscuously
scattered.
FLINT

The flint artifacts found here [Brawley's Cave] are of finer finish than any
others found in this region.
The drills vary from 1 to 2\6 inches long and are excellent. The triangular
scrapers, up to 3 inches long, are extremely good specimens. The knives are also
excellent and measure up to 4 inches in length. One fine spear is 5 inches long. The
arrow points are superior to all. Varying in length up to 2 inches, they have fine,
thin blades, long barbs chipped inside and out, and delicate, narrow stems. Many of
the points are serrated.
A good percentage of the flint was broken and seemed to have been injured by
fire. Yet these broken fragments, together with the whole specimens, furnish comparative material to show that the flint artifacts found here average superior in
workmanship to those found on the open camps of the same region. It is regrettable
that many specimens were carried away by curious people who cared little for them
and only later fell into the hands of those who were interested in the work.
PoTTERY AND MoRTARS

There is very little to be said of pottery and mortars. No whole specimens, so far
as we can learn, have been found here--only broken fragments of pottery; but they
are of an extra weight and thickness that is sufficient to guarantee the quality of
the work. They are fairly shiny and black. The curvature of some fragments indicates vessels of considerable capacity and strength, as some pieces are % of an inch
thick. This is much heavier and better than the fragments found on the open camps.
Many fragments of mortars, made of slabs of stone, were found . The hollow in
many seemed to be shallow as if worn by the process of grinding. Some were pecked
into shape. An examination of the fragments showed some to be severely burned as
if they had been used for cooking vessels.
HAMMERS AND PESTLES

So far as we know no pestles, other than natural granite boulders, have been
found in this ·c ave, but plenty of granite boulders and pebbles and lumps of flint

147

BRAWLEY'S CAVE

showing signs of wear were discovered. There were some oval-shaped sandstones
(so-ca lled " rubbing stones").
SHELLS

Other domestic utensils found here are the beautiful mussel shells, some of which
are highly polished from long u se. They were evidently household utensils used in
the capacity of spoons or scrapers. The end farthest from the hinge is gradually
worked to a point from both sides. Although most of them have been broken or
injured by fire, there are some good specimens. A number of them d1 n::>t appear t1
have been " worked" or u sed at all. The shells belong to the common species from the
river a mile away . There were no shell ornaments reported.
MISCELLANEOU S

Among a varied assortment of specimens were: a bunch of feathers, apparently of
the blue heron; a few twi sts of grass folded and turned, similar to "dry twist tobacco;" a fragment of a grass mat, which was the center coil, measuring about 3
inches across. This piece of mat was sufficient to show the development in mat
weaving. I t was necessary to handle it with the greatest care in order to preserve
the specimen. Other items included a small tuft of buffalo hair, a piece of mink
skin, and a small bit of skin dressed on the fl esh side, leaving the hair on the opposite side. Another remarkable find was a quantity of red paint. One lump of this,
w eighing about 3 ounces, had a cup-like ca vity in one side.
WooD
There were a few pieces of well preserved wood. A section of arrow shaft still had
the stem of a delicate flint projectile bound to it with a dry sinew. The "feather end"
of an arrow shaft still shows the marks of the things which held the feathers in
place. A basket stay 8 inches long is as good as when made. Another interesting
specimen is a piece of cedar wood 2Yz inches lon g, rounded on one side and flat on
the other. The flat side, % of an inch wide, has a groove running centrally end to
end. One end has been burned off and the entire flat side is charred. There was also a
pine shaft as large as one's little finger, 15 inches long, which had been slightly
burned from end to end.
BoNE AND HoRN

A number of bone and horn tools were found. The horn artifacts, few in number,
were all of antler and consisted of awls or punches 2 to 4 inches long.
The b::>ne tools, with on e exception, were of deer. The 20-odd awls or punches are
made of the stiple [sic] bone taken from the deer. They are 3 to 6 inches long, and
most of them have been injured by fire. There is one long needle-like bone 6 or more
inches long and several smaller ones. Other discoveries included a bone object 6
inches long and over Yz an inch wide, flat with raised edges, and polished; and an
excellent bone gouge, 6 inches long, with the point broken off. One minute round
object, 1,4 of an inch thick and as large as a ten cent piece, was bored through the
center. This well preserved specimen was the only ornament found.
A scraper 2 inches long, rounded and worn to a polish on one end, was made of
the wide section of a bison rib.

148

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
BARK CoRDAGE

We found a piece of bark which had been wound tightly around a small stem
but had slipped off; this had to be handled with much care to keep it whole. A piece
of cord, the size of an eight-penny nail, consisted of two strands of what appeared
to be 'Cedar bark pulped and nicely twisted together. This was found under three
feet of dust and ash accumulations. There were also some fragments of bark with
about 2 inches of one end pulped; the other end was left in its natural state as if
held in the fingers while working the pulped end to a fibrous stage. This was found
near a piece of grass that had been looped and drawn to a hard knot.
GouRDs

We found many fragments of the shell of the gourd commonly used for drinking
dippers.
PROJECTILE POINTS ( FIG.

11)

The projectile point being by far the most common form found, we give it first
consideration. There are a multitude of forms which may be brought under three
heads : A, B, and C.
Class A (Fig. 11, A-C ), the lozenge shape, neither shouldered nor barbed but similar to the outline shown, is represented by fairly numerous specimens.
Class B (Fig. 11 , D-F), stemmed and shouldered but not barbed, has many variations.
Class C (Fig. 11, G-1) , stemmed, shouldered, and barbed, presents the most beautiful specimens in the stone art.
There are many variations of forms which may be grouped with classes B and C
and vary in size from a tiny "bird point" up to a spear 5 inches long.
In the many collections known to us in the Bosque Basin we can account for
some 5000 points of all varieties. By far the greater number of these are rude, blunt,
or clumsy, but there is a high percentage of excellent specimens. These are not all
collected from old camps; but this being a country with an abundant supply of flint,
we believe that most places where points are found were merely workshops, as most
of the cruder forms come from them. The distinction in the mechanical execution of
the work flint found on the old camps is quite above the worked specimens found on
old workshops. There are many peculiar forms found in the Bosque Basin, all, however, being variations of the three great classes.
A listing and description of these peculiar forms (Fig. 11 , J-V) follows:
!: Fairly common form. Usually heavy, large, and clumsy.
K , L: Not numerous. May be straight, concave, or convex at base. Usually small
and well chipped.
M: Common. Varies in size from small to large. Has a bifurcated stem. There are
many blunt, heavy forms, but some are excellent and barbed.
N : Stemmed and barbed points ranging up to 4 inches long. Nearly always excellent.
0, P: Stemmed and barbed bird points. Always excellent.
Q: The serrated point is almost always an excellent one. Sometimes they are
stemmed and barbed, often only stemmed and shouldered.
R: Rarely found. Note base of stem is as wide as the base of the blade. Sometimes
beveled.

149

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

A

8

c

E

0

F

{j
G

L

Q

6

0
R

p

0

N

M

K

J

H

s

T

u

v

Fig . 11 . Outline Drawings of Projectile Points. A-C , Class A. D-F, Class B. G-1, Class C.
J-H, Projectile points with peculiar shapes . Drawings by Frank E. Simmons, not to scale.

150

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

S: Stemmed, barbed, and beveled.
T : Not very common. Usually broad and thin with only one barb. Some, though,
are blunt and heavy.
U: Only two specimens seen bke this. One is 3 inches long. Both are well finished.
Note pecubar notch in one edge.
V: Only two specimens seen like this. Both finely finished. Note extremely broad
base.
In addition to the unusual forms we have listed and described from our field notes,
there is still another "flake point," of which we have found a few. These are made
from a flint flake of such size and form that a few hammer strokes shaped it into
a rude small point-though a sharp, keen-edged one.
Mr. G. A. Anderson made a very interesting find at Camp 5. It was an obsidian
point, and would be a good specimen were the point not broken off. Personally, we
have found only one chert point in the Bosque Basin, a rude specimen 2 inches long.
Spear points here are not very numerous. Of a collection of some 500 points, we
have found half a dozen over 3 inches long that we felt safe to call spears, while
there are some shorter than 3 inches that would seem too heavy for arrows. A few
good specimens of spears up to 5 inches long have been found.

KNIVEs, ScRAPERS, AND HoEs (FIG. 12, A-H)
Of the flint implements used by primitive man none seems to have been of more
universal use than the three named at the heailing of this topic. And the forms of
the three blend so readily together that it is hard to draw a line of demarcation except with the more distinctive forms. For instance, we know that the long, oval
bladed, gracefully and symmetrically finished ones are knives. We know that the
fine, triangular blades are scrapers. And we know that the heavy, thick spades or
hoes could not have been other than digging tools, used in the field or at the flint
quarry. But variations leading from one of these types to the other are many. Thus
we find a great many of these diverse types whose proper classification we are not
sure of and yet feel that they belong to one of the three general types. individually
many could have been used in several ways. Of the well defined types, the Bosque
Basin has furnished some fine specimens of each-knife, scraper, and hoe . And we
can better illustrate by drawn outlines than by long worded descriptions.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, A is the prevailing type. This specimen is 5
inches long.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, B is another fine knife, 4Y2 inches long.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, Cis semi-lunar, 4Y2 inches long.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, D is beveled on both edges, giving a drill effect.
It is made of blue flint, 5 inches long, and comes from the Jacob Olsen collection.
The knife illustrated in Fig. 12, E is also beveled on both edges, giving a drill
effect, is 5 inches long, and made of blue flint. It is in the G. A. Anderson collection.
We find many large flint flakes that were struck off from the mass at one blow
of the hammer. Some of them have one thick edge, while the other edge is very thin
and s4arp. The thick edge was chipped, and the sharp edge was left as it was struck
off, thus making one of the best of flint knives.
The form of the scraper (Fig. 12, F -H ) is triangular, or nearly so. The base may
be somewhat rounded. The scrapers are seldom over 3 inches long and are very
often shorter. Sometimes they are thin and finely chipped, but often they are thick

15 1

BRAWLEY ' S CAVE

B

A

F

c

D

G

H

E

K

L

M

J
Fig . 12 . Outline Drawings of Knives, Scrapers , large Serrated Flakes, and Drills . A-E,
Knives . F-H, Scrapers. I, J, large Serrated Flakes. K-M , Drills . Drawings by Frank E.
Simmons, not to scale .

152

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and clumsy. We sometimes find them nearly round, 2 inches across, and thick. The
most beautiful forms are those approaching the triangular.
The scraper in Fig. 12, F is of a distinct triangular form that is not numerous. It
is 3 inches long, thin, and finely finished.
The scraper in Fig. 12, G is a very common type, often nicely chipped. This one
is 2\IQ inches long.
The scraper in Fig. 12, H has a stem for attaching the handle. It is 3\IQ inches
long.
Coming in this same general class is the flint hoe. Sometimes it is a beautifully
finished blade 6 inches long and 3 or 4 inches wide, and sometimes it is a rude,
heavy hoe struck out at a few blows of the hammer. The heavy, rude hoes are often
found around old flint quarries and where land was cultivated. The finer ones are
found around old camps and fields . We have two fine examples 6 inches long and
3\IQ inches wide. We also have some quarry spades of the same dimensions, except
thicker transversally. Then there is the turtleback, which is quite common. This
type ranges in length up to 5 inches, and some of the specimens are nicely finished.
A few large flakes (Fig. 12, I, J ), 2 or more inches long, are usually thin and
knife-like, but serrated on one edge. They seem to be scarce. We found one in
Coryell County, 4 inches long by 2 inches broad, that was very finely serrated on
one edge. What were they used for? The outline of these serrated flakes is similar
to the outlines shown in the illustration.
Drills (Fig. 12, K-M) appear frequently. Some of them are excellent, but many
are poorly finished. They, like flint projectiles, run through several variations as to
form, and they range to more than 3 inches in length. The outlines will give a general idea of the variations in the more common forms. These are all well made and
thin and come from Brawley's Cave. The drill illustrated in Fig. 12, K is 1 \iQ inches
long, Lis 2% inches long, and that of Fig. 12, M is 2\IQ inches long.
There is another large implement made by chipping a slab of flint to a blunt edge.
The edge is often battered as if used for hammering, perhaps for breaking wood or
bones at camp. These are most often found at old flint quarries.
Many small flint hammers are found. They are usually about the size of an egg,
with all corners and edges very much battered as if used for hammering.
FLINT QuARRIES

There are numerous flint quarries, usually along the brow of the mountain where
a stratum of flint is often found just under the cap rock. At some points flint was
fairly extensively quarried. Comparisons of the flint found here and that found in
eastern counties where there is no "native flint" would seem to indicate that flint
was a commercial commodity between the tribes of this and the eastern counties.

