DONATED BY SAM WHITESIDE TO
THE TEXAS HISTORICAL
COMMISSION, OFFICE OF THE
STATE ARCHEOLOGIST, 1991

BULLETIN
of the

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
VoLUME

36

Editor: Dee Ann Story
Assistant Editors :
Harry J. Shafer
Marsha F . Jackson

Published by the Society at Austin, Texas, 1965

Table of Contents
Articles
Anderson's Mill ( 41 TV 130 ): A Historic Site in Travis
County, Texas
By E. Paul Durrenberger

1

The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas
By Daymond D . Crawford .

71

Notes on the Clark Site, McLennan County, Texas
By Frank H. Watt .

99

Report on Materials from Brawley's Cave, Bosque
County, Texas
By Dorris L. Olds

111

Five Crania from the Jamaica Beach Site ( 41 GV 5 ),
Galveston County, Texas
By L. E. Aten .

153

The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir, Henderson
and Kaufman Counties, Texas
By Dee Ann Story .

163

The Bipolar Flaking Technique in Texas and New Mexico
By Kenneth H. Honea .

259

A Guide to the Drafting of Archeological Maps
By Vaughn M . Bryant, Jr. and Robert K. Holz

269

A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study
of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas
By R. K. Harris, In us Marie Harris, Jay C. Blaine,
and Jerrylee Blaine

287

Book Reviews
Cosgrove, Mr. and Mrs., The Cosgrove Report.
By Curtis Tunnell .

365

Nowothny, Karl A. , Tlacuilolli: Die mexikanischen Bilderhandschriften Stil und I nhalt mit einem Katalog der
Codex-Borgie-Gruppe
By John A. Graham

366

The Bipolar Flaking Technique
In Texas and New Mexico
KENNETH H. HONEA
ABSTRACT
The bipolar flaking technique consists basically of holding a pebble core vertically
on an anvil and striking th e top of th e core with a hammerstone. Primary flaking
of this type is widespread in those parts of the world where the main source of
flaking material is pebbles. The author has found the bipolar technique to occur in
east-central Texas and north-central N ew Mexico.

The nature of core material available in a given area is a prime
factor determining not only the practice of certain stone flaking techniques but also the technological development of prehistoric cultures.
Research has shown that certain materials-depending on their fracturing qualities, size, and form-can be worked by certain techniques
but not by others, and that these materials can be used to produce
certain tool forms but not others (Clark, 1954: 160- 161; Honea, ms.a;
ms.b; 1965 ) .
Take as an example the McGee Bend Reservoir of east-central Texas
where the most abundant raw material is coarse-grained silicified
wood. Fracturing qualities are characteristically laminate or tabular.
Chunks of this material are easily fashioned into a variety of hand
tools by freehand hammerstone percussion. Due to its inherent fracture, however, it cannot be successfully worked by either the pressure
or cylinder-hammer (billet ) techniques. A prerequisite of materials
to be worked by either of these techniques is conchoidal to even fracturing qualities. Consequently, there is a notable absence of implements fashioned by these techniques in a~eas where native coarsegrained silicified wood or similarly textured stones are the only sources
of core material.
It is of course possible, and in some cases demonstrable, that a change
in the type of available material took place (either through human or
natural agencies ) permitting the development of flaking techniques
and tool forms not previously possible. Trade and quarrying are two
such possibilities; another is the exposure by either erosion or tectonic
action of new, more suitable materials.
On the other hand, the practice of certain flaking techniques may

260

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

be characteristically associated with given stages in the development
of a lithic complex. Later stages may show evolutionary changes tending towards refinement. Nonetheless, "crudity" of flaking does not
always indicate a lesser stage of development, nor refined flaking an
advanced stage. Here again, the above-mentioned nature of available
material may play an important role. Thus, a series of closely related
lithic cultures occurring in different areas may show some diversity of
materials and flaking techniques in their respective areas of occurrence, but yet belong to a related complex.
The relation of all these factors to the formal morphology of flaked
stone tools is obvious . Projectile point Type X may be characteristically
made of certain materials and by certain techniques in one area, but
the same type point may also be made from different materials and by
different techniques in another area.
In other instances, the choice of flaking materials may have been
determined through cultural conservatism, even when a variety of
suitable materials were available. So far as known, obsidian was rarely,
if ever, used in the making of projectile points during the Paleo-Indian
Horizon of north-central New Mexico. This material was certainly
available in quantity. By contrast, obsidian, pitchstone, and finegrained basalt, all black rocks, were extensively employed during the
succeeding Archaic Horizon of the same district, even though choice
chalcedonies and cherts were also at hand (examples in Museum of
New Mexico collections).
Finally, the choice of materials was influenced by the intended
function o£ tools. Thus, implements utilized in battering functions are
generally of tough, durable materials, such as the basalt used for
hammerstones found in north-central New Mexico Puebloan sites .
The occurrence of the bipolar technique in certain areas of the world
is a striking example of the influence of the size and form of locallyavailable core material on flaking techniques. Lantier, the French
archeologist, working on the basis of Old World findings, has shown
that the bipolar technique consistently occurs in those areas where
the main or choice source of core material is littoral or fluviatile pebbles too small to work by freehand hammerstone, cylinder-hammer,
or block-on-block percussion (Lantier, 1958: 33-34).
The bipolar technique consists of holding an oblong pebble core, the
size of an egg or smaller, vertically on a flattish, stationary anvil and
striking the core on the proximal or top end with a hammerstone
(Breuil et Lantier, 1959: 75-77; Clark, 1954: 155; Furon, 1958: 149;
Honea, ms.a). The anvil utilized is commonly of stone, but a large

261

BIPOLAR FLAIUNG TECHNIQUE

bone, block of hardwood, the ground, the padded thigh or even palm
of the stone-worker's hand may also be employed.
The flakes struck off in the above manner are called bipolar flakes.
They are usually about three-quarters the length of the pebble core
and are commonly longer than they are wide. Sometimes flakes are
detached simultaneously from both ends of the core. More frequently
than not, those coming off the distal or lower end of the core are both
smaller and shorter than those coming off the top (Fig. 1).
Occasionally, a bipolar flake, approximately equal in length to the
pebble core, will exhibit a major bulb of percussion on the proximal
end and a minor bulb of percussion on the distal end of the inside or

D

0

2

3

c

Fig. 1. Sketch Showing Detachment of a Flake by the Bipolar Technique. A, Pitted stone.
B, Single-ended bipolar core. C, Arrows showing the direction of hammerstone blow. D,
Hammerstone. E, Bipolar flake in process of detachment. F, Minor flake detached from
bottom of core along with E.

262

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

flat face. These are produced in the following manner on stone anvils.
As the term "bipolar" implies, mechanical force, inducing fracture of
a flake from a core, is applied at both ends of a core: at the proximal
end by the hammerstone and at the distal end, resting on the stone
anvil, by secondary mechanical force rebounding from the anvil upwards into the core. Opposed major and minor bulbs are formed when
the axes of percussion or poles of this combined primary and secondary
mechanical force coincide. Bipolar cores are occasionally worked on
their lateral edges, in which case flakes tend to be short and stubby
(Fig. 2, C, D). Several types of bipolar pebble cores can be distinguished. The criteria used in their classification are much the same as
those applied to cores worked by other techniques (see recent description by Suhm in Johnson, et al., 1962: 73). On the single-ended type,
flakes have only been struck from one end of the core (Fig. 2, A). On
the double-ended type, flakes have been struck alternately from both

CM
Fig . 2 . Sketch Show ing Type s of Cores, All of the Non-Prepa red Variety . !A rrows indicate
points of impact of hammerstone , and the dotted areas the stone cortex .) A, Single-ended.
B, Double-ended . C, D, Multi- platformed .

BIPOLAR FLAKING TECHNIQUE

263

ends of the core (Fig. 2, B) . On the multi-platformed type, however,
flakes have been struck from both ends and lateral edges of the core
(Fig. 2, C, D ) .
Platforms of bipolar pebble cores are commonly plain. That is, a
naturally convex, concave or plane, cortex-covered surface of one end
of a pebble core was used as a platform. Remnants of this kind of platform, as well as the others described below, are present on the proximal or bulbar ends of the detached bipolar flakes . Occasionally, utifaceted platforms are made on pebble cores. In this case, a single flake
is struck off one end of the core at an approximate right to slightly
oblique angle to the length of the core and direction of intended primary flaking. The resultant flake scar, somewhat concave, is used as a
platform. Faceted platforms are less frequently made on pebble cores.
They are made by striking off a series of roughly parallel flakelets from
the top of the core at approximate right angles to the intended direction of flaking. Both unfaceted and faceted cores are sometimes prepared in the Levallois fashion, i.e. , the cortex is trimmed off the core
surfaces by multi-directional unifacial or bifacial percussion flaking
before preparation of the platform and prior to commencement of
primary flaking .
In summary, it might be asked how we can specifically determine
presence of the bipolar flaking technique at an archeological site. One
body of suggestive evidence is the presence in quantity of bipolar pebble cores. A second, and better, indicator is the presence of s ~one-anvil
struck bipolar flakes exhibiting a major, positive bulb of percussion on
the upper end and a minor, positive bulb of percussion on the lower
end. On bipolar cores, these features on any given bipolar flake scar
are apparent as major negative and minor negative bulbs respectively.
They are only produced when direct primary mechanical force (from
the hammerstone ) and indirect secondary rebounding mechanical
force (from the stone anvil) are exerted simultaneously on both ends
of a core. The third indicator is association of bipolar pebble cores and
bipolar flakes with stone anvils, as outlined below.
In the course of research carried out between 1960 and 1964, the
author has found evidence suggesting the bipolar flaking technique in
both east-central Texas and north-central New Mexico. The studied
artifactual material from Texas sites stemmed from the McGee Bend
Reservoir area ( 41 SA 69, Sowell Site ; 41 SA 117, Wolfshead Site; 41
SA 118; 41 SA 120; and 41 NA 11 , Etoile S.!te ) . The New Mexico
material was from the Cochiti Reservoir sites LA 272; LA 6455, Nelson Site ; LA 6462, North Bank Site; and LA 70, Pueblo Encierro, all
to the west-northwest of Santa Fe. Study of lithic assemblages from

264

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

these two regions was complemented by experimental flaking carried
out in both the field and in the laboratory, using unworked pebble
cores, hammerstones, and stone anvils excavated or collected from the
above sites. In the way of specific materials, the Texas pebble cores
were of jasper and fine-grained silicified wood, while those from New
Mexico were of obsidian, chalcedony, and similar materials.
Experiments consisted of flaking, in the bipolar fashion, of 20 vertically-held pebble cores from each site, employing either stone or
wooden anvils, and the palm of the hand. Ten additional cores from
each site were separately worked by free-hand hammerstone percussion, during which the horizontally held cores were end-struck.
Results of these experiments showed that pebble cores were more
effectively worked in conjunction with stationary anvils of stone, using
the bipolar technique as above described. Free-hand hammerstone
percussion of horizontally hand-held cores was difficult to control.
There was a consistent tendency for detached flakes to be quite short
and thick, probably as a result of the absence of secondary rebounding
mechanical force.
While it was feasible to strike off flakes from the ends of cores held
vertically in the supported palm of the hand, it was determined the
method was neither as efficient nor as satisfactory as in the use of
stone or wooden anvils, especially the former. Disadvantages in the
repeated use of the palm were apparent in a bruised, aching palm.
Insertion of a leather cushion did relieve some of the discomfort, however. Otherwise, palm-worked cores compared favorably with those
worked on stone and wooden anvils. The superiority of the latter,
particularly those of stone, was marked with respect to facility and
rapidity of flaking, by which large numbers of longish bipolar flakes
could be detached.
Stone anvils employed in the working of Texas jasper pebble cores
were of sandstone; basalt, sandstone, and rhyolite stone anvils were
used with New Mexico materials. Use-marks produced on all, including those of wood, were in the form of localized areas of battering or
pitting. Texas sandstone anvils u sed in the experiments had a small,
circular depression on one face, in which the core was held while flaking. The apparent advantage of the depressions was prevention of
cores from slipping when struck on their upper end with the hammerstone.
" Pitted stones" were noted during our research to consistently occur
at sites in the McGee Bend Reservoir, together with bipolar cores and
flakes. These stones, which, as we shall observe, may have been used
as anvils, are flattish, frequently fist-sized or somewhat larger cobbles

BIPOLAR FLAKING TECHNIQUE

265

exhibiting one or more small, shallow, circular depressions on one or
more faces or sides. In some instances, pitted stones have been intentionally pecked and ground to rectangular, oval or discoidal shapes.
They are commonly of sandstone, less frequently of hematite.
Some authors, such as Fundaburk and Foreman (1957: Pl. 72 ) ,
have considered pitted stones to have been used as " nutting stones"
(i.e. , nuts presumably were placed in a depression and cracked with
another stone ) . Another possible use would be utilization as miniature
paint grinders. Although it is probable that pitted stones may have
been in part thus used, it does not seem this was in fact their only
function.
The characteristic depressions on pitted stones have been produced
either incidental to use, or by intentional pecking and perhaps grinding. It seems feasible , at least in theory, that their function could have
been to accommodate the convex bases of pebble cores during flaking
by the bipolar technique, perhaps to prevent the core from slipping
to the side at the moment of percussion. Pitted stones observed to have
more than one depression, often of different sizes (usually on the
opposite face, but occasionally, on larger stones, several on both faces
or sides ) , are thought to conceivably have been used in the working
of cores of variable size. This, however, is only a conjecture.
The association of pitted stones with the bipolar flaking technique
in the McGee Bend district seems to be supported by the occurrence
at all of the sites studied of 1) stone-anvil struck bipolar pebble cores,
as well as bipolar flakes, and 2) various tools which may have been
made of these small cores and flakes.
It is of interest, and at the same time quite in keeping with evidence
from sites in parts of the Old World, that the main sources of quality
core material in the McGee Bend area were pebbles of jasper and, to
a lesser extent, fine-grained silicified wood. Both of these take a conchoidal fracture. The quantitatively dominant material, however, was
coarse-grained silicified wood. It occurs abundantly in small to large
angular chunks. In contrast to pebble materials, this was worked uniformly by free hand hammerstone percussion. The tabular or laminate
fracturing qualities of this material seems, incidentally, to have precluded flaking by the cylinder-hammer (billet) , pressure, and bipolar
techniques.
An analysis of McGee Bend bipolar cores and flakes showed the
presence of single-ended, double-ended, and multi-platformed bipolar
pebble cores. The latter was least frequent. Studies of platforms indicate that bipolar cores were commonly flaked without special preparation of the platform surface. Characteristically, this surface was

266

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

comprised of the cortex of the original pebble core. Unfaceted platforms were quite rare, while faceting was absent. The faces of some
cores may have been prepared in the Levallois fashion prior to the
striking off of bipolar flakes .
Studies of lithic assemblages from sites in the Cochiti Reservoir
district of north-central New Mexico suggest practice of the bipolar
technique during all Pueblo culture stages represented in the district.
The technique is associated there with the working of obsidian pebbles,
which are found in abundance in deposits of volcanic ash in the nearby
Jemez Mountains. These pebbles also occur in local stream gravels,
primarily those of the Rio Grande. Pebbles of chalcedony, agate, chert,
and jasper were less often employed.
Bipolar core and flake types are in the main stone-anvil struck and
do not differ with respect to morphology appreciably from those of
east-central Texas. Cochiti district specimens usually have plain platforms, and cores are either single-ended, double-ended, or multi-platformed, in that order of frequency.
Pitted stones of the type found in the McGee Bend Reservoir area
of Texas are absent at the Cochiti sites. The perhaps closest parallels
are the occasional, secondarily pitted manos which have a circular
depression worked into either one or both faces. The original function
of these pieces is established by the presence on one or both faces of
previously-produced use-striations running at right angles to the mano
long-axis. Such striations are typically the result of grinding grain on
a metate. Depressions are sometimes also found on the surface of
grinding stones, grinding slabs, and lapstones. In the Cochiti district,
the latter are usually of fine-grained basalt. They were used primarily
as a base or support stone on which leather or vegetal materials were
rested while being cut with stone knives or sharp-edged flakes. Long,
shallow, multi-directional striations are suggestive of this function.
More frequently , localized areas of battering, rather than actual depressions, are observed on the surface of lapstones. These use-marks,
in our opinion, are strongly suggestive of use in an anvil function.
Since stone-anvil struck bipolar cores and flakes were excavated from
the same Cochiti sites where these implements were found , it seems
possible bipolar flaking could have been carried out on them. The rare
depressions observed on manos, grinding stones, grinding slabs, could,
it appears, have been similarly used. Nonetheless, we do not discount
the possibility that at least some depressions were employed in paint
grinding. This was not the general practice, however, since large num bers of pigment-stained paint grinding palettes were excavated from
the sites in question.

BIPOLAR FLAKING TECHNIQUE

267

As a final point, it should be noted that both pebble cores and pitted
ston es of various kinds occur in many parts of the Southwest. Whether
or not they were associated with practice of the bipolar flaking technique remains to be clarified. We also do not yet know the temporal
range of this technique, nor all the culture complexes with which it
occurs. Clearly, there is much research to be done before these question s can be an swered.
REFERENCES CITED
Breui l, H ., et R. Lantier
1959. L es H ommes de la Pierre Ancienn ". P ayo t.
Clark, J. D .
1954'. P reh is toric Cul tures of the Horn of Africa. Cambridge Un iversity Press.
Fundaburk, E. L., and M . D . F. Fo reman (editors )
195 7. Sun Circles and Human Hands. Publish ed by Emm a Lila Fundaburk.
Funn, R.
1958. Manuel de Prehistoire Generale. Payot.
Hon ea, K.
ms. a. The M cElroy Site. Unpublished m anu script on file at the T exas Archeological Salvage Project Office, The University of T exas.
ms. b. The Flaked Stone Industries of Pueblo Las M adres and Pueblo Largo,
Galisteo Basin, North-central New M exico. Unpublished manuscript on
fil e at the Division of Research, Museum of New M exico.
1965. A M orphobgy of Scrapers and their M ethods of Pro:lu ction. Southwes tern
L e~ re, Vol. 31 , N J. Z. The Colorado Arch aeological Society .
John son , LeRoy, Jr., D ee Ann Suhm, and Curti s D . Tunnell
1962. Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge,
and Oblate Sites. Texas M emorial Mu seum, Bulle tin No. 5.
Lantier, R.
1958. La Vi e Prehiste>rique. Que Sais-ie?, No. 535. Le P oint des Connaissan ces
A ctuelles. Presses U niversitaires de France.
Museum of New M exico
Santa Fe, N ew Mexico

