Table of Contents
Page
A Wooden Mortar and Pestle from Val Verde County, Texas.
by Michael B. Collins and Thomas Roy Hester

1

Coral Snake Mound (X16SA48).
by Harald P. Jensen, Jr

9

The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas.
by Jay C. Blame, R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook,
and Joel L. Shiner

45

A Partial Report on Research Work Concerning Lithic
Typology and Technology.
by J. B. Soliberger

95

Excavation at a Midden Circle Site in El Paso County, Texas.
by John W. Greer

111

Report on Excavations at the Field Ranch Site (X41CO-1O)
Cooke County, Texas.
by Harald P. Jensen, Jr

133

Paleo-Indian Artifacts from Sites Along San Miguel Creek:
Frio, Atascosa and McMullen Counties, Texas.
by Thomas Roy Hester

147

Suggestions to Authors.
by Maxine and Joel Shiner

163

Book Review
Ambler, J. Richard. Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar
Bayou, Galveston Bay Area.
byJonL. Gibson

167

Illustrations
Page
BLAINE, CROOK, HARRIS AND SHINER
Fig. 1 Geologic cross-section showing the location of
Acton Archeological site
Fig. 2 Idealized cross-section of the geology at the
Acton Archeological site.
Fig. 3 Plainview points
Fig. 4 Meserve points
Fig. 5 Angostura, Scottsbluff, San Patrice and
Untyped points
Fig. 6 Early Archaic points.
Fig. 7 Late Archaic points.
Fig. 8 Scrapers
Fig. 9 Gouges
Fig. 10 Biface foliates
Fig. 11 Burins, gouges, netsinker.
COLLINS AND HESTER
Fig. 1 Site location map
Fig. 2 Wooden mortar and pestle.
Fig. 3 Vertical section of mortar.
GREER
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

HESTER
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3

54
55
58
62
65
70
74.
78
81
82
83

2
4
6

Sketch plan of site.
Profile through the center of niidden.
Pottery
Rim profiles
Small flint artifacts
Limestone tools
Large limestone knives

112
114
117
118
120
124
125

Archeological Sites along San Miguel Creek.
Group A projectile points
Group B and Group C projectile points.

148
150
153.

.

Page
Fig. 4
Fig. 5

JENSEN
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
Fig. 4
Fig. 5
Fig. 6
Fig. 7
Fig. 8
Fig. 9
Fig. 10
JENSEN
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.

1
2
3
4
5
6

Group C and Group D projectile points.
Group A, Group D, and Group E
projectile points

•

.

•

.

•

•

•

.

.

.

•

.

•

.

•

SOLLBERGER
Fig. 1 Tools, probably used as abrading knives.
Fig. 2 Tools, probably used as carcass cleavers.

155
157

Plan of mound
Profile of mound, N—S
Profile of mound, E—W
Three large stemmed points.
Projectile points
Knives and other stone tools.
Pottery
Marksville stamped pot
Marksville stamped pot (bottom view).
Ear spool, beads and pendant

Field Ranch Site
Sketch of Hearth 1
Sketch of Hearth 2
Projectile points
Graver, Denticulates, Gouge and Convex
Side Scraper
Cores and Hammerstones

•

•

•
•

•

.

10
11
11
14
17
19
27
28
29
30

135
136
137
138
141
143

100
102

A Partial Report on Research Work Concerning
Lithic Typology and Technology
J. B.

SOLLBERGER

INTRODUCTION
As long as I was just a collector, everything seemed O.K. hobby
wise. When I came to look upon myself as an amateur archaeologist,
I became dissatisfied. Why? Well, in the latter state, one should have
enough knowledge to answer simple questions concerning archaeology.
For example—where in archaeology can one read that lithic knives
were adapted to wood working, sewing or household chores, and for
the hunt? Where can one read why the answers may or may not be so?
Questions of this nature have always intrigued me.
Finally, I realized that Typology had a new baby brother called
Technology, and that with the two of them, I might again be happy in
archaeology because through technology I might answer some of my
own questions. I resolved to proceed in the following manner. Do the
things with lithics that the Indian did. Learn to make my own lithic
tools. Determine what lithic materials will or will not do.
As a direct result of these experiments in technology I have found
some answers that are presented in the titles following this introduc
tion. My experiments are continuing. Here is a partial list of questions
that I have subjected to research and experiment. Why have lithic
knives not been studied in order that their use-class can be recognized?
Why do we not have bifacially flaked knives with the artifact inven
tories of the Clovis point kill sites (Soliberger, 1968)? Why are
beveled knives beveled? Why should some artifacts be classed as a
hand axe when it often has a thin curved blade with a fine sharp
pressure retouched edge that would obviously break at the first chop
into wood or bone? Is it true that one can examine lithic artifacts and
say—this was done with a hard or soft hammer stone, this with a
billet, or this by pressure?
Among all the questions that I have asked myself, one of the most
pressing has been, can one engage himself in lithic typology and tech
nology with conviction and not be able to duplicate the artifacts as well
as make actual use of them in serious work projects? Can the steel age
mind accurately guess use, class and type, without actually working
with the tools?
These are only some of my questions. My attempts for answers these

Sb

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

past few years, involve many hours and days of flintknapping, quarry
ing, heat-treating of the silica stones, chopping, cutting, boring, and
reaming.
Projects are designed to simulate those I logically expect that the
Indian engaged in. I have acquired some understanding of the qualities
and limitations of lithic materials, and perhaps, some knowledge of
them that the Indian may have applied in using these materials as
tools and weapons.
From the above, I do not suggest that my answers are the ultimate,
or proof positive of use and type. I do believe that by combining a
working knowledge of the capabilities of lithic materials with the
experience of making and using the various artifact replicas will
permit the archaeologist to classify and type artifacts with much more
certain confidence. This approach to typology places the steel age mind
and logic in a secondary position to demonstrable facts. These facts,
homogenized with logic, should build some acceptable bridges beyond
the old stymie of proof positive.
THE LITHIC KNIFE
A lithic knife is a tool used by man that has an edge that is capable
of dividing, portioning, or shaping object materials, with the addition
of force or pressure administered by man.
This tool therefore, may be very elementary. It may be a naturally
sharp stone edge made by nature or it may be a purposely made spall,
flake, blade, uniface, or bifacially chipped flake or core. This cutting
edge may also be stone that has been pecked, ground and polished.
Knives fall into a number of different classes. Expendable knives
had short lives because of the severe nature of work they were put to.
These have a minimum of labor devoted to their manufacture. Long
life knives are finely wrought specimens used on materials that are
soft and easily cut. Wood working knives for coarse wood work are
heavy bodied and strong to inhibit breakage. Wood working knives
designed for across the grain cutting (butt-ends and square cuts) have
especially designed cutting edges that are out of line both lineally and
vertically. Finer work on softer materials required cutting edges that
were in line both lineally and vertically.
Unretouched flake knives will debark and shave limbs of wood for
dart shafts, handles, etc., considerably smoother and faster than will
biface edges. Flake knives will shape and reduce shafts in diameter
easier and faster than will biface edges. Long uniform smooth shavings
are easier and more possible with unretouched flake knives than with
biface edges. Fabric and leather may be cut straighter, easier, and more

J__1 I fliV_ RtOtflfls_fl

intricately with a naturally sharp flake edge. The above is true because
the cutting edge of a flake is even and in line both lineally and
vertically. It is not interrupted by being wavy and ridged as is the
edge pattern of a biface. The flake edge is razor like and does not
clog-up and has a minimum of friction. The biface edge collects fibers,
its undulations increase friction, the cut is wider, coarser and uneven—
which reduces the strength of leather strings or thongs. Flake type
knives were sharpened unifacially (beveled) to preserve the straighter
non clogging cutting edge.
The minus factors of flake knives may have resulted in the develop
ment of biface knives. The biface knife has up to 100% lineal cutting
edge. Unnecessary bulk and thickness is eliminated. Being thin, it is
capable of being resharpened many times making it the equivalent of
many flake knives. The biface knife is more adaptable to shaping that
will incorporate versatility such as points, punches, reamers, etc. If
large, portability is improved. Rafting is provided for and more easily
accomplished.
From the evidence as presented above, knives have attributes or
technological applications in their manufacture that divides them in
use and function. In classifying artifacts as knives, edge technology
must be considered.
The raw material for knives originates at quarry sites or from
cobble stones. Material quality influences both the class and quality of
the knife produced. An artifact in the knife class is a finished product.
It must not be classed as a knife while in the quarry blank stage or in
the intermediate stages of completion. Such partial unifaces and in
complete bifaces should be so listed in site or type inventories.
Once class has been determined, typology can be considered. Be
cause artifacts so often could be used out of class, the major function
must be used to determine type. Knives have been separated from dart
points and spear points in the past on the basis that knives are broader
and ior have more rounding points—making them unsuitable as pene
trators. J. T. Patterson (1936) makes the separation where the stem or
tang is out of line of flight with the point—hence they could not be
used as spears or dart points. Projectiles receive almost no wear
between the point and the haft: therefore, those that show wear or
polish on these lineal edges were used as knives.
I propoce a knife is not a knife, in class, or type, until it is proven to
be so by wear evidence or edge technology.
THE ABRADING KNIFE
I searched through the artifact tool inventories for a tool that would

98

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

make a neat, nearly square, end Cut on limbs and small saplings. This
was a need the Indian faced in making construction materials, arrows,
handles for hoes, knives, celts, and axes. Many experiments proved
that the ground edge and the chipped edge axes will not fill this
requirement.
The right tool was found in the archaeologists scrap pile. Namely,
the quarry blank, the large rough biface, the unfinished blade, or the
cache of blanks. Certain ones of these have the lineal edge character,
the use marks of wear and the proven ability to end my search. With
them, I have cut a number of small saplings and limbs in the proper
sizes for the haftings listed above, and have found them to work
easier, neater, and often quicker than stone or flint axes. The small
willowy limbs that are a bit large for severing, in any fashion, with a
normal edged biface knife are next to impossible to sever with a stone
axe. The stone axe or the flake axe will in this case produce only a long
tapering cut accompanied by much bruising and mashing. The abrad
ing knife will cut these same limbs neatly, and with almost no effort.
Another type of knife, the knife for dressing game and for preparing
hides calls for a light, straight, and sharp cutting edge. Straight, as
opposed to undulating or wavy, so that the skin or leather cuts will be
smooth and even and not burred. Sharp for ease of cutting. In line, as
opposed to serrated, for smoothness of cut. Thin, to eliminate side
friction and drag. This means that butchering and general utility
knives will have as their diagnostic feature a very carefully pressure
flaked edge. These qualities however, represent the opposite require
ments needed for making cuts across the grain on wood. Cutting
wood demands a Strong edge that will not break or dull so quickly
and easily. A saw has teeth that are “set” out from the blade. A saw
passes through a cut leaving parallel planes adjacent to each face. True
saws are next to impossible to fabricate with lithic materials.
The abrading knife is not a saw. It is a biface with long, fairly
straight, lineal edges. These edges are cupped and wavy from per
cussion flaking. The ridges between flake scars are left high and Un
retouched. The3e ridge3, at the lineal edge, do the abrading away of
the wood fibres that are cut partially loose by the lineal cutting edges
of the blade between the ridge ends. The tool is used like a saw—
pushed back and forth. An additional simultaneous motion is added—
the rocking of the tool left and right. This widens the cut to prevent
wedging the tool in the cut. It is also essential because it digs the ridge
points into the side of the cut. This not only removes the fibres raised
by the cutting edge, it also controls the width of the cut and the angle

1d’llrilU RES±Att(kJ.

of the cut. Work progresses around the circumference, as does a
beaver.
Four such heavy duty wood working tools from Edwards Plateau
Aspect Sites, Kerr County, Texas are illustrated (Fig. 1). They are
efficient for cross cut or square end cuts on wood. Example a. is
142 mm. long, 62 mm. wide and 20 mm. thick. The lower long edge
shows heavy wear. Example b. is 135 mm. long, 57 mm. wide, and
24 mm. thick. The lower right edge shows abrasive wear.
Large abrading knives approach twelve inches in length and are
suitable for two handed operation. They have no provision for hafting
as this would obstruct the cutting edges. The large examples sometimes
have their ends unfinished or cortex covered. Some have complete
perimeter cutting edges.
The pictured abrading knife from Kerr County (Fig. 1, c.) is a
combination cross cut (pointed end) and planing or shaving (lower
edge) knife. This example is 170 mm. long, 65 mm. wide, and 24 mm.
thick. The principle wear is on each edge of the pointed half. Shaft
shaving is indicated in the large concave edged flake in the middle.
Small, dart point sized abrading knives have stems for hafting, and
are distinguishable from regular dart point types only by their asym
metry or by the presence of wear on their lineal edges that is evident.
The abrading knife shown in Figure 1, d. is 190 mm. long, 80 mm.
wide and 28 mm. thick. The edges show minutely small flaking that is
evidence of use. This example is also from Kerr County. Projectile
points receive little or no wear as tips for darts.
THE HAND HAMMER

This tool when used as a percusor in flaking stone, requires a
special edge. Opposite the cortex holding end, the cortex is flaked off to
expose the denser, inner material that is required of a hard hammerstone. This working edge is pecked down to remove any sharpness.
The working edge is variable in length and shape and the cobble
cannot be considered to have a blade. The edge is desigred to prevent
spalling of the cobble faces, or splitting, by directing the impact
compression and force lines toward the center of the cobble. Also,
this edge permits the striking on small or limited platform areas. This
type of percussor varies in weight according to the flake size desired.
The:e especially designed percussors are nearly always made from flint
or chert and are most numerous where the coarser grained quartzite
cobbles are lacking.

ThKA6 AauaEuwozc4L SOCIETY

ci

C

d
I
FIGURE

1. ToGis, probably used as abrading knives.

THE HAND CHOPPER
This tool has a cortex covered holding end with a roughly formed
blade at the opposite end. The bit, or chopping end, shows the evidence
of rough work by being dull, or dubbed blunt, from bone splitting,
grubbing, etc. Some may represent wood cutting hand axes whose
blades have been used to the point that they became too thick and
short for such work, and were retained for more simple hacking work.
THE HAND PICK
This tool has a cortex poii or holding area. It is generally sym
metrical in the form of a triangle. A definite point is directly opposite
the p0
11 and the lineal edges are essentially straight and of the same
length. The blade is generally thick and coarsely flaked. The size
ranges from that of heavy axes to medium sized dart points. Use, or
wear evidence, appears mostly along the lateral edges near the point.
THE HAND AXE
This tool has more refined, thinner cutting edges than the choppers.
Two forms are present. Form A. is made from a flat tabular cortex
covered cobble. Opposite the cortex hand-holding end, a bit is formed
that varies from lightly convex to rounding, but the sides are not
worked lineally, toward the p0
, to form a completely bifaced blade.
11
Form B. is made from lozenge shaped cobbles and have completely
bifaced blades. The lineal edges are convex to rounding and are
irregular and cupped from a lack of finer, or secondary flaking. The
bit generally has this secondary flaking that straightens the edge by
removing the ridges between the primary flakes.
The hand axe was a general utility wood cutting tool. In this
medium silica edges dull rather quickly, necessitating frequent re
sharpening. This erased any polish that would normally accumulate
on the blade faces if the cutting edge remained sharp. New or little
used specimens have wide blades, some of which approach being
pointed. As they are used and resharpened, the blade becomes shorter
and thicker. The open point becomes more rounded until the whole is
too short and thick for wood cutting.

THE CARCASS-CLEAVER
This tool (Fig. 2, a. and b.) is the most refined of the cortex covered
unaltered end, cobble tools. It is presently known in the literature as
the fist, or hand axe. In order to understand why this tool that looks
like an axe is not an axe, requires an explanation of the nature of silica
materials, and what the design features of axe work require.

Office of the State

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a

b
I
FIGURE

I

CM..

2. Tools, probably used as carcass cleavers.

The cutting principle of a steel axe is that a deep penetration is made
across the grain of the wood and at an acute angle to the length of the
wood fibre. This compresse3 the fibres length, causing a chip to fly out,
provided the fibres have been cut by a lower, previous strike. This
angle of penetration is the flaking-angle of silica edges. Therefore, if
the wood is hard grained, the silica axe will have its edge flaked on
hard wood (which can be used as a billet or percussor). Silica axes
must also be thicker than steel axes to prevent blade breakage above
the cutting edge. Any prying sideways to loosen chips is, in effect,
pressure flaking, and must be avoided. This applies to deep penetra

.L.I I t1I flE’..ri

tions also, because of the angle of entry through the hard and soft
annual rings of wood. Chipped silica axes must therefore be strong
bladed and the bit ends cannot be too thin. The tool must be of a
highly expendable nature because it will not last very long.
The features that describe the carcass-cleaver knife in its used
classical form, automatically remove the tool from the axe classifica
tion. The cobble selected had fine grained silica suitable for pressure
flaking and sharp cutting edges. The cortex end conveniently fits the
palm of the hand for a thrusting or pushing motion. The biface blade
is flaked, and then it is additionally thinned. On the classic examples,
this thinning results in concavities below the cortex holding area on
each face, also one or both lineal edges will be concave from the addi
tional thinning. A slight in-curve of the blade is present on some
examples near the distal end. This is an impossible feature for a
chopping tool, because it would allow impact forces to break the thin
blades. The distal ends vary in shape from a near-point that is slightly
rounding, to cutting edges that are almost straight, though short.
Others have blades that are “U” shaped below the holding area. Most
classic examples have fine pressure flaking along the extreme distal
cutting end.
An additional feature of this distal end is that it is lineally straight,
ridgeless, thin, and sharp. Sharp in spite of the fact that “use” has
produced a polish on the faces that sometimes extends back more than
an inch from the end.
I have determined from experiments that silica stone edges, when
extensively used to cut earth, stone, bone, or wood, cannot remain
knife-sharp sufficiently long to produce high polish extensively on the
faces above the cutting edge. There is no wood soft enough in Texas
that can be penetrated sufficiently deep to account for this polish on
the carcass-cleaver knives. This tool had to be used in a soft nonabrasive substance.
The Edwards Plateau Aspect was a hunting and gathering culture.
Sickle sheen is implausible because the polish is concentrated at the
ends of these tools and because the balance, and the physical features,
indicate that a thrusting or pushing motion is required for its proper
use. A lack of fine retouch and consistent polish up the lineal edges
supports this method of use. The sum of these cited features proves
that this tool is a knife—not an axe. To demonstrate the type and
justify the name carcass-cleaver, necessitates the introduction of some
logic; logic that is based on the listed features.
I have not yet found a carcass-cleaver knife that was not on, in or
within a very few feet of a burnt rock mound. This certainly associates

I J-t

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the tool with food preparation. Assume a deer sized animal has been
brought to camp. The skin has been removed or laid open with flake,
or other knives. The carcass is ready for division. Proper slicing is done
to expose the ball-joint of a ham. The ham is raised to place the balljoint under the proper strain. The knife is pushed in and through the
cuter edges of the joint until severance is complete. The back-bones
are divided by bending, away from the thrust. This allows insertion of
the knife’s leading edge in between the bones where tendon, sinew,
and cartilage are cut with body weight exerted through the palm of
the hand, pushing the knife between the bone segments. From this
friction, polish accumulates above the leading edge.
As the back bone becomes too short for effective bending, attempts
to pry the segments open for deeper penetration is evidenced by num
erous carcass-cleaver knives being broken squarely across the blade
about one inch above the leading end. Such breaks, when repaired,
obliterate the major polish. Newer knives with little use, will show no
polish. I recovered these broken distal ends at the burnt rock mounds.
This is further proof that use was at the cooking center. Some are usepolished from about 1/4 inch to 1 inch back from the cutting edge. This
is about the average for this tool whether whole or broken.
A high-gloss shine is present on some very few specimans along an
entire lineal edge to the cortex end. High-gloss is rare on an entire face
but may exist. Some examples have had enough use that the higher
ridges between the flake scars are rounded and worn but do not yet
show polish.
The cortex end of this knife is a very necessary feature for its use
as a carcass cleaver push-knife. This enlargement above the thinned
lower blade allows a full solid grip for the hand to grasp. The cortex
is, in most cases, of a porous texture and a bit rough (like coarse, but
dull, sandpaper). This assures a non-slip grip for the hand, through
which, force can be applied in what is normally a slick, bloody job.
There is little to review, in the literature of the past, concerning
this knife that is called a fist axe. J. E. Pearce and A. T. Jackson (1933:
144) speaking of Southwest Texas say, “Fist axes of both regions are
very much alike but show finer workmanship in Central Texas. E. B.
Sayles (1935: 70) referring to his Plate XIX-a says, “Hand Axe, with
finely chipped, thin blade from Edwards Plateau.” A. T. Jackson,
(1938: 98—100) Fist Axes, Site No. 6 Llano County says “All are
worked down to a fairly sharp cutting edge, but lack the delicate
secondary chipping common to specimens from Edwards to Val Verde
Counties. Length of No. 1 is 6 and 3% inches. Note the large unworked
areas at the upper ends.” A more recent reference is Leroy Johnson Jr.

, i tii’ __ti

I UD

(1961: 275) referring to two small Fist Axes notes “one has signs of
secondary flaking.” Johnson (1964: 65) notes that “The blade was
thinned by careful billet flaking near the tip.”
These past references to a “fist axe” verify many of the features of
Cleaver knives that I have listed earlier in this paper. None, however,
mention the classic forms (Fig. 2) that have developed a “heel” over
the lineal concave edge that is opposite the straighter edge on some
examples. This “heel” is heavy enough from its bulk to throw the
artifact badly out of balance for use as a hand axe.
Is there another knife type in American pre-history with a similarly
shaped blade that was enlarged at the holding end and was pushed
into the work? The Eskimo “Ulus” of Alaska, and the Early Archaic
Ulu of the New England region are of this type. The Ulu is normally
made from slate—chipped, pecked, and ground into a thin, half-circu
lar, blade. The blade expands in thickness at the top to form an en
larged area for holding that is sometimes flat on the top. The cutting
edge is honed for sharpness. The shape and balance of the Ulus and
cleaver knives are basically the same.
THE BILLET. AN INDISPENSABLE TOOL FOR
BIFACING WIDE THIN FLAKES
References to the technology of tools, their processes and products,
are becoming more frequently common in the analysis of the lithic
sections of site reports that may not always be well grounded in fact
or research. Specifically, references to billets, “the hammer and billet
technique,” and the special flake attributed to this tool—the billet flake.
Site inventories have not provided us with adequate artifacts—ex
amples of this tool—that we know its full range in form, size, materials,
and applications. Crabtree (1967: 60—71) has provided descriptions
and uses of the billet tool. My work with the billet tool has produced
information that I believe is pertinent and additional to that now in
print; and is information that places the billet in its proper place in the
lithic tool kit. The following description of a billet is not one of an
artifact, but one that fits me best for the medium to heavy work
described in this text.
A billet is an antler main-beam from a large deer or elk, prefer
ably, and should have all branching tines removed. It should include
as much as possible of the bone between the skin-ring and the top of
the skull, as this bone has the ideal density and hardness for low, or
acute angle, percussion flaking. The tool is best when made from
fresh killed animals, because the bone and antler dry out and become
harder and more brittle with age. The length should be 12 to 16 inches

ivy

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

and the diameter (average) about 1 to 1 1/4 inches. Large tines are
useful as billets but lack the inner density and the bonus quality of
the bone between the skin-ring and the top of the skull.
The billet in use, is held like a modern nail hammer, but the swing
is more stable if three or four inches extends behind the heel of the
hand. The stone being worked, is held in the other hand—which is
protected by leather from flying flakes and jar. A position should be
assumed that is relaxed, wherein the billet may be swung in identical
arcs with repeated precision.
The production of large flakes is primarily the product of large hard
hammer-stones. The initial steps of bifacing the large flakes (reducing
humps and very thick lineal edge areas) is the work of smaller and/or
softer hammer stones. The flake is at this point, roughly bifaced, but
with irregular lineal edges, cupped uneven facial areas, and ‘with
prominent flake scar ridges. These features are the normal result of
bifacing with hand held stone percussors.
Additional work with stone percussors will not materially change
the above conditions, because large platform areas are required for
stone percussion. Continued use will also result in unnecessary loss of
material width in maintaining these platforms. Hammer stone plat
forms must contact the hammer stone face to face, or about 9Q0 to
each other, to prevent crushing the platform. This required depth or
angle inevitably results in biface edge-angles greater than desirable.
The overhang of the hammer stone above the negative bulb on the
biface damages this edge by the follow-through motion of the hammer
stone. Because of hardness and relatively slow speed, the hand held
hammer stone produces prominant positive and negative bulbs of per
cussion. Additional flakes of the desired length and thinness are im
possible without first removing these negative cavities. The replat
forming over these cavities also causes material loss of width to progress
as fast, or faster than, the progress of thinning the biface. Obviously
then, hammer stones are inadequate for producing wide thin bifaces
with desirably acute edge angles.
Let us now consider the billet. The billet does produce flakes of a
distinctive character that are straight, flat and thin, and, the tool was
used for thinning. My research with the billet agrees that this is true,
but that it is of secondary importance. It does not explain the prime
uses of the tool! These are: 1. The execution of trimming and finishing
flakes following initial biface roughed-out flakes by hammer stones;
2. The complete application of bifacing flakes on large flakes that are
too thin to be bifaced with hammer stones. The working details are as
follows.

LITHIC RESEARCH

1U/

Primarily, the billet is for percussion flaking from very narrow or
thin platform edges, at angles more acute than is possible with hammer
stones. This is possible for a number of reasons. There is little or no
overhang of the platform as in the case of hammer stones. Platforms
as narrow as one-sixteenth of an inch may be struck at biface edges
that are at very acute angles. This is because the billet is slightly
penetrated by the platform. The platform does not crush because the
force is spread evenly along the penetrated billet end. The bone
(antler) being softer than lithic material, crumbling or crushing is
almost entirely eliminated. Deep negative bulb cavities are absent,
because of the high speed delivery of the billet stroke and the thinness
of platform area struck.
Very thin original flakes can be completely bifaced with a billet, and
yet remain relatively broad, because of the small size and minimum
of under cutting of the biface by the negative bulbs of percussion. The
billet in this instance is irreplacable because of the very acute angle
of flake removal required and because the flakes must be longer and
wider than pressure flaking permits. Otherwise, the broad thin flake
can not be completely bifaced without being seriously narrowed.
Billet flaking is much faster and easier to perform on thinning and
finishing bifaces than is indirect percussion flaking for these reasons.
1. Small punches (to prevent their ends from splintering or collaps
ing) must seat on deep platforms and face-up with the platform, as in
hammer stone percussion. 2. Compaction and/or splintering of bone
or antler punches results in hinged and broken flakes that ruin the
biface. 3. Punches of larger diameter are best suited for blade making
from large stable masses of stone. The increased diameter does not
materially reduce edge failure of the punch. 4. Rounding of the punch
end to strengthen it still does not eliminate the problem of the very
thin edged, acute angled, biface edges penetrating and splitting the
bone or antler punch.
Percussion flaking with bone or antler in bifacing is desirable over
stone percussion also, because less shock is delivered to the biface.
More pre-forms are therefore finished, rather than broken.
The processes of converting a large flake into a finished biface are
not completely separate and distinct. A hammer stone may be needed
to remove a certain flake in the midst of the billeting procedure. It is
sometimes desirable to pressure flake a platform while the pre-form
is in any stage. It is not always possible to separate hammer stone
flakes, billet flakes, indirect percussion, and pressure flakes. Conditions
in flint knapping exist where the “typical billet flake” is produced by
all four methods. The requirements in. each case involves a platform

108

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

that does not crush and fast undirninishing force application to the
platform.
Conversely, on large flakes that feather out evenly to sharp distal
edges, the deepest negative bulbs possible to produce are the product
of pressure flaking by leverage that is built up slowly until the flake
is detached. The face below the positive bulb will be straight to con
cave. If the pressure is diminished or lost during detachment of the
flake, the flake will shorten in length and the face below the positive
bulb will be convex in the long axis.
The billet may be used to produce flakes with un-billet-like charac
teristics simply by slowing down the billet stroke, and striking plat
forms that have the angle, size, and depth designed for hammer stones.
Postive and negative bulbs will be diffused somewhat, but the resulting
flakes will appear to have been struck by a soft hammer stone.
The rules for successful billet flaking are few and simple. The
important ones are: 1. Large, thin, straight flakes, require a very fast
billet stroke; 2. To prevent hinged or broken flakes, facial and flake
ridges that are concave (at the biface edges) must be rendered straight
or convex before billeting the next row of flakes; 3. To prevent split
ting or breaking of the pre-form, platforms must be lowered to the
side or face of the proposed flake so that the material remaining above
the proposed flake is thicker than the flake proposed. Otherwise, the
flake will be a very short one, at a much greater angle to the lineal
edge of the pre-form. The striking of platforms that are too thick, will
generally result in a broken biface,
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Crabtree, Don E.
1967 Notes on Experiments in Flintknapping: 4 Tools Used for Making Flaked
Stone Artifacts. TEBIWA, The Journal of the idaho State Museum, Poca
tello, Idaho.
Jackson, A. T.
1938 The Fall Creek Sites. The University of Texas Publications. No. 3802,
Austin.
Johnson Jr., Leroy
1961 The Devils Mouth Site. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
30, Austin.
1964 The Devils Mouth Site. Archeology Series No. 6, Department of Anthro
pology, The University of Texas, Austin.
Patterson, 3. T.
1936 The Corner-Tang Flint Artifacts of Texas. Anthropological papers of the
University of Texas, Vol. I, No. 4.

LITHIC RESEARCH

IUSI

Pearce, J. E., and A. T. Jackson
1933 A Prehistoric Rock Shelter in Val Verde County, Texas. University of
Texas Publication No. 3327, Anthropological Papers, Vol. 1, No. 3, Austin.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archeological Survey of Texas. The Medallion, Gila Pueblo, Globe,
Arizona.
Soliberger, J. B.
1968 The Paleo Type Flake Knife. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 38.
Dallas, Texas

