Table of Contents
Page
A Wooden Mortar and Pestle from Val Verde County, Texas.
by Michael B. Collins and Thomas Roy Hester

1

Coral Snake Mound (X16SA48).
by Harald P. Jensen, Jr

9

The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas.
by Jay C. Blame, R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook,
and Joel L. Shiner

45

A Partial Report on Research Work Concerning Lithic
Typology and Technology.
by J. B. Soliberger

95

Excavation at a Midden Circle Site in El Paso County, Texas.
by John W. Greer

111

Report on Excavations at the Field Ranch Site (X41CO-1O)
Cooke County, Texas.
by Harald P. Jensen, Jr

133

Paleo-Indian Artifacts from Sites Along San Miguel Creek:
Frio, Atascosa and McMullen Counties, Texas.
by Thomas Roy Hester

147

Suggestions to Authors.
by Maxine and Joel Shiner

163

Book Review
Ambler, J. Richard. Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar
Bayou, Galveston Bay Area.
byJonL. Gibson

167

Illustrations
Page
BLAINE, CROOK, HARRIS AND SHINER
Fig. 1 Geologic cross-section showing the location of
Acton Archeological site
Fig. 2 Idealized cross-section of the geology at the
Acton Archeological site.
Fig. 3 Plainview points
Fig. 4 Meserve points
Fig. 5 Angostura, Scottsbluff, San Patrice and
Untyped points
Fig. 6 Early Archaic points.
Fig. 7 Late Archaic points.
Fig. 8 Scrapers
Fig. 9 Gouges
Fig. 10 Biface foliates
Fig. 11 Burins, gouges, netsinker.
COLLINS AND HESTER
Fig. 1 Site location map
Fig. 2 Wooden mortar and pestle.
Fig. 3 Vertical section of mortar.
GREER
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

HESTER
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3

54
55
58
62
65
70
74.
78
81
82
83

2
4
6

Sketch plan of site.
Profile through the center of niidden.
Pottery
Rim profiles
Small flint artifacts
Limestone tools
Large limestone knives

112
114
117
118
120
124
125

Archeological Sites along San Miguel Creek.
Group A projectile points
Group B and Group C projectile points.

148
150
153.

.

Page
Fig. 4
Fig. 5

JENSEN
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
Fig. 4
Fig. 5
Fig. 6
Fig. 7
Fig. 8
Fig. 9
Fig. 10
JENSEN
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.

1
2
3
4
5
6

Group C and Group D projectile points.
Group A, Group D, and Group E
projectile points

•

.

•

.

•

•

•

.

.

.

•

.

•

.

•

SOLLBERGER
Fig. 1 Tools, probably used as abrading knives.
Fig. 2 Tools, probably used as carcass cleavers.

155
157

Plan of mound
Profile of mound, N—S
Profile of mound, E—W
Three large stemmed points.
Projectile points
Knives and other stone tools.
Pottery
Marksville stamped pot
Marksville stamped pot (bottom view).
Ear spool, beads and pendant

Field Ranch Site
Sketch of Hearth 1
Sketch of Hearth 2
Projectile points
Graver, Denticulates, Gouge and Convex
Side Scraper
Cores and Hammerstones

•

•

•
•

•

.

10
11
11
14
17
19
27
28
29
30

135
136
137
138
141
143

100
102

Report on Excavations at the Field Ranch Site
(X41CO-1O) Cooke County, Texas
HARALD

P.

JENSEN, JR.

ABSTRACT
Two eroding hearths were excavated on the Field Ranch Site in West
Central Cooke County, Texas. Surface collections and excavation produced
tools and lithic refuse which relates technologically and lithologically to
early points found there previously.
PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Anthropology Research Center of Southern Methodist Univer
sity was contacted during March, 1967 by Butch Guerin, of Nocona,
Texas, concerning a site in Cooke County. The Field Ranch Site
(X41CO-1O) is eroding out of the bank of a small conservation lake
on the upper reaches of the Elm Fork of the Trinity River in Cooke
County, Texas, within the construction area of Soil Conservation
Project No. 5, a proposed dam and lake complex some eight miles
southeast of Saint Jo, Texas.
The Field Ranch Site was visited twice by Southern Methodist Uni
versity field parties, and extensive surface collections were made. Two
concentrations of material were noted and hearth stones were seen
eroding from these areas. Materials from the locale included several
Paleo-Indian projectile points.
A change order was negotiated with the National Park Service to
provide for excavation. A field team under the direction of Dr. Edward
B. Jelks tested the site during the second week of May, 1967.
A number of individuals provided assistance and cooperation during
excavation at the site. H. D. Fields granted us permission to work on
his property and Doc ‘Welsh, the ranch foreman, his son, Guy Welsh,
and Butch Guerin, allowed the study of their artifact collections from
the area. Jon Gibson assisted in the excavation and recording of data at
the site.
R. King Harris, Tony Marks, and Joel Shiner, of the Anthropology
Research Center, offered advice and criticism during analysis of the
collections from the site. Marcia McGee and Linda Smith prepared
the illustrations for this report.
ENVIRONMENT
The area is characterized by gently rolling limestone hills covered

134

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

with native bunch grasses. The creeks which intersect the region are
permanent and dense vegetation and tree stands are present along
them. Cooke County falls within the Texan biotic province described
by Blair (1950: 100-402). A small portion of the flora and fauna may
well have been utilized by earlier site occupants; these include wild
plums, large mouth bass, bullheads, bluegills and bull frogs. Rabbits,
waterfowl, quail, and deer are quite common in the area.
GEOLOGY
The geological situation at the Field Ranch Site is similar to that
seen at road cuts in the area.
Zone II
The upper most geological member in the area consists of two
facies. Zone TIc is a poorly developed humic zone, averaging 15 cm.
in depth. Zone JIb is a buff to gray brown sandy silt with some humic
content. The zone averages 1 m. to 2 m. in depth and a great deal of
caliche is weathering out of its exposed faces. Zones JIb and c may
have been deposited as outwash from nearby hills surroimding this
area. It is suggested that Zone ha clays originate from the weathered
sandstone below (Bob Slaughter: personal communication).
Zone I
Zone I, the basic bedrock member, consists of a white, fairly coarse
sandstone extending down for an undetermined depth. This sand
stone is part of the Travis Peak Formation of the Lower Cretaceous
described by Sellards (1966: 310—319).
EXCAVATION PROCEDURE
Extensive surface collections were made along the bank. Material
from the5e collections was probably associated with the two exposed
hearths and possibly others which may have completely eroded out.
The approximate limit of each hearth was blocked out and the
matrix around the exposed hearth stones was removed. All tools,
debitage, and additional hearthstones were left in place for photo
graphing and recording. Detailed plans of the excavations were plotted
from surveying stakes placed by the United States Corps of Engineers,
the hearths were later recorded on a Corps of Engineers map for the
area (Fig. 1).
THE FEATURES
The hearths were situated at the contact between Zone ha and lib,

135

a?

Cd)

Ca

“a?
a?

Ca
0

1 3b

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

top of the red clay. The hearths were 100 meters apart. A filled in
stream channel, which had cut through the red clay into the Zone I
white sands, separated them. It could not be determined whether this
channel pre-dated or post-dated the occupational features.
Excavation showed that one of the hearths exposed in the bank of the
lake had been almost completely disturbed by erosion and the other
was only partially disturbed. Neither of the hearths showed any evi
dence of fire, there was no charcoal present and the clay showed no
discoloration.
on

Hearth 1 (Fig. 2)
Hearth 1 is an almost completely disturbed hearth at the northern
end of the bank. Fine washlines beneath the hearthstones indicated
thai: they had been moved out of place by erosion; several flakes in and
around the feature were in undisturbed matrix. The hearthstones and
associated material were concentrated in an area about 1 m. east-west
and 2m. north-south. The material associated with the hearth includes
1 tool and 6 flakes.

X41 CO-tO
FEATURE I
0

0.5
meter

M N
.

0

KEY
.

FLAKES

A

TOOLS
HEARTH

.
STONES

Fxouaa 2. Sketch of Hearth 1.

A

137

FIELD RANCH SITE

X41 CO-b
FEATURE 2
0

0

0.5
meter

M
oIIo

0

0

C
A

KEY

çO

•

FLAKES

A

TOOLS
CORES
HEARTH

•

B

FJGURE

STONES

3. Sketch of Hearth 2.

Hearth 2 (Fig. 3)
Hearth 2 was eroding out of the southern margin of the lake bank
and was only partially disturbed. While several hearthstones had
washed silts beneath them, several were found resting on undisturbed
red clay. The feature encompassed an area 1 m. east-west and 3 m.
north-south. Materials associated with this hearth include 3 cores,
2 tools, a chunk, and 2 flakes.
MATERIALS RECOVERED
The bulk of the material found at the Field Ranch Site, unfortu
nately came from surface collections. A few tools and a fairly large
amount of debitage was recovered.
Dart Points
Midland Point: (1 specimen, Fig. 4 a)
0

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL 5OULE’I

138

b

a

C

e

g

h

e, Edgewood;
FIGURE 4. Points: a, Midland; b and d, Folsom; c and f, Plainview;
g, Clovis; h, Hell Gap-like. Actual size.

I

Description: A well-made bifacially chipped lanceolate point, the
flake scars are symmetrical and in general conform well with speci
mens described from the Midland Site (Wendorf et al.: 1955). The
point is basally and laterally ground, and made of gray chert.
Dimensions: Maximum length: 49.6 mm.; maximum blade width,
16 mm., maximum thickness, 5 mm.; basal width 15.9 mm.; depth of
basal concavity, 1 mm.
Provenience: Surface, Guerin collection.
Folsom Point: (2 specimens, Fig. 4, b and d)
Description: Neither of these points are worked as carefully as
specimens from the type site Folsom, New Mexico (Wormington
1957: 23—25). They are somewhat asymmetrical; flake scars are fairly
irregular, and thinning scars are not as long or broad as on examples
from Folsom, New Mexico or the Lindenmeir Site in Colorado. Both
specimens are basally and laterally ground, one is made of a uniform
gray chert (Fig. 4 d), the other of a white patinated chert (Fig. 4 b).
The gray colored point has been reworked laterally from about mid
way to the distal tip. This subsequent work has modified the thinning
scars on both faces, and the general outline now appears truncated
rather than recurved.
Dimensions: Gray reworked specimen, maximum length, 34.9 mm.;
maximum width, 18 mm.; maximum thickness, 5.7 mm.; basal width,
18.3 mm.; depth of basal concavity, 3 mm. White specimen: Maxi
mum length, 31.5 mm.; maximum width, 18mm.; maximum thick
ness, 5.4mm.; basal width, 16mm.; depth of basal concavity, 1 mm.
Provenience: Surface (2), Guerin collection.
Plainview Points: (2 specimens, Fig. 4, c and f)
Description: This type is represented by the basal portions of two
points. Both were made of gray chert and have a series of basal thinfling scars similar to those found on some of the Plainview Site speci
mens (Sellards, Evans, and Meade, 1947: 928—952). Basal and lateral
grinding is present.
Dimensions: Specimen in Figure 4, f, maximum length, 18 mm.;
maximum width, 23.6 mm.; maximum thickness, 6 mm.; basal width,
20.4mm.; depth of basal concavity, 2mm. Specimen in Figure 4, c,
maximum length, 14 mm.; maximum width, 24 mm.; maximum
thickness, 7 mm.; basal width, 23.3 mm.; depth of basal concavity,
3 mm.
Provenience: Surface (2), Guerin collection.
Clovis Point: (1 specimen, Fig. 4, g)
Description: The specimen is a basal portion of a large Clovis point

I

-ru

.1

£.AflO flfllfl

L,UJ1L.flt OJ’..1JL1 A A

made of a fine textured white quartzite. The fragment is bifacially
worked, has the typical broad flutes or thinning scars on both faces,
and is basally and laterally ground.
Dimensions: Maximumlength, 19.5 mm.; maximumwidth, 32 mm.;
maximum thickness, 8 mm.; basal width, 34 mm.; depth of basal con
cavity, 1.5 mm.
Provenience: Surface, Guerin collection.
Edgewood point: (1 specimen, Fig. 4, e)
Description: Edgewood points were first described by Suhm, Krieger
and Jeiks (1959: 418—419). The Field Ranch point has an expanding
stem and is made of buff-gray chert. The tip is damaged, and the edges
are slightly irregular to concave base.
Dimensions: Maximum length, 28 mm.; maximum width, 22.8 mm.;
width at base, 14.8 mm.; depth of basal concavity, 1.5 mm.
Provenience: Surface, Guerin collection.
Hell Gap-like: (1 specimen, Fig. 4, h)
Description: A long, slightly contracting stemmed point made of
gray chert. The blade edges are convex and symmetrical; rather weak
shoulders are present at the blade-stem juncture, and the base is
slightly concave. The point has a lenticular cross section and very
uniform bifacial chipping. This specimen is similar in most respects
to the Hell Gap Points described by Agogino (1961: 558—560), except
for basal concavity which the Wyoming specimens do not have.
Dimensions: Maximum length, 66 mm.; maximum width, 25 mm.;
maximum thickness, 6 mm.; width of base, 14.3 mm.; depth of basal
concavity, 2.5 mm.
Provenience: Surface, Welsh collection.
Gouge: (1 specimen, Fig. 5, d)
Description: A trapezoidal shaped, bifacially worked tool showing
use polish on its ventral surface. The dorsal surface is convex giving
the specimen a plano-convex cross section. The narrower end of the
specimen is convex; the wider end is roughly convex, but has two large
flake scars which give it a slightly irregular appearance. One lateral
edge is concave, the other convex; all four edges of the tool were formed
by steep percussion flake removal from the ventral surface. The tool is
niädëof buff caliche encrusted chert.
Dimensions: Maximum length, 28 mm.; maximum width, 29 mm.;
maximum thickness, 13 mm.
Provenience: Surface

1’t1

a

b

C

$

d

e
FXGURE

Actual

f

5. a, Graver; b, c, and f, Denticulates; d, Gouge; e, Convex Side Scraper.

Size.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Convex Side Scraper: (1 specimen, Fig. 5, e)
Description: This tool is made of a chunk or slab of tabular white
fine grained quartzite. Cortex remains on both surfaces. The scraping
edge is convex and characterized by steep unifacial percussion flaking.
Dimensions: Length, 64 mm.; width, 48 mm.; thickness, 26 mm.
Provenience: Surface.
Graver: (1 specimen, Fig. 5, a)
Description: A graver point or bit was made on a secondary cortex
flake. About 50% of residual cortex remains on the outer surface; no
bulbar or platform retouch is present. The distal end, opposite the
bulb of percussion, is retouched to form a “beaked” tip or graver point.
This unifacial modification is represented by two oblique truncations,
one on the distal end of the flake and parallel with the striking plat
form. The other is a transverse truncation on the flake’s cortex bearing
side. Both truncations are slightly concave thereby accentuating the
graver tip. The tool is made of white chert.
Dimensions: Length, 30 mm.; width, 18 mm.; thickness, 4mm.;
length of graver tip, 2 mm.
Provenience: Surface.
Denticulates: (3 specimens, Fig. 5, b, c and f)
Description: Two of these tools are made on irregularly shaped
chunks of white chert. The third specimen is on a gray chert cortex
flake. The three denticulates have at least one retouched edge. The
natural or non-prepared flat surfaces on these tools were used as
striking platforms for the removal of a series of shallow percussion
flakes at fairly regular intervals thereby forming a toothed or jagged
edge.
Dimensions: Figure 5, c, Length, 24mm.; width, 25 mm.; thick
ness, 15 mm. Figure 5, b, Length, 34mm.; width, 27 mm.; thickness,
16mm. FigureS, f, Length, 44mm.; width, 42mm.; thickness, 13 mm.
Provenience: Surface (1), Hearth 1 (1), Hearth 2 (1).
Hammerstones: (2 specimens, Fig. 6, d and f)
Description: Fairly smooth, oval quartzite pebbles, with edges that
show battering. Both specimens have a large amount of battering at
their opposed ends.
Dimensions: Specimen in Figure 6, d, length, 80 mm.; width,
48 mm.; thickness, 44 mm. Specimen in Figure 6, f, length, 81 mm.;
width, 67 mm.; thickness 38 mm.
Provenience: Surface.

143

FIELD RANCH SITE

C

e
FIGUIE

6. a, b, c, and e, Cares; d and f, Hanimerstones.

Cores: (6 specimens)
Single platform lisse: (2 specimens Fig. 6, a and c)
Irregular chert chunks, on which a striking platform was prepared
by removing a single large flake. A series of flake scars extend down
from the lisse or flat platform on both specimens.
Provenience: Hearth 2.

144

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Single platform cortex: (1 specimen Fig. 6, b)
A series of flakes were removed from an unprepared striking plat
form on this quartzite cobble.
Provenience: Surface.
Informe: (2 specimens)
Irregular chert chunks with flakes removed in a nonpatterned man
ner. It appears that any convenient surface was used as a striking
platform throughout the removal of flakes on this specimen.
Provenience: Surface.
Isolated Flake Core: (1 specimen, Fig. 6, e)
An oval quartzite pebble that has had one large flake removed. One
edge of this flake scar is considerably smoothed, possibly by cutting or
back and forth movement.
Provenience: Hearth 2.
Cortex flakes: (7 specimens)
Description: Flakes which retain 50% or more of original cortex
on their outer surface. One white chert flake in this class was utilized;
materials include quartzite (2), white chert (4), and red chert (1).
Provenience: Surface.
Flakes: (95 specimens).
Description: These specimens retain striking platforms and bulbs
of percussion, but have little or no cortex. Seventeen of this class are
made of a fine grained white quartzite and of these 13 are eclat de
taille or biface thinning flakes, one of which has use retouch. Fifty-five
of the remaining chert flakes are also biface thinning flakes and one
of these also shows use retouch.
Provenience: Surface (90), Hearth 1 (3), Hearth 2 (2).
Chips: (49 specimens)
Description: Chips are the broken portions of cortex flakes and
flakes which have no striking platform or bulb of percussion. Twelve
of these chips are made of quartzite and one of these has steep unifacial
retouch along one edge. None of the remaining 37 chert chips have
retouch of any kind. Thirty of the chips are from broken biface thinfling flakes.
Provenience: Surface (47), Hearth 1 (2).
Chunks: (15 specimens)
Description: This category includes broken chert cores and other

FIELD RANCH SITE

145

pieces of chert which cannot be placed into a tool or tool making
by-product category, and are essentially unidentifiable chipped stone
fragments.
Provenience: Surface (13), Hearth 2 (2).
DISCUSSION
Seven early points including Clovis, Folsom, Midland, Plainview,
and Hell Gap-like were found at the site; the sample includes four
complete and three basal sections. The convex side scraper, denticu
lates and the utilized isolated flake core together with numbers of
sharp little flakes probably served as butchering tools. The graver and
gouge were probably wood and bone working tools, and perhaps were
used specifically for making dart shafts. The two hammerstones, the
cores, and numerous flakes all argue for work of a non-food processing
sort. From a total flake sample of 151 pieces, 98 were complete or
fragmentary biface thinning flakes. These flakes are the by-product of
manufacturing bifaces and especially thinning them. The size of the
biface thinning flakes from the site essentially reflects point manu
facture; materials from which the Field Ranch points and tools were
made is lithologically the same as much of the debitage and stone
refuse.
Surface materials represent a geological rather than cultural associ
ation and therefore may represent more than one occupation. The
presence of an Archaic dart point at Field Ranch Site suggests visits to
the area by later hunting groups. Notched points have been reported
in early contexts by Agogino and Frankforter (1960 414—415) and
Sellards (1940: 1637 and 1642), however, and we cannot rule out
entirely the possibility of the Edgewood points origin in a pre-Archaic
context.
The materials and architectural features indicate that a range of
activities were conducted at the site; the presence of cores, hammer
stones, debitage, bone and wood working tools, and scraping instru
ments suggest that the site represents a base camp for tool manufacture
and food preparation. However, the presence of points from different
chronological horizons would suggest differential use of the site at
different times. As such, it may represent a hunting station also. The
limited amount of material would argue for short, intermittent
occupancy.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Agogino, George A.
1961 A New Point Type From Hell Gap Valley, Eastern Wyoming. American
Antiquity. Vol. 26, No. 4, Salt Lake.

146

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Agogino, George A. and W. P. Fran.kforter
1960 A Paleo-Indian Bison-kill iii Northwestern Iowa. American Antiquity.
vol. 25, No. 3, Salt Lake.
Blair. yT Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal Of Science. Vol. II, No.
No. 1. San Marcos.
Sellards, E. H.
1940 Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils From Bee County, Texas. Bul
letin Of The Geological Society Of America. Vol. 51, New York.
Sellards, E. H., Glen L. Evans, and Grayson E. Meade
1947 Fossil Bisons and Associated Artifacts From Plainview, Texas. Bulletin
Of The Geological Society Of Amcrica. Vol. 58, Ne wYork.
Sellards. E. H.. W. S. Adkins, F. B. Plummer
1966 The Geology Of Texas. Vol. 1 Stratigraphy. The University of Texas Bul
letin, No. 3232. Fifth Printing. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jeiks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin Of The Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25. Austin.
Wendorf, Fred. A. D. Kreiger, C. Albritton, and T. D. Stewart
1955 The Midland Discovery. A Report on the Pleistocene Human Remains
from Midland. Texas. Austin.
Wormington. H. M.
1957 Ancient Man In North America. Denver Museum Of Natural History
Popular Series No. 4. Denver.
Texas Archeological Salvage
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, Texas

