Table of Contents
Page
A Wooden Mortar and Pestle from Val Verde County, Texas.
by Michael B. Collins and Thomas Roy Hester

1

Coral Snake Mound (X16SA48).
by Harald P. Jensen, Jr

9

The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas.
by Jay C. Blame, R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook,
and Joel L. Shiner

45

A Partial Report on Research Work Concerning Lithic
Typology and Technology.
by J. B. Soliberger

95

Excavation at a Midden Circle Site in El Paso County, Texas.
by John W. Greer

111

Report on Excavations at the Field Ranch Site (X41CO-1O)
Cooke County, Texas.
by Harald P. Jensen, Jr

133

Paleo-Indian Artifacts from Sites Along San Miguel Creek:
Frio, Atascosa and McMullen Counties, Texas.
by Thomas Roy Hester

147

Suggestions to Authors.
by Maxine and Joel Shiner

163

Book Review
Ambler, J. Richard. Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar
Bayou, Galveston Bay Area.
byJonL. Gibson

167

Illustrations
Page
BLAINE, CROOK, HARRIS AND SHINER
Fig. 1 Geologic cross-section showing the location of
Acton Archeological site
Fig. 2 Idealized cross-section of the geology at the
Acton Archeological site.
Fig. 3 Plainview points
Fig. 4 Meserve points
Fig. 5 Angostura, Scottsbluff, San Patrice and
Untyped points
Fig. 6 Early Archaic points.
Fig. 7 Late Archaic points.
Fig. 8 Scrapers
Fig. 9 Gouges
Fig. 10 Biface foliates
Fig. 11 Burins, gouges, netsinker.
COLLINS AND HESTER
Fig. 1 Site location map
Fig. 2 Wooden mortar and pestle.
Fig. 3 Vertical section of mortar.
GREER
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

HESTER
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3

54
55
58
62
65
70
74.
78
81
82
83

2
4
6

Sketch plan of site.
Profile through the center of niidden.
Pottery
Rim profiles
Small flint artifacts
Limestone tools
Large limestone knives

112
114
117
118
120
124
125

Archeological Sites along San Miguel Creek.
Group A projectile points
Group B and Group C projectile points.

148
150
153.

.

Page
Fig. 4
Fig. 5

JENSEN
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
Fig. 4
Fig. 5
Fig. 6
Fig. 7
Fig. 8
Fig. 9
Fig. 10
JENSEN
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.

1
2
3
4
5
6

Group C and Group D projectile points.
Group A, Group D, and Group E
projectile points

•

.

•

.

•

•

•

.

.

.

•

.

•

.

•

SOLLBERGER
Fig. 1 Tools, probably used as abrading knives.
Fig. 2 Tools, probably used as carcass cleavers.

155
157

Plan of mound
Profile of mound, N—S
Profile of mound, E—W
Three large stemmed points.
Projectile points
Knives and other stone tools.
Pottery
Marksville stamped pot
Marksville stamped pot (bottom view).
Ear spool, beads and pendant

Field Ranch Site
Sketch of Hearth 1
Sketch of Hearth 2
Projectile points
Graver, Denticulates, Gouge and Convex
Side Scraper
Cores and Hammerstones

•

•

•
•

•

.

10
11
11
14
17
19
27
28
29
30

135
136
137
138
141
143

100
102

A Wooden Mortar and Pestle
From Val Verde County, Texas
MICHAEL

B.

COLLINS AND THOIVIAS ROY HESTER

ABSTRACT
This paper describes a wooden mortar and pestle found by spelunkers
in a small cave near Pandale, in Val Verde County, Texas. Cactus seeds
(Opuntia sp.) were found in the mortar, suggesting that one function of
the implements was the preparation of plant parts for food. Ethnographic
accounts have mentioned the presence of wooden mortars and pestles in the
aboriginal cultures of southwestern Texas and northern Mexico; although
perishable artifacts are abundant in the dry caves of this region, the speci
mens described in this paper are the first of their type to be reported.
In February, 1968, David G. Cooke and Glenn Southard (spelunkers
from Ozona, Texas) entered a small cave near the mouth of Big
Fielder’s Canyon in the vicinity of Pandale, Val Verde County, Texas
(Fig. 1). Cigarettes accidentally dropped behind a ledge by the
spelunkers led to the discovery of a wooden mortar and pestle evi
dently cached beneath an overhang in the ledge. Cooke and Southard
reported their find to the Department of Anthropology, The Univer
sity of Texas at Austin. The authors, accompanied by Mary Ringwood
Bacon of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, examined and
photographed the specimens at Ozona in March, 1968.
The cave in which the mortar and pestle were found is in the Pecos
River canyon near Pandale Crossing, approximately 22 miles north
of Langtry and 65 miles northwest of Del Rio, Texas. The region is an
extensive tableland of limestone (the Edwards and Stockton plateaus)
that has been deeply dissected by three major rivers, (Pecos, Rio
Grande, and Devils) and countless small streams. Rockshelters and
caves are numerous in these canyons and many show evidence of
aboriginal occupation. Aridity has occasioned the preservation of a
wide variety of perishable debris and artifacts in some of the shelters.
The archeological material from these sites exhibits the general char
acteristics of the widespread Desert Culture (Suhm and others, 1954;
Lehmer, 1960; johnson, 1964; Story, 1966). Occupation by peoples
who practiced gathering of plant foods, fishing, and hunting evidently
began at least 6,000 years ago and lasted until historic times. Cultural
change was minimal over this entire period—even the brief influx of
bison hunters at about 700 B.C. and the introduction of the bow and
arrow at about A.D. 1400 failed to alter significantly the economy

2

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

crossing
41 VV 425

Oc VICINITY

0

5

10

miles

I

Co

Co

FIGURE 1. Site location map, 41 VV 425.

based on hunting, gathering and fishing (Dibble, 1968; Johnson, 1964;
Story, 1966). The prehistoric cultural trait relevant to the present
paper is the gathering and preparation of Opuntia (prickly pear) tuna
for plant food. Prickly pear tuna (as well as lechuguilla and sotol)
provided a substantial part of the diet throughout the long periods of

WOODEN MORTAR AND PESTLE

3

occupation. Various techniques of baking in earth ovens seem to have
been employed in preparation of the agave and sotol whereas prickly

pear tuna was evidently eaten raw or prepared in various ways
(including pulverization). Human feces (currently under analysis)
from late prehistoric deposits in a shelter near the mouth of the Pecos
River contain whole Opuntia seeds as well as other plant and animal
parts (V. M. Bryant, Jr., personal communication). It seems clear
that gathering of desert plant foods was the major means of subsistence
for over 8,000 years. Bedrock mortars and oval-basin metates (both
portable and in bedrock) occur at most sites in the area and presum
ably served in food preparation. Pestles are rare (or have escaped
recognition). The large samples of perishable artifacts from the area
contain little or nothing that would suggest the use of wooden crushing
implements.
Historic documents record the presence of numerous groups, mostly
of Coahuiltecan linguistic affiliation, in the Edwards Plateau and Rio
Grande Valley regions. These were food gatherers who also practiced
fishing and some hunting. Jumanos and numerous other Indian groups
inhabited the general region in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries.
Apaches were reported in Big Fielder’s Canyon in 1879, and Coman
ches crossed the region frequently during the 19th century (Hackett,
1926 and 1931; Newcomb, 1961; Bolton, 1911; Kirkland, 1942; Rueck
ing, 1955; Campbell, ms.). The various Coahuiltecan groups were fre
quently reported to have gathered Opuntia tunas and one reference
mentions use of wooden mortars (Ruecking, 1955; Bandelier, 1905).
The wooden mortar and pestle were discovered in a small cave
(University of Texas site designation: 41 VV 425) on a rocky hillside
on the west bank of the Pecos River. The cave is in a thick ledge about
one-third of the distance up the hillside from the river, and just north
of the mouth of Big Fielder’s Canyon. There are numerous other small
caves, crevices, and shelters in the immediate vicinity, most of which
seem to be devoid of cultural remains. The cave faces south and is
about 10 feet high at the mouth and only 2 to 3 feet wide; it extends
back into the hill for a distance of about 15 to 20 feet. Near the back
of the cave, a ledge extends into the passageway, and it was on the
surface beneath this ledge that the mortar and pestle were found. The
mortar lay on its side and the pestle was nearby. The floor of this
small cave is covered with roof spalls and there is no evidence of any
cultural deposit; however, some smoke staining on the roof is present
at the mouth of the cave. A few lithic artifacts (including a contracting
stem dart point) were collected from the hillside below the cave.
The mortar (Fig. 2, a, b, d and e) appears to have been fashioned

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

L

I,
ci

C

e
0

15

30

centimeters
2. Wooden mortar and pestle from 41 VV 425. a, interior cavity. b, side
view with pestle in position. c, pestle with crushing end up. d. side view of mortarnote charred area below rim on interior. e, mortar base—note concavity.
FIGURE

from a section of a tree with fine, straight-grained wood (probably
pine), from which the bark had been removed. The height of the
specimen is 31 cm., with maximum diameters at the rim and base of
17.6 and 18.3 cm. The interior cavity is 18 cm. deep; the lip of the
rim has been rounded and smoothed, and is beveled along one-third
of its interior circumference. The interior is roughly conical in vertical
section (Fig. 2, a; Fig. 3). There is a charred area extending in a band
most of the way around the interior just below the beveled rim, sug

WOODEN MORTAR A Ii I’ESTLE

gesting that the cavity was formed by a process of alternately charring
and scraping (Fig. 2, d; Fig. 3, b, c). The interior is polished from use;
several small pebbles, embedded at the bottom of the cavity, are ground
smooth, and cactus seeds (Opuntia sp.) were discovered in the cracks
(caused by desiccation) along the sides (Fig. 2, a). The cactus seeds
were tightly wedged in the cracks and had to be pried out with a knife
blade; evidently, the mortar was used after cracks had developed.
The central part of the base of the mortar is a concave depression
about 2 cm. deep (Fig. 2, e; Fig. 3, e). The rim of the basal depression
is rounded and smoothed.
The exterior of the mortar does not appear to have been modified to
any extent. There is a small oval depression opposite the charred band
on the interior. It was impossible to determine if the depression was
the result of charring and scraping, or of wear, although it appeared
to be slightly charred.
The pestle (Fig. 2, c) is a section of what is tentatively identified as
a pecan shoot. from which the branches have been trimmed. The
entire length is smoothed, and the knobs left by the removal of the
branches are polished, probably from repeated handling. One end is
conical and somewhat rounded; it is this end that was evidently used
in conjunction with the mortar (upper end in Fig. 2, c). The opposite
end which is also rounded but exhibits several cutmarks, has not been
smoothed, and shows no evidence of use. Large cracks, resulthg from
desiccation, extend almost the entire length of the specimen. It is
58 cm. long, and has an average diameter of about 4.5 cm.
Wooden mortars and pestles have not been previously recorded in
the archeological literature of Texas and northern Mexico. Alonso de
Leon (1905) states that Coahuiltecan bands in Nuevo Leon, Mexico,
used wooden mortars to crush seeds and other foods, but descriptive
details are lacking. Cabeza de Vaca recorded the use of wooden pestles
by Indians in either southwestern Texas or northeastern Mexico.
These pestles were used to pulverize mesquite bean pods, the juice of
which was mixed with earth and then consumed (Bandelier, 1905).
Wooden mortars and pestles have been recorded among cultures
over much of North America (Hodge, 1912; Driver and Massey,
1957), but none have been noted in southwestern Texas or north
eastern Mexico.
SUMMARY
A wooden mortar and pestle from near Pandale in Val Verde
County, Texas, have been described, and represent the first examples
of these implements from this region. The presence of cactus seeds in

tj

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
d

a

A
C

I’

3. Vertical section of mortar, a, charred area on exterior, b,c, charred band
on interior. d, beveled rim. e, basal concavity.
FIGURE

WOODEN MORTAR AND PESTLE

the mortar suggests at least one function of the implements—the
processing of plant parts for food. While ethnographic accounts dealing
with the Indians of southwestern Texas and northeastern Mexico note
the presence of the wooden mortar and pestle, no examples of these
artifacts have come to light in the extensive excavations of dry shelters
in this area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. T. N. Campbell, Professor of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin, for his helpful
criticisms regarding this paper. Identification of the Opuntia seeds
from the mortar was made by Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., of the Depart
ment of Botany, The University of Texas at Austin; for this and the
information he supplied on his analysis of human feces from site
41 VV 162, we are grateful.
ADDENDA
After this paper was submitted for publication, a fragment of wood
from the mortar was examined by Mr. Marvin A. Stokes of the Labo
ratory of Tree-Ring Research at the University of Arizona. Mr. Stokes
believes that the wood is conifer, possibly pinyon (Pinus cembroides).
REFERENCES CITED
Bandelier, Fanny R. (trans.)
1905 The Journey of Alvar Nuñez Cabeza de Vaca. The Rio Grande Press, Inc.
Chicago.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1911 The Jumano Indians in Texas, 1650—1771. The Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association, Vol. 15, PP. 66—84.
Campbell, T. N.
ms. Unpublished notes on the named Indian groups of Texas, on file at the
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Dibble, David S.
1968 Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde County, Texas:
Part 1, The Archeology. Miscellaneous Papers, No. 1, Texas Memorial
Museum.
Driver, Harold E. and W. C. Massey
1957 Comparative Studies of North American Indians. Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, Vol. 47, Part 2.
Hackett, Charles W.
1926 Historical Documents Relating to New Mexico, Nueva Viscaya, and Ap
proaches Thereto, to 1773. Carnegie Institute of Wahsington, Publication
No. 330.
1931 Pichardo’s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas. University of
Texas Press, Austin.

8

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Hodge, F. W.
1912 Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, Part 1. Bulletin 30, Bu
reau of American Ethnology.
Johnson, LeRoy
1964. The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas, Archeology Series No. 6.
Kirkland, Forrest
1942 Historic Material from Fielder Canyon Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Ar
cheological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 14, pp. 61—71.
Leon, Alonso de
1905 Relacion y Discursos del Descubrirniento, Poblacion y Pacificacion de Este
Nuevo Reino de Leon. Volume 25, Documentos ineditos o muy raro para
la historia de Mexico. ed. Genaro Garcia, pp. 5—188. Mexico, D.F.
Lehmer, Donald J.
1960 A Review of Trans-Pecos Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Ar
cheological Society, Vol. 29, pp. 109—144.
Newcomb, W. W.. Jr.
1961 The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Ruecking, F. H.. Jr.
1955 The Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico.
Unpublished MA thesis, on file at The University of Texas, Austin.
Story, Dee Ann
1966 Introduction. A Preliminary Study of the Paleoecology of the Amistad
Reservoir Area. Final Report of Research under the Auspices of the Na
tional Science Foundation, GS-667.
Sub.m, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society. Vol. 25.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project and the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

