Table of Contents
Page
A Wooden Mortar and Pestle from Val Verde County, Texas.
by Michael B. Collins and Thomas Roy Hester

1

Coral Snake Mound (X16SA48).
by Harald P. Jensen, Jr

9

The Acton Site: Hood County, Texas.
by Jay C. Blame, R. K. Harris, Wilson W. Crook,
and Joel L. Shiner

45

A Partial Report on Research Work Concerning Lithic
Typology and Technology.
by J. B. Soliberger

95

Excavation at a Midden Circle Site in El Paso County, Texas.
by John W. Greer

111

Report on Excavations at the Field Ranch Site (X41CO-1O)
Cooke County, Texas.
by Harald P. Jensen, Jr

133

Paleo-Indian Artifacts from Sites Along San Miguel Creek:
Frio, Atascosa and McMullen Counties, Texas.
by Thomas Roy Hester

147

Suggestions to Authors.
by Maxine and Joel Shiner

163

Book Review
Ambler, J. Richard. Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar
Bayou, Galveston Bay Area.
byJonL. Gibson

167

Illustrations
Page
BLAINE, CROOK, HARRIS AND SHINER
Fig. 1 Geologic cross-section showing the location of
Acton Archeological site
Fig. 2 Idealized cross-section of the geology at the
Acton Archeological site.
Fig. 3 Plainview points
Fig. 4 Meserve points
Fig. 5 Angostura, Scottsbluff, San Patrice and
Untyped points
Fig. 6 Early Archaic points.
Fig. 7 Late Archaic points.
Fig. 8 Scrapers
Fig. 9 Gouges
Fig. 10 Biface foliates
Fig. 11 Burins, gouges, netsinker.
COLLINS AND HESTER
Fig. 1 Site location map
Fig. 2 Wooden mortar and pestle.
Fig. 3 Vertical section of mortar.
GREER
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

HESTER
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3

54
55
58
62
65
70
74.
78
81
82
83

2
4
6

Sketch plan of site.
Profile through the center of niidden.
Pottery
Rim profiles
Small flint artifacts
Limestone tools
Large limestone knives

112
114
117
118
120
124
125

Archeological Sites along San Miguel Creek.
Group A projectile points
Group B and Group C projectile points.

148
150
153.

.

Page
Fig. 4
Fig. 5

JENSEN
Fig. 1
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
Fig. 4
Fig. 5
Fig. 6
Fig. 7
Fig. 8
Fig. 9
Fig. 10
JENSEN
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.
Fig.

1
2
3
4
5
6

Group C and Group D projectile points.
Group A, Group D, and Group E
projectile points

•

.

•

.

•

•

•

.

.

.

•

.

•

.

•

SOLLBERGER
Fig. 1 Tools, probably used as abrading knives.
Fig. 2 Tools, probably used as carcass cleavers.

155
157

Plan of mound
Profile of mound, N—S
Profile of mound, E—W
Three large stemmed points.
Projectile points
Knives and other stone tools.
Pottery
Marksville stamped pot
Marksville stamped pot (bottom view).
Ear spool, beads and pendant

Field Ranch Site
Sketch of Hearth 1
Sketch of Hearth 2
Projectile points
Graver, Denticulates, Gouge and Convex
Side Scraper
Cores and Hammerstones

•

•

•
•

•

.

10
11
11
14
17
19
27
28
29
30

135
136
137
138
141
143

100
102

The Acton Site:
Hood County, Texas
JAY
WILSON

W.

C.

BLAINE, R. K. HARRIS,
CROOK, JR. AND JOEL L. SHINER

ABSTRACT
Typological and technological studies of a large systematic collection
of flaked and ground stone artifacts indicate a considerable occupation of
the Acton Site during a transition period from late Paleo-Indian stage to
early Archaic stage. For the first time, all of the materials from this type
of site are described according to a standard system.
INTRODUCTION
Investigation of this site was undertaken by the senior author and
his wife in the spring of 1961. Initial collection was selective and con
fined to surface artifacts. By 1962 it became apparent that an un
usually high percentage (approximately 50%) of the dart points being
found were those generally held to be representative of the Paleo
Indian stage in Texas. In addition, tool forms, cores and flakes were
present in quantities potentially useful for detailed study. In the hope
of eventually affiliating some of this material with the Paleo-Indian
tools, a complete surface collection procedure was initiated and even
tually supplemented by test excavations. This report concerns analysis
of materials primarily collected from the surface of the site from 1961
through 1967; the results of limited testing; and geological interpreta
tion and correlations pertinent to this site.
While all of the authors contributed in all phases of this investiga
tion, there are areas in which each assumed primary responsibility.
Joel L. Shiner is responsible for the technological analysis of all arti
facts, Wilson W. Crook, Jr. for the geological investigation and inter
pretation, R. K. Harris for the Archaic and Neo-American points, and
Jay C. Blame for the Paleo-Indian points. Linda Harris Brown is the
artist responsible for the excellent illustrations of artifacts.
In accordance with the explicit instructions of the land holders only
the authors together with Mrs. Jerrylee Blame and Mrs. Maxine
Shiner have worked at the site during the investigation.
The De Corciova Dam is under construction down stream from the
site and the development of lakeside property and recreational facilities
terminated our investigation of the site.

46

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The authors wish to express their appreciation to the land holders
for permission to carry out this study. The assistance in manuscript
preparation and typing given by Maxine Shiner, Inus Marie Harris
and Jerrylee Blame is gratefully noted. Lastly we express our gratitude
to J. B. Soilberger of the Dallas Archeological Society for carrying
out special flint knapping projects in support of technological study.
THE SITE AND ITS SETTING
The Acton Site is located in east-central Hood County, Texas, on
the east side of the Brazos River and near the community of Acton.
The exact location is on file with the Department of Anthropology of
Southern Methodist University and bears the site designation
X41HD-13.
The present channel of the Brazos River is less than 0.5 miles west
of the site and a seep spring emerges within 200 yards. The site is
situated upon sand-capped low clay ridges shghtly protuding from a
general land slope which gently descends toward the south.
Most of the artifacts were found in an area about 200 yards long
and 160 yards wide and within this area all tools, flakes, cores and cul
tural debris observed were collected. This area lies within a larger
cleared field which has been cultivated for many years. The general
site surface is now one of shifting sand through which clay ridges
protrude. The generally overlying sand is relatively deep between
these ridges or high spots and completely gone or intermixed by plow
ing with the clay on the ridges.
With only one exception all surface finds of early dart points were
made where the plow had penetrated to or into the basic red clay sur
face. Many of the later types of dart points and other artifacts and
debitage were found in the same situation but the latter were also
found where some sand cover was present arid the underlying clay
had not been disturbed by cultivation. There did not appear to be any
obvious or significant concentration of artifacts or flakes in any use
fully limited area or situation within the site boundaries. In short, the
areal distribution of the generally recognized classes of artifacts, in
cluding cores, appeared homogeneous for the area studied. Despite the
above factors and the fact that the site continued to be under cultiva
tion, the senior author decided to record precise locations for each early
point found against such time that test excavations could be carried
out. Observations and experiments noted by Fitting et al. (1966: 99)
would indicate that most specimens are probably not moved far from
their original locations by cultivation or wind action. Subsequently two

ACTON SITE

47

compass bearings were secured from each early point location to two
widely separated and fixed reference points. The distance between
these reference points was measured by tape and formed the basis for
map scale. All test excavations and other site detail were similarly
mapped.
Test results
Nine test excavations measuring from 3’ by 3’ up to 6’ X 12’ were
made where sand cover remained over the clay. All tests were located
within the artifact bearing area. Standard controls and recording pro—
ceclures were followed. Excavation ‘was primarily by 6 inch levels and
4 inch screens were used.
i/
The culture-bearing sand deposit was quite thin in its seemingly
undisturbed portion. After factoring out the 6 inch to 8 inch disturbed
plow zone the mean thickness of sand deposit for all tests was only 12
inches. Only two reasonably definitive artifacts were found. One, a
notched “sinker,” was found 2 inches below the plow zone and 14
inches above the clay in test B. The other, a Plainview golondrina
basal fragment, was found in test H on the clay at a point 10 inches
below the plow zone. Occasional flakes ‘were found in the surface of
the clay and down to 5 inches below the surface. There was no evidence
observed of sand-filled cracks or fissures involving the latter. There
was a tendency for flakes and lithic debris to concentrate in the lower
2 inches of the first 6 inch level above the dense red clay but in the
overlying one or two levels, the vertical distribution appeared essen
tially homogeneous below the plow zone. The intra-level debris counts
were not significantly different between the first two to three levels
above clay in the tests.
As a general observation it would appear possible that the first sig
nificant occupation took place after the clay surface had been reduced
by exposure and other factors and a thin derived sand veneer devel
oped. The tests reveal a comparative concentration of lithic debris just
above, seldom in or under, the dense red clay. Subsequently the thick
sand deposition took place.
An alternative possibly could have the lowest concentration initially
on or in the clay surface and freed from this condition by flooding
which deposited the major sand layer.
No features were observed in excavation. Occasionally fire-altered
rock, flint, and some carbonaceous flecks were found at random depths.
Three cultivation scattered groups of fire-altered limestone occured on
the surface of the site.

48

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

GEOLOGIC ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE
In the De Cordova Bend Reservoir region, the country bedrock is a
rather massive limestone member of the Comanche series of Cretaceous
sedimentary origin. Its surface weathers into a rocky, low-grade dark
soil (in no manner comparable to the rich blackland prairies to the east
derived from the soft Austin Chalk of the Gulf series of the Creta
ceous). In nature, this supports live oak on the uplands and in the
valleys; on the slopes a tendency to heavy growth of juniper-cedar
and sumac; and otherwise native grasses. Cultivation is neglible, graz
ing being the principal agricultural pursuit, plus some feed grains;
there is also a considerable production of cedar fence-posts.
Lying west of the Balcones Fault Zone, whose southwest-northwest
trend essentially separates the higher ground of the Cretaceous forma
tions of Texas from the lower and totally different Tertiary formations
of the Gulf-Mississippi Embayment, the area is in effect an extension
of the Edwards Plateau feature to the northeastward. However, among
other things being much more a heavily cedared region, it is by no
means identical to the more classic Texas “hill country” another 150
miles southwest. Native flint ledges and nodules occur in varying qual
ity and purity in the limestone, similar but not equal to the high con
centration-variety-quality of such in the type Edwards Plateau region.
(The later Cretaceous Austin Chalk to the north and east, previously
referred to, is notable for its complete lack of flinty materials.)
Topography of the region is purely a result of gentle regional uplift
primarily since the beginning
and resultant erosional sculpture
of the Pleistocene epoch of the Quaternary and due to the work of the
Brazos River system with its tributaries, large and small. Differences
in elevation are rather impressive, with many mesas and named
“mountains” of size, but all are related to the breaks of the master
Brazos Valley.
With its headwaters far to the northwest on the High Plains, the
Brazos is a through-flowing stream on its way to the Gulf of Mexico,
being laden with a brown sandy silt even today throughout all its
lower reaches. The material is brought from far upstream, yet every
where comprises the present floodplain deposits regardless of the local
soils and formations through which the river passes.
In the former times of the alternate cut-and-fill cycles, equated with
the alternating glacial-stadial-pluvial and intergiacial-interstadial
interpluvial periods of the Pleistocene and Recent, as the river progres
sively trenched its valley ever deeper it left remnants of former flood
plains as typical alluvial terraces. These are also composed of exotic
.

.

.

flAV.JL

OJLr.

materials, ranging from gravels of harder materials such as cobbles
and pebbles of quartzite, flints, petrified wood, petrified Cretaceous
molluscs, silicified limestone, and some ironstone-sandstone
all
obviously transported at the time of much greater flow and volume
than today; thence through a progression of yellowbuff sands, tough
yellow-buff clays, red sandy clays, and grey-tan sands. The latter com
ponents represent varying degrees of carrying-capacity at the times of
deposition.
These sandy and sandy clay soils of the Quaternary alluvial forma
tions support a natural flora quite distinct from the surrounding areas,
especially featuring a great variety of oaks other than the live oak,
which is absent here. Since the terrace surfaces are so relatively level
and so deep in alluvial materials, large areas have been cleared and
intensive agriculture practiced—particularly peanuts, peach orchards,
and of late the many legumes for hay. Such denuding of the natural
cover has allowed in many places extensive wind and water erosion,
deflating the loose dry sand surfaces as much as three-to-five feet
piling up sand drifts along fences or against windbreaks of trees
causing erosion channels, gullies, and ravines of surprising develop
ment in the apparent period of only the last 60—1 00 years.
In previous studies (see writer’s pertinent Bibliography, plus
others), it has been observed that the Red River, the Sulphur River,
the Sabine, the Trinity, the Brazos, the Leon, the Lampasas. and even
the Colorado River all more-or-less exhibit the same general north
west-to-southeast pattern of drainage towards the Gulf. Their some
what parallel courses essentially cross the same series of formations.
It is therefore not so surprising that their alluvial terrace systems
appear to be quite comparable, even to elevations above stream-grade;
when their relative lithologic, paleontologic, and even archeologic con
tents and inclusions seem to match well at the different levels, the pre
viously suggested “correlations” deserve serious consideration (Slaugh
ter, etal., 1962, pp. 5—11; Crook and Harris 1957, pp. 37—54).
A common phenomenon among the terrace systems of these streams
is the difference above-and-below the crossing of the Balcones Fault
line. As specific examples, at Dallas on the Trinity to the northeast
of De Cordova, Waco on the Brazos downstream, and Austin on the
Colorado to the southwest
all at the cut-through of the softer
Austin Chalk
there are ‘well-developed 5-terrace sequences appar
ently dating back to the Early Pleistocene (Slaughter, et al., 1962).
These are most suggestive of the 5-terrace sequence of the Red River
so carefully studied and described in its middle reaches in Northern
Louisiana (Fisk, 1938 and 1940).
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

-

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

On the other hand, above the Balcones line, despite the depth of the
Bedrock valley-trench there appears to be only the last or latest two
terraces present (or preserved) from the standard sequence. The writer
has personally observed this situation upstream on all three major
forks of the Trinity; at the Acton Site subject of this paper, at the
Possum Kingdom Reservoir, and on the Clear Fork of the Brazos near
Abilene even further upstream (Crook, 1955); on the Leon upstream
at North Fort Hood; and on the Colorado (and its tributaries, the
Llano and San Saba) npstream near Brady and Goolbusk, and near
Junction and Menard. Quinn, when paleontologist for the Bureau of
Economic Geology for Texas and operating out of Austin, was ever
looking for extinct Late Pleistocene fossil bone occurrences; his field
of research was more often than not above the fault line to the north
and west, and he became so imprecsed with this almost universal cir
cumstance (though he was only interested in the higher or second
terrace where his specimens occurred), that he incorrectly ventured
a paper suggesting that ALL Texas river terraces were of Sangamon
Interglacial vintage.
Even today, in the confusion over the identification and division of
the Late Pleistocene, no one is quite sure about the last “Interglacial”
or “major interstadial”
but in Quinn’s time, the fauna was attrib
uted to “Sangamon.”
All of which suggests that the major stream-systems were present
upon the worn-down Tertiary surface of Texas before the start of the
Pleistocene uplift. Their courses were primarily across the vast Coastal
Plain, but their head-waters had at least incised across the soft Austin
Chalk and were nibbling into the Comanche series. Thus, with reju
venation by both uplift and increased precipitation, they were able to
completely record the progressive levels of cut-and-fill, even through
the Austin Chalk; and after perhaps a major cutting-period through
most of Pleistocene time across the Comanche series, were only able
to retain the Late Pleistocene despositions above the fault line, while
gnawing headward to this day into the Permian Basin and High Plains
formations.
The Acton archeological site in the De Cordova Bend area is located
in precisely such a region on the Brazos above the Balcones line, as
discussed above. As impressive as the valley-relief is, only the present
floodplain, Recent, and Late Pleistocene alluviations are preserved as
terrace remnants. They are however, as high and massive as their
conterparts in the complete total sequence downstream at Waco, and
almost completely identical as to sequence, Ethology, and inclusions.
Further upstream in this vein, the writer’s studies of such High
.

.

.

AG’l’OIN S1f1i

Plains headwater tributaries as Prairie Dog Fork at Lubbock and
and the creek-like source
Running Water Creek at Plainview
Mexico
have found no
New
Folsom,
near
Cimarron
stream of the
than the last
being
earlier
of
suggestive
evidence of any alluviation
preserve
they
While
epoch.
Recent
10,000 years, or essentially the
caliche
carries
the
massive
none
climatic differences vs. the present,
last
major
the
attributable
to
found downstream in terrace formations
is so
which
ago,
years
non-glacial interpluvial of some 25,000—40,000
they
bases
their
do
only
at
common to deposits of the period; indeed,
include a few terminal species of the Late Pleistocene fauna as fossils.
the last members of which seemingly completely disappeared between
10.000 and about 8,000 years ago.
It is within the topmost five feet of the highest terrace at Acton
that the archeological site occurs in p!ace. Whether exposed by exca
the materials appear to be consistently
vation, erosion, or deflation
associated with the ancient surface, and perhaps some inches into, of
and also occur upwards into the
the underlying red sandy clay
basal 18 inches or so of the over-lying tan-gray sands.
Based upon previous correlations, the Acton Site appears to be nearly
identical in context with the other river system terrace sequences. The
Recent. “overlay” of red sandy clay, followed by even later
late
tan-gray sands, on top of the latest sloped-off Pleistocene terrace de
posits is standard. The in-place position is precisely the same. Nowhere
is there positive evidence of anything but the existing fauna of the
last 8,000—10,000 years. And everywhere, including Acton, there is evi
dence of a naturally-buried Early Archaic human culture at this level;
the difference at Acton being only that while it includes all expectable
items of comparable types; there is indeed a higher (55%) occurrence
of Paleo-type projectile points vs. the usual (5—10%) of same in sim
ilar combination and contexts at Dallas and Waco, in preciely the
same geologic provenience (Crook and Harris, 1955).
Upon inspection, there is little doubt of the correspondence. A solu
tion is that the upper-middle reaches of the Brazos system were in
more direct contact at Acton with the High Plains-oriented Palco
hunters coming downstream into the Early Archaic areas about 8,000—
10,000 years ago, along the through-flowing Brazos. Neighboring
stream-systems such as the Leon River to the south, or the Trinity to
the north, received the High Plains “influence” to a lesser degree,
reflecting a much-reduced occurrence of such Paleo points at “contact.”
There is only one radiocarbon date available for this period, from the
basal 12 inches of the universal overlying tan-gray sands at Woods
Pit near Dallas on the Trinity, which falls right at ca. 6,000 years ago.
.

.

.

.

...

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

TiiXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Therefore, everything else must fall earlier (Crook and Harris, 1961)!
The surface occupation of the red sandy clay must have consumed
some extensive period, based upon the debris and many sites on all
such related stream systems. Site after site exhibits this same sequence
and occurrence. Based upon the Dallas-area Wood Pit date of ca.
6,000 B. P. for the lowest foot of the tan-gray sands (deposited 50—60
feet above present stream-grade), it is not unlikely that the sands repre
sent a warm-dry period of the last high sea level and alluvial deposition
connected with the theoretical Hypsi-Alti-Thermal period postulated
by various authorities from 6,500—4,500 years ago.
If so, there would be no “problem.”
1. The red clay surface period might easily correspond to the minor
Recent glacial readvarice recorded as the “Longdraw” in the U. S.
Rockies and the type-site Cochrane moraine below James Bay south
of the Hudson Bay embayment, already radiocarbon dated at ca. 6,800
B. P. This interruption may well have taken place in the period 7,500—
6,500 years ago.
2. Objects left on the red clay surface over an extended period
might penetrate into same by human activities such as fire-pit digging,
posthole digging, refuse pits, burials, etc.; and by non-human activities
such as erosional drop-down, gullies and ravines, root-action, gophertunnels, and tree-stumping.
3. Even so, such occurrences must be of an age of Ca. 6,500—9,500
years ago.
4. Likewise, the tan-gray sands period of deposition seems to fall
in the estimated 6,500—4,500 years ago period (Slaughter, et al., 1962).
5. By known radiocarbon dates, the Late-Paleo “Portales Complex”
in adjacent New Mexico is only ca. 6,000 years old (with questionable,
undistinguished fauna)
a number of the varied “Yuma” Paleo
sites on the High Plains range by radiocarbon dates from ca. 6,500 to
9,500 years ago
and by many radiocarbon datings, the “Early
Archaic” of the Midwest, Southeast, Mexico, Canada, and elsewhere
likewise range up to 11,000 years ago. A possible overlap and “contact”
is not at all difficult to imagine.
Acton seems to meet all the requirements to comply with the several
possibilities made possible by the above circumstance and its mixture
of inclusions. Its geologic provenience is strikingly identical to all
other known buried Archaic sites in the alluvial terraces of the Texas
rivers.
The Brazos River has been cutting deeply into the Comanche lime
stone from the De Cordova Bend dam location back upstream past the
Acton Site location since at least the inception of Pleistocene time
.

.

.

.

.

.

(Fig. 1 and 2). The valley impinges against an almost cliff-like wall
of same throughout the horseshoe-shaped “bend”
nearly west
below the Acton Site, south-southwest at the tip of the bend, and al
most east-southeast at the dam. The tops of the cliffs correspond to the
local uplands.
Inside the bend, like a peninsula pointed southward, lies a lower
high ground composed of the alluvial terrace sequence described,
dropping off in progressive slopes towards the river.
Basically, there is a limestone bedrock channel-cut of about 10—I S
feet deep in which the stream presently runs, braided here and there
at low water with sand-bars. Above this the floodplain deposits or T-O
terrace cap the limestone with about 10 feet of tan-gray sand; this
buried limestone surface apparently represents the base-level of the
last previous major valley-cut.
Where preserved, there is a T- 1 terrace with its surface some 10 feet
higher. It is composed of some 5 feet of tan-gray sand on top, with up
to 10 feet of red sandy clay beneath where exposures are available.
No definite human artifacts have come from this terrace as yet in the
Acton investigations, but there are numerous tiny flint flakes upon its
surface here and there that are quite suggestive of the typical debris
of late Neo-Indian arrowpoint manufacture and in sharp contrast with
the heavy rubble and flaked cobble debris of typical Archaic occupa
tions. The surface of the T-1 terraces of all Texas rivers and their
similar version of the tan-gray sands normally exhibit such Neo
Indian presence.
Above this is the T-2 terrace, comprising the bulk of the high ground
“peninsula” within the bend. At its highest it is approximately 70 feet
above present stream-grade, some 40 feet above the T-1 surface. On
the slopes, bedrock limestone is exposed for 20—25 feet above the T-1
surface, capped by 15—20 feet of alluvial materials. This outcrop of the
bedrock bears numerous seep springs from the groundwater flow pene
trating from the broad areas above and then following this resistant
formation to the escape point. The seep-level is so constant that willows
and cottonwoods are present even at such an altitude above the present
river.
It would appear that the top of this limestone exposure represents
the level of the next older major valley-cut. The alluviation that fol
lowecl laid down first a gravel formation as earlier briefly described,
of up to 10 feet in thickness, capped by a distinct cemented zone 12—18
inches thick. Where minor gravel operations have been initiated,
blocks of this cemented capping have been discarded on all sides. The
fragmentary and fossil inclusions of proboscidian tusks (mammoth or
.

.

.

CD

0
CD

9
C
CC
CC

C
CD
CC

C
CM

s:.
CD
0
CC
0
0

CM,

CD
CC
0
CD
CC
CC

CD
0
0
CC
CM

C

CD
CM

0

CC

CM
CD

-C

CC
0

S
CC

X13i)OS 7V)T

TOfW9TV cvyT.

FEET

T-I

T-O

20 FEET

TERRACE SYSTEM

30 FEET

SITE,

BRA ZOS

FIGURE

2. Idealized cross-section of the geology at the Acton archeological site. Straight-line connections of the columns indicate pres
erit terrace surfaces and slopes; dashed-lines illustrate buried Comanche series limestone Cuts and relief.

T-2 too

ACTON

U
U

56

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

mastodon?), camel, horse, and other bones and teeth leave little doubt
of the Late Pleistocene period of provenience
in common with al
most any other Texas river system T-2 terrace composition. Above this,
varying from exposure-to-exposure, especially as more sloped-off to
wards the valley by subsequent erosion or more fully preserved in
the higher parts of the terrace, lie 3 to 5 feet of yellow-buff sand; then
5 to 8 feet of yellow-buff clays including definite caliche nodular con
cretions; and above this, almost universally a late (actually T-1 age)
“veneer” of 3—S feet of red sandy clay overlain by 3—5 feet of tan-gray
sands.
It would seem that the T- 1 period of deposition was able to overflow
the T-2 terrace surface
at least at its maximum flooding period and
nearest the river where erosional slope-off was most pronounced
before finishing with a deeper deposit below as the T-1 basic fill. This
phenomenon is also in common with the other Texas river terrace
systems earlier discussed (Crook, 1961). The matrix involved is in all
respects identical with the red sandy clay and tan-gray sands below.
At the Acton archeological site itself, test excavations, plus erosion
and deflation due to the combined activities of agriculture, land-clear
ing, and shallow bull-dozing for gravel have produced the following
results:
1. In places, the original surface essentially persists; here the tangray sands are about 5 feet in thickness; excavations here produce
flakes and debris, plus some tools (including one Paleo-Indian type)
in the basal 12 to 18 inches of the sands. However, the real concentra
tion of artifacts, plus all expectable Archaic types and many Paleo
Indian projectile points, appear to be concentrated just above the
underlying red clay surface and to a slight extent into it. Such a situa
tion is quite comparable to the other Texas terrace systems.
2. Where erosion of wind-deflation has reduced the tan-gray sands
cover to the bare red sandy clay surface, or to within a few inches of
same, the lowering-action of the sands
to join the already known
concentration essentially of or on the red clay surface. has produced
truly massive accumulations. Nonetheless, these are remarkably stand
ard and comparable to the excavated materials, hence no serious ques
tions as to their origin.
3. Where deflation has piled up the surface tan-gray sands against
wind-breaks of one kind or another, test excavations have revealed a
tan-gray sand thickness of up to nine feet deep above the red clay.
Here, the top 4—S feet have been devoid of debris
at such depth,
peach seeds and bits of barbed-wire (rusted) of very recent occurrence
.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

57

A(TOI’. SITE

are encountered
and below, the original standard sequence as in
number 1 above.
In all areas at Acton, modern plow-zone depth in obvious. Where
the sands are present, there is a 6—9 inch light-colored, dry zone; where
the sands are shallow, or the red clay exposed, there is either a mixed
sand-and-clay matrix or there are visible plow-grooves in the surface
of the red clay. There are no gopher or mole tunnellings in the tena
cious, tough, red sandy clay! (Plenty, in places, in the overlying tangray sands where they occur in depth).
.

.

.

PALEO POINTS
Typologically speaking 77 of the dart points from the Acton Site
exhibit attributes common to Paleo-Indian projectile points. Of this
number 50 can be classified as presently recognized types and subtypes
in the Plainview, Plainview golondrina, Meserve, Angostura and San
Patrice categories.
Plainview Points
Some 30 specimens are classified as Plainview and Plainview go/on
drina. This group is primarily composed of basal fragments but in
cludes two complete points and two medial-distal sections of points.
All of the bases present are concave. The lateral outlines of these points
can be described as essentially parallel-sided with minor variations
including slightly expanded midsections and slightly expanded bases,
or both. The edges of the distal ends or tips of the specimens are convex.
Although the general classification is based on a sum of attributes,
to facilitate description, the Plainview points have been divided into
four subgroups or forms, wherein similarities in the lateral outlines of
the proximal sections starting at the base are the basis for selective
grouping. The variation in proximal form is often very slight but is
utilized primarily because basal fragments predominate This range of
variation is recognized within Plainview as described by Krieger
(1947: 939—942) and Suhm, Krieger and Jeiks (1954: 472). Our par
ticular approach is adapted from that used by Baker, Campbell, and
Evans (1957: 3—7) in describing the large series of Plainview points
from the Nall site The four forms are 1 Points with lateral edges
essentially straight and parallel at the base (5 specimens); 2. Points
with lateral edges slightly converging for a short distance above the
base then becoming straight and parallel (1 specimen); 3. Points with
the lateral edges slightly converging above the base then turning out
ward in a smooth arc (5 specimens); 4. Points with the lateral edges

5

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

essentially straight but slightly diverging from the basal corners (10
specimens).
Form 1. (Fig. 3, a and e) One specimen (Fig. 3, a) is complete but
quite short. The length-width ratio is less than 2 to 1 and contrasts

U
C

b

.—l.

e

h

.1.
FIGURE

variant.

m
O

1

2cm.

3. a—k, and n, Plainview points; 1 and m, Plainview-like; o Plainview

59
with the 3 or 4 to 1 ratio reported for the type
site specimens (Krieger,
1947: 942). Examination of secondary flaking
and longitudinal sec
tion makes it probable this specimen has been
re-pointed. All speci
mens are smoothed in the basal concavity
and on the lateral edges.
One specimen also shows double lateral-medial
basal facets (Epstein,
1963b:189). The mean basal concavity dept
h is 3 mm. (range 1—5
mm.). (Approximate measurements are mad
e where damage is light.)
Mean basal width is 21 mm. (range 20—23
mm.). Mean maximum
thickness is 7 mm. on two specimens. Leng
th of the repointed speci
men (Fig. 3, a) is 40 mm.
Form 2. Form 2 points are slightly expanded
at the base. There is
one specimen (Fig. 3, h) in this form;
broken distally. The lower
lateral edges and basal concavity are smoothe
d. Depth of basal con
cavity, 4 miri.; maximum width is at the
base, 24 mm.; maximum
thickness is 5.8 mm.
Form 3. (Fig. 3, f and g) Form 3 points
are slightly constricted
between base and mid-section. Five basal secti
ons are in form 3; none
are complete through the mid-section. All
show fine bifacial lateral
edge retouch and smoothing of the lower later
al edges and basal con
cavities. The mean basal concavity depth is 2.5
mm. (range 2—3 mm.);
mean basal width 20 mm. (range 18—21 mm.
).
Form 4. (Fig. 3, d, j and n) Form 4 points are
slightly contracted
at the base. None of the ten specimens in this
form are complete. Two
specimens are distally modified. One (Fig. 3,
d) has a convex-bit (end
scraper form) and one (Fig. 3, j) a straight-b
it (gouge form). The
latter also has one lateral edge removed by
a proximal-distal blow
(Epstein, 1963b: 189). All lower lateral edge
s are smoothed but four
specimens are not noticeably smoothed in the
basal concavity. Mean
basal concavity depth on nine specimens is 3 mm.
(range 2—5 mm.).
Mean basal width on eight specimens is 20 mm.
(range 17—22 mm.).
Two distinctive specimens are classified as Plain
view despite their
lack of basal sections. Both have lower later
al edge smoothing. The
lateral edges are approximately straight and
parallel. Maximum
widths are 21.7 mm. (Fig. 3, k) and 24 mm.
Respective maximum
thicknesses are 6.6 mm. and 7.0 mm.
Using a discussion by Wormington (1957: 103—1
08) as guidance
the general flaking technique on the Plainview
and other early points
from this site can best be characterized as skill
ful but irregular in
pattern. Most specimens of all types show roug
hly parallel horizontal
to irregular shallow flaking. Some elements of
the more classic tech
niques are pre’sent but seldom appear to be emp
loyed systematically
on both faces of a given point. Since basal fragm
ents are predominant,

60

TEXAS ARCHE0LOG1GAi.

i

rely hampered as
a truly accurate assessment of overall flaking is seve
Table 4, 149).
evidenced at the Plainview type site (Krieger, 1947:
the removal
Basal thinning is bifacial and usually accomplished by
five short retouch
of one to three major longitudinal flakes and two to
the tweny-one
flakes from the basal curve upward. On seventeen of
ing flakes is 10 mm.
Plainview points one or more of the major thinn
e fractures and
or over in length. Occasionally these show strong hing
but the over all
seem indistinguishable from some on Clovis points
uced this effect
impression is that bold thinning has probably prod
ively narrow and
fortuitously. Normally the flute-like scars are relat
shallow in comparison to Clovis.
mes fine. Al
Bifacial lateral edge retouch is common and someti
rve of lower
t
recu
sligh
a
show
ens
though many Acton Site specim
ing.
edges this cannot be attributed to excessive edge smooth
are some
there
often
s
erou
num
are
In sites where Plainview points
ger,
(Krie
site
type
the
for
rted
specimens below the size range repo
onally
Occasi
utes.
attrib
in
view
1947: 939—942) but otherwise Plain
in some dimensions
such specimens intergrade in basal outline and
ger, Albritton and
Krie
f,
ndor
with the proposed “Midland” type (We
67). Recently,
1959:
ger,
Krie
Stewart, 1955: 45—49; Wendorf and
Blame (1968:
by
rted
repo
supplemental and additional type data are
st above mid
wide
lly
usua
1—11). Apparently “Midland” points are
short basal
but
ction,
section and Plainview points at 01 below mid-se
er, when
howev
lly,
Usua
n.
fragments often do not reveal this distinctio
view
Plain
given
a
on
the above degree of intergrading has occurred
er
thinn
h
muc
be
will
point (Fig. 3, f) a typical “Midland” specimen
bit
exhi
will
also
It
and flatter in cross section at any comparable point.
bifacial edge retouch
the very fine, regular, relatively short and steep
Plainview.
(Blame, 1968, Fig. 1) more common to Folsom than
those for the
ma
Among published reports from Texas and Oklaho
), Granite
1957
al.,
Plainview Site (Krieger, 1947), Nail Site (Baker et
e and
(Dibbl
Site
ter
Beach Site (Crawford, 1965), and Bonfire Shel
uate
adeq
l
and
detai
Lorrain, 1968) contain both the morphological
points.
early
sampling for useful comparison with Acton Site
Plainview golondrina
spond in all
There are seven specimens which completely corre
by Johnson
ed
propos
ty
a
varie
ndrin
observable attributes with the golo
one basal
of
end
the
for
except
t
(1964: 46—52). One (Fig. 3, b) is intac
3, 1)
(Fig.
one
ents;
fragm
corner or “ear”. Five specimens are basal
last
The
end.
l
dista
the
across
neatly reworked as a convex bit scraper
in
well
so
onds
corresp
h
whic
specimen is a very small basal fragment

JLN

Lt.

61
every detail within this category that confident assign
ment is made.
All specimens are smoothed on the lower lateral edges
and in the basal
concavity. The length of the complete specimen (Fig. 3,
b) is 40 mm.
(possibly re-worked in distal portion). Its maximum
thickness is 7.3
mm.; mean basal concavity depth on six specimens is
5 mm. (range
4—6 mm.). Mean basal width on five specimens is 24
mm. (range
22—27 mm.).
Plainview-like and Altered Plainview
All four specimens in this group have concave basal
edges. All are
bifacially thinned from the basal edge with one or both faces
showing
flake scars typical of the Plainview series basal thinnin
g in this site.
The first two have smoothed basal curves. Both appear compl
etely
bifacially reworked above this area and retain only
a remnant of
smoothed lower lateral edge. One (Fig. 3, c) remains a project
ile point
after irregular reworking but the other is too short to assess.
The last two (Fig. 3, 1 and m) are not smoothed in basal curve
or
lateral edges. In the proximal section lateral edges are
essentially
straight and parallel but they curve inward abruptly in the
mid-section
and the profile here is asymmetrical. Cross sections of the broken
distal
ends are essentially lenticular with steep bifacial lateral-medial
flaking.
These probably were drills or perforators and similar specim
ens occur
on sites with reasonably large Plainview assemblages (Baker
et al.,
1957; Alexander, 1963; Crawford, 1965).
Plainview Variant
This one point (Fig. 3, o) strongly resembles Plainview
but has
edges beveled and serrated, on the right. One lower lateral
edge has
been removed by a proximal-distal blow. The shape
is essentially
straight and parallel-sided with short convex-sided tip.
The lower
lateral edge present and the basal concavity are smoothed. Bifacia
l
basal thinning consists of removal of one major central flake
and two
or three short retouch flakes. General flaking pattern is truly
irregular.
Length is 51.7 mm. Maximum thickness is 6.0 mm.
Meserve
There are thirteen specimens in this series; none complete. All
are
beveled on the right edge of each face (all specimens oriente
d with
tip up) and the general flaking pattern is irregular to roughl paralle
y
l.
Two specimens possibly were modified into perforators or drills instead
of points, (Fig. 4, band e).
The first four (Fig. 4, a, c, and e) specimens have straight, bifacia
lly

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

62

•ø.

C

a

I p.,
g

o

2cm.
I
FIGUSE 4. a—f, and h, Meserve points; g Meserve variant.
I

i
I

retouched and smoothed lower lateral edges. On two, (Fig. 4, a and e)
these edges are parallel from the basal corners (form 1) and on the
other two (Fig. 4, c) expand very slightly (form 4). All four have
smoothed basal concavities; two (Fig. 4, a, and e) exhibit double
lateral-medial proximal facets (Epstein, 1963b: 189). Bifacial basal
thinning appears typical of Plainview in this site. Only one point
(Fig. 4, a) displays irregular edge flaking and asymmetry in the
beveled portion to a degree that contrasts obviously with the well
formed base. Mean maximum thickness is 6.6 mm. (range 5.8—7.3
mm.); mean maximum basal width on three specimens is 21.2 mm.
(range 20.5—21.8mm.).
The next three specimens have straight to convex smoothed lower
lateral edges. One is broken across the lower base; the other two have
smoothed concave bases. On all three the lateral edges diverge too
strongly from the base to strictly be classified as Plainview in basal
outline. All Acton Site Plainview-like specimens which would exceed
a 3 mm. difference between basal and maximum width (Krieger, 1947:

ACTON SITE

63

939) presently are not classified as Plainview. Basal thinning is bifacial
on two of these points. Each has one major thinning flake scar on one
face and short multiple thinning scars on the other face. Although all
would appear to have approximately similar basal widths, the only
measurable base (Fig. 4, b) is 16mm. wide.
The eighth specimen (Fig. 4, d) has been distally modified into a
convex bit scraper form. The angular basal concavity is not typical of
Plainview nor is the essentially flat surface of one face. The base was
bifacially thinned by removing one central conchoidal flake from each
face and three or four shorter retouch flakes. Lower lateral edge re
touch is unifacial on alternate right edges. These edges and the basal
concavity are smoothed. The lower lateral edges diverge from the
basal corners. Basal width is 24.6 mm.
The next four specimens closely resemble each other but contrast
with Plainview and the rest of the Acton Site points. None of them
retain lower lateral edges. On two points (Fig. 4, f) these have been
removed by proximal-distal blows (Epstein, 1963b: 189). What re
mains of their basal concavities is smoothed. The third specimen is a
portion of mid-section which retains the central basal thinning flake
scars and a smoothed portion of lateral edge. The opposite edge shows
a distal-proximal burin facet (Epstein, 1963b: 187). The fourth is a
distal end. These four fragments are essentially flat to only slightly
convex across the face and contrast sharply with most Plainview speci
mens in that respect. Beveling is short, steep and angular, producing
a straight-sided rhomboidal cross section. Bifacial basal thinning scars
indicate one to three major central flakes were removed from three
specimens. All four remarkably match corresponding sections of a
plastic cast of Specimen X illustrated by Suhm et al., (1954, Plate
104). They also match a similar specimen in the R. K. Harris collec
tion from Lamar County, Texas. Mean maximum thickness is 6.9 mm.
(range 6.8—7.0 mm.).
The last point (Fig. 4, h) has been ground in the basal concavity
but lateral edges have been removed by proximal-distal blows (Ep
stein, 1963b: 189). It is not clearly beveled but extensive secondary
and retouch flaking is evident on the right edge. Basal thinning is bi
facial with one flute-like central scar and two shorter, and flanking,
secondary flake scars on each face.
It is quite possible that some of the shorter basal portions classified
under Plainview and Plainview golondrina may have been beveled in
the missing distal sections. The latter variety, especially, often has
basal attributes comparable to the beveled points which do not appear
to be reworked Plainviews.

lEXAS AEU±IEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

It is interesting that six points in the “Meserve” category exhibit
burin facets. Epstein’s (1963b: 192) observation of the high proportion
of such facets on “Meserve” type points as compared with other Paleo
Indian types is supported by the situation at Acton.
In the original definition by Davis (Bell and Hall, 1953: 6—7) the
“Meserve” type included both reworked Plainview points and points
which may have been reworked. Subsequently Suhm and Jelks (1962:
217) suggested that two types may be represented. We tend to concur
in the latter. Unfortunately adequate objective data to enable reliable
distinction between the two or more types are lacking. Essentially we
cannot reliably establish whether or not the beveling was done by the
original makers or their contemporaries. We suspect it usually was;
sometimes as part of the original design and sometimes as a modifica
tion or repair on Plainview points.
Meserve Variant
This one specimen (Fig. 4, g) has distal edges that are steeply
beveled to the right and serrated like Dalton. General face flaking pat
tern is irregular on one face and oblique on the other. Lower lateral
edges are essentially parallel, bifacially retouched and smoothed. Bi
facial basal thinning was done by removing seven or eight short flakes
to form a steep bevel on one face. The opposite face was thinned by
removing two longer central flakes and four short retouch flakes. The
basal edge is slightly convex and not smoothed. Length 52.0 mm.;
basal width 22.3 nun.; thickness 7.5 rum.
Scottsbluff
Two medial-distal sections (Fig. 5, b and d) are classified as Scotts
bluff (Suhm and Jeiks, 1962). Both exhibit the thick beautifully sym
metrical cross section distinctive in this type. Lateral edges are gently
convex in the manner of Scottsbluff I (Wormington, 1957, Fig. 70)
and are bifacially edge retouched. Similar but complete points from
N. Central Texas are illustrated by Crook and Harris (1955, Plate 12).
One Acton specimen (Fig. 5, b) has received a new tip and base at a
much later time as evidenced by partial removal of otherwise uni
formly heavy patina. Both specimens are skillfully flaked in a some
what irregular pattern.
San Patrice
One San Patrice point (Fig. 5, c) was found at the Acton Site. This
specimen appears to be the yery short stemmed variety described and
illustrated by Webb (1946, Plate 1, #11, #13) and subsequently

03

ACT0N SITE

proposed by Duffield (1963: 91) as the st. johns variety of San Patrice.
Webb (1960: 3.41) cites R. K. Harris concerning a radiocarbon dating
of 5945 ± 200 B. P. for a Carroliton Focus site which contained two
San Patrice points.
Angostura
Four points (illustrated by Fig. 5, a and e) fit the type description
(Suhm etai., 1954) as it is limited to Texas specimens. One asymmetri
cal specimen appears entirely reworked above the basal portion and
one is badly spalled, probably by thermal action. Bases are straight to
slightly concave and three are smoothed on the basal edge. Lateral
edges are smoothed on all four and curve inward below the mid-section
on three. One distal section (Fig. 5, e) is alternately beveled to the

I

b

d

e

o
FIGURE

f
I

2cm.

5. a and e, Angostura; b and d. Scottsbluff; c, San Patrice; f. Untyped.

66

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

right in a contrasting rough and irregular fashion that suggests bevel
ing was not part of the original plan. General flaking pattern is
irregular to roughly parallel. Except for the one re-worked specimen
all are slightly broken at the distal end. Mean basal width 15.5 mm.
18.4mm.). Two measurable points are 22.5 mm. and
(range 14.5
23.4 mm. wide at the widest point. Maximum thickness of one is
8.5 mm.
One specimen (Fig. 5, e) has a deposit of white stained red clay
tightly adhering to one surface. This deposit appears indicative of long
and direct contact with the basic red clay. In situ flakes showing such
a limey deposit invariably were found directly on the red clay in
moist situations.
Lerma-like
This proximal fragment has lateral edges which expand rapidly
from the narrow and slightly convex basal end. Lateral edges are
smoothed and bifacially retouched. One face shows short lateral-medial
flaking forming a definite medial ridge.
Although a fragmentary specimen, the principal contrast with the
type description (Suhm et al., 1954) lies in the smoothed edges of this
specimen. Epstein (1 963a 117) reports Lerma points and Clear Fork
gouges from Period 1 at Damp Cave and suggests a possible starting
date of B.C. 7000 for this period.
At the Devils Mouth Site Johnson (1964: 83) describes a consecu
tive three stratum sequence in which a Lerma-like point follows Plainview goloncirina and precedes Angostura. Johnson (ibid.: 91) as
signs all three to a late Paleo-Indian time horizon, about 6000 B.C.
(ibid.: 97).
Untyped Paleo-Indian points
There are twenty untyped specimens which show stylistic attributes
common to Paleo-Indian points. Two specimens are essentially com
plete, eleven are basal fragments and seven are mid-section and tip
fragments.
Six of the basal sections, including the two points, show the usual
Plainview attributes previously described. However, their lower lateral
edges diverge from the basal corners to a greater degree than presently
allowable for Plainview. The larger point (Fig. 5, f) also twists grad
ually to the left from the basal corners to the tip. This series could
represent a continuum with Plainview.
The remaining seven fragments with some part of the basal portion

b7

intact vary from flaring through straight to slightly contrac
ted at the
base. All show lateral and/or basal concavity smooth
ing and longi
tudinal thinning.
Two of the medial-distal sections are beveled to the right
and one of
these is almost a carbon copy of the corresponding
area of (Fig. 3, o)
the Plainview variant. Two more of these specimens
have been care
fully modified on one end. One has a convex-bit scraper
edge and one
a concave-bit gouge edge. Both are skillfully flaked and
probably were
originally Paleo-Indian in style and modified by the origina
l makers.
Such modifications on typeable points at the Acton Site
are confined to
the Paleo-Indian points. All of the above and the
remaining three
specimens show flaking and shape in outline and cross-s
ection that are
more common to early points from this site.
Data from mapping.
One Plainview point and one Angostura point were
found six feet
apart. Subsequent testing revealed no other diagnostic
artifacts or
lithic concentration remaining in the immediate vicinity.
Plowing had
reached into dense clay here.
One group of five points could be enclosed in a circle
42 feet in
diameter. These were an end scraper on a distal Paleo
fragment, a
Plainview golondrina, an untyped but like Plainview,
an Angostura
and a second Plainview golondrina. Again testing
disclosed plow
disturbed dense red clay and no other diagnostic
artifacts or lithic
concentration remaining.
The balance of the recorded points were 24 or more
feet apart.
Two parts of the same Plainview point (Fig. 3, n)
were found
313½ feet apart. One part is slightly patinated but the other
is well
patinated. One section was recovered downslope where
there is a clay
and sand mixture plow zone remaining and the other
was found
upslope on dense red clay where the sand is now gone.
From plotting points on a map of the site, no clustering
of typeable
points is recognized.
Lithic sources
Virtually all of the collected lithic material appears
similar to that
found in local river cobbles and sandstone exposures.
Nine of the early
points are not made from strictly local material. Six
of these are made
from the blue-gray flint common to central Texas.
The nearest good
source we know of is about 75 miles south of the Acton
Site and on the
Leon River. No alibates material was found.

1.XAS AItLIiJULOGLUAL SOGIE’!’ Y

Early point specimens from
non-local material.
Plainview
Plainviewgolondrina
Meserve
Meserve variant
Scottsbluff
Angostura
Unclassified

1
2
1
1
1
1
2

Presumed source.
?
C. Tx.
C. Tx.
C. Tx.
?
?
C. Tx.

Derived chronology
The temporal estimates for the initial occupation at the Acton Site
are largely inferred from the more recent c-I 4 data concerning Plainview points in Texas sites. James H. Word (personal communication)
reports C-14 dates of 6820—7 100 B.C. and 6850—7310 B.C. (TX 128
and TX 129, Tamers et aL, 1964) for the Baker Shelter in Val Verde
County. At Bonfire Shelter in Comstock County (Dibble and Lorrain,
1968, 33) th edate is 10,230 ± 160 years (TX 153, Pearson et al.,
1965). Willey (1966: 46) cites Agogino concerning a C-14 date of
7320 B.C. for a Plainview-Meserve layer in a Brazos River shelter near
Waco, Texas. The latter date appears especially pertinent since the
Acton Site is approximately 65 miles above Waco on the same river.
Estimates for the general terminating dates for Plainview have been
altered by other data accumulated since 1954. Currently, Story
(Suhm) suspects that about 6,000 B.C. may be a more accurate termi
nal date for Texas specimens (personal communication).
It would appear that, stylistically, the Acton Site Plainview points
would represent an initial late Paleo-Indian occupation and that,
chronologically, this occupation roughly should date from 6,000 to
7,000 B.C.
The balance of the early point types from Acton probably are not
yet sufficiently defined in chronological range to support any further
intrasite refinement of priority between types. It is entirely possible
that some are essentially contemporaneous at Acton. Most would
seem to terminate during the early Archaic in Texas. The youngest of
these may be San Patrice which Webb (1946: 15—17) believed could
extend into a comparatively late Archaic horizon in Louisiana.
Functional Discussion
No limited functional role can be established for the Acton Site
early points. Such points usually are held to represent specialized
big game hunting in the late-Pleistocene, since they are found with

AU1Oi’ 11t.

the remains of extinct mega-fauna or in corresponding stratigraphic
situations. At the Acton Site apparently there was no preservation of
any kind of vertebrate remains and the availability of big game is not
established. There are some indications that any presumed big game
orientation is, at least, undergoing change. The noted skillful modifica
tion of early style points into special end scraper and gouge forms
could indicate this changing orientation. Since these alterations were
confined to the early points they appear to be a contemporary activity
and contrast with general high plains Paleo-Indian practice. The maxi
mum use of local lithic sources of mediocre quality apparently is not a
common trait of the earlier western Paleo-Indian tradition, particu
larly when select flint sources were available within reasonable
distances.
The concentration of such a large number of early points in a limited
area is uncommon. A kill-site can show a similar concentration but
there is nothing recognizable in a terrain-oriented sense to suggest this
possibility. There would, however, appear to be a repeated use of a
limited area predicated on camping and refurbishing activity. A high
proportion of basal fragments is generally held to indicate a re-hafting
(camp) function.
In total these indications seem to point toward an exploitation of
local environment that is more sedentary in nature than is normally
expected from big game hunting Paleo-Indians. They quite possibly
indicate an adaptation to changing, or changed, food source and en
vironment or economic pattern.
ARCHAIC POINTS
This class of artifact is usually referred to as a dart point because of
its weight and length—thus, probably it was used with the throwing
stick or atlati. These dart points are considerably heavier than the
arrow points used with the bow and arrow, and are made mostly by
percussion chipping. Some overlapping of size takes place between the
dart and arrow points; however, the arrow points which are usually
small, thin, and light, are made by pressure flaking. Some of the small
dart points found with arrow points were probably used on arrow
shafts, thus making it difficult to establish exact criteria.
The term “body” will be used in this section, instead of “blade”—
to refer to that part of the projectile point between the tip or distal end.
and the stem.
The analysis of the archaic dart points from the Acton Site shows
the presence of both early Archaic and late Archaic activity. A total
of 75 dart points are in the collection. Of these 75 specimens, 26 speci-

F

TEXAS

70

AMGkIEULUI1i..nL,

UL.I.I

leaving
mens are broken to the extent that they cannot be typed—thus
ens, 34
specim
49 specimens that can be typed, or discussed. Of the 49
ens
specim
15
specimens appear to belong to the early Archaic, and
be
will
belong to the late Archaic. The early and late Archaic types
als
materi
discussed separately. All Archaic specimens are made from
Table I
that can be found locally on the terraces of the Brazos River.
gives a breakdown of the dart points by types.
EARLY ARCHAIC POINTS

types,
The 34 specimens in this group can be broken down into 9
”
“varia.
and 2 specimens will be discussed under
Bulverde (3 specimens, Fig. 6, a)
,
This type fits the description given in the Texas Handbook (Suhm
Site
Acton
the
from
ens
Krieger and Je]ks, 1954: 404). Two specim
have slightly smoothed lateral edges and bases of the stem.

a

f

I’

e

Ii

o

i

2cm.

H

dale; d, Peder
FIGURx 6. Early Archaic points: a, Bulverde; b, Dallas; c, Martin
Leaf.
er
Wheel
Dan;
iton;
i,
Carrol
;
h,
j,
nales; e. Nolan; f, Varia; g, Travis

TABLE 1
Archaic projectile point types
Early Archaic Dart Points
Bulverde
Carroilton
Dallas
Darl
Martindale
Nolan
Pedernales
Travis
Wheeler Leaf
Varia
Total
Late Archaic Dart Points
Edgewood
Evans (variant)
Fairland
Gary
Godley
Palmillas
Yarbrough
Total
Total Archaic Projectile Point Types Classified

3
2
2
12
2
3
S
1
2
2
34

3
1
1
3
1
I
5
15
49

Carroliton (2 specimens, Fig. 6, h)
This Carroilton Focus type is described in Special Bulletin No. 1,
Oklahoma Anthropological Society (Bell, 1958: 12). Both specimens
of this type from Acton have smoothing of the lateral edges and bases
of the stem.’
Dallas (2 specimens, Fig. 6, b)
This Carroliton Focus Type is described in Special Bulletin No. 2,
Oklahoma Anthropological Society (Bell, 1960: 24). Both specimens
from Acton have smoothed stems and bases.
Darl (12 specimens, Fig. 6, i)
A description of this type is found in the Texas Handbook (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 414). The type is described as having the lateral edges of
1 For all descriptions of .the Carrollton and Elam Foci Type points, refer
to the
Oklahoma Handbooks, as the Texas Handbooks do not always have as accurate
descriptions and illustrations.

12

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

the stem “sometimes smoothed.” Nine of the 12 specimens (75%)
from Acton have smooth lateral edges or bases. In the Texas Hand
book, the estimated age is possibly from about the time of Christ to
1000 A.D. The high percentage of smoothed bases and lateral edges at
Acton would seem to place this type in early Archaic. Also, the Darl
Type occurs in the Carrollton Focus, in small numbers, probably as
trade points (see two C-14 dates under Netsinkers in this paper).
Martindale (2 specimens, Fig. 6, c)
A description of this type is found in the Texas Handbook (Suhm,
etal., 1954: 446).
Nolan (3 specimens, Fig. 6, e)
A description of this type is found in the Texas Handbook (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 458). In this description, they do not mention smoothing
of the lateral edges of this type. Two of the specimens have some
smoothing of the lateral edges.
Pedernales (5 specimens, Fig. 6, d)
The description of this type is found in the Texas Handbook (Suhm,
et aL, 1954: 468). In this description, they state that the stem of this
type is rarely ever smoothed. Three of the 5 specimens from Acton
have smoothed lateral edges, and two of these have smoothed bases.
Travis (1 specimen, Fig. 6, g)
A description of this type is given in the Texas Handbook (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 484). The one specimen from Acton fits the description.
Wheeler Leaf (2 specimens, Fig. 6, j)
This type occurs in the Carroilton Focus of the Trinity Aspect,
ranking third in percentage in point types of this focus (Crook and
Harris, 1954: 3). The body is usually lon.g and narrow, and there is
no stem. The base is sometimes straight, at other times, convex or
concave. Where bifacing has not been completed, the bulb of per
cussion may still be faintly seen on some specimens. Most of these
pieces appear to be made from blades. Chipping is sometimes fine
pressure flaking, resembling Paleo flaking, but on some specimens
only percussion flaking is present. Many specimens have flaws develop
during chipping—thus causing the piece to be abandoned. It is the
opinion of Crook and Harris that this type is probably a preform for
making either Paleo or Archaic points. The illustrated specimen (Fig.
6, j) from Acton appears to be an unfinished Paleo point in which a

flL.ISJN

J1Th

flaw developed near the distal end. There is some small evidence of
smoothing of the lateral edges near the base.
Varia (2 specimens, Fig. 6, f)
These two specimens are very, very similar, and cannot be placed in
any known type. The body of these points is triangular, with straight
to slightly convex edges between the distal end and the shoulders.
The shoulders are very weak. The stem, which is about 1/3 the length
of the entire point, has slightly concave lateral edges, which have been
smoothed. The bases are concave. Both specimens have some fine
pressure flaking, resembling Paleo flaking, in some areas. In other
areas some percussion flaking is present. On both specimens, the edges
of the body are serrated. The maximum length of the two specimens
is about 50 mm., and the maximum width is 22 mm. LeRoy Johnson
(1964: Fig. 17, J) illustrates a specimen which he calls a “miscellane
ous Paleo-Indian point.” The two specimens from Acton somewhat
resemble his specimen, but there are some differences. Until more
specimens of this type are found in situ, it is not clear whether the
point belongs to the Paleo or Archaic period.
The above named specimens are types found in the Edwards Plateau
Aspect, Archaic Stage and the Carroilton Focus, Trinity Aspect. Timewise, they seem to be dated around 4000 to 3000 B.C. and fit well with
the two C- 14 dates for Carrollton Focus discussed in this paper, under
Netsinkers or Atlati weights.
LATE ARCHAIC POINTS

Fifteen specimens from Acton seem to belong to the late Archaic
period. These dart point types are discussed below.
Edgewood (3 specimens, Fig. 7, a)
These specimens fit the descriptions given in the Texas Handbook
(Suhm,etal., 1954: 418).
Evans-variant (1 specimen, Fig. 7, b)
This specimen is a variant of the Evans point found in Late Archaic
Sites in Louisiana (H. F. Gregory, personal communication 1968).
The Evans type has been described by Ford and Webb (1956: 64).
The difference between the description by Ford and Webb, and this
variant, is in the base. This variant has one or two flakes removed
across the base—from each side.

I

-r

LlXAS Ak((LEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

a

C

b

e

0

I

2cm.
9

7. Late Archaic points: a, Edgewood; b, Evans-variant; c, Gary; d, Fairland; e, Godley; f, Palmillas; g, Yarbrough.

FIGURE

Fairland (1 specimen, Fig. 7, d)
A description of this type is given in the Texas Handbook (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 424). In the handbook, no mention is made of beveling
the stem. On the Acton specimen however, the stem is beveled in the
same way as the Nolan Type.
Gary (3 specimens, Fig. 7, c)
A description of this type is given in the Texas Handbook (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 430). The specimens from Acton fit well within the type.
Godley (1 specimen, Fig. 7, e)
A description of this type is given in The Kyle Site report (Jelks,
1962: 40). The specimen from Acton fits the description.
Palmillas (1 specimen, Fig. 7, f)
A description of this type is given in the Texas Handbook (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 462), and the specimen from Acton is within the type
range.

75

ACTON SITE

Yarbrough (5 specimens, Fig. 7, g)
A description of this type is given in the Texas Handbook (Suhm,
et ci., 1954), and the specimens from Acton fit well within the
description.
All of the specimens in the Acton Site, belonging to Late Archaic,
appear to have been in use from roughly 1000 B.C. to around 500 A.D.
It is entirely possible that some of these Late Archaic tool types may
have also extended into the Neo-American period; however, only
further excavation can determine this fact.
Judging from the scarcity of certain projectile point types, and
other diagnostic tools such as small end-scrapers. drills or perforators,
occupation during the Late Archaic period was much lighter than the
preceding Early Archaic period.
NEO-AMERICAN POINTS
A total of 10 specimens of this type of projectile point have been
recovered from the Acton Site. Five of the 10 specimens can be typed.
The other 5 specimens are too fragmentary to be typed. As a group,
the arrow points are relatively small and thin, with pointed distal ends,
and well defined stems. They are all made from local cherts and flints
found along the Brazos River. Based primarily on variations in outline,
the five tvpeable specimens are grouped into three well known types:
Clifton, Perdiz and Scallorn, all of which are usually found in Neo
American Sites.
Cliffton (1 specimen)
This one specimen has a triangular body with convex lateral edges,
and a contracting stem. A small part of the distal end is broken off,
but the length was probably about 30 mm. The maximum width is
20 mm., and the stem length is 3 mm. These dimensions fit well within
the Clifton Type (Suhm, et ci., 1954: 496, Plate 127 D and E).
Perdiz (2 specimens)
This type has contracting stems and triangular bodies, with straight
to slightly concave lateral edges. The shoulders are prominent with
sharp barbs. The maximum length of 30 mm. and the maximum width
of 21 mm. fit well within this type (Suhm, et ai., 1954: 504, Plate
131 C-E).
Scallorn (2 specimens)
Each of these specimens has an expanding short stem, and a some-

76

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

what long, triangular body, with slightly concave lateral edges. Small,
fine serrations occur along the lateral edges. The maximum length of
33 mm. and maximum width of 19 mm. of the specim€ns fits well
within this type (Suhm, et al., 1954: 506, Plate 132 A-C).
The number of specimens of arrow points found at the Acton Site is
very low, and no other tools of the Neo-American period have been
found. This would indicate that during the Neo-American period, this
site had little or no occupation. In many of the sandy fields along the
Brazos River, one may find occasional arrow points probably lost in
hunting, with no signs however, of a village site in the area of the finds.
OTHER ARTIFACTS OF FLAKED STONE
Tools other than projectile points do not offer much material for
comparison and discussion since they have not been studied syste
matically by more than a very few workers in this part of North
America. There is such a confusion in the terminology of scrapers and
bifaces as well as some other tools that we have adopted a slightly
modified European system. We see no advantages to the outmoded
local systems that employ such terminology as “scraper type D-2” or
“Jonesville knife.” We deplore the setting up of new typological
systems or names based on small collections and highly recommend
the use of this system which is in use in most of the world outside of
the United States.
TOOL LIST

Paleo points
Archaic points
Arrow points
Points, unclassified

77
49
10
26

7.2%
4.6
0.9
2.4

Side scrapers
End-scrapers
Transverce scrapers
Concave scrapers
Multiple edge scrapers
Oblique scrapers
Core scrapers
Various scrapers

72
58
29
25
81
23
13
13

6.7
5.4
2.7
2.3
7.5
2.1
1.2
1.2

Gouges on bifaces
Gouges on flakes
Gouges on pebbles

52
12
1

4.8
1.1
0.1

A1U1’ SIlL

//

Biface foliates
Biface blanks

107
125

9.9
11.6

14

1.3

Burins, transverse
Burins on snapped pieces
Burins on truncation
Burins, dthedral
Burins, angle
Burins on snapped points
Burin facets, points parallel
Burin facets, points transverse
Burins on truncated bifaces

8
3
6
1
3
7
6
2
1

0.7
0.3
0.6
0_i
0.3
0.7
0.6
0.2
0.1

Drills

3

0.3

Borers

4

0.4

Gravers

30

2.8

Denticulates

28

2.6

Notches

67

6.2

114

106

6

0.6

1076

100.1

Truncations

Retouched Flakes
Varia

SCRAPERS

This broad category of tools is divided into seven types plus a group
of non-conformable specimens. Before this collection was examined,
we had some slight reservations about the applicability of the so-called
European terminology. Now, there remains no such concern, for these
artifacts respond remarkably well.
The key to scraper classification is to orient the tool with the proxi
mal end of the flake or blade nearest the viewer and the bulbar side
down. Thus, end-scrapers will have the majority of the retouch at the
distal end of the flake or blade and side scrapers will show the retouch
on one side or the other. We were unable to discover any significance
in separating straight from convex edges among the side scrapers.
Concave (hollow) scrapers appear to be a distinct type.
In general, 60% of the scrapers were made on cortex pieces. Less
than 2% are on blades and 4% are on cores. More than 42% of the
scrapers have had the bulb of percussion chipped away or reduced by

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
...

b

d

C

f

e
0

g

cj

8. Scrapers: a, side scraper; b, end-scraper; c, concave scraper; d, transverse
scraper; e andf, multiple edge scraper; g, oblique scraper.
FIGURE

flat retouch. Flakes with flat retouch along a thin edge have not been
included among the scrapers but are classified as retouched flakes.
Side scraper (72 specimens)
Side scrapers show regular percus3ion retouch along all or most of
one edge and the retouch is unifacial. Secondary retouch consisting of
smaller, shorter flakes, smooth out the bit (Fig. 8, a). The working
edge is essentially parallel to the axis of the flake, and that edge is
straight to convex. Mean length is 60 mm.
End-scraper (58 specimens)
The working edge is always convex, usually at the distal end of the
flake or blade, but occasionally appears at the proximal end. The
angles of the cutting edges vary considerably and the artifact is longer
than it is wide. Mean length is 47 mm. considerably smaller than that
of the side scrapers (Fig. 8, b).
Transverse scrapers (29 specimens)
This tool is similar to an. end scraper, but is wider than it is long; in
other words, it is fan-shaped with a flatter curve. Mean length is 40
mm. and mean width is 54 mm. (Fig. 8, d).

79

ACTON SITE

Concave scrapers (25 specimens)
These are not spokeshaves because of the large diameter of the
working edge. Working edges face from 45° toward the proximal end,
through parallel to the long axis, to 45° toward the distal end of the
flake. Mean length is 63 mm. (Fig. 8, c).
I’vlultiple edge scrapers (81 specimens)
Several varieties are included here: scrapers with two edges (21);
scrapers with two edges that meet in a distinct point located 45° off
the main axis, sometimes called dejetd (34); side-end scrapers (18);
and end-scrapers on a retouched piece (7). The latter show strong
retouch along one or both lateral edges of the end-scraper (Fig. 8, e
andf).
Oblique scrapers (22 specimens)
The working edge resembles that of a side scraper, but is placed
approximately 45° off the main axis of the flake. This category does
not include the concave scrapers. Mean length is 46 mm. (Fig. 8, g).
Core scrapers (12 specimens)
These tools are difficult to recognize unless one is an experienced
flint worker. The working edge is that of a scraper and is not just
corrective core trimming. Corrective core retouch consists of fine per
cussion work, usually of flakes up to 5 mm. in length, which removes
the platform overhang. A core scraper must have an edge similar to
that described for a side scraper. Concave and convex edges are equally
represented.
Scrapers on points (in tool list as points)
Five Paleo-points have their distal ends reworked into end-scrapers.
The workmanship and result is similar to the end-scrapers made on
flakes.
Various scrapers (13 specimens)
These are unusual pieces, some with combinations of obverse and
inverse retouch or with combinations of concave and convex working
edges.
GOUGES

Gouge. were classified as a group following the original definitions
of Ray (1941 152—461) In this assemblage each specimen has most
of the following attnbutes

‘1

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Outline is sub-triangular.
Bit is at right angles to the long axis.
Bit is straight to slightly concave.
Gouge is thicker toward the bit end.
The cross section is nearly plano-convex.
The bit is usually the steepest edge.

There appear to be three types of gouges. Although one of these,
the last, is poorly represented in this assemblage, it is abundant in
south Texas.
1. Gouges made on bifaces.
2. Gouges made on flakes.
a. Bulbar surface not retouched.
b. Bulb of percussion removed or reduced (Fig. 11, e).
3. Gouges made on pebbles with smooth cortex on the ventral
surface.
Gouges on bifaces (52 specimens)
In this assemblage the gouge made on a biface was most frequent
(Fig. 9). Thirty specimens are piano-convex with a piano ventral
surface. Five are piano-convex with convex ventral surface (Fig. 11.
d) and 17 are bi-convex. Two additional specimens are made on the
distal portions of Paleo-points.
Gouges on flakes (12 specimens)
Ten of these specimens have reduced bulbs of percussion.
Gouges on pebbles (1 specimen)
This form of gouge apparently is not a common type for this region.
The flat or “under” face is the cortex surface of the pebble.
BIFACES

Bifaces are larger and heavier than the projectile points. They lack
such alterations as fluting, notching or shouldering, and essentially are
not as well finished as the points. These tools would be called knives
or blades by some authorities, but we would prefer to avoid such con
flicting terminology.
Biface foliates (107 specimens)
The foliates are reasonably thin with quite a few specimens showing
pressure retouch (Fig. 10). It is interesting to note that all but 13

S
.

b

ci
S

d
C

e
FIGURE

9.

Gouges.

01
I

I

2

cm..

f

.)fl3

flLti1

‘SItt1L,

I

g

0

C

b

d

oie
FIGURE

V

10.

Biface foliates.

f

e
cm’.

.JtJt,1fl.1 I

AcjIur

S1i,J.

specimens are broken. Does this suggest some rough usage? The edges
show little evidence of battering, raking, or splintering.
Biface blanks (75 specimens)
None of these artifacts seem to be suitable for use as tools in the
condition they are in. There is little question but what they are
partially finished bifaces. Many of them clearly show where the maker
was unable to remove a “knot” in spite of repeated blows.
BIJRINS

There are a number of types as can be seen in the type list above.
Eight of these are of dubious character since they were struck directly
from the edges of points and not from a snapped or truncated platform.
The rest are true burins, many of which could be lost in Old World
collections (Fig. 11, a, b, and c). Almost all of the latter are on snapped
pieces or on truncations.
While it is possible that a few of the burin spalls on the points could
have been the result of the point striking a hard object, this cannot
explain the spalls that originate on the proximal ends. A number of
experiments conducted in the laboratory were unable to produce a

C

b

e

d

o
FIGuRE

11.

f

2cm.

a—c, Burins; d, gouge, inverse bit; e, gouge, thinned bulb; f, netsinker?

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

lateral-medial spall by working a concave-base point within its bind
ings on a shaft. Our conclusions were that the spalls were produced by
blows, not pressure.
DRILLS

Drills are bfacially flaked and pressure retouched. All three are on
Paleo-points.
BORERS

These small artifacts show bifacial retouch only at the working tip.
They are on small flakes, frequently biface thinning flakes.
DENTICULATES

Otherwise known as serrated-edged pieces, the denticulates are uni
facially or bifacially worked with three or more uniformly spaced
teeth.
NOTCHES

Notches correspond to spokeshaves in other terminology. Since we
do not know their use, we feel the descriptive term is best. The
diameter of a notch is much smaller than that of a concave scraper,
usually 5 to 15 mm. A single notch is near the distal tip of a broken
Paleo-point.
RETOUCHED FLAKES

Most of these are probably tools of expediency, and the chief
characteristic is the quality of not being a finished piece. Many of
these tools are “flake scrapers” or the like. The worked edges are on
the border between deliberate retouch as found on true scrapers and
heavy use retouch.
VARIA

Oddly shaped bifaces, inversely retouched scrapers and other un
usual tools that do not fit into normal types are placed in this group.
VVorking with a large collection is rewarding in that one can not
only see how well these materials fit the European forms, but one is
permitted to generalize on the range of tool types. There are several
comments that should be made. The scrapers are larger and show
better workmanship than was expected. There are only a few idio
syncratic pieces which might unfortunately be called types in some
local systems.
The frequency and variety of burins was unexpected, but probably
will not be so when more early sites are examined. Epstein (1960:
93—97) has called Texas burins to our attention, but few others seem
to have noticed the frequency of burins on truncations in early sites.

Alexander (1963: 521—523), despite obvious problems with his termi
nology, apparently recovered 7 or 13 specimens at the Levi Site.
There is no way to separate the non projectile point artifacts into
Paleo, Early Archaic or Late Archaic even though the points suggest
that the site was occupied during these eras. There is a strong con
sistency of material, of workmanship, of tool size, and of horizontal
distribution that argues against sharply distinct cultural components.
Rather, there is an impression of relatively continuous utilization of
the same environment by the same ethnic group.
TECHNOLOGY OF FLAKED STONE
Technological processes at the site may have been varied, but the
only one on which we were able to collect considerable data is stone
flaking. In the debris we find cores, cortex flakes, biface thinning flakes
(eclat de taille) and chips. While these demonstrate that considerable
flaking was done at the site, there is an unbalance in cores and cortex
flakes that indicates the shaping of biface blanks and the production
of debitage at some other place, perhaps a gravel bar.
On the projectile points the remains or traces of the technology
have largely been removed, but the scrapers tell us a great deal.
Ninety-six percent of these tools were made on flakes. Sixty percent of
the scrapers are on cortex flakes, and 42.5% had the bulbs of per
cussion deliberately reduced by retouch.
There is no question but what this is essentially a flake industry.
The few blades that appear in the debitage form just over two percent
of the total. Practically all of the tools which permit this sort of
examination were made on flakes.
Within the large collection of cores (126 classifiable) there are few,
if any, that could have produced a flake or blade large enough to
permit the manufacture of most of the biface foliates. It probably
should be assumed that most of these tools were made directly from
cobbles (core-tool rather than flake-tool). Much of this kind of flaking,
as was mentioned above, seems to have been done elsewhere. Cores,
however, were the source of material for other tools. From an inspec
tion of these artifacts we find that 34.1 % had single platforms, 26.2%
had opposed platforms, 23% were more or less globular, and 16.7%
had platforms at 900 to each other.
Prepared platforms appear on 54.3% of the cores while the rest
show only cortex. Flint was the overwhelming choice of material with
quartzite a poor second.
The following is the gross breakdown of artifacts:

ou

TEXAS

Chips
Cores and fragments
Cortex flakes
Biface thinning flakes
Debitage
Use retouch
Tools

Total

ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

3515
319
542
375
1265
452

46.6%
4.2
7.2
5.0
16.8
6.0

1068

14.2

7536

100.0

Chips were saved if they were large enough to be retained on

14”

hardware cloth. Unfortunately, this did not permit the collection of
most of the debris of pressure chipping, but that would have been an

impossible undertaking. Cortex flakes are less frequent than the ten or
eleven percent often found at Archaic sites, but there are no available
figures for Paleo sites.
Biface thinning flakes were so classified only if the platform con
sisted of the opposite edge of the biface and the angle between the
platform and the bulb was very acute. The figure of 5% seems some
what low, and again may reflect the practice of doing some preforming
at the source of the river cobbles.
Debitage, those flakes and blades available for use as tools but not
used, is of the same material and reflects the same technological
processes as do the tools and the debris.
Use retouch is found mostly on pieces that otherwise would have
been classified as debitage. Equipment similar to that used by Seminov
(1964) was not available for studies of used edges and therefore our
studies are incomplete. Experiments in the laboratory indicate that
similar regular rows of tiny flake scars on sharp flakes can be produced
by lightly scraping bone or vigorously scraping wood. We are not in a
position to comment on the cutting of soft material such as meat,
hides etc.

GRINDING STONES
There are 151 specimens of complete or fragmentary- rnanos (handstones). Fifteen of these are made from stream-rolled cobbles and
136 are made from sandstone rubble. Five cobbles are pecked to shape,
and the grinding surfaces are sharpened by pecking. Two of these are
rounded in outline and three are subrectangular. The rounded speci
mens have a mean diameter of 9.5 cm. The subrectangular manos
have mean lengths of about 9.5 cm. and widths of about 7.0 cm. Two
specimens show to-and-fro use and the ridge between the grinding
fäcsts runs diagonally across their faces. Only two of these cobble
manos have been used on both faces.

IUI’

b

ci

id..

d
C

0

e
FtGUeE

2

criL.

f

12. Grinding stones.

Ten cobbles have been used as manos without any shaping. All of
these are of quartzite and two of these show use on both faces. Dimen
sions range from 5 to 8 cm. in width and 7 to 10 cm. in length. Thick
nesses would vary according to amount of use.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

One hundred and thirty-six manos or fragments are made from
stream Cobbles or rubble, hut are so altered that one Cannot be certain.
Seven examples are quite round, 24 are subrectangular to square, and
all the rest are irregular or fragmentary. Of the 136 manos or frag
ments, 58 have been used on both faces and 78 have been used on
only one. A number show a crest between two facets, some of these
are parellel to the long axis and some are diagonal. Exact numbers are
not given because of the fragmentary condition of the sample.
Metates or milling stones are also abundant at the site. One specimen
had been used on both faces, ground to a depth of 0.4 cm. and is
13.5 cm. wide by 26.5 cm. long. The second was used on one face only.
The oval basin is 0.5 cm. deep, 14.0 cm. wide and 30.5 cm. long.
Fragments of metates or milling stones number 164 specimens. Of
these, some 52 specimens have shallow basins to deep narrow basins.
Eight fragments show use on both faces. In addition to all of the
grinding stones listed above, there are 57 fragments that may be either
manos or metates.
Because of the wide distribution of the grinding stones and frag
ments, over the same area as that of the Paleo-Indian and the Archaic
points, it is believed that they date from the same time period as do
those points.
NETSINKERS OR ATLATL WEIGHTS
Ten specimens of this type artifact are in the collection from the
Acton Site. Frank Watt of Waco described this artifact (Watt, 1938:
21—70), and divided it into 12 types. He named it the “Waco Sinker,”
but remarked that this did not infer that the artifact was used as a
fishing sinker. Using Watt’s classification, these artifacts from the
Acton Site are typed as follows :3 specimens, type 3; 2 specimens,
type 4; 1 specimen, type 9; 2 specimens, type 10; and 1 specimen,
unfinished.
Some of these artifacts are made from quartz or quartzite pebbles,
while others are made from sandstone. They are chipped, pecked, and
ground into roughly a long, egg-shaped piece; and then notches are
chipped or ground in each end. All of the specimens from the Acton
Site are made from local materials. One specimen (type 4) came from
Test B (level 2, 6” to 12”) at the site, and was found in a cluster of
pebbles and flakes below the plow zone. It is shown in Fig. 11, f.
This type artifact is always found in sites of the “Carollton Focus”
of the “Trinity Aspect.” A carbon-14 date of 5945 ± 200 B.P. (3986 ±
200 B.C.) was obtained from the Carroliton Focus Zone at the Wood
Pit Site (Crook and Harris, 1959: 1—2). Another Carroliton Focus

ACTON SITE

radiocarbon date of 6030 ± 300 B.P. (4066 ± 300 B.C.) was obtained
from a hearth at Gore Pit Site (Bastian, 1964: 1—4), located near
Lawton, Oklahoma.
CONCLUSIONS
We have attempted to accomplish several purposes in this paper,
the most important of which is the description of the environment,
artifacts and chronology of the Acton Site. The projectile points have
been treated in more or less the traditional way, but the other tools
have been classified in a modern or modified-European system. Basic
to this system is the recognition that form can be described whereas
use is frequently speculative. In addition, we have classified ‘the debris
and debitage into various steps in the manufacturing process. The
value of presenting this kind of information will not be apparent until
a number of sites have been reported in this manner and systematic
comparisons have been made.
The Acton site was the scene of considerable activity over a long
period of time. In regard to the activity, it is apparent that just about
every kind of work went on at the site since numbers of all kinds of
tools were found as well as all sorts of debris and debitage. In other
words, the site was apparently not the scene of one or two highly
specialized kinds of work, play or duty.
If there were any sub areas of specialized activity, we did not
discern them. Repeated ploughing of the field may have been re
sponsible in part for scattering artifacts, but had specific concentra
tions of cores or particular tools existed, we believe they would have
been detected. Paleo points, Archaic points, various other types of
tools as well as debris and debitage were rather evenly scattered over
the field. It is believed that this distribution of artifacts argues against
the existence of a large group which include specialists in certain arts
and crafts. Instead, it would appear that small bands repeatedly or
continuously camped at the site. There are, unfortunately, no specific
hear’ths or concentrations that can be interpreted as single camps.
There are no data which could confirm or deny seasonal occupation
of distinct sites, beyond the observations made above that all kinds of
artifacts were recovered at the site.
There is no accurate technique to determine the length of time
during which the site was occupied. The very small “Arrowpoints”
can be dismissed with a clear conscience as being hunting losses as
there are no other tools at the site that correspond in time. Particularly
scarce to absent are the small end-scrapers, serrated pieces, drills and
most significantly pottery. Technologically, and, we believe, typologi

90

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

cally the assemblage resulting from the major part of the occupation
consists of the Paleo points, the Archaic points, and the various
scrapers, bifacDs, burins and so forth. To consider just the projectile
points could lead to a traditional view that there were two occupations:
one Paleo-Indian and one Archaic. It is not possible in this assemblage
to separate out two categories of tools, one Paleo and one Archaic.
Thirty-two projectile points were reworked into burins, scrapers,
gouges or notched pieces. It must be emphasized that thirty-one of the
above are Paleo points. We cannot accept the backward hypothesis
that a Late Archaic People went out and collected Paleo points for the
purpose of reworking into other tools.
From the technological viewpoint the tools are characterized by a
uniformity of processes of manufacture that is observable both in the
Paleo points and Early Archaic points as well as in the scrapers,
foliates and gouges. Comparative literature on tools of the Archaic
other than projectile points and “knives” is distressingly weak in
Texas. To the best of our ability, we were able to discover only a
fraction of the scrapers, gouges and retouched flakes within the Acton
assemblage that would appear to be compatable with the few Late
Archaic dart points. There are probably a few artifacts in this collec
tion that are not part of the assemblage in a cultural sense. These
include the late small arrow points and possibly some of the Late
Archaic points. These amount to a very small percentage of the total
artifacts. For statistical purposes it is believed that the typological and
technological lists represent essentially a single culture, certainly an
adaptation to one environment.
Our conclusions, therefore, are that the site represents a single
homogeneous group of Indians who lived there intermittently, season
ally or perhaps for rather long periods of time. The cultural picture is
that of a transition from what has been called Late Paleo-Indian to
Early Archaic. We cannot force the data to produce more than the
mere suggestion that the social unit was a hunting-gathering-fishing
band who made and used all of their varied tools at or near the site.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alexander, Herbert L. Jr.
1963 The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian Campsite in Central Texas. American An
tiquity, Vol. 28, No. 4, Salt Lake City.
Baker, William E., T. N. Campbell, and Glen Evans
1957 The Nell Site: Evidence of Early Man in the Oklahoma Panhandle. Bul
letin of the Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. V.
Bastian, Tyler
1964 Radiocarbon Date for An Archaic Site in Southwestern Oklahoma. News

letter, Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Vol. 12, No. 9, Norman, Okia
homa.
Bell. Robert E.
1968 Guide to the Identification f Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Special Bulletin, No. 1.
1950 Guide to the Indentification of Certain American Indian Projectile Points.
Oklahoma Anthropological Special Bulletin, No. 2.
Bell, Robert E., and Roland Scott Hall
1953 Selected Projectile Point Types of the United States. Bulletin of the Okla
homa Anthropological Society, Vol. 1.
Blame. Jay C.
1968 A Preliminary Report of an Early Man Site in West Texas. Transactions
of the Third Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New
Mexico and Western Texas. South Plains Archeological Society, Lubbock,
Texas.
Crawford. Daymond. D.
1965 The Granite Beach Site, Liano County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 36, Austin.
Crook. W. W.. Jr.
1952 The Wheeler Site: A 3,500 Year Old Culture in Dallas County. Texas.
Field and Laboratory, Vol. XX, No. 2.
1955 Reconsideration and Geologic Revaluation of the Famous Abilene, Texas,
Sites. Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, Vol. XXVIII.
1961 A Revised Interpretation of the Lagow Discovery, Texas. American An
tiquity, Vol. 26, No. 4.
Crook, W. W. Jr., and R. K. Harris
1952 Trinity Aspect of the Archaic Horizon: The Carroilton and Elam Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Palentological Society, Vol. 23.
1954 Carroliton Focus Traits. The Record, Newsletter Dallas Archeological So
ciety, Vol. 12, No. 1.
1955 Scottsbluff Points in the Obshner Site Near Dallas, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 26, Austin.
1957 Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man Near Lewisville, Texas, and Associated
Faunal Material. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 28.
1958 A Pleistocene Campsite Near Lewisville, Texas. American Antiquity, Vol.
23, No. 4.
1959 C-14 Date for Late Carroliton Focus Archaic Level: 6000 Years B. P.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter, Vol. 8, No. 3.
1961 Significance of a New Radiocarbon Date From the Lewisville Site. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32.
Dibble, David S., and Dessamae Lorrain
lt68 Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site. Val Verde County, Texas.
Miscellaneous Papers No. 1, Texas Memorial Museum, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Duffield, Lathel F.
1963 The Wolfshead Site: An Archaic—Neo-American Site in San Augustine
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 34, Austin.

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Epstein, J. F.
1960 Burins from Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 26, No. 1.
1963a Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavations in Val Verde County. Texas,
1958. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 33, Austin.
1963b The Burin-Faceted Projectile Point. American Antiquity, Vol. 29, No. 2,
Salt Lake City.
Fisk, H. N.
1938 Geology
Bulletin
1940 Geology
Bulletin

of Grant and La Salle Parishes. Louisiana Geological Survey
18.
of Avolles and Rapides Parishes. Louisiana Geological Survey
18.

Fitting. James E., Jerry Dc Visscher. and Edward J. Wahla
1966 The Paleo-Indian Occupation of the Holcombe Beach. Anthropological
Papers, Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, No. 27. Ann
Arbor.
Ford, James A.. and Clarence Webb
1q56 Poverty Point, A Lato Archaic Sto in Louisiana. American Museum
Natural History Anthropological Papers, Vol. 46, Part 1.
Gregory. Hiram F.
1968 Personal Communication, May 15. 1968, to R. K. Harris.
Jeiks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill County,
Texas. University of Texas. Department of Anthropology No. 5. Austin,
Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy
1964 The Devil’s Mouth Site: A Stratified Campsite at Amistad Reservoir, Val
Verde County, Texas. Dept. of Anthropology. No. 6, University of Texas
Press. Austin, Texas.
Krieger, Alex D.
1947 Artifacts from the Plainview Bison Bed. In Fossil Bison and Associated
Artifacts from Plainview, Texas by E. H. Sellards, et al.. Bulletin of the
Geological Society of America. Vol. 58.
Lull, R. S.
1921 Fauna of the Dallas Sand Pits. American Journal of Science, 5th series,
Vol. 2.
Pattillo, L. F., Jr.
1940 River Terraces in the Carrollton Area, Dallas County, Texas. Field and
Laboratory, Vol. 8, No. 1.
Pearson, F. J. Jr., E. Mott Davis, M. A. Tamers, and Robert W. Johnstone
1965 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates Ill, Austin.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1941 The Various Types of the Clear Fork Gouge. Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 13, Abilene, Texas.
Semenov, S. A.
1964 Prehistoric Technology. (Originally published in Russian 1957, U. S. S. R.,
Translated by M. W. Thompson), London.

ACTON SITE

Shuler, E. W.
1918 The Geology of Dallas County. University of Texas Bulletin 1818.
1923 Occurrence of Human Remains with Pleistocene Fossils, Lagow Sand Pit,
Dallas, Texas. Science, Vol. 57.
1935 Terraces of the Trinity River, Dallas County, Texas. Field and Labora
tory, Vol. 3.
Slaughter, B. H., et al.
1962 The Hill-Shuler local faunas of the Upper Trinity River, Dallas and
Denton Counties, Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, University of
Texas, Report of Investigations No. 48.
1963a Pleistocene mammals of the Clear Creek Local Fauna, Denton County,
Texas. Journal of the Graduate Research Center, (and Field and Labora
tory), Vol. XXXI.
1963b Sulphur River Formation and the Pleistocene Mammals of the Ben Frank
lin Local Fauna. Journal of the Graduate Research Center, Vol. XXXI.
Story, Dee Ann
1968 Personal Communication, March 12, 1968, to Jay Blame.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jeiks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 25, Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks, editors
1962 Handbook of Texas Archeology. Type Descriptions, Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication No. 1 and Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin
No. 4, Austin.
Tamers, M. A., F. J. Pearson. Jr., and E. Mott Davis
1964 University of Texas Radiocarbon Dates II. Radiocarbon, Vol. 6, Austin.
Watt, Frank H.
1938 The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeological Society Vol. 4, Waco,
Texas.
Webb. Clarence H.
1946 Two Unusual Types of Chipped Stone Artifacts from Northwest Louisiana.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 17,
Abilene.
1960 Book Review. The Jake Martin Site: An Archaic Site in the Ferrell’s Bridge
Reservoir Area. Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 31. Austin.
Wendorf, Fred, Alex D. Krieger, Claude C. Aibritton, and T. D. Stewart
1955 The Midland Discovery: A Report on the Pleistocene Human Remains
from Midland, Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Wendorf, Fred, and Alex D. Krieger
1959 New Light on the Midland Discovery. American Antiquity, Vol. 25. No.
1, Salt Lake City.
Willey, G. R.
1966 An Introduction to American Archaeology. Vol. 1, North and Middle
America, Prentice-Hall, Inc., New Jersey.
Word, James H.
1968 Personal Communication, June 4, 1968, to Jay Blame.

94

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Wormington, H. M.
1957 Ancient Man in North America. Fourth Edition. Denver Museum of
Natural History, Popular Series No. 4.
Dallas, Texas

