onograph

t

c

Series

. ..

.

as e

1

Number 1

I

. R.

c
So

r

s

A
1ss

ri Sta

niver

(

">I

,

.

J \ '( I ,

19th Century Ceralllics
in the Eastern
Ozark Border Region
Cynthia R. Price

An analysis of refined earthenware from selected archaeological sites in
the Ozark Border Region of Southeast Missouri: Proposed Pearlware
and Whiteware type descriptions and ceramic sequence from 1810 to
1870.

Monograph Series: Number 1 - First Edition, 1979
' Il

CENTER FOR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Southwest Missouri State University
Springfield, Missouri 65802

Acknowledgements
The Widow Harris site excavations and subsequent ceramic analysis from which
a large portion of the data used in this paper was derived were made possible
through

the

assistance

of

research

grants

(RS

25416-76-774

and

RS

27740-77-790) from the National Endowment for the Humanities.
would like to thank Stanley South, William Lee Minnerly, Samuel D. Smith
and Timothy Klinger for reading and providing valuable comments on an earlier
draft of this paper. I also wish to acknowledge the support of Dr. Robert E.
Cooley, Director of the Center for Archaeological Research, and Kathy Boswell
for typing the manuscript. The photographs were taken by Paul Ripley of
Doniphan, Missouri.
The opinions presented in this paper are the sole responsibility of the author
and in no way reflect the official policy of the above agency.

iii

Contents
Page
Acknowledgements .......................................... iii
Introduction ................................................. 1
Methodology ................................................ 3
The Wares .................................................. 9
Pearlware/Whiteware Distinction ................................ 13
Decorative Types and Varieties ................................. 17
Vessel Forms ............................................... 23
The Assemblages ............................................ 27
Comparisons with Archaeological Sites in the
United States and Canada ..................................... 35
Conclusions ................................................ 41
Plates ..................................................... 43
References ................................................. 71
Appendix .................................................. 75

v

List of Tables
Table 1.

Page
Archaeological sites in the Western Lowland
included in the ceramic analysis ......................... 6

Table 2.

Archaeological sites in the Eastern Ozark
Highland included in the ceramic analysis .................. 7

Table 3.

Archaeological sites dating between 1810 and
1870 included in assemblage comparisons
with Ozark Border sites ............................... 36

Table 4.

Ceramic types present on selected sites in
order of decreasing frequency .......................... 38

vii

Li st of Figures
Page
Figure 1. Location of environmental zones and archaeological
sites in the study area ................................ .4
Figure 2. Common vessel forms found on archaeological sites in
the Ozark Border area from ca. 1810 to 1870 ............. 24
Figure 3. Common "covered sugar" form found on archaeological
sites in the Ozark Border area from ca. 1810 to 1870 ....... 25
Figure 4. Relative frequency of ceramic types at selected
archaeological sites in the Ozark Border area .............. 28
Figure 5. Proposed sequence for ceramic types in the
Ozark Border area ca. 1810 to 1870 ..................... 31
Figure 6. Relative frequency of ceramic types at three
archaeological sites in the United States and Canada ........ 37

ix

List of Plates
Page
Plate 1.

Edge Decorated Sherds .............................. .44

Plate 2.

Edge Decorated Sherds .............................. .46

Plate 3.

Annular Decorated Sherds ............................ .48

Plate 4.

Blue Transfer Printed Sherds ........................... 50

Plate 5.

Transfer Printed Sherds ............................... 52

Plate 6.

Sponge Decorated Sherds ............................. 54

Plate 7.

Stamp Decorated Sherds .............................. 56

Plate 8.

Hand Painted Sherds, Banded and Earthen
Polychrome Varieties ................................. 58

Plate 9.

Hand Painted Sherds, Blue Floral Variety ................. 60

Plate 10. Hand Painted Sherds, Bright Polychrome Variety,
Fine-line and Sprig Style .............................. 62
Plate 11. Hand Painted Sherds, Bright Polychrome Variety,
Broad-I ine Style ..................................... 64
Plate 12. Flow Blue and Mulberry Decorated Sherds ................ 66
Plate 13. Miscellaneous Types .................................. 68

xi

Introduction

This paper was prompted by a need for the
development of a workable ceramic sequence for
the first three quarters of the nineteenth
century in the midwest. A rather "fine-tuned"
ceramic sequence exists for the eighteenth
century (see South 1972, Noel Hume 1970), but
the archaeological literature for the nineteenth
century is almost totally lacking in adequate and
consistent descriptions of nineteenth century
ceramics. There is a remarkable lack of
consistency, for example, in employing type
names, with a wide variety of names (some
obviously incorrect) used for what is usually
the same type (for example, blue-edge ware,
feather-edge, blue shell-edge, and shell-edge
pearlware are used almost interchangeably).
Often the investigator displays a less than
rudimentary knowledge of the ware which he is
attempting to classify. Thus, it is often
impossible to know which ceramic types are
present at a site, much less to utilize the data in
comparative analysis with the ceramic
assemblages present at other sites.

As increasing attention is given to nineteenth
century sites in the midwest, and particularly to
such sites as frontier farmsteads or hunters'
cabins ..on the western frontier, and as more and
more individuals find themselves involved in
nineteenth century site archaeology as the result
of cultural resource management studies with a

concomitant increase in the amount of data
being collected from nineteenth century sites, it
is imperative that a well-defined ceramic
sequence be developed and consistently
employed in artifact descriptions and analysis.

The development of a consistent, workable
typology is essential for dating occupations on
historically unrecorded sites in order to test
hypotheses and construct settlement system
models.

The value of ceramics in dating site
occupation may be seen in the mean Ceramic
Date Formula proposed by South
(1972:71-117), which appears to work well for
the eighteenth century. The formula's
applicability to nineteenth century sherd
assemblages has not yet been adequately tested,
and indeed, according to South (1974:249), it
was not designed to produce dates beyond the
early nineteenth century. While some
investigators apparently have obtained favorable
results using the formula with nineteenth
century assemblages (Smith 1976:160-163, G.
Miller 1972: 193-195), others have had difficulty
(Fairbanks 1974:77-82, South 1974:249). The
limited extant ceramic chronologies available for
the nineteenth century make it difficult to
assess the formula's potential for dating
nineteenth century site occupation, and a

1

2

refinement of the chronologies should aid in
assessing and perhaps strengthening its
usefulness.
Furthermore, these chronological refinements
will also be important if we are ever to
understand social systems and cultural process in
general during the historic period. Ceramics have
long been considered sensitive indicators in the
archaeological record of certain aspects of
cultural process during prehistoric times (for
example, Longacre 1970, Hill 1970, Deetz 1965,
to list a few) and have recently come to be seen
as such with respect to European and American
populations during historic times (J. Miller and
Stone 1970, Deetz 1972, Brown 1972, Otto
1975, Smith 1977). The confusion rampant in
the literature on the nineteenth century
assemblages makes such work difficult with
these later sites.
The following discussion is preliminary in
nature and is not an attempt to establish a
finished ceramic chronology for the entire
midwest during the nineteenth century. It is
rather intended to provide a description of
refined earthenware types which have been
recovered from sites in the Ozark Border region
of southeast Missouri occupied from ca. 1810 to
1870. A suggested ceramic typology, as wel I as
suggested dates based on the analysis of
ceramics from these sites and on the available
literature are provided. Assemblage compositions
for the ceramics from several sites are also
presented on the assumption that dating may be
more accurately determined by considering a
ceramic assemblage rather than specifically

dating individual types (The Mean Ceramic Date
Formula proposed by South ( 1972) essentially
dates assemblages) and in the hope that it will
provide comparative data for assessing such
assemblages on an inter-regional level. These
data are also intended to provide a preliminary,
systematic description of the ceramic
assemblages from domestic sites (farmsteads)
along the Ozark Border during the period of
initial or pioneer American settlement. The
available literature for midwestern sites presents
such assemblage descriptions primarily for
military forts and plantation sites, no
comparable data for small domestic sites having
been found.
There are limitations in the following
discussions - most of the sites used in the
assemblage analysis may be dated only generally
by historical documentation, thus, providing
minimal control in formulating a chronological
sequence; the sites are from a relatively
restricted geographical area; and the samples are
derived from surface collections at all but two
sites, thus, limiting the possibility of
stratigraphic control.
Finally, this paper is intended as a first step
toward organlZlng the nineteenth century
ceramic data in Missouri and nearby areas. It is
hoped that archaeologists in adjacent areas will
aid in refining the type descriptions and
chronologies so that a consistent and workable
set of definitions and dates may be developed
which will then be comparable with those from
other parts of the midwest.

Methodology

The following discussion will examine only
one class of ceramics, refined earthenwares, and
will examine only those wares and decorative
types found to date in the Ozark Border region
of southeast Missouri at sites dating ca. 1810 to
1870. Refined earthenwares are generally the
most numerous of the ceramic wares present on
these nineteenth century sites, and may be
among the most obvious reflectors of
chronological, social, and economic variation.
The coarse earthenwares and stonewares
common on these sites were probably derived
from several local or regional manufacturers and
exhibit a variety of forms and glazes. They are
yet poorly understood in the southeast Missouri
area. Porcelain has been recovered only very
rarely and in small quantities on the sites
occupied during the first three quarters of the
nineteenth century in this area and, therefore,
will not be considered here.

An analysis involving the classification of
sherds of refined earthenware from a selected
sample of nineteenth century archaeological sites
along the Ozark Border in southeast Missouri
and the calculation of relative percentages of
wares and types was conducted in an attempt to
construct a chronological assemblage sequence
and in order to assess the possibility of
assemblage comparisons on a regional level.
Type definitions were formulated as a basis for
the assemblage comparisons. Rather than a

consideration of types alone, assemblage
comparisons are thought to be of greater value
in chronological assessments, in determining the
nature of trade in ceramics on the frontier, and
in regional comparisons.

The archaeological ceramic collections chosen
for the analysis were those which contained at
least 100 sherds and which were obtained from
sites along the Ozark Border in southeast
Missouri thought to have been occupied between
1810 and 1870, from the earliest major
Euro-American occupation in the area under
consideration to the time of the predominance
of undecorated ceramic vessels of English and
American manufacture. Additional collections
from early to mid-nineteenth century sites
which contained fewer than 100 sherds were
also available for study and were used to a
limited extent in formulating some of the type
and/or variety descriptions.

The Sites
The area in which the sites are located is a
major ecotonal zone in Ripley and Butler
Counties, Missouri, with the Eastern Ozark
Escarpment and Highlands to the west and the
Western Lowlands of the Mississippi Alluvial
Valley to the east (Fig. 1).

3

4

.
Figure 1
Location of environ.
and archaeological m_ental zones
study area.
sites in the

Ozark
Highland

.

5

Archaeological survey and excavation data
from this area coupled with historical
documentation suggest that the Ozark
Escarpment and Ozark Highlands were settled
earlier than the Western Lowlands (see Price and
Price 1978 for discussion of settlement patterns
and supporting data in this area). Historical
documentation (Shinn 1907: 117, Lawrence
County, County and Circuit Court Records
Book, 1818-1838, and Circuit Court Records
Book, 1815-1826) suggest that the escarpment
and highlands were relatively heavily settled
shortly after the Louisiana Purchase. These same
documentary records suggest that the Western
Lowlands were not settled to any extent before
the late 1820s. The ceramic assemblages, in the
near absence of pearlware from lowland sites,
also supports a late lowland settlement (see
below).
Although the Western Lowlands have been
extensively surveyed, archaeological survey in
the highlands to date has been limited; thus,
there is a larger sample of archaeological site
collections available from the lowlands than
from the highlands.

and 2 present data on the
Tables
archaeological sites selected for the ceramic
analysis, and Figure 1 indicates their general
locations. The sites considered here all appear to
have been Euro-American farmsteads. The
lowland sites are all situated on the tops of low
sand ridges which prior to drainage ca. 1915
were surrounded by low swampy ground. All are
in present day agricultural fields. The one
highland site in the sample is situated on a low
ridge top above a permanent stream on the
Ozark Escarpment. It is a less disturbed
situation, and is surrounded by woods and
overgrown fields.
The surface collections from the lowland sites
were obtained over a period of several years and
consisted of total collections on most occasions.
A total collection was obtained by walking over
the sites systematically along each agricultural
crop row and collecting all observed cultural
material. The two pit samples from 23Rl-H1 are

from complete excavations of the two features.
Pit 1 was probably a cellar or storage pit
thought to have been under the cabin and
measuring 4' x 12' x 8" deep. Pit 2 was an
intentionally dug pit of unknown function
(possibly also for storage) which was clay-lined
and later filled with fireplace ash and refuse.
Al I of the material from 23R1-H 19, the
highland site, was recovered from excavations.
The Feature 3 sample was recovered from three
5' x 5' units along the edge of a cabin; the
Feature 11 sample was from one 5' x 5' unit of a
possible cellar pit beneath the breezeway of a
second cabin (the pit is like that described for
23Rl-H1 and measures approximately 4' x 8' x
1' deep); the Feature 5 sample was recovered
from a shallow basin-shaped depression beside
the cabin associated with Feature 11 which was
filled with refuse and measured approximately
4' x 10' x .5' deep; and the Feature 6 sample
was recovered from a second basin-shaped
depression measuring 16' x 4' x .5' deep and
situated approximately 30' from the Feature 11
cabin. The Feature 6 fill appears to have been
deposited earliest; the Feature 5 and 11 fills
appear to have been deposited at about the
same time; and the Feature 3 fill appears to
have been the latest.

Of the lowland sites 23Rl-H1, 23BU-H2 and
23R1-H 17 appear much a Ii ke in to ta I artifact
assemblage and based on this assemblage appear
to date to the second and third quarters of the
nineteenth century and to be approximately
contemporaneous with Features 5 and 11 at
23Rl-H19. Barfield has an occupation range
from the mid-1850s to the 1880s (based on
artifact assemblage and
historical
documentation, Table 1), and is probably
contemporaneous with Feature 3 at 23Rl-H19.
Site 23R1-H 25 appears to date later than the
first three lowland sites and resembles Barfield
to some degree. Very little is known about
23R l-H49 and 23R l-H50.

The sites may be temporally ordered then as
follows based on artifact assemblage and

Table 1.
Archaeological Sites in the Western Lowland included in the Ceramic Analysis

Site Name and No.

Nature of Ceramic
Collections

Historical Documentation

Stick Chimney
23BU-H2

Surface

Indicated on GLO plat
for T22N R5E, 1848

ca.1830's-1860's

Bradom I
23RI-Hl7

Surface

Indicated on GLO plat for
T22N R4E, 1848; family
listed in Ripley County
Census 1850: 422 and 1860:5

ca.1840's-1860's

C. Woodard
23RI-Hl

Surface and Feature
1 and 2 Excavations

None found

ca.1830's-1870

Barfield
23RI-H2

Surf ace

Family listed in Ripley
County Census 1860:4; Ripley
County Deed Records;
grave marker in family
cemetery on site and local
history

23RI-H25

Surface

None found

?

23RI-H49

Surface

None found

?

23RI-H50

Surf ace

None found

?

6

Approximate
Occupation Dates

1855-1880's

Table 2.
Archaeological Sites in the Eastern Ozark Highland included in the Ceramic Analysis

Site Name and No.

Nature of Ceramic
Collections

Historical Documentation

Approximate
Occupation Date

Widow Harris
23RI-Hl9

Excavated Features
3, 5, 6 and 11

Family listed in *Wayne County
Census 1830: 42 and in Ripley County Census 1840:250,
1850: 427, 1860: 13-14,
1870: 657; Lawrence County
Records, County and Circuit
Court Records Book 1818-1838,
Circuit Court Records Book
1815-1826; mentioned by
Featherstonhaugh 1844:353356 and Bell 1957:296; Lawrence
County Tax Records 1815 and
1816; Ripley County Deed
Records

ca.1815-1870

* Site area was first part of Lawrence County, then Wayne County, and finally Ripley County, Missouri.

7

8

available
earliest:

documentation,

beginning

with the

1. 23Rl-H19: Feature 6
2. 23Rl-H19: Features 5 and 11, 23Rl-H17,
23Rl-H1, 23BU-H1

3. 23Rl-H19:
23R 1-H25(?)

Feature

3,

23Rl-H2,

Sites 23Rl-H49 and 23Rl-H50 probably fall
in with the third group, but this is not certain.

The Wares

Most of the refined earthenware prior to ca.
1865 found on the southeast Missouri sites is
probably of English manufacture, since England
dominated the ceramic market during the part
of the nineteenth century under consideration
here (Godden 1963: 12, J. Miller 1965:46).
Although very few makers' marks have been
found on the refined earthenwares present in
the samples, all of those which have been found
are of English manufacturing firms with the
most common marks being the printed and
impressed marks of the Davenport and Clews
factories (Godden 1964:189-191, 151-152).
Even though no American manufacturers' marks
have yet been found, the possibility of some of
the vessels being of American manufacture
certainly exists, since there were American
attempts at production of refined earthenwares
similar in decorative treatment to the English
products. For example, Keyes (1930:335) noted
that the American Pottery Company, Jersey
City, New Jersey, was producing sponge ware
during the 1840s (see also Ohio State Museum
1960). There are also a few reported attempts
to manufacture refined earthenwares in Missouri
during the first part of the nineteenth century.
Edmond Flagg (1905:88) mentioned during the
1830s that a pottery manufactory was
operating in Cape Girardeau, Missouri, utilizing
kao Ii n or china clays from the nearby

Tywappity Bottoms. It is not clear, however,
what kinds of ceramic products were being
made there. Finally, Roberts (1964:465-466)
described two attempts to produce refined
earthenwares in Missouri prior to 1860. In 1848,
Frederick Woolford was producing whiteware
(called queens ware in his advertisements) near
Caledonia in Washington County using locally
available clays, and in 1850 E. H. Shephard
joined Woolford in an expanded venture, which
closed during the Civil War, to manufacture
"china, queensware, and other types of pottery"
(Roberts 1964:465-466). Both the Caledonia
and Cape Girardeau locales are within one
hundred miles of the southeast Missouri research
area.
No attempt has been made yet to distinguish
English-made vessels from American-made vessels
in the archaeological collections from southeast
Missouri.

Definitions

The predominant ceramic wares of the first
three quarters of the nineteenth century found
archaeologically in the Ozark Border area may
generally be classed as one of the following two
wares: pearlware and whiteware. A third ware,
creamware, has been found only rarely to date.

9

10

Cream ware

Pear/ware

Creamware, also called Queen's ware, is a
refined earthenware exhibiting a yellowish or
cream-colored paste and a clear lead glaze which
has a yellowish or greenish cast (Towner
1957: 1-4). The glaze is characteristically a deep
green or yellow-green where it pools or puddles
in vessel crevices (footrings, handles, molded
decoration) (Noel Hume 1970:124-128). Various
types and varieties of decorated creamware
vessels were produced during its period of
popularity, from ca. 1760 to 1810 or 1820
(Noel Hume 1973 and 1970, Towner 1957).

Pearlware is a refined earthenware having a
white paste and a clear lead glaze to which a
small amount of cobalt was added. (Noel Hume
1969:390, 1970:128-129). As a result, pearlware
glaze exhibits a characteristic bluish or greenish
cast and frequently a deeper blue color where it
puddles in crevices in the vessel (footrings,
handles) (see also Towner 1957:17, 34,48).

Creamware sherds have been recovered only
rarely to date in the Ozark Border region and in
other areas of southeast Missouri. In a small
surface collection from a site near New Madrid,
undecorated creamware was the predominant
ceramic ware (Price and Harris 1978:24). Several
sites in the Eastern Ozarks have produced a few
sherds each, all undecorated (unpublished data
on file with the Center for Archaeological
Research, Southeast Missouri Field Station). The
small number of creamware sherds recovered to
date is most likely a result of both the
post-1820 settlement of much of the southeast
Missouri lowlands where fieldwork has been
conducted to date and the limited work in areas
settled prior to 1820 (such as along the
Mississippi River and the Eastern Ozark
Escarpment) where creamware would be
expected to occur. Noel Hume (1963: 236)
noted that by 1810 pearlware (see below) had
become the dominant common tableware in
America, and Towner (1957:47) stated that,
toward the end of the eighteenth century,
creamware was supplanted in Staffordshire by a
whiteware decorated in blue transfer, the
manufacture of which, by 1820, exceeded in
output any other class of ware. This suggests
that creamware would not be expected in any
quantity in many areas of southeast Missouri.
Since creamware has been recovered in only
relatively small quantity, it will not be
considered further. The reader is referred to
Noel Hume (1970, 1973) and Towner (1957)
for a detailed discussion of the ware.

Josiah Wedgwood is credited with developing
the ware in England during the latter 1770s
(No'el Hume 1969:391, 1970:128), and it was
probably introduced into this country during
the early 1780s. Although Noel Hume suggested
an introduction date for pearlware of about
1785 (1969:394), archaeological evidence now
suggests a slightly earlier date. Ferguson, for
example, has documented the occurrence of
annular pearlware vessels as early as 1781 at
Fort Watson, a British Fort in South Carolina,
(Ferguson 1977:48-51); and South uses 1780 as
the manufacture and/or occurrence date in
South Carolina for at least three types of pearlware (1974:162-163, 334). According to Noel
Hume (1970:130-131), large quantities of pearlware vessels were shipped to America between
1790 and 1830, and although pearlware and
creamware were sold and used together through
the second decade of the nineteenth century,
pearlware was the predominant common
tableware in this country by ca. 1810 (No'el
Hume 1973:236). He stated that by the 1820s
pearlware was on its way out (No'el Hume
1970:130-131). Contrary to Noel Hume's
implication that 1830 generally marked the
decline of the ware in America, South (1972:85,
1974:333) listed some pearlware decorative
types as being produced as late as the 1840s,
1850s, and even 1890s, and Noel Hume
(1969:396) stated that the Wedgwood factory
was making pearlware as late as 1865. Thus,
although there seems to be close agreement on
the general date of the development of the
ware, there is some disagreement as to the date
of its introduction and decline in this country.
Pearlware vessels were produced in a variety
of forms (No'el Hume 1970:131), and were

11

decorated using a variety of motifs and methods
in eluding underglaze painting and transfer
printing. Pearlware vessels seldom occur
archaeologically in forms bearing no painted or
printed decoration. The "undecorated" sherds
are most often those from undecorated portions
of decorated vessels. (For a more complete
discussion of pearlware, see Noel Hume 1969,
1970, and 1973).
Pearlware occurs commonly on early
nineteenth century sites in the highland portion
of the Ozark Border area but only rarely in the
Io w Iand areas where fieldwork has been
conducted (Price and Harris 1978).

Whiteware
Whiteware is a refined earthenware which has
a white paste and a clear, colorless glaze, and
which lacks the greenish and yellowish tints of
creamware and the bluish and greenish-blue tints
of pearlware (Noel Hume 1970:130-131).
Undoubtedly, there was a change in the glaze
composition from the earlier pearlware, although
the nature of the change is not clear. Hughes
and Hughes (1968:85-86), for example,
discussed a change in glazes used by at least one
pottery ca. 1830. As discussed below, cobalt
appears still to have been a glaze ingredient as
evidenced by a slight bluish puddling in the
crevices of vessels which otherwise lack the
overall bluish cast of the earlier pearlware.
According to Noel Hume (1970:130-131),
whiteware began replacing pearlware ca. 1820
and continued to be produced throughout the
century.
Whiteware vessels were produced in a variety
of forms and were decorated using a wide range
of methods and motifs, some of which were the
same as, or similar to, decorative methods and
motifs of the earlier pearlware vessels. Although
undecorated pearlware vessels were rare, during
the mid-to-latter part of the nineteenth century
undecorated whiteware forms were common.
Whiteware is one of the most common
ceramic wares recovered from sites in southeast

Missouri occupied during the first three quarters.
of the nineteenth century.

Ironstone
Ironstone has been defined as a refined
earthenware having a hard white paste and a
clear glaze (Hugh es and Hugh es 1968: 108,
Fairbanks 1974:77). It has also been aptly
described as being a "cold grayish-white color"
(Lofstom 1976:23).
Several potteries were experimenting during
the early nineteenth century with ceramic body
composition, and "Turners Patent Body" was
produced in 1800, "Stone China" was produced
by Spode in 1805, and Mason patented his
"Ironstone China" in 1813 (Noel Hume
1970:131, Godden 1963:13-14,31, Hughes and
Hughes 1968:108). Vessels which have been
called Ironstone were not commonly in use until
the mid-nineteenth century, and were most
common in the decades following the Civil War
(Fairbanks 1974:77). Vessels marked Ironstone
or Stone China were produced throughout the
century in both England and the United States,
and at least during the latter part of the century
factory and manufacturers' marks were common
on these vessels.
A Ithough in use in the archaeological
literature (see for example, Fairbanks 1974,
Walker 1971:122, 124, 126, and Watkins
1970:50), the term "ironstone" presents a
problem in nineteenth century ceramic
classification. The ironstone or "stone china"
wares are often difficult to distinguish visually
from whiteware in archaeologicai collections,
and this is particularly so with respect to the
early pre-1870 sherds (see also Lofstrom
1976:23 and South 1974:248). Although paste
hardness has been utilized as a distinguishing
criterion, ironstone being defined as having a
harder paste than whiteware, the variation in
paste hardness present in a single vessel suggests
this is not always a satisfactory distinction
(South 1974:247-248). Likewise, the variations
in the glaze color are also an unsatisfactory
distinguishing characteristic.

12

South has proposed a single category,
"Whiteware/lronstone," for nineteenth century
ceramic classification which includes both
whitewares and those wares commonly called
"ironstone" (1974:248,252).
Because of the difficulty in visually
separating whitewares and ironstones and

because of the present lack of consistently valid
distinguishing characteristics, particularly in
pre-1870 archaeological collections, the two
wares will here be considered together following
South's lead, but will be classed under the single
category "whiteware". Ironstone will, thus, be
considered a variety of whiteware.

Pea rlw are/Wh itewa re

Distinction

Perhaps . nowhere is the confusion about
nineteenth century ceramics more evident in the
literature than in the distinction between the
wares discussed above. Although the definitions
as given here appear fairly clearcut,
distinguishing between the wares in
archaeological ceramic samples appears to
present problems which have yet to be
satisfactorily resolved. While the distinction
between creamware and pearlware apparently is
fairly easily made, that between pearlware and
the later whiteware is not always so obvious and
presents perhaps the greater problem with
respect to archaeological ceramic description.
Although several writers have addressed the
problem of sorting pearlware sherds from
whiteware sherds (Smith 1976: 140, 142;
Lofstrom 1976: 19, 22-24), others have confused
the issue by ignoring the distinction altogether,
or by using the terms interchangeably (for
example, "undecorated whiteware saucers made
of c reamware, pearlware, and ironstone,"
Walker 1971:124, or" . . . plain white glazed
ware, or pearl ware, as it is better known," Chase
1974:24).
Since site dating is often based on the
relative proportions of the two wares in the
archaeological assemblage, the problem of the
pearlware/whiteware categories is of importance
in constructing a ceramic sequence and in dating

archaeological site occupations, and is not a
problem for the ceramic specialist alone.
Frequently, the characteristic of
qlue-puddling of the glaze), particularly
11oticeable in the crevices of\l~ss~Li~9trir:i_gsLJs.1
taken as a certain mark- of pearlware and is,
often the . sole crit~r:.iQll~_used to distinguish
pearlwe1re from whiteware ,(apparently based on
No'el Hume's discussion of the distinction
between whiteware and pearl ware ( 1970: 130
and 1969:395); see for example, the discussion
in Smith 1976:140)). Vessels which lack the
blue-puddling in crevices are then classed as
whitewares. No'el Hume did, however, caution
against the indiscriminate use of the "blue
puddling" criterion as the only mark of
pearlware and noted its appearance also on
porcelains produced at Leeds (1969:395).
The use of blue-puddling as the sole
di st i nguishing mark of pearlware presents
perhaps the major problem in the
pearlware-whiteware distinction. While it is true
that the blue-puddling does occur on pearlware
vessels (as a result of the cobalt in the glaze), it
is also true that a slight blue-puddling sometimes
occurs in the crevices of vessels which might
otherwise be classed as whiteware (see also
Lofstrom 1976:23). Using the standard ware
distinction, blue-puddling, the archaeologist
given a rim or body sherd of one of the latter

13

14

kinds of vessels would classify it as whiteware,
but given a basal sherd of the same vessel would
classify it as pearlware. It is even the case that
on some sherds (from southeast Missouri at
least) the blue-puddling is more pronounced in
some portions of the vessel footring crevices
where the glaze· has pooled or puddled more
thickly than in others, and may, in fact, be
unnoticeable on various portions of the same
vessel.
The question of definitions may now arise:
How broadly or how narrowly should the
particular wares be defined? No'el Hume, for
example, defined pearlware as those vessels with
cobalt oxide in the glaze (1969:360). Those
favoring a broad definition of pearlware may
wish to include all vessels exhibiting the
blue-puddling in crevices in that ware class. Most
archaeologists, however, fail to include their
definition or a discussion of the basis for their
type distinctions in their reports, so that one
must simply guess at the method used in their
analysis.
I suggest that the broad inclusion of all
vessels exhibiting a blue color in the puddled
glaze is unworkable with respect to nineteenth
century ceramic chronologies and archaeological
sherd assemblages, and suggest a narrower
definition of pearlware - restricting this term to
those vessels exhibiting additional characteristics
(following in part the definition proposed by
Lofstrom 1976:22-23). Pearlware vessels, in
addLtion to. the blue_color:Til the -pudd-led..glaz~;·
should al!)o_exhibit_an m,1er£}ll blue or blye-gree_n
cast generally visibJe on the entiie vessel surface.
Vess-els- which lack this overall bluish or
blue-green cast, even though they do have
blue-puddled glaze in the footring or other
vessel crevices where the glaze is thicker, should
not necessarily be classed as pearlware. Sherds
of pearlware appear more blue or blue-green
when held next to those of whiteware, and so it
follows that sherds of whiteware will appear
white and sometimes even slightly yellowish
next to pearlware.
The vessels exhibiting an overall blue or
blue-green cast do occur earlier than those

which appear to be whiteware with blue-puddled
glaze. In archaeological assemblages, in southeast
Missouri at least, pearlware (from here on used
to mean those vessels only which exhibit the
overall bluish tint) occurs only very rarely in
collections from lowland sites, thought to have
been occupied after ca. 1820 or 1830, while it
occurs in relatively large quantities on at least
one Ozark Highland site occupied as early as
1815. I suggest the shift in glazes occurred ca.
1820 or 1830, and that the whitewares with
blue glaze puddling appear to continue until the
1860s, if not later.
Furthermore, the shift from vessels with an
overall bluish cast - those here being called
pearlware - to those with a completely white
cast, or whiteware, appears to parallel changes in
the color palette of the painted decoration
found on certain of the ceramic types. The shift
in glazes, for example, appears to correspond to
the widespread use of a variety of colors on
transfer-printed vessels. The increase in use of
red, lavender, lighter blues, and green is
generally dated to the late 1820s (Hughes and
Hughes 1968: 151). Prior to that time darker
cobalt blue and black seem to have been the
predominant colors among the pearl ware
transfer prints. The shift in colors is also evident
among the handpainted vessels. Earthen tones
(yellow, orange, brown, earthen green) and dark
cobalt blue are evident on the earlier pearlwares,
while brighter pinkish reds, bright light blues
and greens, black or purple predominate on the
whiteware. The collections from the Ozark
Border area, for example, contain no sherds
with the latter colors and the pearlware glaze.
They do contain sherds with these colors on
whiteware which both do and do not exhibit
the blue-puddled glaze in the footrings. These
same colors ar.e those utilized on the sponge
decorated vessels and later stamped forms (see
below), which have not yet been recovered in
southeast Missouri with a pearlware glaze.

No'el Hume observed the color shift, stating
that polychrome printed pearlwares from
"1795-1815 are generally in soft pastel tints,
but, thereafter and continuing to about 1835,
directly stenciled floral patterns in bright blue,

15

orange, green and a pinkish red became the
vogue among poorer classes" (No'el Hume
1970: 179). His dating of the shift is, however,
slightly earlier than suggested by the Missouri
collections.

firing. The development of a lead-free glaze and
the introduction of a wider variety of colors in
decoration appear to have occurred in the same
general time span, 1820-1830, and are possibly
associated.

The shift in glazes and the shift in color
palette may be related. Hughes and Hughes
(1968:85-86) discuss the development of a
leadless glaze by John Rose of Coalport in 1820
in an effort to avoid the health hazards
associated with lead glazes. His recipe, according
to Hughes and Hughes (1968:86), was not
patented and could, therefore, be taken by
anyone. Among the advantages of the glaze,
they noted that it fused at a lower temperature
without producing specks or flaws and that
enameled decoration incorporated solidly with
it, the tint being unaffected. They noted that
lead glazes did affect delicately tinted enamels.
In their discussion of transfer-printed forms,
Hughes and Hughes ( 1968: 150) noted that the
earliest colors, cobalt blue and black, were used
because these colors were unspoiled by glaze

To summarize the above, then, it is proposed
that sherds be classified as either pearlware or
wh i teware based on several characteristics
including overall glaze tint and color palette,
rather than relying on the simple
"blue-puddling" of the glaze as the major
distinguishing criterion. As a final note, the
above suggestions for classifying the wares have
not eliminated the problem of the subjective
nature of perceiving tint or cast color and the
often real difficulty in sorting very pale
pearlwares from whitewares in archaeological
sherd collections. Thus, the use of a
combination of characteristics is suggested for
defining typologies, and color palette and
decoration style may become as important as
glaze hue in developing chronologically
significant assemblages.

);

,J\

\!\

,_

,<1

(•

(

I•'. i /

f \
(,

'( l.1 Ii

.\J

f \ '): l

/111 /) ' }

] ,r,

'\)
!\

,\J

'1 ,, \,(

1'

! "t(i' . ._'., , \
1

I>I o,n.

I

Ii,

•(

I

'{I

'

Decorative

\

')
i
I,

Based on the various decorative techniques,
ceramics from the first three quarters of the
nineteenth century may be classified by types.
The type descriptions given here are based on
ceramic collections from selected archaeological
sites in the Eastern Ozark Border region of
southeast Missouri, and are, therefore, restricted
to those types recovered from this area. This is
not to say the types are not valid for other
regions (in most cases they undoubtedly will
be), but it should be noted that additional types
or varieties, not recovered to date in this region,
will also surely exist. Since creamware is nearly
absent from the collections to date, only
pearlware and whiteware types will be
considered. Several broad classes or types may
be defined with these then subdivided into
varieties or subtypes.

Pearlware is used in the restricted sense
defined here, and whiteware includes those
"whiteware" vessels which do, as well as those
which do not, have the blue-puddled glaze.
Appendix Tables 1-3 provide data on sherd
counts from the sites chosen for this analysis.
The following discussions of types and varieties
are based principally on these data.

Plates 1-13 illustrate the types and varieties
defined here.

Types and Varieties

Descriptions
/\ Ty,e: Edge-decorated, pearlware and white-

are
Varieties: 1. Shell-edge, pearlware and whiteware
2. Molded feather and fish scale,
pearl ware
3. Molded dots and plumes, whiteware

Edge decoration consists of a painted band
around the rim of the vessel. The rim generally
has a molded decoration over which the colored
band is applied, shell-edge being the most
common (Noel Hume 1970: 131 ). (Often this is
wrongly called feather-edge in much of the
archaeological literature. According to Noel
Hume (1970:131), the term "feather-edge" is
restricted to a creamware pattern.) Other kinds
of molded decorations occurring on the vessel
rims recovered from the Ozark Border include
plumes, a series of raised dots, feathers, fish
scales, and combinations of the above. The
molded-rim decoration may also occur,
particularly the shell-edge, with no color band.
Relatively dark cobalt blue is the most common
color found, although green also occurs in
smaller amounts, and one example of pink has
been recovered. Although edge-decorated plates
were also made with a painted and/or sponged
decoration in the center (see Noel Hume

17

18

1970: Fig. 48), these have not yet been found in
the Ozark Border area.
The pearlware forms appear earlier here than
the whiteware forms and were probably made
until the 1820s or 1830s (see also Noel Hume
1970: 129-131). A Davenport factory mark
occurs on one of the blue shell-edge whiteware
sherds in the collection. The mark is composed
of an impressed anchor with year numbers on
either side, in this case the year 1844 being
indicated (Godden 1964:189-191). Shell-edge
decorated forms occur until ca. 1860. One
specimen is marked with the J & G Meakin
factory mark and must date later than 1851,
when the factory began production under that
name (Godden 1964:427).
Edge decoration was used on a variety of
vessel forms; however, plates were the most
common (Noel Hume 1970:131). Nearly all of
the Ozark Border sherds of this decorative type
are from plates, with a few sherds of large
platters also represented in the blue shell-edge
form.
In the collections the decoration seems to
change little through time; however, the
shell-edge is perhaps not as well executed on
specimens recovered from the later sites and
features. The more elaborate rim molding is
absent from sherds recovered from the later
deposits.
I

'

1· ·

Type: Annular decorated, pearlware and whiteware
Varieties: 1. Annular or slip banded
2. Mocha
3. Swirl
4. Marbled
5. Circle and Cube
6. Engine turned or rouletted

Annular decoration consists of a series of
differently colored concentric bands applied to
the vessel body. The vessel may then be further
decorated using a variety of techniques. For
example, several colors may be swirled together
in a manner resembling finger painting; circular

or cubic forms may appear between bands of
color; colors may be closely swirled producing a
marblized effect; or bands of impressed
geometric designs, often in color, may be found.
Th is last variety is often termed "engine
turned," and was manufactured by coating the
vessel with a layer of colored slip and while on
the lathe cutting through it and exposing the
contrasting body beneath (Godden 1963:105).
The variety, often termed "mocha ware," is
decorated with feathery fronds between colored
bands made by dripping an acidic mixture of
tobacco juice and urine (Godden 1963:109,
Noel Hume 1970: 131) or tobacco juice and hop
(Hughes and Hughes 1968: 112-113) on a
light-colored alkaline slip.
In the Ozark Border collections most of the
sherds of this type appear to be whiteware. This
should not necessarily be taken to indicate that
pearlware forms are rare since the sample of
pearlware ceramics from this area is yet small.
The only vessel forms represented to date are
bowls and cups (see Godden 1963: 108 and also
No'el Hume 1970:131, who stated that mugs,
jugs, and bowls were the most common vessel
forms with annular decoration).

There appears to be a change through time in
the annular decoration found in the collections
in both the colors used and the complexity of
the decoration. The vessels from the earlier sites
and features most frequently exhibit the earthen
color palette with earthen blue, green, brown,
yellow and black predominating, and the bands
of color are generally narrower with a greater
number of colors used on any one vessel. The
sherds recovered from later deposits were
generally decorated with wide bands of brighter
background colors (brighter blue, yellow, and
white being common), on which very narrow
bands of white or black were used (Noel Hume
1970:131). It is suggested that the pearlware
forms were made until ca. 1830, at which time
the same decoration in a whiteware was made
and continued to the end of the century (see
No'el Hume 1970: 131 ). By the late nineteenth
century mixing bowls, chamber pots, and
possibly also mugs were the most common
vessel forms.

19

('

'·

Type: Transfer printed, pearlware and whiteware
Varieties: 1. Dark cobalt blue, pearlware and
whiteware
2. Red, brown, purple lavender,
etc., whiteware
3. Thick gray-blue, lavender, whiteware

Transfer printing consisted of the application
of colored designs to a vessel by means of an
inked waxed paper onto which the design was
transferred from a copper plate engraving
(Hughes and Hughes 1968: 148-150, Coysh
1974:7-8). A wide variety of designs including
floral, geometric, and historical and other scenes
was used.
Prior to the 1830s, blue was the predominant
color with black and sepia also used (Hughes
and Hughes 1968:150; Godden 1963:113).
According to Towner (1957:47), by 1820 the
blue transfer-printed . ceramics manufactured in
the Staffordshire potteries exceeded in output
any other class of ware (see also Noel Hume
1973:247). A wider range of colors, including
red, purple, lavender, green, brown, brighter and
lighter blues came into widespread use during
the latter part of the 1820s (Hughes and Hughes
1968:150-151), and multi-colored printing came
into use ca. 1840s (Godden 1963: 115).
According to Hughes and Hughes ( 1968: 151)
the use of a wider range of colors followed the
discovery that, by mixing finely powdered
enamel colors with barbados tar, designs could
be transferred in those colors without distortion.
The use of the wider range of colors may also
have been possible with the shift to the
whiteware glaze.
In the Ozark Border collections only
relatively dark cobalt blue is found with a
pearlware glaze, and the remaining colors
including a lighter blue are found with the
whiteware glaze. Transfer printing is also found
on thicker whiteware vessels, with green, brown,
a "washed out" lavender, and grayish-blue being
the most common colors.

In addition to the change in colors in the
collections, the designs generally tend to become
less complex and more open through time with
larger portions of the vessel being left
undecorated. The dark blue decoration tended
nearly to fill the available space on the vessel,
but by the time transfer printing was used with
the whiteware glaze the decorated and
undecorated spaces were more nearly equal, and
by the last half of the century the design
occupied even less space.
Transfer printing occurs in the collections on
a wide variety of vessel forms, including plates,
platters, handleless-shouldered cups, saucers, and
covered sugars and tureens.

. I ) Type: Sponge decorated, whiteware
Sponged decoration, sometimes called
spatterware (Ohio State Museum 1960, Keyes
1930, Greaser and Greaser 1973: 101-103),
consists of the application of various colors to
the vessel surface by means of an inked sponge
(Keyes 1930:332, Greaser and Greaser
1973: 101-103). Decoration most often consists
of a wide band of color, or colors, around the
vessel rim. Cups often exhibit a band of sponged
decoration around the rim on both the interior
and exterior of the vessel. A handpainted floral,
bird or other motif sometimes occurs in the
bottom of plates or on one side of a cup often
over the sponged background decoration (Ohio
State Museum 1960, Keyes 1930, Greaser and
Greaser 1975).
A very wide range of colors is found in the
Ozark Border collections, including light blue,
pink or pinkish red, brown, orange, yellow,
lavender, ·and several shades of green, and
frequently several colors were used in alternating
strips on the same vessel. Sponged decoration
has been found along the Ozark Border only
with whiteware glaze.
It is suggested this form of decoration was
introduced after the late 1820s or 1830, and
perhaps continued to be used until ca. 1850 or
1860. Keyes (1930:333) suggested sponged

20

decoration was introduced ca. 1830, and an
exhibition catalogue of the Ohio State Museum
(1960: 1) dated its period of popularity from
1820 to 1860. Collard (1967) dated its
appearance in Canada slightly earlier than
mid-century.
Although the sponge-decorated sherds in the
Ozark Border collections are all whiteware, this
decorative technique was used on earlier
pearlware vessels as well, but in a slightly
different form. Towner (1957:56) mentioned
several potteries producing pearlware vessels
with painted designs in which the foliage was
sponged in as early as 1817, and Noel Hume
(1973:241) illustrated a blue edge-decorated
pearlware plate which he dated 1815 to 1830,
and which had an underglaze blue house design
with the foliage on the trees sponged in. Sherds
from such vessels have not yet been recovered in
the present study area.
Plates, cups, and saucers are the most
common vessel forms, with one example of a
pitcher also represented in the collections.
Type: Stamped, whiteware
Stamped decoration consists of the
application of a design to the vessel by means of
an inked stamp possibly cut from a piece of
sponge. Godden (1963:111) described a
technique of sponged decoration which must be
a reference to this type. His information was
derived from a description of Scottish potteries.
The decoration was applied by means of
portions cut out of the smooth root of a
sponge, dipped in color, and brought into
contact with the vessel surface, leaving a stamp
of the pattern (Godden 1963:111-112).
Geometric and floral designs are most common
with the design generally being composed of a
series of a single element repeated across the
v es s e I . St am p i n g freq u en t I y occurs in
combination with sponging and handpainting,
and the decorated zone is often bou.nded by
thin painted lines above and/or below. Colors
used are the same as those found in the sponged
decoration, and several colors are often found

on the same vessel (for example, the stamped
design in lavender bounded by red lines).
In the Ozark Border collections stamping
occurs only on whiteware with cups and saucers
being the most common vessel forms.
Stamping appears to be a relatively late
introduction here, possibly ca. the late 1840s or
early 1850s, based on its occurrence only on the
late sites and features.
Type: Handpainted, pearlware and whiteware
Varieties: 1. Dark cobalt blue floral, pearlware and whiteware
2. Earthen
polychrome
floral,
pearl ware
3. Bright polychrome floral, whiteware
4. Banded, whiteware and pearlware
Handpainted decoration generally consists of
floral or other designs applied by painting the
vessel surface. Noe1 Hume noted that the earliest
use of handpainted decoration was the Chinese
house design in blue on pearlware with the
subsequent introduction of a wider variety of
floral and geometric motifs (1970: 129). Hughes
and Hughes (1968:108) noted the use of floral
designs along with bird, animal, and insect
motifs by at least one firm. Along the Ozark
Border only the floral and banded patterns have
been found to date.
Among the floral varieties a range of styles is
present in the archaeological samples including:
fineline decoration in which the design is
carefully executed and the elements are
generally small, the entire design occuping little
of the vessel surface; "sprig" in which a very
small element or motif is repeated around a
vessel; and broad line in which large flowers and
foliage occupy a large portion of the vessel
surface. An additional design, utilizing dots
rather than flowers, is also present in the Ozark
Border samples. The vessels with the broadline
decoration often exhibit a narrow painted band

21

around the rim. The fineline style is the most
common on pearlware vessels, while all of the
styles occur on whiteware.
Three color palettes are found among the
sherds of this type: blue only, earthen colors
and brighter colors. Vessels decorated only with
cobalt blue are found among both the
whitewares and pearlwares although pearlware
forms are more common. Only bowls, cups,
saucers, and a bottle (?) are represented in the
Ozark Border collections to date. F inel ine floral
decoration in the earthen palette with earthen
green, brown, yellow, and orange predominating
is found on pearlware vessels. Only one vessel of
this variety, a covered container, has been
recovered to date. Much brighter colors,
including pinkish red, light, bright green, a dark
blue-green, light and bright blue, and black are
found on whiteware vessels. Vessel forms
represented include plates, cups, saucers, and
covered sugars or tureens, with cups and saucers
being the most common.
As stated above, Noel Hume (1970:179)
noted a change in colors in the handpainted
types:
. . . 1795-1815 are generally soft pastel hues,
but thereafter, and continuing to about 1835,
directly stenciled floral patterns in bright
blue, orange, green, and a pinkish red became
the vogue ....
It is suggested here, based on the Ozark
Border collections, that the soft pastel or
earthen hues were utilized until ca. 1830 and
that the later, brighter colors, the introduction
of which paralleled the introduction of the
whiteware glaze, were utilized from ca. 1830 to
1860 or later. The vessels decorated only in blue
appear to have been made throughout this time
period as evidenced by a vessel from 23Rl-H19,
marked with the Davenport mark and indicating
a year date of 1856 (Godden 1964:189-191).
It is the polychrome handpainted vessels
which perhaps create the most confusion in the
literature. Frequently, they are all lumped

together under "handpainted polychrome
pearlwares," based presumably on the
occurrence of the blue-puddled glaze in footring
crevices. As discussed above, such a classification
system obscures the temporal significance of the
shift in colors and of the shift in glazes. As seen
here, two distinct subtypes may be defined: 1)
overall bluish glaze tint with earthen-colored
fineline decoration, and 2) overall white glaze
tint with brightly colored fineline, "sprig," and
broadline decoration, which may be temporally
ordered, thus dividing a 1790-1840 time span
(South 1972) into a 1790-1830 and 1830-1860
range (note the suggested extention of the time
range).
The banded variety includes those vessels,
principally cups and saucers, decorated only
with a painted band around the rim, or a series
of concentric bands around the body. Colors
found are green, red, black, and light and dark
blue. This variety presents a problem in that
many of the vessels in this class are probably
simply rim sherds of the previously 'described
handpainted vessels with floral designs. As noted
above, these vessels often do exhibit a painted
rim band in addition to the floral motifs. Given
a small rim sherd, then, it would be virtually
impossible to determine whether it was a sherd
of a. handpainted vessel with a floral design or a
sye(d of a vessel decorated only with colored
/bands.

(· ~ Type:. Flow decoration, whiteware
varieties: 1. Flow blue
2. Flow mulberry
Flow blue decoration consists of
transfer printed designs on vessels in
color has flowed out or bled
surrounding undecorated portions of
(Mankowitz and Hagger 1975:90).

painted or
which the
into the
the vessels

In the Ozark Border collections both transfer
prints in cobalt blue as well as what appear to
be hand applied, either painted or by use of a
device like a slipcup, in blue and mulberry, are
represented. The .mulberry design was found on
a paneled handleless cup and saucer set, while

22

the blue types occur on cups and on plates. The
vessels on which the flown decoration occurs are
relatively thick.
The date of introduction of th is type is
uncertain. Based on its consistent association in
Ozark Border collections with other ceramic
types dating ca. 1830 to 1860, it is suggested
that it appears ca. 1830 to 1840. Collard ( 1967)
presented examples of sale bills and
advertisements circulated in Canada during the
1840s which noted that vessels with "flown
blue" decoration were available.
Th is earlier flown decoration may be
distinguished from that dating ca. 1900 by the
style of design and a lack of both gold edging
and raised rim designs common in the later
forms.

tJI

Type: Plain embossed or molded rim, white.--llill!'w!!l!l!a re
I

Plain embossed vessels are those lacking any
form of printed or painted decoration but
exhibiting a molded, raised ("embossed")
geometric or floral design, generally around the
rim of plates or on the body of bowls or cups.
These vessels are often relatively thick, plates
being the most common vessel form in the
Ozark Border area.
It is suggested that these vessels were
introduced ca. the late 1840s or early 1850s based
on their more frequent occurrence on later sites.

r Type:

Undecorated Whiteware

Undecorated whiteware vessels are those
which lack any form of printed, painted, or
molded decoration. A wide variety of
undecorated forms occurs in the Ozark Border
collections including plates, bowls, cups, saucers,
platters, and pitchers. The undecorated cup
forms more often than not are handled, and the
saucers tend to be shallower than the decorated
forms. Although they were probably introduced
somewhat earlier, undecorated whiteware vessels
were most common in the period following the

Civil War (see for example, Fairbanks 1974:77).
This type continued to be produced throughout
the century (South 1974:247-248).

Included in this type are those vessels which
are commonly called "ironstone" (see above). It
may be that varieties can be defined under this
type which would allow the sorting out of the
thicker walled, generally harder bodied vessels
("ironstones"), and the thinner, generally softer
bodied vessels. The sherds available for analysis
here were, however, insufficient to allow such
variety classification to be consistently
accomplished.

J

Other types:

In addition to the decorative types described
above, a few sherds exhibiting other kinds of
decoration have been found along the Ozark
Border. They are not described as types here
simply because the sample is small. This is not
to say they are insignificant, but that they form
very minor parts of the local ceramic
assemblage.

Luster Decorated:
Lu st er decoration consists of a shiny
metallic-appearing surface, generally in the form
of a band around the rim of a vessel. Silver
luster was made from platinum and copper
luster from gold (Godden 1963:108, 1966:xxiv).
According to Godden it was produced after
1800 (1966:xxiv). Only a very few sherds with
luster decoration have been found, and all were
from saucers.

Molded Design with Cobalt Blue:
Sherds of a vessel, which appears to be a
covered sugar or other covered hollow form,
were recovered from one site. A band of molded
floral decoration which is painted in dark cobalt
blue occurs just below the rim. The glaze is
pearl ware.

Vessel Forms

The following vessel forms commonly occur
in the Ozark Border collections: plates, saucers,
shouldered handleless cups, bowls, platters,
pitchers, teapots, covered "sugars" or tureens
(Figs. 2 and 3). along with several yet
unidentified forms including what appear to be
a small bottle and a canister-shaped vessel.
Plate forms are all quite similar being
relatively small in diameter and relatively deep
(Fig. 2D). The plate form appears to have
changed little during the time span under
consideration here. Cups are found in generally
three shapes, all handleless: the most common
form has a steeply angled shoulder (Fig. ·2A);
also occurring is a form having a shoulder more
gently angled or rounded (Fig. 2B); and

occurring less frequently are paneled cups
lacking the shoulder. The first two cup styles
may date earlier than the last which has been
found to date with flow mulberry decoration
and in undecorated forms. It might be noted
that in all of the Ozark Border collections from
sites dating prior to ca. 1870, no cup handles
have been recovered. Bowls are much like cups,
but are larger in diameter, and may or may not
be shouldered. Saucers are relatively deep,
dish-shaped forms (Fig. 2C). Covered "sugars"
or tureens are rectangular in shape with an
interior lip or rim edge on which the lid rests
(Fig. 3). Insufficient fragments of the remaining
vessel forms have been recovered to date to
allow the forms to be described.

23

24

CUP

CUP

B

A
SAUCER

c
PLATE

D
1 inch
One-half vessel shown
Figure 2. Common vessel forms found on archaeological sites
in the Ozark Border area from ca. 1810 to 1870.

25

1 inch
One-half vessel shown

Figure 3. Common "covered sugar" form found on archaeological
sites in the Ozark Border area from ca. 1810 to 1870.

The Assemblages

Appendix Tables 1-3 present information on
numbers of sherds and percentages of wares,
types, and varieties found in the ceramic
assemblages on the sites here considered. Table
1 presents general information on numbers of
decorated, undecorated wh iteware and
pearlware sherds. The decorated sherds include
all those with painted or printed decoration and
those with embossed or molded designs which
are unpainted. The undecorated sherds includ.e
all those lacking any decoration. It should be
remembered that these latter sherds are derived
from either or both of two sources: vessels
lacking any decoration and undecorated portions
of decorated vessels.

The most notable temporal trend observable
in the figures in Appendix Table 1 is a decrease
in the relative proportions of decorated sherds
and an increase in undecorated sherds through
time. Percentages range from 53 percent
decorated on 23Rl-H19, the earliest occupied
site, to approximately 30 percent in the middle
range, to 15-20 percent on the latest sites,
Barfield and 23Rl-H25. The increase in
undecorated sherds may be explained by both
an increase in whiteware vessels lacking any
decoration after ca. 1860, as well as by an
increase in decorated vessels with larger portions ·
of undecorated background present. For
example, the edge-decorated plates contain
relatively little decorated space with respect to

the total vessel, and many of the fineline and
sprig decorated vessels also contain relatively
little decorated space. An increase in either of
these decorated types along with an increase in
undecorated vessels would account for an
increase in the undecorated sherd count.
A second noticeable and expected temporal
trend is a relatively high proportion of pearlware
in the earliest deposits on the earliest site,
Feature 6 on 23R 1-H 19, and a near absence of
this ware on the later lowland sites.
The percentage of whiteware sherds
exhibiting a blue color in areas of thicker or
puddled glaze shows no obvious temporal
change. The percentage of such wares at
23R1-H 19 is not appreciably greater than that of
the other sites. Were this a trait associated only
with earlier pearlware, it would be expected to
vary as the percentage of pearlware varies. As
can be seen, it does not (Appendix Table 1).
Appendix Table 2 presents data on decorative
types alone, without a consideration of the
wares and varieties. Figure 4 presents a summary
of the information in bar graph form. As can be
seen, the first three lowland site assemblages, C.
Woodard, Stick Chimney, and Bradom I, are
quite similar, being composed of handpainted
types, edge-decorated types, and sponge and
transfer types in order of decreasing frequency.

27

Percent

,,
co
c
.....
CD

.j::>.

......

N

0

0

w

Percent

""'

0

Vl

0

"'

0

0

~

sponged

0

sponged

~

....+

transfer

CD

annular

annular

:;::·
-n

.....

CD

.0

c

CD
::l

w

""'

0

0

hand ptd.

~
H

hand ptd.

transfer

Q)

N

0

edge dee.

edge dee .
t:J

CD

......
0

~

stamped

stamped

~

b:I

D>

;:o
>rj

H

t'1

t-<

t:J

H

en

flow bl.

flow bl.

(")

'<
0

-n

(")

.....

hand ptd.

3

sponged

....+

transfer

CD·
Q)

()'

'<

"O
CD

edge dee.

edge dee.

hand ptd.
n

Q)

....+
(J)

N
00

~

transfer

0
0

t:J

D>
;:o

annular

annular

t:J

(J)

~

sponged

:;.:

stamped

stamped

flow bl.

flow bl.

edge dee.

edge dee.

N

w
;:o
H

I

::x:

N
Vl

CD

(")

....+
CD

a.
Q)

......

(")

:r
Q)

CD

0
0

co

()'
Q)
(J)

....+
CD

(J)

hand ptd,

hand ptd.
sponged

b:I

sponged

t:J
0

transfer

H

annular

~

transfer

~

annular
stamped

stamped

flow bl.

flow bl.

I

I

I

N

w
;:o
H

I

::x:

""'

\0

::l
....+

:r
CD

0

N

Q)

......

edge dee,

edge dee.
en

hand ptd.

hand ptd.

rl
H

n

7\

sponged

:;:>::

sponged

OJ
0
......

transfer

::x:

n

transfer

CD

annular

a.

......

H

......

stamped

?>

flow bl.

Q)

~
t'1

annular

K!

I

I

N

I

w
;:o
H

I

::x:

Vl

0

stamped

CD

flow bl.
......
0

N
0

w
0

""'
0

Vl

0

"'
0

......
0

N
0

w

0

""'

0

29

The assemblage from Barfield, the latest known
site, contains a greater proportion of
edge-decorated types with embossed types
second (Appendix Table 2, not indicated on
graph) and handpainted, transfer printed and
stamped types nearly al I equally represented.
Annular types occur in minor amounts at all
sites. The remaining three sites exhibit variation
among themselves as well as among all the sites.
The assemblages from the features on
23Rl-H19, with the exception of the presence
of stamped types in Feature 3, exhibit a strong
similarity even though a time span from 1815 to
1870 is represented. These assemblages are
distinguished from the lowland assemblages in
the near absence of sponge decorated sherds on
the site (which are strongly represented at
nearly all of the lowland sites) and in a
noticeably greater percentage of transfer printed
types. The site also exhibits a much lower
percentage of edge-decorated sherds than do
most lowland sites, and has a greater range in
percentages of the dominant types. The
handpainted and transfer printed types comprise
the largest portion of the assemblages on this
site, while in the lowland sites essentially four
types make up the major portion of the
assemblage.

Since the sample of sites with which we are
dealing is small, particularly including only one
highland site and one known late lowland site
(Widow Harris and Barfield, respectively), it is
difficult to assess the differences observed in the
site assemblages. We do not know at this point
whether the differences observed between the
earlier three lowland sites (C. Woodard, Stick
Chimney, and Bradom I) and Barfield reflect a
real change in assemblage composition through
time or whether they reflect a sampling bias.
Likewise, we do not know if we are dealing
with a real highland/lowland assemblage
difference or again if there is a sampling bias.
The difference in the Widow Harris assemblage
and those from the lowland sites may be in part
a result of the earlier occupation at the Widow
Harris site. The much higher percentage there of
transfer printed sherds (which are predominantly
blue) may be a factor of the pre-1830

occupation. As noted in the type descriptions
above, blue transfer printed vessels dominated
the market (English exports to America) during .
the 1820s (Towner 1957:47, Godden 1963:12,
No'el Hume 1973:247; see also J. Miller 1965).
The decline in the relative proportion of transfer
printed sherds on the lowland sites may then
reflect a change in the predominant export
wares following the 1830 or 1840 time period
(although the shift was not noted in the
available literature). Temporal differences cannot
however, account for the marked difference in
the percentage of sponge decorated sherds
between the Widow Harris and the lowland sites.
Such things as different trade routes or different
social or economic statuses come to mind, but
as yet the data are too limited from these sites
and this area to control for these kinds of
variables.
The most notable chronological markers in
Appendix Table 2 are stamped and embossed
types. All are present in greater proportion in
the later sites than in the earlier ones from
which they are very nearly absent.

Appendix Table 3 presents a more detailed
classification of the sherds by variety. The most
notable differences here are seen in the
relatively higher percentage of dark cobalt blue
transfer prints, the presence of edge-decorated
pearlware with molded rim designs, and
handpainted designs in cobalt blue only in the
earliest assemblages. It might also be noted that
edge-decorated types in whiteware with molded
rim designs other than shell-edge occur only at
the highland sites.

In general, the earliest assemblage (23Rl-H19,
Feature 6) contains a relatively higher
proportion of decorated ceramics, a higher
proportion of pearlware types, and a higher
proportion of dark cobalt blue decoration. In
the early assemblages, the predominant, but not
the only, color is blue (Noel Hume noted also
that pearlware was generally thought of as being
decorated principally in blue, but that a wider
variety of decoration did occur (Noel Hume
1973:245)). By the 1830s or 1840s (represented

30

by Bradom I, Stick Chimney, C. Woodard,
Features 5 and 11 on 23R1-H 19) there is still a
relatively high proportion of decorated sherds, a
high proportion of whiteware, and a high
proportion of .brightly decorated types.
Pearlware and cobalt blue are minor portions of
the assemblage. The decrease in decorated sherds
here is probably a reflection of the more open
decoration and relatively greater undecorated
vessel spaces rather than a great increase in
undecorated vessels. By the 1850s (represented
by Barfield and Feature 3 on 23Rl-H19 and
possibly 23Rl-H25, 23Rl-H49, and 23Rl-H50)
decorated sherds occur in low proportion,
whitewares occur in high proportion, and colors
are still bright. The greater decrease in decorated
sherds is probably here a reflection of a greater
number of undecorated vessels and those
exhibiting only molded rim decoration. The
1870 to 1890 assemblage (not presented here) is
marked by a very high proportion of
undecorated whiteware vessels.
Figure 5 presents the suggested chronological
sequence for selected ceramic types and varieties
in southeast Missouri ca. 1810-1870. It is based
on the limited data available here and is
intended to be tentative only.
Based on the temporal ordering of the eight
sites in the current sample, the following
chronological assemblages are suggested:
1. Predominantly blue transfer printed
, pearlware, blue edge-decorated pearlware,
handpainted blue and earthen polychrome
pearlware with minor amounts of annular
pearlware, high percentage decorated and
pearl ware.
Suggested dating: 1810-1830.
2. Predominantly blue edge-decorated
whiteware, bright polychrome handpainted
whiteware, transfer printed whiteware in
various bright colors, sponge-decorated
whiteware, less amounts of the earthen
annular whiteware varieties, and possibly a
minor amount of flow blue, and plain

embossed varieties, medium percentage
decorated and high percentage whiteware.
Suggested dating: 1830-1850
3. Predominantly blue edge-decorated
whiteware, transfer printed whiteware in a
variety of colors, bright polychrome,
handpainted whiteware, some
sponge-decorated whiteware, stamped
decorated whiteware, plain embossed
whiteware, flow blue whiteware, with
minor amounts of bright colored banded
and mocha varieties of annular whiteware,
low percentage decorated and high
percentage whiteware.
Suggested dating: 1850-1870.
4. Almost all undecorated whiteware with
the thicker walled variety common.
Suggested dating: 1870-1890.
It is suggested here that pearlware sherds
with cobalt blue and earthen colored
handpainted decoration appear to be good
diagnostic markers of pre-1830 occupation.
Brightly colored transfer printed sherds,
sponge-decorated vessels (if present), and
brightly colored handpainted types together
with blue and green edge-decorated plates (all
whiteware) appear to be good diagnostic
markers of the 1830-1860 period. The
post-1840 or 1850 period is marked by the
addition of stamped vessels, flow blue, and plain
embossed types to this latter assemblage.
Generally it appears that three broad classes
or types of decoration were common
throughout the 1810-1870 period: edge,
transfer, handpainted decoration. The temporal
significance lies in changes in color palette and
glaze utilized on vessels in these
classes - pearlware to whiteware and earthen
colors and cobalt blue to bright enameled tints.
A fourth type, annular decorated, was also in
use during the 1810-1870 period but occurs in
relatively low proportion along the Ozark

31

0

0

.-l
00
.-l

N

00
.-l

edge dee.

I

0

0
M

--r
00
.-l

00
.-l

pearf.ware

whi~eware

other molded

pear;i.ware

whifeware

blue
earthen poly.

pearlware

-

l

I
pearfware

0
\D

00
.-l

00
.-l

0

"00
.-l

I

shell edge

hand painted

0
U")

--

?

whiteware

--

?

whiteware

bright poly.
annular
mocha

pearlware
I

whi~eware

earthen band.

pear,lware

whiteware

bright band.

I

I

others

? pearlwar"!

--

- - --?

white ware

?

whiteware

-?

---

transfer
pearlware

blue
bright colors

whf teware

---

whiteware

washed out, thick

?

whiteware

sponged

whiteyare

stamped
flow blue, mulberry
embossed
undecorated

whiteware
-

-

whitewarr
-

--

whiteware

--

whiteware

Figure 5. Proposed sequence for ceramic types in the Ozark Border area
ca. 1810 to 1870.

32

Border. One note of interest is found in Noel
Hume's statement (1930:131) that pearlware
was most commonly found in nineteenth
century archaeological contexts in the form of
shell-edged plates with rims painted in blue or
green, and that, next to these, pearlware was
most commonly found on early nineteenth
century sites in the form of annular decorated
bowls, mugs, and jugs.
In the one pearlware sample available
(23Rl-H19, Feature 6) there is a very low
proportion of edge decoration and of annular
decoration and a very low proportion of annular
decoration in general at all of the sites. The
edge-decorated sherds increase in frequency
following the introduction of whiteware in the
Ozark Border samples.
The low percentage of annular ware in the
collections is of significance with respect to
studies of social difference and ceramic usage.
Studies by Otto (1975, 1977) and Smith (1976
and 1977), for example, suggested that slave
occupations exhibit a greater percentage of these
types than do Euro-American occupations. In
the assemblages considered here annular wares
are not, with the exception of 23Rl-H25, well
represented. (It should not be assumed
23Rl-H25 is a slave site. The percentage is still
low, see Smith 1976: 154-155.)
Although percentage compositions of vessel
form assemblages have not yet been formulated,
a few statements may be made concerning the
relative quantity of the various forms in the
southeast Missouri collections.
In the collections, plates, cups, and saucers
are the most common forms with the other
vessels only rarely represented. (The relative
proportions in terms of numbers or percentages
of each vessel type in the collections have not
yet been determined.) The archaeological sherd
collections may not necessarily accurately reflect
a vessel assemblage in use at any given time by a
family or social group, but may rather reflect
the amount of use and, therefore, the breakage
rate of the various forms. It is also possible that

the vessel form assemblage reflects the relative
availability of the various forms, but, again,
insufficient data on trade in the region during
the 1810-1870 time period are available to allow
this to be determined.
There was very little found in the historical
documents available for this part of Missouri to
shed light on the nature of a household ceramic
assemblage for the period 1810-1870. Only one
inventory for a bill of sale in 1818 was found
which mentioned ceramic items. The list
included "1 small earthen dish, 12 delf plates, 2
sets cups and saucers, 1 blue and white teapot,
2 flowered pitchers and cream pot" (Lawrence
County Deed Record Book B:78-79). An early
traveler th rough Arkansas, Gerstaeker, described
the contents of two dwellings in Arkansas ca.
1839-1841. In one he noted three plates and
one saucer and in the other four plates, two
cups, and three saucers (in Higgins 1964: 125,
139-140).
In general, cups and saucers are the only
vessel forms to appear in sets, that is both cups
and saucers occur in the same decorative
patterns.

As seen above, a few of the decorative types
are restricted to one or a few vessel forms, while
the other types occur on a variety of forms. For
example, the edge-decorated type is found
almost exclusively on plates while the annular
wares are found only as small bowls or cups.
Handpainted floral types, both polychrome and
cobalt blue, are found primarily on cups and
saucers although a few plates of this type are
represented. Sponge decoration also occurs
principally on cups and saucers although plates
and at least one pitcher are also represented.
Stamped decoration also occurs principally on
cups and saucers. Transfer printed decoration
occurs on the widest variety of forms, being
found equally as often on plates as on cups,
saucers, and covered "sugars" or tureens.
Vessel forms seem to change little throughout
the first three quarters of the nineteenth
century. Relative quantities of the various

33

forms also seem to change little, there being as
wide a variety of forms represented in the
earliest assemblages as in the latest. Also the
same decorative methods appear to have been
used on the same vessel forms throu~hout that
time. For example, edge decoration was used
principally on plates from 1810 to 1860.

The decorative type percentages discussed
above, may, therefore, reflect a vessel form
assemblage to some extent. For example, the
relative proportions of edge-decorated sherds
and annular-decorated sherds may reflect the
relative numbers of bowls and plates in use
rather than strictly the relative proportions
(availability or preference) of specific decorative
types.

Comparisons
with Archaeological Sites in
the United States and Canada

Attempts to compare the Ozark Border
assemblages with those from sites dating to the
first three quarters of the nineteenth century
elsewhere in the United States and Canada failed
on all but a very general level in al I but three
cases. Table 3 presents information on the sites
considered, these being the only published
reports on such sites available to this
investigator at the time of this writing.
All but three of the reports (Smith 1976,
Jelks 1973, and Lofstrom 1976) failed to
provide ceramic data usable in comparative
analyses with the data presented here. Some
failed to provide adequate descriptions of the
ceramics to allow type classifications to be made
and others, which did provide reasonably
adequate descriptions, failed to provide adequate
quantitive information.
Appendix Tables 4-6 provide quantitative
information for several cabins at the First
Hermitage (Smith 1976), for certain portions of
the Officer's latrine at Ft. Snelling (Lofstrom
1976), and for Signal Hill (Jelks 1973). The
reports did not distinguish pearlware from
whiteware in the sherd counts (with the
exception of Lofstrom 1976), and in the case of
Signal Hi II it seems possible some of the
decorated sherds may be creamware, nor did
the reports classify the material on anything but
the type level. It should also be noted that

Lofstrom (1976) provided vessel counts while
the other two provided sherd counts.
In spite of these problems, percentage
compositions for the ceramic assemblages on the
sites were computed. Figure 6 graphically
illustrates the results. As can be seen, all three
sites contain relatively similar assemblages, and
comparing Figure 6 with Figure 4, they closely
resemble the Widow Harris assemblage. They
differ from the lowland Ozark Border sites in
having a very low proportion of sponge
decoration and a high proportion of transfer
printed decoration which in all cases had blue as
the predominant color (Appendix Tables 4-6).
All three sites are more similar in occupation
date ranges to the Widow H<,irris site than to the
lowland sites in that all were occupied prior to
1830. Th is, again, suggests that high blue
transfer percentages are a result of the
prominence in the ceramic trade of such vessels
during the first two to three decades of the
nineteenth century.
Although adequate quantitative data were not
available for the remainder of the sites listed in
Table 3, some information on relative
frequencies of some of the ceramic types is
given. Table 4 provides what information was
available.
Although these data allow only general
comparisons, the same decorative types appear

35

Table 3
Archaeological Sites dating ca. 1810 to 1870
included in assemblage comparisons with Ozark Border Sites

Site

Reference

Site Type

Occupation Dates

Location

First Hermitage
Hermitage Necessary

Smith 1976
Smith et al. 1977

Plantation
Plantation

1804 - 1850
1819 - 1938

Tennessee
Tennessee

Darien Bluff

Watkins 1970

3 houses in port
settlement of
Darien

1800 - 1860
(1810 - 1830
principal occupation)

Georgia

Ft. Mitchell

Chase 1974

military post

1813, 1825 - 1840

Alabama

Ft. Renville

Nystuen and
Lindeman

for trade post

1826 - 1846

Minnesota

Ft. Snelling

Lofstrom 1976

military post

1826 - 1880

Minnesota

Signal Hill

Jelks 1973

military post

1795 - 1860's

Newfoundland

Arkansas Post
Bank

Walker 1971

bank in Arkansas
Post settlement

1840 - 1863

Arkansas

Cater Site

Klinger 1975

trading post

ca. 1830 - 1848

Michigan

36

'"d
(1)

,_.
0

""

0

w
0

edge dee.

.i:0

l.JI

0\

-..J

0

0

0

11

n

~rt

'"rj

H

~

hand ptd.

H

"Tl
(.Cl

.,

transfer

m

annular

c

CD

~. ::0
.-+ CD
CD -

(/)

sponged

OJ

~

~

H

H

;t>

C'l

tT1

stamped
flow blue

-· !:!".

::J <
.-+ CD

::; -n

(.....)

-....I

CD

(il

::J

c

c.o

edge dee.

- · CD
.-+ ::J
CD (')

hand ptd.

0..-<
Cllo
@" -n

sponged

.-+ (')
CD

(/)

OJ

::J

.,
CD

OJ

3

0.. (')
-·

Ul

H

C'l

z

~
::r:
H

transfer

t-<
t-<

annular
stamped

(') .-+
OJ<

::J '"O

OJ

flow blue

CD

0.. (/)
OJ

OJ

.-+

w

.,OJ

edge dee .

::;

hand ptd.

(')

OJ
CD

0
0

ce.
(')

OJ

sponged

'"rj

H

1----""

C.ll

z

tT1

transfer

t-<
t-<

H

annular

z

C'l

stamped
flow blue
'"d
(1)

I-'

0

""

0

w
0

.i:0

l.JI

0\

-..J

0

0

0

11

n(1)

::s

rt

Table 4
Ceramic types present on selected sites in order of decreasing frequency.1
1

2

3

4

Hermitage Necessary

hand painted

transfer printed

sponged

Darien Bluff

transfer printed*

edge decorated

"banded and painted"

Ft. Renville

transfer printed *

sponged(?) 2

edge decorated

Cater Site

transfer printed*

hand painted

annular, edge decorated, sponged3

Arkansas Post Bank

transfer printed

edge decorated

hand painted

1in some instances information is not entirely clear and the
assemblage ordering may not be correct
2 this type was described as "green and red speckled underglaze"
(Nystuen and Lindeman 1969:17) and this may or may not be
sponged decoration
3no relative ordering given for these 3 types in text
*indicates blue is predominant color

38

hand painted

sponged and annular

39

to be present in generally the same relative
proportions at all the sites considered. The most
notable variation appears in the distribution of
sponge and stamped vessels, both well
represented in the Ozark Border area, but
poorly represented at most other sites.
Finally, it should be noted that not all of the
sites used in these comparisons are functionally
similar. The Ozark Border sites are all most
likely nuclear family farmsteads while the other
sites considered range from plantations to
military posts. It is of interest, however, that in
spite of the functional dissimilarities, the
ceramic type assemblages are generally
comparable. One possible difference may well be
found in the distribution of sponged vessels, but
perhaps of more significance is the relative
proportion of annular vessels. As noted above
these latter vessels are thought to occur more

·.

frequently on black slave sites (Smith 1976,
1977 and Otto 1975, 1978). On all but one of
the Missouri sites, 23Rl-H25, the percentage of
annular sherds was less than 5 percent, while on
some of the other sites considered here it
approached and exceeded 10 percent. For
example, it reached 22 percent in the Structure
4 and Queen's Battery area of Signal Hill
(Appendix Table 5). It may be that these vessels
tend to occur more frequently at military posts
as well. That such decoration occurs more
frequently on mugs and bowls (Noel Hume
1970:131, Godden 1963:108) suggests a
possible relationship between site function and
vessel type which results in a greater frequency
of that decorative type. At present, too little
information is available in the literature to
determine whether or not functionally distinct
sites wi 11 contain distinguishable ceramic
assemblages, and, if so, whether the differences
will be on the type or variety level.

Conclusions

As stated in the introduction, the ceramic
type definitions and assemblage analysis are
preliminary only. They are intended to provide
a beginning framework for a nineteenth century
ceramic description and to provide a set of data
on ceramic assemblages in the Ozark Border
Region of southeast Missouri which are
amenable to intra- or inter-regional comparison
as well as to comparison with the assemblages
from functionally different site types. Although
the approach may be called culture historical
and is essentially chronology building, it is seen
as a necessary first step in testing hypotheses
and constructing models of nineteenth century
or frontier cultural process. Without a
standardized set of type descriptions to which
reasonably accurate dates may be assigned, and
without assemblage analyses comparable
between sites and area, we can never begin to
test hypotheses concerning settlement,

economic, or social systems.
The above assemblage analysis, while limited
in scope and available data, did suggest the
presence of patterning in the ceramic assemblage
of early nineteenth century sites in a portion of
southeast Missouri. It also suggests possible
variation in assemblages from the Ozark
Highland sites and Lowland sites which may be
a factor of occupation dates, of differential
availability of types in the two zones or of
economic or social difference. Finally, it
suggested that ceramic assemblage compositions
may be quite similar over a wide geographic
area.
Finally, it is hoped this discussion will
provide a stimulus to others working at
nineteenth century sites to refine the
chronological sequence and type descriptions.

41

Plates

43

44

PLATE 1.
Edge Decorated Sherds
First Row:

Blue shell edge plate, whiteware (23RI -H1 Pit 1-A); Blue
shell edge plate, whiteware (23Rl-H1 Pit 2 SE-3); Blue
shell edge platter(?), pearlware (23Rl-H1 Pit 2 NE-2)

Second Row:

Blue shell edge plate, whiteware (23Rl-H1Pit1-B); Blue
edge decorated plate, pearlware (23WE-H 1-A); Blue shell
edge plate, whiteware (23R·l-H19 Feature 3-9)

Third Row:

Blue feather and fish scale plate, pearlware (23R1-H 19
Feature 6-211); Blue plume and dot plate, whiteware
(23R1-H 19 Feature 6-257 and 30)

45

46

PLATE 2.
Edge Decorated Sherds
First Row:

Blue edge decorated plate with raised rim design, whiteware
(23WE-H1-A); Blue edge decorated plate(?) with raised rim
design, whiteware (23WE-H 1-A); Blue edge decorated
platter (?) with raised rim design, whiteware (23WE-H1-A)

Second Row:

Green shel I edge plate, whiteware (23R1-H 1 Pit 1-D); Green
shel I edge plate, whiteware (23R1-H 19 Feature 5-206)

Third Row:

Green edge decorated plate with raised rim design,
whiteware (23WE-H1-A); Green edge decorated plate with
raised rim design (23WE-H1-A)

47

48

PLATE 3.
Annular Decorated Sherds
First Row:

Bowl rim with blue and white bands, whiteware (23 Rl-H19
Feature 3-168); Cup or bowl rim with white, dark brown
and earthen gray-green bands, whiteware (23R1-H 17
surface); Cup or bowl shoulder with white, dark brown and
earthen orange bands, whiteware (23WE-H 1-A); Bowl with
black and white bands, whiteware (23WE-H 1-A)

Second Row:

Cup or bowl rim with white, blue, and black bands and
black "mocha" design on earthen yellow background,
whiteware (23Rl-H19 Feature 11-149); Cup or bowl with
earthen red, black, blue, and white bands and black
"mocha" design, whiteware (23Rl-H19 Feature 15-53);
Bowl with brown and white swirled or "finger painted"
design on earthen yellow background, whiteware
(23WE-H1-A3)

Third Row:

Cup or bowl with earthen red, blue and white swirled or
marbleized design, pearlware (23WE-H 1-A); Cup or bowl
with dark brown, blue and white swirled or marbleized
design on tan background, whiteware (23WE-H1-A); Bowl
with light brown, dark brown, and white bands and green
filled engine turned or rouletted design, whiteware
(23WE-H 1-A)

49

50

PLATE 4.
Blue Transfer Printed Sherds
First Row:

Dark blue, plate, pearlware (23Rl-H19 Feature 6-299);
Dark blue, plate, pearl ware (23R 1-H 19 F D-72); Dark blue,
plate, pearlware (23Rl-H19 FD-105)

Second Row:

Dark blue, globular shaped vessel, pearlware, exterior design
(23WE-H 1-A); Dark blue, cup or bowl, whiteware, exterior
design shown with interior design present (23R 1-H 19
FD-88); Medium blue, plate, whiteware (23Rl-H19 FD-152)

Third Row:

Light blue, saucer, whiteware (23Rl-H19 Feature 5-146);
Light blue, cup, whiteware, interior design shown with
exterior design present (23Rl-H19 Feature 5-84)

51

'

0

·~]····~·····
I

3

IN.

CM.

52

PLATE 5.
Transfer Printed Sherds
First Row:

Red, plate, whiteware (23WE-H 1-A); Red, plate, whiteware
(23Rl-H1 Pit 1-B); Lavender, saucer, whiteware (23Rl-H19
Feature 11-24)

Second Row:

Light blue, cup, whiteware, exterior design (23R 1-H 1 Pit
1-B); Black, vessel shape undetermined, exterior design,
whiteware (23Rl-H19 Feature 11-20); Lavender, cup,
whiteware, exterior design shown with interior design
present (23Rl-H19 Feature 5-179)

Third Row:

Blue-gray, plate, wh iteware, thick-walled vessel (23R1-H 19
Feature 3-8); Lavender, plate, whiteware, thick-walled vessel
(23Rl-H19 Feature 3-75); Lavender printed with red,
yellow, and green painting, plate, whiteware, thick-walled
vessel (23R1-H 19 Feature 3-142)

53

IN.
0

2

3

4

5

CM.

54

PLATE 6.
Sponge Decorated Sherds
First Row:

Green sponged background with red, blue, and black hand
painted design, cup, whiteware, exterior design (23R 1-H 1
Surface); Red sponged background with red handpainted
design, cup, whiteware, exterior design shown with interior
sponging around rim present (23R l-H50 Surface); Blue
sponged background with red handpainted design, cup,
whiteware, exterior design shown with interior sponging
around rim present (23R 1-H 1 Surface)

Second Row:

Blue and red alternating vertical zones, cup, whiteware,
exterior design (23Rl-H2 Surface); Red sponging around
rim, cup, interior shown with alternating red and purple
vertical zones present on exterior, whiteware (23R 1-H 1 Pit
1 Plowzone); Red and purple alternating vertical zones,
saucer, whiteware (23Rl-H1 Pit 1-D)

Third Row:

Blue, plate, whiteware (23Rl-H1 Surface); Blue and purple
alternating zones, cup, whiteware, exterior design
(23Rl-H49 Surface); Blue, pitcher (?), whiteware (23Rl-H1
Surface)

55

-,
2 IN.
0

2

3

4

5

CM.

56

PLATE 7.
Stamp Decorated Sherds
First Row:

Brown stamping with green rim band and leaves, saucer (?),
whiteware (23R1-H 19 Fe~ture 3-235); Purple stamping with
red rim band, saucer, wh'lteware (23Rl-H19 Feature 3-78);
Green stamping, saucer, whiteware (23R l-H50 Surface)

Second Row:

Red stamping, plate (?), 1hiteware (23R l-H2 Surface)

Third Row:

Purple stamping with red bounding lines, saucer, whiteware
(23Rl-H19 Feature 3-154); Purple stamping, cup or bowl,
whiteware, exterior design (23Rl-H19 Feature 3-169)

57

58

PLATE 8.
Hand Painted Sherds, Banded and
Earthen Polychrome Varieties
First Row:

Banded variety, red, cup, exterior shown with interior
banding present, whiteware (23WE-H 1-A); Banded variety,
red, cup, interior shown with exterior banding shown on
following sherd, whiteware (23R 1-H 17 Surface); Banded
variety, red, cup, exterior shown with interior shown on
preceding sherd, whiteware (23Rl-H17 Surface)

Second Row:

Banded variety, blue top and bottom with earthen orange
in between, cup, pearl ware, exterior design (23WE-H 1-A);
Banded variety, black, cup, exterior shown with interior
band present, whiteware (23Rl-H1 Pit 1-D); Banded variety,
broad blue band with narrow red bands, saucer, whiteware
(23R 1-H 1 Surface N%)

Third Row:

Polychrome earthen variety, blue and earthen orange, bowl,
pearlware (23Rl-H19 FD-68); Polychrome earthen variety,
yellow, red, blue, green, and brown, lid, pearlware
(23R 1-H 19 Feature 6-1)

59

2

3

4

__

-

_,

0

~

IN.
5

CM.

60

PLATE 9.
Hand Painted Sherds, Blue Floral Variety
First Row:

Cup, pearlware, exterior design (23Rl-H19 Feature 15-56);
Saucer, pearlware (23Rl-H19 Feature 6-215); Bowl,
pearlware, exterior design shown with interior rim band
present (23Rl-H19 Feature 15-52)

Second Row:

Saucer, whiteware, impressed Davenport anchor mark with
year number "56" on base (23Rl-H19 Feature 11-196)

Third Row:

Bowl, whiteware, exterior design shown with interior rim
band present (23WE-H1-A); Saucer, whiteware (23Rl-H19
FD-82); Saucer, whiteware (?) (23WE-H1-A)

61

',

62

PLATE 10.
Hand Painted Sherds, Bright Polychrome Variety,
Fineline and Sprig Style
First Row:

Blue, green and black, cup, exterior shown with green
interior rim band present, whiteware (23R1-H 1 Pit 1
Plowzone); red, green, blue and black, cup or bowl,
exterior shown with similar interior design present,
whiteware (23 Rl-H19 Feature 11-58); Blue, yellow, green
and black with red rim band, cup, exterior shown with red
interior rim band present (23R1-H 1 Pit 1-C)

Second Row:

Blue, red, green and black, cup, whiteware, exterior design
(23R1-H 1 Pit 1 Plowzone); Red, blue, green, and black,
interior cup base, whiteware (23Rl-H1 Pit 1-B); Blue,
green, and black with black rim band, cup, whiteware,
exterior shown with black interior rim band present
(23Rl-H1Pit1-C)

Third Row:

Red and blue with blue rim band, saucer, whiteware
(23R1-H 1 Pit 1-B); Red, green, and black with black rim
band, saucer, wh iteware (23WE-H 1-A); Red, cup, whiteware
(23 RI -H 19 Fea tu re 11-19)

63

64

PLATE 11.
Hand Painted Sherds, Bright Polychrome Variety,
Broadline Style
First Row:

Red, green, and black with black rim band, cup, whiteware,
exterior shown with black interior rim band present
(23RI -H19 Feature 11-24); Blue, green and black, cup,
whiteware, exterior shown (23 Rl-H2 surface); Red, green
and black, cup, whiteware, exterior shown (23R1-H2
Surface)

Second Row:

Red, blue, green and black, saucer, whiteware (23 R l-H2
Surface); F'{ed and green, plate base, whiteware (23 Rl-H1
Surface); Purple, cup, whiteware, exterior design (23R1-H 1
Surface)

Third Row:

Red and blue, saucer, whiteware (23WE-H1-A:3); Purple,
cup, whiteware, exterior shown (23R1-H 1 Surface 1); Red,
saucer, whiteware (23Rl-H1Pit1-C)

65

66

PLATE 12.
Flow Blue and Mulberry Decorated Sherds
First Row:

Blue, hand painted, cup, whiteware, exterior shown with
interior rim band present (23Rl-H19 Feature 11-215);
Mulberry, hand painted, cup, whiteware, exterior shown
with interior rim band present (23Rl-H1 Pit 1-B); Blue,
hand painted, cup, exterior shown (23R 1-H 19 Feature
5-41)

Second Row:

Blue, hand painted, cup, whiteware exterior shown
(23Rl-H19 Feature 5-90); Blue, hand painted, plate base,
whiteware (23Rl-H19 Feature 11-13); Blue, hand painted,
plate, whiteware (23Rl-H19 Feature 11-22)

Third Row:

Blue, transfer printed, plate, whiteware (23Rl-H1 Plowzone
11); Blue, hand painted, plate, whiteware (23Rl-H19
Feature 11-13); Blue, hand painted, plate, whiteware
(23Rl-H19 Feature 11-19)

67

.68

PLATE 13.
Miscellaneous Types
Molded strawberry (?) design with blue, pearlware, vessel
shape undetermined, exterior design (23Rl-H1 Pit 1-B);
Molded floral design with blue, pearlware, lidded vessel,
possibly sugar (23Rl-H1 Pit 1-A)

I

69

I}

References
Bell, John R.
1957 The journal of Captain John R. Bell,
official journalist for the Stephen H.
Long Expedition to the Rocky
Mountains, 1820. Reprint of 1820
edition edited by Harlan M. Fuller and
LeRoy R. Hafen in The Far West and

the Rockies, Historical Series
1820-1875, Vol. VI. The Arthur H.
Clark Company, California.
Brown, Marley R.
1972 Ceramics from Plymouth, 1671-1800:
The documentary record in Ceramics in
America, ed. by Ian B. Quimby,
Winterthur Conference Report, 18th
Annual Conference.
Chase, David W.
1974 Fort Mitchell: An archaeological
exploration in Russel County, Alabama.

Special Publication of the Alabama
Archaeological Society, No. 1
Collard, Elizabeth
1967 Nineteenth

Century Pottery and
Porcelain in Canada. McGill University
Press.

Coysh, A. W.
1974 Blue

and White Transfer Ware
1780-1840. David and Charles, Newton

Abbot, London and Vancouver.

Deetz, James
1965 The dynamics of stylistic change in
Ari kara ceramics. Illinois Studies in
Anthropology No. 4, University of
Illinois Press.
1972 Ceramics from Plymouth, 1635-1835:
the archaeological evidence, in Ceramics
in America, ed. by Ian B. Quimby,
Winterthur Conference Report, 18th
Annual Conference.
Demeter, C. Stephan and William L. Lowery
1977 Archaeological and Historical
Investigations at the Berrien Springs Jail
Site. The Michigan Archaeologist 23
(2-3).
Fairbanks, Charles H.
1974 The Kingsley Slave Cabins in Duval
County, Florida, 1968, in The

Conference on Historic Site
Archaeology papers 1972, edited by
Stanley South, Institute of Archaeology
and Anthropology, University of South
Carolina.
Featherstonhaugh, George William
1844 Excursion through the Slave States,

From Washington on the Potomac to
the Frontier of Mexico with Sketches
of Popular Manners and Geological
Notices, in two volumes. John Murray,
London.

71

72

Ferguson, Leland G.
1977 An Archaeological-historical analysis of
Fort Watson: December 1780-April
1781 in Research Strategies in
Historical Archaeology, edited by
Stanley South. Academic Press.
Flagg, Edmund
1905 The Far West or a tour beyond the
mountains, in two volumes, 1836-1837.
Reprint of the Harper and Bros. 1838
edition in Early Western Travels
1748-1846 edited by Reuben Gold
Thwaites, Cleveland, Ohio, Vol. 26, 27.
Gerstaeker, Friedrick Wilhelm Christian
1855 Wild Sports of the Far West, London.
Godden, Geoffrey A.
1963 British Pottery and Porcelain 17801850. A. S. Barnes and Co., Inc.
1964 Encyclopedia of British Pottery and
Porcelain Marks. Bonanza Books, New
York.
1966 An Illustrated Encyclopedia of British
Pottery and Porcelain. Crown
Publishers.
Greaser, Arlene and Paul Greaser
1973 Homespun Ceramics. Wal lace- Homestead
Book Co., Des Moines, Iowa.
Higgins, Earl Leroy
1964 Source Readings in Arkansas History.
Pioneer Press, Little Rock.
Hill, James N.
1970 Broken K. Pueblo, Prehistoric social
organization in the American
Southwest. Anthropological Papers of
the University of Arizona, No. 8.
Hughes, G. and T. Hughes
1968 The Collectors Encyclopedia of English
Ceramics. Abbey Library, London.
Jelks, Edward B.
1973 Archaeological explorations at Signal
Hill, Newfoundland, 1965-66. Canadian

Historic Sites: Occasional Papers in
Archaeology and History, No. 7. Ottawa.

Keyes, Homer Eaton
1930 Spatter. Antiques 17:332-337.
Klinger, Timothy C.
1975 The Cater Site, a nineteenth century
homestead on the Chippewa River.

Chippewa Nature Center, Man, Time
and Environment Publication, No. 1.
Midland, Michigan.
Lawrence County Records
County and Circuit Court Records
Book 1818-1838; Court Records Book
1815-1826; Deed Records Book B. On
f i I e with the Lawrence County
Arkansas Courthouse, Walnut Ridge,
Arkansas.
Lawrence County Tax Records
1815- Lawrence County, Missouri/Arkansas
1816 Territory Tax Records. On file with the
Missouri State Archives, Jefferson City,
Missouri
Lofstrom, Edward V.
1976 An analysis of temporal change in a
nineteenth century ceramic assemblage
from Fort Snelling, Minnesota. The
Minnesota Archaeologist, 35( 1): 16-4 7.
Longacre, William A.
1970 Archaeology as anthropology, a case
study. Anthropological Papers of the
University of Arizona, No. 17.
University of Arizona Press.
Mankowitz, Wolf and R. G. Haggar
1975 The Concise Encyclopedia of English
Pottery and Porcelain. New York:
Hawthorn Books, Inc.
Miller, George L.
1972 The application of the South Mean
Ceramic Date Formula to a nineteenth
century site. The Conference on

Historic Site Archaeology Papers 1971,
6, edited by Stanley South, Institute of
Archaeology and Anthropology,
University of South Carolina.

!'

73

Miller, J. Jefferson
1965 Transfer-printed English earthenware
for the American Market. Apollo
LXXXI (35) :46-50.
Miller, J. Jefferson and Lyle M. Stone
1970 Eighteenth Century ceramics from Fort
Michilimackinac: a study in historical
archaeology, Smithsonian Studies in
History and Technology, No. 4.
Smithsonian Institution Press.
No'el Hume, Ivor
1969 Pearlware: forgotten milestone of
English ceramic history. Antiques,
95:390-397.
Guide to Artifacts of Colonial
1970 A
America. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.
1973 Creamware to pearlware: a Williamsburg
perspective. In Ceramics in America
edited by Ian B. Quimby, Winterthur
Conference Report, 18th Annual
Conference.
Nystruen, David and Carla G. Lindeman
1969 The excavation of Fort Renville, an
archaeological report. Minnesota
Historical Archaeology Series, No. 2.
Minnesota Historical Society.
Ohio State Museum
1960 Spatterware, from the collections of
Mr. and Mrs. T. B. Christopher,
Greenville, Ohio. Catalogue of an
exhibition at the Ohio State Museum.
Columbus.
Otto, John Solomon
1975 The theoretical possibi I ities of
plantation archaeology-Cannons Point
Plantation, St. Simons Island, Georgia.
Paper presented at the 8th Annual
Meeting of the Society for Historical
Archaeology.

I

I

I1

I

1977 Artifacts and status differences - A
Comparison of Ceramics from Planter,
Overseer, and Slave sites on an
antebellum plantation. In Research

Strategies
edited
Press.

by

in

Historical Archaeology

Stanley

South.

Academic

Pilling, Arnold R.
1967 Nineteenth Century glazed ceramics in
Michigan and Elsewhere, parts 1-111.
Coffinburry News Bulletin 14(5,6,7).
Michigan Archaeological Society.
Price, Cynthia R. and Suzanne E. Harris
1978 A Cu I tu ra I Resources survey of
proposed sewer line and/or watermain
routes in New Madrid Industrial Park
area, New Madrid, New Madrid County,
Missouri:1978. Center for
Archaeological Research Report No.
155. Sou th west Missouri State
University, Springfield.
Price, Cynthia R. and James E. Price
1978 Investigation of settlement and
subsistence systems in the Ozar:k Border
Region of Southeast Missouri during
the first half of the Nineteenth
Century. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Society for Historical
Archaeology, San Antonio, Texas.
Ripley County Deed Records
Ripley County, Missouri, Deed Records
on file with the Ripley County
Courthouse, Doniphan, Missouri.
Roberts, Clarence N.
1964 Developments in the Missouri pottery
industry, 1800-1950. Missouri Historical
Review LVll1(4):464-473.
Shinn, Josiah H.
1908 Pioneers and Makers of Arkansas.
Democrat Printing and Lithographing
Company. Little Rock.
Smith, Samuel D. (editor)
1976 An archaeological and historical
assessment of the First Hermitage.
Research Series, No. 2, Division of
Archaeology, Tennessee Department of
Conservation.

74

1977

Plantation Archaeology at the
Hermitage: some suggested patterns.
Tennessee Anthropologist, 11 (2).

Smith, Samuel D., et al.
1977 Results of the 1976 season of the
Hermitage archaeological project.
Report prepared for the Ladies
Hermitage Association and the
Tennessee American Revolution
Bicentennial Commission.
South, Stanley
1972 Evolution and horizon as revealed in
ceramic analysis in historical
archaeology. The Conference on
Historic Site Archaeology Papers, 1971,
edited by Stanley South, Institute of
A r ch a e o Io g y a n d An th ro po Iogy,
University of South Carolina.
1974 Palmetto
Archaeology
Carolina,
Studies 1.

Parapets; Exploratory
at Fort Moultrie, South
38CH50. Anthropological
Occasional Papers of the

Institute of Archaeology and
Anthropology. The University of South
Carolina.
Towner, Donald
1957 English Cream Colored Earthenware.
Faber and Fabe~ London.
Walker, John W.
1971 Excavation of the Arkansas Post Branch
of the Bank of the State of Arkansas.
Report prepared for the National Park
Service, Southeast Archaeological
Center, Division of Archaeology, Office
of Archaeology and Historic
Preservation.
Watkins, Malcom
Caldwell)
1970 Artifacts
nineteenth
at Darien

C. (edited by Sheila Kelly
from the sites of three
century houses and ditches
Bluff, Georgia. University of

Georgia Laboratory of Archaeology
Series, No. 9.

Appendix

(
I

I,

75

~~"'

;

.

Table 1
Relative proportions of decorated, pearlware, and whiteware ceramics on a selected
sample of archaeological sites in the eastern Ozark Border region, ca. 1810 - 1870.

% Pearlware
Dec. and Undec.

% Blue
Puddling

Total
Sherds

Total
Decorated

Total
Undecorated

Decorated

Feature 6

633

357

276

56

48

33

Feature 5

685

363

322

53

16

37

Feature 11

604

394

210

65

16

13

Feature 3

474

148

326

31

2

36
30

Site

%

23RI-Hl9

2396

1262

1134

53

22

2837

776

2061

27

T

24

Pit 1

260

153

107

59

61

Pit 2

41

24

17

59

-

40

3138

953

2175

30

T

29

204

67

137

33

1

Stick Chimney

1737

568

1169

33

-

65
36

Barfield

243

1030

19

-

25

23RI-H25

1273
220

34

186

15

188

41

146

28

-

30

23RI-H49
23RI-H50

110

19

91

17

-

-

Total Features
C. Woodard
Surface

Total Site
Bradom I

77

20

Table 2
Relative proportions of ceramic decorative types and selected varieties on
archaeological sites in the eastern Ozark Border region, 1810 to 1870. (Numbers
indicate percent of the total decorated sherds)
'"cl

..,
Q)

ell
!-<
0

u
Q)

'"cl
I

Q)

'"cl
Q)

'"cl

'"cl

Q)

Q)

00

p..

i::::

0
p..

(/)

sell

..,
(/)

IJ:l

9
2
6
3
6

T
1

-

T

-

2
8
1

'"cl

..,

'"cl

i::::

i::::

•.-4
ell

p..

!-<

..c::u

I >.
'"cl .-f

'"cl

..,

Q)

·.-4
ell

i:::: 0

i:: 0
~ p..,

00

'"cl

23RI-H19
Feature 6
Feature 5
Feature 11
Feature 3
Total Features

Q)

.., s

..,

Q)

Q)

p.. ::l

I .-f
'"cl iXl

i::

~

Q)

i::::

.-f Ti
ell ell

•.-4 '"cl
ell Q)
p.. '"cl
I i::
'"cl ell
i:: iXl

.., p..
O

E-<

I
'"cl

i::
ell

~

Q)

!-<
ell
.-f

::l
i::

~

~

0
.-f

µ:.

>.

!-<
!-<

~

0 Q)
.-f ..0
µ:. .-f

£

::i::

-

!-<

!-<

Q)
.....

(/) ::l
i:::: .-f

ell iXl
!-<

!-<

'"cl

Q)

Q)

.-f .....
ell (/)

(/)

ell

..0

::>:

-

1
1
2

::l

rn .a

i::

E-<

E-<

I

.., i::

0

E-< !-<
E-<

i::

ell
!-<

z

0

15
18
29
33
22

2
4
3
3
3

4
8
7
9
6

-

59
27
27
27
36

11
39
31
22
24

70
66
58
49
60

4
5
4
4

27
39
46
29

4

5
3

4
8

15

3

4

2
2
4
2

-

16

47

2

1

7

36

T

1

-

T

12

4

T

-

9

-

-

24

-

10

1
1

10

8
2
9

20
26
21
21

16
10
13
15

-

1

22
33
42
24

Bradom I

22

22

-

31

Stick Chimney

29

13

-

29

Barfield

26

5

10

12

3

-

9

9

-

1

-

-

23RI-H25

23

9

-

6

23RI-H49

15

29

2

10

-

5

15

-

2

23RI-H50

16

37

5

16

-

5

21

5

-

78

.

Q)

..... .-f

Q)
Q)

T
4
5
2

5
8
17
26
11

C. Woodard
Surf ace
Pit 1
Pit 2
Total Site

1

::l

.-f
iXl

(/)

0

~

T
-

4

8
14

19
19
8
18

2

-

2

-

5

13

18

T

4

13

19

24

6

-

19

19

17

5

11

16

-

11

4

-

4

u

(/)

•.-4

-

1
3
2
4
2

~~~~~-~-~~~~~~-

·..,,

~~

Table 3
Relative proportions of ceramic varieties on selected archaeological sites in the eastern
Ozark Border region, 1810 to 1870. (Figures indicate percent of the total decorated sherds)
C. WOODARD

23RI-Hl9
Total
Feat.

Surface

Pit 1

Pit 2

Total
Site

21

18

Feat. 6

Feat. 5

Feat. 11

blue shell edge:ww

-

-

2

3

1

18

21

pw

-

1

1

1

2

-

T

feather-fishscale:pw

5

1

-

2

molded edge:ww

2

-

1

-

1

-

-

ind.

-

green shell edge

-

1

1

-

1

2

5

-

-

-

T

-

-

Feat 3

Edge Decorated

other edge dee.
Sponged
Stamped

-

-

3

T

1

-

T

16

10

13

15

-

2

8

1

1

-

-

1

T

Hand Painted
earthen poly:pw

1

1

2

2

1

T

-

-

T

bright poly: ww

3

7

15

24

10

22

33

42

24

banded:pw

-

T

l

-

T

-

-

-

-

WW

T

3

5

2

4

5

4

4

ind.

-

-

-

-

-

10

4

-

6

-

-

7

-

-

blue:pw

-

-

WW

T

-

4

2

2

1

1

-

1

ind.

3

-

T

-

1

-

-

-

-

NOTE:

pw

= pearlware,

ww

= whiteware,

79

ind.

indeterminate ware

Table 3 (Continued)
C. WOODARD

23RI-Hl9
Total
Feat.

Surface

Pit 1

Pit 2

Total
Site

-

2

-

-

-

T

-

T

1

1

Feat. 6

Feat. 5

Feat. 11

Feat. 3

earthen band.

-

1

2

T

3

1
1

-

Annular

bright band

-

T

T

mocha

1

2

T

-

swirl

-

1

-

3

T

T

rouletted

1

-

T

-

T

T

T

-

T

-

-

-

1

2

other
Molded Blue:pw

-

-

-

-

Flow Decoration
blue

4

8

7

9

6

5

3

-

4

mulberry

-

-

-

-

2

2

4

2

-

-

T

-

T

4

-

-

4

4

22

14

7

13

7

7

4

7

8

5

4

4

8

-

4

-

-

-

-

Embossed
Transfer Printed
red
lavender
med. & light blue:ww
pw
ind.
dark blue:pw
black
brown
green
thick gray, lavender
painted
other
Misc.

6

15

4

2

6

12
2
1
12

12
2
2

11

3

so
1

-

-

11
1

4
1

10
1
3
22
1

-

-

-

1
4
7

T
1
1

12

T

-

T

-

-

2
T

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

1

2

-

1

2

-

-

2

-

80

2
T

-

4

T

T

-

-

4

2
T

-

-

T

Table 3 (Continued)

1

Bradom I

Stick
Chimney

Barfield

23RI-H25

23RI-H49

23RI-H50

blue shell edge:ww

22

29

25

20

15

11

pw

-

-

-

-

ind.

-

-

-

-

-

Edge Decorated

feather-fishscale:pw

-

-

molded edge:ww

-

green shell edge

-

-

-

other edge dee.

-

T

Sponged

22

Stamped

-

-

3

-

1

-

-

-

13

5

9

29

37

-

-

10

-

2

5

-

-

-

-

-

-

31

29

12

6

10

16

banded:pw

-

-

-

-

-

-

WW

16

7

T

5

5

-

-

WW

3

ind.

-

-

-

-

blue:pw

-

-

5

Hand Painted
earthen poly.:pw
bright poly. :ww

ind.

81

-

3

-

-

-

Table 3 (Continued)
Bradom I

Stick
Chimney

Barfield

23RI-H25

23RI-H49

23RI-HSO

Annular
earthen band.
bright band.

2

T

4

9

mocha
swirl
rouletted
other
Molded Blue:pw
Flow Decoration
blue
mulberry

1

l

T

T

19

red

2

T

lavender

6

Embossed

2

6

17

Transfer Printed

med. & light blue:ww
pw
ind.
dark blue:pw
black
brown

2

5

9

2

thick gray, lavender

2

painted

T

T

l

l

other

24

T

5

5

2

green

Misc.

11

12
3

NOT CALCULATED FOR THESE SITES

82

2

Table 4
Ceramic types at selected cabin areas of the First Hermitage (taken from Smith
1976: 143-151 ). (Numbers indicate percentages of total of listed decorative types)

i::

i::

i::

i::

·ri

·ri

u

A
t1l

r-1

.

u

A
t1l

Cf.l

~

~

z

E-<

24

17

35

19

26

Sponged

2

2

3

2

Stamped

-

-

-

-

-

11

2

16

or{

A
t1l

u

Edge Decorated

Handpainted Polychrome

·ri

A
t1l

u

...,t1l
0

18

13

Handpainted Blue

3

12

5

-

4

Total Handpainted

21

25

16

2

20

Annular

24

5

10

1

18

T

6

-

2

1

20

38

28

32

24

9

8

8

14

9

29

46

36

46

33

109

319

41

1267

Flow Blue
Blue Transfer
Non-blue Transfer
Total Transfer
Total No. Sherds

798

83

Table 5
Ceramic types at Signal Hill (taken from Jelks 1973: 101-123). (Numbers
indicate percentages of total of listed decorative types.)
Ill
N

i:::

Q)
Q)

;:l

>.

Q)

M

M

;:l

.j.J

CJ

Q) .j.J

CJ
;:l

s0

.j.J

0 ct!

,_:ii:Q

M
.j.J

0

en I>::

Ill

...;!"

Q)

>

;:l .....

O' M
M Ql

;3:

Edge Decorated

N

Q)

Cl) CJ
CJ ;:l
::l .-l El
M CJ O
.j.J
:< 0
en al I>::
.j.J

•
Q)

i:::

;:l

Ql
Q)

M

ct!
Q)

M

<

>.

.......

.......
.......

Q)

Q)

0

M

;:l

.j.J

.j.J

::l M

;:l

.j.J

M "Cl

;:l

;:l

.j.J

M

M

.j.J

en

Q)

i::: ct!

ct! i:Q

CJ

.j.J

<

M

;:l

.j.J

CJ O'

ct!
Q)

M

CJ

.j.J

.j.J

Ill

;:l

ct!

.j.J

A

0

CJ~

.-l

0
0

M

.j.J

>.~

"Cl

Ill
Q)

M II"\
;:i ......
;:i ......
A

.j.J <')

ct!

0

en

en

...:l...:l

en,.....,

E--<

11

9

6

12

10

13

16

14

12

-

-

-

4

1

1

1

1

-

2

2

1

T

2

-

14

6

4

20

20

30

15

6

21

Annular

7

4

3

22

7

14

6

4

10

Flow Blue

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

64

78

71

34

49

36

52

71

50

4

4

14

6

12

5

8

5

6

68

82

85

40

61

41

60

76

56

920

125

219

131

454

1612

177

143

3781

Sponged
Stamped

1

Handpainted Polychrome
Handpainted Blue
Total Handpainted

Blue Transfer
Non-blue Transfer
Total Transfer
Total No. Sherds

84

Table 6
Ceramic types at the Ft. Snelling Officers' Latrine (taken from
Lofstrom 1976:29-32).

SW

VESSEL COUNTS
NE

Total

%

Edge Decorated

8

1

9

9

Sponged

-

-

-

Stamped

-

-

-

Handpainted Polychrome

5

3

8

8

Handpainted Blue

4

2

6

6

Total Handpainted

9

5

14

14

Annular

8

8

8

1

1

Blue Transfer

41

1
13

54

52

Non-blue Transfer

11

6

17

17

Total Transfer

52

19

71

69

Total Vessels

82

26

103

Flow Blue

85

