CoAS Newsletter
Council of Affiliated Societies, Society for American Archaeology
Now available on the SAA website
Number 15-Fall

December 2007

ARCHAEOLOGY WEEK POSTER CONTEST
Winners of the poster contest were voted upon
at the annual SAA meeting in Austin, TX, from
among the many beautiful entries. Posters from
Arizona (First, below) and Wyoming (Second,
right) are shown here. Contest sponsors are the
Public Education Committee (PEC) and CoAS.

CONTENTS: Archaeology Month Poster Winners (p. 1); Notes from the Chair (p. 2); 2007 Business
Meeting Minutes (p. 2-4); Notes from Member Societies (p. 4-10); Invitation to Participate in CoAS Activities
at 2008 SAA Meeting (p. 11-12) List of CoAS Officers (p. 12)

1

FROM THE CHAIR:

efforts she undoubtedly deserves a lot more than I could
possibly write in these pages and her institutional
memory, of course, precedes us all. Finally, we all
appreciate the efforts of Gina Powell in taking over the
newsletter editorship, a difficult job to say the least.

To begin I would like to thank the CoAS representatives
at the 2007 Austin business meeting for putting their trust
in me as the chair of our organization. I look forward to
serving the organization and will try to follow in the
footsteps of my predecessors to expand our involvement
in the SAA, expand our programs, and reach out to the
vast avocational and other regional archaeological
communities throughout the Americas.

I look forward to seeing all of you at the CoAS business
meeting during the next annual SAA convention in
Vancouver. Bring new ideas, especially regarding what
your society would like to see from CoAS and, of course,
bring material for the table. [Please see p. 11 for the
official invitation].

In that regard we have made some progress. Last year a
short article appeared in the SAAs Archaeological Record
(May 2007, pp. 35-36) on the Past, Present, and Future of
CoAS. This has had an effect of alerting many SAA
members to a little-known branch of their society. As
many SAA members are also members of local and
regional societies, the result has already been several new
applications to the council. Perhaps as significant is our
success in getting the CoAS newsletter on the SAA open
web page. All our member societies, but perhaps even
more important all of their individual members, now have
access to the CoAS Newsletter. And, even more to the
point, non-member societies also have access to the
newsletter and will hopefully be encouraged to join us.
Finally we are in the process of developing closer ties
with the Crabtree award committee, the SAA committee
that recognizes outstanding avocational contributions to
archaeology. CoAS will continue to request and provide
booths to its members at the SAAs, a place that offers a
location to display member society journals, brochures,
posters, and any other material they wish.

Marcel Kornfeld
CoAS Chair

Former CoAS Chair, Susan Edwards, at her
contribution to the sponsored poster session, 2007.

Finally, I would like to acknowledge the immediate past
and current officers for efforts they have devoted to
developing and maintaining CoAS's programs. Susan
Edwards, the chair for the past four years should be
especially noted for organizing a symposium on
avocational professional partnerships at the 2007 annual
SAA meeting. The current officers are greatly indebted to
Cathy Poetschat, for serving as the vice-chair of the
organization. More than anyone else she has helped
organize the CoAS booths at the annual SAA meetings,
assisted in scheduling volunteers to sit at the booths, and
sat at the booth herself for many hours. Moreover, her
longstanding involvement with our organization makes
her a valuable asset for institutional memory. Hester
Davis's invaluable editing of the newsletter since its
beginning in 1994 until 2002 is much appreciated, after
which she has been serving as secretary of the
organization. She has also organized at least one CoAS
sponsored symposium at the 2005 SAA meetings
highlighting
the
contributions
of
avocational
archaeologists to archaeology. Although not the first
sponsored CoAS session, the topic of the symposium is
particularly appropriate and Hester's efforts are pointing
us in the right direction for the future. I hope that the
current and future officers will take a hint from her and
continue to organize CoAS sponsored sessions. For all her

MINUTES OF THE COAS BUSINESS MEETING
April 26, 2007; Austin, TX
The meeting was called to order by Chair Susan Edwards
at approximately 4:10 pm
Present were the following Affiliate Representatives:
Susan Edwards, Nevada Archaeological Association
Candace Ehringer, Society for California Archaeology
Marcel Kornfeld, Wyoming Archeological Society
Brenda Poulous, Arizona Archaeological Society
Virginia Wulfkuhle, Kansas Anthropological Association
Hester Davis, Arkansas Archaeological Society
Carolyn Spock, Texas Archaeological Society
Pam Wheat-Stranahan, Texas Archaeological Society
Cathy Poetschat, Oregon Archaeological Society
Gina Powell, Missouri Archeological Society
Guest: Mary Lou
Committee Chair

2

Larson, SAA

Crabtree Award

SAA Board Liaison: John Driver (arrived, with many
apologies, about 5 minutes before adjournment because of
another meeting that lasted TOO long)
Susan welcomed everyone, and asked that a pad of paper
be passed so that everyone’s name address and email
could be recorded. She introduced Mary Lou who wished
to speak first in order to go on to another meeting.

pictures and for information about awards given and/or
support for students, as well as meetings and field
activities. There was then discussion about access to the
newsletter on the SAA website (the website is being
upgraded and the webmaster is relatively new; there have
been problems with CoAS visibility on the SAA website).
One problem seems to be that the link to each society’s
web was not “hot” last time Susan checked.

Mary Lou indicated that the Crabtree Award Committee
would like to have a member of CoAS serve on the
Committee. The present committee members beside
herself are Tom Green, from Arkansas, Kevin Smith, of
Rhode Island, and Jim Wood, Idaho. Brenda asked if it
should be someone whom we know works under
professional supervision? Discussion indicated that others
agreed. Nominations need to be in to Mary Lou by 1
December, and by 1 June we should have a name of
someone to be on the committee. She left at the end of
the discussion.

Old Business:
The 2006 poster contest at San Juan had 23 entrants, and
Wyoming won. There was a problem this year about the
date of Archeology Month in a couple of states, i.e., some
posters submitted were for May 2007. Those posters were
rejected. It has been a ‘rule’ that the Month must be
between March and March but this is the first time anyone
has paid attention. Mention was made of the new website
from the Public Education Committee (available at the
Public Archaeology website) that shows all the winning
posters from past years.

Susan asked if there were any additions or corrections to
the Minutes of the 2006 meeting that she distributed.
There were none and a motion was made, seconded, and
passed to approve them as distributed.

CoAS Poster Session at this meeting: There are nine
affiliate posters on the theme: Avocational and
Professional Partnerships: The Power of Cooperation:
Texas, Kansas, Arizona, Arkansas, Nevada (3
organizations), California, and Alabama. Susan thought it
would be good to do a poster session or a symposium
every other year, perhaps. For example, a poster session
again at Vancouver, and then skip a year and have a
symposium on Stewardship in St. Louis at the 75th
anniversary meeting.

Officers Reports:
Chair: Susan indicated that she hadn’t been able to be
active this spring because of fieldwork. However, she did
organize the Poster Session, which will be held tomorrow
afternoon, with nine states participating. She had also
made two requests to the SAA Board. One was for having
a member of CoAS on the Crabtree Committee—which
seems to be happening, and the other was for a second
table for our booth in the Exhibit Room, which has not
happened. NOTE: Dean Snow, our previous liaison with
the Board came to the room just before the meeting
started and asked Susan if she had anything for the Board
and she told him of these two things and that not only was
there no second table, but word is our request had not
reached Kevin (who is in charge of the Exhibit Room).
Dean said he would look into it. There was a second table
by Friday afternoon.

Web Page: See previous discussion re: problems with
SAA updating information and making links to all the
affiliates web pages.
By-Laws Revisions: Cathy said that she had problems
contacting Leslie for a while, but did get some
“copyediting” kinds of comments from her. CoAS doesn’t
have By-Laws actually, it has Policies and Procedures and
there are some things mentioned that we are not doing and
some things the SAA is not doing. For example: we have
been using the term President for the leader of CoAS and
it turns out that the word should be Chair and Vice-Chair;
the Procedures say that the SAA Executive Director
should meet with CoAS not the SAA Board Liaison; there
is no mention that the SAA will provide CoAS with a
FREE booth in the Exhibit Hall at the Annual Meeting;
and there is no mention of the Newsletter editor as an
officer. Hester agreed to work with Cathy on suggested
revisions and updates.

Because Hester had a conflict with the CoAS meeting in
San Juan, Susan had also taken the minutes of the 2006
meeting and produced them.
She said that she has enjoyed being Chair of CoAS, but
that she will not run again—four years is long enough!
Vice Chair: Cathy said that there had been no activity on
her part.

CoAS at the SHA: Susan had a CoAS display at the SHA
meeting in January 2007 in Williamsburg, and she will
see that CoAS is represented in the SHA Archeology
Road Show at the 2008 meeting in January in
Albuquerque. Any volunteers to help with this would be
more than welcomed.

Secretary: Hester said she hadn’t even taken and
produced the minutes this year.
Newsletter Editor: Marcel thanked all those who sent in
information for the two newsletters; he hoped for more

3

FROM THE MEMBERS:
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF ALBERTA

New Business:
We need to find candidates for our four officers.
Cathy does not want to be Chair, but is willing to continue
as Vice-Chair. Hester agrees to continue as Secretary. It
took some doing, but Marcel agreed to be Chair; and Gina
volunteered to be co-editor (at least for the first issue) of
the newsletter. Marcel said that he would like to have
societies discuss in the newsletter such issues as how to
bring new people into the society; what are you doing
about the graying of your society; what has your group
done this year to attract more members??

by Autumn Whiteway
On September 23, 2007, four members of the ASA
embarked on a field trip lead by Brian Vivian. The
excursion was nearly canceled due to soggy and frigid
weather conditions. However, we decided to tough it out
and continue on to Grotto Canyon. After a scenic hike up
the streambed, we stopped to investigate the Grotto
Canyon pictographs.

A motion was made, seconded and passed unanimously to
elect the following officers: Marcel Kornfeld, Chair;
Cathy Poetschat, Vice-Chair; Hester Davis, Secretary; and
Gina Powell/Marcel Kornfeld, Newsletter Co-editors.

Having seen the ASA’s Grotto Canyon rock art postcards,
I expected bright red figures painted on the cliff face.
Instead, I found figures that were faded by the natural
elements. Brian stopped the group as we almost bypassed
the obscure rock art. While listening to Brian’s
interpretation of the site, I was particularly interested to
see the Kokopelli-like (flute-player of Hopi myth) and
Kachina-like figures that were seemingly out of place in
Alberta.

2007 Poster Contest: 20 participants this year, down a
little perhaps because of the deadline being enforced.
There was some discussion about needing a CoAS
Webmaster and about having an electronic version of the
newsletter but no decision was made (because we were
running out of time).

The next site visited was the historical site of Bow Fort,
located on the Morley Reserve. The fort was built as a
trading post in 1832 but was quickly abandoned and
demolished. After a quick surface survey we noted that
the features of this site include chimney stones and post
holes, and also contained a few scattered faunal remains.
Prior to returning home, we also saw the Morley Mission,
McDougall Orphanage, and a pictograph of a shield,
located next to the Cochrane Ranch.

Jonathan Driver, our new SAA Board Liaison, appeared
during the last 5 minutes, having been detained at another
meeting. He was full of apologies. We ran out of time
and did not have any reports on the activities of the
societies represented at the meeting.
Hester passed out a copy of the recently signed
Legislative Act in Arkansas amending the State Antiquity
Act making it a felony (rather than a misdemeanor as it
had been since 1967) to dig on state land or on private
property without permission of the landowner.

ARKANSAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
by Hester Davis (hadavis@uark.edu)

Susan and Marcel were thanked publicly for their efforts
in keeping CoAS viable for four years despite some lack
of communication from/with the SAA.

The 2007 Training Program for Amateur Archeologists
was held June 8-24 in the beautiful Ouachita Mountains.
A total of 87 Society members participated. The plan was
to test a large Middle Archaic site (Jones Mill site) on the
banks of the Ouachita River, which had been tested
previously but which only, suggested that there were deep
stratified deposits. The land is owned by Entergy Inc. who
had given permission but whose lawyers decided at the
VERY last minute (the day before everyone was to arrive)
that the insurance that both the Arkansas Archeological
Survey (co-sponsor of the program) and the Society had
was not adequate. As a consequence, two other small
Middle Archaic sites, known only from surface surveys,
were opened to put people to work. Within a few days all
was settled, and work at Jones Mill could proceed. One of
the small sites had no depth and was closed down, but the
volunteers continued at Jones Mill and the other smaller
site. Jones Mill proved to have deep stratified Middle
Archaic deposits, but because of division of the crew to
two sites and the depth at Jones Mill, an insufficient
sample was obtained, according to Dr. Mary Beth Trubitt,

The meeting was adjourned a few minutes before 6 pm.
Respectfully submitted
Hester Davis

4

the dig director and Survey Archeologist at Henderson
State University. So the 2008 program will be held again
in June at the Jones Mill site.

Archaeology Month is “The Archaeology of Colonial
California.” The 2007 Archaeology Month poster,
“Digitally Documenting Colonial California,” was created
by Eric Blind of UC-Berkeley and the Presidio Trust. It is
a visual representation of the digital restoration process of
a mural at Mission Dolores. The mural was painted circa
1790 by Native American artists, but was covered by a
relief sculpture and concealed for over 200 years. See
www.missiondoloresmural.com for more information.
Other CoAS members should prepare for some stiff
competition at the 2008 SAA Poster Competition!

We have members from many neighboring states who
attend our program. In addition to excavation, we run a
lab for processing, and for the ridiculously low charge of
$12.50, you can register in our Certification Program. We
offer 9 half-day seminars, which last five days. Usually
five are given one week and 4 the other. The Basic
Excavation seminar is offered twice and is a full day for
five days so that both lectures and supervised excavation
is covered. You do not have to be registered in the
Program to attend a seminar, but those who are have first
choice; and, of course, you must be a member of the
Society to participate. For more information look at our
website (www.arkarch) or contact the Society at 2475
North Hatch Ave, Fayetteville, AR 72704; email:
bhscott@uark.edu.

Second, the latest issue of the SCA Newsletter (Vol. 41,
No. 3) is devoted to CASSP (the California
Archaeological Site Stewardship Program), with many if
not most of the articles written by volunteer site stewards.
CASSP was established in 1999 as a Society for
California Archaeology program; the SCA manages and
monitors the group’s activities. It consists of a partnership
between archaeologists, public land management
agencies, Native Americans, and citizen volunteers. The
goal of the program is to protect archaeological and
historical sites and increase public awareness of these
sites. Volunteers from all walks of life and of all ages
work with local archaeologists to monitor and report on
sites in their local areas. Each site steward is assigned a
site, which they visit about once a month to inspect it for
damage caused by vandalism and other sources. He or she
fills out a two-page form and takes pictures. This
information is handed over to the supervising
archaeologist (usually an archaeologist from a public
agency) and is often forwarded to the region’s
information center.

The Arkansas Archeological Society's annual meeting is
held the last week in September. This year it was held at a
popular venuethe Ozark Folk Center in Mountain
Viewand it was, as a consequence, the second largest
meeting we have had (Hot Springs attracted more!) with
116 registered, including a bunch from our neighbor to
the north, Missouri State University. A reception on
Friday night for visiting; a full day of papers on Saturday;
a banquet and guest speaker; and a tour of Blanchard
Springs Caverns constituted the full agenda. The weather
was perfect. We were able to give our highest award, the
McGimsey Preservation Award, to two people this year:
Society member James Johnston, who, because he found
that pothunters were digging in a site on his land, went to
his local state representative and suggested that an
amendment to the 1967 State Antiquities Act was needed
to strengthen the punishments for removal of artifacts
without landowner permission. James testified at
Committee hearings, and he found a sponsor for the bill in
the Senate. Representative Roy Ragland shepherded the
bill through the legislature and we were very pleased to be
able to bestow the McGimsey Award on him for this
important improvement to the law. Sam Brookes, Forest
Service Archeologist in Mississippi, was the banquet
speaker. He gave a stimulating and amusing public lecture
on the Middle Archaic period in Mississippi.

Volunteers receive two days of training during which
they learn about local archaeology, safety procedures, and
how to deal with difficult situations, in addition to visiting
a real archaeological site to get hands-on experience with
their new duties. Volunteers can also take advanced
workshops, learning skills like mapping, lab analysis, and
how to record rock art. Currently, there are about 100
active site stewards. The dedication of these volunteers is
exemplified by Spencer Berman and Ron Weitz, who
work under the guidance of BLM archaeologist Wanda
Raschkow. The two spent four days hiking (over New
Year’s, no less!) into the Santa Rosa Mountains (near the
Salton Sea) gaining 5800’ in altitude to monitor
archaeological sites, such as an outcropping containing
bedrock mortars and milling slicks.

SOCIETY FOR CALIFORNIA ARCHAEOLOGY
by Candace Ehringer (ehringerc@gmail.com)

Lastly, I would like to report on the SCA’s 41st Annual
Meeting held in San Jose from March 22-25. The theme
of the meeting was public outreach and education. At
least 735 people attended the meeting, including more
Native American contributors/participants than ever
before. As always, the silent auction was a big success,
generating nearly $20,000 in proceeds (including ticket
sales). The awards banquet keynote speaker was Timothy

I have three items of interest to report on for this CoAS
newsletter. First, the Society for California Archaeology
(SCA) has moved Archaeology Month from May to
October, mainly because October will better fit into
California’s K-12 curricula, facilitating SCA outreach
with California schools. The theme of this year’s

5

R. Pauketat of the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign. His address was titled “Talk about Politics
and Religion! How Ancient Cahokia ‘Civilized’ Eastern
North America.” The Martin A. Baumhoff Special
Achievement Award was presented to Robert L. Bettinger
by David Hurst Thomas, a lifelong friend and colleague.
The Lifetime Achievement Award was given to Keith L.
Johnson, who co-founded the anthropology department at
CSU-Chico and has been a member of the SCA for over
40 years. On the last day of the meetings, UC Berkeley
and the Presidio Trust hosted the First Annual SCA
Archaeology Public Day. Over 350 members of the public
attended the event. Several hands-on activities were
available, including flint knapping, basketry, food
preparation, excavation, artifact identification, and
stratigraphic analysis. The event also included exhibits
and
demonstrations
by
museums,
universities,
government agencies, descendant communities (including
Native American, Chinese, and Japanese groups), and
technical specialists such as zooarchaeologists, costumed
interpreters, and dancers. The day was a big hit and will
likely be included in future SCA meetings.

artifacts from the Wapanucket site on the north shore of
Assawompsett Pond in Middleborough. The Technology
Committee’s proposal to the IBM Corporation obtained a
new desktop computer and a network printer. The new
computer awarded to the Society is being used to
maintain inventory records.
Collections inventory work continues with an increase in
hours spent by volunteers and staff. During the past
winter, a group of Native Americans from the
Wampanoag Program at Plimoth Plantation came in
weekly to assist us with the inventory until they returned
to work at the Plantation. Their volunteer hours and those
of two other volunteers helped to advance the inventory
process directed by Curtiss Hoffman. We are now
reviewing our museum accession procedures and hope to
improve those as well.
Our Annual Meeting and Conference was held at the
Middleborough Public Library on October 13, 2007, with
a Symposium, organized by Rhode Island member Alan
Leveillee, on the Transitional Archaic Period. An open
house for conference attendees and the general public
immediately followed the afternoon presentations.

MASSACHUSETTS ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

Even though MAS faces numerous challenges as a small
non-profit organization run almost entirely by volunteers
in today’s fiscal climate, I remain optimistic that we hold
an important position in the Commonwealth as keepers of
Native American artifacts entrusted to us and the culture
they represent. Our mission is to make this information
available to our members, Native Americans,
archaeologists, historians, and the interested public.

by Tonya Largy, M.A
The MAS has continued to welcome our members and the
public over the last year. The number of visitors has
increased, I believe in response to our efforts to publicize
the Robbins Museum as well as our expanded web site
(www.massarchaeology.org), which gives us more
exposure. The new children’s program has brought
children and their families from a wide area to the
Robbins Museum. We also initiated the First Annual
Poster and Essay contest to involve fifth grade students of
the Commonwealth in the study of archaeology. Over
200 submissions were judged and prizes given for the best
in each category.

MISSOURI ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
We had the MAS annual meeting March 30-April 1 in
Lake Ozark, Missouri, marking 72 years of MAS history.
This year’s meeting was a joint effort with the Missouri
Association of Professional Archaeologists (MAPA). The
gathering included two meetings of the MAS Board of
Directors (first with old members, second with the new),
the MAPA Board of Directors and business meeting, an
open exhibit (well attended and presented), book sales,
and a silent auction, and the annual Koch Lecture given
by Dr. Patricia O’Brien of Kansas State University,
Distinguished Professor Emerita. She spoke about her
ethnographic and archaeological research on Pawnee
religious cosmology and sacred places in the central
Plains. There were representatives of the Arkansas, Iowa,
and Illinois archaeology societies at the meeting.

In May, the A.D. Makepeace Corporation awarded us a
grant of $4,000 toward our Native American Educational
Outreach Project. With these funds, we were able to hire
a museum education specialist to develop school tours
with assistance from Native American Consultants. Also,
it will enable the Robbins Museum to open one additional
day to provide more flexibility for scheduling field trips
and for visitation by both our members and the public.
We also received several other smaller grants as well as
generous donations from our members.
A smaller grant from the Middleborough Cultural
Council enabled MAS to reprint Wapanucket, one of our
most significant publications, which went out of print in
2006. To celebrate our success, we sponsored a monthlong exhibit in the Middleborough Public Library and
offered a free public lecture on recent research conducted
by Dr. James Bradley, our Bulletin editor, on Paleo-Indian

Boonslick Chapter
by Earl Lubensky (lubenskye@missouri.edu)
We (MAS and Boone County Historical Society)
conducted the 2007 field exercise, for a third year (June
22-28) at the site of the old town of Lexington in Boone

6

County. We had hoped to find more evidence of the town
of Lexington but in spite of indications in a resistivity
study of a possible structure, just to the west of last year's
excavation of the blacksmith shop area, the results did not
prove the existence of a structure. We tried a series of
cuts near the two features (a burned building and a well)
uncovered in 2005, but also found little evidence of other
structures. There is a mass of artifacts yet to be
examined, however, and we are hopeful some evidence
may come out of their analysis.

MO in October of 2007, with the expectation that a
longer-term field project will follow in the spring/summer
of 2008.
Ozarks Chapter, by Jack Ray
Work at the multicomponent Big Eddy site continued
with the excavation of 12 sq. m in the pre-Clovis-age
deposits. Unfortunately, nothing of significance was
found. We did, however, find a few interesting San
Patrice tools in deposits overlying pre-Clovis areas. Neal
Lopinot and Jack are currently writing up the fourth and
final volume on the Big Eddy site, which will deal with
all our Paleoindian and potential pre-Clovis-age findings
through the years. For more information on the Big Eddy
site, please see http://www.missouristate.edu/car/.

I am working on revival of the Boonslick Archaeological
Society (chapter of MAS), which has not met for some
time after the MAS was moved out of University facilities
here and went to Springfield. I am hoping an arrangement
can be made with the Boone County Historical Society,
uniting in this area the historic and prehistoric period of
Boone County past. As of now things look promising, but
it is still a hope.

Jack’s new book, Ozarks Chipped-Stone Resources: A
Guide to the Identification, Distribution, and Prehistoric
Use of Cherts and Other Siliceous Raw Materials, is now
available. It is a product of more than 25 years of research
on the various raw materials in the Ozarks that prehistoric
Native Americans used to make chipped-stone tools. The
purpose of the book is to provide a reference source or
guide to the bewildering array of chipped-stone
(knappable) resources available in the Ozarks. The normal
purchase price for this publication is $45, but it is being
offered to Missouri Archaeological Society (MAS)
members for $35. To purchase this new publication,
please contact the MAS office.

We are still analyzing the artifacts (in my basement) from
the 2006 exercise, and then will come careful analysis of
the results and publication. If we can get the Boonslick
Society going again we plan a joint presentation (me and
Dave Sapp from the Boone County Historical Society) on
the Rock Bridge Park excavation of a structure from the
old Rock Bridge community we did jointly in 2003. I am
preparing a PowerPoint presentation for the Woodland
symposium on my work directing the Mendenhall sites
excavations in 1983, 1985, and 1986 (23BO876 and
23BO87).

Southwest Missouri Chapter, by Lyle Sparkman
We sent five volunteers to the Big Eddy site during June
(2007) to help screen through the Paleo-level buckets of
sediment excavated by the University of Kansas crew
under the watchful eye of site specialist Jack Ray of
Missouri State University's Center for Archaeological
Research.

Kansas City Chapter
New Fort Osage Museum, by Gina Powell (ginsuguardcoas@yahoo.com)
We are happy to announce the official opening of the new
Fort Osage Education Center in eastern Jackson County,
Missouri. The fort was built in 1808, under the direction
of William Clark, and the design reflects its dual role as a
military garrison and Native American trade center. The
archaeological site on which the museum sits was
excavated by a team of professional and avocational
archaeologists in 2005. The results of the excavation are
displayed at the museum.

OREGON ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Ideas for Getting Presenters and Activities for Your
Society by Cathy Poetschat (poetschat@msn.com)
Every month (except during the summer) the Oregon
Archaeological Society (OAS) has a business meeting,
followed by a presentation about archaeology by a guest
presenter. Most of the time the presenters are involved
with OAS in other ways. Information about these other
involvements may give some ideas to societies who are
looking for presenters, activities, or projects to support.

Work begins in “The Burned District”, by Ann Raab
Ann Raab, R.P.A, PhD Archaeology student at the
University of Kansas, is conducting archaeological
investigations in Bates County, Missouri, with the help of
students. Known as “The Burned District” because of the
devastation brought about by General Order #11 in the
midst of the Civil War, Ann is locating rural farmsteads
that were inhabited before, during, and after this event.
The focus of the work is to shed light on how people in
the areaincluding farmers, women, enslaved African
Americans, and free African Americanswere living
before, during, and after this tumultuous time.
Excavations began with a pilot project in Amsterdam,

OAS gets ideas for presenters from OAS members who
volunteer on the presenter’s projects or events; have given
support to a presenter’s cause; have read a new book by
the
presenter;
or heard
the presenter
at
a
conference. Other presenters have been teachers at
our 'Training Program' classes or recipients of a grant or

7

scholarship from OAS. We have had a few presenters
come to us, asking to make a presentation to get the word
out about their project or organization, so that our
audience might want to join them or help on their
projects.

this year his presentation will be about ALI's very
successful The Archaeology Channel (TAC) he formed.
Pettigrew invites OAS members to help at his annual ALI
International Archaeology Film and Video Festivals, and
at his ArchaeologyFest Film Series. He provides OAS a
table at these events for us to promote OAS and sell our
books. Pettigrew had many OAS members help on an
excavation project last year in Portland. He supports the
Oregon Archaeology Celebration, and so does OAS.

The following are a few examples of OAS involvement
with our presenters. They are given in hope that other
societies can get some ideas for possible presenters (from
those you already do other things with), or possible
activities (with your presenters) for your members:

*DOUGLAS WILSON (NPS Archaeologist) came to
OAS many years ago with a presentation about his
'Garbology' Garbage Project in Arizona. Since then he
has made presentations about NPS Ft. Vancouver and Ft.
Clatsop archaeology projects. Many members have
volunteered to help on various excavation and laboratory
projects at Ft. Vancouver before and since Wilson joined
the NPS. One of those members is Paul Lawson, who
even gave Ft. Vancouver his vast archaeology/geology
library this year.

*ALISON STENGER (Institute for Archaeological
Studies) has given many presentations to OAS about
historic, prehistoric, and underwater archaeology projects,
and most recently paleontological projects. She has been
an OAS Member for over 20 years. She and Chuck Hibbs
directed many years of excavation and laboratory work at
Ft. Vancouver, Felida Moorage, and Woodburn Sites,
with OAS volunteers. They led an OAS Committee that
formed the OAS Training Program in the early 1990s, and
taught the classes until Hibbs’s death five years ago.
Stenger has involved OAS in most all of her projects, and
is co-editor of our monthly newsletter. She supports, and
is on the committee for Oregon Archaeology Celebration
(OAC, archaeology month) and OAS also supports OAC,
and has a member on that committee.

*THOMAS GUDERJAN (Maya Research Program)
contacted OAS and offered to give a presentation about
his non-profit Blue Creek Project in Belize. We got
a program attended by over 200 people, and Guderjan
was able to interest possible volunteers to contribute to
the project, and give information about his new book.
*Many OAS presenters are obtained by asking
archaeologists to come and give a talk about their
projects. This public outreach gives their projects interest,
support, and volunteers if they ask for them. It provides
our audience information about local archaeology projects
and possible volunteer opportunities.

*JAMES
KEYSER (former
USFS
Regional
Archaeologist) gave an OAS Training Program
'Archaeological Draftsmanship' class 14 years ago. He has
gone on to make many OAS presentations about rock art
and archaeological laws, teach many classes on rock art
documentation, lead many OAS rock art projects, created
and led two OAS International Rock Art Symposia, raises
money for OAS projects and publications, writes many
OAS publications about rock art, gives European rock art
tours that OAS members have participated in, encourages
members to get undergraduate and graduate degrees,
and was
OAS
President
twice!
All
this
involvement started after he was asked to teach that class
14 years ago.

*OAS asks that recipients of our scholarships and grants
give a presentation about the projects we helped fund, and
this can lead to other OAS involvement with them.
In summary, I hope that these examples will give
you ideas for presenters and activities for your society.
Everyone can gain from helping each other out - for the
betterment of archaeology!

*RICHARD MCCLURE (USFS Gifford Pinchot NF
Archaeologist) has made numerous presentations to
OAS about his USFS Passport In Time (PIT) projects in
the Gifford Pinchot National Forest. He enlisted OAS
help when he was developing his first PIT project and
many OAS members have participated in his PIT projects
since then. He gave OAS booths for us to promote OAS
and archaeology at the USFS 'Windows on the Past' Fairs
all over the State. McClure has taught the OAS Training
Program's Survey class many times, assists with our
Stewardship Program, and is a resource and advocate for
OAS.

SASKATCHEWAN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Excerpts from the Journal of Robert Clipperton,
Volunteer Excavator at the South Branch House
South Branch House, occupied from 1786 to 1794, played
a significant role in the history of the fur trade in the
province. Between archaeological evidence and historical
documentation of the events surrounding South Branch
House's demise, we hope to better understand the trials of
life at a typical Hudson's Bay post. Explorer and
mapmaker, David Thompson, helped build the fort, and
also documented the daily activities while there.

*RICHARD PETTIGREW (Archaeological Legacy
Institute 'ALI') has given many presentations to OAS, and

8

Field School at South Branch House: Day One
8:42 – Arrive at SAS Office. Too early. Wait in car while
listening to a former CIA Operative on CBC Radio telling
us that we are digging ourselves into a hole in
Afghanistan. Excavation to follow I guess.
9:20 – Depart for South Branch House. Pleasant Day.
Projected high of 32°C.
10:44 – Talina Cyr-Steenkamp, the Executive Director,
assembles us in front of the historic markers at SBH.
Says she will tell us all about the site. I quickly return to
car for lawn chair and thermos of coffee. This is my type
of school.
11:02 – Tour of site including unisex latrine with great
ventilation and view of river.
11:20 – We are divided into teams and each is assigned a
square metre of ground.
12:00 - We ignore the call for lunch to get the edge on the
opposing teams.
12:30 - Lunch in the shade of a tarp strung in the trees.
Light breeze. No bugs.
1:03 - The competition begins in earnest.
1:52 - Loud team next door extols bone fragment. We
continue to dig out grass and roots. Score 1-0.
2:36 - More bone fragments from next door. Ours must be
hidden under the layer of sod against which we are
rapidly making progress. Score 2-0.
3:18 - Neighbouring team exposes a piece of bone large
enough to be drawn on a diagram. Score 3-0. We begin to
take pride in the evenness of our excavation and the
meticulous manner in which we work.
3:49 – Someone notes that the 3rd team has found a lot of
bone. We try to ignore them until they uncover the nail,
which is obviously the find of the day. We quit keeping
score.
4:00 – My teammates abandon me due to prior
commitments in Saskatoon. I finish off their quadrants to
complete the level, finding three microscopic bone flakes.
I quietly put them into a Ziploc™ bag and fill out the
label.
4:48 – Help staff pack up for the night.
5:07 – Depart for Saskatoon wondering where I can get
some artefacts to plant for tomorrow’s competition.

residues inside would show and as an aside asks if I did a
lot of drugs when I was younger.
2:37-The Bead Queens make another announcement. A
green one this time.
2:56 - We uncover a few miniscule bone fragments and
stop to do the paperwork. Wander over to Pit 3. They
show me their collection of rodent bones. Quite
appropriate I think.
3:29 - Team 3 finds a piece of glass.
4:02 - Teen-aged teammate muses about how music
would make the time go faster. Blues maybe. Sings the
words “I got a pit but I ain’t got no artefacts,
ooooohhhhh,” under his breath.
4:52 - About to pack up. We have uncovered the tops of
two larger pieces of fire-cracked rock. We conceal our
find so as to demoralize the opposition first thing in the
morning.
South Branch House: Day Three
9:06 - Arrived late at site. Delayed by the group of turkey
vultures perched on fence posts between Rosthern and
Batoche. Is this an omen?
9:10 - We uncover the pits. Large pools of water on the
tarps from last night’s rainstorm. We manage to pull the
first tarp off only to have the water all run downhill and
back into the Bead Queens’ pit. They think it was an
accident.
9:34 - Turns out our fire-cracked rocks are not firecracked at all, just rocks.
9:43 - “Look!” a shrill voice from the group of Bead
Queens echoes in the trees. “Another pipe stem.” We
keep digging.
10:02 - “Another bead!” We try to look like we are
concentrating too hard on our work to notice.
10:23 - “Buffalo skull,” exclaims a voice from Pit 3. It
isn’t. Just a large collection of bones. Quite impressive
actually.
Looks
like
horse bones to me. South
Branch Horse undoubtedly.
12:00 – Break for lunch after marveling how the Bead
Queens managed to find tiny lead ball of gunshot.
1:23 – Talina tries to boost our morale by identifying one
of our rocks as a core of Swan River chert. We bag it and
do the paper work. Teen-aged teammate shows his
artistic side by doing the mapping diagram. Good thing.
I can only draw stick rocks.
2:13 – “Another one!” We don’t look up. It only
encourages them.
3:05 – I go over to inspect the ‘Horse Pit’. Scapula with
round circles cut out of it. Pipe stem in with the bones. I
decide not to mention my two small bone fragments.
3:15 – Break. I maneuver the conversation around to the
possibility of live anthrax spores thriving amongst buried
bison bones, for those so unfortunate to come across
them.
4:41 – Bead Queens ponder whether they are at the
bottom of their pit, as they haven’t found an artefact for
maybe 12 minutes. Discussion is interrupted by “Here’s
another blue one.”

South Branch House: Day Two
9:06 - My team assembles for the day’s struggles.
9:08 - Leader of Team 3 requests larger artefact bags,
loudly for our benefit.
9:14 - With renewed optimism we ‘attack’ the pit.
10:03 - “It’s a bead!” - the sound resonates from Pit 2
next door. We ooh and aah appropriately to maintain
yesterday’s solidarity against Team 3.
11:31 - “Another bead!” - we are less enthusiastic but still
polite.
12:30 - Lunch in the shade. Very pleasant. You could
almost think our competitors were nice people.
1:48 - “Look, a pipe stem!” Again from Team 2. My teenaged teammate speculates on what a chemical analysis of

9

5:10 – Talina and Mike suggest that our pit be abandoned
as non-productive after 35 cm of basically nothing. We
are to be re-assigned to a new pit in the morning.
Understand the origin of the expression, “This is the pits.”
5:23 – Clean up is interrupted by a large bear that is
watching the action from the wheat field
SOUTH BRANCH HOUSE: DAY FOUR
9:17 - Arrive on site.
9:22 - Our team is being disbanded and our expertise
spread around. The teen-ager infiltrates the Bead Queens
while I am joined at a new pit by two of the Horse Bone
Whisperers. I am confident that this is due to my
demonstrated excellence at digging through grass and
roots.
10:14 - Continue to do machete work with a dull trowel.
11:26 - Defying the pounding rays of the sun, I bag a few
limestone flakes.
12:29 - The Bead Queens are shaken out of their artefactinduced euphoria by a call to lunch.
1:56 - One of the Horse Whisperers in my pit finds a
piece of broken kitchenware.
3:12 - It is determined that the South Branch Horse is
actually the remains of two elk. I choose to think that it is
really remains of a single member of the now extinct fourscapula elk.
3:32 - My find of the week – a possible prune pit. This
would prove that South Branch House was not used by
regular fur traders.
4:29 - Have reached the bottom of our level, we record
and put our tools away.

petroglyphs in central Wyoming, just outside of
Thermopolis, and a part of Hot Springs State Park. Other
WAS members excavated at the stratified Paleoindian
Hell Gap site in east central Wyoming. Hell Gap, owned
by the Wyoming Archaeological Foundation (WAF), a
branch of WAS, is being investigated by the George C.
Frison Institute of the University of Wyoming, under a
long term cooperative agreement. The project at Hell Gap
includes research, field schools, volunteer opportunities,
and exhibits/tours. Aside from visitations during biennial
field seasons, local school groups visit the site every year.
The WAS held its annual summer meeting at the Hell Gap
site as well. The participants toured the site and the WAF
property, excavated, participated in lab work, and assisted
in the maintenance of the field facilities. The WAS
featured speaker and guest at the meeting was Bob Patton
from Denver. Along with helping us dig, Bob did a
number of daytime and evening flintknapping sessions for
the meeting participants, in the process making several
fine preforms and points. Many members of WAS chose
to help in maintaining the facilities, consisting mostly of
cutting and clearing trees that have grown into the fence
and maintaining the fence. Also visiting Hell Gap during
the WAS summer meeting were members of the Kimble
family. The Kimbles owned a ranch at the location of the
current field camp for the Hell Gap project and their
family's ranch ruins are among the recent archaeological
treasures of the WAF property. The WAS members
learned a lot about the historic archaeological remains
from the Kimble's and the meeting will hopefully spur
some oral histories.

WYOMING ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY

The next meeting of the WAS will be in Rock Spring
from April 25-17, 2008, hope you can join us!

by Marcel Kornfeld (anpro1@uwyo.edu)
The spring meeting of WAS was held at Saratoga from
April 20-21, 2007. The well-attended meeting included
presentations of current research by professional
archaeologists throughout the state, as well as many UW
students. As usual a silent auction and banquet were part
of the events. The banquet speaker was E. Jim Dixon of
CU at Boulder. Dixon discussed his ideas and data from
his excavations at On-Your-Knees-Cave to argue for a
probable Pacific Coastal migration hypothesis for the
First Americans. At the meeting, the WAS scholarship
committee awarded the Frison award to graduate student
Patrick Mullen, however, no undergraduates applied for
the Mulloy award and no Ph.D. students applied for the
Henry and Clara Jensen travel grant. The annual award of
appreciation for years of contribution and service to
Wyoming Archaeology (the Golden Trowel Award) was
presented to Will Husted of Billing, Montana.
During the summer, WAS members participated in
several projects throughout the state and the region. Many
members participated in excavation and recording of rock
images at Legend Rock, a major concentration of

10

Invitation to all SAA Council of Affiliated Society Members
to Participate in the Exhibit Booth and General Meeting at the Annual SAA Meeting in
Vancouver, BC, Canada, March 26-30, 2008
The Society for American Archaeology (SAA) works cooperatively with regional societies through
the Council of Affiliated Societies (CoAS). The Council was established by the SAA board of
directors for the mutual benefit of the societies and to advance the practice of archaeology. CoAS
members receive two CoAS newsletters per year, a copy of The SAA Archaeological Record, are
represented at the annual meeting if they send a representative, and are allotted space at the CoAS
booth in the Exhibit Hall. This year’s CoAS Business Meeting will be held on Thursday, March
27th from 4-6 pm as part of the SAA Meeting. The meeting room is the Lord Byron Room at the
Hyatt Regence Hotel, 655 Burrard St., which is another hotel about three blocks from the main
hotel.
CoAS Booth in the Exhibit Hall at the SAA Meeting
Thanks to the SAA Board and Executive Director, CoAS will have a booth at the SAA Annual
Meeting in Vancouver. We encourage CoAS member societies to participate at the conference by
having your members volunteer to staff the booth and share information about CoAS and your
society with conference attendees. Your society can display literature, such as journals, journal lists,
brochures, newsletters, membership applications, publication lists, a t-shirt, button, decal, and your
state's archaeology week/month poster, and other items at the booth. We cannot sell things at the
booth. Located in the large exhibit hall in the Vancouver Convention and Exhibition Centre, the
booth typically attracts many of the 3000+ conference attendees. This is a great opportunity for
CoAS to promote the role of avocational groups at the SAA meetings and promote the help we’ve
given on archaeological projects, and much more.
How can your Society participate, you ask? Read on!
1) All CoAS Societies will have their name listed prominently on a banner at the booth. CoAS
membership demonstrates a commitment to archaeology. Your society is a CoAS member or
immediate past member and we are proud of your dedication.
2) CoAS societies can help staff the booth to share information about CoAS and their own
local society. It is a great opportunity to staff the booth a few hours and then explore the rest of the
exhibit hall and the conference. We also co-sponsor the SAA Archaeology Poster Contest with the
SAA Public Education Committee that takes place in the exhibit hall.
3) Your Society can send items for the CoAS Booth to:
HOLD FOR ARRIVING GUEST:
Cathy Poetschat (3-26-08)
Renaissance Harborside Marriott Hotel
1133 West Hastings Street
Vancouver, British Columbia
V6E3T3, Canada
Send your name, address, phone number and email address with your organization’s materials.
PLEASE DO NOT SEND YOUR PACKAGE TOO EARLY OR WE MAY NOT GET IT! Check
with your local post office or shipping service for approximate delivery times. Please try to have the
11

materials arrive between March 24th and 26th. We will not be able to return the material by mail, but
you can pick it up on Saturday in the Exhibition Hall.
4) YOUR ORGANIZATION CAN SEND A REPRESENTATIVE! Sending a representative has
several advantages. First, they can be your organization’s eyes, ears, and voice at the annual CoAS
business meeting. Second, you can bring your society’s materials with you instead of mailing them.
And finally, your representative can staff the booth for a few hours and receive a pass to the exhibit
hall as well as network with other groups attending the meeting. Call or email Cathy Poetschat in
advance to schedule volunteer hours and arrange for a pass.
So help us celebrate the 73rd Anniversary of the SAA and take advantage of this fantastic
opportunity to get out information about your society. CALL OR EMAIL US WITH YOUR
QUESTIONS or if you are interested in sending material to be shown/distributed at the CoAS booth
or volunteering a few hours of your time. If you are attending the meeting and can’t decide whether
to volunteer right now, drop by the booth and let us know if you have some free time. On-site
volunteers are always welcome. We hope to see you and your society’s materials in Vancouver!
Sincerely,
COAS OFFICERS
Marcel Kornfeld, Chair
George Frison Institute, Dept. 3431
1000 E. University Ave.,
Laramie, WY 82071
anpro1@uwyo.edu
Cathy Poetschat, Vice Chair
Oregon Archaeological Society
13255 SW Glenhaven St.
Beaverton, OR 97005
Poetschat@msn.com
Hester Davis, Secretary
Arkansas Archeological Society
2475 N. Hatch
Fayetteville, AR 72704
hadavis@uark.edu
Gina Powell, Newsletter Editor
Missouri Archaeological Society
Kansas City, MO 64110
ginsuguard-coas@yahoo.com

12

