CoAS Newsletter
Council of Affiliated Societies, Society for American Archaeology
Now also available on the SAA website
To navigate there: go to SAA.org >> ”About SAA” >> ”Go Directly to” (pull-down menu) >> ”Council of Affiliated Societies”
https://ecommerce.saa.org/saa/staticcontent/staticpages/adminDir/coas_newsletter_archives.cfm

Number 17-Fall

October 2008

FROM THE CHAIR:
by Marcel Kornfeld (Anpro1@uwyo.edu)

Photos from the CoAS Booth at the
2008 Spring Meeting of the SAA

The Council of Affiliated societies had two tables in the
exhibit room at the Vancouver Annual SAA Meeting.
They were full of literature, exhibits, and posters brought
or sent to the conference by member societies. Numerous
conference attendees stopped by and looked at or picked
up the literature and membership forms. It is very gratifying to see the wonderful publications that some members
of CoAS are publishing. We know that there are many
more of you out there with regional publications and we
encourage you to send them to the next year’s CoAS table
in Atlanta. We are sure that many of your contributions
deserve national exposure and the CoAS table is an excellent venue for such exposure.
The business meeting was held on Thursday of the SAA
Annual Meeting. Our Board liaison Jonathan Driver was
present for part of the meeting and announced that our
next liaison would be Barbara Mills. As a result of various mailings by the chair and the article in CoAS by the
Secretary and Chair we seem to be slightly increasing our
membership with several new applications received before the Vancouver meeting and several after. Unfortunately some older members have not renewed their membership, so membership numbers have not increased
much. If you haven’t yet, please renew your membership.
On the basis of previous discussions and changes in the
Public Education Committee, next year’s Poster Contest
will be operated solely by CoAS and the SAA office staff.
We congratulate the 2008 Poster Contest winners: Alaska
(1st), Wyoming (2nd), and Oregon (3rd). Way to go! But
all the posters were wonderful, check out previous years’
winners
(http://www.saa.org/public/archposters/postercontesthistory.html.

Figure 1. Marcel Kornfeld and Cathy Poetschat

Figure 2. Candace Ehringer, Hester Davis, and Cathy
Poetschat. Photos by George Poetschat.

The 75th anniversary of the SAA is coming up in 2010
and it will be a great opportunity for local, regional, and
avocational societies to showcase their programs. Information might include the historic development of their
societies and the contribution of avocational efforts to
their local archeological record. In addition, local avocational societies have contributed to the current structural
and historical development of archeology by being involved in the various legislative processes in their states
that resulted in the development of state surveys, state

historic preservation offices, state archeologist offices,
historical societies, or other state agencies that today constitute the infrastructure of archeology. The same is true at
the national level; member societies and individual avocational archeologists were integral to the initial organization of the SAA, as well as in many of the following efforts to pass national legislation protecting the
archeological record. The same remains true today; avo-

1

cational archeologists are often at the cutting edge of archeological protection and research.

Each area of certification takes several years to finish.
Certification candidates may work on several areas simultaneously, however, 40 to 80 hours spent on task (supervised by Kansas State Historical Society [KSHS] personnel), several formal classes, and other projects are
required for each category. Specific requirements are delineated in a Certification Notebook, which is received
when a KAA member enrolls in the program for a onetime fee of $10. Completion of each requirement is verified by the signature of a KSHS archeologist. When all
requirements for a category have been signed, copies of
the completed record pages are given to the Certification
chair, who prepares a recognition document.

For the 75th anniversary of the SAA, we hope to highlight
these efforts and successes. I hope that CoAS can sponsor
several paper and poster symposia on the history, role,
successes, and continued involvement and participation of
avocational archeologists in American archeology. From
California to New York and from Alaska to Tierra del
Fuego, avocational archeology has contributed to and
shaped today’s archeology both structurally and substantively. Let us together highlight these events at the annual
meeting of the SAA in St. Louis! This central location
should allow more of our members to attend and participate in these important events.

Classes are offered at the June field school (Kansas
Archeology Training Program [KATP]) for no charge
beyond the KATP registration fee. In addition to credit for
KAA Certification, college credit is available for most
classes offered at field school (subject to tuition costs)
through Emporia State University. For the last five years
we have also offered a winter certification seminar. We
often ask $10 for these two-day classes, to pay for classroom rental and to reimburse the instructor for expenses.

If you have any ideas for symposia topics that CoAS
should sponsor for this event please contact: Marcel
Kornfeld (Chair, anpro1@uwyo.edu), Cathy Poetschat
(Vice-Chair, poetschat@msn.com), Hester Davis (hadavis@uark.edu), or Gina Powell (Newsletter editor, ginsuguard-coas@yahoo.com).

FROM THE MEMBERS:

At field school, the classes last four hours a day for five
days, or the equivalent. Instructors are KSHS archeology
personnel or other professionals in the field. A slate of
eight core classes is offered in rotation and an interesting
array of 20 or more elective courses supplement them.
The winter seminar is especially popular because many
have responsibilities at field school that preclude them
from taking classes in June.

KANSAS ANTHROPOLOGICAL A SSOCIATION
by Rose Marie Wallen, KAA President
(roseandmikewallen@yahoo.com)
The Kansas Anthropological Association (KAA) oversees
an in-house Certification Program for its non-professional
members; many similar associations have expressed interest in its requirements and how it is administered. In 1974
a small committee of KAA members, working in cooperation with then state archeologist Tom Witty, designed our
program, following a model established by the Arkansas
Amateur Training Program. There were revisions and
updates in 1993, and as field and lab procedures change,
no doubt our program will continue to evolve.

Two evening meetings are held at field school to answer
questions about certification, to allow new members to
inspect the certification materials, and for them to consider enrollment. The Kansas State Public Archeologist,
Virginia Wulfkuhle, and Kansas State Archeologist, Robert Hoard, assist the KAA Certification committee in
fielding questions at these meetings. At other times of the
year, interested persons simply contact the Certification
Chair to bring questions forward or to enroll. Contact
information for the chairman is included in the quarterly
KAA Newsletter following Certification news. As members complete each category of Certification, the certificate of recognition is awarded at a state KAA event
(KATP, Summer Spree, Fall Fling, Winter Seminar, or
Annual Meeting) and publicized in the newsletter. This
recognition is a seed of encouragement that spurs others
to pursue certification.

The Certification Program of the KAA is a comprehensive program that guides the amateur archeologist in personal study and achievement. Completing areas of the
program is an indication of competence and knowledge,
but is not construed as a license to excavate. Professional
archeologists do take this experience into account, however, when assigning leadership roles and major responsibilities at our annual field school, or when hiring crew
members in contract work.

Certification is an excellent program for guiding one's
learning and measuring one's achievements in archeology,
as well as a personal record of experiences. Completing
certification in all categories would take many years; it is
not a short-term commitment. The considerable requirements and time necessary to complete them means that
few persons have finished all seven areas of Certification.

There are seven categories of Certification, each having
requirements specific to the category. The seven categories are: Basic Surveyor, Advanced Surveyor, Basic Crew
Member, Advanced Crew Member, Basic Lab Technician, Advanced Lab Technician, and Outreach Specialist.

2

However, a revival of interest in the program in recent
years, together with the expansion of educational offerings by the KAA, has allowed many to make significant
progress toward these goals.

describes archaeological and geophysical research performed at Wilson’s Trading Post/Bell Tavern and Wilson’s Cemetery, both associated with the northern route.
Three Rivers Chapter
Joe Harl, Archaeological Research Center of St. Louis
(ARC) Vice President, presented preliminary results of
archaeological investigations on a large U-shaped
Lohmann phase, Mississippian village uncovered in Granite City, Illinois. This village dates to the start of the Mississippian period (ca. A.D. 1050) and was occupied for a
maximum of 50 years.

MISSOURI ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
By Gina Powell (ginsuguard-coas@yahoo.com)
Another successful Missouri Archaeology Month (September) has come and gone with many interesting programs held around the state, some of which are listed
here.
Kansas City Chapter
The first Lower Missouri River Archaeology and History
Conference was sponsored by the Fort Osage Historic Site
in eastern Jackson County. The theme of this conference
was the cultural and historical resources of the lower Missouri River valley, focusing on early human settlement,
American frontier expansion, and historic development of
this region. This conference was also part of the 200th
anniversary celebration of Fort Osage’s founding in 1808
by William Clark.

NEW YORK STATE ARCHAEOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION
by Bill Engelbrecht, NYSAA President
(engelbwe@gmail.com)
One hundred forty-six individuals registered for the annual meeting in Syracuse, April 18th-20th. Thanks go to
Tim Abel (Thousand Islands Chapter) for organizing an
outstanding program and to the many presenters who
shared their research.
Van Epps-Hartley Chapter
This chapter is one of the oldest chapters in the NYSAA
and has been active in both fieldwork as well as the curation of archaeological collections. This short report will
attempt to highlight some of the Chapter’s more recent
activities, primarily in the area of collection curation
work. Over the many years that the Chapter has been in
existence, artifacts from Chapter digs as well as many
private collections have been received as gifts, and these
collections have been stored at our Chapter headquarters
at the Kateri Shrine in Fonda, New York. Many of these
collections have languished in the storage area for decades without ever having been properly cleaned, inventoried, cataloged and placed into retrievable and secure
storage containers. Under the direction of Chapter President Gary Bernhardt and assisted by Trustee John Vallely,
the Chapter began to hold work nights on Friday evenings
during summer and early fall months to study and properly inventory these collections. Over the last fifteen years
several thousand artifacts have been curated with individual artifact data entered into an Access database. This
activity has been a good learning experience for many of
our newer members as well as a good refresher on artifact
typology for the rest of us. Our newly elected chapter
president, Wayne Lenig, offered his invaluable experience
in assisting the Chapter in characterizing our large ceramic collections.

Fort Osage in the fog. Photo by Gina Powell.
Mound City Chapter
Larry and Marilyn Kinsella presented a lecture on Ishi,
the last member of the Yahi tribe from northern California, who lived his entire life outside of EuropeanAmerican contact until he was discovered in 1911. This
program was co-sponsored by the Mound City Archaeological Society and the Missouri Historical Society as part
of their monthly archaeology lecture series, which meets
on the first Tuesday of each month.
Ozarks Chapter
Archaeology, History, and Geoscience of Trail of Tears
Sites in Greene and Christian Counties, Missouri
Dr. A. Holly Jones, Assistant Director of the Center for
Archaeological Research (CAR) at Missouri State University (MSU), has created a photographic exhibit showing the northern route of the Cherokee Trail of Tears in
Greene and Christian counties, Missouri. The exhibit also

SAA Book Award
Congratulations to James Bradley for receiving the Society for American Archaeology’s book award in the Public
Audience category. Notice of this book, Before Albany:
An Archaeology of Native Dutch Relations in the Capital
Region, 1600-1664, appeared in our NYSAA Fall 2007
newsletter. The award states: “...this volume epitomizes
3

what a book written and designed for the public should
achieve.” For more on the award, see The SAA Archaeological Record, May 2008, vol. 8, No. 3.

Each poster is matted and framed, and is accompanied by
a descriptive label explaining the poster's theme for that
year. The introduction says what Oregon Archaeology
Celebration is, how to get a calendar of events, and lists
the sponsors of the exhibit. Response to request to show
the exhibit has been good and it is already booked through
March of 2010 at some of Oregon's major heritage museums. Once the exhibit was completed, it will now be relatively easy to move it every 3 or 4 months, and add one
new poster to the exhibit every year.

OREGON ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
by Cathy Poetschat, Vice Chair (poetschat@msn.com)
Oregon Archaeology Celebrations: Invitations to the
Past, a traveling poster exhibit by the OAC Steering
Committee
One of the advantages of belonging to several groups is
that you get ideas from one group that you can use for
another. That's how the new exhibit called "Oregon
Archaeology Celebrations: Invitations to The Past" came
about. Being the Oregon Archaeological Society (OAS)
representative and vice-chair of the SAA Council of Affiliated Societies, I know Professor Marcel Kornfeld, its
Chair. Dr. Kornfeld is also chair of the George Frison
Institute. He put my name on the Frison Institute Newsletter mailing list, and one of the issues had articles about
events at the opening of the new Anthropology Building
at the University of Wyoming. One of the articles had a
photo of the lobby of the building filled with Wyoming
Archaeology Month posters displayed on easels. That's
where I got the idea for the Oregon Archaeology Celebration (OAC) Steering Committee's exhibit of its 15 unique
posters (one each year since 1994).

There is no reason why this exhibit cannot go to different
places around Oregon for many years, raising awareness
about archaeology. This idea for an exhibit of state archaeology posters could achieve the same result for other
states that Oregon hopes to get, and could put some of
those gorgeous posters to work for a long, long time!
Oregon Archaeology Celebrations: Invitations to The
Past schedule to date:
October - December 2008
Columbia River Maritime Museum, Astoria
January - March 2009
Newberg Library, Newberg
April - August, 2009
High Desert Museum, Bend
September - November, 2009
Tamastslikt Cultural Institute, Pendleton
December 2009 - March 2010
Oregon Museum of Science and Industry, Portland

The exhibit is a reality now, and it will be traveling
around the state so that Oregonians can see it and discover
(if they were not aware before) that Oregon HAS archaeology; that it is important to our heritage; that we should
support and protect it; and that there is an Oregon Archaeology Celebration every October.

ATHERTON CANYON 2007
by George Poetschat
In July 2005, while recording the rock art at Bear Gulch,
the Oregon Archaeological Society (OAS) and Montana
Archaeological Society (MAS) volunteers visited Atherton Canyon and verified similarities between the primary
motifs at Atherton Canyon and those at Bear Gulch.
Based on the similarities of images, we developed a research plan to record the rock art at Atherton Canyon as
part of the Bear Gulch Project. In June 2007, we returned
and recorded the Atherton Canyon rock art.

At the September OAS Meeting, members got a sneak
peek at a part of the exhibit before it started its journey to
destinations around the state. OAS is listed as one of the
sponsors of the exhibit because they distribute posters and
calendars of events to the greater Portland area and contribute money to help print them.
The Introduction to the Exhibit says: "Under a proclamation by the Governor of Oregon, thirty days are set aside
each year to celebrate and promote archaeology, heritage,
and history with a focus on Oregon. These celebrations
have been held annually in the fall since 1993 with dozens
of events occurring throughout the state sponsored by
many organizations. Starting in 1994, the Oregon Archaeology Celebration Steering Committee has been designing and producing a new poster and calendar of
events each year to publicize the celebration and promote
Oregon's heritage. These posters and calendars of events
are distributed to schools, museums, libraries, parks, state
and federal agency and tribal offices, visitor centers, and
at Oregon Archaeology Celebration event sites statewide."

Atherton Canyon is four miles east of Bear Gulch in what
appears to be the same limestone rock formation. The
canyon is fairly narrow with a small meandering creek
flowing from west to east-northeast, filled with willows,
small trees, and grasses. The rock art is scattered over the
exposed limestone cliffs on both sides of the creek. The
site has over 200 panels of rock art situated in 20 separate
loci. We began recording with seven known rock art locations (Locus 1 to Locus 7). During the week John Greer
located 13 more areas of rock art, which more than tripled
our workload. The largest concentration of rock art is at
the eastern end of the canyon where the cave/shelter begins and the canyon continues to narrow. Locus 7 is a
4

small cave or rock shelter located near the center of the
rock art distribution, and this area also contains a bison
kill midden.

motifs similar to those at Bear Gulch. Finally, Atherton
Canyon has “small figure” style images (very small
scratched scenes) similar to those identified at Bear Gulch
(Figure 4).

The art was applied using at least five distinct methods:
red, white, and black finger paint, red ocher crayon, black
charcoal drawings, incised/scratched images, and pecked
images.
Atherton Canyon rock art has many similarities to Bear
Gulch. Bear Gulch has the largest number of shieldbearing warriors (SBW) at any single site in the Northern
Plains, at over 800. Atherton Canyon has the secondlargest number of SBW, nearly 200. The shields in question cover nearly 2/3 of the full body height (Figure 3).
This large shield was used before the horse was introduced into the Northern Plains.

Figure 5. Red painted images of three people (one holding a gun) and horse tracks. Photograph by George Poetschat.

A number of key motifs make Atherton Canyon somewhat different than Bear Gulch. There are two guns (Figure 5) and three horses depicted at Atherton Canyon while
Bear Gulch has no guns or horses. Also unique to Atherton Canyon are a number of Pecked Abstract tradition
geometric designs and one vertical series painted panel.
One very unique petroglyph was a women’s style “Box
and Border” robe (Figure 6).

Figure 3. Tracings of shield-bearing warriors from Atherton Canyon.

Figure 4. Tracing of a “small-figure-” style hunting
scene from Atherton Canyon. Width is about 7 cm.

All the SBWs at Atherton Canyon have nearly identical
compositions and designs to those at Bear Gulch. They
show identical shield heraldry designs, headdresses,
weaponry and large spears with flags, medicine bundles,
and bustles. The Atherton Canyon SBW images also include superimpositions where a painted image is superimposed by a scratched image of the same size shield with
a different heraldry design and different weapons, headdresses, and/or bustles. This site also has animal and bird

Figure 6.
Tracing of the
women’s style “Box and Border” robe.

5

The OAS volunteers
included Jim Keyser,
George
Poetschat,
David Kaiser, Lisa
Ripps, Mark Fitzsimons, and Mike
Taylor.
Montana
Archaeological Society participants included Melissa Ray,
John Greer, Sara
Scott and
Betty
Harmann.
OAS
member
Steve
Rathman and his
wife
Georgianna
Johnsrud provided
camp and logistics
support. We were
joined by Angelo
Fossati from Italy,
who is an excellent
recorder. During the
field
recording
Angelo fell and dislocated his shoulder
but was back in the
field the next day

recording with one arm in a sling.

Pfannkuchke, Illinois Association for Advancement of
Archaeology.

We had a great project and now have much more rock art
to report with a future “combined” Bear Gulch and Atherton Canyon publication.

1. The minutes of the 2007 meeting were approved as
published in the newsletter.

The Bear Gulch/Atherton Canyon project has been funded
by generous donations from Jean and Ray Auel, David
Easly, Carol Garner, and many other individuals. The
project was also funded by grants from OAS and the
MAS.

2. Announcements: Marcel welcomed new members. He
said he had not received notice from the SAA office as to
new members who have been approved by the SAA
Board, but he thinks there are several either new or who
have been members in the past.
3. Officers reports:
Chair: Marcel reported that he had spent some time working with Gina on the transition of the newsletter from his
office to hers; she, however, did most of the work! The
problems that had to be worked out were that any person
in a photograph that is recognizable must give written
permission for the publication of that photo. Cathy wondered if there is a difference in need to get permission
between the website and hardcopy. One hardcopy is sent
out to all affiliated members.

WYOMING ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
by Marcel Kornfeld (anpro1@uwyo.edu)
The 2008 Wyoming Archaeology Month and the 11th
George C. Frison Institute lecture "Pre-Clovis, ParaClovis, or Post-Clovis? The early peopling of the southern
cone of South America" was given by Dr. Gustavo G.
Politis. Dr. Politis is a professor of anthropology at the
Universidad de La Plata and at Olavarria, as well as an
investigator of the Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones
Científicas (CONICET). His main research interests are:
archaeology of the Pampean region, peopling of the
Americas, ethnoarchaeology among tropical forest huntergatherers, and theory in archaeology.

The newsletter and CoAS are now both accessible from
the SAA main webpage. On the SAA main page,
(www.SAA.org, click on “About SAA”; then from the
pull-down menu, select CoAS; click on newsletter and/or
application form (for potential new affiliates. It was
pointed out that the application form should indicate the
dues amount.

The Wyoming Archeological Society assisted with the
organization and support of the Plains Anthropological
Conference that was held in Laramie from October 1-4,
2008.

Marcel said he has also sent out about 50 invitations to
potential CoAS members with the assistance of Cathy
Poetschat who provided addresses of the organizations.

The Spring meeting of WAS will be in Cody Wyoming
from April 3-5, 2009. The conference hotel will be the
Holiday Inn. Further details are not yet available. A symposium on Legend Rock State Historical site will be held
in conjunction with the WAS spring meeting. Legend
Rock, one of the significant rock art sites in the central
Rocky Mountains is currently in the process of being developed to enhanced visitation as well as to better protect
the site.

Vice-Chair: One of Cathy’s main duties was to answer
Marcel’s questions and advise him in other ways. She also
arranged with Kevin about the CoAS booth for the Vancouver meeting, including getting a second table. She
acted as nomination committee, and got the three officers
(including herself) to agree to another term. We did not
actually vote because we would be voting for ourselves—
the other three people (representing two organizations)
had not been officially approved as affiliates, so could not
vote.

The WAS, along with Wyoming Department of State
Parks and Cultural Resources, the Bureau of Land Management, as well as local interest groups are participating
in the planning process.

She had an email discussion with Hester and Leslie about
changes needed to update the “policies and procedures
document” including, for example, to include that the
SAA will provide a booth at the annual meeting for free.
BUT she thought it better not to rock the boat now by
asking for change.

MINUTES OF THE 2008 COAS BUSINESS MEETING
Thursday, March 27, 2008, Vancouver, BC
The meeting was called to order by Chair Marcel Kornfeld at 4:07 pm. Six members were eventually present:
Marcel Kornfeld, Wyoming; Cathy Poetschat, Oregon;
Hester Davis, Arkansas; Lisa Marie Anselmi, New York
State Archaeological Association; Alice Berkson and Sara

Secretary: Hester said she had taken the minutes at the
2007 meeting, and had distributed them to the other officers for comment, and they had been published in the
newsletter.

6

Newsletter Editor: Gina has been ironing out the wrinkles
out of the rules regarding pictures for the newsletter (NL)
on the SAA website. Without contributions from the officers, the NL would be impossible at this point. Gina
would consider them to be prerequisites for officers.

Do we want to have a session of some kind at the Atlanta
and/or St. Louis meetings? We need to start planning soon
if so.
Alice Berkson then gave a pitch for more involvement by
archeological societies in natural resource education and
volunteer service programs. Twenty-nine states have such
programs, called Master Naturalists and organized similarly to the Masters Gardeners program. By looking at
archeological societies web pages she found only eight
states that had any environmental education along with
their archeological training. There is now, however, a
national umbrella organization, the Alliance of Natural
Resource Outreach and Service Programs (ANROSP:
http://www.nralliance.org). She has given information to
the Public Education Committee of SAA also, to encourage them to encourage societies to find out about the environmental stewardship programs in their state and work
out cooperative programs.

It is very difficult to get articles from nonofficers, especially when the contact information for local chapters is in
constant flux. The editor has not been able to get some of
that contact information updated. She needs the e-mail
addresses for any new members and information on who
has dropped out (and info on who is likely to contribute
so that she can chat them up).
The content of the newsletter, logistics aside, is terrific
and should be read by avocational and vocational
archaeologists alike.
4. Old Business
The request carried to the SAA Board that a CoAS member be appointed to the Crabtree Award Committee was
turned down, but Pam Wheat is on the Committee anyway. Cathy said we should urge the CoAS members to
submit nominations when they are called for (put this in
our newsletter; information is in the SAA Record).

There being no further business, the meeting was adjourned at 5:55 pm.
Respectfully submitted,
Hester Davis, Secretary

Jon Driver, our SAA Liaison appeared and said that Barbara Mills would be our liaison for the next couple of
years.

COAS OFFICERS
Marcel Kornfeld, Chair
George Frison Institute, Dept. 3431
1000 E. University Ave.,
Laramie, WY 82071
anpro1@uwyo.edu

Cathy wondered why it was necessary for an organization
who had once been a member of CoAS but let their membership lapse to fill out an application form again and
send in their by-laws and constitution. What happens
when SAA sends an invoice to an organization, but that
letter falls through a crack and that is why they didn’t
renew? Maybe SAA should send another letter/invoice
and ask for the names of officers each year.

Cathy Poetschat, Vice Chair
Oregon Archaeological Society
13255 SW Glenhaven St.
Beaverton, OR 97005
Poetschat@msn.com

Poster contest: Cathy reminded us that CoAS is a cosponsor but we are never are asked to DO anything. She
had offered last year to help put up the posters and to
count the ballots; she was turned down to the first offer,
but did help counting. She was surprised at how few people actually voted compared to the attendance.

Hester Davis, Secretary
Arkansas Archeological Society
2475 N. Hatch
Fayetteville, AR 72704
hadavis@uark.edu

5. New business
Several items were mentioned:
We need to send a letter of thanks to the SAA; Jon Driver
suggested this be best done by sending the letter to Tobi
Brimsek and ask that it be sent to the Board.

Gina Powell, Newsletter Editor
Missouri Archaeological Society
Kansas City, MO 64110
ginsuguard-coas@yahoo.com

We need to consider how to improve relationship and
communications between affiliated societies.
Marcel and Gina will prepare instructions for the newsletter on how to access the newsletter on the web.

7

