CoAS Newsletter
Council of Affiliated Societies, Society for American Archaeology
Now also available on the SAA website
To navigate there: go to SAA.org >> ”About the Society” >> ”Council of Affiliated Societies”
http://www.saa.org/coas

Number 20-Spring

March 2010
tion of the 13th PAA Congress (Panafrican Association of
Prehistory and Assimilated Disciplines), and the 20th
conference of the SAfA (Society of Africanist Archaeologists). This unprecedented opportunity to bring together
members of these two associations dedicated to African
Prehistory, on African soil, will certainly represent a turning point in the history of African Archaeology. This
meeting will be held November 1-7, 2010 at the University Cheikh Anta Diop in Dakar, Senegal. Please
see http://panaf-safa2010.ucad.sn/ for further information.

FROM THE CHAIR:
Marcel Kornfeld's work getting the poster session into the
SAA’s schedule is the main story for the year. Please attend the CoAS business meeting on Thursday, April 15
from 4 to 6 pm in Landmark 6 in the Renaissance St.
Louis Grand Hotel where we will discuss our relationship
with the SAA, and whether someone wants to organize a
symposium for the Sacramento meeting. The newsletter
editor says she has only gotten one message from our
[non-officer] members for the newsletter, so at the moment our reason for being (which I believe is contact with
each other) is not working.

FROM THE MEMBERS:
MISSOURI ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
Like the Society for American Archaeology, the Missouri
Archaeological Society (MAS) is celebrating its 75th Anniversary. The MAS was formed in 1935 by two professors at the University of Missouri-Columbia: Brewton
Berry, a sociologist, and Jesse Wrench, a historian. Together they explored Boone County (where the university
is located) where they met local amateurs and learned
about local archaeology. The two received a grant from
the Federal Emergency Relief Administration in 1934 to
perform a statewide archaeological survey with the help
of localized investigators who found and recorded sites.
When that funding was gone, they decided to form an
organization to continue the research. The first meeting of
the MAS was on December 8, 1934 (Pool 1989:52). The
goals were

PLEASE try to see that there is a representative of your
society at the CoAS business meeting.
Hester Davis
Chair

COAS POSTER SESSION, THURSDAY APRIL 15
Morning Poster Session
Avocational Archaeology, Making a Difference: Who’s
Done it and Who’s Doing It, Part I, organized by Marcel
Kornfeld (Sponsored by the Council of Affiliated Societies)
Chair: Marcel Kornfeld; Participants: Marcel Kornfeld
and Mark Miller; Paul Picha; Kevin Black; Tim Weston

to preserve the remains of the prehistoric peoples of Missouri; to study those remains
scientifically; to publish information about
them; to provide amateurs and professionals
with opportunities to discuss their common
interests; and to arouse public opinion to the
appreciation
of
Missouri’s
antiquities
(Chapman 1985:242).
They urged professionals to teach classes on methods,
where the two professors learned alongside other interested amateurs. After WWII, they were able to expand
their program at the university with the hiring of Carl H.
Chapman, who was to direct the American Archaeology
Section in the Sociology Department and to run the Survey. Mr. Chapman accepted the challenge and began to
rebuild the MAS after the war. He started the MAS Newsletter and suggested the formation of local chapters.

Afternoon Poster Session
Avocational Archaeology, Making a Difference: Who’s
Done it and Who’s Doing It, Part II
Participants: Michael B. Collins and D. Clark Wernecke;
Nancy Hawkins and Reca Jones; Hester Davis and Glen
Akridge; Gina Powell; Alice Berkson; Leslie Shaw; Suanna Crowley, Curtiss Hoffman, Frederica Dimmick,
Mary Concannon and Eugene C. Winter, Jr.; Lisa Anselmi and William Engelbrecht

FROM A PAST MEMBERS:
SOCIETY OF AFRICANIST ARCHAEOLOGISTS
Preserving African Cultural Heritage
by Dana Drake Rosenstein
The University Cheikh Anta Diop (UCAD) of Dakar, and
Institut Fondamental d’Afrique Noire Cheikh Anta Diop
(IFAN-CAD), are pleased to announce the joint organiza1

References Cited
Chapman, Carl H.
1985 The Amateur Archaeological Society: A Missouri
Example. American Antiquity 50:241-248.

archaeological evidence of climate change, volunteers in
archaeology, Fort Rock Cave, the Oregon Trail, and
Champoeg. A new poster is added every year. The exhibits goals are to show that Oregon has a rich archaeological
past worth supporting and protecting, and that the public
is invited to activities celebrating Oregon archaeology
every October.

Pool, Kelly J.
1989 A History of Amateur Archaeology in the St. Louis
Area. Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 50.

WYOMING ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
by Marcel Kornfeld

Today there are 12 local chapters around the state of Missouri that hold monthly meetings and participate in local
and statewide events. On March 19-21, the annual meeting of the MAS will be held in Excelsior Springs, Missouri. The guest speaker will be Dr. David Anderson from
the University of Tennessee and there will be a field trip
to Watkins Woolen Mill State Historic Site.
For
more
details,
please
visit
http://associations.missouristate.edu/mas.

The spring meeting of the Wyoming Archeological Society (WAS) is scheduled for April 9-11, 2010 in Casper,
Wyoming, hosted by the Casper Chapter of WAS. The
meeting will be held in conjunction with the Wyoming
Association of Professional Archaeologists (WAPA). The
meeting will include a series of speakers, a silent auction,
and a Saturday evening banquet. The WAS meeting will
be held at the Parkway Plaza Hotel and Convention Center, just off I-25 at 123 West E Street. Events will take
place in the Tiffany and Champaign rooms at the Parkway
Plaza. A block of rooms has been reserved at the Parkway
Plaza. For Room Reservations Call: 1-800-270-7829 or
307-235-1777. Mention you are with the Wyoming Archaeological Society to get the special rate of: $70.00 +
tax. The room block is being held until March 19, 2010.

OREGON ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
“Oregon Archaeology Celebration” Exhibit on its Second
Year! by Cathy Poetschat
Oregon Archaeology Celebration (OAC) is Oregon's archaeology month that is held every October with activities
all over the state. Since 1994 the OAC committee
has designed a unique poster every year for the celebration that features an aspect of Oregon archaeology, and
provides information about how to get a calendar of
events. The Oregon Archaeology Society supports OAC
monetarily and by distributing posters and event calendars
every year.

The Banquet Speaker will be Dr. Douglas Bamforth, Professor of Anthropology at the University of Colorado at
Boulder. His primary research interest is human use of the
Plains landscape and how it responded to long-term environmental change during the Paleoindian period. He is
also interested in the archaeology of farmers on the central and northern Plains during the last 1000 years, and he
is currently involved in a long-term field project that examines the archaeology of the Ceramic Period along the
Pine Ridge in northwestern Nebraska. Among his publications is The Allen Site: A Paleoindian Camp in Southwestern Nebraska.
The meeting will begin with a welcome social on April 9
from 6:00 pm to 9:00 pm in the Tiffany and Champaign
rooms at the Parkway Plaza. There will be a no host cash
bar. Please come and mingle with the group! The annual
fund-raising silent auction provides a variety of items for
your bidding pleasure. If you would like to donate to the
auction, please bring items with you to the meeting.
Please direct any questions to Mavis Greer at 307-4732054 or mavis@greerservices.com.

Figure 1. People enjoying the exhibit at Oregon Museum
of Science & Industry, Portland, Oregon.

The Casper Chapter is offering 6x6” magnetic signs of the
WAS logo for sale. The signs can be placed on your vehicle, refrigerator, or any place metal adheres. These are not
dated, so they can continue to display your association
with the organization. Please consider ordering one with
your registration to be picked up when you arrive at the
meeting. They will be available for sale at the meeting,
and we may have some clear signs available also. If you

In 2008 the OAC committee created an exhibit called
Oregon Archaeology Celebrations: Invitations to the
Past to bring attention to archaeology in Oregon. The
exhibit features the nicely framed annual posters (Figure
1) and describes their themes, such as preservation of ship
wrecks and shell middens, technologies through time,
2

are interested in selling archaeologically related items at
the meeting, please check the web site for an application.

3) Bring your items to the CoAS Booth on Thursday
Morning (April 15) or mail them to:
Hester Davis, 4-14. Arriving Guest c/o Renaissance St.
Louis Grand 800 Washington Ave. St. Louis, MO 63101.
Please include your name, address, phone, and email address with your society's materials. Please do not send
your package to arrive earlier than April 14th, or it may
not be delivered properly.

Please check the WAS web site for information or forms:
http://www.wyomingarchaeology.org, and come join the
WAS for its annual meeting.
WAS members will have a series of summer volunteer
opportunities that are presently being organized with University of Wyoming, Office of the Wyoming State Archaeologist and with private CRM companies. (abstracted
and
revised
from:
WAS
web
site:
http://www.wyomingarchaeology.org/images/2010_WAS
_Annual_Meeting_Information_Form_1_.pdf)

Come to the SAAs and join us at the CoAS Annual Business Meeting, and the CoAS Booth! We look forward to
seeing you in St. Louis! If you have any questions about
CoAS or our activities at the SAA Meeting, please contact
Hester Davis or Cathy Poetschat.

COAS OFFICERS

INVITATION TO THE 2010 SAA MEETING

Hester Davis, Chair
Arkansas Archeological Society
2475 N. Hatch
Fayetteville, AR 72704
hadavis@uark.edu

Please join us at the SAA Council of Affiliated Societies
(CoAS) Annual Business Meeting and CoAS Booth
THE CoAS ANNUAL BUSINESS MEETING will be
held on Thursday, April 15 at 4-6 PM, in Landmark 6
during the Annual Society for American Archaeology
(SAA) Meeting at the downtown St. Louis Renaissance
Grand Hotel, the headquarters hotel for the SAA meeting.
We invite all CoAS member societies and prospective
members to send a representative to the CoAS meeting!
Email us if you know you will be coming, or just come
join us!

Cathy Poetschat, Vice Chair
Oregon Archaeological Society
13255 SW Glenhaven St.
Beaverton, OR 97005
Poetschat@msn.com
Lauren Ritterbush, Secretary
Waters Hall 17 Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS 66506
lritterb@ksu.edu

CoAS Booth in the SAA Meeting Exhibit Hall
Thanks to the SAA Board of Directors, CoAS will again
have a booth in the Exhibit Hall at the St. Louis Renaissance Grand Hotel. The booth will be visited by thousands of SAA Meeting attendees. This is a great opportunity for CoAS to highlight local and avocational
participation in American archeology, distribute information and materials, and promote our member societies!
Renewal for a society is only $30 per year. Please request
a renewal or application from Kevin Fahey at
kevin_fahey@saa.org

Gina Powell, Newsletter Editor
Missouri Archaeological Society
Kansas City, MO 64110
ginsuguard-coas@yahoo.com

1) You can staff the CoAS booth and share information about your society and CoAS. This is a great opportunity to meet attendees while getting information out
about CoAS and its member societies.
2) Bring or send information about your society to be
exhibited or given away. This includes brochures, membership applications, newsletters, publication lists, a tshirt, button, your states archaeology posters, etc. We
cannot sell things and we are not able to return what you
mail us for display, but you can pick up remaining items
at the booth Saturday afternoon.

3

