CoAS Newsletter
Council of Affiliated Societies, Society for American Archaeology
Now also available on the SAA website
To navigate there: go to SAA.org >> ”About the Society” >> ”Council of Affiliated Societies”
http://www.saa.org/coas

Number 22-Spring

March 2011

Are you going to the 76th Annual Meeting of the
SAA in Sacramento? If so, don't miss the CoAS
Booth (#305) in the Exhibit Hall! Please see the
last page of this newsletter for a formal invitation.

As one contributor, Rosemary Lyon of the PreColumbian Society of Washington, D.C., told
me, “we appreciate our affiliation with the SAA,
and we want to share with fellow organizations
some information about the kind of quality programs that can be put together by knowledgeable ‘amateurs’ in the field of archaeology.
Membership in CoAS also gives us an opportunity to learn from the work of others.”

We at CoAS would also like to congratulate the
creators of the winning Archaeology Week/
Month posters from last year’s SAA meeting:
1st Place - Washington
2nd Place - Nevada
3rd Place - New Mexico

FROM THE MEMBERS:
KANSAS ANTHROPOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION
by Vita Tucker

FROM THE CHAIR:
by Hester Davis, Arkansas Archeological Society

The Kansas Anthropological Association
(KAA) held the 2010 Fall Fling on October 23
and 24 near Salina, Kansas. Participants performed an extensive survey of the Winslow Site
(14SA403), a Middle Ceramic hamlet. Harold
Reed of Salina recorded the site and it was partially excavated by State Archeologist Tom
Witty and a KAA crew in 1968.

In this newsletter, I want to draw attention to the
article that former chair, Marcel Kornfeld and I
wrote for the SAA Bulletin in May 2007 (pp.
35-36), entitled The Council of Affiliated Societies: Past Present, and Future. The bulletin is
available online at saa.org. In the article, Dr.
Kornfeld and I describe the history of the development of CoAS, its current activities, and ideas
for futures activities.

The main focus of the Saturday survey was on
an old Smoky Hill River meander left high and
dry after the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
channelized the stream following the 1951
flood. A railroad track runs alongside the property. Any chert found in this area of the field
was very suspicious due to the railroad grade
that included chert deposits. Prehistoric artifacts
included a Smoky Hill jasper flake, about a
dozen chert flakes, mussel shell fragments, and
sandstone pieces, some with grooves believed to
be machine damage.

FROM THE EDITOR:
The response to my semi-annual plea for newsletter submissions was greater than usual, and I
suppose it has to do with the CoAS poster
symposium last year organized by former chair,
Marcel Kornfeld. The session, Avocational Archaeology, Making a Difference: Who’s Done it
and Who’s Doing It, was well attended and
probably brought a greater degree of visibility to
our avocational-oriented society of societies.

On Sunday the focus was on the Debold property to the east of the Winslow farm. A sparse
1

flake concentration was found next to a tree line
on the old river channel. A thin biface that may
have been part of a triangular arrowpoint was
found. After reviewing maps, surveyors determined that this might be the location of the
earthlodge that was excavated in 1968.

morning she gave an overview of the basics,
talked about Kansas geology, and the participants got to observe and handle many examples
of Kansas lithic materials. After lunch she focused on lithic materials found in Kansas whose
origins were outside the state: Ozark and Southern Plains sources and Rockies and Northern
Plains sources. The session ended with a report
of a preliminary study of the Coffey site,
14PO1, done in the fall of 2009. There was a
great deal of interest in this report, since the
2011 KATP Field School event will be held
there this coming June.

The conclusion of the survey participants was
that the once abundant prehistoric cultural materials have been destroyed by years of farming.
This constant farming allowed them to find a
wide variety of historic items, including which
included a small blue glass marble, porcelain
doll parts, crockery, plain and decorated
whiteware, yellow ware, several colors of bottle
glass, amethyst glass, milk glass, window glass,
porcelain doorknob fragment, insulators, square
nail, copper wire, brick fragments, concrete,
metal machinery parts, clay pigeon pieces, and
clinkers. None of these artifacts were collected.

The weather was warm, and, as an added bonus
to the weekend, the Birger Sandzén Memorial
Gallery featured a special exhibition of
Sandzén's Kansas landscape paintings within
walking distance of the seminar.
Upcoming KAA events:
April 2, 2011 - Discover Kansas Archaeology
family archeology event at the Topeka &
Shawnee County Public Library, partnering with
KSHS, Shawnee Chapter KAA, and Professional Archaeologists of Kansas (PAK)

The first major KAA event for 2011 was the
Certification Seminar held at Lindsborg, Kansas. The subjects of study were Lithic Identification and Report Writing. The following article
was submitted by Byron Strom from Des
Moines, Iowa, and is his first attempt at writing.

April 16, 2011 - KAA Annual Meeting at the
Smoky Hill Museum in Salina, hosted by Mud
Creek Chapter.

A two-day seminar was held February 19-20,
2011, at the Burnett Center on the campus of
Bethany College in Lindsborg, Kansas. Between
30 and 40 archeology enthusiasts converged on
this central Kansas town to enhance their
knowledge in two areas: report writing and
lithic identification. Virginia Wulfkuhle and
Marsha King took turns explaining types of
publications, writing styles, how to deal with
reports from different time periods, and proper
ways to organize a report. Some of the material
was geared toward writing in general and some
was specific to archeological reporting. Break
times allowed for conversation, and there was a
bounteous spread of tempting goodies provided
by the participants.

June 4-19, 2011 - 2011 Kansas Archeology
Training Program (KATP) Field School. Detailed information and registration forms are
available on the Kansas State Historical Society
web site at www.kshs.org/p/kansas-archeologytraining-program-field-school-2011/14622
or
just Google “KATP Field School.”
MISSOURI ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The Missouri Archaeological Society (MAS)
celebrated its 75th Anniversary in 2010 and undertook or sponsored numerous activities in
honor of this milestone. The MAS Annual
Meeting was held at Excelsior Springs in April.
It featured a series of eleven papers by professional, avocational, and student archaeologists.
The Albert C. Koch banquet lecture was pre-

On Sunday Janice McLean, archeologist with R.
Christopher Goodwin and Associates in Lawrence, spoke about lithic identification. In the
2

sented by Dr. David Anderson, Professor in the
Department of Anthropology at the University
of Tennessee. Dr. Anderson entertained an audience of over 130 with a lecture titled From
Colonization to Complexity: First Peopling to
Monumental Architecture in Eastern North
America. The 2011 MAS Annual Meeting will
be held in April in Springfield at the University
Plaza.

In late July and early August, the MAS hosted
its third annual educational booth at the Ozarks
Empire Fair. The booth was in the Kidz Zone,
which is typically visited by a quarter of a million fair attendees. In addition to a variety of
educational displays, the booth featured face
painting, artifacts, archaeology-themed coloring
sheets, and a popular corn-grinding activity.
September was Missouri’s 14th Annual Archaeology Month. The 2010 theme for the 2010
Archaeology Month poster was “Major Missouri Sites: 75 Years of Missouri Archaeology.”
The Society distributed several thousand free
posters to public schools, historical societies,
state parks, and other public institutions
throughout Missouri, as well as all Society
members and elected state officials. The MAS
sponsored over 50 activities around the state,
including the Annual Fall Symposium in Arrow
Rock, which featured presentations by leading
archaeologists and an artifact identification session.

In April, the MAS had a booth at the annual
SAA (also celebrating its 75th Anniversary)
meeting in St. Louis. This event, attended by
over 4,000 archaeologists from around the
world, provided excellent exposure to MAS
membership, publications, and activities.
In May, the MAS held the first of two sessions
of the Archaeological Survey Training and
Site Recordation for Missouri: A Pilot Outreach Program. This program, sponsored by
the MAS, Missouri State Parks, and the City of
Kansas City, was funded by a grant from the
State Historic Preservation Office of the Department of Natural Resources. This free program has three goals: (1) the training of avocationals regarding responsible artifact collecting
and site recordation; (2) field surveys on public
lands owned by the City of Kansas City (urban)
and Missouri State Parks (rural); and (3) the certification of participants for program completion. The program is open to avocational archaeologists and other members of the
interested public.

In September, the MAS published and distributed MAS Special Publication No. 9 entitled
Marginality and Continuity: The Archaeology of
the Northern Ozarks by Steven R. Ahler, Paul P.
Kreisa, and Richard Edging. This book was
published by the MAS through a grant from
Colorado State University and was distributed to
a host of Native American tribes and the MAS
membership for free. For more information, go
to http://associations.missouristate.edu/mas/.

The first session was conducted at Minor, Santa
Fe, and Smith parks in Kansas City. The second
was held in July at Knob Noster State Park.
Each session was well attended and included
instructional classroom activities, field survey,
laboratory analysis, and recordation of identified
archaeological resources. Two additional sessions are planned for the summer of 2011. Pictures of the activities are archived at
http://photobucket.com/, search for “survey
training program.”

Also in September, ten MSU undergraduate and
graduate students received free memberships to
the Missouri Archaeological Society. The memberships were donated by an anonymous member of the local Ozarks Chapter.
Kansas City Archaeological Society, MAS
by Mary Conrad
John Peterson, the archaeologist in charge of
excavations at Ft. Osage (northeast of Independence, Missouri), established five 1-x-1-m
test units west of the reconstructed fort so sci3

ence teachers taking the Project Archaeology
workshop in July of 2010 could experience excavating. More on Project Archaeology can be
found at www.projectarchaeology.org/.

continued to dig the units as time allowed. On
some Saturdays, KCAS volunteers, such as Gina
Powell, Lundeen, Mary Conrad, and others also
helped.

Participants began excavating four of the five
squares on July 22 and 23. Peterson and the
other two workshop instructors, Kansas City
Archaeological Society (KCAS) President Gail
Lundeen and member Sally Bell, as well as
Steve Wilson, the Ft. Osage site supervisor, dug
alongside the teachers. KCAS member Jim
Feagins also dug on the day he presented a talk
to the teachers in the workshop.

When analyzing artifacts, Peterson obviously
will be considering not only the era of the fort
(ca. 1809-1827), but also the succeeding generations of the Town of Sibley. During and after
the fort’s occupation, settlers began to build
houses on and around the land of the fort.
George Sibley, the factor of the fort, likely had a
home in the area of the excavation units. The
1850 and 1860 census records list several businesses, six doctors, and a hotel, but those same
records do not give the exact locations of the
referenced buildings. The Town of Sibley continued to be a prosperous town for a time, until
it was burned during the Civil War.

Peterson had placed the units where artifacts
could be seen in the backdirt of gopher holes.
By the end of the second day of digging, Peterson observed that the western two units contained lots of structural materials, such as bricks
and large pieces of limestone, while the two
eastern units were rich in artifacts with little
structural debris.

Over the decades, various archaeological projects have continued to add to the knowledge of
where parts of the fort and of the town were located. Since the excavations conducted before
the Education Center was constructed turned up
few features of the fort, Peterson speculates that
gardens and cropland may have been south of
the fort, between the fort and the historic Sibley
Cemetery.

In one of the western units, there was an alignment of limestone and bricks, which was oriented in the same direction as the town lots of
the antebellum Town of Sibley. Peterson hypothesizes the alignment is the remains of one
of the Town of Sibley structures.

The 2010 archaeology also will add to the prehistoric record. As the excavators continued to
dig downward until they reached sterile soil in
the four squares, they did encounter prehistoric
artifacts, including ceramics.

Most of the bricks uncovered are soft red ones,
but three or four are bluish with gray glaze.
Pieces of window glass, cut nails, and wire nails
were plentiful. Some of the other types of items
recovered included a bent spoon, a piece of
metal that might have been part of a harmonica,
bottle glass, wire fragments, a piece of lead, a
couple of lead balls, a spent musket or rifle ball,
bones, and a tooth that may have come from a
pig. Fragments of dishware were numerous.
These were found in a wide variety of colors,
some yellow ware and some with gray saltglazed exteriors with unglazed interiors.

Since funds are limited, Peterson must depend
on many volunteers. When the analysis of the
2010 excavation is complete, he likely will be
able to add a few more details to both the historic and prehistoric records of the Ft. Osage
site.

Excavations in those squares continued as Peterson taught Boy Scouts who were working on an
archaeology merit badge. Peterson and Wilson
4

shown in an Archaeology Film Sym posium at the January
2009 Society for Historical Archaeology conference to great
interest in the high tech procedures and processes shown
in the film , such as – faunal analysis, paleoethnobotany,
soil geo-m orphology, archaeophysics, UV soil analysis,
dendrochronology dating, and soil block lift and analysis..

NEW YORK, SUFFOLK COUNTY
ARCHAEOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION (SCAA)
by Gaynell Stone
SCAA’s film, The Sugar Connection: Holland,
Barbados, Shelter Island is finished in a 1 hour,
59 minutes version. The archaeology portion of
the film was shown in an Archaeology Film
Symposium at the January 2009 Society for
Historical Archaeology conference to great interest. Special interest was expressed in the
high-tech procedures and processes shown in
the film, such as faunal analysis, paleoethnobotany, soil geomorphology, archaeophysics,
UV soil analysis, dendrochronology dating, and
soil block lift and analysis.

The excavated
artifacts
reveal how
the by
Europeans,
Figure
1. Sylvester
Manor.
Photo
GaynellNative
Am
ericans,
and
Africans
lived
together
at
Sylvester
Manor
Stone.

Excavations at Sylvester Manor (in New York)
reveal how the Europeans, Native Americans,
and Africans lived together on the Manor
grounds, producing provisions for Constant
Sylvester’s plantations on Barbados. Sylvester
Manor was one of six manors in Suffolk
County, New York, the most in one area of the
New World.

Dutch world history, slavery, sugar production,
Dr.theSteve
staff, in
and
and
role ofMrozowski,
Jews and others
the students
vital inter-of the
Anthropology
Departm
ent,
U-Mass-Boston
at
national sugar trade. The documentary excavated
shows
Sylvester Manor on Shelter Island for 8 years, beginning in
how
much
Dutch
world
history
affected
thefunded
de- the
1999.
Alice
Fiske,
resident
of the
Manor,
velopment
of Long
and the role Foundation
the Island at UAndrew Fiske
Mem Island
orial Archaeological
Mass in
to support
the extensive
and the
played
the development
of excavations
globalization–
Sylvester/Fiske
fam
ily
story..
which is not noted in regional accounts.

producing provisions for Constant Sylvester’s plantations
on Barbados. Sylvester Manor was one of six m anors in
Over
forty
scholars
theirofexpertise
inorld.
Suffolk
County,
the contributed
m ost in one area
the New W

Stratigraphy from the excavation and fam ily docum ents

Editors note: For more information on Shelter
Island, go to http://shelterislandhistory.org/, the
website of the Shelter Island Historical Society.

The
Sugar
shows
the Dutch
prin-was by
reveal
thatConnection...
the first labor on
the Manor
plantation
ciples
toleration
and
freedom
of inconscience;
hired of
Native
labor, the
first
such proof
the country. The
Manor, was
later the
using
enslaved
provisioning
Holland
only
countrylabor,
in thewas
17ththe
-century
plantation
for
the
Sylvester
fam
ily’s
sugar
plantations
world to have it. It also illustrates the role of the on
Barbados. Dr. Mrozowski recently began testing of the
Quakers,
from England to New England to ShelConstant Plantation site on Barbados to ascertain that end
terofIsland,
in fighting for freedom of conscience.
the story.
These beliefs affected the world and have
Over forty
scholars
contributed their expertise in Dutch
shaped
American
history.

Dr. Steve Mrozowski, staff, and students of the
Anthropology Department, U-Mass-Boston excavated at Sylvester Manor on Shelter Island for
eight years, beginning in 1999. Alice Fiske,
resident of the Manor, funded the Andrew Fiske
Memorial Archaeological Foundation at U-Mass
to support the extensive excavations and the
Sylvester/Fiske family story.

world history, slavery, sugar production, and the role of
Jews and others in the vital international sugar trade.

The information in this film supports the view
of Editor-at-Large of the Long Island History
Journal, Wolf Schaefer, that “an integrated
study of local, national, and global history is not
only possible but preferable.”

Family documents and stratigraphy from the
excavation reveal that the first labor on the
Manor plantation was hired Native labor, the
first such proof in the country. The Manor, later
using enslaved labor, was the provisioning plantation for the Sylvester family’s sugar plantations on Barbados. Dr. Mrozowski recently began testing of the Constant Plantation site on
Barbados to ascertain that end of the story.

The film is available on DVD for $50, plus
$6.00 sales tax and shipping, from SCAA (for
information, please contact Gaynell Stone,
gaystone@optonline.net). A version for teachers
with a menu to locate the strands of world history, slavery, sugar production, religious toler5

ance, etc. for classroom use, is also available at
the same price.

At each site, students will utilize these procedures:
1. Rock Art Recording- Each panel of rock art
will be individually recorded. Individual and
associated motifs/panels will be drawn to scale
and each panel will be photographed. Motifs
and panels will be identified as to style and age.

ARCHAEO-NEVADA SOCIETY
Field School at Valley of Fire
by Dr. Kevin Rafferty
A new survey field school will be taking place
at Valley of Fire State Park, with fieldwork
from mid-March to the end of May. Dr. Rafferty
and his students will be concentrating on a
square mile area abutting and just north of Atlatl
Rock; it will probably cut across the north edge
of the outcrop, necessitating a re-recording of
some of the rock art sites there. Dr. Rafferty
may be calling on Archaeo-Nevada Society
(ANS) members to assist in some of the recording if my crew gets bogged down in the details.

2. Rockshelters- The shelter interior will be
mapped and photographed. The artifacts on the
surface will be identified as to type and cultural
affiliation, if any. The shelter will be probed to
determine if it contains any depth of deposit, as
per BLM standards. The deposits removed will
be screened, any artifacts recorded, and then
returned to the deposit.
3. Open Sites-These will be mapped and photographed. The artifacts on the surface will be
identified as to type and cultural affiliation. The
area will be probed to determine if it contains
any depth of deposit, as per BLM standards.

Students will be performing the following procedures. The survey area will be subjected to a
pedestrian survey, with crew members spaced
no more than 10 m apart, which exceeds BLM
minimum standards. The crew will examine potential shelters and alcoves for the presence of
cultural resources. Both patinated and unpatinated sandstone outcrops will be examined for
the presence of petroglyphs, pictographs, or
other evidences of human presence or alteration.

4. Site Context- All sites will be mapped in the
field, with panels mapped and photographed in
relationship to one another and the rockshelter.
The end result of the project will be the preparation and submission of a report detailing the
project. For pictures of the park, please visit the
Valley of Fire State Park website,
http://parks.nv.gov/vf.htm.

When artifacts or features are encountered the
entire crew will halt, mark their locations, and
converge on the artifact. The principal investigator will then will help identify the artifact and
then radial transects will be run around the artifact to determine if it is an isolated occurrence
or part of a site complex. If the artifact is part of
a larger site complex the boundaries of the site
will be determined and marked, concentrations
of artifacts will be noted and flagged, and the
entire site will be mapped in the field. Each site
will also be probed for subsurface deposits.
Specific artifacts or features, as well as the
probes, will be mapped and photographed, and
overview photographs of each site will be executed.

OREGON ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
A Month at the Riddle Ranch That Will Forever
Be Remembered, by Bob Schetter
As the sun rises over Steens Mountain, you can
expect another day of adventure and knowledge
from times past. My wife Sharon and I are just
starting our third year as caretakers at the Riddle
Ranch. Not a day goes by that we do not learn
something new in relation to the activity of the
Riddle Brothers Ranch. Every Oregonian should
visit this historic ranch, which is managed by
the BLM, as it represents the last frontier of
Oregon history.
6

In the late 1800s when the youngest Riddle
brother Ben was 16 years old, he convinced his
two older brothers, Walt and Fred, to purchase
land in the Steens Mountain area. Ben built a
stone house along the Little Blitzen River, Walt
built a log cabin at the mouth of the Little
Blitzen Gorge, and Fred bought a one-room log
cabin from Scott Catterman, an earlier settler.
Fred then added the kitchen, the upstairs and a
screened-in porch that runs the length of the
front of the house.

accessible to visitors and we get positive feedback on how the buildings are maintained.

They harvested 150 tons of hay each year in the
valley that runs along the Little Blitzen River;
all of the irrigation ditches were dug by hand
and with a large shovel pulled by horses. We
think it is interesting that during the Riddle
ownership, there were many other families that
occupied homesteads in the area.

One day, our friends Dan Braden, Dianne Ness,
Mike and Joyce Green, and Kelly Edmondson
came for a visit bringing a fine lunch that we all
enjoyed. Good archaeological conservation took
place after lunch; we were sorry to see them
leave. That weekend, Ethan, Emily, and Etta
Epstein came to visit, bringing a grill and fixing
another great lunch and more wonderful conservation. The following Monday, Scott Thomas,
BLM Archeologist, drove down with some well
appreciated apricot jam and veggies from his
garden. We discussed the ranch and had him
inspect the work we had done.

Visitors start arriving around 10 a. m. and most
stay longer than they anticipated. Many bring
lunches and enjoy the picnic table next to the
Little Blitzen River that runs behind the caretaker’s cabin. In the heat of the day the river is
a good place to cool off. We also learn insightful information from the visitors who have
worked on the ranch in the past.

As caretakers of the ranch, our day would start
in our cabin by building a fire in the woodstove
to take off the chill. The morning temperature is
usually in the 30s even though it reaches 90 to
100 during the day in the month of August. The
smell of fresh-perked coffee and smoked bacon
fills the air, whetting our appetites.

Native Americans have lived in the valley for
approximately 1,500 to 2,000 years BP, and the
history is plentiful. There were many villages in
the Little Blitzen valley; the culture is everywhere.

One of the outback wranglers comes early to
saddle up and prepare for another day in the
wilderness. This year we met Chas, a fine young
man who is well versed in mule and horse care
and training. We exchange “good mornings”
and Chas greets us with a big smile.

We have Mondays and Tuesdays off each week
and we go into Burns for supplies, rock hound
in the Narrows area, explore other historical
sites in Harney County, and spend time exploring the area around us at the ranch.

We open the gate at 9 a.m. Thursday through
Sunday, and secure the gate at 5 p.m. Visitors
are able to walk, ride horses, or bike down to the
ranch when the gate is closed.

As we get closer to September and the temperatures get cooler during the day, we have the
feeling of how the Riddle brothers might have
experienced it as winter approached. We surmise that it was a good life for the Riddles and
that the work was hard but rewarding. If they
needed equipment it would be made at the ranch
if possible, and anything that was broken or
needed repairing was fixed with items on the

After enjoying a western-style breakfast, Sharon
goes up to Fred Riddle’s ranch house and the
bunk house (also called the Honeymoon cottage) to sweep the floors and make sure the
rooms are clean. I split firewood and kindling as
I like to replace what I use each morning. We
also clear brush, mow the yards, and do other
necessary chores. All of the ranch buildings are
7

ranch. They would also have had to prepare for
winter by having plenty of firewood available.

cheology, regional archeological resources, and
the need for resource preservation.”
THC Archeology Division (AD) Director Jim
Bruseth and former THC Development Officer
Toni Turner, who retired recently, were among
the presenters at this year’s International Rio
Grande Delta Archeology Fair. Bruseth and
Turner organized a display on the archeological
investigations of the Belle shipwreck
[www.texasbeyondhistory.net/belle/].
Other
THC staff members, AD archeologists, and
members of the THC Texas Archeological
Stewardship Network also participated in this
year’s TAM observance by organizing events,
giving presentations, consulting with event
hosts, and providing hands-on assistance on the
day of the event.

The setting sun glows on the ranch house as it
slips behind the landscape. Darkness comes fast
in the valley and we light the oil lamps that
glow from inside the cabin. As time grows near
to leave this paradise for home, we savor every
minute to remember when we are far away from
the ranch. We bid farewell and look forward to
our time next year.
For additional information, please see
http://www.blm.gov/or/resources/heritage/.
TEXAS ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
by María de la Luz Martínez, Texas Archeology
Month Coordinator, Texas Historical Commission

TAM 2010 included diverse events in a number
of categories such as lectures, speakers, presentations, or workshops; archeology fairs, festivals, or thematic events; special TAM-related
displays; special activities such as mock digs;
daylong or weeklong archeology celebrations;
permanent exhibits; open-house events; and
conferences or annual meetings. The event diversity in the TAM 2010 Calendar provided irresistible choices for some families and individuals—the Houston Museum of Natural
Science, for instance, reported a San Antonioto-Houston trek by attendees interested in an
evening lecture on Blackbeard’s flagship.

Thousands Flock to Texas Archeology Month
Events
More than 47,000 people in 70 cities and 60
counties across Texas participated in Texas Archeology Month (TAM) events and related activities during this year’s celebration in October.
The attendance number (47,253) was reported
by TAM hosts who responded to a survey administered in November by the Texas Historical
Commission (THC). Despite a few last-minute
cancellations due to unforeseen problems and
postponements, the 2010 attendance figure is
much higher than numbers reported in 2009
(24,487) and 2008 (31,842).

The majority of the respondents indicated they
would sponsor a TAM event next year. “Having
a statewide archeology month (celebration) is a
wonderful idea,” said one respondent. “We
know we can visit other counties, hear and see
wonderful speakers, and attend great events. If
only we had time to attend them all!”

Rolando Garza, who serves as the integrated
resource manager at the Palo Alto Battlefield
National Historical Park in Brownsville, wrote,
“This event (the Fourth Annual International
Rio Grande Delta Archeology Fair) is cosponsored by the Historic Brownsville Museum and
Palo Alto Battlefield National Historical Park.
We have up to a dozen archeologists, museums,
and other entities from South Texas and northeastern Mexico that participate in the event by
providing displays and demonstrations designed
to enlighten the visitor about the science of ar-

TAM is coordinated by the THC in association
with the Texas Archeological Society, the
Council of Texas Archeologists, and numerous
groups and organizations across the state. For
more information, go to www.txarch.org/.

8

WASHINGTON, DC – THE PRE-COLUMBIAN
SOCIETY (PCSWDC)
by Rosemary D. Lyon

WYOMING
ARCHAEOLOGICAL
(WAS)
by Marcel Kornfeld

SOCIETY

The Pre-Columbian Society of Washington, DC
(www.pcswdc.org/) held its 17th Annual Symposium entitled “Under Cover of Darkness: The
Meaning of Night in Ancient Mesoamerica” on
September 25, 2010. One hundred and sixteen
participants who attended this successful symposium heard a panel of scholars in archaeology, art history, and cultural anthropology examine the meaning of darkness and night in
Olmec, Maya, and Aztec societies.

The WAS chapters have been active in hosting
speakers over the winter and looking toward the
spring thaw so they can get back out into the
field for visits, volunteering, and join various
field programs.
The Wyoming State archaeologist, Mark Miller,
compiles a list of potential speaker and topics
for chapters to use if they wish. The list includes
archaeologists, anthropologists, and historians
from the survey division of the office of the
state archeologist, SHPO, University of Wyoming (UW) faculty, state museum, and Game
and Fish departments. A broad variety of topics
is available from historic and prehistoric archaeology to bioanthropology as well as others.

F. Kent Reilly, Ph.D. of Texas State University
at San Marcos, moderated the daylong program
and gave the opening presentation, which focused on the “liminal space” between night and
day, as perceived by the Olmec. Linda Brown,
Ph.D. of The George Washington University,
looked at contemporary Tz’utujil Maya ritual
specialists in highland Guatemala, and who use
for their rituals objects that transform into spirits
between the day and the night. Keith Prufer,
Ph.D. from the University of New Mexico, shed
light on the use of caves by Maya elites to reify
their power and authority. John Pohl, Ph.D.
from UCLA, examined the significance of the
representation of night and darkness in the ancient Mexican codices, while Cecelia Klein, of
UCLA, continued this emphasis on the meaning
of the night and deities of the night in Aztec
written manuscripts. The final presentation was
by Marc Zender, Ph.D., of the Peabody Museum
of Anthropology, Harvard University, who focused on the ways that the ancient Maya showed
darkness and the night in their writing and art.

Examples of the speakers hosted by the
Sheridan chapter are Colin Ferriman and Judy
Slack. While Ferriman spoke about ceramic assemblages in southeastern New Mexico, Slack
spoke about the historical records and archives
at the library and their use. The former worked
in eastern New Mexico before joining Cultural
Resource Analysts’ Sheridan Office, and Slack
is a Sheridan County librarian. Among the
speakers of the June Frison Chapter in Laramie
were Jason Toohey, Marty Rogers, and Danny
Walker, all adjuncts of the UW anthropology
department. They covered topics as diverse as
Andean middle range societies, UW repository
and its history, and the Czech Republic respectively.
The WAS Spring Meeting will be held in
Sheridan Wyoming from April 15 to 17, 2011,
at the Holiday Inn Convention Center. The usual
schedule includes a Friday Social, followed Saturday with a business meeting, with papers
starting in mid morning and continuing through
the afternoon. Saturday evening’s banquet
speaker will be Jason Labelle of Colorado State
University. He will be presenting the results of

The symposium concluded with a panel discussion in which the presenters responded to questions from the audience. Summaries of symposium presentations will be published in future
issues of the PCSWDC’s monthly newsletter,
“The Smoking Mirror.”

9

his recent research at and around the Lindenmeier Folsom site. There will be a silent auction
and presentation of scholarships and awards
supported by the WAS, Wyoming Archaeological Foundation (WAF), and the Wyoming Association of Professional Archaeologists.

3) Volunteer at the booth, representing your society. Stop by or contact me for more information.
You can also attend the CoAS annual meeting.
It will be held during the SAA meeting on
Thursday, March 31 at 4 pm. You are encouraged to send a representative from your society
to this meeting in the ROYAL Room at the
Sheraton Grand Sacramento.*

The summer meeting of the WAS is proposed
for the Hell Gap Site on June 17-19. The Hell
Gap Site, owned by the sister organization the
WAF, serves as a permanent location for the
biennial University of Wyoming’s Advanced
Archaeological Field School and excavations
by the Paleoindian Research Laboratory (PiRL).
The events are still in the planning stages, but in
the past included amateur atlatl throw, flint
knapping demonstration and workshop, as well
as volunteering and site tours. This year we are
coordinating with the Wyoming Atlatl Association to have a joint WAS meeting and Atlatl
throw, along with the other activities. Camping
on site is available and rooms can be booked
(well in advance because of the local National
Guard activities) at motels in nearby Guernsey
and a little farther in Wheatland or Torrington.

Please call or e-mail Cathy Poetshcat for more
information re: mailing or bringing material to
the booth and about the CoAS meeting.
Cathy Poetschat
SAA CoAS Vice Chair
503-644-2144
poetschat@msn.com
*For more about CoAS, and to see if your society is a member yet, go to www.saa.org, click
on "About the Society", then click on "Council
of Affiliated Societies".
COAS OFFICERS
Hester Davis, Chair
Arkansas Archeological Society
2475 N. Hatch
Fayetteville, AR 72704
hadavis@uark.edu

INVITATION TO THE 76TH ANNUAL MEETING OF
THE SOCIETY FOR AMERICAN ARCHAEOLOGY
MEETING IN SACRAMENTO, CA, MARCH 30APRIL 3, 2011
Are you going to the SAA Meeting in Sacramento? If so, don't miss the CoAS Booth (#305)
in the Exhibit Hall! CoAS was formed by the
SAA to mutually benefit all societies in this
field and to advance the practice of archaeology.*

Cathy Poetschat, Vice Chair
Oregon Archaeological Society
13255 SW Glenhaven St.
Beaverton, OR 97005
Poetschat@msn.com

At the CoAS Booth, you can:
1) See what state archaeology societies are doing and get ideas for your local society.
2) Share your society’s information with exhibit
hall browsers. This includes newsletters, membership applications, publication lists, event
flyers, posters, etc., to be displayed and/or distributed.

Gina Powell, Newsletter Editor
Missouri Archaeological Society
Kansas City, MO 64110
ginsuguard-coas@yahoo.com

10

