OKLAHOMA ANTHROPOLOGICAL SOCIETY

NEWSLETTER

Oklahoma Anthropological Society Newsletter
4001 24th Ave SE, Apt. 7
Norman, OK 73071

Fall 2015 Vol. 7 No. 4

MESSAGE FROM THE PRESIDENT
OAS CHAPTERS
ARKOMA CHAPTER, Ft. Smith, Ark.
Meetings 7 p.m. 3rd Thursdays
Echols Building, University of Arkansas, Ft. Smith
Contact: Tim Mulvihill (tim.mulvihill@uark.net)

KAY COUNTY CHAPTER, Ponca City
Meetings 6:30 p.m. 3rd Thursdays
Public Library 5th and Grand, Ponca City
Contact: Richard Sherrod (580.765.9661)

BYRDS MILL CHAPTER, Ada
Meetings 7:30 p.m. 2nd Tuesdays
Valley View Hospital Conference Room, Ada.
Contact: Carl Gilley (580.332.3812)

MCALESTER ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, Krebs
Meetings 7 p.m. 2nd Thursdays
Krebs City Hall, Krebs
Contact: Guy Folger (guyfolger@aol.com)
See websites for McAlester and Tahlequah Chapters

CENTRAL CHAPTER, Oklahoma City
Meetings 7p.m. first Thursdays
Will Rogers Garden Center, 3400 NW 36
Contact: Dean Vernon (dean_vernon2002@yahoo.com)
CLEVELAND COUNTY CHAPTER, Norman
Meetings 7 p.m. first Mondays
Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History
Norman, OK
Contact: Bill May (paleogatherings@yahoo.com)
GREATER SOUTHWEST CHAPTER, Lawton
Meetings 2 p.m. on 4th Saturdays
Museum of the Great Plains,
601 NW Ferris Avenue, Lawton
Contact: Debra Baker (baker1994@sbcglobal.net)
OR See Greater Southwest Chapter OAS website

STILLWATER CHAPTER, Stillwater
Meetings 7 p.m. 3rd Thursdays
First Presbyterian Church, 524 S Duncan, Stillwater
Contact: Alisa Hines (hines84@yahoo.com)

Happy Holidays! As we are nearing the end of 2015, I want to thank you all for your continued support for OAS.
Moreover, I would like to congratulate our members on the many successful initiatives, events, and activities they
hosted and participated in this year. We, as a society, not only hosted our traditional events (e.g. biannual society
meetings and digs), but had many opportunities for our members to participate in and be representatives of anthropology both inside and outside of our state. However, having successful events for and by our members
are just the tip of the iceberg. Little by little we have also been taking measures to revitalize OAS in order to
shape it into a stronger, active, and vibrant society. Some of the measures we’ve taken this year include:
1.

Hosting Biannual Society Meetings in Differing Locations —This year we’ve made an effort to host our spring

2.

Participating in Diverse Forms of Outreach —This year was our second year collaborating with

3.

Defining Our Focus as a Society — It is my opinion, and this has been expressed by many other OAS

TAHLEQUAH ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, Tahlequah
Meetings 7 p.m. 4th Thursdays
Tahlequah Public Library, Tahlequah
Contact: Connie Masters (918.470.3781)
TULSA ARCHEOLOGICAL SOCIETY, Tulsa
Occasional meetings /field trips 7 p.m. 4th Mondays
Aaronson Auditorium, Central Library,
400 Civic Center, Tulsa
Contact: Paul Robert (broberts31@cox.net)

and fall meetings at new places that offered something for individuals of all ages. For instance, in May the
Spring Meeting was hosted at the Chickasaw Cultural Center (CCC) while last month’s Fall Meeting was
hosted at the Museum of the Great Plains (MGP). Members who attended these meetings were treated to
engaging and knowledgeable speakers, interactive exhibits or live demonstrations of traditional native dances, stories, and songs.

several groups to host Oklahoma Archaeology Month (OAM) and Project Archaeology workshops. As
a result of our outreach efforts, we had a teacher who heard about the fall excavation and decided to
provide her students with the opportunity to visit a real archaeological site. This group of young
archaeologists had the opportunity to see archaeology in action and learn about the importance of this
discipline in the state. This extraordinary outcome not only demonstrates to the State how our society can
collaborate with other state and local organizations, but how we can create an engaging learning
environment that coincides with a group’s educational initiatives.
members, that we have been stagnant as a Society for a long period of time. This can be seen by failing
programs, such as the certification program. It also has been expressed through Holly’s Thesis that many of
us, as members, wish for OAS to grow and expand, however for this to happen we all need to be on the same
page first. To be on the same page means determining who we are as a society in order to build a stronger
and more focused societal base that will enable us to create an organization that is able to offer vibrant,
diverse, and enjoyable programs, such as a training (certification) program.
message continues on pg. 3

Now many of you may have heard rumors and speculations regarding the status of OAS and its
archaeology training program (i.e. certification program). Some may have even heard the words “retreat”
and “change” thrown around. I want to clear up any misconstrued ideas regarding these topics by
addressing it now.

MISSION STATEMENT
The Oklahoma Anthropological Society is a non-profit
organization committed to the stewardship of anthropological resources in Oklahoma. We achieve this through
public education, research, conservation and enhanced
opportunities for responsible participation in anthropology for interested individuals and organizations.

OUR HISTORY
The Oklahoma Anthropological Society (OAS) came into
existence in 1952 as a focus for people having interests in
the history and prehistory of humans in Oklahoma. The
Cleveland chapter, in Norman, OK, was also founded in
1952 and is the oldest continuously active chapter. Subsequently, other groups were established in other Oklahoma cities, and a state organization was created.
Now, with a history of more than 60 years, OAS has ten
Chapters throughout Oklahoma. and has developed
many programs, research projects, and activities.

First, let me assure our members that the archaeology training program committee (ATPC), elected
back in November of 2014, met in February of this year to discuss options for revising the program. They
spent a significant amount of time discussing possible training program options. However, upon further
discussion on of the direction the training program should take and the results of Holly’s thesis, it became
clear to the committee should hold off from immediately working on revisions to the program. This
decision is based upon the results of Holly’s thesis, which demonstrated that the problems OAS has
been experiencing run much, much deeper than certification structure. In particular, she demonstrated
that the shelving of our archaeological certification program was symptomatic of some larger challenges
we face, such as a divided membership and lack of unified understanding about what OAS is, values,
and stands for, and a need for better communication.
The OAS leadership team (the presidency and board) therefore decided to address those larger problems
by choosing to hold a two-day retreat to which all 33 current board members have been invited. The
ultimate outcome of the retreat will be a strategic plan to guide OAS as we move forward.
We have held the first half of the retreat on the Friday before our fall OAS meeting in Lawton. Holly
Andrew facilitated a spirited 6-hour brainstorming session that resulted in a draft OAS vision statement,
mission statement, and statement of core values. Part 2 of the retreat will take place in January in
Norman and will proceed to evaluate OAS’s strengths and weaknesses and tackle other components of
strategic planning.
If any member is interested in reading Holly’s thesis or the homework board members read to prepare for
the retreat (an outstanding article about the value of strategic planning and tips on how to do it properly),
please contact me and I will forward these to you.
When the board has completed a Strategic Plan draft, we will forward the document to the full
membership for input and discussion. Once we have adopted a plan to guide us forward, the real fun of
implementing the plan (for example, prioritizing where we as an organization want to expend our energy),
will begin.
For many of our members this process may seem long, but as Holly’s data show, it is absolutely necessary
to create the strong foundation OAS needs to meet the needs of a highly diverse membership and the
needs of a discipline that has changed a great deal since the founding of OAS.

Join Us At:

Although, I’ve just given a small glimpse of the road we traveled this year, I want to end this message by
letting every member know that the positive upward trend we’ve achieved is due to their hard work. With that
being said, I would like to thank each and every one of you.

Visit Us At:

Have a fun and safe Holiday season, and prepare for an exciting 2016.

http://www.ou.edu/cas/archsur/oas/2015%20OAS%20membership%20form.pdf
http://www.ou.edu/cas/archsur/oas/index.html

Newsletter Editor:
Holly Andrew
h.l.andrew@ou.edu
2 | OAS Newsletter

Matt Griffin
Matt Griffin
OAS President
OAS Newsletter | 3

2nd ANNUAL OCTOBER OKLAHOMA
ARCHAEOLOGY MONTH A SUCCESS!
by Holly Andrew

O

klahoma Archaeology Month (OAM) celebrates Oklahoma’s rich archaeological and cultural resources with a month of lectures and
hands-on learning. Held every October, the goal of this
celebration is to increase the knowledge of and appreciation for the archaeology of Oklahoma, as well as, to
build stronger relationships between the professional
archaeological communities and the public they serve.

Visitor learning to throw an atlatl dart at the Sam Noble Museum’s Archaeology Day on October 17, 2015. Photograph courtesy of Susie Fishman-Armstrong.

This year OAM came one step closer to achieving its
goal thanks to the enthusiastic engagement of professional archaeologists from across the state. A number
of these professionals are members of OAS who work
in federal, tribal, state, and local governments; nonprofit/for-profit organizations, colleges and universities; or OU Anthropology Grad Student, Shawn Lambert, demonstrating how to
museums, such as the Oklahoma Archeological Survey, make traditional native ceramic vessels at Open Range Archaeology’s
Open Range Archaeology, Historic Preservation, and (ORA) Archaeology Workshop event. Photograph courtesy of Open Range
Archaeology, LLC.
the Archaeology Department at the Sam Noble Museum. Events that our members took part in included
tours of archaeological/cultural sites and museums, Attendance at individual OAM events ranged from 30
open lab days, hands-on demonstrations of traditional to 400 people with an end total of nearly 900 visitors
who participated in the state’s month-long celebration.
skills and other activities for individuals of all ages.

{

Two visitors learning about archaeological excavation by participating in
a mock dig at Open Range Archaeology’s (ORA) Archaeology Workshop
event. Photograph courtesy of Open Range Archaeology, LLC.

4 | OAS Newsletter

“To watch proEvery member in OAS has
fessional archaethe power to connect, comologists from all
municate, and inspire an
sectors—federal,
tribal, state, and
appreciation for our state’s
local
governrich and diverse history.
ments; nonprofit
organizations, colleges and universities, museums, and
others from across the state—actively innovate and engage with each other as they share their knowledge and
experience with their local communities not only made
me proud, but grateful to have had the opportunity to
organize this fantastic month,” said Stephanie Stutts,
coordinator of Oklahoma Archaeology Month events
for the state. “Their excitement is what made this year’s
Oklahoma Archaeology Month so successful!”

Dr. Brian Andrews, Assistant Professor of Social Science at RSU, discusses
artifacts found in northeastern Oklahoma during the Archaeology Open
House on the Claremore campus. Photograph from Roger State University.

For next year’s OAM celebration, one of our society’s goals is to find ways for every interested member in OAS to be more actively engaged in OAM.
We feel that each member can help OAM achieve
its goal of building stronger relationships between
our archaeological communities and the public by:
1. hosting an OAM event(s),
2. serving as a volunteer for an OAM event(s),
3. offering your expertise and knowledge for an
OAM event,
4. attending an OAM events with friends or family
“It is so important for archaeology to be brought to the
attention of the public,” said Stutts. “This is because archaeology, when communicated well, has the power not
only to connect us with our state’s rich and diverse history, but to communicate and inspire an appreciation of
our shared heritage with our fellow men.”

Project Archaeology Master Teacher, Meghan Dudley, training five 3rd5th grade teachers and four archaeological educators how to teach Project
Archaeology cirriculum in the class room October 3, 2015 at the Oklahoma History Center in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Photograph courtesy of
Meghan Dudley.

and diverse history. For more information about Oklahoma Archaeology Month (OAM), its focus in educational outreach, and how to get involved, contact:
Holly Andrew (h.l.andrew@ou.edu) or Meghan Dudley
(meghan.forney@ou.edu).
Special thanks to this years sponsors of Oklahoma Archaeology Month: the Oklahoma Anthropological Society; Oklahoma Archeological Survey; Oklahoma Historical Society,
State Historic Preservation Office; and the University of Oklahoma Anthropology Department.
More information about these organization is available online.

Every member in OAS has the power to connect, communicate, and inspire an appreciation for our state’s rich
OAS Newsletter | 5

OAS FALL DIG AT FORT WASHITA
PRODUCES WAGON PARTS GALORE
by Amanda Regnier

T

he 2015 OAS Fall Dig was held September 17 -20 at Fort Washita, in Bryan County, Oklahoma. We had a
great turnout of experienced excavators, new members, and students ranging from elementary to college.
On Saturday afternoon, 63 people were working on or observing excavations!

Although confident after the 2015 Spring Dig, that our site was not a blacksmith shop, we were still unclear about
what its purpose was. The Fall Dig, which was a continuation of our excavations started last spring, focused on
excavating inside the building to learn more about the its purpose.
Excavations in the northwest corner of the building provided us with our best clues. Under a jumbled pile of mid19th century handmade bricks, excavators encountered a massive pile of iron, including a great number of spent
wagon parts. Identifiable pieces included harness hooks, springs, wheel hubs, and carriage bolts. We also found
horseshoes, nails, and unidentifiable scrap metal. From our excavations in the central portion of the building, we
recovered military artifacts, including mini ball rounds and uniform buttons (see an illustrative map of the site on
page 9).
Our current thinking is this was a shop used for building and maintaining military wagons with a possible small
forge in the northwest corner of the building. However, we are about 2/3 of the way to our goal of excavating the
entire building. Analysis of artifacts recovered takes place in the lab of the Archeological Survey in Norman on
Monday and Tuesday afternoons. If you are interested in helping out, please contact me at: aregnier@ou.edu.

OAS member Judy Medlin with visitors sifting excavation dirt at a fall dig held Sept. 17-20 at Fort Washita, in Bryan County.
Photograph courtsey of Jon Denton.

FIELD EQUIPMENT: PUTTING TOGETHER A BASIC DIG KIT
by Amanda Regnier

A

rchaeologists are both proud of and fiercely protective of treasured field tools. I am still smarting from
losing a treasured trowel, sharpened down small after years of use, to a frozen puddle nearly a decade ago.
I wagered it wasn’t worth the frostbite I would have developed trying to get it back, but in hindsight,
maybe it would have been. If you plan to do substantial excavation, certain tools are better than others. This
issue came up at a recent dig, and one of our field volunteers asked me to write an article about where to
buy the best tools for your dig kit.
In this article, I’ll cover the equipment for a basic starter kit, which will set you back between $50 - $75.
In a subsequent issue of the newsletter, I’ll provide you with information on additional items you will
find useful in an expanded kit.

1. Trowel – The most vital excavation tool is a trowel.
OAS members cleaning and bagging artifacts at a fall dig held Sept. 17-20 at Fort Washita, in Bryan County. Photograph courtsey
of Jon Denton.

6 | OAS Newsletter

Archaeologists prefer
the Marshalltown brand. They are forged from a single piece of steel, as
opposed to cheaper versions in which the blade is spot-welded to the
handle. Marshalltown has a variety of trowels available on their
OAS Newsletter | 7

website, and size and shape is a matter of personal preference. To start, I advise a 5-inch pointing
trowel, which runs about $15. I also use a square margin trowel, which is excellent for creating neat
walls and corners. As I frequently warn my students, owning a trowel holster is grounds for
being openly mocked. Once you get your trowel, you will want to use a Dremel tool or an
angle grinder to put an edge on the blade. Only sharpen the top edge, or you’ll make a
tool best suited for gouging excavation floors!

2. Metric Folding Rule or Tape Measure – You will need at least one but preferably a

pair of metric measuring devices, one of which should extend to at least 5 m
in length. I own several tape measures and a pair of 2 m metric folding rulers.
Until recently, it was relatively easy to find imported metric tape measures in
discount hardware stores. For some reason, they have become harder to find of late. I
have turned to online sources, particularly Amazon. This plastic folding rule (http://
tinyurl.com/p4tssda) is relatively cheap, at about $12, and much more durable than
the old wooden folding rules. I own a couple and swear by them. Metric tapes like
this one (http://tinyurl.com/pyu26jm) run less than $10.

3. Line Level – On the surface, a line level seems like a simple purchase. But only when you have dealt

with a truly terrible line level can you understand why a good one is important. Cheap plastic line
levels constantly fall off your datum string. The best line level is the trusty Stanley aluminum level
(http://tinyurl.com/nqydlmv), which retails for about $1.50 and has clips on either end that keep it in
place.

4. Gloves – Gloves are an absolute must on historic sites and recommended

everywhere else. I have tried a huge variety ranging from expensive
leather to cheap pairs made out of scraps of car upholstery. In recent
years, I’ve come to the conclusion that woven, nitrile coated gardening
gloves (http://tinyurl.com/nsf7asq) are best. They are fitted, solving the
mitten effect of many work gloves, and they’re cheap, which is good because the nitrile will start to wear off after repeated use.

5. Root Clippers – No matter where you’re working, roots will get in your way,

so you’ll need a pair of root clippers (AKA handheld pruning shears). Root
clippers come in a variety of sizes and quality, ranging from about $10 (http://tinyurl.com/oq7pysq) to upwards of $25 (http://tinyurl.com/qfyjayy). I have a pair
that is well over 10 years old and was definitely on the cheaper end
of that
spectrum.

8 | OAS Newsletter

OAS Newsletter | 9

BOOK REVIEW

ANNOUNCEMENTS

Title: “The Lost World of the Old Ones: Discoveries in the
Ancient Southwest”
Author: David Roberts
Publication date: 2015
Publisher: W. W. Norton; New York
First off, I must say that I have read quite a few of Mr. Roberts’
previous books. I am a fan of his works. His writing style is
easy to digest and he invariably teaches me something new
about Southwest U.S. archaeology/anthropology.
That said, I must divulge that I consider some aspects of Mr.
Roberts’ personality as peculiar. In many of his books, he takes
the opportunity to crow and do some shameless self-promotion; in particular, he has a noticeable penchant for making
numerous references to his previous works -- obviously, as a
thinly-veiled attempt to win more customers for future book
sales. Mr. Roberts also has the bothersome tendency to portray personality conflicts with other scientists as “I am right;
they are wrong.” In short, the guy is full of himself. Yet, he is
very knowledgeable and is an accomplished communicator; I
am just telling you that some aspects of his personality need
to be taken with a grain of salt.
With all that said, I will say that I unhesitatingly encourage you to give this book a read. It has a lot of new information about modern theories of how the ancient people of the southwestern U.S. lived, worked and prayed.

The OAS Newsletter includes policies approved by the Executive Board, notices of pending meetings, chapter
news, notices of nominations and elections, and other information and stories of interest to OAS members.
Yet in the past, members of OAS also used the newsletter as a forum to ask and discuss questions about
anthropo-logical topics and as a place to share and exchange information.
We, as your newsletter committee, want to reestablish this practice by inviting all OAS members (avocational
and professional) to submit questions, announcements, articles, or book reviews. The newsletter is published
four times a year. Issues are published in January, April, July, and October, although the dates may be changed
to fit the Biannual Meeting Schedules. Members interested in submitting a piece for one of the 2016 newsletters
please contact: Holly Andrew (newsletter editor) at h.l.andrew@ou.edu.
Deadlines for newsletter submissions are:
• January 8th
• March 8th
• June 8th
• September 8th

I like the way he writes; it is almost as if you are hiking a desert trail alongside the guy -- with him engaged in a
travelling dialogue on what the two of you see alongside the trail up ahead.
It is a fun adventure in a literature format.
(This book review is by Neil Garrison; Yukon, OK.)

10 | OAS Newsletter

OAS Newsletter | 11

