AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE COLEMAN COUNTY
SPECIAL UTILITY DISTRICT PHASE 7 WATER LINE PROJECT IN
COLEMAN COUNTY TEXAS
Antiquities Permit 5057

By
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 211

October 2008

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE COLEMAN COUNTY
SPECIAL UTILITY DISTRICT PHASE 7 WATER LINE PROJECT
IN COLEMAN COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project 08-24

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore, RPA

Prepared for
Coleman Special Utility District
214 Santa Anna Avenue
Coleman, Texas 76834

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of three segments of a proposed 26.1 mile water
line and a 60 foot x 60 foot tract that will be the site of proposed expansion to an
existing water storage tank in central County County, Texas was performed on
October 14, 2008 by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) for the
Coleman County Special Utility District (SUD) under Antiquities Permit 5057. In
all, the area comprises 1.18 acres. The areas investigated included two creek
crossings, one high hill, and a proposed water storage tank expansion site. No
sites were found, and no artifacts were collected. Therefore, it is recommended
that the Coleman County SUD be allowed to proceed with their project with no
further consultation from the Texas Historical Commission (THC). Copies of the
report are on file at the THC, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL);
Coleman County SUD; and BVRA.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am appreciative of the assistance provided by others during this project.
Kelly Warren and Kelly Rosenbaum at Jacob & Martin, Ltd, provided me with the
necessary maps and other information regarding this project. Travis Rhoads of
the Coleman County SUD signed the permit application as the representative of
the owner and sponsor and provided a backhoe and operator. Lili G. Lyddon
prepared the figures that appear in this report.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT...........................................................................................................II
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ......................................................................................III
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................6
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................8
METHODS ..........................................................................................................10
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................12
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................14
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................15

APPENDIX I: Photographs of Areas 1-4
Figures
FIGURE 1. GENERAL LOCATION ..................................................................................... 2
FIGURE 2. AREA 1 ON COLEMAN TOPOGRAPHIC QUADRANGLE ....................................... 3
FIGURE 3. AREAS 2 AND 3 ON FISK TOPOGRAPHIC QUADRANGLE.................................... 4
FIGURE 4. AREA 4 ON LAKE SAN TANA TOPOGRAPHIC QUADRANGLE .............................. 5

iv

INTRODUCTION
The Coleman County SUD plans to install 26.1 miles of six-inch, eightinch., ten-inch, and twelve-inch water line as well as the construction of two
pump stations and an expansion of an existing water storage tank in rural
Coleman County (Figure 1). This project is being funded by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Rural Development with Patricia Butler the agency
representative. The water line will be placed in a trench with three feet of cover,
and the width of the trench will be eighteen inches. The water line and other
proposed improvements will be on private property within an existing easement
owned by the Coleman County SUD or on land owned by the Coleman County
SUD. The four areas investigated are depicted on USGS topographic maps
Coleman (399-4342) (Figure 2), Fisk (3199-423) (Figure (3), and Lake San Tana
(399-431) (Figure 4). Coleman County is located in a part of Texas that contains
numerous prehistoric and historic sites, many of which have been considered to
possess significant research potential. The THC requested an archaeological
survey prior to allowing the construction of the proposed water line. BVRA
conducted a pre-survey assessment and identified three areas of where an
archaeological site might be present. The THC concurred with the findings of the
pre-survey assessment and agreed that these areas (plus the site of the
proposed expansion to the existing water storage tank) be investigated. In order
to comply with this request, the Coleman County SUD retained BVRA to conduct
this investigation.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Area 1 on Coleman Topographic Quadrangle

3

Figure 3. Areas 2 and 3 on Fisk Topographic Quadrangle

4

Figure 4. Area 4 on Lake San Tana Topographic Quadrangle

5

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The project area is located within the Cross Timbers Geographic Region
of Texas (Biesaart et al. 1985:Figure 4) and the Austropriarian biotic province as
defined by Blair (1950:98-100). Most of the county consists of gently undulating
uplands with elevations that range from about 1300 feet above sea level at the
Colorado River to about 2250 feet in the northwestern part of the county. The
reader is referred to Volume I (Stratigraphy) of the Geology of Texas by Sellards
et al. (1932) for a more in-depth discussion of the geology of this area. The
following data are taken from the Texas Almanac for 1984-1985 (Kingston and
Harris 1983) and the soil survey for Coleman County (Botts et al., 1974). The
county receives 26.82 inches of annual rainfall, and a January minimum
temperature of 32 degrees Fahrenheit and a July maximum temperature of 96
degrees Fahrenheit, creates a growing season of 235 days. About 62 percent of
the county is used as range, and cattle and sheep are the principal livestock.
The rest of the agricultural land is cultivated or in old fields that were cultivated in
the past. Small grains, sorghums, and cotton are the main crops. Soils at the
three high probability areas consist of Frio Clay Loam (Fo) at Area 1; Frio Clay
Loam (Fo), Tarrant and Purves, undulating (TPB), and Stony land and Owens
soils, moderately steep (STE) at Area 2; and Speck and Tarrant soils, undulating
(SRB) at Area 3.
Frio Clay Loam belongs to the Frio series that consists of calcareous,
nearly level soils on the floodplains of streams. In a representative profile, the
surface layer is clay loam that is dark grayish-brown in the upper 12 inches and
brown in the lower 14 inches. Below this, and extending to a depth of 60 inches,
is brown clay loam. These soils are well drained, permeability is moderately slow,
and available water capacity is high.
Speck and Tarrant soils belong to the Speck series that consists of
shallow, loamy and clayey soils that overlie limestone. These soils are gently
sloping to sloping and are found on uplands. In a representative profile, the
surface layer is dark brown clay loam about 8 inches thick over a 10-inch layer of
reddish-brown clay that is directly above a hard limestone. These soils are slowly
permeable, well drained, and the available water capacity is low.
Stony land soils are a mixture of rock fragments and soil material. This
soil is generally found on east-facing scarps that are scattered throughout most
of the county. The areas are generally less stony at lower levels and between 3
and 15 percent of the surface is covered with stones. When this soil is found at
the top of the slope, the soil material is mainly pockets of gravelly and cobbly clay
between the rock fragments. The less stony areas on the lower slopes are
mainly a mixture of clays and rock fragments that have been moved into place
through gravity, soil creep, and local wash. These soils are underlain by shale
and soft limestone.

6

Tarrant soils, undulating consist of undulating soils that are mainly on
uplands. Slopes range from about 1 to 8 percent but are mainly about 2 percent.
The landscape formed by these soils has contour strips 50 to 150 feet wide that
has 25 to 50 percent of their surface covered with stones and boulders. These
strips typically make up 5 to 15 percent of the area. Between the strips, the
amount of surface covered by limestone pebbles and cobbles ranges from 1 to
25 percent. In a representative profile, the surface layer is dark grayish-brown
clay in the upper 6 inches. The lower eight inches consists of about 80 percent
limestone fragments. Below this is limestone bedrock.

7

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
According to a planning document published by the THC (Biesaart et al.
1985:Figure 4), Coleman County is part of the North Central Texas CulturalGeographical Region of Texas. In 1985, Coleman County had 151 recorded
sites, and was fifth in the region that consists of 39 counties. Of the 151
recorded sites in 1985, 2 are Paleo-Indian, 84 are Archaic, and 13 are Late
Prehistoric. Disturbance to sites in the county is listed by Biesaart et al.
(1985:122) as erosion (n=121), construction (n=18), and disturbed and artificially
capped (n=14), deflated (n=25), dispersed (n=54), and vandalized (n=15). Only
one site was listed as pristine. Investigation at sites in the county in 1985
consisted of those tested (n=49) and surface collected (n=71). Sites with hearths
numbered 115, sites with burned rock middens numbered 38, and sites with a
burned rock feature numbered 6. One site was reported to have midden soil,
and one site was reported to have a bone bed. One stone quarry, two stone tool
manufacturing areas, and one burial was known to be present. The planning
document does not provide site numbers that can be associated with the above
statements.
The only major archaeological survey that has been conducted within the
boundaries of Coleman County was for the proposed Stacy (O. H. Ivie) Reservoir
that was projected to flood portions of Coleman, Concho, and Runnels counties
over 19,200 acres. The first survey was conducted by archaeologists from
Espey, Huston & Associates, and the report was written in 1980 (Wooldridge and
Nichols 1980). According to the abstract for this report, a 100% pedestrian
survey recorded 431 sites in the three counties. Types of prehistoric sites
recorded include burned rock middens, campsites, lithic scatters, quarry sites,
lithic procurement sites, lithic workshops, base camps with middens, small
camps, and rock cairns. These sites date to the Paleoindian, Archaic, and Late
Prehistoric periods of Texas prehistory. Historic Indian sites include possible tipi
rings. Of the total number of prehistoric sites, 327 contained only prehistoric
cultural materials, and 42 contained prehistoric and historic components. The 62
historic sites include cemeteries, farmsteads, industrial sites, house sites, lime
kilns, and ranch complexes. Standing structures include a cotton gin, house,
outbuildings, cellars, cisterns, foundations, corrals, and cattle pens. These sites
are discussed in the second volume of the Stacy Reservoir report (Freeman and
Freeman 1981). Additional work at the site of the proposed reservoir include
survey at the dam construction zone (Bailey et al. 1989), an inventory of cultural
resources above the 1,551.5 contour line (Bryan and Collins 1988), data
recovery at sites 41CN74 (Batterman 1991), and an investigation of historic
cemeteries (Earls et al. 1991).

8

The remainder of cultural resource surveys in Coleman County consists of
small area and linear projects performed for various federal agencies such as
Farmer’s Home Administration (FMHA), Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA),
Rural Electrification Agency (REA), and Soil Conservation Service (SCA). Of the
seven surveys conducted in the general area, six were performed in the 1980s,
and the remaining survey was performed in 2004. There has been no activity in
the area since that time. Only one of these surveys found and recorded an
archaeological site. During a survey for a proposed transmission line south and
east of the town of Coleman, a single historic site (41CN269) was observed and
classified as a farmstead dating to the early part of the 20th century. This is the
nearest recorded site to any of the three areas surveyed for this project.

9

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, the Archeological Site Atlas was checked for
previously recorded sites and past surveys in the area. Several documents were
reviewed during the planning stages of this project. These are a planning
document by the Texas Historical Commission (Biesaart et al. 1985), an
archeological bibliography for the Central Region of Texas (Simons and Moore
1997), and all volumes of the Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology published
by the THC. The interested reader is referred to these sources for additional
information regarding the prehistory of this area. The soil survey for Coleman
County (Botts, et al. 1974) was reviewed in order to identify the soils present in
the Ares of Potential Effect (APE). The Principal Investigator and Travis Rhoads
(General Manager for the Coleman County SUD) conducted a pre-survey
assessment of the entire APE. The route of the water line was driven, and three
high probability areas were identified. These are the north bank of Hoards Creek
(Figure 2), both banks of Loss Creek (Figure 3), and a high hill on the north side
of Farm-to-Market Road 2131 where numerous rocks were observed in the
highway cut bank (Figure 3). The site of the proposed expansion to the existing
water storage tank was originally depicted on top of a high mesa on the USGS
topographic map Lake San Tana. Later, it was learned that the water storage
tank is actually on the slope of the mesa in an area that had been altered to
accommodate this facility (Figure 4). The THC requested that this area be visited
as well as the three high probability areas identified during the pre-survey visit.
The field survey was conducted on October 14, 2008. The first area to be
examined was the north bank of Hoards Creek (Area 1). Approximately 500
meters of the waterline route was walked and visually inspected. Two backhoe
trenches were excavated to depths of 150 cm and 180 below the existing ground
surface. The trenches were 36 inches wide and three meters long. A digital
camera was used to illustrate the field conditions at Area 1 at the time of this
survey, and the photographs of this area are presented in Appendix I.
The second area visited was the east and west banks of Loss Creek on
the north side of Farm-to-Market Road 2131 (Area 2). Each bank was walked
and visually inspected, as was the creek bank. Segments of approximately 100
meters were walked on the east bank and 130 meters were walked on the west
bank. Two shovel tests were dug on the east bank, which is the floodplain side of
the creek. The depth of these tests varied from 30 cm to 100 cm, and they were
50 cm in diameter. The soil was not screened due to the presence of firm clay at
Shovel Test 1 and creek gravels at Shovel Test 2. The west bank contains a
terrace and a high hill with bedrock at or near the surface. Therefore, no shovel
tests were excavated in this area. A digital camera was used to illustrate the field
conditions at Area 2 at the time of this survey, and the photographs of this area
are presented in Appendix I.

10

The third area visited was a very high hill along the north side of Farm-toMarket Road 2131 where numerous cobbles were observed on the slope of the
cut bank (Area 3). Since lithic procurement sites and lithic quarries are very
common in Coleman County, this hill was walked for a distance of approximately
300 meters and visually inspected for evidence of tested cobbles. This hill
contains bedrock at or near the surface. Therefore, no shovel tests were dug. A
digital camera was used to illustrate the field conditions at Area 3 at the time of
this survey, and the photographs of this area are presented in Appendix I.
The fourth area visited was the site of the proposed expansion to the
existing water storage tank (Area 4). This 60’ x 60’ tract is on the north slope of a
high mesa identified on the topographic map as Santa Anna Mountains. The
area was altered by heavy equipment to create a platform for the existing water
storage tank and a road to the top of the mesa. The entire tract was visually
inspected. Since the surface is bedrock, no shovel tests were excavated. A
digital camera was used to illustrate the field conditions at Area 4 at the time of
this survey, and the photographs of this area are presented in Appendix I.

11

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
According to the Archeological Sites Atlas, no portions of the APE have
been examined by a professional archaeologist. No previously recorded sites
are present within the APE, and the current survey did not observe any evidence
of a prehistoric or historic site. Previous work at Stacy Reservoir demonstrated
that prehistoric sites dating from Paleoindian through Late Prehistoric times are
present in the county and a variety of historic sites that are evidence of early
settlement, farming and ranching, and the industrial development of Coleman
County are also present.
Area 1
This is the high ground on the north bank of Hoards Creek. It is flat and
featureless. At the time of this investigation, it was in cultivation for a variety of
maize, and the soil was saturated due to recent rains. Very few rocks were
observed on the surface, and not one was large enough to be used in the
manufacture of stone tools. Two backhoe trenches revealed a uniform dark gray
clay loam from the surface to depths of 150 cm and 180 cm. No rocks or
features were present in the walls or back dirt of the two trenches. The soil in
this area is described by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service (Botts et al.1974:Sheet 28) as Frio Clay Loam (Fo), and it
is considered to be prime farmland. It is not known why prehistoric groups did
not select this area as a desirable location for a campsite or activity area, but the
absence of raw materials and tendency of the soil to become saturated in wet
weather are two possibilities.
Area 2
This is the crossing of Loss Creek by Farm-to-Market Road 2131. The
east bank is the low side and is the area that would flood when the creek leaves
its banks. Although the creek does not appear to be large enough to create a
deep floodplain, two shovel tests were excavated in this area to identify the types
and depth of soils present. According to the soil survey for Coleman County
(Botts et al. 1974:Sheet 28), the soil in the floodplain is Frio Clay Loam (Fo).
This segment was walked, and no cultural materials were observed on the
surface. Two shovel tests were excavated to determine the probability of buried
cultural materials. Shovel Test 1 was dug on the first terrace in TPB soils to a
depth of 100 cm, and firm clay was observed throughout with no rocks or
features present. Shovel Test 2 was dug in the floodplain in Fo soils to a depth
of 30 cm. The test was terminated due to the presence of stream gravels and
large fragments of limestone. No cultural materials or features were observed.
BVRA believes that the first terrace was not a suitable area for a campsite due to
the presence of firm clay, and the floodplain was probably not selected for a
campsite or activity area because of the shallow soils and lack of raw materials
suitable for stone tool manufacture.
12

The west bank of Loss Creek consists of a terrace above the creek and a
high mesa overlooking the valley to the east. Both areas were walked, and the
surface was inspected for cultural materials. According to the soil survey for
Coleman County (Botts et al. 1974:Sheet 40), the soils on the first terrace above
the creek are Stony land and Owens soils, moderately steep (STE). These are
moderately steep areas of generally east-facing scarps that consist of broken
layers of hard rock that resists erosion and forms a scarp. The top of the mesa
contains soils identified by the soil survey for Coleman County (Botts et al.
1974:Sheet 40) as Tarrant and Purves soils, undulating (TPB). These soils have
a shallow layer of clay that is about 80 percent limestone fragments that range in
size from pebbles to boulders. The underlying material is limestone. Most of the
area adjacent to the fence had been scraped and pushed. Since this disturbance
is within the path of the proposed water line, any site restricted to the surface
would have been destroyed. The scraped area and the back dirt areas were
examined for cultural materials, but no artifacts were found. No shovel tests
were excavated, as the soil present is too shallow and rocky. BVRA believes
that the terrace and west bank were not selected for permanent campsites due to
the shallow soils, and the absence of chert cobbles precluded these areas from
being selected for quarrying or lithic procurement.
Area 3
This area is the top of a high mesa overlooking a broad valley to the west.
During the pre-survey assessment, numerous cobbles were observed along the
slope of the cut bank. This area was selected for survey because lithic quarry
and procurement sites have been found in similar settings. Approximately 300
meters along the top of this landform were walked and visually inspected for any
evidence that might suggest the presence of a prehistoric activity area. The soils
in this area are described in the Coleman County soil survey (Botts et al.
1974:Sheet 40) as Speck and Tarrant soils, undulating (SRB). These soils are
shallow, loamy, and clayey soils that overlie limestone, and they are found in the
uplands. No evidence of a prehistoric site or activity area was observed, and it is
concluded that this area was not utilized due to a lack of chert cobbles that could
have been used in stone tool manufacture.
Area 4
This area is the 60’ x 60’ site that has been selected by the Coleman SUD
for an expansion of an existing water storage tank. It is located on the slope of
the Santa Anna Mountains. The platform for the existing water storage tank and
the road that leads to this facility and eventually to the top of the mesa has been
cut from the slope of the mesa, and the area where the storage tank and site for
proposed expansion is located has been created by cutting into the mesa with
heavy equipment. The entire site was walked and visually inspected, and no
evidence of a prehistoric site was observed. This was not unexpected, as sites
are not commonly found on steep slopes.

13

RECOMMENDATIONS
No archaeological sites were found as a result of this project. It is, therefore,
recommended that construction be allowed to proceed as planned by the Coleman
County SUD without further consultation with the THC. Should construction plans
change to include additional water line in an area that can be viewed as a likely
setting for an archaeological site, the THC must be notified in case additional
survey by a professional archaeologist is warranted. Should evidence of a
prehistoric or historic site be unearthed during construction, all work in the area of
the find must stop until the THC can evaluate the situation. This study conformed
to the Minimum Survey Standards as defined by the Archaeology Division of the
THC.

14

REFERENCES CITED
Bailey, Gail L. James T. Abbott, Michael B. Collins, Martha Doty Freeman, and
Jeanine M. Seay, David L. Miller, and Dan K. Utley
1989 Cultural Resources Survey, Testing, and Assessments in the Dam
Construction Zone at Stacy Reservoir, Coleman and Concho
Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of
Investigations Number 65.
Batterman, Bill
1991 Archaeological Investigations at Sites 41CN74, 41CC46,
41CC44/45 in the O. H. Ivie Reservoir, Coleman and Concho
Counties, Texas. Mariah and Associates, Inc. Technical Report
Series 391.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
2(1):93-117.
Botts, O. L., Buford Bailey, and Wayburn D. Mitchell
1974 Soil Survey of Coleman County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Bryan, William A., and Michael B. Collins
1988 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources above the 1,55.5
Contour Line, Stacy Reservoir Recreation Areas, Concho, Coleman,
and Runnels Counties. Prewitt and Associates, Reports of
Investigations Number 57.
Earls, Amy C. Christopher R. Lintz, George W. Gill, Patrick L. O’Neill, and W.
Nichlas Trierweiler
1991 Investigations of Historic Cemeteries at O. H. Ivie Reservoir,
Coleman, Concho, and Runnels Counties, Texas. Mariah and
Associates, Inc. Technical Report 403.
Freeman, Martha Doty, and Joe C. Freeman
1981 A Cultural Resources Inventory and Assessment of the Proposed
Stacy Reservoir, Volume II: Historic Cultural Resources. Espey,
Huston & Associates. Document Number 81052.

15

Kingston, Michael T., and Ruth Harris (Editors)
1983 1984-1985 Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide. Dallas.
Simons, Helen, and William E. Moore (compilers)
1997 Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas. Office
of the State Archeologist, Special Report 36. Texas Historical
Commission.
Woolridge, Harold G., and Peter W. Nichols
1980 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of the Proposed
Stacy Reservoir, Volume I: Prehistoric Cultural Resources. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc. Document Number 81052.

16

APPENDIX I
PHOTOGRAPHS OF AREAS 1 – 4

Area 1. View of Field on North Side of Hoards Creek (looking north)

Area 1. Backhoe Trench 1 (during excavation)

Area 2. View from Loss Creek (looking west)

Area 2. Top of Mesa (looking east)

Area 3. View along Fence (looking west)

Area 4. View of Existing Water Storage Tank on Slope of Mesa

Area 4. Site of Proposed Expansion Depicting Disturbance and Slope

