AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
COLORADO VALLEY TELEPHONE COOPERATIVE
TX 592 DISTRIBUTION NETWORK UPGRADE NUMBER 6
PROJECT IN COLORADO, FAYETTE,
AND LAVACA COUNTIES, TEXAS
Antiquities Permit 5161

By
William E. Moore and Edward P. Baxter

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 212

2009

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
COLORADO VALLEY TELEPHONE COOPERATIVE
TX 592 DISTRIBUTION NETWORK UPGRADE NUMBER 6
PROJECT IN COLORADO, FAYETTE,
AND LAVACA COUNTIES, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 09-03

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Colorado Valley Telephone Cooperative
Post Office Box 130
La Grange, Texas 78945

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of twenty-six high probability areas (A-Z) for prehistoric
sites within the path of a proposed 96 mile telephone cable was conducted by Brazos
Valley Research Associates (BVRA) in February of 2009 for the Colorado Valley
Telephone Cooperative under Antiquities Permit 5161. The total length of the 26 high
probability areas is 10.19 miles. Most of the project area is in Colorado and Fayette
counties, but a small segment is in Lavaca County. In all, 20.38 acres were examined.
Five previously recorded prehistoric sites are shown on the Ammannsville topographic
map on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) as being in close
proximity to the Area Potential Effect (APE). One previously unrecorded prehistoric site
(41FY556) was found at Area A. Artifacts noted within the right-of-way consist of
Colorado River gravels that were tested for their potential for stone tool manufacture.
Site 41FY556 is classified in this report as a lithic procurement or quarry site. That
portion of the site within the project area is not eligible for listing on the National
Register of Historic Places or for designation as a State Archeological Landmark; and
no further work is recommended. Only two cobbles from this site were determined to be
cultural, and they were discarded following analysis. Several historic cemeteries are in
the area, but only the Salem Memorial Cemetery is near the APE. The client has
decided to install the telephone cable on the opposite side of the road. Therefore, the
Salem Memorial Cemetery will not be affected. The project area passes near several
standing structures dating to the early 20th century, but the telephone cable will not
affect them. Some of these structures are located within the Dubina National Register
District. There is also a church that is listed in the National Register of Historic Places
near the APE, but it will not be affected. In addition, the route of the telephone cable
passes near four areas where signs were noted marking the location of early schools.
They are outside the APE and will not be affected.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to those individuals who participated in this project. At
BEFCO Engineering, Inc. we were assisted by Bradley C. Loehr, P.E. (Project Manager).
Mr. Loehr provided maps and logistical support in addition to driving the entire project area
with the Principal Investigator prior to the field survey. Our contact at Colorado Valley
Telephone Cooperative was Scott Martin. The site number for 41FY556 was assigned by
Jonathan Jarvis, TexSite & Atlas Coordinator at TARL. Jean Hughes, Records
Conservator at TARL, helped research previous work in the area. The artifacts were
examined by William A. Dickens. Lili G. Lyddon of L. L. Technical Services and Edward P.
Baxter prepared the figures. Donna Green at the Fayette Heritage Museum and Archives
in La Grange shared her knowledge of cemeteries in Fayette County. Ms Lyddon also
served as editor.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING......................................................................................... 4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ............................................................................ 5
METHODS .................................................................................................................... 11
DISCUSSION OF HIGH PROBABILITY AREAS SURVEYED...................................... 13
PREHISTORIC SITES NEAR THE PROJECT AREA ................................................... 25
HISTORIC SITES NEAR THE PROJECT AREA .......................................................... 26
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 35
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 36
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 37
Appendix I: Shovel Test Log
Appendix II: Areas Investigated on Topographic Quadrangles
Appendix III: Site Location
FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location.............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Areas Surveyed................................................................................................ 3
Figure 3. Exposed Gravels at 41FY556.......................................................................... 14
Figure 4. Plowed Field at Area C .................................................................................. 16
Figure 5. View of Disturbed A Horizon............................................................................ 17
Figure 6. Sign Marking Site of Content School.............................................................. 26
Figure 7. Dubina Historic District ................................................................................... 27
Figure 8. New Bielau Cemetery .................................................................................... 28
Figure 9. Distance from New Bielau Cemetery to Highway Right-of-Way ..................... 29
Figure 10. Foundations Associated with New Bielau School......................................... 30
Figure 11. Pecan-Orech School .................................................................................... 31
Figure 12. St. Paul Colored School ............................................................................... 32
Figure 13. Salem Memorial Cemetery........................................................................... 33
Figure 14. St. Mary’s Blessed Virgin Catholic Church ................................................... 34

iv

INTRODUCTION
The Colorado Valley Telephone Cooperative in La Grange, Texas proposes to
improve its telephone system by providing service to existing customers in rural
Colorado, Fayette, and Lavaca counties (Figure 1). The main portion of the project
area is in southern Fayette County and western Colorado County with a minor
segment in northeast Lavaca County. This firm plans to place 96 miles of telephone
cable within the state highway and county road rights-of-way and centered in a 16.5foot wide construction corridor. The cable will be between 0.5 and 1.5 inches in
diameter and will be placed in a trench 12 inches wide and 36 inches deep on all
county roads and 42 inches deep on all state highways and Farm-to-Market roads.
Creek borings will most likely be deeper than five feet below the channel bottom. A
trenching machine will be used to dig the trenches for the installation of the telephone
cable. Topographic coverage of the entire project area is provided by ten USGS 7.5’
maps. These are Ammannsville (2996-331), Borden (2996-313), Ellinger (2996-342),
Flatonia (2997-414), Muldoon (2997-441), Oakland (2996-321), Sawmill Branch
(2996-312), Schulenburg (2996-323), Swiss Alp (2996-332), and Weimar (2996-324).
The THC stated that the line on only five of these quadrangles should be
investigated. The 26 high probability areas examined during this study are depicted
on four of the quadrangles (Ammannsville, Oakland, Schulenburg, and Weimar), and
the Salem Memorial Cemetery is depicted on a fifth quadrangle (Flatonia) (Figure 2).
In a letter from William A. Martin of the THC to Donna Bogart of TRC Engineering
Services, Inc, a cultural resources survey by a qualified professional archaeologist
was requested. In order to satisfy this requirement, BEFCO and the Colorado Valley
Telephone Cooperative retained BVRA to perform this service.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Areas Surveyed

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The project area is located within the Texan Biotic Province of Texas (Blair
1950:93-117). This is a region that contains a mixture of Eastern and Western faunal
elements. At least 49 species of mammals, 2 species of land turtles, 16 species of
lizards, 39 species of snakes, 5 species of newts and salamanders, and 18 species of
frogs are known to inhabit the Texan Biotic Province. Characteristic upland trees are
post oak, blackjack, and cedar. In the valleys, the dominant trees are cottonwood,
willow, and pecan. Average yearly rainfall measured at Columbus (Colorado County) is
40.27 inches and at La Grange it is 36.22 inches. The average yearly temperature is
69 degrees Fahrenheit at Columbus and 63 degrees at La Grange. Agricultural
products in the area include rice, cotton, and milo. The topography overall is hilly with
erosional surfaces present in many areas. In general, soils are sandy loam over clay in
the uplands hills and black gumbo in the lowlands. Part of the area is referred to as the
Blackland Prairie Major Land Resource Area. The soils in this area were formed under
grass and are mostly dark. A portion of the project area is in the Texas Claypan Major
Land Resource Area. Soils in this area were formed under post oak savannah and are
mostly light in color. The project area is drained by the Colorado River, East Navidad
River, West Navidad River, and Navidad River as well as numerous creeks, many of
which have several tributaries. Natural springs are also present.

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
General
The project area is located in a region referred to in a statistical overview
compiled by Biesaart et al. (1985:Figure 15) as the Central Coastal Plain CulturalGeographic Region. When the overview was published in 1985, there were 1067
recorded archaeological sites in the region. This figure represented 5.28% of the
state. Of the 13 cultural-geographical regions in Texas, the Central Coastal Plain
was 10th in number of sites recorded.
In 1985, there were only 65 previously recorded sites in Fayette County. This
was 6.10% of the region and 0.32% of the state. Site types were listed as PaleoIndian (2), Archaic (19) and Late Prehistoric (6). Some sites are mentioned as being
disturbed due to erosion, construction, and soil deflation. Four sites are mentioned
as being destroyed. No sites had been excavated, 48 had been tested by hand, and
14 had been surface collected. Hearths and concentrations of burned rock are also
noted.
In 1985, there were only 60 previously recorded sites in Colorado County.
This was 5.60% of the region and 0.30% of the state. Site types were listed as
Paleo-Indian (1), Archaic (6) and Late Prehistoric (2). Some sites are mentioned as
being disturbed due to erosion, construction, and vandalism. One site had been
excavated, 12 had been tested by hand, and 51 had been surface collected. Shell
middens, stone tool manufacturing areas, and a burial are also noted.
In 1985, there were only 3 previously recorded sites in Lavaca County. This
was .29% of the region and 0.01% of the state. The age of these sites is not stated
in the statistical overview. Some sites are mentioned as being disturbed due to
erosion construction disturbance. Not one of the three sites had been excavated or
tested by hand. Three burials had been reported.
According to Nightengale and Jackson (1983:6), the project area occupies a
transitional zone between east, coastal, and central Texas cultures with the most
influence being from the central part of the state. This statement is based on a
comparison of projectile point types and, in some cases, pottery with those found in
the Central Texas region. This thesis is presented in more detail in a report by
Duford W. Skelton (1977:13-16).

5

Previous Investigations in the Project Area and Vicinity
The majority of previous work by professional archaeologists relating to the
current project area has been conducted in Colorado and Fayette counties. In the
early 1960s, a survey of the archaeological resources of the proposed Columbus
Bend Reservoir in Colorado and Fayette counties was conducted by John P. Nunley
(1963), who was working with the Texas Archeological Salvage Project of The
University of Texas at Austin. This was the first major scientific study in the area, and
it represented a major reservoir project as the water surface at normal lake level was
projected to cover 18,500 acres. Prior to this study, the area is described by Nunley
(1963:47) as “unknown archeologically.” He also mentions that, at the time of his
study, there have been no scientifically controlled archeological excavations in either
Colorado or Fayette counties. Nunley states that his project area lies in a marginal
position between Central Texas and the Texas coast, and this has made it impossible
(in the 1960s) to definitely identify any of the sites with recognized foci or aspects.
His results provide evidence that all three major prehistoric stages (Paleo-Indian,
Archaic, and Neo-American are present. He mentions that there is a large number of
sites which yielded Paleo-Indian dart point types, and these sites (without exception)
were upland sites.
Nunley separated known sites into upland sites and alluvial terrace sites.
According to his definitions, an upland site was defined as an “open campsite
situated on a hill or knoll well above the level of the flood plain” (Nunley 1963:9). At
these sites, the sandy soil is normally very thin, and sometimes it has been
completely eroded away exposing a bedrock formation of clay or sandstone. He
states that even though large quantities of flint debris are often present on the eroded
surfaces of upland sites, artifacts are surprisingly scarce. Burned rock and ashy
areas are frequently found at these sites. Nunley does not provide a definition for
terrace sites. His study includes three sites in Fayette County in close proximity to the
project area. No sites near the project area in Colorado and Lavaca counties are
mentioned in his report. The three sites in Fayette County are 41FY9, 41FY10, and
41FY18.
Site 41FY9 is a terrace site located on the left bank of Williams Creek about
0.5 mile from its junction with the Colorado River. The terrace on which this site is
located is bisected by Farm-to-Market Road 155 (High Probability Area D). In this
area, the creek has two well-defined alluvial terraces, the modern floodplain and an
older, higher terrace. Occupational material was collected on the surface of the lower
terrace and observed buried in the upper terrace (Nunley 1963:38-39). A profile wall
cleared along the edge of the upper terrace revealed a brown sandy soil containing
cultural material as much as ten feet below the surface of the upper terrace. Test pits
dug in an eroded portion of the lower terrace yielded arrow points and dart points and
one corner-tang knife. Extensive excavation of this site was recommended. Nunley
(1963:Table 1) dates this site to the Neo-American stage.

6

Site 41FY10 is a terrace site in the same general area as 41FY9, but it is 100
yards to the east of that site and closer to the confluence of Williams Creek and the
Colorado River (near High Probability Area D). Although the fill is the same as at
41FY10, the depth of the deposit was not determined. Flint and mussel shell were
observed on the surface, but no artifacts were collected. Further testing was
recommended (Nunley 1963:39). Nunley (1963:Table 1) dates this site to the NeoAmerican stage.
Site 41FY18 is located in a creek bank about 800 feet south of the confluence
of Williams Creek, Lane Pool Creek, and Criswell Creek, and it is well outside the
APE for this project (near High Probability Area D). A profile of the site was cleaned
on the sheer erosional face of the creek bank, and it showed evidence of cultural
deposits to a depth of two feet. Originally, the site probably covered an acre or more,
but much of it has been eroded away. At the time this site was visited by Nunley, the
remaining portion was relatively undisturbed and rich in occupational materials. The
soil is described as a loose sandy loam of undetermined depth. Artifacts collected
from the surface include one projectile point, two scrapers, and numerous flint flakes.
It was recommended by Nunley (1963:42) that extensive testing be conducted.
Nunley (1963:Table 1) dates this site to the Neo-American stage.
The next major study relevant to the current project area was carried out by
New World Research, Inc. in 1983 (Keller and Campbell 1984). This project was
designed to conduct a series of cultural resource investigations within the area of the
proposed Columbus Bend dam and reservoir in Colorado and Fayette counties. The
study consisted of a background and literature review, a 20% sample survey and site
recording, a program of deep testing, judgmental survey, and relocation of specified
known sites (Keller and Campbell 1984:vi). This study recorded 96 archaeological
sites, mainly prehistoric lithic scatters, although lithic and ceramic scatters and some
stratified prehistoric and historic sites were also identified. As a result of this study, a
predictive model of site location was offered. Three prehistoric sites were recorded
in close proximity to the current project area. They are 41FY425 – 41FY427).
Site 41FY425 is described in the report by Keller and Campbell (1984:102) as
a diffuse lithic scatter occupying the crest and side slopes of an alluvial terrace. At
the time of this study, a small intermittent tributary of Williams Creek separated the
site from the broad floodplain of Williams Creek. The size of this site was measured
at approximately 30 x 70 meters and encompasses portions of a plowed field and the
front yard of the owner. Disturbance in the form of cultivation and the construction of
Farm-to-Market Road 155 that truncates the site on the east was noted. The depth
of cultural materials exceeded 50 cm, and in the relatively undisturbed areas under
the house of the landowner in situ deposits are probably present. Artifacts recovered
included lithic debitage exhibiting all stages of reduction, prehistoric ceramics, and a
large metate fragment. Ground stone and mussel shell were also present.

7

Site 41FY426 is described on the site form and in the report by Keller and
Campbell (1984:131-132) as a lithic scatter located on a narrow relict levee in the
broad floodplain known locally as Mullins Prairie. An intermittent drainage, which is a
tributary of Williams Creek, is located immediately to the east. The southern end of
this site, as depicted on the TARL topographic map, is very close to Farm-to-Market
Road 155. When this site was visited in 1983, it and the surrounding floodplain was
in cultivation. A small portion of the site at its southern end had been protected by a
farm structure. This protected area measures approximately 50 x 75 m of a total site
area of 10,000 square meters. Outside of the protected area, the site had been
totally disturbed by plowing. A scatter of mussel shell, burned rock, and lithic debris
was observed scattered over an area of organically stained soil. Shovel testing
indicated a 25 cm thick stratum of highly disturbed fill, which may be the result of
bulldozer activity during the razing of the farm structure. Cultural materials were
found to a depth of 80 cm below the ground surface. Keller and Campbell
(1984:132) postulate that this site may have been far enough removed from the
ubiquitous massive gravel deposits in the area “to offer some chance at the
examination of non-quarry related occupations.” They also state that a systematic
surface collection might help define relationships with sites 41FY9, 41FY10, 41FY18,
and 41FY427. They also offer the hypothesis that since these sites (as well as
41FY425) were located adjacent to either Williams Creek or the Colorado River,
some seasonality and/or cyclical reuse is implied and investigations might produce
information regarding site location strategies through time.
Site 41FY427 is a large site situated west of 41FY426 and Farm-to-Market
Road 155. It is also situated on a low, inactive levee in the midst of a plowed field
(Keller and Campbell 1984:133). It measures approximately 130 x 60 meters and
consists of a scatter of lithic material. Overall, this scatter is light. However, at the
southern end of the levee where it is truncated by Williams Creek a heavy
concentration of material was observed. This concentration was measured at 100
square meters. The authors view this site, and others in the area, as an indication of
a preference for elevated rises or terraces in floodplains as preferred site locations.
Shovel tests recovered cultural materials to a depth of 40 cm. Artifacts recovered
include lithics, fire-cracked rock, mussel shell, and burned clay. The lithic materials
suggested to the authors that quarry activities and initial stages of tool manufacture
were not carried out at this site. Rather, they (Keller and Campbell 1984:134) found
it to be “indicative of intensive or semi-intensive habitation.” Ceramics were reported,
but it could not be determined if they were part of the site or brought in as fill during
the construction of Farm-to-Market Road 155.

8

The next site to be recorded in close proximity to the APE is 41FY528. This
site is located on an upland landform on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 155
and is near Area A. According to the site form, this site was recorded in 1994 by
several archaeologists employed by the Lower Colorado River Authority on personal
time, and there is no report that documents this action. This is a significant site as
adult and infant burials were found in a private borrow pit along with stone tools and
food processing artifacts. Five shovel tests and two 1 x 1 meter test units were dug
at the site through loamy sand (depth not stated on site form). Members of the Llano
Uplift Archeological Society participated in the excavation. The site was discovered
when artifacts from a quarry were found in fill brought to an individual’s residence.
The lithic assemblage consisted of a large San Saba biface and other projectile
points, all found in the fill removed from the quarry site. It is assumed by those who
investigated the site that borrowing continued, and the site is now destroyed.
Located in a now defunct borrow pit or quarry area immediately to the north of
41FY528 is a site (41FY52) that was recorded by William E. Moore in the 1960s.
This site is important as it yielded diagnostic artifacts from the Early Archaic through
Late Prehistoric periods of Texas prehistory, all found on the surface of this very
disturbed site by Mr. Moore. The oldest projectile point was a fragmented Andice
dart point that dates to the Early Archaic. Several Middle Archaic Pedernales points
were found, and a Scallorn arrow point that dates to the Late Prehistoric period. At
one time, the landowner had an extensive collection of artifacts including many large
stemmed points that could not be classified as to type. The midden portion of the site
is at least 50 cm deep in places and overlies a lens of gravels that provided a source
of raw material for stone tool manufacture. At the time this site was recorded, it was
owned by the Fietsams, a family of German origin who lived in an early 20th century
farmhouse.
Other important studies in the area include the investigation of the Frisch Auf!
site (41FY128) which produced the first association of Scallorn arrow points as grave
goods in Central Texas burials (Hester and Collins 1969) and the Meier site (41FY59)
which contained a Paleo-Indian component (Meier and Hester 1972). The Frisch
Auf! site, in contrast to other sites in Fayette county, lies within the Colorado River
floodplain.
In the 1980s, the most extensive survey in Fayette County was conducted
over a 13,000 acre tract destined to become a lignite mine (Nightengale and Jackson
1983). This study identified 56 prehistoric and 34 historic sites. Overall, the
prehistoric sites were found to be adjacent to creeks as only five sites were found on
upland interfluves. In the Cummins Creek Prospect area, 80% of the project area is
overlain by Quaternary fluviatile terrace deposits of gravels containing large
quantities of chert and quartzite. Two percent is overlain by the Manning Formation,
which contains quantities of knappable petrified wood. This tract is located on the
divide between the Brazos and Colorado rivers and, as such, would have been easily
accessible to groups from both basins as well as from the northwest and southeast
(Nightengale and Jackson 1983:7).

9

The most recent large-scale project to be conducted in the area was a survey
for a proposed water line by BVRA in 2005 (Moore and Baxter 2005). The project
area included portions of Bastrop, Fayette, and Gonzales counties, and part of the
Fayette County area was in the general area of the current project. Previously
recorded sites 41FY145 and 41FY454 were assessed and the portions of these sites
within the APE were found to lack research potential. One new site (41FY544) was
found on the high bluff that overlooks the Colorado River. This site yielded an arrow
point and flakes. Due to the shallow soils overlying bedrock, it was classified in the
report as a probable lithic scatter.
In addition to archaeological reports, historical accounts are documented in
local county histories. Those identified for Colorado County include Weimar, Texas:
First 100 Years 1873-1973 (Hinton 1973); From Then Til Now: A History of What is
Now Known as the New Bielau-Content Community (Albright 1986); Colorado County
Sesquicentennial Commerative Book (Colorado County Sesquicentennial Committee
1986); and Colorado County Chronicles: From the Beginnings to 1923 (Colorado
County Historical Commission n.d.). Those for Fayette County include Fayette
County, Her History and Her People (Lotto 1902); Chronicles of Fayette (Sinks 1975);
Early History of Fayette County, 1822-1865 (Weyand 1932); An Early History of
Fayette County (Weyand and Wade 1936); and Fayette County: Past and Present
(Williams 1976). The only history of Lavaca County found during this study is History
of Lavaca County (Boethel 1959).

10

METHODS
Background Check
Prior to entering the field, the site records at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin and the Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas were checked for the presence of previously recorded
archaeological sites in the project area and vicinity. In addition, a thorough review of
the existing literature for the project area was conducted. The location of the project
area as currently planned is depicted on these USGS maps, which are on file at TARL
on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin.
Pre-Survey Assessment
The Principal Investigator drove the entire project area with the Project Engineer
(Bradley C. Loehr) in order to better identify high probability areas and become familiar
with the landscape. During this assessment, notes were taken at all creek crossings,
and recommendations were made as to which areas should be formally investigated.
This assessment did not involve an on-the-ground investigation, as the observations
were made from inside the vehicle. Areas eliminated from consideration because of
obvious disturbance such as erosion or human intervention (i.e., agriculture, structures,
or ponds), shallow soils (i.e., clay or sandstone at the surface), and distance to water.
Field Survey
Based on the pre-survey assessment, 26 areas (A-Z) considered to be high
probability areas for significant prehistoric sites were identified, and these areas were
visited and examined by the Project Archaeologist from February 18-20, 2009. This
assessment consisted of a thorough surface inspection of the right-of-way at each area
and shovel testing and probing. Information regarding the shovel tests was entered
onto an Microsoft Excel shovel test log (Appendix I). Shovel tests were not excavated in
areas where the A Horizon had been severely disturbed or in areas where firm clay was
present at the surface. In all, 39 shovel tests were excavated. Photographs were taken
of each area, and observations regarding vegetation, disturbance, and general
condition of each area were entered into a Microsoft Word document, and a GPS-aided
mapping program was utilized to document the precise location of each area examined
and each shovel test excavated. During the field survey, other historic sites were
observed in close proximity to the APE, but they were not in any of the 26 high
probability areas. These sites are discussed and illustrated in the Prehistoric Sites Near
the Project Area and Historic Sites Near the Project Area sections below. Two
previously recorded sites (41FY426 and 41FY528) were found to be very near the
project area, and they were investigated. At two areas (Area A and Area C), chert
gravels were observed on the surface, and a sample of these gravels were collected
from the surface for analysis. These areas were given the field designation CVT-1
(Area A) and CVT-2 (Area C). The BVRA number for CVT-1 is 09-02, and the TARL
trinomial is 41FY556. The gravels from CVT-2 were found to be not cultural.

11

Artifact Analysis
The chert gravels collected by the Project Archaeologist were analyzed in the
laboratory by William A. Dickens, Ph.D. Dr. Dickens sorted the specimens by type of
fracture and identified those that had been altered by prehistoric groups as well as
those that had been altered by natural methods (freezing and thawing) or modern
human methods such as plows and other farm equipment. His observations appear in
the Results and Conclusions section of the report.

12

DISCUSSION OF HIGH PROBABILITY AREAS SURVEYED
Area A
This high probability area is 0.56 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. Area A is located on a high
landform that overlooks the Colorado River floodplain. Previously recorded site
41FY528 is on the eastern side of the highway in the northern portion of Area A, and
Area A is off of the original landform slope where the site is located. Eight shovel tests
were excavated along Area A, of which four (A-1 – A-4) were adjacent to the boundary
of site 41FY528. In this area, the right-of-way has been disturbed by borrowing of dirt
for road fill in the area of shovel tests A-1 and A-2. The entire area was subjected to a
visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes and eight
shovel tests that were dug into clay and caliche. The original ground surface within the
APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted
in the removal of the “A” horizon if one existed. Other forms of disturbance include a
water line, road construction, a fiber optic cable, and the borrowing of dirt for road fill.
Surface visibility was estimated at greater than 50 percent. Chert gravels were
observed on the surface at the southern end of this area, and they were later
determined to be part of a lithic procurement site (41FY556) (Figure 3). Four shovel
tests (A-5 – A-8) were excavated at or near the newly recorded site, and they were
negative. Additional information regarding these shovel tests appears in a shovel test
log (Appendix I), and the approximate placement of shovel tests in this area is depicted
on the relevant topographic map (Appendix II - Map 1). The site appears to extend to
the west onto private land where the landform suggests the main part of the site is
located.

13

Figure 3. Exposed Gravels at 41FY556
Area B
This high probability area is 1.03 miles in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the north and south sides of Farm-to-Market Road 155. This area passes
through a portion of the Colorado River floodplain. The entire area was subjected to a
visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes and five
shovel tests. Small rises were shovel tested at the western end of the area on the
south side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. A three-foot profile was exposed in the cut
bank along the right-of-way, and it was examined for cultural materials. The north side
of the road had been leveled on private property, exposing 100% of the surface, and
this area was visually inspected for evidence of a site in the general area. The line then
crosses the road and continues on the north side. It was also visually inspected. Near
a small intermittent drainage, the soil changes from a sandy loam over clay to dark clay
loam over clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel tests and
probes. The original ground surface within the APE has been disturbed by the
excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon.
Other forms of disturbance include buried cables and other utility lines on both sides of
the road. Surface visibility along the north side of the road was estimated at 100
percent. Additional information regarding these shovel tests appears in a shovel test
log (Appendix I), and the approximate placement of shovel tests in this area is depicted
on the relevant topographic map (Appendix II – Map 1).

14

Area C
This high probability area is 0.2 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. This area passes through a portion
of the floodplain of the Colorado River. The entire area was subjected to a visual
inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes and two shovel
tests that were dug through clay. Portions of the original ground surface within the APE
have been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted in
the removal of the “A” horizon. Chert gravels were observed in a freshly plowed field
along the edge of the right-of-way where surface visibility was 100 percent (Figure 4).
No artifacts were found in the shovel tests and probes. The main concentrations of
gravels were found on or near a low rise. Samples were collected, and it was
determined in the laboratory that the gravels were probably altered by modern means
(i.e., plowing) or natural causes such as extreme heat. Additional information regarding
these shovel tests appears in a shovel test log (Appendix I), and the approximate
placement of shovel tests in this area is depicted on the relevant USGS topographic
map (Appendix II – Map 1).
Area D
This high probability area is 0.27 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. This area includes both banks of
Williams Creek and is within the floodplain of the Colorado River. The entire area was
subjected to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel
probes and four shovel tests that were dug through clay. No artifacts were observed on
the surface or in the shovel tests and probes. Additional information regarding these
shovel tests appears in a shovel test log (Appendix I), and the placement of shovel tests
in this area is depicted on the relevant topographic map (Appendix II – Map 1).
Area E
This high probability area is 0.6 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. This area is within the floodplain of
the Colorado River and crosses an intermittent tributary of Williams Creek. The entire
area was subjected to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through
shovel probes and two shovel tests that were dug through clay. No artifacts were
observed on the surface or in the shovel tests and probes. The original ground surface
within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has
resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. The northern two-thirds consisted of hard
clay, and the southern one-third contained some sand, but most of the sand had been
removed by ditch construction. Additional information regarding these shovel tests
appears in a shovel test log (Appendix I), and the placement of shovel tests in this area
is depicted on the relevant topographic map (Appendix II – Map 1).

15

Figure 4. Plowed Field at Area C

Area F
This high probability area is 0.28 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. This area begins in the floodplain of
the Colorado River and extends onto a higher landform to the southwest. The entire
area was subjected to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through
shovel probes that were dug through clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or
in the shovel probes. The original ground surface within the APE has been disturbed by
the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted in the removal of the “A”
horizon. This area is depicted in Appendix II – Map 2.

16

Area G
This high probability area is 0.2 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. The line in this area crosses a hill
above the Colorado River floodplain. The St. Wenceslaus Cemetery is on the western
side of the road, but it is well outside the APE. The entire area was subjected to a visual
inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes that were through
clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel probes. The original
ground surface within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage
ditch, and this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon (Figure 5). This area is
depicted in Appendix II – Map 2.

Figure 5. View of Disturbed A Horizon

17

Area H
This high probability area is 0.25 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road 1965. This line crosses a side slope and
hilltop near Pecan Creek. North of the right-of-way is the site of the Pecan-Orech
School. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was
examined through shovel probes that were dug through clay. No artifacts were
observed on the surface or in the shovel probes. The original ground surface within the
APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted
in the removal of the “A” horizon. This area is depicted in Appendix II – Map 2.
Area I
This high probability area is 0.72 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road 1965. The line crosses White Creek and
two of its intermittent tributaries as well as higher landforms between these streams.
The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined
through shovel probes that were dug through clay. No artifacts were observed on the
surface or in the shovel probes. The road was being resurfaced, and the high ground at
the confluence of White Creek and one of its tributaries was covered with road material
and highway equipment, and this area could not be examined. The original ground
surface within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and
this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. This area is depicted in Appendix II
– Map 3.
Area J
This high probability area is 0.2 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. The line begins at Pecan Creek and
continues southward to the top of the elevated landform. The entire area was subjected
to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes that
were dug through clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel
probes. The original ground surface within the APE has been disturbed by the
excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon.
Additional disturbance included buried utilities and road construction. This area is
depicted in Appendix II – Map 2.

18

Area K
This high probability area is 0.3 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-ofway on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. The line begins at the north bank of
Roper Creek and continues to the top of the elevated landform to the north. The entire
area was subjected to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through
shovel probes that were dug through clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or
in the shovel probes. The original ground surface within the APE has been disturbed by
the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted in the removal of the “A”
horizon. This area is depicted in Appendix II – Map 2.
Area L
This high probability area is 0.5 mile in length and is depicted on the
Ammannsville 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway road
right-of-way on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. The line crosses an
unnamed tributary of Roper Creek. The site of the St. Paul Colored School is located to
the west of the right-of-way, but it is outside the APE. The entire area was subjected to
a visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes that were
dug through clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel probes.
The original ground surface within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the
drainage ditch, and this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. This area is
depicted in Appendix II – Map 2.
Area M
This high probability area is 0.56 mile in length and is depicted on the Weimar
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed county road right-of-way on the
north and east sides of Dubina-Weimar Road. The northern portion of the area runs
down slope to an unnamed tributary of the East Navidad River. Then, it crosses the
tributary and runs along the west side of the stream. At the southern end, it turns
upslope for a short distance. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection, and
the subsurface was examined through shovel probes and two shovel tests that were
dug through clay. The original ground surface within the APE has been disturbed by
the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted in the removal of the “A”
horizon. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel tests. Additional
information regarding these shovel tests appears in a shovel test log (Appendix I), and
the placement of shovel tests in this area is depicted on the relevant topographic map
(Appendix II – Map 4).

19

Area N
This high probability area is 0.55 mile in length and is depicted on the Weimar
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed county road right-of-way on the
west side of County Road 204. This line crosses Harvey’s Creek and an unnamed
tributary of Harvey’s Creek. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection, and
the subsurface was examined through shovel probes that were through clay. No
artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel probes. The original ground
surface within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and
this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. This area is depicted in Appendix II –
Map 5.
Area O
This high probability area is 0.8 mile in length and is depicted on the Weimar 7.5’
topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-of-way on the north
side of Farm-to-Market Road 2434. This area includes both banks of West Sandy
Creek and an unnamed tributary. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection,
and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes that were dug through clay.
No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel probes. The original ground
surface within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and
this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. This area is depicted in Appendix II –
Map 6.
Area P
This high probability area is 0.4 mile in length and is depicted on the Weimar 7.5’
topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-of-way on the west
side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. This area includes both banks of an unnamed
tributary of West Sandy Creek. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection,
and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes that were dug through clay.
No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel probes. The original ground
surface within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and
this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. This area is depicted in Appendix II –
Map 6.

20

Area Q
This high probability area is 0.64 mile in length and is depicted on the Oakland
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-of-way on the
south side of Farm-to-Market Road 532. This area includes both banks of the Navidad
River. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was
examined through shovel probes and three shovel tests that were dug through sandy
clay loam and sand over clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the
shovel tests and probes. On the east end the right-of-way has completely removed a
large clay hill on the east side of the river. The right-of-way near the river bank on each
side is composed of fill. On the west side of the river, there is a terrace that has had
dirt borrowed to be used for fill elsewhere. Other forms of disturbance include buried
utility lines. A new utility line in the western one-third of the western portion of this area
had just been added, and this resulted in exposed backfill the entire length of the new
line. The surface visibility was 100% in this area, and a surface inspection was
conducted. Additional information regarding these shovel tests appears in a shovel test
log (Appendix I), and the placement of shovel tests in this area is depicted on the
relevant topographic map (Appendix II - 7).
Area R
This high probability area is 0.4 mile in length and is depicted on the Oakland
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-of-way on the
north side of Farm-to-Market Road 532. This area includes both banks of Cottonwood
Creek and an unnamed tributary. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection,
and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes and three shovel tests that
were dug through sand and clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the
shovel tests and probes. Additional information regarding these shovel tests appears in
a shovel test log (Appendix I), and the placement of shovel tests in this area is depicted
on the relevant topographic map (Appendix II – Map 7).
Area S
This high probability area is 0.23 mile in length and is depicted on the Oakland
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed county road right-of-way on the
north and east sides of County Road 270. This area includes both banks of
Cottonwood Creek, a small intermittent stream. The entire area was subjected to a
visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes that were
dug through clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel probes.
The original ground surface within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the
drainage ditch, and this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. This area is
depicted in Appendix II – Map 7.

21

Area T
This high probability area is 0.3 mile in length and is depicted on the Oakland
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-of-way on the
north and east sides of County Road 270. This area includes both banks of McKinnon
Branch and Allen Branch, both intermittent streams. The entire area was subjected to a
visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes and four
shovel tests that were dug through clay. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in
the shovel tests and probes. There was some sand present on the western portion of
the area, but work within the right-of-way had lowered the elevation significantly below
the surface of the private land. The confluence between the stream branches was
washed out to clay, and the eastern portion of the area had a hard clay surface.
Additional information regarding these shovel tests appears in a shovel test log
(Appendix I), and the placement of shovel tests in this area is depicted on the relevant
topographic map (Appendix II – Map 7).
Area U
This high probability area is 0.25 mile in length and is depicted on the Oakland
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed county road right-of-way on the
west side of Lavaca County Road 139. This area includes both banks of Miller Branch,
a small intermittent stream. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection, and
the subsurface was examined through shovel probes. This investigation indicated that
the north end of the line has clay soils and the “A” horizon had been removed by road
construction activities and the south end had 10 cm of sand over clay, but the right-ofway was very narrow and had been disturbed by a fiber optic line. The original ground
surface within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and
this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. No artifacts were observed on the
surface or in the shovel probes. Other forms of disturbance included a fiber optic line.
A thin mantle of sand (10 cm) was observed at the south end of this area. This area is
depicted in Appendix II – Map 7.
Area V
This high probability area is 0.3 mile in length and is depicted on the Oakland
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed county road right-of-way on the
west side of Lavaca County Road 139. This area includes both banks of two unnamed
tributaries of the Navidad River. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection,
and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes that were dug through clay.
No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel probes. The road cut has
removed the “A” horizon leaving a clay surface. This area is depicted in Appendix II –
Map 7.

22

Area W
This high probability area is 0.13 mile in length and is depicted on the Oakland
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-of-way on the
west side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. This area includes both banks of Miller Branch,
an intermittent stream. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection, and the
subsurface was examined through shovel probes that were dug through clay. No
artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel probes. The original ground
surface within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and
this has resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. The soil on the north side of the
creek was clay, and sand was observed on the south side of the creek on private land.
This sand had been removed in the right-of-way leaving a clay surface. This area is
depicted in Appendix II – Map 8.
Area X
This high probability area is 0.3 mile in length and is depicted on the Oakland
7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed highway right-of-way on the
east side of Farm-to-Market Road 155. The line crosses Honey Creek, an intermittent
stream. The entire area was subjected to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was
examined through shovel probes that were dug through clay. No artifacts were
observed on the surface or in the shovel probes. The original ground surface within the
APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted
in the removal of the “A” horizon. This area is depicted in Appendix II – Map 8.
Area Y
This high probability area is 0.37 mile in length and is depicted on the
Schulenburg 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed county road rightof-way on the west side of Bryant Road. This area includes the high ground north of
Rocky Creek to the high ground on the south side of Rocky Creek. The entire area was
subjected to a visual inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel
probes and two shovel tests that were dug through clay. The original ground surface
within the APE has been disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has
resulted in the removal of the “A” horizon. No artifacts were observed on the surface or
in the shovel tests and probes. Additional information regarding these shovel tests
appears in a shovel test log (Appendix I), and the placement of shovel tests in this area
is depicted on the relevant topographic map (Appendix II – Map 9).

23

Area Z
This high probability area is 0.56 mile in length and is depicted on the
Schulenburg 7.5’ topographic quadrangle and consists of the mowed county road rightof-way on the north side of Seidel Road. It extends from a hill above the West Navidad
River, which is just a small stream at this point, and continues across the floodplain and
into an upland setting on the opposite side. The entire area was subjected to a visual
inspection, and the subsurface was examined through shovel probes and four shovel
tests that were dug through clay. The original ground surface within the APE has been
disturbed by the excavation of the drainage ditch, and this has resulted in the removal
of the “A” horizon. No artifacts were observed on the surface or in the shovel tests and
probes. Additional information regarding these shovel tests appears in a shovel test log
(Appendix I), and the placement of shovel tests in this area is depicted on the relevant
topographic map (Appendix II – Map 9).

24

PREHISTORIC SITES NEAR THE PROJECT AREA
Two previously recorded sites were found to be near the project area
(Appendix III). These are 41FY426 that is located between areas A and D and
41FY528 which is located adjacent to Area A.
41FY426
The line runs along the eastern right-of-way of Farm-to-Market Road 155 in
the floodplain of the Colorado River. This section was investigated due to the close
proximity of a previously recorded site. The right-of-way is off the landform that
contains the site, and the right-of-way has been cut down to remove the “A” horizon.
This site is located between areas C and D.
41FY528
No indication of this site was found to be in the project area. The Area A
discussion details the investigations near the site.

25

HISTORIC SITES NEAR THE PROJECT AREA
During the field survey, several historic sites were observed in close proximity
to the project area. These include two cemeteries, a National Register district, four
areas where schools used to be, and a church listed in the National Register of
Historic Places. They are discussed and illustrated below.
Content School
The site of this school is located on the south side of County Road 242 in
Colorado County (Appendix II – Map 6). There is a sign on a fence marking the
location of a 19th century school (Figure 6). This sign does not give the date that this
school was in operation, but the students were moved to a new building in 1925 as
the New Bielau and Content schools consolidated. There is no evidence that this
school is within the APE, and the telephone cable will be placed on the opposite side
of the road. It is located on the Weimar topographic quadrangle.

Figure 6. Sign Marking Site of Content School

26

Dubina Historic District
The community of Dubina is located on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road
1383 in Fayette County, and the route of the proposed telephone cable traverses the
eastern edge of the historic district which is listed in the National Register of Historic
Places under reference number 3000970 (Appendix II – Map 4). The district
comprises 190 acres and contains the sites of various former buildings such as
residences and commercial structures. The St. Cyril Methodius Church is the only
building still standing. This community was the first Czech settlement in Texas,
having been founded in 1856 by immigrants who sought shelter from a storm under a
grove of large oak trees in the area now known as Dubina. Following the Civil War,
the community contained a gin, general store, saloon, meat market, blacksmith shop,
hotel, mill, zoo, telegraph office, and post office. The post office was in operation
from 1885 to 1910. The community was first referred to as Navidad, and later the
name was changed to Bohemian Navidad. It was finally named Dubina which is
Czech for “oak grove.” Dubina was a popular place for Czech immigrants during its
early days. In 1873, the railroad bypassed Dubina, and a fire in 1912 caused
extensive damage to the town. Many people left, and the population was reduced
from 500 in the latter part of the 19th century to 44 in 2000. The proposed route of
the telephone cable will not affect any significant structures. Figure 7 illustrates a
portion of the route as it passes through this district. It is located on the Weimar
topographic quadrangle.

Figure 7. Dubina Historic District

27

New Bielau Cemetery
This cemetery is on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 155 at the
intersection of Farm-to-Market Road 2144 in Colorado County (Figure 8). It is
adjacent to the Trinity Church. It is fenced and contains graves dating from the 19 th
through 20th centuries. Its location on the Weimar topographic quadrangle, and it is
depicted in Appendix II (Map 6). This cemetery is outside the APE, as the telephone
cable will be placed on the opposite side (west) of the road (Figure 9).

Figure 8. New Bielau Cemetery

28

Figure 9. Distance from New Bielau Cemetery to Highway Right-of-Way

29

New Bielau School
On the north side of Farm-to-Market Road 532 in Colorado County is a sign on
a fence marking the location of a 19th century school. This sign does not give the
date that this school was in operation, but the students were moved to a new building
in 1925 as the New Bielau and Content schools consolidated. Cement foundations
associated with the school are visible across the fence beneath a clump of oak trees
on private property well outside the APE (Figure 10). It is located on the Weimar
topographic quadrangle. The telephone cable will be placed on the opposite side of
the road. This school is depicted in Appendix II – Map 11.

Figure 10. Foundations Associated with New Bielau School

30

Pecan-Orech School
The site of this school is on the north side of Farm-to-Market Road 1965 in High
Probability Area H (Figure 11). According to Donna Green, Archivist at the Fayette
Heritage Museum and Archives, the site of this school was in the pasture across the
fence. These signs were erected by the office of the County Judge. No other
information was available at the time of this study. This school is depicted in Appendix
II – Map 2.

Figure 11. Pecan-Orech School

31

St. Paul Colored School
The site of this school is on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road 155 in High
Probability Area L, but it appears to be outside the APE (Figure 12). No evidence of
foundations or artifacts was observed within the disturbed right-of-way. According to a
sign marking the location of the school, it was a school for Negroes and it was in use
from 1890 to 1946. According to Donna Green, Archivist at the Fayette Heritage
Museum and Archives, the site of this school was in the pasture across the fence.
These signs were erected by the office of the County Judge. No other information was
available at the time of this study. This school is depicted in Appendix II – Map 2.

Figure 12. St. Paul Colored School

32

Salem Memorial Cemetery
This cemetery is located in the community of Freyburg on County Road 371
(also known as the Salem-Freyburg Road), and it is on the west side of the road
(Appendix II – Map 10). It is four acres in size and was established in 1870 when the
Salem Lutheran Church at Freyburg acquired land for their church. According to the
tombstone records, the first burial was that of Dorothea Sauer who died on August
31, 1871 at the age of 65. The church building was moved to Swiss Alp and is still
standing, but it is outside the current APE. This cemetery is still in use and is well
maintained (Figure 13). In 2006, it was designated a Historic Texas Cemetery. It is
depicted on the Flatonia topographic quadrangle. The deed records that describe
the boundaries of this cemetery are on file at the Fayette County Courthouse in La
Grange. Donna Green, Archivist at the Fayette Heritage Museum and Archives,
provided the above information. The telephone cable will be placed on the opposite
side of the road. Therefore, this cemetery will not be affected.

Figure 13. Salem Memorial Cemetery

33

St. Mary’s Blessed Virgin Catholic Church, Nativity of Mary
This church is located on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 2672 in
Fayette County (Appendix II - Map 9). It is listed in the National Register of Historic
Places under reference number 83003136. The construction date is listed on the
National Register form as 1912. This religious structure was built by Leo M. J.
Dielmann and Frank Bohlmann in the Gothic Revival style (Figure 14). The proposed
route of the telephone cable will not affect this historic structure. It is depicted on the
Schulenburg topographic quadrangle.

Figure 14. St. Mary’s Blessed Virgin Catholic Church

34

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
One prehistoric lithic procurement site (41FY556) was recorded in the project
area. This site consists of a surface scatter of Colorado River gravels in the highway
right-of-way ditch. According to Dr. Dickens, these gravels are very difficult to flake.
Of the sample of seven specimens collected during this survey, only two were
classified by the artifact analyst as having been altered by prehistoric man seeking to
obtain material suitable for the manufacture of stone tools. One of the specimens
exhibited the removal of a macro flake that had been sheared off by a blow struck
directly into the cobble. The other specimen is a large cobble, and several flakes had
been removed from it at both ends. Negative bulbs of percussion are present on
each end with platforms that are crushed. These bulbs are opposite each other, and
this suggests that the flakes were removed by the bi-polar method or by the use of an
anvil. According to Dr. Dickens, the remaining specimens were probably altered by
modern means such as contact with plows and other farm equipment. Since the
major portion of this site extends outside the APE, it is likely that more tested cobbles
are present. In the site area, soils consist of heavy dark clay at the surface and
orange-yellow clay at 5 cm. This site is very near previously recorded sites 41FY28
and 41FY52, and it is possible that the occupants of these sites were the ones who
tested the cobbles at 41FY556. Nine gravels were collected from the surface of a
freshly plowed field at Area C. The main concentration of lithics was on or near a low
rise. These specimens are also Colorado River gravels. They were determined to be
non-cultural, and the flaked areas are the result of natural causes such as extreme
heat. Two shovel tests were dug in this area, but they were negative. Only the Salem
Memorial Cemetery was found to be in close proximity to the APE. The client has
decided to move the telephone cable to the opposite side of the road. Therefore, the
Salem Memorial Cemetery will not be affected.

35

RECOMMENDATIONS
The proposed construction will not affect any prehistoric sites eligible for listing in
the National Register of Historic Properties or designation as a State Archeological
Landmark. The proposed route of the telephone cable will, however, pass near the
Salem Memorial Cemetery. The client has decided to install the telephone cable on the
opposite side of the road. Therefore, the Salem Memorial Cemetery will not be
affected. A separate report documenting this activity will be prepared as a supplement
to the current report. It is recommended that the Colorado Valley Telephone
Cooperative be allowed to proceed with the installation of the telephone cable in the
remaining areas as planned. Should any archaeological sites not mentioned in this
report be discovered during construction, all work must cease until the situation can be
resolved by the THC. If the route of the telephone cable is changed to include areas
not assessed during this study, the THC must be notified, as additional field survey may
be necessary. This project was conducted following the Minimum Survey Standards
defined by the THC, Archeology Division.

36

REFERENCES CITED
Albright, Doris Beken
1986 From Then Til Now: A History of What is Now Known as the New
Bielau-Content Community. Schulenburg Printing & Office Supplies.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office
of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Boethel, Paul C.
1959 History of Lavaca County. Von Boeckmann-Jones.
Colorado County Historical Commission
n.d. Colorado County Chronicles: From the Beginnings to 1923. Nortex
Press.
Colorado County Sesquicentennial Committee
1986 Colorado County Sesquicentennial Commerative Book.
Hester, Thomas R., and Michael B. Collins
1969 Burials at the Frisch Auf! Site: 41FY42. Texas Journal of Science.
Hinton, Mary
1973 Weimar, Texas: First 100 Years 1873-1973. Von Boeckmann-Jones
Company.
Keller, John E., and L. Janice Campbell
1984 Patterns in Prehistoric Settlement: Examining the Distribution of Sites in
a Portion of the Colorado River Valley – The Colorado Coastal Plains
Project, Fayette and Colorado Counties, Texas. New World Research,
Inc., Report of Investigations Number 83-11.
Lotto, Frank
1902 Fayette County, Her History and Her People. Published by author at
Stickersteam Press in Schulenburg, Texas. (copy on file at Fayette
Public Library in La Grange, Texas)
Meier, C. J., and Thomas R. Hester
1972 Notes on the Meier Site, Fayette County, Texas. Lower Plains
Archeological Society Bulletin 3.

37

Moore, William E., and Edward P. Baxter
2005 An Archaeological Survey for the Fayette Water Supply Corporation
Phase VII Water System Improvements Project in Bastrop, Fayette, and
Gonzales Counties, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates,
Contract Report Number 148.
Nightengale, Bruce A., and Jack M. Jackson
1983 Intensive Survey of Cultural Resources in the Cummins Creek
Prospect, Fayette County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report Number 86, The University of Texas at Austin.
Nunley, J. Parker
1963 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of the Columbus Bend
Reservoir, Colorado and Fayette Counties, Texas. Report submitted to
the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Price, G. R. Dennis
1991 Significance Testing at Sites 41FY170 and 41FY509, Fayette County,
Texas. Unnumbered report prepared by the Texas State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division.
Ressel, Dennis D., and Samuel E. Brown, Jr.
2004 Soil Survey of Fayette County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Sinks, Julia Lee
1975 Chronicles of Fayette. Private printing, La Grange, Texas.
Skelton, Duford W.
1977 Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report Number
60, The University of Texas at Austin.
Weyand, Leonie Rummel
1932 Early History of Fayette County 1822-1865. Unpublished Masters
thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Weyand, Leonie Rummel, and Houston Wade
1936 An Early History of Fayette County. La Grange Texas Journal.
Williams, Marjorie L. (Editor)
1976 Fayette County: Past and Present. Fayette County Heritage Committee,
La Grange.

38

Wilson, H. M.
1930 Areal Survey of Travis, Bastrop, and Fayette Counties. Manuscript on
file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

39

Appendix I - Shovel Test Log
Shovel
Test

Depth
(cm)

Soil

Date

Comments

A-1
A-2
A-3
A-4
A-5
A-6
A-7
A-8

20
20
20
10
15
15
15
10

clay with caliche
clay with caliche
clay with caliche
clay with caliche
dark clay/ orange clay
dark clay/ orange clay
dark clay/ orange clay
clay with caliche

02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09

disturbed ditch adjacent to site 41FY528
disturbed ditch adjacent to site 41FY528
disturbed ditch adjacent to site 41FY528
disturbed ditch adjacent to site 41FY528
landform south of small creek
landform south of small creek
landform south of small creek
landform south of small creek

B-1
B-2
B-3
B-4
B-5

80
80
70
30
30

sand/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay
dark clay loam/clay
dark clay loam/clay

02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09

floodplain rise
floodplain rise
floodplain rise
floodplain
floodplain

C-1
C-2

10
10

clay loam/ clay
clay loam/ clay

02-20-09
02-20-09

floodplain
floodplain

D-1
D-2
D-3
D-4

10
10
10
10

dark clay
dark clay
dark clay
dark clay

02-20-09
02-20-09
02-20-09
02-20-09

floodplain
floodplain
floodplain
floodplain

E-1
E-2

10
10

dark clay
dark clay

02-20-09
02-20-09

floodplain
floodplain

M-1
M-2

10
10

dark clay
dark clay

02-18-09
02-18-09

slope
slope

Q-1
Q-2
Q-3

40
60
40

sandy clay loam/clay
sand/clay
sand/clay

02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09

floodplain
floodplain
floodplain

R-1
R-2
R-3

40
10
10

sand/clay
dark clay
dark clay

02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09

toe slope
creek
slope

T-1
T-2
T-3
T-4

60
50
10
10

sand/clay
sand/clay
dark clay
dark clay

02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09
02-19-09

slope
slope
slope
slope

Y-1
Y-2

10
10

dark clay
dark clay

02-18-09
02-18-09

hill top
hill top

Z-1
Z-2
Z-3
Z-4

10
10
10
10

dark clay
dark clay
dark clay
dark clay

02-18-09
02-18-09
02-18-09
02-18-09

hill top
slope
slope
slope

APPENDIX II
AREAS INVESTIGATED ON TOPOGRAPHIC QUADRANGLES

APPENDIX III
Site Location

