AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE CENTRAL TEXAS
WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION WATER LINE IMPROVEMENTS 2009
IN BELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Project Number 09-16

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Central Texas Water Supply Corporation
Post Office Box 2393
Harker Heights, Texas 76548

by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey along a proposed water transmission line (nine miles)
and a proposed pump station site (1.5 acres) in south-central Bell County, Texas was
performed by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) for the Central Texas Water
Supply Corporation (WSC) in July of 2009 under Antiquities Permit 5327. The Principal
Investigator for this project was William E. Moore, and Edward P. Baxter was the
Project Archaeologist. The project area was investigated using the pedestrian survey
method supported by shovel tests, shovel probes, and machine-aided subsurface tests.
In all, the project area consisted of 12.4 acres. No archaeological sites were recorded,
and no artifacts were collected. The Bell Plains Cemetery (BL-099) is within 100 feet of
the route of the pipeline as currently proposed. Trenching for graves outside the known
boundaries of the cemetery was not necessary because limestone bedrock is present
within three feet of the surface. Copies of the final report are housed at the Texas
Historical Commission (THC), Archeology Division, the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL), the Central Texas WSC, and BVRA.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to those who helped ensure the success of this project.
At the Central Texas WSC, Lee Kelley (General Manager) provided support and visited
the project area with the Project Archaeologist to ensure he was in the right area. Added
assistance in the field was provided by Marc Mahoney and Micah Craig (Distribution
Technicians for Central Texas WSC). S. D. Kallman of Roundrock, Texas was the
engineering firm for this project. Steve D. Kelley of Kelley Environmental Consulting in
Georgetown provided additional assistance. Jean Hughes, Records Conservator at
TARL, checked the site files for previously recorded sites in the project area. The
figures in this report were prepared by Lili G. Lyddon of LL Technical Services, and she
edited the report.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 5
CULTURE SEQUENCE ................................................................................................ 12
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS..................................................................................... 18
METHODS .................................................................................................................... 21
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 32
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 33
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 34
Appendix I: Shovel Test Log

iv

FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location ......................................................................................................... 3
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles............................................................. 4
Figure 3. North Central Cultural-Geographical Region of Texas........................................ 13
Figure 4. Previous Archaeological Surveys in Bell County ................................................. 20
Figure 5. Areas Investigated .................................................................................................... 22
Figure 6. Subsurface Testing at Area C (facing south)........................................................ 24
Figure 7. Subsurface Tests at Area C .................................................................................... 25
Figure 8. Area F (facing south) ................................................................................................ 27
Figure 9. Area H (facing east) .................................................................................................. 27
Figure 10. Bell Plains Cemetery (facing west) ...................................................................... 29
Figure 11. Machine-Aided Tests at Area I.............................................................................. 30
Figure 12. Pump Station Site (facing south) ......................................................................... 31

v

INTRODUCTION
The Central Texas WSC proposes to install nine miles of 24-inch water
transmission line in south-central rural Bell County (Figure 1) and a pump station
and storage tank on a 1.5 acre tract. The water transmission line will be placed
in a trench 36 inches wide and beneath between 36 inches and 48 inches of
cover. The construction easement throughout most of the project area will be
restricted to the highway right-of-way. Part of the project area is on private
property. In this area, there will be a permanent construction easement of twenty
feet. In addition, there will be a temporary construction easement that will
parallel the permanent construction easement and will also be twenty feet. In all,
there will be a 40 foot area to be used during construction. The official title for
this project is the Central Texas WSC Water Line Improvements 2009. Funding
will be provided by the Texas Water Development Board, and the agency
representative is T. Clay Schultz. The proposed water transmission line crosses
two drainages – Salado Creek and Holland Branch. These streams are part of
the Little River drainage basin.
The proposed water distribution line begins at the site of the new water
treatment plant on West Amity Road. It runs east along the southern right-of-way
for a distance of approximately one mile. Then it changes to the north side of
West Amity Road at its intersection with Smith Dairy Road and continues for
approximately 0.85 mile along the north right-of-way to the point where West
Amity Road turns to the north and crosses Interstate Highway 35. Then the route
is in the east and south rights-of-way of West Amity Road for approximately 0.3
mile to the feeder road of Interstate Highway 35 where it is in the west right-of­
way for approximately 0.14 mile to a location where it will pass beneath Interstate
Highway 35 through directional boring. Then it continues along the eastern rightof-way of the feeder road along Interstate Highway 35 for approximately 0.2 mile
where it intersects with East Amity Road. It follows the southern right-of-way of
East Amity Road for approximately 1.28 miles to the intersection of Blackberry
Road where it follows the western right-of-way for approximately two miles where
it turns to the east-southeast and runs along a fence line on private land for
approximately 0.5 mile to the proposed pump station and storage tank site. It
then turns to the south-southwest for approximately 0.5 mile and runs under a
private gravel road to its intersection with the north right-of-way of Royal Road
where it turns to the east-southeast for a distance of approximately 1.35 miles to
the intersection of Royal Road and Armstrong Road. The proposed line then
runs northeast along the southeastern right-of-way of Armstrong Road for about
0.68 mile to the point where it connects with an existing water line.

1

An archaeological assessment of the Area of Potential Effect (APE) was
required by the THC, Archeology Division. Since the water supply corporation is
a public entity, a permit from the THC was required, and Antiquities Permit 5327
was issued to BVRA by this agency. The project area is depicted on two 7.5’
United States Geological Survey topographic quadrangles. They are Holland
(3097-433) and Salado (3097-344).

2

Figure 1. General Location

3

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Bell County is located within the Balconian biotic province as defined by
Blair (1950:112-116) and includes the Gulf coastal plain from the Atlantic Ocean
to eastern Texas. The size and location of this province is described below by
Blair (1950:112):
The Balconian province, as here defined, takes in
most of the Edwards Plateau as limited by Sellards,
Adkins and Plummer (1933): (figures 3 and 4), the
Lampasas Cut Plain and Comanche Plateau of Raisz
(1939 [cited as 1946 in Blair]), and the Central Mineral
or Llano Uplift region. That part of the Edwards
Plateau lying west of the Pecos, and often referred to
as the Stockton Plateau, is not included, but is
referred instead to as the Chihuahuan province.
The Balconian climate is characterized by a decrease in rainfall from east
to west. Bell County is located in the eastern half of the province that has been
classified by Thornwaite (1948) as dry subhumid, mesothermal with average
annual potential evapotranspiration of between 39.27 and 44.88 inches. The
annual rainfall for Bell County is 34 inches, the January minimum temperature is
37 degrees Fahrenheit, the July maximum temperature is 96 degrees Fahrenheit,
and the growing season is 258 days (Kingston and Harris 1983).
According to Blair (1950:113), the most characteristic plant association of
this province is a scrub forest of Mexican cedar (Juniperus mexicana), Texas oak
(Quercus texana), stunted live oak (Quercus virginiana), and various less
numerous species. The project area is also located well within the Prairies
Vegetation Region and the Edwards Plateau Vegetation Region (Gould 1962).
Species of vegetation characteristic of the region include Plateau live oak
(Quercus fusiformus), Texas oak (Quercus texana), ashe juniper (Juniperus
ashei), honey mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa), cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia),
cottonwood (Populus deltoides), pecan (Carya illinoinensis), elm (Ulmus spp.),
sumacs (Rhus spp.), Texas persimmon (Diospyros texana), agarita (Berberis
trifoliolata), Texas stillingia (Stillingia texana), yucca (Yucca spp.), Texas prickly
pear (Opuntia Lindheimeri), yaupon (Ilex vomitoria), and American beautyberry
(Callicarpa americana).
Grasslands include seep mulhy (Muhlenbergia
reverchnoii),
Canadian
wildrye
(Elymus
canadensis),
dichanthelium
(Dichanthelium spp.), Texas grama (Bouteloua rigidiseta), and red grama
(Bouteloua hirsuta).

5

The Balconian Biotic Province is characteristically represented by a
general mixture of fauna from nearby surrounding provinces (Blair 1950). Typical
species found within the project area include white-tailed deer (Odocoileus
virginianus), cotton-tailed rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus), nine-banded armadillo
(Dasypus novemcinctus), black-tailed jack rabbit (Lepus californicus), racoon
(Prycon lotor), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), wild turkey (Melagris
gallopavo), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), scissor-tailed flycatcher
(Tyrannus forficatus), northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), western
coachwhip (Masticophis flagellum testaceus), and the bullsnake (Pituophis
melanoleucus sayi).
The water pipeline passes through twenty soil types. They are Austin silty
clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (AsB), Austin silty clay, 3 to 5 percent slopes (AsC),
Crawford silty clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (CrA), Crawford silty clay, 1 to 3 percent
slopes (CrB), Denton silty clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (DeB), Eddy-Stephen
complex, 0 to 3 percent slopes (EsB), Eddy-Stephen complex, 3 to 8 percent
slopes (EsD), Frio silty clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (Fs), Heiden-Ferris complex, 3
to 8 percent slopes (HgD2), Houston Black clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (HoA),
Houston Black clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (HoB), Krum silty clay, 0 to 1 percent
slopes (KrA), Louisville silty clay, 3 to 5 percent slopes (LeC), Lewisville-Altoga
complex, 2 to 5 percent slopes (LgC), McLennan clay loam, 8 to 15 percent
slopes (AIE2), Purves association, 1 to 8 percent slopes (PVD), Purves silty clay,
1 to 4 percent slopes (PrB), San Saba clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (SaA), San
Saba clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (SaB), and Stephen silty clay 1 to 3 percent
slopes (StB).
Austin silty clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (AsB)
AsB soils are found on ridges along foot slopes and base slopes, and the
parent material is residuum weathered from chalk. The depth to restrictive
feature is 20 to 40 inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and
the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding
and ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is moderate
(about 6.3 inches). A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 35 inches
and bedrock at 35 to 80 inches.
Austin silty clay, 3 to 5 percent slopes (AsC)
AsC soils are found on ridges along back slopes and side slopes, and the
parent material is residuum weathered from chalk. The depth to restrictive
feature is 20 to 40 inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and
the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding
and ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is low (about 5.2
inches). A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 29 inches and
bedrock at 29 to 80 inches.

6

Crawford silty clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (CrA)
CrA soils are found on ridges and summits, and the parent material is
clayey alluvium over limestone. The depth to restrictive feature is 20 to 40
inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to
the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is
described as none. The available water capacity is low (about 5.0 inches). A
typical profile is described as clay from 0 to 36 inches and bedrock at 36 to 70
inches.
Crawford silty clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (CrB)
CrB soils are found on ridges on summits, and the parent material is
clayey alluvium over limestone. The depth to restrictive feature is 20 to 40
inches to lithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to the
water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is
described as none. The available water capacity is low (about 4.4 inches). A
typical profile is described as clay from 0 to 31 inches and bedrock at 31 to 60
inches.
Denton silty clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (DeB)
DeB soils are found on ridges, summits, and shoulders, and the parent
material is clayey residuum weathered from limestone. The depth to restrictive
feature is 40 to 60 inches to lithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the
distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and
ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is moderate (about
6.0 inches). A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 40 inches and
bedrock at 40 to 80 inches.
Eddy-Stephen complex, 0 to 3 percent slopes (EsB)
Eddy complex soils are found on ridges on shoulders, summits, and
interfluves, and the parent material is residuum weathered from chalk. The depth
to restrictive feature is 3 to 15 inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well
drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency
of flooding and ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is
very low (about 0.8 inches). A typical profile is described as gravelly clay loam
from 0 to 5 inches, gravelly clay loam from 5 to 8 inches, and bedrock at 8 to 60
inches.

7

Stephen complex soils are found on ridges on shoulders, summits, and
interfluves, and the parent material is residuum weathered from austin chalk
formation. The depth to restrictive feature is 7 to 20 inches to paralithic bedrock.
This soil type is well drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80
inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as none. The available
water capacity is very low (about 1.8 inches). A typical profile is described as
silty clay from 0 to 14 inches and bedrock from 14 to 80 inches.
Eddy-Stephen complex, 3 to 8 percent slopes (EsD)
Eddy complex soils are found on ridges on summits, back slopes,
sholders, side slopes, and interfluves, and the parent material is residuum
weathered from austin chalk. The depth to restrictive feature is 3 to 15 inches to
paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to the water
table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as
none. The available water capacity is very low (about 0.8 inches). A typical
profile is described as very gravelly clay loam from 0 to 5 inches, gravelly clay
loam from 5 to 8 inches, and bedrock at 8 to 40 inches.
Stephen complex soils are found on ridges on summits, shoulders, back
slopes, side slopes, and interfluves, and the parent material is residuum
weathered from austin chalk formation. The depth to restrictive feature is 7 to 20
inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to
the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is
described as none. The available water capacity is very low (about 1.8 inches).
A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 14 inches and bedrock from
14 to 80 inches.
Frio silty clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes frequently flooded (Fs)
Fs soils are found on flood plains, and the parent material is loamy
alluvium derived from limestone and shale. The depth to restrictive feature is
more than 80 inches. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to the water
table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as
none. The available water capacity is high (about 10.2 inches). A typical profile
is described as silty clay from 0 to 80 inches.
Heiden-Ferris complex, 3 to 8 percent slopes (HgD2)
Heiden complex soils are found on ridges on back slopes and side slopes,
and the parent material is clayey residuum weathered from clayey shale of
eagleford shale or taylor marl. The depth to restrictive feature is more than 80
inches. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to the water table is more
than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as none. The
available water capacity is moderate (about 9.0 inches). A typical profile is
described as clay from 0 to 80 inches.

8

Ferris complex soils are found on ridges on back slopes and side slopes,
and the parent material is clayey residuum weathered from calcareous shale in
Eagleford shale or Taylor marl formations of Cretaceous age. The depth to
restrictive feature is 40 to 60 inches to densic bedrock. This soil type is well
drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency
of flooding and ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is
moderate (about 8.5 inches). A typical profile is described as clay from 0 to 80
inches.
Houston Black clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (HoA)
HoA soils are found on plains, and the parent material is residuum
weathered from calcareous shale of taylor marl and eagleford shale. The depth
to restrictive feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is moderately well
drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency
of flooding and ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is
high (about 9.7 inches). A typical profile is described as clay from 0 to 99 inches.
Houston Black clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (HoB)
HoB soils are found on ridges, summits, shoulders, and interfluves, and
the parent material is clayey residuum weathered from calcareous shale of taylor
marl and eagleford shale. The depth to restrictive feature is more than 80
inches. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to the water table is more
than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as none. The
available water capacity is high (about 10.4 inches). A typical profile is described
as clay from 0 to 99 inches.
Krum silty clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (KrA)
KrA soils are found on stream terraces, and the parent material is clayey
alluvium of Pleistocene age derived from mixed sources. The depth to restrictive
feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to
the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is
described as none. The available water capacity is high (about 10.1 inches). A
typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 82 inches.
Louisville silty clay, 3 to 5 percent slopes (LeC)
LeC soils are found on stream terraces, and the parent material is
alluvium of quaternary age derived from mixed sources. The depth to restrictive
feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to
the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is
described as none. The available water capacity is high (about 9.9 inches). A
typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 60 inches.

9

Lewisville Altoga complex, 2 to 5 percent slopes (LgC)
Lewisville complex soils are found on stream terraces, and the parent
material is alluvium of quaternary age derived from mixed sources. The depth to
restrictive feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is well drained, and the
distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and
ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is high (about 9.9
inches). A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 60 inches.
Altoga complex soils are found on stream terraces, and the parent
material is clayey alluvium derived from mixed sources. The depth to restrictive
feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is well drained, and the distance to
the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and ponding is
described as none. The available water capacity is high (about 10.2 inches). A
typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 80 inches.
McLennan clay loam, 8 to 15 pecent slopes (AIE2)
AIE2 soils are found on ridges, back slopes, and side slopes, and the
parent material is clayey residuum weathered from shale and siltstone. The
depth to restrictive feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is well drained,
and the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of
flooding and ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is high
(about 9.1 inches). A typical profile is described as clay loam from 0 to 32 inches
and silty clay loam from 32 to 80 inches.
Purves association, 1 to 8 percent slopes (PVD)
PVD soils are found on ridges, summits, and shoulders, and the parent
material is clayey residuum weathered from limestone. The depth to restrictive
feature is 8 to 20 inches to lithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the
distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and
ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is very low (about
1.9 inches). A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 12 inches, very
gravelly silty clay from 12 to 16 inches, and bedrock from 16 to 24 inches.
Purves silty clay, 1 to 4 percent slopes (PrB)
PrB soils are found on ridges, summits, and shoulders, and the parent
material is clayey residuum weathered from limestone. The depth to restrictive
feature is 8 to 20 inches to lithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the
distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and
ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is very low (about
2.0 inches). A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to 8 inches, very
gravelly silty clay from 8 to 14 inches, and bedrock from 14 to 24 inches.

10

San Saba clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (SaA)
SaA soils are found on ridges and foot slopes, and the parent material is
clayey residuum weathered from shale over limestone. The depth to restrictive
feature is 24 to 40 inches to lithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the
distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and
ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is low (about 4.9
inches). A typical profile is described as clay from 0 to 35 inches and bedrock
from 35 to 40 inches.
San Saba clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (SaB)
SaB soils are found on ridges and foot slopes, and the parent material is
clayey residuum weathered from shale over limestone. The depth to restrictive
feature is 24 to 40 inches to lithic bedrock. This soil type is well drained, and the
distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency of flooding and
ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is low (about 5.0
inches). A typical profile is described as clay from 0 to 36 inches and bedrock
from 36 to 40 inches.
Stephen silty clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (StB)
StB soils are found on ridges, summits, shoulders, and interfluves, and the
parent material is residuum weathered from Austin chalk formation. The depth to
restrictive feature is 7 to 20 inches to paralithic bedrock. This soil type is well
drained, and the distance to the water table is more than 80 inches. Frequency
of flooding and ponding is described as none. The available water capacity is
very low (about 1.3 inches). A typical profile is described as silty clay from 0 to
10 inches and bedrock from 10 to 36 inches.

11

CULTURE SEQUENCE
Bell County is located in the North Central Texas cultural-geographical
region as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:76) (Figure 3). This area is referred to
as Central Texas by most archaeologists, and it is rich in archaeological sites.
Summaries relevant to the prehistory of Bell County and vicinity have been
prepared by various archaeologists, primarily as a result of work at Fort Hood in
Bell and Coryell counties (Guderjan et al. 1980; Skinner et al. 1981, 1984;
Thomas 1978; Roemer et al. 1985; Carlson et al. 1986), Belton Reservoir (Shafer
et al. 1964), the Youngsport site (Shafer 1963), and Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir
(Shafer et al. 1964; Sorrow et al. 1967). Summaries of the region have been
published by Suhm (1960), Weir (1976), and Prewitt (1981, 1985). Most
recently, two thorough articles concerning Central Texas were published in
Volume 66 of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. These works,
entitled “Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas,” by Michael B. Collins
(1995) and “Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas
Archeological Region” by Linda Wootan Ellis, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D.
Frederick (1995), represent a major synthesis of the vast amount of collected
data for the region. The following discussion is taken primarily from the works
cited above.
Paleo-Indian Period
Although problems exist with the term “Paleo-Indian,” it is so widely
accepted that it is used in this discussion. Paleo-Indian typically refers to those
cultures that were oriented toward big game hunting with food collecting not a
major pursuit (Willey and Phillips 1958:80). Eileen Johnson (1977:65-77) states
that it has been erroneously stereotyped as a migratory systematic big game
procurement adaptation. Collins (1995:381) argues that subsistence in Clovis
times, for example, Paleo-Indian exploited a diverse fauna base that not only
included large herbivores such as mammoth, bison, and horse but also included
smaller animals such as water turtles, land tortoises, alligator, mice, badger, and
raccoon. At Kincaid Rock Shelter, a paved floor suggests that the inhabitants of
this site returned to the same site as part of a regular hunting and gathering
strategy in contrast with nomadic hunters who only pursued big game. It is,
therefore, assumed that an array of plants presumably also constituted part of
Clovis subsistence (Collins 1990; Collins et al. 1989).

12

Figure 3. North Central Cultural-Geographical Region of Texas

13

According to Skinner et al. (1981:13), the Paleo-Indian period is one of the
least understood time periods in Central Texas prehistory, primarily because few
sites have been excavated. Evidence of this period often occurs in the form of
surface collected materials found over much of Central Texas. At Fort Hood, this
period is represented by distinctive projectile points found in multi-component
surface sites and as isolated finds on the surface (Carlson et al. 1986:15).
Generally, it is believed that this period lasted from about 10,000 B.C. until 6000
B.C. Diagnostic artifacts of the period include dart point types Angostura, Clovis,
Folsom, Golondrina, and Plainview as defined by Suhm and Jelks (1962) and
Turner and Hester (1985).
These early sites are often found on old terraces of major river drainages
and may be more distant from major streams than some more recent
occupations (Bryan 1931). Some rock shelters, such as Levi (41TV49) in Travis
County, were intensively occupied even though they are located a considerable
distance from major rivers. The only example of a rock shelter in Central Texas
immediately adjacent to a major drainage known to contain Paleo-Indian
occupation is the Horn Shelter (41BQ46) in Bosque County (Redder 1985). Two
major sites dating to Paleo-Indian times in Bell County are Buttermilk Creek
(41BL1239) and Gault (41BL323). These sites contain evidence of Clovis
peoples, and a possible pre-Clovis occupation was found at the Gault site
(Collins and Bradley 2008). Collins (2002), Collins and Brown (2000), and
Dickens (2005) have reported on work at Gault. Work at Buttermilk Creek is
ongoing by archaeologists from Texas A&M University.
Archaic Period
The Archaic represents a broad cultural time period that lasted from
approximately 8500 B.P. to 1250 B.P. in Central Texas. According to Prewitt
(1981:71), "The Archaic Stage dominates all other remains in Central Texas."
Prewitt (1981) has subdivided the Archaic into eleven phases. LeRoy Johnson
(1987) has questioned the validity of the phase concept as used by Prewitt,
especially the phases occurring before the Middle Archaic. These have been
grouped into Early, Middle, Late, and Terminal periods by Carlson et al.
(1986:15). According to Prewitt (1981:77-78), during the Early Archaic there was
a "strong orientation toward the gathering aspect rather than the hunting, and a
mobile population was of low density." This occurred during the Circleville, San
Geronimo, and Jarrell phases (8500 B.P. - 5000 B.P.). In the Middle Archaic,
food gathering had become very specialized as evidenced by the presence of
numerous burned rock middens/mounds (Prewitt 1981:78-80). The Middle
Archaic is seen by Prewitt to have taken place during the Oakalla, Clear Fork,
Marshall Ford, and Round Rock phases (5000 B.P. - 2600 B.P.). An overall
decrease in burned rock middens took place during the Late Archaic. Bison were
important as a food resource, but did not dominate subsistence activities (Prewitt
1981:80-81). The Late Archaic occurred during the San Marcos and Uvalde
phases (2600 B.P. - 1750 B.P.).

14

The Terminal Archaic, according to the classification by Carlson et al.
(1986), includes the Twin Sisters and Driftwood phases (1750 B.P. - 1250 B.P.).
An increase in the importance of gathering and an apparent peak in site density
seem to have occurred during Prewitt's (1981:82) Driftwood phase.
According to the statistical overview (Biesaart et al. 1985) published by the
Office of the State Archeologist in 1985, the prehistoric site inventory for Bell
County was heavily skewed towards the Archaic. Of the 197 recorded sites, 2
were classified as Paleo-Indian, 10 Early Archaic, 37 Middle Archaic, 32 Late
Archaic, 52 General Archaic, and 29 Late Prehistoric. These statistics suggest
that Bell County was occupied mainly during the Archaic period which, according
to Prewitt (1981:Figure 3), lasted from 8500 years B.P. to 1250 B.P. This is
supported by the statement by Collins (1995:383) that "two-thirds of the
prehistory of Central Texas is “Archaic' in character."
Late Prehistoric Period
This period has been referred to by some as the Neo-American Stage
(Suhm et al. 1954), Neo-archaic (Prewitt 1981), and Post-Archaic (Johnson and
Goode 1994).
Technological changes are the primary distinguishing
characteristics of this stage. The Austin (1250 B.P. - 650 B.P.) and Toyah (650
B.P. - 200 B.P.) phases belong to this stage of prehistory. During this time arrow
points first appeared as well as ceramics and possibly horticulture.
According to Collins (1995:385), there is now evidence that only the bow
and arrow appeared initially in Central Texas; pottery was added later, and
agriculture developed last and was of minor importance. Because Late
Prehistoric groups continued to practice hunting and gathering, a division or two
sub-periods seem to have taken place. These are referred to as early and late
by Collins (1995:385) with the break between the long-standing Archaic period
and the Late Prehistoric period occurring at circa 800 B.P. when Toyah replaced
Austin as the prevailing archeological manifestation.
The most obvious change that emerged at the beginning of the Late
Prehistoric period is the introduction of the bow and arrow and decreased use of
the atlatl or spear thrower. Otherwise, subsistence lifeways in the Late
Prehistoric were probably little different from those in the earlier Archaic period
(Prewitt 1981:74; Weir 1976). A chronological model by Dillehay (1974) of bison
presence and absence periods on the southern plains suggests that bison were
present during the Toyah phase but not during the preceding Austin phase.

15

Historic Period
Collins (1995:386) divides the Historic period of Central Texas into three
sub-periods: early, middle, and late. During the first two, vestiges of both
indigenous and European peoples and cultures were present; however, in the
third the indigenous peoples had virtually disappeared. The early Historic subperiod in Central Texas began in the late 17th century with the first documented
arrival of Europeans. Bell County is situated within the historic range of the
Tonkawa Indians who inhabited the area in the 16th Century (Newcomb 1986).
By the 19th Century, they had broken ties with the Comanche and Wichita and
were associated with the Lipan Apache (Aten 1983:32). They have been
described as typical southern Plains Indians who were hunters and gatherers
and who lived along the streams and rivers of Central Texas. Remains of this
group have not been found in an historic context in Bell County.
During this period, Texas was occupied by numerous aboriginal groups
including the Caddo, Jumano, Tonkawa, Comanche, and Lipan Apache
(Newcomb 1986). Trade is known to have existed between the Jumanos and the
Caddos. The Lipan Apaches and subsequently the Comanches entered the
region from the Plains while following key animal resources as they migrated into
Texas. Contact period occupations are often identified by the occurrence of
glass beads, gun parts, gunflints, metal projectile points, and European
manufactured ceramics. The archival search did not locate any Historic Indian
sites in Bell County; however, Texas Archeological Society (TAS) member Bob
Burleson (1995:6) reports finding a metal arrow point cut from a barrel strap in
fresh gravels placed on the road to his farm. In adjacent Coryell County, a blue
glass bead was found with one of the burials at 41CV1, a group burial along the
Leon River (Jackson 1931), and a steel arrow point has been reported as an
isolated find on Horse Creek in the extreme eastern corner of Coryell County
(Campbell 1952).
Historically, Bell County was first settled in 1834 and 1835 by colonists
who settled along Little River. The area was abandoned during the "Runaway
Scrape" of 1836, reoccupied, and deserted again after the fall of Fort Parker in
June 1836. The early settlements were constantly harassed by hostile Indians
and, although several forts were established, by 1838 all settlers had left the
county. On May 26, 1839, the Indians suffered a decisive defeat at what is
referred to as the "Famous Bird Creek Fight" about one and a half miles
northwest of the present site of Temple, Texas. However, settlement did not
return to the Bell County area until after 1843.

16

Bell County was created on January 22, 1850 and was named for Peter H.
Bell. Nolan Springs was chosen as the county seat and named Nolanville, but on
December 16, 1851 the name was changed to Belton. Early settlement was
along the creeks and rivers. One of the early communities was Salado, a town
established on Salado Creek. Archibald Willingham was the first permanent
Anglo-American settler having arrived in 1850. In 1852, the first post office was
established when a stage line with terminals at Waco and Austin began a weekly
run more than a dozen years before the town was laid out. The town of Salado
was founded directly as a result of the establishment of Salado College. This
town prospered as an educational, industrial, and agricultural center. A series of
eight flour and grist mills were built on Salado Creek during the early days. In
1990, the population of the town was 1216. This is the closest community to the
current project area. The above information was taken from the Handbook of
Texas Online. Early histories of Bell County refer frequently to the Shallowford
Crossing on the Leon River as an important transportation route for wagon traffic.
The exact location of this crossing has not been identified, but it substantiates the
importance of this part of Bell County during its early settlement. By 1860, most
of the land had been taken. The last serious Indian raid occurred in 1859. With
the Indian problem apparently resolved, settlement increased and the county
grew from 4799 in 1860, to 9771 in 1870, and to 20,518 in 1880. The number of
farms in the county increased from 640 in 1869, to 2231 in 1871, and to 4249 in
1889. Bell County is chiefly an agricultural region with cotton and corn the
leading crops. The construction of Fort Hood led to a population increase in the
county from 44,863 in 1940 to 74,145 in 1950.

17

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
According to Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical
Overview (Biesaart et al. 1985:111), there were 197 sites recorded at TARL in
1985 when this study was published by the Office of the State Archeologist. At
this time, Bell County was third in the North Central Texas region, and the 197
sites represented 7.35% of the region and .97% of the state. The archaeological
significance of this area is further indicated by the fact that 61 of the 197 sites
recorded in 1985 were registered as State Archeological Landmarks. This figure
represents 30.96% of all sites in Bell County.
Since 1985, however, the number of recorded sites has greatly increased,
and 1259 sites were on file at TARL as of July 10, 2009 (TARL site files).
Although sites have been recorded by private contract archaeology firms, local
archaeological societies, and interested individuals, this increase in the number
of sites in the county is mainly due to large-scale federal projects such as Lake
Belton, Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir, and Fort Hood. At the time of this survey, no
previously recorded sites were known to exist within the current project area.
According to the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, there have been 76 area
surveys and 69 linear surveys conducted in Bell County at the time of this project
(Figure 4).
There are two previous surveys that are contiguous to the current project
area. This project was initially awarded to Paul Price Associates, Inc., and this
firm conducted a cultural resources survey of a proposed water treatment plant
site (78 acres) in 2001 under antiquities permit 2543 (Schroeder 2005). One
historic site (41BL1107) was recorded as a historic building complex consisting of
a small house and associated well and feed trough. A review of aerial photos,
materials recovered in shovel tests, and architectural features suggested to the
recorders that the house was constructed sometime between World War I and
World War II. Because the house did not appear on the aerial photo dated 1953,
they hypothesized that it had been moved to its present location sometime
between 1953 and 1970. This site was not viewed as significant, and no further
work was recommended. At the time of their investigation, access to portions of
the water distribution line had not been obtained, so their survey was limited to
the site of the proposed water treatment plant.
The other nearby survey was conducted by Paul Price & Associates in
1997 along Farm-to-Market Road 1670 at the western end of the current project
area (Schroeder and Jones 1998). One site (41BL1092) was recorded on
Salado Creek as an unknown prehistoric campsite containing various lithic tools,
debitage, and thermally altered limestone. The site form states that this site has
research potential for absolute dating, and it is described as having potential for
listing in the National Register of Historic Places. The Texas Archeological Sites
Atlas incorrectly cites this survey as having been conducted by BVRA.

18

The largest area survey in the vicinity of the project area was the Texas
Archeological Society Annual Field School at the Tenroch Ranch conducted in
2002 along Salado Creek. Eleven sites (41BL1159 – 41BL1169) were recorded.
The prehistoric sites are described on the site forms as an open camp, a burned
rock midden, a buried terrace site, an open terrace site, a rock shelter, lithic
scatters, and lithic procurement sites. Since this survey was limited to a surface
survey with no shovel testing, the information collected was limited. The majority
of the prehistoric sites contained no diagnostic artifacts and are described as
simply “unknown prehistoric.” One site may date to the Archaic and the buried
terrace site is described as Early Archaic. The single historic site is a home site
with outbuildings that probably dates to the 20 th century. No statements
regarding the eligibility of these sites for listing in the National Register of Historic
Places is present on the site forms. This survey is documented in a report by
Kibler and Schroeder (2004).
The efforts of members of the Central Texas Archaeological Society and
Bell County Archeological Society have made notable contributions. These
include articles in the form of bulletins, newsletters, special reports, and
unpublished manuscripts on file at TARL or with society members. Bell County
has been the subject of intensive investigations by members of the Central Texas
Archeological Society. As a result of the above-mentioned investigations, "Bell
County is one of the better known Central Texas counties and has provided
significant information toward the understanding of prehistoric chronologies in
this part of Texas" (Young 1987:9).

19

Figure 4. Previous Archaeological Surveys in Bell County

20

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, the Texas Archeological Site Atlas and the files
at TARL were checked for previously recorded sites and past surveys in the
area. Several documents were reviewed during the planning stages of this
project. These are a planning document by the Texas Historical Commission
(Biesaart et al. 1985), an archeological bibliography for the Central Region of
Texas (Simons and Moore 1997), and all volumes of the Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology published by the THC. The interested reader is referred to
these sources for additional information regarding the prehistory of this area.
The USDA online soil survey for Bell County was reviewed in order to identify the
soils present in the APE.
The field survey was conducted on July 2nd and 3rd, 2009. The entire
project area was visually inspected during a “windshield survey” designed to look
for historic buildings and cemeteries that might be affected by the proposed
water line. Portions of the pipeline segment of the project area near creeks and
near the Bell Plains Cemetery (BL-C099) were chosen prior to the survey to be
subjected to an intensive survey if needed. Nine areas (A-I) (Figure 5) and the
area of the proposed pump station were given this more intensive investigation.
These investigations consisted of shovel probes, shovel tests, and a visual
inspection of the ground surface and cut banks. In areas of deeper dense clay,
silt, and rock, a Ditch Witch FX30 “Pot Hole” machine was utilized. This machine
used a water jet that surgically excavated a 30-centimeter diameter round hole.
Next, the fill (now a slurry of clay and rocks) was vacuumed into a holding tank.
This tank was then emptied into ¼ inch hardware cloth and water screened. This
method was utilized along the flood plain area of Salado Creek where the soil
depth was beyond the reach of traditional shovel testing and the cemetery area
to test for depth of bedrock. Shovel tests were screened through ¼ inch mesh.
Information regarding the shovel tests and subsurface testing using the Ditch
Witch FX20 is presented in Appendix I.
Area A
This area is 630 meters in length and is on the north side of West Amity
Road. It is located in the ditch within the highway right-of-way. The area was
selected for survey because of its proximity to a tributary of the Lampasas River.
At the time of this survey, the creek that parallels the proposed water line was in
a pasture north of the right-of-way and was only present as a low grass covered
swale. Soils consist of Austin silty clay. The ditch had been cut down a foot
below the original ground surface. Given the disturbed nature of the shallow
soils and the low probability of a site due to a lack of permanent water, the
investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey.

21

Figure 5. Areas Investigated

22

Area B
This area is 200 meters in length area and is on the south side of East
Amity Road. It is located in within the cut ditch within the highway right-of-way,
and a portion of the area passed through a residential area with manicured
lawns. The proposed line crosses a small dry tributary of the Lampasas River.
Soils consist of Denton silty clay. Given the amount of surface visibility and the
disturbed nature of the shallow gravelly soils, the investigation consisted of a
pedestrian survey of the entrenched creek banks and the cut ditch.
Area C
This area is 900 meters in length and is on the west side of Blackberry
Road where it crosses Salado Creek. It begins at a high hill north of Salado creek
and runs down slope to the creek. Then, it crosses the floodplain on the south
side of the creek and continues up a terrace to the base of the hill to the south.
Soils consist of Lewisville silty clay on the high hill, Purvis silty clay and
Lewisville-Altoga complex on the side slope, and Frio silty clay on both sides of
Salado Creek. The terrace is composed of Lewisville silty clay and Krum silty
clay, and the hill to the south contains soils of the Purves association. The
topographic quadrangle shows a spring 75 meters east of the right-of-way at the
toe slope of the hill to the south. At this area, on the base of the hill, the right-of­
way has cut into the hill. This cut (and the ditch) is several feet below the original
ground surface, and limestone bedrock is exposed. The entire area is in a highly
disturbed right-of-way ditch. The investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey,
four shovel tests, shovel probes, and three subsurface tests utilizing the Ditch
Witch FX30 (pot hole) machine. The area where boring beneath the creek will be
conducted was examined using the Ditch Witch FX30 (Figure 6). The location of
shovel tests and machine-aided subsurface tests are depicted in Figure 7.
Area D
This area is 300 meters in length and is within the highway right-of-way on
the west side of Blackberry Road along a small dry tributary of Salado creek.
Soils consist of Austin silty clay, Denton silty clay, and Heiden-Ferris complex.
The area here is a well-developed ditch with good exposure of both banks of the
ditch. Given the amount of surface visibility and the disturbed nature of the
shallow soils, the investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey.

23

Figure 6. Subsurface Testing at Area C (facing south)
Area E
This area is 200 meters in length and is located in pasture. It crosses a
small intermittent tributary of Salado creek. In this area, the creek was only a low
swale in woods and had been highly impacted by cattle finding a shady place to
escape the sun. The disturbance caused by the cattle resulted in surface visibility
of approximately 90 percent. Soils consist of Heiden-Ferris complex. Given the
amount of surface visibility and the disturbed nature of the shallow soils, the
investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey. This area was viewed as a very
low probability area for an archaeological site.

24

Figure 7. Subsurface Tests at Area C

25

Area F
This area is 470 meters in length and is located on private land where it
crosses a small intermittent tributary of Holland Branch. The north end of this
area terminates at the proposed pump station. That portion of the water
transmission line crossing the creek was found to have been recently bulldozed
by the landowner as a result of construction of a large tank and a road (Figure 8).
In the remainder of the area, a gravel road covers the proposed water
transmission line. Soils consist of Austin silty clay, Eddy-Stephen complex, and
Stephen silty clay. Given the amount of surface visibility and the disturbed nature
of the shallow soils, the investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey of the
disturbed areas and the area next to the road.
Area G
This area is 160 meters in length and is located in the ditch within the
highway right-of-way on the north side of Royal road. It crosses Holland Branch,
which is deeply entrenched with no flood plain present. Soils consist of EddyStephen complex and Frio silty clay. At the time of this survey, exposed
limestone bedrock was observed on the east side of the creek in the bottom of
the ditch. Given the amount of surface visibility and the disturbed nature of the
shallow soils, the investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey.
Area H
This area is 200 meters in length and is located in the ditch within the
highway right-of-way on the north side of Royal Road. It crosses an intermittent
tributary of Holland Branch. Soils consist of Austin silty clay. At the time of this
survey, shallow clay with a heavy concentration of limestone fragments over
bedrock was observed in the ditch (Figure 9). Given the amount of surface
visibility and the disturbed nature of the shallow soils, the investigation consisted
of a pedestrian survey.

26

Figure 8. Area F (facing south)

Figure 9. Area H (facing east)

27

Area I
This section is 90 meters in length and runs along the east side of
Armstrong Road and is located in the ditch within the highway right-of-way. Soils
consist of Austin silty clay. It was chosen for investigation because of its close
proximity to the Bell Plains Cemetery (Figure 10), which is located on the west
side of the road at a distance of 60 feet. The cemetery is located on east slope of
an elevated landform, and there is a fifteen-foot elevation difference from the
west side of the cemetery to the proposed waterline. An eroded culvert was
examined, and limestone bedrock was found to be present at a depth of three
feet. The ditch was visually examined and the Ditch Witch FX30 was utilized to
excavate four subsurface tests along the length of the area (Figure 11). These
tests revealed the presence of limestone bedrock three feet below the original
ground surface. The only test greater then three feet had two feet of fill from
road construction.
Pump Station
The pump station site is 1.5 acres in size and is located on private land.
Soils consist of Eddy-Stephen complex. The area has been disturbed by past
clearing activities, and (at the time of the survey) had a ground surface visibility
estimated to be 80 percent (Figure 12). Much of the surface was exposed
limestone rock. Given the amount of surface visibility and the shallow soils, the
investigation consisted of a pedestrian survey.
The survey was documented through the utilization of Microsoft Word and
Excel documents. Location data was collected and documented with a Garmin
GPS-aided computer topographic program, National Geographic Topo and ESRI
ArcMap. A Kodak digital camera was used to document the project, and all
photographs were enhanced using Adobe Photoshop software.

28

Figure 10. Bell Plains Cemetery (facing west)

29

Figure 11. Machine-Aided Tests at Area I

30

Figure 12. Pump Station Site (facing south)

31

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The records check revealed that no previously recorded sites are within
the project area, and no portions of the project area had been previously
surveyed by a professional archaeologist. The project area crosses two major
streams, Salado Creek and Holland Branch. No sites were found as a result of
this survey. The absence of sites is attributed to two factors. Most of the project
area is within existing highway rights-of-way in disturbed ditches, and the soils
overlying limestone bedrock are shallow, often less than three feet from the
original surface. In many cases, the disturbed ditch was from one to two feet
below the original ground surface. The Bell Plains Cemetery is approximately
sixty feet from the route of the proposed water transmission line, but subsurface
testing revealed the presence of limestone bedrock three feet from the surface.
Due to the shallow nature of the soils in this area, William A. Martin (THC
archaeologist) determined that the presence of unmarked graves in the path of
the proposed water transmission line is highly unlikely. This survey was
conducted according to the Minimum Survey Standards as outlined by the THC.

32

RECOMMENDATIONS
No archaeological sites were observed within the current project area. It
is recommended that construction be allowed to proceed as planned. Should
evidence of an archaeological site be encountered during construction, all work
in the area of the find must cease until the situation can be evaluated by the
THC. Also, if the route of the water transmission line is changed, the THC must
be notified as additional survey by a professional archaeologist may be
warranted.

33

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science
11(1):93-116.
Bryan, F.
1931

Burleson, Bob
1995

Notes on the Archeology of Central Texas. American
Anthropologist 33(1):16-31.

Letter from Bob Burleson to Roming-Parker Associates, L.L.P.
Consulting Engineers and Beach Engineering dated November
7, 1995. In Improvements and Extension to Pepper Creek
Trunk Sewer: Preliminary Engineering Report, prepared by
Roming-Parker Associates, L.L.P. and Beach Engineering,
November 1995.

Campbell, Thomas Nolan
1952
Note written by T. N. Campbell dated October 24, 1952. On file
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin,
Texas.
Carlson, David L., Shawn B. Carlson, Frederick L. Briuer, Erwin Roemer, Jr., and
William E. Moore
1986
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1983,
The Eastern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
11.
Collins, Michael B.
1990
The Archaeological Sequence at Kincaid Rockshelter, Uvalde
County, Texas. In Transactions of the 25th Regional
Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, pp. 25-33. Midland Archeological Society,
Midland.
1995

Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.

34

Collins, Michael B. (continued)
2002
The Gault Site, Texas and Clovis Research. Athna Review:
Quarterly Journal of Archaeology, History, and Exploration
3(2):31-42, 100-101.
Collins, Michael B., G. L. Evans, Thomas Nolan Campbell, M. C. Winans, and C.
E. Mear
1989
Clovis Occupation at Kincaid Shelter, Texas. Current Research
in the Pleistocene 6:3-4.
Collins, Michael B., and Kenneth M. Brown
2000
The Gault Gisement: Some Preliminary Observations. Current
Archeology in Texas 2(1):163-166.
Collins, Michael B., and Bruce A. Bradley
2008
Evidence for Pre-Clovis Occupation at the Gault Site (41BL323),
Central Texas. In Current Research in the Pleistocene 25:70-72.
Dickens, William A.
2005
Biface Manufacture and Blade Production at the Gault Site
(41BL323): A Clovis Occupation in Bell County, Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern
Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65):180-196.
Ellis, Linda Wootan, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick
1995
Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas
Archeological Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:401-426.
Gould, F. W.
1962

Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin MP-585. College
Station.

Guderjan, Thomas H., George B. Thomas, and Howard R. Cramer
1980
Existing Data Inventory of Cultural Resource and
Paleontological Information, Fort Hood, Texas. Soil Systems,
Inc. Marietta, Georgia.

35

Huckabee, J. W., Thompson, D. R., Wyrick, J. C., and Pavlat, E. G.
1977
Soil Survey of Bell County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture-Soil Conservation Service. United States
Government Printing Press, Washington, D.C.
Jackson, A. T.
1931

Excavation of a Burial Site on Fred Acree Farm, Coryell County,
Texas, January 29 to February 3, 1931. Unpublished
manuscript on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

Johnson, Eileen
1977
Animal Food Resources of Paleoindians. The Museum Journal
17:65-77. Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1987
A Plague of Phases: Recent Soiocultural Taxonomy in Texas
Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., and Glenn T. Goode
1994
A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene Climates, as
well as Archeological Periods, on the Eastern Edwards Plateau.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.
Kibler, Karl W., and Eric A. Schroeder
2004
Archeological Survey at the Tenroc Ranch, Bell County, Texas:
2002 Texas Archeological Society Field School. Report
prepared for the Texas Archeological Society.
Kingston, Michael T., and Ruth Harris (editors)
1983
The Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide: 1984-1985. The
Dallas Morning News.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1986
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press. (Seventh Paperback Printing)
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas
Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
54:201-238. (for 1983)

36

Raisz, Erwin
1946

Map of the Landforms of the United States. Harvard University.
Cambridge.

Redder, Albert J.
1985
Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End a Preliminary Report.
Central Texas Archeologist 10:37-65.
Roemer, Erwin, Jr., Shawn Bonath Carlson, David L. Carlson, and Frederick L.
Briuer
1985
Archaeological Surveys at Fort Hood, Texas, The Fiscal Year
1982 Range Construction Projects. United States Army, Fort
Hood Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research
Report Number 10.
Schroeder, Eric A.
2005
Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Water Treatment
Plant Site and Distribution System, Bell County, Texas. Paul
Price and Associates, Cultural Resources Report 335.
Schroeder, Eric A., and James T. Jones
1998
Archeological Survey of the Williamson County Raw Water
Pipeline, Williamson and Bell Counties, Texas. Paul Price and
Associates, Cultural Resources Report 220.
Sellards, E. H. Adkins, W. S. and F. B. Plummer
1933
The Geology of Texas: Volume I, Stratigraphy. The University of
Texas Bulletin 3232. Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace
Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 34:57-81.
Shafer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. D. Scurlock
1964
An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources
of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962.
Texas Archaeological Salvage Project, Miscellaneous Papers,
Number 1. The University of Texas at Austin.
Simons, Helen, and William E. Moore
1997
Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 36. Texas
Historical Commission.

37

Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, George B. Thomas, Ivan Show, and Eli
Mishuck
1981
Initial Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year
1978. United States Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report Number 1.
Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, W. A. Meiszner, Ivan Show, and Eli
Mishuck
1984
Archaeological Survey, at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year 1979.
United States Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report Number 2.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967
Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, Number 11. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960
A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 29:63-107.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society, Special Publication Number 1 and Texas
Memorial Museum, Bulletin Number 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 25. (entire volume).
Texas Historical Commission
1991
Endangered Historic Properties of Texas: Second Edition.
Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Thomas, George B.
1978
A Survey and Assessment of the Archeological Resources of
Fort Hood, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
49:195-240.
Thornwaite, C. W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
Geography Review 38:55-94.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas
Monthly Press.

38

Weir, Frank A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
Washington State University. Pullman. On file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1958
Method and Theory in American Archaeology. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Young, Wayne C.
1987
Archaeological Testing of Site 41BL260 Bell County, Texas.
Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division.

39

APPENDIX I: SHOVEL TEST LOG

TEST

DEPTH
IN CM

SOIL TYPE

AREA INVESTIGATED

Shovel Tests
1
2
3
4

80
50
40
40

Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock

Area C (flood plain)
Area C (terrace)
Area C (terrace)
Area C (terrace)

Sub-Surface Machine Tests
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

160
140
130
160
100
100
100
100

Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock
Silty clay and gravel/ rock

Area C (bore hole location)
Area C (flood plain)
Area C (flood plain)
Area I (near cemetery)
Area I (near cemetery)
Area I (near cemetery)
Area I (near cemetery)
Area I (near cemetery)

