AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE MUSTANG CREEK
BIOGAS PLANT PROJECT IN LEON COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project 09-17

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Mustang Creek Biogas Plant, LLC
2330 North Farm-to-Market 3083 Road East
Conroe, Texas 77303-1864

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) conducted an archaeological survey
of a ten acre tract for the proposed Mustang Creek Biogas Plant in south-central Leon
County, Texas on June 30, 2009. The plant will be constructed by Mustang Creek
Biogas, LLC of Conroe, Texas and funded by Weldon W. Alders the landowner. The
agency responsible for oversight is the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA), Rural Development. The area was inspected by a thorough surface inspection
and shovel tests and probes. No evidence of a prehistoric site was found, but a scatter
of historic artifacts was observed and identified as the remains of two structures that
probably were dwellings occupied by tenant farmers who grew cotton. This area was
recorded as historic site 41LN472. The entire project area contained clay at or near the
surface. Therefore, shovel tests were only dug to a depth of ten centimeters. No
artifacts were collected. Copies of the report are on file at the Texas Historical
Commission (THC), Archeology Division; Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), and BVRA.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank everyone whose cooperation made the
completion of this project possible. Project area maps were prepared by David Free, a
registered surveyor in Centerville. George King is the Plant Manager for Mustang
Creek Biogas, LLC, and he visited the project area with the Project Archaeologist and
the landowner Weldon W. Alders. Others who are part of the team include Allen Smith,
the USDA NRCS (Natural Resources Conservation Service) Coordinator in Bryan,
Texas; Shane Ice, the NRCS Area Engineer in Huntsville, Texas; and Floyd Nauls,
Regional Coordinator for the Bedias Creek Soil and Water Conservation District in
Madisonville, Texas. We were assisted with our background research by Jean Hughes,
Assistant Curator of Records at TARL on the campus of The University of Texas at
Austin. Lili Lyddon of LL Technical Services in North Zulch, Texas prepared the figures
that appear in this report. Jonathan Jarvis, TexSite and Atlas Coordinator at TARL,
assigned the site trinomial for 41LN472. Trisha Wilson and Ruthy Sullivan at the Leon
County Abstract Company in Centerville took time from their busy schedule to check the
tax records for information that might identify the prior owners of site 41LN472. Louie
Thompson is a lifetime resident of the town of Leona, and he provided us with a brief
history of the project area and the two structures that are depicted on the topographic
quadrangle.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 5
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ............................................................................ 6
CULTURE SEQUENCE ................................................................................................ 11
METHODS .................................................................................................................... 14
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 16
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 18
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 19
Appendix I: Site 41LN472 on Topographic Quadrangle
Figures
Figure 1. General Location of Project Area ..................................................................... 2
Figure 2. View of Project Area (taken on June 30, 2009) ................................................ 3
Figure 3. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles ...................................................... 4
Figure 4. North Central Cultural-Geographical Region of Texas ..................................... 7
Figure 5. Previous Archaeological Surveys in Leon County.......................................... 10
Figure 6. Site Map and Shovel Tests in Project Area.................................................... 15
Figure 7. Concentration of Modern Trash...................................................................... 17

iv

INTRODUCTION
Mustang Creek Biogas Plant, LLC plans to construct a biogas plant on a ten acre
tract in southwest Leon County (Figure 1). The footprint of the plant is 2.5 acres, and it
is being permitted with Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). There will
be three major conduits that will drain the plant site, and they will collect the storm water
and transfer it away from the silage storage area and the digesters. These drains will
consist of 16-inch diameter conductors that will be buried at a depth of 36 inches. The
conductors will be tied to a manifold system that will drain into a holding system. Then,
the controlled release will go into the natural runoff of the plant site. The collectors for
the drains will be located when the final plant layout is approved. The construction site
is a level area south of Mustang Creek. Figure 2 illustrates the condition of the project
area at the time of our visit. The orange cone is placed at the approximate center of the
project area. The current project area is depicted on two 7.5’ USGS topographic
quadrangles. These quadrangles are Leona (3195-223) and Leona SW (3195-222)
(Figure 3).

1

Figure 1. General Location of Project Area

2

Figure 2. View of Project Area (taken on June 30, 2009)

3

Figure 3. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The following general discussion of Leon County is taken from the soil survey for
Leon County (Neitsch et al. 1989) and the 1984-1985 Texas Almanac (Kingston and
Harris 1983). Leon County is situated in the eastern part of Central Texas and consists
of 690,861 acres or 1079 square miles including areas under water. It has an irregular
shape and is about 28 miles long by 40 miles wide. Elevation in the county varies
between 630 feet above sea level in the west-central part of the county to about 140
feet in the southeast area. Overall, the topography is characterized as undulating to
gently rolling and generally sloping to the southeast. The county is drained by numerous
creeks and streams that flow into the Trinity and Navasota rivers which form the east
and west boundaries of the county, respectively. Annual rainfall varies from 39 to 46
inches. The January minimum temperature is 38° Fahrenheit, and the July maximum
temperature is 95° Fahrenheit. These climatic conditions create a growing season of
270 days. Leon County is located in the West Gulf Coastal Plain, Texas Claypan Area,
and Texas Blackland Prairie Major Land Resource Areas. The soils in the county
formed under timber, post oak savannah, and prairie vegetation. Those formed under
timber or post oak savannah are light-colored fine sandy loam to fine sand while soils
that formed under grass consist of dark colored fine sandy loam to clay.
According to the soil survey for Leon County, there are two soils present in the
project area. These are Crockett fine sandy loam, 1 to 5 percent slopes (CrB) and
Crockett-Wilson complex, 1 to 3 percent slopes (CsB). CrB soils are found on ridges at
summits and interfluves. The parent material is residuum weathered from shale of
tertiary age. The depth to restrictive feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is
well drained, and depth to the water table is more than 80 inches. The available water
capacity is moderate (about 6.9 inches). Frequency of flooding and ponding is
described as “none.” A typical profile is fine sandy loam from 0 to 7 inches, clay from 7
to 18 inches, and clay from 18 to 63 inches.
CsB (Crockett) soils are found on ridges at summits and interfluves. The parent
material is residuum weathered from shale of tertiary age. The depth to restrictive
feature is more than 80 inches. This soil type is well drained, and depth to the water
table is more than 80 inches. The available water capacity is moderate (about 6.9
inches). Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as “none.” A typical profile is
fine sandy loam from 0 to 7 inches, clay from 7 to 18 inches, and clay from 18 to 63
inches.
CsB (Wilson) soils are found on paleo terraces. The parent material is clayey
alluvium of quaternary age derived from mixed sources. The depth to restrictive feature
is more than 80 inches. This soil type is moderately well drained, and depth to the
water table is more than 80 inches. The available water capacity is moderate (about 7.8
inches). Frequency of flooding and ponding is described as “none.” A typical profile is
loam from 0 to 6 inches, clay from 6 to 42 inches, and clay from 42 to 80 inches.

5

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
General Overview
According to a recently published planning document for the Eastern Planning
Region of Texas (Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993:Figure 1.1.2), Leon County is situated
within the Prairie-Savannah Archeological Study Region. Although 471 sites have been
recorded at TARL prior to this survey, the site density in the county is low in terms of sites
per square mile. Figure 1.1.3 in the planning document indicates that Leon County had
only 0.001 - 0.1 sites per square mile in 1993. This includes it within those counties with
the lowest site density in the state. In 1985, according to a statistical overview prepared
by the Texas Historical Commission (Biesaart et al. 1985:83), Leon County contained 115
recorded sites. This document places the project area in the North-Central CulturalGeographical Region (Figure 4). It is beyond the scope of this report to discuss in detail
the archaeological background of Leon County, especially when several recent in-depth
studies are available. Therefore, the following discussion is taken from the planning
document for the Eastern Planning Region prepared by the Texas Historical Commission
and several of the major and more recent contract reports. The planning document does
not provide site numbers that can be associated with the above statements. The
interested reader is advised to consult these monographs for additional information.
The first major archaeological project in Leon County was the Lake Limestone
study (formerly Upper Navasota Reservoir). The lake is located in Leon, Limestone, and
Robertson counties with the majority of the project area in Limestone County. The Texas
Archeological Survey conducted this work in 1974 under contract with the Brazos River
Authority (Prewitt 1974; Prewitt and Dibble 1974). Only areas of high site probability such
as floodplains and valley margins along the Navasota River and its major tributaries were
surveyed. Fifty-two prehistoric sites were recorded within the reservoir area. Of this
number, 37 were found to be situated on the crests or slopes of eroded valley margins.
Fifteen historical localities were noted but not recorded as sites.
Following the Lake Limestone project, the next major study in Leon County was
conducted at Jewett Mine where work was performed from 1980 to 1991 and is still
ongoing. The majority of sites in the county are on Jewett Mine property and most of our
current knowledge of the prehistoric and early historic sites of the area has been obtained
from these studies. Archaeological firms who have worked at the mine include Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc., Geo-Marine, Inc., Prewitt and Associates, Inc., and the
Archeological Research Laboratory at Texas A&M University. Sites found at Jewett Mine
were mainly found in transitional zones of the major creeks with the average horizontal
distance to water being 131 meters. One site was found in the bottomland zone on a low
knoll in the floodplain of Birch Creek (Voellinger and Freeman 1980:4-15).

6

Figure 4. North Central Cultural-Geographical Region of Texas

7

Diagnostic artifacts recovered during this survey indicate a prehistoric occupation,
which spanned the early, middle, and late Archaic and the Neo-American stages.
Additionally, they are viewed as an indication of the area's culturally peripheral location
providing evidence of culture contact with areas to the north, east, and west. A scarcity of
sites in areas of shallow soils was noted by this and previous surveys. Soil probes on the
terraces and upland breaks along the lower expanses of Mine Creek, for example,
repeatedly indicated less than twenty centimeters of soils over a clay base. In these areas
sites were absent. Beginning with the first deep sand hill upstream, however, an
abundance of prehistoric sites was found (Freeman and Voellinger 1982:2-62). One
suggestion for the preference of deep sandy soils is the possibility that certain plants that
prefer these deep soils were desired and exploited by prehistoric populations. Prewitt and
Grombacher (1974:7) found a scarcity of sites along the major tributaries. They attribute
this to the possibility that desirable or needed resources were more readily available along
the main stem valley than along the tributaries. Freeman and Voellinger (1982:2-63)
suggest that sites located on higher terraces and upland margins are smaller in area
extent and contain less material cultural remains than those along the major creeks. The
latter should represent habitation sites with artifact assemblages reflecting the area's major
occupations. Features such as hearths, storage pits, and structural remains might be
found in sites along the major creeks while the smaller sites at higher elevations should
contain activity specific tool assemblages.
The vast amount of work in Leon County, particularly Jewett Mine and Lake
Limestone, has resulted in the recording of over 400 sites in the region when adjacent
counties are included. In addition to the numerous surveys, testing has been conducted at
56 prehistoric sites with data recovery performed at 14 sites. Despite problems with the
archaeological record of the region such as low site visibility and interpretability based on
survey data, poor preservation of organic remains, a scarcity of sites with clear
stratigraphy, and the prevalence of bioturbation and other disturbance factors, much has
been learned about the prehistory of the area. Fields et al. (1991) integrated data from the
eight excavated sites at Jewett Mine and three excavated sites at Lake Limestone to
compile the most recent synthetic effort for this area. This study resulted in the isolation of
35 cultural components or analytical units. All but two of these units represent occupations
during the late Archaic, Woodland, or Late Prehistoric periods (Fields et al. 1992).
Soil probes on the terraces and upland breaks along the lower expanses of Mine
Creek, for example, repeatedly indicated less than twenty centimeters of soils over a
clay base. In these areas, sites were absent. Beginning with the first deep sand hill
upstream, however, an abundance of prehistoric sites was found (Freeman and
Voellinger 1982:2-62). One suggestion for the preference of deep sandy soils is the
possibility that certain plants that prefer these deep soils were desired and exploited by
prehistoric populations. They (Freeman and Voellinger 1982:2-64) comment on the
difficulty of assessing site depth and size in the project area. Most sites were found by
a single flake in shovel tests. According to them, "the general lack of surface evidence
indicating the presence of cultural manifestations will require testing far beyond the
scope of an archaeological survey to adequately address real site dimensions."

8

The intensive shovel testing during this survey sometimes failed to disclose a
site's integrity. Many sites have no obvious stratigraphy beyond the gradual change
from humic sand to sand to clayey sand.
In addition to the larger projects mentioned above, numerous small-scale surveys
have been conducted within the county. According to a review of the Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology series (published by the THC for the years 1987 through 1992),
twelve reports documenting archaeological investigations in the county are on file at the
THC library for that period. The Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology series was
discontinued in 1993, so the exact number of reports on file at the THC since 1992 is
not known. The number of recorded sites in Leon County has increased from 115 in
1985 to 471 as of the writing of this report. A search of the Texas Archeological Sites
Atlas revealed that 10 area surveys and 24 linear surveys have been conducted in the
county. The first survey reported on the Atlas was linear, and it was performed in 1978,
and the most recent surveys were area, and they were performed in 2008. These
surveys are depicted below in Figure 5.

9

Figure 5. Previous Archaeological Surveys in Leon County

10

CULTURE SEQUENCE
Prehistoric Sequence
Despite more than a half century of work in developing a culture sequence for
Southeast Texas, considerable debate still exists over the arrangement of chronological
sequences (Meyers 1997:14). Ensor (1991:5-6) believes this lack of consensus stems
largely from the nomenclature and application of projectile point typologies as well as a
dearth of securely stratified sites in the region. The region lacks extensive sites with
unmixed archaeological components. All of the peoples of Southeast Texas appear to
have been nomadic and subsisted through hunting and gathering (Shafer 1974;
Patterson 1995). Agriculture was never practiced on the Upper Texas Coast, unlike the
Caddoan culture area of Northeast Texas.
The earliest cultures in Southeast Texas are referred to as Paleo-Indians, and
they occupied the area circa 10,000 B.C. to 8000 B.C. In Southeast Texas, this period
is not well defined. Clovis points have been found on the surface of some sites;
however, no examples have been recovered from sites with secured stratigraphic
deposits. Hester (1980) suggests that large-scale environmental changes during the
Late Holocene period are responsible for the dearth of Paleo-Indian sites in Southeast
Texas. He states that these sites, if not destroyed, may lie offshore on the continental
shelf or deeply buried in the floodplains of major waterways. According to the statistical
overview by Biesaart et al. (1985), there was one recorded Paleo-Indian sites in Leon
County in 1985, but this source does not provide the site number.
The Archaic period in Southeast Texas is generally defined as that time between
the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna and the introduction of ceramics. The Early
and Middle Archaic periods were characterized by increased climatic aridity and the
expansion of prairie habitats (Aten 1983:153). Population densities in the region appear
to have been low and may have even decreased from Paleo-Indian times. This
probably stemmed from a reduction in available food resources due to the less
productive climate. Although sites from the Early and Middle Archaic periods have been
documented along the Upper Texas Coast, they are rare, and this time period is poorly
defined. According to the statistical overview by Biesaart et al. (1985), there were three
recorded Early Archaic sites and three recorded Middle Archaic sites in Leon County in
1985, but this source does not provide the site numbers.
The occurrence of several environmental issues and cultural phenomena during
the Late Archaic period distinguishes it from what is known of the earlier periods in
Southeast Texas (Meyers 1997:16). According to Patterson (1995), the climate
stabilized to its essentially modern state during the Late Archaic. He believes that food
resources were more available and more abundant. Because of this, population
densities increased, and this is evidenced by the proliferation of Late Archaic sites in the
region. According to the statistical overview by Biesaart et al. (1985), there were eight
recorded Late Archaic sites in Leon County in 1985, but this source does not provide
site numbers. Seventeen sites are listed as General Archaic.

11

The Late Prehistoric period is the last period of Southeast Texas prehistory and
is generally defined as that time between the introduction of ceramics and the bow and
arrow and contact by Europeans. This period is characterized by a continued growth in
population levels from the Late Archaic period and then a decline in population towards
the end of the Late Prehistoric period. Patterson (1995:246) suggests that “over­
population, perhaps aggravated by climatic deterioration” may have been partly
responsible. According to the statistical overview by Biesaart et al. (1985), there were
thirty-three recorded Late Prehistoric sites in Harris County, but this source does not list
site numbers.
Proto-historic and historic Indian sites are largely under-documented due to the
lack of non-European diagnostic artifacts for such sites (Meyers 1997:17). Historic
Indian sites are typically identified based on the presence of European trade goods
such as gunflints and beads. According to Patterson (1995:249), European influence
did not disrupt aboriginal habitation of the Upper Texas Coast until after 1700. During
the 18th and 19th centuries, however, the local Indian populations declined due to
disease, establishment of missions, and the fur trade. Historic Indian groups known to
inhabit the area were the Karankawa on the coast and the Akokisa in inland areas on
the Trinity River and in the area of Galveston and Trinity bays (Swanton 1946). There
are no known historic Indian sites in Leon County.
Historic Sequence
The following information regarding the history of Leon County was taken from
the Handbook of Texas Online, which obtained its information from books and
manuscripts by Gates and Fox (1977) Leathers (1946), Leon County Historical Book
Survey Committee (1986), and Wood (1901). The area referred to today as Leon
County was occupied by the Deadose Indians in the 17th century when the first
Europeans arrived. The Deadose is a band of the Bidais, a tribe that spoke one of the
Caddoan languages. Domingo Teran de los Rios is believed to be the first European to
pass through the area on his way to inspect Spanish claims in East Texas. The main
route of the Old San Antonio Road passed near what is now the southern boundary of
Leon County, but the Spanish did not create any settlements in the area. The nearest
the Spanish came to establishing a settlement was Bucareli on the Trinity River in
adjacent Madison County in 1774. Many of the local Indians died when a smallpox
epidemic broke out in 1777. Many of the surviving Deadose were absorbed by
neighboring Indian groups such as the Keechis, Kickapoos, and Kichais. Known
villages in the area were documented by Peter Samuel Davenport in 1809, and they
consisted of a Kichai village near the site of present-day Leona and a Kichai village on
the west bank of the Trinity River 2 ½ miles north of the site of present-day Centerville.
The Mexican government made the first land grant in what is now Leon County to
Ramon de la Garza in 1831. Prior to Texas Independence in 1836, additional grants
were given, but few people settled in the area on a permanent basis. In 1833, Indians
attacked Fort Parker in neighboring Limestone County, and this caused most of the
settlers to abandon the region and not return until 1837 after the Texas Revolution.

12

In 1837, as a form of protection against the hostile Indians, the settlers built a
blockhouse on Boggy Creek and named it Fort Boggy. Soon, a small community was
created adjacent to the fort, and the first store was a gristmill owned and operated by
Moses Campbell. Hostile action between the Indians and settlers continued into the
1840s. By the end of the decade the Keechis and Kickapoos had been driven from the
area, and the county remained relatively free of Indians except for an occasional raid by
Comanche war parties. Once peace had been established, large numbers of settlers
moved to the area and established farms. The site of Fort Boggy is approximately 4.8
miles to the north of the project area.
Leon County was officially formed from Robertson County in 1846, and it was
most likely named for Martin De Leon, the founder of Victoria, Texas. Leona was the
first county seat, but it was moved to Centerville in 1851 due to a requirement that
county offices had to be as close to the geographical center of the county as possible.
During the early days of the county, most of the population was along the Trinity River in
steamer landings such as Cairo, Commerce, and Brookfield’s Bluff. By the 1850s, most
settlers moved away from the river valley and established farms on the higher land in
the center of the county. During the decade prior to the Civil War, population growth
was rapid, with the majority of settlers arriving from states of the Old South. The local
economy was based on small farms rather than large plantations, even though at least
320 families owned slaves. Approximately half of the farms during this time were less
than 50 acres in size, and only three farmers planted more than 500 acres. Originally,
the major crops were corn, cattle, and hogs. However, cotton soon became the major
cash crop.
Following the Civil War, major changes occurred. Many planters suffered harsh
financial conditions due to the loss of their slaves as taxable property and a sharp
decline in property values. Most of the former slaves stayed in the county, but many of
them left the farms to seek better working conditions. Many eventually worked on the
land for shares as “sharecroppers,” and they typically received one-third or one-half of
the crop for their labors. It was not until 1880 that production levels of crops met or
exceeded pre-war levels. In the years just after the war, corn was the leading cash crop
in the county, but it soon changed to cotton. There was a large increase in farms from
1870 to 1880, mainly due to the growth of sharecropping and the rapidly increasing
population. The increase in population was mainly due to the arrival of the railroad. By
1900, the population had tripled from what it was in 1870. The old river towns declined,
and new towns such as Jewitt, Buffalo, and Oakwood, emerged along the route of the
railroad. The peak years of the cotton boom were 1910 to 1929. This changed during
the 1930s due to falling prices, droughts, and the boll weevil. One of the problems with
the Great Depression was the inability of local farmers to borrow from banks in order to
maintain their farms. Following World War II, the economy changed as many farmers
turned to raising hogs and cattle, and other residents relied on lumbering. Although
cotton remained an important crop, watermelons became the main crop during this
period. In the early 1990s, Leon County was one of the leading areas in the country for
cow and calf production. Other major crops included hay, watermelons, vegetables,
small grains, and Christmas trees.

13

METHODS
Prior to conducting the field survey, the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas and the
site records at TARL were checked for previously recorded sites and past surveys in the
project area. Since this project does not involve any political subdivision of the State of
Texas, an Antiquities Permit from the THC was not required. The tax records at the
Leon County Title and Abstract Company in Centerville were checked for past owners
of the project area. The survey was performed by the Project Archaeologist on June 30,
2009 who conducted a 100% Pedestrian Survey supported by shovel tests and probes.
Each shovel test was recorded on a shovel test log and discussed in the project notes.
The excavated matrix was screened using 1/4-inch hardware cloth. In all, 22 shovel
tests were excavated, of which nine were in the vicinity of a historic scatter. The
locations of these tests are depicted in Figure 6. Shovel Probes were not screened,
numbered, or depicted on the field map. The survey was documented through the
utilization of Microsoft Word and Excel documents. Location data was collected and
documented with Garin GPS-aided computer topographic programs ESRI ArcMap and
National Geographic Topo. A Kodak digital camera was used to document the project,
and all photographs were enhanced using Adobe Photoshop software.

14

Figure 6. Site Map and Shovel Tests in Project Area

15

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
According to the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas and the site records at TARL,
there are no previously recorded sites in the current project area. No evidence of
prehistoric utilization of the project area was found during this study. According to the
published soil survey for Leon County (Neitsch et al. 1989), the two soil types in the
project area are loam and fine sandy loam over clay at a depth of six to seven inches.
The field survey encountered clay at or very near the surface throughout the project
area with the deepest sandy mantle consisting of seven centimeters. It is possible that
deeper sandy soils were present at one time as the soil survey suggests, but past land
clearing activities, agricultural activities, and erosion have altered the original sandy
mantle and leaving the clay surface that is present today. Since Indian sites in this part
of Texas are typically found on landforms with deep sandy soils, it is our opinion that the
lack of such soils may be the primary reason for a lack of prehistoric utilization. The 7.5’
USGS topographic quadrangle Leona SW dated 1964 shows two non-inhabited
structures along the west side of a two-track road in the approximate center of the
project area at an elevation of between 350 feet above mean sea level (AMSL) and 361
feet AMSL (Figure 3). According to Louie Thompson (personal communication, July 2,
2009), the two structures were occupied by tenant farmers who grew cotton as their
main cash crop. Mr. Thompson is 87 years of age and a native of Leona, a small
community two miles northeast of the project area. He stated that one of the structures
was inhabited by Will Morris who moved to the area shortly after the end of World War
II. In addition to the two tenant dwellings there was a barn, well, and outdoor privy. The
barn was demolished by Jack Hall who inherited the property from his father (C. A. Hall)
in 1947. Mr. Thompson stated that one of the shacks burned in the 1940s, but he did
not know what happened to the other one. No evidence of the privy or well was
observed during this survey. Since the 1964 quadrangle depicted open squares at the
locations instead of filled black squares, the structures were not occupied when this
map was made. The open squares could have been a holdover from an earlier map
version. The only evidence of this site at the time of our visit was a scatter of Corsicana
and Ferris brick, fragments of white ware, glass, screw top bottles, tin cans, and a cast
iron window sash weight. One concentration of mainly modern trash was observed at
the north end of the site (Figure 7) According to Mr. Thompson, one of the tenant
dwellings had a brick fireplace. The size of site 41LN472 is not known, but (based on
the size of the artifact scatter around the squares on the topographic quadrangle
indicating structures) its size is estimated at 2800 square meters. The artifact scatter
has been re-deposited by land clearing activities, and now it is evenly spread over a
large area. No portion of the site is considered to be intact due to the presence of a
hard clay surface that has been modified by mechanized clearing. No artifacts were
found in any of the nine shovel tests placed in the vicinity of the two structures as
depicted on the topographic quadrangle. Another open square appears on the 1964
quadrangle just outside the project area, and no evidence of a site was found in this
area. A map depicting the site area and approximate shovel test locations appears
above as Figure 6. Site 41LN472 has been totally destroyed, and it is not considered
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places.

16

Figure 7. Concentration of Modern Trash

17

RECOMMENDATIONS
Construction of the biogas plant by Mustang Creek Biogas Plant, LLC will not
affect any prehistoric or historic sites. It is, therefore, recommended that the Mustang
Creek Biogas Plant, LLC be allowed to proceed with construction with no restrictions.
Should cultural materials be encountered in areas not discussed in this report, all work
should stop until the situation can be evaluated by the THC. Also, if the project is
change to include land not examined by BVRA during this project, this should be
discussed with the THC, as additional archaeological survey may be required.

18

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1991

Comments on Prehistoric Chronology Building in Southeast Texas.
Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 98:1-11.

Fields, Ross C., L. Wayne Klement, C. Britt Bousman, Steve A. Tomka, Eloise F.
Gadus, and Margaret A. Howard
1991
Excavations at the Bottoms, Rena Branch, and Moccasin Springs
Sites Jewett Mine Project, Freestone and Leon Counties, Texas.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations, Number 82.
Fields, Ross C., Stephen P. Austin, Roger W. Johnson, Karl W. Kibler, and Jerrilyn B.
McLerran
1992
National Register Assessments of Seven Prehistoric and Two
Historic Sites at the Jewett Mine, Freestone & Leon Counties,
Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations,
Number 87.
Freeman, Martha Doty, and Leonard R. Voellinger
1982
A Cultural Resources Survey of the First Five-Year Permit Area,
Jewett Mine Project. Appendix D to An Assessment of the Cultural
Resources of the Jewett Mine Project Area. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. Document Number 81233, Job Number 1401.
Gates, James Young, and H. B. Fox
1977
A History of Leon County, In Leon County News.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980
A Survey of Paleo-Indian Archaeological Remains along the Texas
Coast. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by
Lynn Highley and Thomas R. Hester, pp. 1-12. Center for
Archaeological Research, Special Report 11, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.

19

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele and Timothy K. Perttula
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource Management
Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
Kingston, Michael T., and Ruth Harris (editors)
1983
The Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide 1984-1985. Dallas
Morning News.
Leathers, Frances Jane
1946
Through the Years: A Historical Sketch of Leon County and the Town
of Oakwood.
Leon County Historical Book Survey Committee
1986
History of Leon County. Curtis Media.
Meyers, Alan D.
1997
An Archeological Survey of Four Flood Control Units Rights-of-Way
Harris County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting, Reports of
Investigations Number 2002.
Moore, William E.
1994
An Archeological Survey of the Concord Robbins WSC Project in
Leon County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates, Contract
Report Number 29.
Neitsch, Conrad L., Joseph L. Castille, and Maurice R. Jurena
1989
Soil Survey of Leon County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. Washington, D.C.
Patterson, Leland W.
1995
The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:239-254.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974
Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological Assessment. Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report 47. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R., and David S. Dibble
1974
Letter Report, Survey of Archeological and Historical Resources to be
Affected by Construction of Proposed Upper Navasota Reservoir. On
file at the Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical
Commission. Austin.

20

Prewitt, Elton R., and Kerry A. Grombacher
1974
An Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Areas to be
Affected by the Proposed Twin Oak and Oak Knoll Projects, East
Central Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 43. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1974
Archeology and Indians of Southeast Texas. In Participants Handbook,
The Big Thicket. Contemporary Science Seminar, University of
Houston and Houston Museum of Natural Science.
Swanton, John R.
1946
The Indians of the Southeastern United States. Bureau of American
Ethnology Bulletin 137.
Voellinger, Leonard R., and Martha Doty Freeman
1980
A Cultural Resources Survey of the First Impact Areas of the Jewett
Mine Project Area. Appendix C to An Assessment of the Cultural
Resources of the Jewett Mine Project Area. Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc. Document Number 80353, Job Number 0607. Austin.
Wood, W. D.
1901

History of Leon County. Quarterly of the Texas State Historical
Association, Volume 4.

21

APPENDIX I
SITE 41LN472 ON TOPOGRAPHIC QUADRANGLE

