ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS FOR THE WHEELER BRANCH
PIPELINE AND WATER TREATMENT PLANT IN CENTERALSOMERVELL
COUNTY, TEXAS
VOLUME I: ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Antiquities Permit 5393

BVRA Project Number 09-24

Principal Investigator

William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Somervell County Water District
Post Office Box 1386
Glen Rose, Texas 76043

January 2010

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) conducted an archaeological
survey for the proposed Wheeler Branch Pipeline and Water Treatment Plant
project in central Somervell County, Texas in November of 2009 under Antiquities
Permit 5393. The project area consists of 58 acres. William E. Moore was the
Principal Investigator, and Edward P. Baxter was the Project Archaeologist. This
survey consisted of a visual inspection of the surface and shovel testing, where
appropriate, such as selected creek crossings and other high probability areas
along the proposed water line, and locations where the proposed elevated storage
tank, two proposed ground storage tanks, and pump stations are to be constructed.
No previously unrecorded sites were identified. Proposed project locations such as
the water treatment plant and proposed water line within the boundaries of previous
archaeological projects were not investigated. Charles D. Frederick conducted a
geoarchaeological survey that included the excavation of backhoe trenches in order
to define the types of soils present and to look for buried features in the Area of
Potential Effect (APE). The geoarchaeological survey identified two isolated finds
and a sparse amount of artifacts within the boundaries of previously recorded
prehistoric site 41SV51. His findings are found in Volume II: Geoarchaeological
Survey. Copies of the final report are on file at the Texas Historical Commission
(THC), Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the Texas Water
Development Board (TWDB), the Texas State Library, BVRA, the Somervell
County Historical Commission, and the Somervell County Water District.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are appreciative of those whose cooperation made the
completion of this project possible. Kevin D. Taylor, General Manager of the
Somervell County Water District, provided project area maps and assisted the
Project Archaeologist and Geoarchaeologist to ensure access to project areas on
private lands was provided. Larry Fleming operated the backhoe that was
provided by the Somervell County Water District. Dorothy Leach is the Archivist
at the Somervell County Historical Commission, and she conducted archival
research regarding a house that was in close proximity to the project area before
it was demolished. Edward P. Baxter and Lili G. Lyddon prepared the figures
that appear in this report. Ms. Lyddon also edited the report. The records were
prepared for curation by Christal McMillion. Jean Hughes and Roszrio Casarez
at TARL assisted with the curation process.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................2
METHODS............................................................................................................3
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ............................................................................4
AREAS INVESTIGATED ......................................................................................6
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................13
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................14
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................15
Appendix I: Areas Investigated
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log

iv

INTRODUCTION
The Somervell County Water District proposes to install a water
distribution line approximately 143,000 feet in length in central Somervell County.
The width of the permanent easement will be twenty feet. The majority of the
water distribution line will be in easements on private property, but a few
segments will be in the rights-of-way of United States Highway 67, State
Highway 44, farm-to-market roads 56 and 200, and county roads 301 and 321.
When these roads need to be crossed by the water distribution line, this will be
accomplished by horizontal directional drilling. This technique will also be used
to cross streams, such as Cross Branch Creek (Crossing 13), a tributary of
Squaw Creek on State Highway 144 (Crossing 4), a tributary of Squaw Creek on
Farm-to-Market Road 200 (Crossing 6), the main channel of Squaw Creek on
State Highway 67 (Crossing 2), the main channel of Squaw Creek on State
Highway 144 (Crossing 3), a tributary channel of Squaw Creek on State Highway
144 (Crossing 5), the Paluxy River on State Highway 67 (Crossing 1), and a
cross-country portion of the water line at Barker Creek (Crossing 15). The
locations of these crossings are depicted on the enclosed project area maps
(Appendix I). The diameter of the pipe varies from four to eighteen inches, and it
will be placed in a ditch two to three feet wide plus the width of the pipe. The
pipe for the water line will be placed in a ditch beneath a minimum of four feet of
cover. Additional construction will consist of an elevated storage tank on Farm-toMarket Road 56 with a footprint of 100 x 100 feet, a ground storage tank and
pump station on Farm-to-Market Road 56 with a footprint of 125 x 200 feet, a
ground storage tank and pump station on United States Highway 67 with a
footprint of 125 x 200 feet, and an expansion of a water treatment plant that has
been previously surveyed by professional archaeologists. A cemetery and an
isolated grave were assessed, and the water line was move to avoid the location
of the grave as depicted on the topographic quadrangle.
The project area is located within the central portion of the county and is
within the city limits of Glen Rose and rural areas of the county. The proposed
construction areas are depicted in on four United States Geological 7.5’
topographic maps. They are Glen Rose East (3297-213), Glen Rose West (3297­
334), Hill City (3297-334), and Nemo (3297-242). Somervell County is located in
an area known to contain significant prehistoric and historic sites. Five
previously recorded sites (41SV4, 41SV51, 41SV150, 41SV153, and 41SV157)
are within close proximity of the route of the water line as currently proposed. In
order to protect any important cultural resources that may be present, the THC,
Archeology Division, requested a survey by a professional archaeologist prior to
construction. In response to this request, the Somervell County Water District
retained the services of BVRA for this task.

1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
At 197 square miles, Somervell County is the second smallest county in
Texas. According to Hill (1901) and Carter (1931), it is part of the Grand Prairie
geographic zone. Altitude ranges from 600 feet to 1300 feet with elevations of 1200
feet in the project area. Overall, the county is hilly with rugged areas such as
eroded plateaus and ravines where dissected by the Brazos and Paluxy rivers.
Squaw and Kickapoo creeks are the two other major streams that drain the county.
The climate of Somervell County is hot in summer, but cool in winter when an
occasional surge of cold air causes a sharp drop in otherwise mild temperatures.
Rain falls throughout the year and is highest in spring and fall. Snowfall is
infrequent. In winter, the average temperature is 49 degrees Fahrenheit, and the
average daily minimum temperature is 35 degrees Fahrenheit. In summer, the
average temperature is 84 degrees Fahrenheit, and the average daily maximum
temperature is 96 degrees Fahrenheit. Of the total annual precipitation, 18 inches
(60%) falls in April through September, which includes the growing season for most
crops. Average seasonal rainfall is two inches. Tornadoes and severe
thunderstorms occur occasionally. The above climatic data were taken from the
Soil Survey for Hood and Somervell Counties, Texas (Coburn 1978:1-2).

2

METHODS
Prior to commencement of the field survey, the Texas Archeological Sites
Atlas and the site files at TARL were checked for previously recorded sites and
surveys in the project area and vicinity. Soil information for the project area was
obtained by consulting the Soil Survey of Hood and Somervell Counties prepared
by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (Coburn
1978). Relevant reports that describe previous investigations in the area were
reviewed in order to obtain information regarding the kinds of sites known to be
present in the area and where other sites are likely to be found.
The archeological survey was conducted from September 14, 2009 through
September 19, 2009 by the Project Archaeologist, and it involved a surface
inspection of exposed areas as well as shovel testing and probing. All previously
selected creek crossings not associated with previously surveyed areas were
visited and shovel tested where necessary. Shovel testing was not necessary in
those areas with excellent surface visibility and where shallow soils were found to
overlie bedrock. The excavated fill in each shovel test was screened through ¼ inch
hardware cloth, and a shovel test log was maintained (Appendix II). In all, fortythree shovel tests were excavated. The areas investigated were primarily on
private property, as this is where the water line will be installed. The only areas
surveyed were within easements on private property. Although a small portion of
the APE is within highway right-of-way, this segment was not examined because it
was considered to be a low probability area by BVRA and the geoarchaeologist.
Maps depicting areas surveyed are presented as Appendix I to this report.
A Kodak digital camera was used to document the project, and all
photographs were enhanced using Adobe Photoshop software. Location data
was collected and documented with a Garmin GPS, National Geographic Topo
and ESRI ArcMap.

3

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
General
The first professional work in the county consisted of an intensive survey
and preliminary testing program within the proposed Squaw Creek Reservoir by the
Archaeology Research Program at Southern Methodist University (SMU) in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). This project examined an area of approximately
3200 acres along a six-mile segment of Squaw Creek. The Squaw Creek project
resulted in the addition of 48 newly recorded sites to the archaeological record for
Somervell County. The sites recorded at Squaw Creek represent the first site
recordings at TARL for Somervell County. Site locations at Squaw Creek were
found to occur on a variety of landforms. The distribution of sites includes the
Upper and Middle Squaw Creek flood plain, limestone benches, uplands, alluvial
terraces, and steep limestone bluffs. The only micro-environment where sites were
not found were the flood plains adjacent to the Brazos and Paluxy rivers. The
prehistoric remains at Squaw Creek were found to range in age from 8000 B.C. to
A.D. 1500, with the majority of this occupation belonging to the Late Archaic period.
In addition to a surface survey, controlled surface collecting and testing was
conducted at sites 41SV30 and 41SV40 in Somervell County.
Investigations Relevant to Sites Near the Project Area
Site 41SV51 was recorded by Bob Vernon in 1972 (TARL site files). No
formal report was written. Artifacts found included arrow points and dart points.
In addition, a panel of petroglyphs on a large boulder adjacent to Squaw Creek
was observed. This site is in close proximity to the current project area.
BVRA (Moore 1991) conducted a survey of the Glen Rose Golf Club in
1991. A pedestrian survey supported by shovel testing was carried out over a tract
of approximately 200 acres adjacent to Squaw Creek just to the east of the town of
Glen Rose. Previously recorded site 41SV51 was visited and evaluated. The rock
art mentioned on the site form was found and discovered to be along the creek
bank below the ridge on which the site is situated. The rock art at 41SV51 is
unique to the area. Therefore, it was suggested that it be protected and considered
a candidate for the National Register of Historic Places. That portion of the site in
the golf course was found to be severely disturbed as construction for the golf
course was in progress, and no additional work was recommended. Four new
prehistoric sites (41SV3, 41SV4, 41SV5, and 41SV47) were recorded. Sites
41SV4 and 41SV51 are in close proximity to the current project area.

4

Site 41SV111 was recorded by Archeological Steward Jimmy Smith in 1991
(TARL site files). He visited the site based on information from informant and
collector Don Lemens who accompanied him during his visit to this site. According
to Jimmy Smith, this site was a very sparse scatter of lithics on the surface of a hill
composed of clay. He stated that this site was restricted to the hill, and it does not
extend to the right-of-way of State Highway 67.
In 1997, BVRA conducted an archaeological survey of a 260-acre addition to
an existing golf course (Moore and Bradle 1997) surveyed earlier by BVRA. One
previously unrecorded prehistoric site (41SV151) was identified in the project area.
It is a buried hearth on an ancient terrace adjacent to a former channel of Squaw
Creek. Burned rock was found in a backhoe trench at a depth of 45 centimeters
below the existing ground surface, and fragments of burned rock, bone, and
charcoal were found between 95 and 110 centimeters in an adjacent trench. No
artifacts were observed, and no collection was made. This was avoided during
construction, so further work was not required. This site is not within the path of the
water line as currently proposed.
Site 41SV150 was recorded by TxDOT archaeologist Robert Perale in 1997
for a survey involving work along United States Highway 67. There is no site form
or report on file at TARL. The only information available is the plotting on the
topographic maps at TARL. This site is in close proximity to the APE.
Site 41SV157 was recorded by Timothy B. Griffith, Rob Thrift, and Jon Grant
of Prewitt and Associates, Inc. in 2005 while investigating the site of a proposed
bridge replacement on the Paluxy River (Griffith 2005). This site was adequately
examined through surface inspection, shovel testing, and nine backhoe trenches.
The recorders determined that “the site has no capacity to contribute important
information.” This site is in close proximity to the project area.
Archaeologists from Prewitt and Associates, Inc. (McWilliams et al. 2006)
conducted archaeological surveys in Somervell County between 2003 and 2006
as part of a contract for the Texas Department of Transportation. As part of this
study, previously recorded sites (41SV4, 41SV51, and 41SV157) were
evaluated, and site 41SV153 was recorded. Sites 41SV4, 41SV151, and
41SV157 were determined to be not significant, and no further work was
recommended. Site 41SV153, however, was believed to possess research
potential. Following testing of this site by Prewitt & Associates, Inc., (Griffith and
Boyd 2006), no further work was recommended.

5

AREAS INVESTIGATED
The following are the areas investigated during the archaeological survey.
In some areas, backhoe trenches were excavated as part of the
geoarchaeological survey. Information regarding this study is presented in
Volume II (Geoarchaeological Survey) that contains a map depicting the location
of the trenches and the results of this study.
Crossing 1
The proposed water line will cross the Paluxy River on the south side of
State Highway 67. It will be installed by horizontal directional drilling (boring) from
the high ground on both sides of the river. Previously recorded prehistoric site
41SV157 is located on the northwest side of the highway on the southwest bank
of the river, opposite the path of the proposed water line. The bore will be
approximately 1400 feet long and will not impact the site area or the river
crossing area. The bore locations were visually inspected, and shovel testing
was not necessary, as the area on the north side of the river has undergone
extensive testing by the Texas Department of Transportation, and the south side
was in an area of shallow soil and bedrock.
Crossing 2
The proposed water line will be placed on the south side of State Highway
67, and it will cross Squaw Creek. It will be installed through horizontal directional
drilling. Previously recorded prehistoric site 41SV4 is located on the northern
side of the highway and on the west side of the creek. Previously recorded
prehistoric site 41SV51 is located on the north side of the highway and on the
east side of the creek. Shovel Test 13 was excavated on the west side of Squaw
Creek just outside of the previously surveyed area. There were several bare
spots in the vegetation with excellent surface visibility for the surface
examination. Shovel tests 14 and 15 were excavated outside of the previously
surveyed area on the east side of the creek, and the surface was examined.
Backhoe Trench 14 was excavated on the west side of the creek, and backhoe
trenches 15 and 16 were excavated on the east side of the creek and outside of
the previously surveyed area.
Crossing 3
The proposed water line will cross Squaw Creek on the east side of State
Highway 144. It will be installed through horizontal directional drilling. The area
was not investigated since it was in a previously surveyed area. Previously
recorded prehistoric site 41SV153 is in the area.

6

Crossing 4
The proposed water line will be placed on the east side of State Highway
144, and it crosses an unnamed tributary of Squaw Creek. It will be installed
through horizontal directional drilling. Shovel Test 34 was excavated on the south
side of the creek, and Shovel Test 35 was excavated on the north side of the
creek. The ground surface on both sides of the creek and the deep creek cut
profiles were visually inspected. Backhoe Trench 7 was excavated on the north
side of the creek.
Crossing 5
The proposed water line will be placed on the east side of State Highway
144, and it will cross an unnamed tributary of Squaw Creek. It will be installed
through horizontal directional drilling. Three shovel tests were excavated. Shovel
Test 31 was on the south side of the creek, and shovel tests 32 and 33 were
excavated on the north side of the creek. The ground surface on both sides of
the creek and the deep creek cut profiles were visually inspected. Backhoe
Trench 8 was excavated on the south side of the creek.
Crossing 6
The proposed water line will be placed on the east side of Farm-to-Market
200, and it will cross an unnamed tributary of Squaw Creek. It will be installed by
horizontal directional drilling. Shovel Test 21 was excavated on the north side of
the creek, and Shovel Test 22 was excavated on the south side of the creek. The
ground surface on both sides of the creek and the creek cut profiles were visually
inspected. Backhoe Trench 21 was excavated on the south side of the creek,
and Backhoe Trench 22 was excavated on the north side of the creek.
Crossing 7
The proposed water line will be placed in a cross-country setting, and it
will cross an unnamed intermittent tributary of Squaw Creek. This area is 1.3
kilometers west of Crossing 4. There was less than 10 centimeters of soil and
gravels over gravels and bedrock. The area was visually inspected, and shovel
tests were not necessary.
Crossing 8
The proposed water line will cross a segment of Wheeler Branch, but it
was not inspected since the area had previously been surveyed for another
project for the Somervell County Water District.

7

Crossing 9
The proposed water line route will be placed on the north side of County
Road 321, and it will cross an intermittent segment of Wheeler Branch that is
deeply entrenched into the limestone bedrock. Shovel tests 3 and 4 were
excavated on the west side of the creek, and shovel tests 5 and 6 were
excavated on the east side of the creek. The ground surface on both sides of the
creek and the creek cut profiles were visually inspected.
Crossing 10
The proposed water line will be placed on the east side of Farm-to-Market
56, and it will cross a small intermittent headwater tributary of Panther Branch.
The soil was clay mixed with gravels. Shovel Test 1 was excavated on the north
side of the creek, and Shovel Test 2 was excavated on the south side of the
creek. The ground surface on both sides of the creek and the creek cut profiles
were visually inspected.
Crossing 11
The proposed water line will be placed on the north side of Moody Lane,
and it will cross an unnamed intermittent tributary of the Paluxy River. The area
was disturbed by residential yards. The area was investigated through a visual
inspection. Shovel Test 40 was excavated on the west side of the creek, and
Shovel Test 41 was excavated on the east side of the creek. Backhoe Trench 25
was excavated on the west side of the creek, and Backhoe Trench 26 was
excavated on the east side of the creek.
Crossing 12
The proposed water line will be placed in a cross-country setting, and it
will cross an unnamed tributary of Cross Branch. The area was visually
inspected, and two shovel tests were excavated. Shovel Test 27 was excavated
on the east side of the creek, and Shovel Test 28 was excavated on the west
side of the creek. Backhoe Trench 28 was excavated on the east side of the
creek.

8

Crossing 13
The proposed water line will be placed in a cross-country setting, and it
will cross Cross Branch. It will be installed by horizontal directional drilling. The
area was visually inspected, and three shovel tests were excavated. Shovel tests
25 and 26 were excavated on the east side of the creek where deeper loam was
found, and Shovel Test 24 was excavated on the west side. Backhoe trenches
27 and 29 were excavated on the east and west sides of the creek.
Crossing 14
The proposed water line will be placed in a cross-country setting, and it
will cross Montgomery Branch. The creek crossing is on the northwest side of
Farm-to-market Road 56. The area was visually inspected, and two shovel tests
were excavated. Shovel Test 29 was excavated on the south side of the creek,
and Shovel Test 30 was excavated on the north side of the creek. Backhoe
Trench 30 was excavated on the south side of the creek.
Crossing 15
The proposed water line will be placed on the north side of State Highway
67, and it will cross an intermittent segment of Barker Branch. The water line will
be installed by horizontal directional drilling. Two shovel tests were excavated.
Shovel Test 9 was excavated on the southwest side of the creek, and Shovel
Test 10 was excavated on the northwest side of the creek. The ground surface
on both sides of the creek and the creek cut profiles were visually inspected.
Crossing 16
The proposed water line will be placed on the north side of State Highway
67, and it will cross an intermittent unnamed tributary of Barker Branch. Two
shovel tests were excavated. Shovel Test 42 was excavated on the west side of
the creek, and Shovel Test 43 was excavated on the east side of the creek. Soil
in the area consisted of 10 centimeters of clay over rock. The ground surface on
both sides of the creek was visually inspected.
Elevated Storage Tank
The proposed water line runs along the east side of Farm-to-Market Road
56 to the existing elevated storage tank and continues past it prior to crossing to
the west side of the road. The elevated storage tank is on a clay and gravel hill.
It was visually inspected. Shovel tests were not necessary due to the lack of
sandy soil.

9

Ground Storage Tank and Pump Station
The site of this proposed ground storage tank is on a hill composed of clay
and gravels on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road 56. The ground cover
consisted of short pasture with scattered trees, and this provided excellent
surface visibility. Shovel probes and a visual inspection were performed.
Ground Storage Tank and Pump Station
This proposed ground storage tank and pump station is located on the
north side of State Highway 67. The location was visually inspected, and shovel
tests 7 and 8 were excavated. The soil in the area consisted of 20 centimeters of
sand over orange clay.
Water Treatment Plant
The proposed water treatment plant site was not inspected since the area
had been previously surveyed on another project for the Somervell County Water
District.
Floodplain of Tributary of Squaw Creek
A portion of the route of the proposed water line will be placed in a crosscountry setting north of an unnamed tributary of Squaw Creek. This section is on
the west side of State Highway 144. The area of the floodplain was visually
inspected, and shovel tests 36 and 37 were excavated. Backhoe trenches 23
and 24 were also excavated in this area.
Brazos River Terrace (South Side of State Highway 67)
A section of the terrace west of Crossing 2 was visually examined and
investigated by shovel tests 11 and 12 and backhoe Trench 13. At the time of
this investigation, the area was under cultivation. A second section of the terrace
is east of Crossing 2, and it was visually examined and investigated by backhoe
trenches 17 and 18.
Brazos River Terrace (County Road 312)
The route of the proposed water line runs along the north side of County
Road 312 and along a section of Brazos River Terrace. The area has been very
disturbed by residential housing projects. Shovel tests 16-20 were excavated in
relatively undisturbed areas. Backhoe trenches 19 and 20 were also excavated
in this area.

10

Line opposite 41SV150
The proposed water line runs along the south side of State Highway 67
near its intersection with State Highway 144 in the Squaw Creek floodplain.
Shovel Test 23 was excavated on the south side of the highway, and the plowed
field was visually inspected. The site is on the high ground on the north side of
the highway, and not on the landform containing site 41SV150.
Toe Slope Overlooking Paluxy River/Squaw Creek Floodplain
The route of the proposed water line runs along the east side of Van Zant
Road on a toe slope overlooking the floodplain of the Paluxy River and Squaw
Creek. The area was visually inspected, and Shovel Test 38 was excavated.
This test revealed shallow soil.
Toe Slope Overlooking Paluxy River Floodplain
The route of the proposed water line runs along the north side of Van Zant
Road on a toe slope overlooking the floodplain of the Paluxy River. The area was
visually inspected, and Shovel Test 39 was excavated. This test revealed
shallow soil.
Additional Backhoe Trenches
Backhoe trenches 1-3 were excavated on the east side of State Highway
144 at spaced intervals north of Crossing 3. Backhoe trenches 5 and 6 were
excavated on the east side of State Highway 144 at spaced intervals between
crossings 3 and 4. Backhoe trenches 9-12 were excavated on the east side of
State Highway 144 at spaced intervals between Crossing 5 and the intersection
of State Highway 144 and State Highway 67.
Isolated Grave
An isolated grave is depicted on the USGS topographic quadrangle Hill
City on the west side of Farm-to-Market Road 56 as being on the opposite side of
the road from the proposed elevated storage tank depicted on Map A in
Appendix I. The proposed water line was initially planned to cross the road near
this location. The ground surface was visually inspected, and no evidence of a
grave (i.e., tombstone or marker) was observed within the purported grave
location. Therefore, the line was moved to an adjoining property well away from
the location as indicated on the topographic quadrangle. The new location is in
terraced pasture.

11

Post Oak Cemetery
This cemetery is located on the east side of Farm-to-Market Road 56. It is
fenced and well maintained. The route of the proposed water line is on the west
side of Farm-to-Market Road 56, more than 100 feet from the cemetery.

12

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Fourteen creek crossings were investigated through a visual inspection,
shovel testing, and probing, and no evidence of a prehistoric or historic site was
found. The soil in many areas was found to be shallow loam with gravels over
limestone bedrock. In addition, similar methods were used to investigate the site
of the proposed elevated storage tank and the two ground storage tanks and
associated pump stations with negative results. The site of the water treatment
plant was not examined because it had been part of previous archaeological
survey. Creek crossings 3 and 8 were not investigated because they are in areas
that have been previously surveyed by professional archaeologists. In addition to
the creek crossings, cross-country segments and other high probability areas,
such as terraces, were also investigated with negative results. One cemetery and
isolated grave are depicted on the topographic map as being close to the APE.
A surface inspection of the area where the isolated grave is depicted on the
topographic map failed to locate any evidence of this grave. In an effort to
ensure that the water line does not affect an unmarked grave, the line was
moved to an adjoining property. The cemetery was found to be greater than 100
feet from the APE. The only cultural materials observed during this project were
within the backhoe trenches that were dug under the supervision of the
geoarchaeologist. In Backhoe Trench 3, a single flake was found. This artifact is
viewed as an isolated find, and the area is not considered an archaeological site.
The find was at least 100 meters from the nearest stream. In Backhoe Trench 8,
a fragment of burned rock was found at Crossing 5. Since no cultural materials
were observed, this may represent a natural occurrence, and this find is not
believed to be evidence of a prehistoric site. The only area where a considerable
number of cultural materials were found was in Backhoe Trench 15. In this
trench, 24 fragments of burned rock and three flakes were observed. This trench
was dug within the boundaries of previously recorded site 41SV51.
Archaeologists from Prewitt & Associates, Inc. in 2006 concluded that the portion
of this site on the south side of State Highway 67 was not significant based on a
paucity of artifacts found during their extensive investigation of this site. The
presence of only three flakes confirms their hypothesis. Historic artifacts were
found in two backhoe trenches. At the intersection of State Highway 144 and
Farm-to-Market Road 200, there was a house that was constructed circa 1945
and demolished in 1993. The footprint of this structure is outside the APE;
therefore, it was not recorded as a historic site. According to local historian
Dorothy Leach, it was made of concrete blocks and had three rooms and a bath.
Outbuildings consisted of a garage and two barns. In Backhoe Trench 20, a
rusted metal can and portion of a septic system was observed. This trench was
dug in what would have been the yard of the house, and the findings are not
significant. Several modern historic artifacts were found in Backhoe Trench 30 in
a creek overbank deposit. They were identified in the field as four pieces of
rusted metal, two modern beer cans, and one cold cream jar. They appear to
represent primary refuse of twentieth century age.
13

RECOMMENDATIONS
Since the water line will not affect any significant archaeological sites, it is
recommended that the Somervell County Water District be allowed to proceed
with construction as currently planned. It is always possible that evidence of a
prehistoric or historic site will be encountered during construction. If cultural
materials are found in any of the areas not identified as archaeological sites, all
work in the area of the find must cease until the situation can be evaluated by the
THC. If the route of the water line is change to include areas not investigated
during this investigation, the THC must be notified, as survey may be required for
these new areas. This project was conducted according to the Minimum Survey
Standards compiled by the THC.

14

REFERENCES CITED
Carter, W. T.
1931

The Soils of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station
Bulletin 41. College Station.

Coburn, Winfred C.
1978
Soil Survey of Hood and Somervell Counties, Texas. United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Griffith, Timothy B.
2005
Archeological Survey on U.S. Highway 67 at the Paluxy River,
Somervell County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Letter
Report Number 706.
Griffith, Timothy B., and Douglas K. Boyd
2006
National Register Testing at 41SV153, Somervell County,
Texas. Technical Reports, Number 75. Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., Austin, Texas.
Hill, R. T.
1901

Geography and Geology of the Black and Grand Prairies, Texas
with Detailed Description of the Cretaceous Formations and
Special Reference to Artesian Waters. In Twenty-First Annual
Report to the United States Geological Survey 1899-1900, Part 7
- Texas.

McWilliams, Jennifer, Ross C. Fields, Karl W. Kibler, E. Frances Gadus, Douglas
K. Boyd, and Timothy B. Griffith
2006
Archeological Impact Evaluations and Surveys in the Texas
Department of Transportation’s Abilene, Brownwood, Fort
Worth, and Waco Districts, 2003-2006. Prewitt & Associates,
Inc., Report of Investigations Number 148 and Archeological
Studies Program Report Number 93, Texas Department of
Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division.
Moore, William E.
1991
An Archaeological Survey of the Glen Rose Golf Club Project,
Somervell County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates,
Contract Report Number 11.

15

Moore, William E., and Michael R. Bradle
1997
An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Squaw Valley Golf
Course Expansion Project, Somervell County, Texas. Brazos
Valley Research Associates, Contract Report Number 51.
Skinner, S. Alan, and Gerald K. Humphreys
1973
The Historic and Prehistoric Archaeological Resources of the
Squaw Creek Reservoir. Southern Methodist University, Institute
for the Study of Earth and Man, Contributions in Anthropology
Number 10.

16

APPENDIX I
AREAS INVESTIGATED

MAP C DELETED DUE TO SENSITIVE INFORMATION

MAP D DELETED DUE TO SENSITIVE INFORMATION

APPENDIX II: SHOVEL TEST LOG
Shovel Test

Depth (in cm)

Soil

Comments

1

15

clay and gravels

Crossing 10

2

15

clay and gravels

Crossing 10

3

20

clay loam over gravels

Crossing 9

4

15

clay loam over gravels

Crossing 9

5

25

clay loam over gravels

Crossing 9

6

20

clay loam over gravels

Crossing 9

7

30

8

30

brownish-orange sand
over orange clay
brownish-orange sand
over orange clay

ground storage tank and
pump station
ground storage tank and
pump station

9

20

clay loam over gravels

Crossing 15

10

30

clay loam over gravels

Crossing 15

11

100

Brazos River terrace
(south of SH 67)

12

100

dense brown over orange
clay loam
dense brown over orange
clay loam

13

100

dense brown over orange
clay loam

14

100

dense orange clay loam

15

100

dense brown clay loam

16

100

17

100

18

100

19

100

20

100

21

90

22

90

reddish-orange sandy
loam
reddish-orange sandy
loam
reddish-orange sandy
loam
reddish-orange sandy
loam
reddish-orange sandy
loam
brown sandy loam over
clay
brown sandy loam over
clay

Brazos River floodplain
Crossing 2
Brazos River floodplain
(across from 41SV4)
Crossing 2
Brazos River floodplain,
(across from 41SV51)
Crossing 2
Brazos River floodplain,
(across from 41SV51)
Brazos River terrace
Brazos River terrace
Brazos River terrace
Brazos River terrace
Brazos River terrace
Crossing 6
Crossing 6

Shovel Test

Depth (in cm)

Soil

Comments

23

80

clay loam over water

opposite site 41SV150.

24

100

25

90

26

20

27

100

28

10

clay and rocks

Crossing 12 (west side)

29

70

yellow clayey sand- large
root at 70 cm

Crossing 14 (south side)

30

10

clay and rocks

Crossing 14 (north side)

31

80

32

70

33

80

34

80

35

90

36

100

brown clay loam

cross-country

37

100

brown clay loam

cross-country

38

50

brown clay loam over clay
and rock

toe slope
(east side of SH 144)

39

40

brown clay loam over clay
and rock

toe slope
(east side of SH 144)

40

100

dark gray sandy clay

Crossing 11 (west side)

41

80

dark gray silty clay over
clay

Crossing 11 (east side)

42

10

dark clay over rock

Crossing 16 (west side)

43

10

dark clay over rock

Crossing 16 (east side)

clay loam and mixed
limestone pieces
clay loam over clay loam
and gravel
clay loam and gravel over
gravel
clay loam and mixed
limestone pieces

dark brown clay loam over
dark gray silty clay
dark brown clay loam over
dark gray silty clay
dark brown clay loam over
dark gray silty clay
brown clay loam over
gray clay
brown clay loam over
gray clay

Crossing 13 (west side)
Crossing 13 (east side)
Crossing 13 (east side)
Crossing 12 (east side)

Crossing 5 (south side)
Crossing 5 (north side)
Crossing 5 (north side)
Crossing 4 (south side)
Crossing 4 (north side)

