AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
CITY OF RULE WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT IN HASKELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Antiquities Permit 5736

By
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 245

2010

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
CITY OF RULE WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT IN HASKELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Antiquities Permit 5736

BVRA Project Number 10-24

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
City of Rule
Post Office Box 607
Rule, Texas 79547

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

2010

ABSTRACT
The City of Rule in west-central Haskell County, Texas plans to construct an
irrigation pond at a five-acre site. In addition, a water transmission line will connect
the new pond with an irrigation system that will be used to water local crops. The
length of the water line will not be known until the final selection is made regarding
which five-acre site will be used for the pond. In response to a request by the Texas
Historical Commission (THC), an archaeological survey was performed by Brazos
Valley Research Associates (BVRA) on August 17, 2010 under Antiquities Permit
5736. Two five-acre tracts and the possible routes for the water transmission line
were surveyed for a total of 10.75 acres. No prehistoric sites were identified. No
streams or other sources of water are in the area. Therefore, it is assumed that this
area was not regarded in prehistoric times as a suitable area for a temporary or
permanent camp. A sparse scatter of historic artifacts was noted in a plowed field,
and they probably represent the remains of one of two structures depicted on the
topographic quadrangle in this area. These artifacts are believed to date to the
early part of the 20th century. They consist of glass, ceramics, brick fragments, and
a metal bottle cap. They are not significant and have been discarded. Copies of the
report are on file at the THC, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL),
BVRA, the Texas State Library, Enprotec, Hibbs & Todd, and the City of Rule.

ii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ........................................................................................................... ii
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA ............................................................................ 1
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ................................................................................. 4
METHODS ............................................................................................................ 5
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS.......................................................................... 7
RECOMMENDATIONS ....................................................................................... 11
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................ 12
Appendix I: Photos of Project Area

FIGURES
Figure 1.General Location .............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle Rule ......................................... 3
Figure 3. Soils in the Project Area .................................................................................. 6

iii

DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The City of Rule plans to construct an irrigation pond on a five-acre tract in
west-central Haskell County (Figure 1). The exact site for the pond is not known.
Therefore, two locations were selected for investigation. The pond will be dug to
a maximum depth of fifteen feet. The water in the new pond will be pumped to
the site from an existing lift station. This water will be used for irrigating local
crops. The water will be transported from the pond to the irrigation site in a pipe
between six and eight inches in diameter and placed in a trench a maximum of
five feet wide and about five feet deep. If the western tract (Area A) is selected,
the water will be transported along a private road for 500 feet to County Road
453. Then, it will follow the county road (Area E) to the west (about 500 feet)
before traversing a plowed field (Area D) in a southwest direction (1500 feet). If
the eastern tract (Area B) is selected, the water will be transported south along a
private road (about 800 feet). The pipe will then follow the county road to the east
(2000 feet) before traversing a field (Area C) to the northeast (1500 feet). The
engineering firm creating the plans for this project is Enprotec Hibbs & Todd, Inc.
of Abilene. The area investigated is depicted on the USGS 7.5’ topographic
quadrangle Rule (3399-223) (Figure 2).

1

Figure 1.General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle Rule

3

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
This project was performed in order to identify any cultural resources that
might be present within the project area. The client is the City of Rule. The
Principal Investigator was William E. Moore, and he supervised the field survey.
The survey was performed on August 17, 2010 and involved sixteen person
hours. Christal McMillion assisted with the field survey and was responsible for
the digital photography and GPS plottings. We were assisted by Jeff Sorrells
(Water Superintendent for the City of Rule) and Alan Beard (Chief of Police for
the City of Rule). This project is regulated by the United States Department of
Agriculture, Rural Development. The THC is the reviewing agency for the state.

4

METHODS
Prior to the field survey, Jean Hughes checked the site records at TARL for
the presence of previously recorded sites in the project area. In addition, the Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas was checked for previous projects in the project area and
vicinity, standing structures (past and present), and the presence of cemeteries.
The Haskell County soil survey (Mowery et al. 1961) was used to identify the types
of soils in the project area (Figure 3). The field methods consisted of an inspection
of the exposed ground surface in all areas. The two five-acre tracts were found to
be severely disturbed, as at least two meters of the original surface had been
removed in each area in order to extract gravel. Therefore, these areas were
photographed and not shovel tested. The two areas where the proposed water line
crosses cultivated fields were walked, and the surface in each area was closely
inspected for cultural materials. Since surface visibility was virtually 100 percent in
these fields, shovel testing was not necessary. These areas were very muddy due
to rain the night before, and screening would have been very difficult due to the wet
soils with high clay content. The county road was visually inspected and found to
be an unlikely setting for a prehistoric site. Shovel tests were also not necessary in
this area. Special attention was paid to two areas where structures are depicted on
the topographic quadrangle (Figure 2) and in the soil survey for Haskell County.
Tommy Stryker is a local resident who has a farm near the project area and is very
familiar with the local history. He remembers houses near Area D, but he could not
recall who lived there. This project was documented by digital photography, notes,
and forms. The artifacts were discarded following analysis.

5

Figure 3. Soils in the Project Area

6

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
General
Examination of the files at the Texas Archeological Laboratory in Austin,
Texas and the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas revealed that there are no known
sites in the project area. In addition, no previous surveys have been conducted in
the area. At the time of this investigation, only thirty-seven archaeological sites had
been recorded in Haskell County. The majority of sites (n=21) were identified and
documented by Edward B. Jelks and Edward H. Moorman in 1952 during a survey
for the proposed Paint Creek Reservoir (now Lake Stamford) in Southeast Haskell
County as part of the River Basin Surveys program (Jelks and Moorman 1953).
The second largest number of sites recorded (and the most recent) was for the
Paint Creek Diversion Project in 2000 by Karl Kibler (2000) of Prewitt & Associates.
This study recorded sites 41HK30 – 41HK37. The known sites are found adjacent
to major streams such as Paint Creek. Camps were apparently common along the
larger streams as twenty-seven of the known sites contain burned rock mounds or
scattered burned rock and hearths or possible hearths. Evidence of subsistence
was found at nine sites that yielded mussel shell and bone. One site (41HK27) is
described on the site form as a quarry where local materials were selected for tool
manufacture. Only one site (41HK29) dates to the historic period. At this site, a
scatter of artifacts dating to the 20th century was recorded.
The project area is considered to be an unlikely setting for a prehistoric site
for several reasons. The prehistoric inhabitants of the area probably rejected this
area for a temporary or permanent camp due to its distance to water, as the closest
major water source to the project area is the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos
River, estimated to be at least 2.25 miles to the west and the presence of soils at
or near the surface with high clay content. The area was not likely to be selected
as a quarry site due to the small size of gravels present.
This survey examined the two five-acre tracts (Area A and Area B), that are
being considered for irrigation ponds, the two areas (Area C and Area D) being
considered as routes for transporting the water from County Road 453 to the
selected irrigation site, that segment of County Road 453 (Area E) that will be
utilized, as well as other connecting points of various lengths. The various areas
examined are discussed in detail below.

7

Area A
This is a five-acre tract that has been selected as a possible site for the new
irrigation pond (private road from site to the county road is included). If selected, the
water will be transported along the private road for 500 feet to County Road 453.
Then, it will follow the county road to the west (500 feet) before traversing a
plowed field (Area D) in a southwest direction of about (1500 feet). At the time of
this survey, the entire area had been disturbed through quarrying for gravel, and
the existing ground surface was estimated as being 2.5 meters below the original
ground surface (see photos in Appendix I). Any archaeological site in this area
would have been disturbed to the point that no cultural materials would be in their
original context. The cobbles exposed in the soil profiles were small and not
likely to have been selected as materials suitable for the manufacture of stone
tools. Two soils are present in this area. They are Rough broken land, clayey
(Ro) and Wichita clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (WcB). The soil survey shows a
stream passing through this area. This drainage is the upper reaches of a small
tributary and not the main channel of a stream.
Rough broken land is a miscellaneous land type that consists of exposed,
unweathered material of the red beds. It consists of reddish, calcareous clays and
shales. Gullies are present and still being formed making the resulting topography
rough. This land type occurs in most parts of the county. Wichita clay loam has a
surface soil of reddish-brown clay loam six to eight inches thick. The subsoil is
reddish-brown sticky clay. This clay occurs between ten and twenty-eight inches.
Area B
This is a five-acre tract (and private road from the site to the county road)
that has been selected as a possible site for the new irrigation pond. If selected,
the water will be transported south along a private road for 800 feet. The pipe will
then follow the county road to the east (2000 feet) before traversing a plowed
field (Area C) to the northeast (1500 feet). At the time of this survey, the entire
area had been disturbed through quarrying for gravel, and the existing ground
surface was estimated as being at least 2.5 meters below the original ground
surface (see photos in Appendix I). The surface consisted of clay, and standing
water was present in several areas. Any archaeological site in this area would
have been disturbed to the point that no cultural materials would be in their
original context. The cobbles exposed in the soil profiles were small and not
likely to have been selected as materials suitable for the manufacture of stone
tools. The soil in this area is Wichita clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (WcB). It is
described above.

8

Area C
If Area B is selected, this is the area where the water will be transported
from the county toad to the irrigation site about 1500 feet to the northeast. At the
time of this survey, this area was planted in cotton. Recent rains had made walking
in the clay soils difficult, and screening would have also been problematic. The
surface visibility was excellent in the furrows and between the plants (see photos in
Appendix I). No cultural materials were observed. Three soil types are found in the
area. They are Abilene clay loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (AcA), Mansker clay loam,
1 to 5 percent slopes, eroded (MaC2), and Wichita clay loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes
(WcA). Abilene clay loam has a surface layer of clay loam about eight inches thick.
Below this layer is clay to forty-eight inches. At this depth, a layer of reddish caliche
is present. The parent material is reddish sandy clay or clay loam. Mansker clay
loam is often damaged by water erosion. In most places, three to four inches of the
soil above the layer of caliche is gone. A typical profile exhibits a strong calcareous
layer that is six to ten inches thick. The subsoil consists of very crumbly heavy clay
loam. Depth to caliche is between ten and twenty-four inches. Concretions lime
may be present. Wichita clay loam has a surface soil of reddish-brown clay loam
six to eight inches thick. The subsoil is reddish-brown sticky clay. This clay occurs
between ten and twenty-eight inches.
Area D
If Area D is selected, this is the area where the water will be transported
from the county toad to the irrigation site about 1500 feet to the southwest. At the
time of this survey, this was a fallow hay field that had recently been harvested, and
hay bales were scattered about the landscape. There was more ground cover, and
this made walking easier than in Area C. The surface visibility was excellent in the
furrows and over most of the area (see photos in Appendix I). No evidence of a site
dating to the prehistoric period was observed. This is probably due to the distance
from water to this area and the clayey soils. The soils in this area are AcA and WcA
(see discussion above).
A sparse scatter of historic artifacts was observed. These specimens
consist of two brick fragments (not collected), one metal bottle cap labeled “rust
proof cap,” one green ceramic fragment (probably plate) that strongly resembles
Fiesta brand ware that was first produced in the 1930s, five milk glass fragments
(four plain and one decorated by embossing, two small pieces of whiteware, three
pieces of glass with a green tint (possible Mason jar), two pieces of clear glass
(curved), one piece of flat clear glass (possible window glass), and one piece of
brown glass (possible snuff bottle). These are typical of what one might find at a
house site, and it is believed that they are probably associated with one of the
abandoned structures depicted on the topographic quadrangle 60 and 100 meters
to the northwest. Since the artifacts could not be definitely associated with a
historic site, no site number was requested. We did not have permission to
examine the area outside of the footprint of the proposed water line.

9

Area E
This is the segment of County Road that runs in an east-west direction. The
water will be transported in a pipe along the north side of this road and tie in with
Area C or Area D, depending on which area is selected for the irrigation pond. The
area examined consisted of 2500 feet. No evidence of a prehistoric or historic site
was found. The abandoned structure depicted on the topographic quadrangle (see
Figure 2) is believed to be outside the right-of-way for the proposed water line. The
soils in this area consist of AcA, WcA, WcB (discussed above), and Abilene clay
loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (AcB). AcB soils have a surface layer of clay loam
about five to eight inches thick. Depth to the layer of caliche varies from thirty to
forty-eight inches. The parent material is reddish sandy clay or clay loam.

10

RECOMMENDATIONS
No evidence of a prehistoric or historic site was found as a result of this
survey. It is recommended that the client be allowed to proceed with construction
as planned. Should evidence of an archaeological site be encountered during the
construction, all work must stop until the THC can evaluate the situation. Also, if
new areas are added, the THC must be notified in case additional archaeological
survey is needed. This survey was conducted in accordance with the Minimum
Survey Standards as outlined by the THC.

11

REFERENCES CITED
Jelks, Edward B., and Edward H. Moorman
1953 Survey and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Paint
Creek Reservoir, Haskell County, Texas. Report on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.
(catalog number AR-TX TARL 01b.1953.01]
Kibler, Karl W.
2000 ArcheologicalSurvey for the Paint Creek Diversion Project, Haskell
County, Texas. Prewitt & Associates, Inc., Technical Reports,
Number 48.
Mowery, Irvin C., M. T. Turner, Dale Gooch, Jack C. Williams, R. B. Hailey, and
Tom Robinson
1961 Soil Survey of Haskell County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture in Cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.

12

APPENDIX I
PROJECT AREA PHOTOGRAPHS

Marker at Southeast Corner of Area A
(Northing 4 13 931, Easting 36 70 001)

Profile of Exposed Bank at Area A
(facing east)

Profile of Exposed Bank at Area A
(facing north)

Exposed Clay Surface at Area B
(facing north)

Exposed Surface at Area B – Tree Line is End of Site
(310  west of north)

Exposed Clay at Surface – Area B

Cotton in Area C
(Northing 4 14 622, Easting 36 70 039)

Cotton Field at Area C
(320 west of north)

Center Stake at Area C
Northing 4 14 567, Easting 36 70 039

Hayfield at Area D
(110 east of north)

Beginning Stake at Area D
(Northing 4 13 640, Easting 36 69 936)

