AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
CITY OF WINTERS – TEXAS WATER DEVELOPMENT BOARD
WASTEWATER IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT IN RUNNELS COUNTY, TEXAS
Antiquities Permit 5960

By
William E. Moore
Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 253
2011

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
CITY OF WINTERS – TEXAS WATER DEVELOPMENT BOARD
WASTEWATER IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT IN RUNNELS COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project 11-02

Prepared for
The City of Winters
310 South Main
Winters, Texas 79567

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

2011

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey for a proposed force main line was conducted by Brazos
Valley Research Associates (BVRA) in May of 2011 for the City of Winters under
Antiquities Permit 5960. The areas examined consisted of 350 linear feet in a private road
that parallels the west bank of Bluff Creek, the east and west banks of Bluff Creek, and
two areas previously described as relict stream channels. In all, 0.95 acre was examined.
According to the site records at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) and
a reconnaissance report prepared by the Texas Department of Water Resources in 1981,
prehistoric site 41RN174 is within the Area of Potential Effect (APE). No evidence of this
site was found in the area where it is plotted on the TARL maps. Historic artifacts and a
possible chert scraper were observed on the surface in an easement for an existing sixinch pipeline that is outside of the APE. This is one of the areas where artifacts associated
with this site were mentioned in the 1981 report. They were not collected, and the area
was not recorded as a site since it may be part of 41RN174. The actual location of site
41RN174, however, is still unknown. Based on the negative findings in the APE, it is
recommended that construction be allowed to proceed without further consultation from
the Texas Historical Commission (THC).

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to those individuals who participated in this project. Personnel at the
City of Winters who provided assistance were Alan Hollander (City Manager), Jack Davis
(Water Superintendent), Chris Clayton, Jason Sherman, and Shelly Antilley-Guevara
(Secretary). Jean Hughes checked the records at TARL for reports and other documents
relevant to this project. Information regarding the methods of construction was provided
by Sage Diller, PE of Enprotec/Hibbs & Todd, Inc. Information regarding the location of site
41RN174 was provided by Jonathan Jarvis. T. Clay Schultz, acting for the Texas Water
Development Board, provided BVRA with a copy of the report by Christopher J. Jurgens
that documented his work in the area in 1981. William A. Dickens analyzed the chert
scraper. Lili G. Lyddon prepared the figures that appear in this report and edited the
manuscript.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT .................................................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ............................................................................................................. iii
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................... 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING .................................................................................................... 4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................... 5
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ................................................................................................... 7
METHODS ................................................................................................................................... 11
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS............................................................................................... 18
RECOMMENDATIONS .............................................................................................................. 19
REFERENCES CITED ................................................................................................................. 20
Appendices
Appendix I – Previously Recorded Sites
Appendix II – Backhoe Trench Profiles
Appendix III – Artifact Description
Figures
Figure 1. General Location ......................................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle Winters, TX ......................................... 3
Figure 3. Caliche Road (looking southwest) .......................................................................... 12
Figure 4. Location of Backhoe Trenches................................................................................ 20
Figure 5. Backhoe Trench 1 (in progress) .............................................................................. 14
Figure 6. Water Containment Feature .................................................................................... 16
Figure 7. Easement for Existing Utilities (looking southeast) .............................................. 17

iv

INTRODUCTION
The City of Winters is applying for funds from the Texas Water Development
Board from its Clean Water State Revolving Fund Project 304-01 to improve its
wastewater facilities in northern Runnels County (Figure 1). The City of Winters
proposes to install a functional replacement of an existing six-inch wastewater force
main with an eight-inch force main. The force main will be placed in a trench that
will be four feet deep and three feet wide. The route of the force main as currently
proposed will begin at an existing wastewater lift station and proceed due east for a
distance of 75 feet. Then, it will run due south along an unimproved road and
parallel the west bank of Bluff Creek for a distance of 350 feet. The new force main
will be approximately four feet to the east of the existing force main. When it
intersects with a private road owned by the City of Winters it turns to the east,
crosses the creek, and proceeds cross-country for a distance of 960 feet until it
connects with a private access road owned by the City of Winters that used to
provide access to the city landfill. Currently, this road is used to reach the existing
wastewater ponds. At this point, the force main will turn to the south and parallel the
west side of a private road for a distance of 750 feet. Then it turns to the east and
ties into an existing force main. The current plan is to cross the creek by horizontal
directional boring. The entry point will be on the west side of the creek at the point
where the force main turns to the north to connect with the lift station. The exit
point will be on the east side of the creek at a distance of 100 feet. The project
area is depicted on the USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangle Winters (3199-333)
dated 1967 (Figure 2). A photograph was taken of the creek looking south from the
east bank, and it is depicted on the cover of this report.
Part of the area was examined by Christopher J. Jurgens of the Texas
Water Development Board in 1981 for the City of Winters proposed facility plan that
included a new wastewater treatment plant, pond system, lift station, and six-inch
force main. Jurgens reported finding two prehistoric sites (41RN173 and 41RN174),
and he recommended that site 41RN174 be examined by a professional
archaeologist “should the pipeline easement not be possible.” When the City of
Winters presented their plans for the current project, T. Clay Schultz of the Texas
Water Development Board asked for an archaeological survey, and this request
was confirmed by Ed Baker of the THC who issued the antiquities permit. The sites
recorded by Jurgens in 1981 are depicted on the Winters topographic quadrangle
(Appendix I).

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle Winters, TX

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Runnels County is located in west-central Texas. The following discussions
were taken from the published soil survey for Runnels County (Wiedenfeld et al.
1970). Most of Runnels County consists of nearly level to gently sloping terrain.
There are a few very steep limestone hills in the northeastern part, but about 40%
of the county has slopes of less than one-foot fall in 100 feet. This nearly level land
is the best farmland in the county, and most of it is in cultivation. About 33% of the
county has slopes of 1-3 foot fall in 100 feet. These areas are suitable for
cultivation, but erosion control is needed. The remaining 27% of the county is too
steep, too shallow, or too sandy to be suitable for crops. On about 71% of the total
acreage in this county, the soils developed in plains outwash or very old alluvium;
on 17% they developed in limestone; on 7% they developed in recent stream
alluvium; and 5% developed in red marine clay, sandstone, or conglomerate, or in a
mixture of these materials. On about 65% of the acreage, the soils are more than
20 inches deep; on 19% they are between 10 and 20 inches deep; and on 16%
they are less than 10 inches deep. On about 81% of the acreage, the surface layer
is loamy; on about 18% it is clay or silty clay; and on 1% it is sandy. On about 86%
of the acreage, the soils are calcareous throughout.

4

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The project area is located in a region referred to by Biesaart et al. (1985)
as the Lower Plains cultural geographical region, by Powell and Creel (1989) as
part of the North Central Texas archeological region, and by Brown et al. (1982)
as on the border between the two. According to Krieger (1946), the cultural
patterns in this region tend to mirror those found to the east more than those
identified farther west in the high plains of the Llano Estacado. Since no defined
culture sequence has been established for the Lower Plains cultural unit,
researchers are forced to borrow the sequences defined in nearby regions such
as Central Texas or North Central Texas.
Cultural chronologies for the North Central Texas area have been
presented by Brown (1987), Krieger (1946), Prikryl (1987), and Skinner and
Gallagher (1974). Chronologies for Central Texas have been prepared by
Prewitt (1981, 1985) and Carlson et al. (1986).
Although there is some
difference in the terminology used by these researchers, they all agree that the
last 10,000 to 12,000 years of prehistory and history for the area can be divided
into four major temporal periods. These are Paleo-Indian (12,000 B.P. to 8000
B.P.); Archaic (8000 B.P. to 1250 B.P.); Late Prehistoric (1250 B.P. to 300 B.P.);
and Historic (300 B.P. to Present).
Even though few sites in the county have been subjected to more than
survey level investigation, it is apparent that the area was occupied from circa
11,500 B.P. through the Historic Indian and Anglo-American periods (Powell and
Creel 1989:10). Possibly the oldest remains in the area have been found at the
Gibson site (41TA1) in adjacent Taylor County. This is a deeply stratified site
along Elm Creek containing artifacts dating to the Paleo-Indian period (Leighton
1936; Ray 1940, 1941, 1945; Sayles 1935). Another early site is McLean
(41TA29), a stratified site with archaeological remains dating from Paleo-Indian
through the Historic period (Bryan and Ray 1938; Ray 1930, 1935).
The majority of known prehistoric sites in the area date to the Archaic
period. They usually consist of burned rock middens, hearths, or lithic scatters
near intermittent and permanent streams. In some cases, sites have been found
beneath alluvial sediments that underlie the modern surface. Other sites in the
area are lithic workshops, quarry sites, and isolated burials in rock crevices or
beneath cairns.
Powell and Creel (1989:10) state that comparatively “few sites with
Historic Indian remains are recorded in the region, although many might exist.” It
is their opinion that most of the known Historic Indian sites are individual burials
probable attributable to Apache, Comanche, or Kiowa Indians. Sayles (1935)
mentions an iron arrow point found at site 41TA29 in Taylor County and a burial
in a rock crevice with glass beads (41TA111).

5

The Historic period is represented by a wide variety of sites. Fort
Phantom Hill was established in 1851 about 15 miles north of present-day
Abilene to protect the advancing American frontier. In 1858, the ruins of the
abandoned fort were used as a way station on the Butterfield Trail Overland Mail
Route (Richardson et al. 1988:169; Conkling and Conkling 1947). This trail
extended southwest from Fort Phantom Hill about two miles northwest of what is
now Dyess Air Force Base. Fort Griffin was established in 1867 to the northeast
of Abilene and was active during the Indian Wars of 1871 to 1874 (Rister 1969).
Anglo-American settlement in the Abilene area was not well established until the
late 1870s (Fox 1983). With the beginning of permanent settlement, towns were
created and the Indians were forced to move. Many historic sites in rural areas
are reminders of ranching activities in an area where cattle raising were the
major industry.

6

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
General
The first major study in Runnels County was conducted in 1977 and 1978
by Southern Methodist University (Lynott 1978) in the Colorado Basin Elm Creek
watershed. Prior to this study, only five sites were known to be present in the
county. Currently, there are at least 265 documented sites. Lynott’s project area
was a series of floodwater retarding structures in Runnels and Taylor counties.
As a result of this project, 91 prehistoric sites and 2 historic sites were recorded.
Thirteen sites were tested during the second phase of the project. In preparation
for the testing, Lynott developed four hypotheses involving the culture history and
variability in technology and function. The results of this phase suggested to
Lynott that the area was probably heavily utilized during the Late Archaic and
less so during the Late Prehistoric or Neo-American Stage (A.D. 1200 to A.D.
1650). The results of this study are valuable because the areas investigated are
scattered about the county and represent a good sample of a large area.
In 1980, work at the proposed Stacy Reservoir began by archaeologists
from Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. The site of reservoir included portions of
Coleman, Concho, and Runnels counties. This survey recorded 431 sites, some
of which contained both prehistoric and historic components. Seventy-one of the
sites are in Runnels County. The Stacy Reservoir Archaeological District was
formed as a result of this survey. Report documenting this project were authored
by Freeman and Freeman (1981) and Wooldridge et al. (1981).
In 1982 and 1983, survey and testing was performed by archaeologists
from the Llano Estacado Museum (Guffee 1989). The project area was located
on Valley Creek less than one mile from its confluence with the Colorado River.
Ten prehistoric sites and two historic sites were recorded. The prehistoric sites
consisted of a small lithic scatter, four quarries, one burned rock midden, three
campsites with hearths, and a possible burial beneath a slab. The historic sites
were identified as the Valley Creek schoolhouse and a steel banister bridge over
Valley Creek. Eight of the ten prehistoric sites were recommended for testing,
and this was conducted during the second phase of the project. The sites range
in age from a possible Paleo-Indian component and continue through the Archaic
and Late Prehistoric periods.
In 1986, Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. surveyed additional areas in
the reservoir as well as some recreational sites (Bryan and Collins 1988). Five
new sites were recorded, and a management plan designed to guide testing and
data recovery phases of the investigation was developed based on the original
survey data and the 1986 studies. Disagreements over the management plan
and research design resulted in a delay of two years before any new projects
were conducted (Sanders 1996:24).

7

In 1988 and 1989, Mariah Associates, Inc. visited previously recorded
sites in the reservoir area and conducted testing and data recovery (Earls et al.
1993; Lintz et al. 1993a, 1993b; Treece et al. 1993a, 1993b). Forty prehistoric
sites and seventeen historic sites were selected for testing. Following testing,
eight prehistoric sites and nine historic sites were selected for intensive data
recovery. An additional eighteen sites were recorded using HABS/HAER forms.
In 1994, archaeologists from Texas A&M University (Sanders 1996) were
in the Elm Creek watershed along Long Branch and Gap Creek approximately
eight miles east of the current project area. They investigated seven sites for the
purpose of determining if one or more sites should be added to the Elm Creek
Watershed Archeological District. They were able to identify clear trends that
distinguish lithic assemblages from primary lithic procurement localities (quarries)
as opposed to sites more closely related to habitation. Not one of the sites was
considered to be regarded as worthy of inclusion in the Archeological District.
Other smaller investigations and surveys have been conducted in the
county, but they are not discussed here. Large-scale projects in other counties in
the general area also provide important data that is useful to the interpretation of
the prehistory of Runnels County. Some of these are Robert Lee Reservoir (now
Lake Spence) in Coke County (Shafer 1967, 1969) and Mitchell County
Reservoir (Lintz et al. 1991; Quigg et al. (1993).
Project Area
The first investigation involving the project area was a reconnaissance by
W. Hayden Whitsett (1979) of the Texas Department of Water Resources (now
the Texas Water Development Board) in 1979. At that time, the City of Winters
had plans to construct a pond system on a 25-acre tract near an existing sewage
plant on Bluff Creek. Whitsett’s methods including a surface inspection with no
shovel testing. As a result of his work, prehistoric site 41RN101 was recorded.
The site was found south of a dirt road leading to the City of Winters sewage
plant (now occupied by the lift station) on the west bank of Bluff Creek. He
reported seeing a “thin scatter of lithic debitage and burned rock.” The only
diagnostic artifact was a Castroville point that dates this site to the Archaic period
of Texas prehistory. The above information was taken from the site form and the
letter report by Jurgens (1981) as the report by Whitsett was not available. The
site reported by Whitsett is depicted on the Winters topographic quadrangle in
Appendix I.

8

According to the report by Jurgens, Whitsett recommended testing for this
site. This was carried out by Eddie Guffee (1979) of the Llano Estacado Museum
in the same year. Guffee found the site to be restricted to the surface and in a
poor state of preservation, and he concluded that it is not eligible for listing in the
National Register of Historic Places. The above information was taken from the
site form and the letter report by Jurgens (1981) as the report by Whitsett was
not available.
In 1981, Christopher J. Jurgens (1981) conducted a reconnaissance
survey of the area to be affected by an amendment to the earlier facility plan that
resulted in the reconnaissance survey and testing of site 41RN101 discussed
above. This reconnaissance was carried out over an area of 150 acres, but the
area where the construction was to take place was a 25-acre tract in the western
portion of a grain field in the southeast corner of the project area where the pond
facility is planned. At the time of this reconnaissance, the vegetation in the
overall area consisted of mesquite, Johnson grass, improved pasture, and a field
planted in oats and rye. An old city dump was present but it was not examined
due to its disturbed condition to a depth of 30 centimeters below the rest of the
terrain. In the area where mesquite was prevalent, the examination was
conducted by walking transects in intervals of 50 meters, and emphasis was
placed on roads, game trails, and other disturbed areas. Due to the heavy grass
cover, the improved pasture received only cursory attention. In the grain field,
transects were walked in a “zig-zag” pattern at intervals of 25 meters along the
length of the field. Artifacts that date to prehistoric times were found in the
mesquite area and the grain field.
The two sites are identified today on the TARL maps as 41RN173 and
41RN174 (Appendix I). According to Jurgens’ report, site 41RN173 was located
on a slight rise between two shallow washes that parallel the slope. It is
described in his report as a “scatter of lithic debitage and thermally altered chert
cobble cores” scattered over an area 100 meters in diameter. No “timediagnostic” artifacts were observed, and a bifacial thinning flake was the only
specimen collected. The surface visibility was obscured by the waist-high oat
and rye plants, but he states that “artifacts could be seen scattered across the
rise.” Several shovel probes were dug, and they indicated that depth at this site
is minimal, probably about 5 centimeters. Jurgens classified 41RN173 as a
“short-term occupation site.”

9

Site 41RN174 is a prehistoric site that was found “while investigating a dirt
road along the force main route near the northern boundary of the survey area.”
He also states that it “occupies a low, levee-like, mesquite covered terrace
remnant between two relict channel scars on the east side of Bluff Creek.”
Jurgens also writes “It is most evident in the pipeline easement which traverses
the site from northwest to southeast, in the road, and in cattle trails crossing the
terrace.” These are contradictory statements in that the only road in the area is
the one to the lift station on the west side of the creek, and the pipeline easement
that fits that description and the two possible relict channel scars ares on the east
side of the creek. Jurgens states in his report that the site “appears to be buried
5 to 10 cm.” Since no shovel testing was carried out, it is not clear how he arrived
at this conclusion. He collected a “grab sample of flakes” from the road, but no
“time-diagnostic” artifacts were observed. What he observed are identified as
interior flakes, secondary flakes, trimmed interior and secondary flakes, a bipolar
pebble core, and thermally altered chert cobble cores made from gray and tan
mottled Edwards chert. Jurgens believes that this site may date to the Late
Archaic based on the patina that has formed on the artifacts and the similarity of
this site to 41RN101 on the other side of the creek where a Castroville point was
found. This is another contradictory statement in that site 41RN101 is plotted on
the TARL maps as due south of 41RN174 and on the same side of Bluff Creek.

10

METHODS
Background Check
Prior to entering the field, the site records at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin
and the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas were checked for the presence of
previously recorded archaeological sites in the project area and vicinity. A review of
the literature for Runnels Counties was conducted, and Christopher J. Jurgens was
contacted regarding his past work in the area.
Field Survey
The first area to be investigated was the beginning segment of the proposed
force main from the existing lift station south to the point where it turns to the east
and crosses Bluff Creek (Figure 3). No work was performed at the site of the
existing lift station because it had already been disturbed through recent
construction that occurred in May of 2011. The road investigated is 350 feet long
10 feet wide. A surface inspection of this area was not possible because the
original surface of the road had been covered with caliche. This segment of road is
within the boundaries of previously recorded site 41RN174. Since the report by
Jurgens (1981) estimated the depth of the site to be shallow (5-10 cm), shovel
testing was considered to be appropriate for testing this area. However, the soil
was very hard due to a lack of rain, making a backhoe the best option. In order to
obtain good coverage of the road, it was decided that four trenches would be
adequate. The location of the trenches is depicted in Figure 4. The trenches were
excavated with a backhoe that had a bucket 18 inches wide, and the length of each
trench was approximately 3 meters. The depth of the trenches 1-3 met or
exceeded the APE. Photographs were taken of the road and each trench. Figure 5
illustrates the excavation of Backhoe Trench 1 in progress. A sample of the soil
from each level below the surface was screened using ¼ inch hardware cloth.
Profiles of the trenches appear in Appendix II. The force main will be placed in the
center of the road. The area near the entry point for the horizontal directional
boring was examined by Backhoe Trench 4. This trench was terminated at 120 cm
because Chris Clayton was concerned about hitting the existing six-inch force main.

11

Figure 3. Caliche Road (looking southwest)

12

Figure 4. Location of Backhoe Trenches

13

Figure 5. Backhoe Trench 1 (in progress)

14

The next area to be investigated was the east bank of Bluff Creek. We were
able to drive to within approximately 150 feet of the creek. We walked through very
thick brush to get to the bank of the creek. It was not possible to get a backhoe into
this area without clearing the brush first. We carried shovels and a screen, but no
shovel tests were excavated because the area was severely disturbed through past
construction associated with the original force main line. There were many areas
where the original ground surface was not clearly discernable. Surface visibility was
excellent, and the area was thoroughly inspected for cultural materials. It would not
have been possible to test this area with a shovel to the depth of the APE because
of the hard soil, and shovel testing did not appear to be necessary because of the
disturbed conditions. This area was walked from the bank of the creek to the road.
The topographic map shows two blue areas that are believed to be what
Jurgens refers to in his report as “relict channel scars.” According to Jack Davis,
these areas were created in the 1970s or earlier by the City for the purpose of
water retention to be used for irrigation purposes. These areas have been greatly
disturbed due to the nature of construction caused by heavy equipment. The first
area does not connect with the creek and was dry at the time of this survey. It is
not visible on the highway maps for Runnels County dated 1936 and 1958 or the
aerial photograph taken in 2008. The area was investigated by examining the
surface for cultural materials.
The possible channel scar appears on the 2008 aerial photograph, but it is
not present on the highway maps for Runnels County dated 1936 and 1958. The
northern edge of this feature is very close to the easement for the abandoned gas
line that was installed in the 1960s, an existing force main constructed in 1985, and
an eight-inch gas line that was installed in 2011 (Figure 6). This area still exhibits
the disturbance from the recently installed gas line (Figure 7). Since Jurgens stated
that site 41RN174 is most evident in this easement, the area was also examined.
Due to the presence of existing utilities, work in this area was restricted to a surface
examination. One piece of chert was observed, and it has been identified by
William A. Dickens as a uniface that may have served as an end scraper or a side
scraper (Appendix III). Evidence of historic utilization was observed by a light
scatter of clear glass and whiteware. In all, six pieces of glass and ceramics were
observed (not collected). Historic artifacts were not observed by Jurgens in this
area.

15

Figure 6. Water Containment Feature

16

Figure 7. Easement for Existing Utilities (looking southeast)

17

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
No new sites were recorded as a result of this survey, and no evidence of
previously recorded site 41RN174 was observed in the APE. A light scatter of
historic trash and one chert scraper were observed in the disturbed easement of
the existing force main and gas pipeline. Jurgens reported prehistoric artifacts in
this area as part of site 41RN174, but he also places this site to the northwest and
on the other side of Bluff Creek. Therefore, it cannot be stated with certainty that
the location of this site was found. The historic trash consisted of glass and
ceramics with no artifacts present that are typically associated with a structure such
as window glass, nails, brick, or foundation stones. There is no structure depicted in
this area on the 1936 and 1958 highway maps for Runnels County or on the
Winters topographic quadrangle dated 1967. It is, therefore, assumed that this
scatter is incidental and may be a place where a few artifacts were discarded after
use. The chert tool supports the claim that Jurgens made when he said prehistoric
artifacts were found in this area. However, he reported numerous pieces of
debitage and only the one tool was found after a very thorough surface inspection
of the disturbed ground. Jurgens did not report historic artifacts in this area. On the
east side of Bluff Creek, the APE was very disturbed. Surface visibility in this area
was excellent, and no cultural materials were observed. It is concluded that any
prehistoric activity in this area would have been temporary, and it is probable that
no significant sites are present. The only evidence of historic utilization in the area
was the light scatter of artifacts on the easement of the existing pipelines. This
area was not given a site number because it may be part of 41RN174. The soil in
the area where 41RN174 is plotted on the TARL maps is described in the Runnels
County soil survey as Olten clay loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (OcA). It is a common
soil type in the area, and it extends to a depth of 30 inches where a layer of lime
accumulation is sometimes present. The soil in the four backhoe trenches was clay
loam that changed in color from dark reddish-brown (5YR 3/2) to reddish-brown
light clay (5YR 4/4). The soil in this area does not match the typical profile because
it is much deeper, and no lime was observed.

18

RECOMMENDATIONS
No evidence of previously recorded site 41RN174 was found in the project
area, and no new sites were identified. Therefore, it is recommended that the City
of Winters be allowed to proceed with construction of the force main as planned
without further consultation with the THC. If any cultural materials are found during
construction of the force main in areas not documented in this report, all work in the
area of the find must stop until the situation has been assessed by the THC and the
TWDB. Also, if the route of the force main is changed, the THC and the TWDB
must be notified as this area may require survey if it passes through a high
probability area for an archaeological site. This project was conducted following the
Minimum Survey Standards defined by the THC, Archeology Division.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Brown, David O.
1987 Archeology at Aquilla Lake, 1978-1987 Investigations. Texas
Archeological Survey, Research Report 81. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Brown, Theodore M., Kay L. Killen, Helen Simons, and Virginia Wulfkuhle
1982 The Resource Protection Process Plan for Texas. Texas Historical
Commission.
Bryan, Kirk, and Cyrus N. Ray
1938 Long Channeled Point Found in Alluvium Beside Bones of Elephas
Columbi. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 10:263-268.
Bryan, William A., and Michael B. Collins
1988 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources Above the 1551.1
Contour Line, Stacy Reservoir Recreation Area, Concho, Coleman,
and Runnels Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations Number
57, Prewitt & Associates, Inc.
Carlson, David L., Shawn B. Carlson, Frederick L. Briuer, Erwin Roemer, Jr., and
William E. Moore
1986 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1983, the
Eastern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
11.
Conklin, Roscoe, and Margaret Conklin
1947 The Butterfield Overland Mail, 1857-1869. Arthur Clark Company.
Glendale, California.
Earls, Amy C., Patrick L. O’Neill, Dennis Williams, Christopher Lintz, W. Nicholas
Trierweiler, J. Michael Quigg, Gus Hamblett, Abby C. Treece, and Dan Scurlock
1993 Cultural Resource Investigations in the O.H. Ivie Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Volume V: Historical
Resources. Mariah Associates, Inc.

20

Fox, Daniel E.
1983 Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450
Years. Corona Publishing Company. San Antonio.
Freeman, Martha D. and Joe C. Freeman
1981 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of the Proposed
Stacy Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Volume
II: Historical Resources. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.
Guffee, Eddie
1979 Archeological Testing at Winters, Runnels County, Texas. Letter
report submitted by the Llano Estacado Museum to the Texas
Historical Commission.
1989 An Archeological Investigation on Valley Creek, Runnels County,
Texas. Report prepared by the Archeological Research Laboratory,
Museum of the Llano Estacado.
Jurgens, Christopher J.
1981 An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Alternate Location,
Wastewater Treatment Facility, The City of Winters, Runnels
County, Texas, C-48-1071-01. Report prepared by the Texas
Department of Water Resources (now the Texas Water
Development Board).
Krieger, Alex D.
1946 Cultural Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The
University of Texas at Austin Publication 4640.
Leighton, M. M.
1936 Geological Aspects of the Findings of Primitive Man near Abilene,
Texas. Medallion Papers 24. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
Lintz, Christopher, W. Nicholas Trierweiler, Fred M. Oglesby, Patrick L. O’Neill,
William Doering, and Michael McFaul
1991 A Cultural Resource Survey at Mitchell County Reservoir, Mitchell
County, Texas. Technical Report Number 433. Mariah Associates.
Lintz, Christopher, W. Nicholas Trierweiler, Amy C. Earls, Fred M. Oglesby,
Michael Blum, Patrick L. O’Neill, John Kuhl, Richard Holloway, Linda ScottCummings, and Dan Scurlock
1993a Cultural Resource Investigations in the O.H. Ivie Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Volume V: Historical
Resources. Technical Report 346-I, Mariah Associates, Inc.

21

Lintz, Christopher, Abby C. Treece, Fred M. Oglesby, Karl Kibler, Patrick L.
O’Neill, W. Nicholas Trierweiler, Charles Frederick, J. Michael Quigg, and A. J.
Taylor
1993b Cultural Resource Investigations in the O.H. Ivie Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Volume II: Test
Excavations at Prehistoric Sites and Assessment of Rock Cairn
Features. Technical Report 346-II, Mariah Associates, Inc.
Lynott, Mark J.
1978 Survey and Testing in the Elm Creek Watershed, Upper Colorado
River Drainage, Texas (Floodwater Retarding Structures 1-10).
Archaeological Research Program, Report Number 106,
Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University.
Powell, Joseph F., and Darrel G. Creel
1989 Cultural Resources in the Proposed Peacekeeper Rail Garrison
`Facities, Dyess Air Force Base,Taylor County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Technical Series 5.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas
Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201238.
Prikryl, Daniel J.
1987 A Synthesis of the Prehistory of the Lower Elm Fork of the Trinity
River. Unpublished master’s thesis, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Quigg, J. Michael, Christopher Lintz, Fred M. Oglesby, and Abby C. Treece
1993 The Testing Phase at Mitchell Reservoir, Mitchell County, Texas.
Technical Report Number 820. Mariah Associates.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1930 Report on Some Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene
Section. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological
Society 2:45-58.
1935 Folsom Sites. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 7:127-129.
1940 New Type of Painted Pebble Found Near Abilene. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. 12:242-247.

22

Ray, Cyrus N. (continued)
1941 Another Type of Gibson Site Point. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 132:177.
1945 Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 16:117-147.
Richardson, Rupert N., Ernest Wallace, and Adrian Anderson
1988 Texas: The Lone Star State. Prentice-Hall. Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey.
Rister, Carl C.
1969 Fort Griffin on the Texas Frontier. University of Oklahoma Press.
Norman.
Sanders, Calvin B.
1996 Archaeological Investigations in the Elm Creek (1250) Watershed,
Runnels County, Texas: Sites 41RN61, 41RN64, 41RN65,
41RN72, 41RN74, 41RN76. Center for Environmental
Archaeology, Report of Investigations Number 4, Texas A&M
University.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers Number 17.
Gila Pueblo, Gila, Arizona.
Shafer, Harry J.
1967 Archeological Survey of Robert Lee Reservoir, Coke County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Survey Report
Number 4, The University of Texas at Austin.
1969 Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir, West
Central Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Papers
Number 17, The University of Texas at Austin.
Skinner, S. Alan, and J. Gallagher
1974 An Evaluation of Cultural Resources at Lake Whitney, Texas.
Southern Methodist University, Research Report 17.
Treece, Abby C., Christopher Lintz, W. Nicholas Trierweiler, J. Michael Quigg,
and Kevin A. Miller
1993a Cultural Resource Investigations in the O.H. Ivie Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Volume III: Data
Recovery Results from Non-Ceramic Sites.. Technical Report
346-III, Mariah Associates, Inc.

23

Treece, Abby C., Christopher Lintz, W. Nicholas Trierweiler, J. Michael Quigg,
and Kevin A. Miller (continued)
1993b Cultural Resource Investigations in the O.H. Ivie Reservoir,
Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Volume IV: Data
Recovery Results from Ceramic Sites.. Technical Report 346-IV,
Mariah Associates, Inc.
Whitsett, W. Hayden
1979 An Archeological Reconnaissance at Winters, Runnels County, C48-1071-01. Letter report submitted by the Texas Department of
Natural Resources to the Texas Historical Commission.
Wiedenfeld, C. C., L. J. Barnhill, and Clifford J. Novosad
1970 Soil Survey of Runnels County, Texas. United States Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Wooldridge, H. G., A. Adams, M. Davis, P. Denny, P. Nichols, B. Stewart, R.
Stephenson, and G. Woodall
1981 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of the Proposed
Stacy Reservoir, Concho, Coleman, and Runnels Counties, Volume
I: Prehistoric Cultural Resources. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.

24

APPENDIX I
PREVIOUSLY RECORDED SITES ON THE
WINTERS TOPOGRAPHIC QUADRANGLE

Sites 41N101, 41RN173, and 41RN174

APPENDIX II
BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

APPENDIX III:
DESCRIPTION OF UNIFACIAL SCRAPER
This specimen was found on the surface of a recently disturbed easement
for an eight-inch gas line that was installed in 2011. Its physical characteristics
are best described as a thick uniface made of chert. It was made from a chert
blank that had been removed from a larger piece through the technique of hard
hammer percussion. The form of the parent material cannot be determined. The
presence of cortex on the dorsal surface suggests a tabular form, but this cannot
be confirmed. The surface has been polished by abrasion from sand particles,
and the color is grayish-white. The patina is evident due to some damage along
one of the dorsal edges that occurred post-deposition.
Modification observed on this artifact is restricted to one corner extending
onto a part of the two adjacent sides, and this alternation to the original piece is
typical of a side scraper or end scraper. In addition, a few flakes were removed,
all in the same direction. Some wear is evident on the extreme ventral edge, and
this is indicative of probably short-term or limited use. This type of scraper has
been found at Paleo-Indian sites and was still in use in Late Prehistoric times.
Additional information and a drawing of this scraper is can be found on a
“Chipped Stone Artifact Recording Form” that is part of the records curated at
TARL.

